Baptism Anatomized: Being Propounded in Five Queries, VIZ.

I. What Water Baptism is? II. What is the End for which it was Instituted?
III. What gives Right to it? IV. Who are the true Administrators of it? V.
Whether it be lawful for a Man to Baptize himself?
WHEREIN The Right that the Infants of Believers have to Water Baptism is
vindicated: The Duty of Believing Parents in that Matter, asserted: And that by
the contrary Tenet and Practice, they ought themselves to be excluded from the
Lord's Supper, is plainly and fully proved.

And wherein also is proved, That the Covenant which God made with Abraham,
Genesis 17. and with Israel Exodus chapter 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. are the Covenant of Grace
in Christ, and not part of the Covenant of Works made with Adam before his Fall.

Romans 3. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles?
Romans 15. 8, 9. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision
for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers: And that
the Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy, etc. Acts 2. 39. For the Promise
is unto you, and unto your Children, etc.

By THOMAS WALL.

London, Printed by G. Groom, for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with Acts of
Parliament, Speeches, and other sorts of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also
Books of Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, etc.
M DC XC I.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
FOrasmuch as many worthy Servants of the Lord Jesus, have so fully vindicated
this Glorious Truth, concerning the Right the Infants of Believers have, by the
Free Gift of God in the Covenant of Grace, to the Remission or Pardon of the
Sin charged on them by the Fall of Adam, Romans 5. 12. and so thereby a Right to
have the Sign thereof Water Baptism Administered on them.

Yet because there is so general a Challenge by the Solemn Call of (Mr. Carry,
and others,) to any that will meet the Anabaptists in open Field in this
Spiritual War: I having some years ago appeared publicly in Print (yet
unanswered by any of them) in the proving the Right the Infants of Believers
have to this Blessed Ordinance Water Baptism. I have for the reason aforesaid,
thought it my duty to add this Mite to my former Testimony: Forasmuch as the
Opposers of the Right, the Infants of Believers have to Water Baptism, have
devised more new matter than heretofore, there is need of a further reply.

The way I have taken for the discovering the Root and Foundation of this Error
of Anabaptistry (is not the usual way that any heretofore have so generally
proceeded in) is by opening and explaining the Doctrine of Baptism in Five
Queries.

1. What it is, with its manner of Administration. 2. The end. 3. What gives
Right. 4. Who is its true Administrator. 5. As also when this new way of
Dipping in Baptizing began among the English Anabaptists.

And because we are certainly fallen into the last and perilous times, 2 Timothy:
3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. wherein Satan is so full of Wrath, because, says the
Scripture, he knows he has but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. therefore his
Ministers are transformed, 2 Cor. 11. 15. as if they were Ministers of
Righteousness, with fair words, to deceive The simple (as Solomon says, Prove.
14. 15. Romans 16. 18.) who believe every word, but the prudent Man looks well
to his going.

The way to look well to our going, is to take Counsel of Gods word, in such a
day, when, as was foretold, The time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears: And they shall turn away their Ears from the truth, and
shall be turned into Fables, 2 Timothy 4, 3, 4. Therefore we are not to believe
every Spirit (John 4. 1. or Doctrine) but to try the Spirits, whether they are
of God or not; because many False Prophets (or Teachers) are gone out into the
World. Now the way to try the Spirits, or Doctrines of Men, is written and laid
before us, in the Example of the Bereans, who were commended not only for
receiving what the Apostles taught for Gospel, with all readiness of mind, but
also for searching the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11. (to wit, of the Prophets, out
of whose labor the Apostles reaped the Gospel, John 4. 38.) daily, whether
those things (taught them) were so.

If this way were taken by all that profess themselves Christians, they could
not so easily be deceived; nor, as the Apostle teaches, like Children, be
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the
sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
Ephesians. 4. 14. Yea, says Christ, If it were possible they should deceive the very
elect, Matt. 24. 24. for the Spiritual Harlot by the flattering of her Lips,
cast down many wounded, many strong Men has been slain by her, Prove. 7. 10,
21, 26.

Now then, as aforesaid, every true Christians Faith must be built (when their
Faith is sound) upon the Foundation, or Doctrine, of the Apostles and Prophets,
Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. If the
Anabaptists Doctrine be but tried by this Touchstone, then all that which
Christ and his Apostles have taught, if it be understood otherwise by them or
any other, than as it can be proved to be Gospel by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, it is not to be believed to be the Gospel of Christ, but another
Gospel, Gal. 1. 8, 9. for all that Christ taught, he sent them that heard him
to search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. to wit, the Prophets, and for the prroof
thereof, For in them, says he, ye think to have eternal life, and they are
they that testify of me. And to this agrees the words of Paul, Acts 26. 22.
saying, Having obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both
to small and great, saying none other things than those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come. So that it is evident, as the Apostle says in
another place, that the Gospel which they taught, was made manifest by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26.

By which it is clear, that there is no other Doctrine to be believed for
Gospel, but what is proved to be Gospel by the Scriptures of the Prophets; so
that hence it is, as Christ said to the Jews, John 5. 43. I am come in my
Fathers Name, and ye receive me not; if another come in his own Name, him ye
will receive. Now his Fathers Name, is the Gospel written in the Prophets as
Christ has expounded from Isa. 42 The Isles shall wait for his Law, Matt. 12.
21. That is, In his name shall the Gentiles trust. Therefore what is Gospel,
but the glad Tidings of Salvation (to fallen Mankind, by the Death of the Lamb
of God, Jesus Christ) merited for them, whether Actual Believers only, or
Believers and their Infants, is a great part of this Controversy to be handled
in this Treatise, for Christ came to save that which by the Fall was lost,
Matt. 18. 11. Romans 5. 12.

Now then, seeing Water Baptism is ordained for a Sign of Remission of Sins,
Acts 2. 38. as is proved in the second Query all that can be proved by the
Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, agreeing in one, whether adult Persons,
or Infants, or both, that have their Sin or Sins pardoned by Christ (mark that)
are the Persons that have right to have Christ, by the visible Sign Water
Baptism, John 1. 31. made manifest to them. I shall therefore refer the Reader,
for a full proof hereof, to read and consider the Answer to the third Query,
wherein is proved that the Actual Believers, as likewise their Infants, are
equal in the Redemption by the Death of Christ. Likewise, as there must be a
true Administrator of the Sealing Ordinances of the New Testament, as well as
of the Figurative Ordinances of the Old. For this I refer the Reader to the
Answer to the fourth Query for Satisfaction: And withal, to observe in the
fifth Query, the Description of that first Administrator of the English
Anabaptists, who Baptized himself, because he could not find any in the way of
Dipping: When denying his Baptism in Infancy, he presumptuously Baptized
himself, without any warrant from God.

Moreover, as the first Sin that generally reigned in the old World, was the
opposing of the Doctrine of Free Grace, (which was first seen in Cain) the main
opposite Doctrine to the Gospel, and now reigning, by the pleading a Right of
Acceptance with God to Gospel Ordinances by the external Act of Man: And that
this is the Ground of Anabaptistry, which they have laid, to deprive the
Infants of Believers from the Benefit of the Free Grace of God, in the Covenant
of the Gospel, of the pardon of their Sin: And so from the Right which they
have to Water Baptism. And this is fully proved against them in the third Query.

Therefore I desire the Reader to observe their Arguments, and the Answer to
them; for when the Apostle Jude saw the Doctrine of Cain spreading it self
among the Christians, he exhorts them that were Faithful, To contend
earnestly for the Faith once given to the Saints, Jude v. 3. Namely, first to
Adam, by which Faith Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain;
therefore, says he, concerning them that opposed the Doctrine of Free Grace,
For they have gone in the way of Cain, v. 11. turning the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: And
again, concerning such as opposed the Doctrine of Faith, he says, v. 10. These
speak evil of those things which they know not, but what they know naturally as
brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. And from this Root
merely, by the Argument arising from Nature, do the Anabaptists continually
urge, namely, that Profession of Faith only gives Right to Water Baptism, to
deprive the Infants of Believers, because they cannot Actually profess Faith
and repent, of a right to the Remission of their Sin, and so of a Right to the
Sign thereof Water Baptism; as in this Treatise is fully discovered. Moreover,

And to maintain this their Doctrine, grounded on Nature, they quarrel with our
English Translation, as though the original word for Baptize was not truly
explained, because it is Englished Wash, and not Dip: Therefore we have proved,
in speaking to the first Query, that the greatest Scholar, who spoke with more
Tongues (1 Cor. 14. 18.) than the rest of the Apostles, has, by the Holy
Ghost, which leads into all Truth (John. 16. 13.) opened and expounded the
true natural and proper meaning of the Sense of the word Baptize, to be a
pouring of Water on the Persons Baptized; as he says, All our Fathers were
Baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Psalm 77. 15, to 20.
being under the Cloud, the Clouds pouring out Water on them, when they passed
through the Sea; so called Sea, where the Water had been, for they went through
the Sea on dry foot; this could not be on dry foot had they been dipped.

Now our Translators durst not presume to have more skill in the Sense of the
original word for Baptize, than the Apostle Paul had, and therefore durst not
confine the word to one strict Sense, as the Anabaptists would have it, to
maintain their disorderly way of Rebaptising. As is fully proved, to be against
Modesty, in answer to the first Query: But they have left the word Baptize, in
its general term to Wash; as it is written, Acts 22. 16. Be baptized, and wash
away thy sins. So that in vain has Been. Keach, in his Book Gold Refined,
brought a multitude of Authors to confirm the word Baptize to be Dipped, being
all disproved by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. and when they can overthrow
his expounding the Sense of the word Baptize, by pouring Water on the Persons
Baptized, then they may have somewhat to plead, that Dipping is the way; and
till then they oppose and withstand the Apostles Doctrine (like Alexander 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15.) for as we may observe in another word, that the Translators
durst not confine it to one strict sense, namely, the word in the original for
Church or Congregation, but left it in the general term, Church or
Congregation, because the plural number more or less, is in Scripture called a
Church. The first Church was in Adam's Family, and after in Noah's Family, and
after that in Abraham's Family, or House; as the Apostle accordingly writes to
the Church in a Man's House, Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19 all but few in number:
Whereas in the Wilderness, Acts 7. 38. the word for Church or Congregation,
were in number above six hundred thousand Souls; and in the Acts above three
thousand. Now to limit the word for Church, to a strict number, is Sin; so to
limit the word to such a mult of Water, is Sin; because it is an abusing of the
word, contrary to the harmonious Agreement of the Scriptures, and so contrary
to the Analogy of Faith; as is showed at large in the first Query. Therefore,

As in the Lords Supper, it is not the quantity of Bread and Wine, more or
less, but the right apprehension of, and sincere Affection to, the thing
signified, that Christ intends thereby; and the same in Baptism, being both
Signs and Seals to one and the same Covenant of the Gospel. So that when any
shall plead skill in the. Tongues, concerning the signification of words,
without regard had to the Mysteries of Faith; which cannot be understood, but
by the help of the Spirit of God, they abuse the use of Learning; for there are
two sorts of Learning, the one to ttanslate the literal words of the original
Scriptures into any Language, or Speech, or Tongue, a special natural Gift of
God; and this may be attained unto by mere natural Men, that want the Spirit of
Grace: The other is the Learning in the Mysteries of Faith. And it was, and
still is, the pleasure of God, to make choice of some Men, unskilled in
School-learning, to publish his Gospel; as for example Peter and John, Acts 4.
13. when the Jews saw their Boldness, and perceived that they were unlearned
and Ignorant Men (in School-learning) they marvelled, and they took knowledge
of them, that they had been with Jesus, who had given them the Tongue of the
Learned in the Spirit, in that he opened their Understandings, Luke 24. 45.
that they might understand the Scriptures. And therefore they that have not so
learned of Christ, by the Gift of God, are Ignorant of true Learning, says
Christ, Matt. 13. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 17. For it is given to you (to wit, to his
chosen) to know the mysteries of the Kingdom; and unto all others, though never
so learned in the Tongues, they know not the true sense of Scripture, according
to the Analogy of Faith; and such, says the Apostle Peter, are unlearned,
although they have skill in all natural Learning, and unstable, wavering,
wandering minded Men, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, as the
Pharisees did, Matt. 5. 17, to 48. and 23. 13. to 24. unto their own
Destruction, such were the learned Rabines of the Jews, for who were more
learned Men than the Jews, in the original Hebrew, and Greek, and other
Languages; yet when the Scriptures were read every Sabbath day, Acts 13. 27. it
is said, they knew not the Voices of the Prophets (spiritually) concerning
Christ in the Promise, no more than did the Eunuch, Acts 8. 30, 31, 34, 35. So
that if the Anabaptists have no better Schollarship to have their Faith rely
on, than humane Learning. to teach them the Mysteries of Christ 's Kingdom,
whereof the Doctrine of Baptism is one; they may see how they deceive
themselves, by a natural Faith, and all others that are led by them, about the
signification of the word Baptism. And therefore let all remember what is
written concerning such as make it a Fundamental Article of their Faith, to
contend, by Carnal Reason, about words in Scripture, as did the Jews, in
opposing the Doctrine which the Apostles taught them concerning the Kingdom of
God: Acts 18. 14, 15, 16. Insomuch that the Heathen Governor Galio, was
ashamed of them, by the very light of Nature, and that contention about words,
does generally arise from pride of Heart, as it is Written, he is Proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about Questions, and strife of Words, whereof
comes Envy, Strife, Raylings, Evil Surmisings, perverse Disputing of Men, of
corrupt minds, destitute of Truth: These consent not, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 3. says the
Apostle, to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine
which is according to Godliness.

For these and the like things, (as appears in the fifth Query by John Smith,
who began first to quarrel with Translation of Scripture;) such Distraction and
Division is among the Churches in this day, as was among the Primitive
Christians; for which God threatened them with Judgments, and they being not
warned, by the Apostles teaching, and Writings sent unto them, God brought his
severe judgments on them; as are threatened now on Chrrstians, for their
Apostasy in this day of like Sins, Rev. 8, 9, and 16. Chapters, as by the
opening of the Seals, and sounding of the Trumpets, and shedding of the Vials
is declared.

Therefore we may see, if we read what is Written, God will do nothing contrary
to that he has Revealed to his Prophets; Amos 3. 7. and in the Prophets
Writings, out of which, the Book of the Prophecy of the Revelations is taken;
concerning the State of the Church of God, and of her Enemies, in all Ages
since Christ's Ascension, and as one well said, (to wit, Ainsworth concerning
the Church of Rome p. 54.) to begin at Revelation 11 Chapter, it is the Key to
open that Book. So that, as God delivered his People of old, Zach. 1. 8, 16.
and 2. 1. 2. out of Old Babylon, and a second Temple was Built, and God's holy
Ordinances restored; then for the Sins of them again, after they Apostatized
from their Faith, and Holy Order in Worship. The Lord raised up against them
that terrible Enemy, under that name Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. 39. to their sore
Affliction and Misery: Even so God who has called his people out of the
Spiritual Babylon, and a second Spiritual Temple is Builded, (Rev. 11. 1. with
Ezekiel. 40. 2. 3, 5. compared with Zach. 6. 12. Christ the Branch should Build
the Temple, 1 Pet. 2. 5.) as has appeared by the many Famous Churches of
Christ, in this, and in most parts of the neighboring Nations, and other some
more remote, since the first Apostasy after the Apostles days; wherein the true
Doctrine of Faith, (to wit, of free Grace flourished,) and Gods holy Order in
Worship, in many Churches abounded, which now for some years have been
Apostatising, both from the Doctrine of free Grace, to maintain the Doctrine of
Merit or Free Will, by the work done; which is proved in this Treatise, to be
the first Foundation of Anabaptistry. Not here to speak of several other
People, called by other Names, professing Christianity, who are likewise guilty
of the same Doctrine, that Caine and the Unbelieving Jews were; pleading a right
to Gods Ordinance by their own Act. What then remains, but the expectation of
God's fearful Judgment, on this, as on other Nations, for Sin of all sorts,
which is begun already, even by that Enemy under the name of Gog and Magog,
Rev. 20. 8. Whose Number is as the Sand on the Sea-shoar; Enemies of all sorts,
covered and uncovered, open wicked and secret hipocritical Enemies to the Truth
of the Gospel, compassing about the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City,
ver. 9. until Fire come down from Heaven, for as in the days of Noah, when the
true Faith was almost lost, none left a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
that is of free Grace in Christ, by Christ's Merit, only for the justification
of all in the sight of God; that shall be saved from wrath to come, but Noah to
his Family, all others were possessed with the Doctrine of Caine, who like
Ishmael mocked at the Doctrine of Faith, Genesis 21. 9. with 2 Pet. 3. 3. which
brought the Flood upon the World, expecting acceptance by the work done, and
how is this Doctrine spread in this our day, almost over all, so that the day of
Christ's coming is likened to the days of Noah, which will be with respect to
the State of things, Luke 17. 26. to the End, as also at unawares, as in the
days of Noah, for as it is written, when the Son of Man comes shall he find
Faith on the Earth, Luke 18. 8. and he will come in an hour, which the wicked
shall not be aware of, Matthew. 24. 44. but the Godly are exhorted to be ready at
all times, Mat. 25. 10.

Therefore seeing the approaching of these Judgments is already beginning, for
Apostasy increases the distress of Nations, 2 Chro. 15. 2. 6. with Seas and
Waves Roaring, Men's Hearts, says Christ, failing them for fear, and for
looking after those things which are coming on the Earth, Luke 21. 25, 26. for
the Powers of Heaven (to wit, of Godliness in the Church) shall he so shaken,
that the power of true Godliness will be hardly found, 2 Timothy 3. 5. only a
Lukewarm, chilled formal Profession remaining in Churches, which is the
effects of the last Vial of Gods Wrath, powered into the Air, Rev. 16. 17. Ephesians.
2. 2. and 4. 14. of false Doctrines of Men, namely among others; that of
meritorious Works, seeking Justification, by the external act of their own
Righteousness, Luke 18. 9. wherein is showed by the Plague of the hail of a
Tallent weight, the coldness of Love to God, and one to another abounding; so
that the Root of Love decaying, Ephesians. 2. 17. all Iniquity will abound, Matthew,
24, 12. that, by it says Christ to John, the Grapes of Sin will hasten to be
fully Ripe, for the Harvest of the latter Day; Rev. 14. 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Now
then, these things seriously considered, would move any Christian heart to
speak, when the sound of that word is heard and regarded, as it is written,
Prove. 24. 10, 11, 12. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy Strength is
small, if thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto Death, and those
that are ready to be slain; if thou say, behold we know it not, does not he
that pondereth the Heart consider it, and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he
know it, and shall not he render to every Man accordsng to his Works.

And Lastly, least these People called Anabaptists should be offended, because
I call them not Baptists, as they call themselves, but Anabaptists; my reason
is this, because, first the word Baptist, Matthew. 3. 1. Luke 7. 20. was a Name
only belonging to Gods immediate Messenger; John, who was by extraordinary
Commission sent to Baptize, therefore was he Surnamed the Baptist, so that
neither the Apostles, nor any of the primitive Christians, did presume to call
themselves by that Name Baptist, and as touching the word Anabaptist, it is no
more than one Anabaptized or Rebaptized, and therefore all that are Baptized in
Infancy, and are Baptized again, properly bear that Name Anabaptist, so that it
is no Nickname, to those people who desire to be called Baptists.

Thus having discharged my Duty, leaving what is here discussed in this
Treatise, to the Impartial Reader to Judge thereof, according to the Written
word of God; Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Now for the
Benefit and Comfort that through Gods Blessing any shall reap, for their Souls
good, by what is here laid down, let them give to God only the Glory, which is
the Father of Lights, and the Author of every good and perfect Gift; to whom be
ascribed, Dominion, Power and Glory, in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, now
and for ever. Amen.

Remaining Thine in the Lord Tho. Wall.

A Breviat of the Contents in this Book,
In Query First.
THe Sense of the Word Baptize, opened in three kinds of Baptism, proving the
manner of Administration, not by Dipping, but by casting or pouring Water on
that part which represents the Person, from page 2. to 9. The meaning of the
word Buried in Baptism opened, page 9. to 11. That part of the person Baptized,
is not to be covered with any Garment, proved page 11. to 14. Why it is said
John Baptized in Enon, because tiere was much Water, explained, page 15. to 17.
That the Apostles Baptized the 3000 in one day, not by Dipping proved, and that
many of them were Children, page 18. to 21.
Query Second, Page 22.
The end why Water Baptism was Ordained, for a Gospel Ordinance, for a sign of
Remission of Sins.
Query Third, Page 23.
How Infants became Sinners, and how made Righteous by Christ., page 24. to 29.
That as Sin entered into the World by Families, even so the Redemption of
Mankind was by Families, and by Covenant added to the Church daily with their
Parents, page 30. to 37. That profession of Faith, gives no Soul right to have
Water Baptism Administered on them, page 38. to 44, and why profession is
required and of whom. What manner of Persons every Nation consists of, that
Christ commanded to Preach the Gospel to, and Baptize them, explained, page 45.
46. That the Apostles taught no other Gospel, than what they found written in
the Writings of the Prophets, page 47 to 50. The manner how the Gospel was
Taught and applied, page 52. to 55. That the House or Houseshold the Apostle
Baptized, were Children and not Servants, page 56. to 61. Objection, show a
Child by Name Baptized, Answered, page 67. That Infants have the Spirit of
Faith proved- page 65. 66. Why Christ was not Baptized, till he was 30 years
old explained, page 67. Objection concerning the order of Words Teach and
Baptize, Answered, page 69. That Repentance was only required of Adult persons,
and not of Infants before Baptized, and why, page 70 to 72. That as Infants
were Church Members of old, so now, proved, page 73. Ben. Keach derission of
Faith to be in Infants Answered, page 77. to 79, and Refuted. Reflections on
the honor of Christ, (by the Anabaptists) charged on (...) as plead for
Infants Baptism, Answered, page 80. 81* Reasons to prove Infants Baptism,
granted by the Equality of the Reasons the Anabaptists prove the first day to
be kept for Gospel Worship, page 82. to 84. That Water Baptism is to be
Administered onlp on the Lord's Day, or first day of the Week, confessed by the
Anabaptists contrary to their practice, page 85 to 88.
Query Fourth, Page 90.
Who are the Persons that have right to Administer Water Baptism showed, page
90 to 100. The Order how every Ordinance in Worship is to be performed, and by
whom, on the Lords day, proved, p. 102, to 105.
Query Fifth. Page 106.
Whether it be lawful for a Man to Baptize himself, and from such an
Administrator the English Anabaptists received their Baptism. p. 107, to 112.
proved. A false report concerning the State of Infants, by the Anabaptists,
against Dr. Ames, Mr. Ainsworth and Dr. Owen Answered. p. 113, to 117. B.
Keach's grant that it is Will Worship for a Man to Baptize himself, p. 118.
Baptism received in Apostasy not to be reiterated, p. 119, to 121. How the
People in this Island, in the Apostles days, received the Christian Faith and
Baptism; and not from Rome, p. 123, 124. That Water Baptism came in place of
Circumcision, proved, p. 125. That as no Person might eat of the Passover
before Circumcised, even so no unbaptized may eat of the Lord's Supper; and that
the Baptized and Unbaptized ought not to join together in the Lord's Supper, p.
126, 12d, The Anabaptists Objection, That Water Baptism was lost, answered, p.
128. The Anabaptists Doctrine concerning the State of the Jewish Church
answered, p. 133. Genesis 17. 7. Exodus 19. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
proved to be no part of the Covenant of Works, p. 133, to 161. B. Keach's
Assertion, That God has quite pulled down the State of the Jewish Church, and
turned all Infants out of door, refuted, p. 162, to 170.
Baptism Anatomized: OR A Seasonable Discourse concerning the Right the Infants
of Believers have to Water Baptism, Opened and Explained in Five Queries.
Query 1. WHAT Water Baptism is, according to the true Sense and Meaning of the
Word, one Scripture opening another, together with the Manner how it was
Administered by the Apostles on the Primitive Christians?

Query 2. To what end Water Baptism was ordained by the Lord Jesus in these
last days of the Gospel?

Query 3. What is that by Scripture evidence, that gives any Soul, Young or
Old, Right to have Water Baptism administered on them?

Query 4. Who are they that the Lord Jesus has ordained in his Gospel, to the
Worlds end, to be the Administrators of Water Baptism?

Query 5. Whether it be Lawful for any Man to Baptize himself? Wherein is also
showed, that from such an Administrator, the Anabaptists successively received
their new way of Rebaptizing of Adult Persons only, and the Reasons disproved,
as they have exerted it.

Now Published as an answer to the several Pamphlets sent to several Persons by
the Anabaptists in Penny Post Letters, and other Books as Gold refined; and
also a Solemn Call, or Challenge by Phillip Carry, to any Person that will
appear to vindicate the Right of Infants Baptism.

Therefore, There is a time to keep Silence, and a time to Speak, says Solomon.

The Sum of these Queries were delivered to one Benjamin Keach, by one that
the Anabaptists pressed with Arguments to be Rebaptized, and not to have her
Children Baptized. In answer to these Queries, a Book Entitled, Gold Refined,
was offered by Benjamin Keach, with this Message, That it was an Answer to the
aforesaid Queries: But being examined, and found too light in the Balance of
Gods Word, to maintain that which it asserteth against Infant Baptism:
Therefore what Benj. Keach says in the aforesaid Book, relating to these
Queries, is here incerted and answered.

To the first Query: What Baptism is, according to the true Sense and Meaning
of the Word, one Scripture opening another, together with the manner how it was
administered by the Apostles on the Primitive Christians.

B. Keach says in Page 33. of his Book, Entitled, Gold Refined, That the
Baptized were always Dipped all over in Water, and certain it is no Baptism at
all, if not so administered. The only Proof he brings, is, the Learned in the
Tongues say, The word for Water Baptism in the Original signifies so. So his
Proof is, not from Heaven, but from Men, Learned Men in the Tongues.

Answ. Our last Translation, Mr. Henry Ainsworth, as well as others Learned in
the Tongues, says, is the well amended Translation, in which written Word of
God, we find three several kinds of Baptism, viz. the Baptism of Water, Acts
10. 47. the Baptism of the Spirit, Matt. 3. 11. and the Baptism of Suffering,
Mark 10. 39. Yet says the Apostle, There is one Faith, and one Baptism, (Ephesians.
4. 5.) by the word, one Baptism, expressed by one and the same word from the
Original, has one and the same Sense, in the Meaning or Signification of the
word Baptism, in the Administration thereof; in all which, the Persons Baptized
with Water, or with the Spirit, or with Suffering, are Passive: So that when
the word for Baptism is rightly understood in its true Sense and Meaning in the
manner of Administration, all three Baptisms, they will agree in one, and
therefore we say with the Prophet, (Isaiah 49. 4) My judgment is with the Lord;
and they that speak not according to this word, (Isaiah 8. 20.) there is no
light in them. Now according to this word, the true Sense of the word Baptism
is as follows.

To begin with Water Baptism, the Apostle would not have the Primitive
Christians Ignorant, how that all our Fathers were Baptized unto Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea, together with the manner in the Administration of this
Water Baptism by the Lord himself, that it was by pouring out Water on the
Israelites (whom the Apostle calls our Fathers) out of the Clouds, as says
the Psalmist, (Psalm 77. 17, 18, 19, 20.) The Clouds poured out water, or the
Clouds were poured forth with Water; Thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths in
the great waters, Thou leddest thy People like a Flock, by the hand of Moses
and Aaron.

Now it is to be believed, that the Apostle Paul, who had the mind of Christ (1
Cor. 2. 16.) was not inferior for Learning in the Tongues, to any Learned Man
since his days, who has given his Sense concerning the signification of the
word Baptism to be understood with its natural signification, from or by the
manner of Isreal's Baptism in the Sea, or where they passed, where the Sea, or
Water, had been, on dry foot, (Exodus 14. 22. 29.) by the Clouds pouring forth
Water on them: So that the true signification of the word Baptism, by the
Apostle Paul's Determination, is a pouring or casting Water on the Persons
Washed or Baptized. And to confirm this, not by Humane Authority, but by the
Testimony of God in his Word, that as John came Baptizing with Water, even so
by the same term of words, in the Baptism of the Spirit, it is written, They
shall be Baptized with the Spirit, (Acts 1. 5.) Thus we see the manner or
meaning of the word Baptize with Water, or with the Spirit; as it is written,
(Isaiah 32. 15.) Until the Spirit be poured on us from on high, not the Person
dipped in the Spirit: And again, says the Lord, (Joel 2. 28.) I will pour out
my Spirit on all Flesh, for John truly Baptized with Water, but ye shall be
Baptized with the Holy Ghost, by pouring out on Persons, agreeing in one sense.

By all which it appears, that at Israel were Baptized with Water (when they
stood in the Sea, so called, because it was the place where the Sea or Water
had been) on dry ground, when the Water out of the Clouds was poured forth on
them, and the Water of the Sea was a Wall on each side: Thus they were Baptized
with Water, as the Apostles were Baptized with the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, when
poured out on them. Therefore John, when he Baptized, Baptized with Water, that
was, by casting or pouring Water on the Persons: So then as we are commanded
not to lean to our own understanding, (Prove. 3. 5.) but to believe Gods Word in
its explaining its own meaning, wherein one and the same Sense, in the manner
of the Administration of Water Baptism and Spiritual Baptism, must, when
rightly understood, agree in one, as before proved.

Again, as to the quantity of Water, in pouring it on the Person in Baptism,
God has not limited, but left free, keeping to the manner, by pouring; and no
otherwise is Gods way in the Spiritual Baptism limited, for some have a greater
measure of the Spirit than others poured on them. For although the whole Church
is Baptized by one Spirit, (1 Cor. 12. 13.) yet There are differences of
Adminstrations, (1 Cor. 12. 5.) some more and some less, as it pleases the
Administrator thereof, the Lord Jesus.

Agreeable hereunto are we to understand the word Baptism by Suffering. (Col.
1. 24. Heb. 13. 15. 34. Isaiah 51. 14. Rev. 1. 9.) one suffers Reproaches and
loss of Goods, others the two former and Imprisonment, others all the three
former and Banishment, others all the former, and loss of Life also: Now he
that suffers but Reproaches for the Name of Christ, or loss of Goods, or
Imprisonment, or Banishment, who dare say, he partaketh not of the Baptism of
Suffering, because he suffers not loss of Life also. Now than the Error to be
reproved, is limiting and confining the word Baptism to one strict Sense, to
Dip; and in truth, contrary to the Sense in the manner of the Administration in
the three Baptisms determined by Gods word, when as it is clear, the word
Baptism signifies a pouring of the Spirit, and so in Water Baptism, a pouring
of Water on the Person, and not a dipping the whole Body in Water, which as
aforesaid is particularly by the Anabaptists affirmed and asserted, if not so
done, to be no Baptism at all: Their Reason is, they say, The word in the
Original signifies so, as though the Scripture were not rightly translated.
Now as we in the things of God are forbidden to lean to our own understanding,
There is a way (says Solomon, Prove. 16. 25.) that seems right unto a man,
but the end thereof is death. Therefore the way of Baptism by dipping seems
right unto Man, by leaning to his own understanding: As for Example, the reason
why the Anabaptists say, or think, that John Baptized by Dipping Persons, or
that Philip Dipped the Eunuch, is, because it is written (Matt. 3. 13, 16.)
John Baptized in Jordan, and Christ came out of the Water, and went down into
the Water, (Acts 8. 38, 39.) Nay, let the Scripture deside the matter, we read
that Israel passed through the Sea, when as they walked on dry Land (Exodus 14.
29.) where the Sea had flowed. The Priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord (Joshua 3. 17.) are said to stand firm on dry ground in the midst of
Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, where the Waters had
been, as it is written, when ye are come to the brink of the Water of Jordan, ye
shall stand still in Jordan, so then to stand at the brink of the Water, they
are said to stand in Jordan, where the Water had sometimes risen, firm on dry
ground, (Joshua 3. 17.) And thus John Baptized in Jordan standing at the brink
of the River (where the Water had sometimes flowed, for sometimes Jordan
overflowed all his Banks, Joshua 3. 15.) and that John did cast Water on the
Person, like as we see before, the manner was, in both the Water and Spiritual
Baptism administered by the Lord himself, which manner we are exhorted not to be
Ignorant of (1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. After the manner of Rain, Psalm 77. 17, 18, 20.)
So we are to understand Philip and the Eunuch went into the Water, as the
Priests did in Jordan, at the brink of the Water, where the Water had sometimes
risen, but not one word that any by John or Philip were Dipped (but by
Imagination only) because it is said they both went into the Water as Israel did
into the Sea and Jordan, which was but where the Water had been; it being
affirmed, they stood in Jordan (Joshua 3. 15, 17.) when they stood on dry
Ground, and so in the Sea, when they stood on dry Ground (Exodus 14. 29.)

So, it is said, that Christ sat in the Sea and taught, (Mark 4. 1.) when he
sat in the Ship, and that Christ went up into a Mountain, (Matt. 5. 1.) when
he stood but on the outside on the rising of it. So Men are said to go down
into the Sea in Ships, yet they are not to be accounted Dipped in their Bodies
in Water.

Again, another great Argument the Anabaptists bring to prove Baptism to be
mere dipping the whole Body under Water, is because it is written (Col. 2. 12.)
Buried with Christ in Baptism: To follow their natural Fancy in this thing, if
every Person must be Baptized according to the word Buried, as a Man Buried
that is Dead, and put in the Grave, (then, as none can deny in the Act of
Baptism, but the Person to be Baptized, as the Anabaptists say, Buried by
Dipping the whole Body under Water, as a Man buried and covered with Earth)
must be Passive, and therefore the Person must have no hand in the act of his
being Baptized, for Christ when buried was wholly Passive, he put neither Foot,
nor Leg, nor Knee, nor any other part into the Grave: Then by this Scripture,
if it intend Water Baptism, as by Romans 6. it does not, but if it did, then to
act according to what they plead for, in the manner of Water Baptism, Buried in
Baptism, the Administrator must take the Party to be Baptized, up in his Arms,
and lay his whole Body first bore up above the Water, and lay him into the
Water, (As a Man in the Grave is covered with Earth, that is, by casting Earth
upon him, then and not before he is buried; so to bury a Man, is to cast Earth
upon him; so in Water Baptism, to cast Water upon, is to bury) as a Man is laid
in the Grave, and so cover him with Water, and there retain him the time the
words, in the Commission of Christ are expressed, I Baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

So then if this be the main Scripture they will stand by, to justify
Baptizing by Burying, as they call Dipping, why do they not so practice, but
Hypocritically plead for that they practice not; for by their Practice, there
is not a Soul of them Buried in Baptism, nor yet the whole Person ever
Baptized, as they call it Dipped, for they Baptize but a part for the whole,
for so far as the Person to be Baptized, puts himself into the Water, either
the Feet, or Legs, or Thighs, or to the Middle, so far the Parties Baptized, as
they call it, Dipped themselves, and then the Administrator puts but the
upper part of the Man or Woman that was out of the Water, into the Water: So by
their Practice, they grant a part is taken for the whole, and what do we plead
for more, but that Water may, by the Administrator, be cast on the upper part,
to wit, the Nobler part of the Party to be Baptized, which represents the
whole Man, even the Forehead and Face: But if it be so, as Benjamin Keach
says, Page 38. of his Book, That it is no Baptism at all, if the whole Body be
not plunged into the Water, then neither he, nor yet any of them, are yet by
his own grant Baptized, when they Baptize but the part from the Waste upward,
because the Party to be Baptized puts the lower part into the Water himself,
who must be wholly Passive, as a Man Dead to be put into the Grave, as they
plead for that manner of Baptism, in the act of his being Baptized; so that
what an outcry do they make, against them that in Water Baptism, Baptize a part
of the Person for the whole, when they themselves do no other, only a little
lower on the Body; now then for ever hereafter let them for shame open their
Mouths no more, about Water Baptism, till they Practice what they Teach; and
then to bring better Grounds, than to say, the word Baptism signifies to Dip
the whole Body in Water; contrary to the use of the word Baptism, as by the
Holy Scripture has been showed, to be a pouring out both of the Spirit, and
also of Water, on the Person; and that on that part of Man, Water Baptism is to
be administered upon, that is Naked, and visibly bare, that is, the Face and
Forehead, that represents the whole Person. As for example,

When Hagar fled from her Mistress Sarah, she is said to flee from the Face of
her Mistress, (Genesis 16. 8.) so the Face is taken for the Person. So Jacob is
said to flee from the Face of Esau, (Genesis 36. 6.) that is, from his Person: So
likewise Christ sent his Disciples before his Face, (Luke 9. 52. and 10. 1.)
that is, before his Person, where he was to come.

Therefore to cast Water upon the Forehead, or Face, the whole Person being
signified thereby, the Person is said to be Baptized; for when the Foreskin
was cut off, the whole Man (Ex. 12. 48.) or Child, was said to be Circumcized.

Again, where should the Sign, Seal or Token of Remission of Sins be
administered, but on that part, where the Name of God, his Law, to wit of Faith,
by the open Profession thereof was hold forth, as it is written, (Rov. 22. 4.)
And his name shall be in their Foreheads, and lo a Lamb stood on Mount Sion,
and with him a hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name written
in their Foreheads, (Rev. 14. 1.) as being not (Romans 1. 16.) ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ; for if by the (Jer. 3. 3.) Forehead is set forth the bold
imperious Whoredoms of Judah in her Apostasy from her Husband, the Lord; how
much more by the Forehead of Christ's Chaste Virgin, is represented her open
Profession of the Commands of her Lord and Husband, (Mark 8. 38.) as not being
ashamed of his Gospel, (2 Timothy 1. 8.) the Power of God to Salvation.

Moreover, as all Gods Ordinances are to be performed under the Form and Manner
of a good report (Phil. 4. 8.) with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, because it is
most certain that part of Man, Woman and Child, that is to be Baptized, must be
naked and bare, for the Flesh must be washed in Baptism, and not the Covering:
As for example in those Figurative Washings under the Law; as the Jews were not
Strangers to Water Baptism; as Mr. Ainsworth on Genesis 17. has showed out of the
Hebrew Writers, that every Proselite that was joined to the Lord, by the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, was Circumcised, Baptized, and brought a
Sacrifice: Now as the Circumcised part must be bare when Circumcised, even so
the part that is to be Baptized must not be covered, as in all Legal Washings,
which signified Sanctification, and Cleansing from Sin by the Blood of Christ:
Therefore when Moses and Aaron, and his Sons washed their Hands and Feet at the
Laver, they (Exodus 40. 31, 32.) washed them not with their Stockins or Gloves
on, for that had been to wash the Covering, and not the Flesh; and do we
believe, that Mary (Luke. 7. 38.) washed Christ's Feet with Tears with his
Shoes on, no sure, for she is said to have wiped his Feet with the Hair of her
Head, and not his Shoes: So when the Saints Feet were (John 13. 5.) washed by
Christ, as also the Deaconist washing the Saints Feet, surely they washed the
bare Feet; so now as Baptism is called a Washing, (Acts 22. 16. so Paul when
Baptized is said to be Washed part for the whole,) so that part Washed, or
Baptized, must be naked and bare: As is showed by the Lord, alluding to the
Laver of Regeneration, (Titus 3. 5.) (he poured Water into a Basin and washed
the Disciples Feet) from and by the Blood of Christ: As says the Lord, (Ezekiel.
16. 9.) Then washed I thee with water, not the Covering but the Flesh, with
water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy Blood, in the Blood of the Covenant of
Grace in Christ by the Water of the word Water Baptism, being a Sign thereof to
us, according to his words Ephesians. 5. 26. Heb. 8. 12.

Now then if a part in Baptism with Water serves not for the whole, as the
Anabaptists affirm, and yet by their Practice deny, then the whole Body, as
they plead for, Washed or Baptized, must be naked, or else they Baptize the
Covering and not the Flesh; and what an unseemly thing it were, for a Man to
Baptize the Female Sex naked, taking the Person up in the Arms of the
Administrator, and lay her in open view of others (for Water Baptism was no
secret Ordinance) into the Water, as they teach, must be buried, (as before
showed, when one is buried, is not till the Earth is cast upon the Person; so
Water must be cast upon the Person Baptized) according to the literal words in
common Burials, or else, say they, the Person is not Baptized at all.

Now let them show any word of God, that among all we read of, were either so
Baptized by, or after the literal word Buried, as common Burials are daily, of
the Bodies of Dead Persons, when Dead, Stripped, their Apparel taken off, and
others put on; we read not any such Practice in Baptism, for although (Acts 16.
13.) Lidia was converted at a Rivers side where the word was taught, as John at
Jordan, and Philip the Eunuch near a Water, yet no mention in the least of
putting off, or putting on any Apparel, but Baptized.

Nor Israel in the Cloud and in the Sea, the Face and Forehead together being
open and bare, whichn represented the whole Person Washed, is a sufficient
warrant for us in Water Baptism; and not to walk by Imagination by a natural
Belief or Conceit, that either Persons changed their Apparel, or went into the
Water to the middle, and that the Administrator put the one half of the Body
into the Water, is to walk by a mere implicit Faith, because some Learned in
the Tongues, say the word signifies to Dip or Plunge, or Overwhelm, but
presuppose the word for Baptism may have a large Signification, and that it is
Lawful to use more or less Water in Washing, and therefore the Translators
durst not confine the word Baptism to one strict Sense, what quantity was used
on the Person, or what was the manner in the Administration which John did use,
in the act of Water Baptism, it is not in words prescribed, but that Water was
used to the Person, none will deny; and seeing the word in Water Baptism is
said to be with Water, and the Baptism with the Spirit is expressed by the same
word, meaning in both, with, which is by pouring or casting, or putting Water
on, or to the Person, and not the Person in it, for it has been proved by
plain words, that when they stood in Jordan, is but to stand where the Water
had been; so to be in the Sea, was but to be where the Sea had been; so as all
going to Ponds or Rivers is by descending; so going down, in, or on any part,
where the Water had or usually did Swell or Flow, is said to go in the Water,
as Israel went into Jordan, or in the Red Sea, when as they stood where the
Waters had flowed on dry ground, both in the Sea and in Jordan, as at low Water
with us; how far may one go where the Water had flowed, yet but to the brink of
the Water; so one may be said to be in the Thames, as they in Jordan.

Another Scripture is urged by the Anabaptists, to prove that John Baptized at
Enon, because there was much Water.

Answ. The word Enon, being the Name of a Town, which took its name from
Springs that did arise there, as the word signifies an Eye, or Holes from
which Water springs up; so that although there may be said to be much Water
by its continual Springing up, yet as Sandy's, and the Travels of the
Patriarchs, Historians say, There is not so much depth of Water standing, as
will dip half the Body in, much less will it dip the whole Body in; but as most
commonly a Spring rises on upper Ground, so it runs away, as may be seen
daily in this Land; so there may be said to be much Water by its continual
Springing, yet no depth of standing Water.

Moreover another reason, why there was said to be much Water at Enon, with
respect to the part of the Country, being forty two Miles Northward from
Jerusalem; so differing from the South part, where arises few Springs, as it
is written, from the Scarcity of Waters, Psalm 126. 4. Turn our Captivity as
Streams in the South; and hereupon when Calebs Daughter came to ask a Blessing
of her Father, she said unto him, Thou have given me a South-land, give me also
Springs of Water, Joshua 15. 18, 19. so he gave her the upper and the nether
Springs. And for another reason we may conceive John did not Baptize at Enon,
because he wanted much depth of Water to Baptize withal; but because there was
Spring water, more desirous than other water, to cast upon the Face, as has
been proved, is the proper place that water in Baptism, or Washing, is to be
administered by casting upon, because that part represents the whole Body, as
before showed.

Moreover, and why should the Anabaptists be so Despising of the word
Sprinkling, or casting of Water in Baptism, on that part that represents the
whole Person; we know not, unless it be to maintain their new way of Dipping,
seeing Sprinkling is so frequently used in Scripture, to signify our
Sanctification, and Cleansing from Sin by the Blood of the Lord Jesus, called
the Blood of Sprinkling, which so well agrees with the like Sign expressed by
water in Baptism, by Pouring or Washing, not by Dipping, but by Sprinkling; as
it is written, Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean
from all your Filthiness, Ezekiel. 36. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 12. 24. alluding to
the Sign in Water Baptism, of Remission or Cleansing from the Filth of Sin, by
the Blood of Jesus, by Sprinkling, as it is written, So shall he sprinkle many
Nations, by washing in Baptism, as before showed; when Paul was Baptized, it is
written, not Dipped, but be Baptized and wash away thy Sins: And herein the
Baptism of the Spirit agrees with Water Baptism, by (Isaiah 32. 15.) pouring
out of the Spirit after the manner of Rain; therefore ought the manner in
Water Baptism to be administered, not by Dipping, but by Pouring or Sprinkling
water on the Face, for the Reasons aforesaid.

But as the Lord, who charge some to have set up an Idol in their Hearts,
(Ezekiel. 14. 4.) so Men may make an Idol of Gods own Ordinance, as some did of
the Brazen Serpent, and as the Jews made little less than an Idol of
Circumcision; as now it is to be feared the Anabaptists do of Water Baptism,
putting that Stress upon it, as the Jews did upon Circumcision, that they could
not be Saved, if not Circumcised.

Moreover, that Been. Keach grants, that the 3000 were not Baptized by
Dipping, is evident, if his words in Page 21 of his Book be but observed, his
words are these, The Multitude to be Baptized were so great, that it required
others, besides the Apostles, to do it. Nor is it to be believed, that Peter
himself, with the Eleven, did Baptize all the Three thousand in one day,
without the help of the Hundred and twenty.

Answ. All Christians are to know, that as the Apostles taught the Churches,
not only to keep Faith (Col. 2. 5.) but Order also, in the Administration of
Gods Ordinances, themselves being Examples to the Flock, to follow them in due
order in the Churches. Then Note, as that work, to wit, of Administering the
Sealing Ordinances, did in all Ages belong to Men in Office to do, as shall be
fully proved in the Fourth Query, none being in Office then, when the Three
thousand were Baptized, but the Apostles, who only had received the Command
from Christ, to go Teach and Baptize Nations, Matt. 28. 19, 20. So that the
Hundred and twenty, the Apostles excepted, were but common Disciples, and some,
if not many of them Women, Acts 1. 14, 15. Some particularly named; therefore
it is not rationally to be believed, that any common Disciple had any hand in
Baptizing the Three thousand in part of that one day, in which short time they
were all Baptized; and therefore how contrary to Sense and Reason, and
Scripture also, is it, for any to believe, that the Three thousand were all
Dipped or Plunged all over in water, every one of them to be taken up in their
Arms, by Twelve Apostles, to be buried in water, as the Anabaptists Plead, but
yet Practice not, for the day was but Twelve hours long, (John 11. 9.) and it
was the third hour of the day (Acts 2. 15.) when the Apostles preached; so that
it is to be believed, that as the Apostles taught so they practiced. If then
the Apostle Paul has taught, that all our Fathers were Baptized, when water
out of the Clouds, by the Lord himself, was poured on Persons, and many of them
were Children, called our Fathers, until the days of David (Acts 7. 45.) and
how highly the Apostle Peter esteemed of all the Writings of his beloved
Brother Paul; who among other things presses Order to be kept in the
Administration of all Gods Ordinances, teaching from Gods Order of Old, when as
a peculiar work belonged to the Ministerial Offices, as it is written, No Man
takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb.
5. 4. So that the Example of (Numb. 16. 1 Chronicles. 13. 11.) Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, and Uzza, shows, by the Judgments that fell on them, what a Sin it
was, for any private Man to take that work to do, which God had bound to
Office. But more to this in the Fourth Query.

So then it is rationally to be believed, and that by grounded Reason from Gods
word, that the Apostles themselves, without the help of the hundred and twenty,
did Baptize the three thousand in one day, which could not be done by Dipping
the Anabaptists grant; and therefore it was done by casting water on the
Forehead and Face, as before showed; for Baptized they all were, and because
that part of Mankind represents the whole Person, either in Old or Young,
therefore they were Baptized by water cast on that part, to wit, the Face; as
by grounded Reason from Scripture is to be believed.

Besides, it is evident to be believed, that many of these three thousand which
the Apostles Baptized were Children; seeing the Promise of the Pardon of Sin,
was, by the Apostle Peter, (Acts 2. 39.) applied to the Children then present,
as well as to their Parents, of the Pardon of their Sins, Water Baptism being
ordained by Christ for a Sign of Remission of Sins: Now to all to whom the
Promise is applied, the Sign of Remission, to wit, Water Baptism, belongs to
them; but the promise of Remission of Sins was applied to them and their
Children, (but more of that anon in the Third Query) for as it was the usual
manner of the Jews, when by Thousands they followed Christ, to hear him Teach,
and see the Miracles which he did, to take their Children with them; as does
appear in that Miracle which Christ did, whom he Fed, with Five Loaves and two
Fishes, Five Thousand Men, besides Women and Children, Matt. 14. 21. for so it
was foretold by the Prophet, speaking of the day of Christ, as it is written,
Thus says the Lord, behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up
my Standard to the People (to wit, the Jews) and they shall bring their Sons in
their arms, (or Bosoms) and thy Daughters shall be carried on their shoulders,
Isa. 49. 22. Even so the Jews that resorted to hear Christ, and afterward his
Apostles, Teach, and to see the Miracles which they did, they carried their
Children with them, unto whom the Apostle Peter jointly applying the Promises
of Life and Salvation by Christ, in the remission of their Sins in the Blood of
Jesus, saying, The Promise is to you and unto your Children: And this makes
way to the Second Query, which is,

Query 2. To what end Water Baptism, by the Lord Jesus, was Ordained in these
last days, for a Gospel-Ordinance.

Answ. John, Surnamed the Baptist, (Matt. 3. 1.) with respect of his immediate
Call to the work of Baptizing, has showed the end in the Sign, why Water
Baptism was ordained, namely but that Christ should be made manifest to Israel
Therefore, says John, am I come Baptizing with Water, John 1. 31. The Apostle
Peter likewise agrees thereunto, saying, Be Baptized for the Remission of
Sins, Acts 2. 38. Again Ananias confirms the same saying, Be Baptized and
wash away thy sins, Acts 22. 6. So then, in fine, the end why Water Baptism was
ordained, to make manifest by that outward Sign, that Christ, the Lamb of God,
is now come, according to the Gospel-Promise preached to Adam, That the Seed of
the Woman (Genesis 3. 15.) shall bruise the Serpents Head, that is, destroy the
works of the Devil (1 John 3. 8.) and deliver them, who by Sin he had
captivated into his Bondage, (Heb. 2. 15.) As also according to the same Gospel
preached to Abraham, That in his Seed Christ, all the Families of the Earth
shall be Blessed (Genesis 12. 3. Acts 3. 25, 26.) with the Pardon of Sin. And
accordingly John, the Forerunner of Christ, sent, as an Herald before, the
Prince of Life, (Acts 3. 15.) to prepare the way of the Salvation of Fallen
Mankind, says, Behold the Lamb of God, that bears away the sin of the World,
John 1. 29. And this makes way to the Third Query to be considered, which is,

Query 3. What is it by Scripture Evidence, that gives any Soul, Young or Old,
Right to have Water Baptism Administered on them?

Answ. We have showed in the Second Query, that Water Baptism is the visible
Sign of the Pardon of Sin, called the Sin of the World. Therefore the next
thing is to be observed, what this Sin of the World is? And secondly, who are
the Persons that stand charged with this Sin? And thirdly, how Christ, the Lamb
of God, bears away this sin of the World from these Persons.

The Apostle Paul has not only showed, what this Sin of the World is, but also
the World this Sin first entered into, and stand charged with the same; and
also how Christ, the Lamb of God, takes away this Sin from many who are
guilty, as being under Condemnation: as it is written, Wherefore as by one man
sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so death passed upon all men,
for that, or in whom, all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. Now because Adam was the
Root of all Mankind, when he broke Gods Law by eating the Forbidden Fruit, all
his Posterity in his Loins sinned in him; for as Levi is said to pay Tithes in
Abraham's Loins, before he was born, when Abraham did (Heb. 7. 9.) even so we
all in Adam's Loins, before we were born, brake Gods Law when Adam did; and
this was the Sin that first entered into the World, and these are the Persons
Sin entered into, namely, the actual Sinner and his Seed, and for these, the
Lamb of God is come, to bear away the Condemnation due to them, even Eternal
Death, the Wages of this Sin, Romans 6. 23.

Thus we see, in the Fall of Mankind, there were two sort of Sinners, the one
Actual, as Adam and Eve, the other their Seed, or Children in his Loins,
Sinners by Original Corruption, derived from Fathers to Children, who have not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam 's Transgression, (Romans 5. 14.) as by their
own act, but are Sinners by Derivation, or Original Corruption from them, and
from these two sorts of Sinners, Christ, the Lamb of God, is come in Person,
who was the same Savior for these two sorts of Sins, (Heb. 13. 8.) yesterday,
from the day he was preached to Adam, unto that day John said, Behold the Lamb
of God, and unto the end of the World, which bears away from these two sorts
of Sinners, the Sin of the World.

The way and the manner how this is done, is one and the same in all Ages, for
as there are two sorts of Sinners, the one who willingly Transgressed; These
God called, as he did Adam and Eve, to the Bar of Justice, (Genesis 3. 10, 11, 12,
13.) to answer for their Evil they had done, before the Judge of all the Earth,
as appears in Moses Narration; but Adam, when called, had lost all Freedom of
Will to Good; his Power being gone, he, with his Seed, were Satan's Captives,
holden by the Cords of Sin, (Prove. 5. 22.) so that instead of showing any
Remorse of Conscience for his Sin, as the Law required; as it is written, He
that covers his Sins shall not prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes
them, shall find Mercy, Prove. 28. 13. but instead of Confession he sought to
cover his Sin, (Job 31. 33.) by laying the fault on the Woman, as likewise did
the Woman on the Serpent. Then God of his Free Grace, laid no more upon them,
but a Fatherly Chastisement in this Life (Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8.) as he does on
all his Children, and freely forgave them and their Posterity in them their
Sin, in the glad Tidings of that Redeemer he had prepared (Ephesians. 1. 4. Titus 1.
2.) before the World was, for them, by the word of his Grace preached to them,
that the Seed of the Woman Christ should bruise the Serpents Head (Genesis 3. 15.)
that is, expounded the Son of God, says, John was made manifest, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, John 3. 8. Thus Christ, in the promise, took
away the Sin of the World from these two sorts of Sinners, which the Apostle
proves thus: Therefore as by the Offense of one (namely the first Adam)
judgment came upon all Men (that is, on all Mankind; to wit, on all Adam's
Posterity in his Loins) to Condemnation: (for a Child is called a Man, Genesis 4.
1. John 16. 21.) even so by the Righteousness of one (to wit, Christ the second
Adam in the Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head, as
aforesaid) the Free Gift came upon all Men (namely on the Actual Sinners and
their Seed in them) unto justification of Life, Romans 5. 18. Again says the
Apostle; For if by one Man's Disobedience (namely the Disobedience of the first
Adam) many were made Sinners (even his Seed in him by original Corruption
derived from him) so by the Obedience of one (namely the Obedience of Christ
the second Adam) shall many be made Righteous, Romans 5. 19. and who, namely the
Believers and their Infants; for as the Infants of Unbelievers are charged, by
original Corruption derived from Father to Child, with the Unbelief and
Disobedience of the first Adam, Romans 5. 12. even so the Children of Believing
Parents are discharged from the Condemnation due for that Sin, by the Obedience
and Righteousness of Christ the second Adam, by the Free Grace of God imputed
to them, according to the Promise in the Everlasting Gospel Covenant; as the
Apostle Peter applied to such as Actually believed, and unto their Children,
Acts 2. 39. saying, The Promise is unto you and to your Children: And again, I
will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities will
I (says the Lord) remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. And thus as was the glad
Tidings of the Gospel first preached to Adam, as after the same, by John the
Baptist, was preached to Israel; that Christ, the Lamb of God, was now come to
take away the Sin of the World; meaning the Seed of the Woman, Christ now
manifest in the Flesh, was to destroy the works of the Devil, and deliver all
such, both Father and Children, who by Sin Satan had captivated into his
Bondage, Heb. 2. 15.

And therefore as Water Baptism was ordained for a Sign of Remission of Sins,
not only the Actual Sins of Parents, but when the Parents Actually believed, it
also was a Sign of Remission of the Sin to their Infants, as to them, who by
original Corruption, Sin is derived in nature from Fathers to Children, and
therefore by the Doctrine of the Gospel, Such are to be Baptized (says the
Apostle) every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus for the Remission of
Sins: Because the Lamb of God being come, has taken away the Sin of the World,
which the Fathers and their Children were guilty of; and why be Baptized every
one of you? for this reason says Peter; For the Promise (of the Pardon of
Sins) is to you and unto your Children; and this is Gods way in all Ages, of
the Redemption of Fallen Mankind, that as Sin entered into the World by
Families, so Christ came to Redeem Fallen Mankind by Families. And hence it is,
that the Children born to Gods Covenanted People, are said by God to be born to
the Lord, whom although they be Man and Woman's Children, by Nature called their
Sons and Daughters; yet by virtue of the Free Grace of God in Christ, in the
Covenant of Grace, into which they are accepted in all Ages with their
Believing Parents; the Lord calls such Children (Ezekiel. 16. 8, 20, 21.) his
Children and of his Kingdom, born unto him, his Heritage, the Fruit of the
Womb, his Reward; for when Adam and Eve was Fallen, they, together with their
Seed in them, were the World Sin entered into (Romans 5. 12.) of whom Satan was
Prince, as he is called (John 14. 30.) The Prince of this World, Prince of the
Power of the Air, the Spirit that now (from the days of Adams Fall) works in
the Children of Disobedience; and hence it is the Apostle says (Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.)
by nature we are all Children of Wrath; but when the Gospel was preached to
Adam, and so ever since to all who have Actually sinned (as they did) God of
his Free Grace mixing Faith with the word of Grace preached to them; by which
power of his word Christ dispossesseth the strong Man armed (Luke 11. 20, 21,
22.) namely the Prince of the Fallen World (first in Adam's House or Children
in his Loins) taking from him all his Armor, wherein he trusted and divided
his Spoil; for says Christ when come in Person to perform that work he the
promised Seed to Adam was to do, in bruising the Serpents Head (Genesis 3. 15.)
namely as it is written (Luke 11. 20.) But if I (says Christ) with the Finger
of God cast out Devils, no doubt the Kingdom of God is come upon you: And
hereupon when by the Preaching of the same Everlasting Gospel before preached to
Adam and to Abraham, to the Dead in Sin (Rev. 14. 6.) in the Spiritual Babylon,
which caused such an Earthquake (Rev. 11. 13.) that the Tenth part of that
Romish City or Church fell from her Traditions or Idol-worship, to embrace
Christ in his Government, in his Church or Kingdom; for their King, Priest or
Prophet, they being Translated out of that Kingdom of Darkness, as in the
beginning of this work, when Adam and Eve, with his Seed in him, were
Translated out of Satan's Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of the Dear Son
of God; then as but one Family became Christ's Kingdom; here many Families or
little Kingdoms of this World were become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ (Rev. 11. 15.) that so he might Reign among them by his Laws; as in
Adam's Family appeared, by the Offerings (Genesis 4. 3, 4.) his Children brought
and offered up to God in his Service. Next in Noah's Family, and so in
Abraham's Family as was the everlasting Covenant-Promise (Jer. 31. 1. Gal. 6.
16.) I will be the God of all the Families of Israel; for as the Fathers, with
the Children, were together (by the Fall) Satan's Subjects, Children of Wrath;
even so the Children with the Parents, when their Fathers and Mothers, who had
Actually sinned, believed, then their Children, who were Sinners by original
Corruption derived from them, Psalm. 51. 5. were restored with them, to be the
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom; as it is written (Isaiah 65. 23. Acts 2. 39.) They
are the Seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring (or buds) with
them. And thus Christ bears away the Sin of the World in all Ages; first
Christ in the Promise to Adam and Abraham, and when come in Person, bore away
their Sins on his Body once offered for many (Heb. 9. 28) namely the Believing
Fathers and Mothers and their Children in Infamy with them; as the Apostle
proves by Romans 5. 19. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners;
so by the Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous. Thus it is clearly
proved, that the Infants or Children, together with their Believing Parents,
are redeemed. Now, if the Children were not Redeemed with their Believing
Parents, then Christ did not bare away the Sin of the World; Contrary to John's
Doctrine John 1. 29. If Infants were not a part of the World Sin entered into;
Then Children are not by Nature Children of Wrath; contrary to Paul's Doctrine.
Ephesians. 2. 3. If Children are not of Christ's Kingdom, then they are of Satan's. If
Children are not to be brought up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord;
then the Promise in the Gospel belongs not to Children in Infancy, contrary
to Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Acts 2. 39. How many like Absurdities may be brought upon the
Doctrine of Anabaptistry, if they well consider how they are led by a natural
Fancy, in denying Infants to be Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, in the washing
away of the Sin of the World, which they by natural Corruption are guilty of;
but the Sin of the Infants Christ has bore away, with the Sins of their
Believing Parents; and Water Baptism is ordained by the Lord, to be Administered
on all that have their Sin or Sins pardoned by the Lord Christ; who by that
Sign Water Baptism Administered on them, Christ is to be made manifest to them,
that he has washed away their Sin in his Blood; which is the only thing that
gives any Soul Right to have Water Baptism Administered on Young or Old. Rev. 1.
5.

And thus the Lord Jesus, as his Kingdom was first in one Family, so it still
continues in Families: And therefore when Adam and his Wife, and Seed in him,
was restored, there was only the Kingdom of Christ on Earth in Adam's House;
and then for a time no Kingdom of Satan was on Earth, he being cast out, as
aforesaid, and Christ taking Possession. But because, as the Anabaptists grant
in their Narrative, there is Election of Persons, page 3. therefore process of
time proves (1 John 2. 19.) that all in the visible Covenant of Grace, visible
Members for a time in the Church of God, are not all of it; as appeared in the
Person of Cain, so in the Person of Cham, or Ham the Son of Noah; therefore Man
is to have his Judgment rest with the Lord (Isaiah 49. 4.) concerning the
Infants of the Lords Covenanted People, commanded to be Trained up in the way
(Prove. 22. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4.) they shall go in; and if they continue in that Faith
(1 Timothy 2. 15.) of Gods Elect, that was in their Parents, as Timothy did in the
same Faith his Grandmother and Mother had, (1 Timothy 1. 5.) they so long are to
be accounted a Holy Seed (Ezra 9. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 14.) Children of the Promise,
born to the Lord, and so of his Kingdom, his Heritage, the Fruit of the Womb,
his Reward, Gal. 3. 28. Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. Psalm. 127.

Now then as that Wise King says, That even a Child is known by his doings,
Prove. 20. 11. (speaking of the Children in Covenant, Acts 3. 25.) whether his
works be pure, or whether it be right: So when Cain, by his evil work, proved
himself not to be of the Election, (wanting the Faith of Gods Elect which Abel
had; known by his Action,) when wanting the work of Faith in Christ, his
Offering was not accepted, for which he was filled with Wrath, but he being
reproved, repented not, but adding Sin to Sin; as it is written (Prove. 29. 1.)
He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy; so was he destroyed, as being cast out of the
Communion of Saints: As he confessed, saying (Genesis 4. 14.) And from thy Face
shall I be hid; namely from the Favor and Light of the Countenance of the
Lord, in his Kingdom of Grace and Worship; being deprived of the Blessing in
Christ, that all the Infants born in the Covenant of Grace have, because by the
Free Love of God, Infants are accepted in Covenant with the Lord, with their
Parents, if they, as they grow up, continue in Faith, and Love, and Holiness,
with Sobriety, they shall be saved: As the Apostle in his reproving the Church
of God at Ephesus, in suffering Women to usurp Authority over the Man, by
Teaching as Men did, Quaker-women like, in the Assembly, against the very Order
of Nature, and Command of God; his reason in reproving the Female Sex was, for
that Adam was first formed; and secondly for Adam was not deceived, but the
Woman being deceived was in the Transgression, notwithstanding she shall be
saved in Childbearing; that is, if she, her Husband and Children, by the Word
of Grace in the Promise, believe in the promised Seed God, Christ, manifest in
the Flesh, the Seed of Adam and Abraham; if they continue in that Faith and
Love to God, in keeping his Commandments and Holiness of Life, as becomes such
as are in Communion with the Lord, and Sobriety; the Women Adorning themselves
in Modest Apparel, as becomes Women professing Godliness, they shall be saved,
1 Timothy 2. 9, 13, 34, 15.

By all which we see the same Doctrine of Faith, Holiness and Love taught in
Adam's Family, is the same to us in Christ, according to the same Covenant of
Grace that was made with Adam and his Children, whom he taught the way of the
Lord; but when grown up, if as Cain, they abide not in it, as he so must they
be cast out; and this could not have been, had he not been a Member of the
Church in his Infancy, born to the Lord in Covenant; but when he not proving to
be of the Election, which the Apostle says, obtains it or continues it in
abiding Faithful to the end; standing fast in the Faith, which Cain did not,
but departed from the visible Profession thereof, Luke 8. 13. so fell away.

Now then of Cain's Seed the World of ungodly began to take Root in the Earth
again; so that there was now on Earth the Kingdom of Christ in Adam's House or
Family; and the Kingdom of Satan in Cain's House or Family, called the World of
Ungodly, who both Fathers and Children were destroyed by the Flood of Noah: And
then again there was only remaining the Church of God, or his Kingdom in Noah's
Family, the Fathers with their Wives and Children, a Holy Nation, a chosen
Generation to the Lord, as Israel were by Families.

But in process of time Satan had his Seed in the Church in the Person of Cham
or Ham (Genesis 9. 25.) who for his Sin was cast out of the Church, and of his
Seed sprang another World of Ungodly. As likewise in process of time almost all
the Posterity of Blessed Shem, became Apostatized from the Faith: So that then
it pleased God to call Abraham from his Idolatry out from his Fathers House
(Joshua 24 2. Genesis 12. 1) and with him and his Seed, as before with Adam and
Abraham and their Seed, God made an everlasting Covenant, or preached to him
the everlasting Covenant of the Gospel, namely that in his Seed Christ, the
Woman's Seed, in the same Gospel before preached to Adam; All Nations of the
Earth shall be Blessed, Genesis 12. 3. And when again the same Covenant was more
particularly applied to belong to the Seed of his Body, of whom Christ must be
exspected; as it is written, I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and
will multiply thee exceedingly; besides the Promise before made to him of his
being a Father of many Nations; and I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee. Genesis 7. 2, 5, 7.
Now this Promise to be a God to the Believer and his Seed, is the Substance of
the Gospel-Promise; as it is written, And they shall be his People, and God
himself will be with them and be their God, Rev. 21. 3. even the God of all the
Families of Israel, Jer. 31. 1.

So then if the very Letter of the Gospel be so plain, that in Christ the
Families of the Earth shall be Blessed; and this Family is the Seed or Infants,
or Children of Believers; and this Blessing is the Remission or Pardon of their
Sins; as it is written, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from your Iniquities, Acts 3. 26.
Water Baptism being the visible Sign thereof, therefore, says Peter to Parents
and Children, be Baptized every one of you; namely, that have their Sin or Sins
pardoned, the Sin of the World, for the Promise in the Gospel Covenant is to
you and unto your Children; is also confirmed by John the Baptist, that this is
the Way of Salvation he prepared before the Lord, saying, Behold the Lamb of
God (preached to Adam) is now come, that bears away the Sin of the World; of
whom is before proved, Children in Adam were a part thereof.

Now until the Anabaptists can prove, that the Infants were no part of the
World Sin entered into, and so Children to be no Sinners; it remains proved,
that Children are Sinners in Adam; and the Sin of the Infants of Believing
Parents, is taken away by Christ the second Adam, as well as the Sin of their
Parents who had Actually committed: As we have the Testimony of the Spirit of
God for to prove it in these words, but not as the Offense; so also is the Free
Gift (Romans 5. 18, 19.) for if through the Offense of one many be Dead, much
more the Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man Jesus Christ,
has abounded unto many; and not as it was by one that sinned, so is the Gift,
for the Judgment was by one to Condemnation; but the Free Gift, is of many
Offenses unto Justification.

So then all is of Free Grace, both to the Actual Sinner, and his Seed in
Infancy, who are Sinners by original Derivation: Now although God does require
of such as have Actually sinned, Actually to repent, and to make Confession of
their Faith before they may have the Sign of Remission of Sins (if they were
not before Baptized into the Name of Christ) to be set on them: So that great
is the Difference between what it is that gives any Soul, Young or Old, Right
to have Water Baptism Administered on them; and what God requires of Actual
Sinners before they be Baptized: Therefore the very Letter of the Law, a
Schoolmaster leading to Christ, might teach the Anabaptists, that of whom did
God require a Sacrifice of Confession brought to the Altar figuring Christ, but
from such only that had Actually sinned; yet the Infants of such, by virtue of
Gods Free Grace in the Covenant of the Gospel, were Blessed with their
Believing Parents, and the Males sealed with the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith; therefore called with their Parents, The Blessed of the Lord; as shall
be more spoken to anon.

But now to insert here the general Argument grounded on Carnal Reason, the
Anabaptists bring as their main Pillar to deny the Right Infants have to
Water Baptism; published by B. Keach in his Book Gold Refined, P. 141. That
nothing less than Profession of Faith and Repentance, can give any Soul, Young
or Old, Right to have Water Baptism administered on them.

Answ. If there were no Sinner pardoned, or their Sin or Sins remissed, there
would not have been this Ordinance of Baptism ordained, seeing it is ordained
for (a Sign of the) Remission of Sins, that such as have Right thereto, may
have Christ made manifest to them, that he has washed away their Sin or Sins
in his Blood. But because Christ, the Lamb of God, is come, who takes away,
not only the Sin of such Actual Sinners, whom his Father gives Faith to
Believe in his Son, but also the Sin of the World Infants stand charged with,
by natural Corruption derived from their Parents. Now then, who is it, Man,
even Sinful Man, that Meriteth a Right to have his Sins pardoned? or is it not
Christ that has done it for him? Surely if Remission of Sins be the greater
work, for which the Sign Water Baptism is to be set on, than all that Christ
has washed away their Sin or Sins; the Right in the Sesser, the Sign is also
merited for them, by him that merited the greater for them; namely, the
Remission of Sin or Sins; so that for any to say, nothing but Profession of
Faith can give any Soul, Young or Old, Right to have Water Baptism administered
on them, is to rob Christ of his Honor, and Sinful Man to take the Glory to
himself: That Man by his External Act, meriteth a Right to partake of one of
the insealing Gospel Ordinances; surely this Man's Faith is not built upon the
Foundation or Doctrine of the Apostles or Prophets; for since Man's Fall, all
Right Man forfeited from under a Blessing, to any Mercy, or Sign of Gods Mercy
either Temporal or Spiritual, for even the very plowing of the wicked is Sin.
So that in fine, when Man has done all, with respect of Meriting by the best
Act he can do, to obtain any Mercy from God, he is repulsed with this, That he
is but an unprofitable Servant, Luke 17. 10. therefore by Grace is our Sins
pardoned, and by the same Free Grace in Christ have we a Right to the Sign of
Remission of Sins; for was it not of Free Grace, that by the Sprinkling of the
Blood on the Door posts of the Israelites in Egypt, that by that outward Sign,
the Destroying Angel passed over them; and was not this Right merited for them
by Christ their Passover; and not for any external Act they did or could do;
even so we, to wit, all Believers and their Infants, as then they and their
Infants, by the Blood of Sprinkling of Jesus, our Passover the Destroying Angel
passes over us; for Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us and our Children,
as of old for the Israelites and their Children: For so it is written, as by
the outward Sign in Baptism, So shall he Sprinkle many Nations; and I will
Sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness,
Isa. 52. 15. Ezekiel. 36. 25. As it is in the Sign Water Baptism, Be Baptized and
wash away thy Sins (or Filthiness.)

By which it is clear, that the Right to Water Baptism is merited by Christ
only, for all such whose Sin or Sins Christ takes away, and by the Doctrine of
the Gospel, it is manifested, that Christ takes away the Sin of the World,
which Infants by original Corruption, derived from their Parents, were guilty
of. And unless the Anabaptists can prove, that Infants were no part of the
World that Sin entered into, and so no part of the World from whom Christ has
taken away their Sin: But the first the Apostle has proved, that Infants by
the Fall, Sin entered into them by original Corruption derived from their
Parents; Adam being the Root, therefore his Offspring, his Branches could not
be clean; as says the Scripture, Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? no not one, Job 14. 4. And likewise the latter the same Apostle
teaches, as foresaid; that is, By one Man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners; to wit, Children, so by the Obedience of one, to wit, Christ the
second Adam, many were made Righteous, the Believers and their Infants. But by
the Anabaptists natural Faith, they cannot see this Mystery of the Gospel; and
therefore leaning to their own Understanding, which is forbidden Man so to do
in the Mysteries of Faith in the Gospel, they run aground; saying, according to
the aforesaid Argument, That Profession of Faith and Repentance, gives right
to Water Baptism; from that Scripture, He that believes and is Baptized shall
be saved. From this and the like Scriptures, they plead against the Right the
Infants of Believers have to be Baptized, without regard to the Free Grace of
God to Sinners by the Doctrine of the Gospel; for that Scripture is not
understood a right, that an Absurdity can be brought on the Inference they
make; as for example, if as they say, None ought to be Baptized, but such as
actually Believe: Then by that Scripture, none can be Saved but only such as
Actually Believe; (for that Scripture says, He that Believes not shall be
Damned:) which the Anabaptists affirm.

Now the true meaning of Mark 16. 16. He that has Actually Sinned, if he does
not Actually Believe in Christ to be his Savior and repent, and so forsake his
Sins, he, according to the Revealed Will of God, has no Promise of Salvation;
but Infants, who are Sinners not by their own Act, but by original Corruption
derived from their Father Adam, and so by nature naturally from their Father
that begot them, they are Children of Wrath, until their Father or Mother
Believe; and then, (until they like Cain, Ishmael and Esau, by their own Actual
Sins prove Wicked:) If they abide Faithful, with Abel and Isaac, they are to be
esteemed a Holy Seed, Gods Children, as aforesaid from the Birth; so that the
Promise of Remission of Sins in the Covenant of Grace belongs to them, and
therefore have Right to the Sign of Remission of Sins, Water Baptism to be
Administered on them by Free Grace: So that if the Argument were rightly stated,
there is nothing less than the Pardon of Sins by the Merits of Christ, can give
any Soul Young or Old, right to have Water Baptism Administered on them. But if,
as B. Keach says, Nothing less than Profession of Faith and Repentance, can
give any Soul, Young or Old, right to have Water Baptism Administered on them.
Then how near a kin is the Faith of the Anabaptists, in this thing about
Water Baptism, to the Romish Clergy; for whereas the one say, Profession of
Faith gives right; The other, The Fathers have Decreed in the Council of
Trent, That whosoever shall say, Grace is not conferred by the work done, Let
him be Accursed. Surely that which gives any Soul Right to have the Sign of
Remission of their Sin or Sins Administered on them, is a Grace, a special
Grace: But it has been proved, that Remission of Sins, or washing away of
Sins, in the Blood of Christ, is the only thing which gives any Soul Right to
have Water Baptism Administered on them; and therefore the Right is by Grace and
not by Merit, for the Act done by any Mortal Man. Simon Magus made an external
Profession of Faith and Repentance, for it is said he Believed, Acts 8. 13. If
that had been that which only gave him Right to be Baptized, he would not have
been told he had no Right nor part in that matter; and why, because he was told
he was in the Bond of Iniquity; therefore Profession gave him no Right, but was
only required of him, because he had been an Actual Sinner; but it is the
Remission of Sins gives Right, as aforesaid, be Baptized, not for Profession,
but for Remission of Sins: So the Right is merited by Christ for all, that the
Scripture testifies he has bore away their Sin or Sins; but Christ is come,
who bears away the Sin of the World, that Infants are guilty of, and we have
proved, the Infants of Believers have their Sins pardoned. And this is the only
thing which gives any, young or Old, right to Water Baptism. So that this
Doctrine, that sinful Man's external Act of Profession, or the Godliest Man's
external Act of Profession gives Right to Water Baptism, is a new Doctrine no
where found written in the Book of God: Now if this be the Anabaptists Gospel,
That God gave his Son to save Actual Sinners only, and these by their own Act
Merit a Right to the Sign of Remission of Sins; and that because Infants cannot
Actually profess Faith and Repent, that they have no Right to the Sign of
Remission of their Sins; or is it their Judgment, because their Sin in Infancy
is not pardoned; therefore they have no Right to the Sign. And whether does
this Doctrine lead these People, but to conclude either Infants are saved
without Christ, or else have no Sin, and so Christ died not for them. If on the
other hand they say, that Infants are Sinners, then they cannot be Saved
without a Redeemer; if Redeemed, then they have Right to the Sign of the
Remission of their Sins, for no other Reason, but because God, for Christ's
sake, has pardoned the Sin of the World charged on Infants: As John says in
preparing the way of the Lord in the Salvation of Sinners, Behold the Lamb of
God, which takes (or bears) away the Sin of the World.

Again B. Keach having asserted the aforesaid Argument to deprive the Infants
of Believers, from the Right they have to Water Baptism, merited by Christ for
them, has formed another Argument, least his former, when tried by the Golden
Reed, Gods Word, Rev. 11. 1. with Rev. 21. 15. should (as it has been proved)
be insufficient to deprive the Infants of Believers of the Right to have
Water Baptism to be Administered on them: His words are these in his aforesaid
Book, Page 64. There is no better way to know who or what manner of Persons our
Lord Jesus has commanded to be Baptized, than to go to the great Commission of
our Lord Jesus, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them.

Answ. That there is no better way, is granted, when the Commission of the Lord
Jesus is rightly understood in his Will and Mind contained therein, which when
rightly understood, will agree with the Doctrine contained in the Prophets and
Apostles, on which our Faith is to be builded on, Christ Jesus being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

Therefore I desire the Reader to observe these two things: First, In the
Commission of the Lord Jesus it is said, Matt. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them. It is also said, Go ye into all the World,
and preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16. 15. By every Creature is all
Mankind that is called the World, which by the Fall Sin entered into Actual
Sinners and their Seed or Infants, as before proved: To these the Apostle
preached the Gospel, as it is written, The Gospel which ye have heard, and
which was preached to every Creature which is under Heaven; whereof I Paul am
made a Minister, Col. 1. 23.

Secondly, What this Gospel is, or from whence it was the Apostles were sent,
to gather or reap the same they were to teach, seeing, when they were sent, no
Gospel was to be found written, but in Scriptures of the Prophets; therefore to
this we shall first speak, namely, what the Gospel was, the Apostles were
commanded to teach all Nations; it was no other than they found in the
Scriptures of the Prophets, as it is written from the words of the Lord Jesus
to his Apostles: I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; other
men labored, and ye are entered into their labor: And herein is that saying
true, One sows, and another reapeth, John 4. 37, 38.

Now concerning this Gospel the Apostles were commanded to teach, the Apostle
Peter writes, saying to the Primitive Christians: The Prophets have enquired,
and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you:
Searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ, that was in them,
did signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the
Glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves,
but unto us (mark that) but unto us, they did Minister (or serve unto) the
things which are now reported unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel
unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; which things the Angels
desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12.

Likewise the Apostle Paul, in his Defense before King Agrippa, to clear
himself of the Charge the Jews laid against him, That he taught other Doctrine
for Gospel, than what he found written in the Prophets: His answer was, Having
therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to
small and great, saying no other things then those which the Prophets and Moses
did say should come: That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first
that should rise from the Dead, and should show light unto the People, and to
the Gentiles. Then Paul said to King Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I
know that thou believe. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest
me to be a Christian, Acts 26. 22, 23, 27, 28. And again, when many Jews at
Rome, had appointed a day to come to Paul's Lodging, to be informed of his
Doctrine or Gospel he taught concerning Jesus; it is written, To whom he
expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus,
both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from morning till
evening, Acts 28. 23. The Lord Jesus himself likewise proved what he taught
concerning himself, in coming into the World according to the Promise to Adam,
proving himself to be the Woman's Seed, God manifested in the Flesh by the
Prophets, Beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in
all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself, Luke 24. 27. So that hence
it is, that the Gospel or glad Tidings of Christ our Savior, the Apostles were
sent to reap their Doctrine they preached from the Scriptures of the Prophets,
as the Apostle Paul says, the Gospel they taught, is made manifest by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26. As in
the Commission, saying, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them,
Matt. 28. 19.

So then Christ sent his Disciples and Apostles, and the Jews, to search the
Scriptures, to wit, of the Prophets, to be informed of the glad Tidings
promised them concerning the Messiah they looked for; as it is written, Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal Life, and they are they
which testify of me, John 5. 39. For Christ in the Promise was the good
Tidings of great Joy, preached by the Angel, Luke 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
according to the Scriptures of the Prophets, Isaiah 9. 6. Micah 5. ^.

Seeing it has been proved what the Gospel is, and from whence the Apostles
reaped it; namely, out of the Scriptures of the Prophets; and that the Angel,
upon the Birth of Christ, preached glad Tidings of a Savior, out of the
Scripture of the Prophets, Luke 2. 10, 11, 12. also Christ himself, and his
Apostles, taught us no other glad Tidings than is written in the Prophets
aforesaid. It is therefore desired, and required, of the Anabaptists, to show
us out of any part of the Scriptures of the Prophets, where they prove that
Gospel to be written, that preaches glad Tidings to Actual Sinners, and not a
like glad Tidings to their Infants in Infancy, who as we have proved, are
Sinners by original Corruption, derived from Father to Children; and if dying
in Infancy cannot be saved, if there be no Promise or glad Tidings of Salvation
for them in the Gospel in Infancy, commanded to be preached to all Nations,
that is, to every Creature of Mankind; unless they will at once affirm and
prove, that Infants are no part of Mankind that the Gospel is to be preached
unto, with their Parents, under the name of every Creature, Col. 1. 23.

To the second thing to be considered in the Commission of our Lord Jesus, who
came to save Sinners, yea Sinners of two sorts as before proved, the Fathers
with their Infants; and that these are the Persons every Nation consists of,
is thus proved: If that the Scripture may be allowed to expound its own Sense
in every Article of Faith, as in lesser matters, therefore we read, that after
the Flood were only left alive Noah and his Family, among which Noah had three
Sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth, and unto these were born Sons after the Flood: And
by these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their Lands; every one after
his tongue, after their Families, in their Nations, Genesis 10. 1, 5. These are
the Families of the Sons of Noah, after their Generations, in their Nations;
and by these were the Nations divided after the Flood, ver. 32. By which it
appears that every Nation consists of Families after their Generations,
that is, the Father and Mother with their Children, the two sort of Sinners Sin
entered into by the Fall of Adam as aforesaid: And likewise as aforesaid Christ
was proclaimed when come according to the Gospel preached to Adam and to
Abraham, that in Christ all the Families of the Earth shall be Blessed, Genesis
12. 3. namely with the Pardon of Sins; so Christ came to take away the Sins of
the World by Families, because he came to save that which was lost, Luke 18.
11. but Mankind was lost by Families, Romans 5. 12. as before showed. Now whereas
Moses writes, concerning the Gospel preached to Abraham, saying, that in his
Seed Christ, all the Families of the Earth shall be Blessed, Genesis 12. 3. The
Apostle Peter preaching that Gospel-Promise to the Nation of the Jews, in his
first Sermon applied the Promise in the Blessing to the Father and Mother with
their Children, saying, The Promise is to you and unto your Children, Acts 2.
39. And in his second Sermon, expounds the word all Families, written by
Moses, to be Kindreds of the Earth shall be Blessed, Acts 3 25. The Apostle
Paul expounds the word Families by Moses, Kindreds by Peter, to mean Nations,
even Men, Women and their Infants; and these are the Persons, which, by Christ's
Commission, are to be Taught and Baptized, Genesis 12. 3. Gal. 3. 8.

Now, as to the manner the Actual Sinners must be taught, and they must
actually confess and forsake their Sins, because they had actually sinned,
before they may be Baptized; and when the Parent believed, then Peter applied
the Gospel-Promise to the Believers and their Infants or Children as aforesaid,
Acts 2. 39. So then a Man's Family under the Promise, are his Children in
Nonage (other of their Children, if they have any that have actually sinned,
as have their Parents, must actually repent and believe before Baptized) but
the Infants in Nonage must be Baptized when their Parents are Baptized,
because their Sin charged on them, is by original Corruption derived to them,
pardoned with them, as Adam's Children and Abraham's, and all Believing Jews
and Gentiles Children in all Ages were, else Children dying in Infancy, could
not be saved by the revealed Will of God, because they are by Nature Children
of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.

Now this is Gods way in his word, that as Families, Kindreds, Nations, are one
and the same, and as a Man's Children are his Family under the Promise in the
Gospel, and a Man's nearest Kindred under the Promise are his Children, and that
every Family is a little Nation, as we see before of Noah's three Sons, the
Isles of the Gentiles were divided, every one after their Families in their
Nations; so when a Believer and his Children are joined to the Lord, called a
Family or Kindred, a little Nation is joined to the Lord; as Judah when they
came up out of Babylon by Families, were joined to the Lord, Jer. 50. 5. as
before all Israel were joined to the Lord by Families in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy.
29. 10, 11, 12, 13. The Father and Mother with their Infants, a Holy Nation;
for says the Prophet, meaning many Families, little Nations were joined to the
Lord in that day; as it is written, many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in
that day, and they shall be my People, Zach. 2. 11. as Israel were Gods People
by Families, and so, many Families in Covenant with the Lord, make one Holy
Nation both of old and now; as by Exodus 19. 6. with 1 Peter 2. 9. is proved,
how God calls his People by Families, some out of every Nation, as it is
written, Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred,
Tongue, People and Nation, Rev. 5. 9. But Nations, as the whole People in
England, France, Spain, Holland, or other Nations, never was yet heard of to be
all Converts in one day; or such a Nation to be joined to the Lord, every
individual Person, in one day; but Israel, as many Families, was joined to the
Lord in one day; being actual Believers and their Seed; so were they a Holy
Nation in a Holy Covenant, Dan. 11. 28, 30. a Nation in the midst of a Nation
or Nations about them; to whom, says the Lord, in respect of their Faith,
Worship and Marriages, they shall not be reckoned among the Nations, Numb. 23.
9. So now as every Gospel Church consisting of Families, as the Churches of God
in all Ages did, are as distinct Bodies, Holy Nations, yet considered as under
one chief Sheepherd Christ, they are but one Fold, one Nation or Brotherhood, 1
Pet. 2. 17. in all the World, called, The Family of Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 3.
15. over whom Christ is King, King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. as in civil States,
earthly Kings are called Kings, or King of Nations, Genesis 14. 1. unto whom both
Believers as well as others, are to obey them in Civil things in the Lord, as
Christ himself paid them Tribute; by which example, as in other Duties, all
Christians are commanded by the Apostles to obey, Romans 13. Now to Nations
consisting of Families of Unbelievers, the Apostles were sent by Christ to
preach the glad Tidings to Families and Kindreds, Rev. 14. 6. Therefore
whosoever shall preach any other Gospel than is found in the Prophets, sent to
be preached to Families, preaches not the Gospel of Christ, but another not
found in the Prophets. And therefore how dare any Man preach such a Doctrine
for Gospel, that is not written in the Prophets, that Adult Persons only have
the Promise of the Pardon of their Sins, and are saved by Christ, and not their
Infants with them; when as the Angel, sent to Cornelius, durst not deliver any
such Message as the Anabaptist Doctrine is, that he should send for Peter, to
tell him words whereby he (that had been an Actual Sinner) should be saved
only, and not his House, his Child or Children in Nonage with him, who were
Sinners, Children of Wrath by original Sin derived from Fathers to Children;
but the Message from God by the Angel, was, according to the Gospel contained
in the Prophets, in Christ, Families or Kindreds shall be Blessed, as
aforesaid. Therefore send for Peter, and he shall tell thee words whereby thou
shall be saved, and thy House; as anon shall by Scripture evidence be proved,
that a Man's House are his Children, his near Kindred, who are not Sinners in
Infancy by their own act, but Sinners, as aforesaid, by original Corruption,
derived from Father to Child, by the Fall in the first Adam, and are therefore
by Grace saved from Wrath to come by Christ the second Adam, the Sheepherd of
his Sheep, who has in his Fold, bought with his precious Blood, Lambs as well
as Sheep, Infants as well as their Parents. As was foretold by the Prophet when
he should come; his forerunner John should proclaim that Christ, who was born
a Lamb, a Sacrifice, a Savior, should like himself be a Sheepherd, most
compassionate to all his Redeemed, as it is written, He shall feed his Flock
like a Sheepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his
Bosom, Isaiah 40. 11.

This did Christ when he was on Earth, took Infants, Lambs of his Fold, of his
Kingdom, in his Arms, or in his Bosom, and Blessed them, Mark. 10. 13, 14, 15,
16. for by the word Bosom, is signified one near him Beloved; as John by that
Sign leaning on Christ's Breast or Bosom, John 13. 23. was said to be the
Disciple whom Jesus loved: And whether was poor Lazarus carried by the Angels,
but into Abraham's Bosom, as one dearly Beloved of his Father; so Christ was by
that word Bosom, manifested as one most dearly Beloved of his Father, John 1.
18.

But now the Anabaptists by their new found Gospel, would persuade, that in
Christ's Fold, he has no Lambs, but all Sheep: Adult Persons, such a Fold was
never heard of in Holy Scripture to be the Fold of Christ; nor from the
borrowed Metaphor of Sheepherds with their Folds on Earth. So that this
Doctrine of the Anabaptists is against the very order in things Natural, and so
in things Spiritual; that a Sheepherds Flock should have no Lambs among them;
but we shall, by Gods help, prove Christ's Fold, his Church on Earth, in all
Ages, had Lambs in that Fold, as well as Sheep, called a Man's House, Children,
or Lambs of the Sheep, Men and Women: Gods Holy Flock are Men, Ezekiel. 34. 3.
such as Fell in Adam, and were Restored in Christ, Romans 5. 18.

And that a Man's Child or Children are his House, saved with him, according to
the Gospel preached unto Abraham, that in Christ his Seed, all the Families of
the Earth shall be Blessed; and that every Nation to whom the Gospel is sent to
be preached, consists of Families or Kindreds, Rev. 14. 6. Acts 3. 25. as
first concerning the Nation of the Jews, in the Scriptures of the Prophets,
Children are there called a Man's House, and so in the New Testament; we
therefore are most certainly right in understanding of Scripture Terms or
Phrases, in the true meaning thereof, according as the Scriptures expound
themselves; as for example, that a Man's Child is called a Man's House; when any
Man Married in Israel, and died without Issue, his next a Kin was to take his
Brothers Widow to Wife, and the first born Son was to bear up the Name of the
Deceased, but if he refused to take his Brothers Widow to Wife, Then shall his
Brothers Wife, in the presence of the Elders, loose his Shoe from off his foot,
and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto the
man, that will not build up his Brothers House, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. to 9. And thus
Ruth did to her deceased Husbands next a kin, that refused to build up his
Brothers House, but when Boaz took her to Wife, the Elders Prayer was, The Lord
make this Woman like Rachel and Leah, which two did build the House of Israel,
Ruth 4. 11, 12. that is, by bearing Children unto Jacob, here we see a Child or
Children are a Man's House, by Scripture Explanation: Likewise the Widow of
Sarephtha's Son is called her House, see 1 Kings 17. 9. to 15. and when God
promised to make the Barren Woman Fruitful, it it written, He makes a barren
Woman to dwell in an House; that is, to be a joyful Mother of Children, Psalm
113. 9. To this truth that a Man's Child or Children are his House, the Doctrine
of the Apostle agrees with the Doctrine of the Prophets, for when the Apostle
Paul, in showing the Qualifications of one to be called into the Office of a
Bishop or Pastor of a Congregation in the Church of God, it is written, 1 Timothy
3. 4, 5. He must be one that rules his House well, (the House being explained
in the next words) having his Children in subjection; the reason is given, For
if a man know not how to rule his own House (his Children) how shall he take
care of the Church (or House) of Gods Children Young or Old. To confirm this
Truth, that Children are a Man's House under the Promise of Remission of Sins,
and so of Salvation by Christ, according to the Gospel preached to Abraham in
Christ; all Families of the Earth shall be Blessed; Christ said to Zacheus
(when he confessed his Faith and repented) This day is Salvation come to this
House (Luke 19. 9.) or Children.

For this reason, although he was in all likelihood a Gentile, yet because he
had the Faith of Abraham, therefore he was his Son, believing as Abraham did,
that God was a God not only to him when he actually believed as Abraham did,
but a God unto his Seed, in that Salvation was come to his House, his Children
with him; therefore to whom the Gospel is by the command of Christ to be
preached unto, and the Promises applied to them, go teach all Nations, these
are they by B. Keach's own grant, that our Lord Jesus has commanded to be
Baptized; as it is written in the great Commission, Go teach all Nations,
(Families or Kindreds of the Earth) Baptizing them, etc.

Again, seeing Lydia and Stephanus were Baptized, and their Households (Acts 16.
15. 1 Cor. 1. 16.) if the Scriptures of the Prophets do expound to us, That a
Man and Woman's Household were their little ones, their Sons and Daughters; then
we hope none can deny, but that the Believers and their Children were Baptized;
for the proof whereof, we read how David and his Men dwelt with Achish at Gath,
every Man and his Household, 1 Samuel 27. 3. but in process of time, while David
and his Men were absent from their Families, their Wives and Children were
taken Prisoners; so that as it is written, Every Man lamented for their Sons
and Daughters, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Thus what before were called their Households in 1 Samuel 27. 3. are explained to be their Sons and Daughters.

Again it is written, Jacob went down into Egypt, Every Man and his Household,
Exodus 1. 1. the Father and Mother, with their Children, concerning whom, Joseph
said unto his Father and Brethren, I will nourish you and your Households, Genesis
45. 11. which is expounded, I will nourish you, and your little ones, called
their little ones in Genesis 46. 5. and 50. 21. Now if Men will not believe the
Spirit of God, his own expounding his own word, to be sufficient ground of
Faith to believe, that the Household is the Children or little ones of his
People; there is no credit to be given to such Teachers, or People in Matters
of Faith; but the Spirit of God has expounded the Households to be Children;
therefore all that will take Gods word for their warrant, may answer
themselves, That the Apostles Baptized Children, or little ones of Believers,
when they Baptized Believers and their Households.

If the Anabaptists will not believe this, let them show better, or more clear
proof for any thing, as an Article of their Faith, which they believe, making
the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, agree in one harmony together. But
if any shall object, that Servants are included in the word Household, on
purpose to cavil at the Right Infants of Believers have to Water Baptism. The
Answer is to them, such need to be taught, rather than to be accounted Teachers
that can no better distinguish between a Son, a Child, and a Servant; the very
light of Nature might convince them, that great is the difference between a Son
and a Servant; a Man's Son is his very next a Kin (Genesis 12. 1. with Genesis 43. 7.
Genesis 15. 4. and 21. 10. Gal. 4. 7.) Heir to his Father, bears his Fathers
name, a Master to his Fathers Servants: As for example, when Abraham sent his
Servant to take a Wife for his Son Isaac, in their return, Rebecca seeing a Man
coming in the Field to meet them, she asked the Servant, who that Man was; he
said, it was his Master, to wit, Isaac, Genesis 24. 65.

Again, the Prodigal Son, when returning to humble himself to his Father, said,
Father, not Master, but Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee;
I am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants,
Luke 15. 18. Now by all this we see a Servant is inferior to a Son; therefore
when the Angel said to Cornelius, Send for Peter; he called two of his Hired or
Household Servants (Acts. 10. 7.) these were not the House, but Servants to the
House, but a Son abides in the House, because he bears the Name of the House
for ever, or for Life: So then, if a Servant were equal with a Son, an Heir, or
to bear up the Man's Name, doubtless Absalom, who had no Son to bear up his
Name, therefore he erected a Pillar, (2 Samuel 18. 18.) which he needed not to
have done, if a Servant had been equal with a Son, to have borne up his Name,
as a Son does his Fathers Name. And who were they that were called the House of
Israel, the House of Aaron, but their Children, and not their Servants. Thus we
see none are properly a Man's House, or Household, but a Man's Children: So Leah
and Rachel, as aforesaid, are said to build the House of Jacob or Israel, by
bearing Children in the Covenant, Heirs with Isaac in Infancy of the Promises
in Christ, until they, with Ishmael, for Sin be disherited, and become Servants
with the Bond-womans Son.

Obj. Another pretended Plea is, say the Anabaptists, Show us a Child by name
that was Baptized.

Answ. It was the way of Christ to some, to answer a Question by a Question; we
say to them, show us a Woman by name, that received the Lords Supper. They will
answer, it is evident that Disciples did break Bread at the Lords Supper, and
Women are called in Scripture Disciples; therefore here is sufficient ground to
believe, that Women did partake of the Lords Supper. It is granted, a Scripture
Consequence is good Proof, that it is to be believed, even in an Article of
Faith. Now then, we read that Infants at eight days old, with their Parents,
are called Disciples in Scripture, as it is written, Acts 15. 10. when
circumcised, Why therefore tempt ye God, to put a Yoke upon the Disciples neck,
which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear. This answer was made by the
Apostle, when the Jews that Believed, taught, that unless the Gentiles and
their Children were Circumcised, they could not be saved; here Infants, with
their Parents, are called Disciples. So then we read, that Disciples were
Baptized, Infants being by the Spirit of God called Disciples: We have grounded
reason to believe, that Infants were Baptized, by the Anabaptists own grant,
proportionably to their own Plea aforesaid in the Objection.

And that Infants of Believers have right to Water Baptism, is most certain,
because Christ has taken away their Sin; as John says, Behold the Lamb of
God, which takes away the Sin of the World: So is Salvation come to them as to
their Parent, when he the Father actually Believes; as Christ said to Zacheus
(Luke 19. 9.) when he believed, This day is Salvation come to this House, for
as much as he is a Son of Abraham, having the Faith of Abraham, believing as
Abraham did, that God was a God to him, and unto his Family or Seed, his
Children; and they that have not this Faith, have not the Faith of Abraham, so
are not Abraham's Seed; and if not Children of Abraham, they are not of Christ;
for it is written, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's Seed,
and Heirs according to promise. So the Children of the Promise are accounted
for the Seed; but the Believer, and his Child or Children, are Children of the
Promise; for so is the Doctrine of the Prophets, taught by the Apostles to the
Believers and their Seed, Acts 2. 39. For the promise is to you, and unto your
Children; from that word written, Ye are the Blessed of the Lord, and your
Offspring (or Buds) with you, Children of the Covenant God made with their
Fathers, Isaiah 65. 23. Acts 3. 25. Moreover the truth of this is confirmed by
the Babes of Christ's Kingdom, who together with their Parents, wellcomed the
Lord Christ, their Savior into his Kingdom, acknowledging Christ to be their
Savior; so that the Children, Crying in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of
David, Matt. 21. 15. that is, O Lord Save, or, Give Salvation O Lord: And this
was a trouble to such Men, then carnal Christians, that expected they should be
accepted, for the external act done, who knew not the way of the working of the
Spirit of Christ in the Infants of his Kingdom. But Christ defends their
Fact, by the Scriptures of the Prophets, and said unto them that were sore
displeased, when they said to Christ, Hear thou what these (to wit, the
Children) say? And Jesus said unto them, Yea, have ye never read (Psalm 8. 2.
Matt. 21. 15, 16.) out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected
praise.

Forasmuch as the Lord has said, concerning these Infants of his Covenant; And
this is my Covenant with them (Isa. 59. 21.) my Spirit that is upon thee, my
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of the mouth of thy
Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from hence forth
and for ever. Thus Gods Promise is, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
Blessing upon thine Offspring, Isaiah 44. 3. Which was here made manifest, to
the Amazement of natural Professors. Thus we see that the Fruit of Faith in
Children appears in time, in due season, when God requires Fruit of them, as
Plants in his Vineyard come forth, saying, But thou have took me out of the
Womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon my Mothers Breast, I was cast
upon thee from the Womb; Thou art my God from my Mothers Belly, Psalm 22. 9,
10. Thus the Lord Sanctifies his from the Womb, Jer. 1. 5. and as it is
written, The Babe leaped in the Womb for joy, Luke 1. 41, 42, 44. when the
Mother was affected with Spiritual Joy; of such the Lord says, Hear, O Jacob,
and all the Remnant of the House of Israel, which are born by me from the
Belly, which are carried from the Womb even to your old Age, Isaiah 46. 3.
these by virtue of the Promise to the Father and Child say, my Fathers God, and
I will exalt him, Exodus 15. 2. So that the Subjects of his Kingdom are Young
Men and Maids, and Old Men and Babes, Psalm 148. 12, 13. are all called upon to
Praise the Lord in due season; as Christ aforesaid, out of the mouth of Babes
thou have perfected thy praise. Now then, as Infants were a part of the
Subjects of the Kingdom of David, and that the Infants were a part of the
Honor of his Kingdom, as Solomon said, In the multitude of People is the Kings
Honor, Prove. 14. 28. Then for the Honor of the Lord Jesus, whom David figured
in his Kingdom; as it is written, They shall hang on him (to wit, on Christ)
all the glory of his Fathers house, the Offspring, and the Issue, all Vessels
of small quantity, from the Vessels of Cups, even to all the Vessels of
Flagons, Isaiah 22. 24. which Vessels great and small, are Saints Young and
Old, Believers and their little ones, A chosen Generation, a Holy Nation, Exodus
19. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. every Vessel great and small, Sanctified and made meet
for the Masters use, 2 Timothy 2. 21. as we see by the Children in the Temple, for
out of their Mouth the Lord perfected his Praise, crying Hosannah to Christ
their Savior.

These things thoroughly weighed, what a wicked Principle are these Men of, that
deny Infants the Sign of the Remission of Sins, Water Baptism, and utterly
reject them from being visible Members of the Church of God, or Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom; and so deprive the Lord Jesus of at least a third part of the
Subjects of his Kingdom; robbing him of his Honor, as aforesaid, the multitude
of People, is the Kings Honor; which Honor they will not allow Christ, but
exempting them out of the Covenant of Grace in Infancy, to be ranked among the
Infants of the vilest of Men, Turks and Pagans: For what says the Scripture
concerning such as are without, that is, without Gods Covenant, Rev. 22. 14,
15. they are reckoned among Dogs, Sorcerers and Whoremongers, and Idolaters,
and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. And this is the State the Anabaptists
reckon their own Children in; and if dying in Infancy, they in their own
judgment, as aforesaid, must perish to all Eternity; O horrible Principle! for
there is no middle way of Purgatory, either the Children of Believers are in
the Covenant of the Gospel or out, if within, as has been proved, they are
Blessed and Happy, dying in Infancy, For Blessed are the Dead that dye in the
Lord, Rev. 14. 13. that is, in his Covenant. If, as the Anabaptists say,
without the Covenant, then under the Curse, Cursed Children, without God in the
World. So that it is a Spiritual Cheat, as aforesaid, to say, to blind the Eyes
of the People that hear them, that the State of Infants is secret; the contrary
has been evidently proved, by these and like Scriptures, Romans 5. 12. Ephesians. 2.
3. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Again, that which blinds these People that they cannot see the Kingdom of
God, and so do not know the Subjects of the same, is because they reason
carnally against Infants thus, that because many of the Children of Believers
fall away, and become Profane; therefore say they, they have no right in
Infancy to Water Baptism. If these Men would look back in and among themselves,
and see how many of them whom they re-baptize by Dipping, do fall away to deny
that to be any Baptism at all; as how many of them turn Quakers, who deny
Water Baptism as well as the Lord's Supper, not now to be externally
Administered, and so no Gospel Ordinances: They might for shame be silent from
such vain Objections against the Baptizing of Infants, until they could enter
into the Secret Council of God, to know who among them, should renounce their
way, and turn to another, and who would not.

Again, another Objection they make to deprive the Infants of Believers from
their Right to Water Baptism, That Christ was Baptized at Thirty Years of Age,
therefore none but Men and Women of Years are to be Baptized.

Answ. This is as Carnal a Plea as the former, for herein they still bewray
their Ignorance, knowing not the reason why Christ was not Baptized until he
was Thirty years of Age, for as God is a God of order, so Christ, as Man, kept
order in all things he did: So that as he came to fulfill all Righteousness for
Believers and their Infants, waited for one foretold of by the Prophet Isaiah,
to begin that work which was to continue for a Gospel-Ordinance; as it is
written, The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make straight in the Desert a Highway for our God, Isaiah 40. 3.
Matt. 3. 12. Now although Christ was God, yet was he also Man, and so waited
for a Ministerial Officer to begin so great an Ordinance, a Gospel-Ordinance,
to remain as a Sign of Justification by Christ's Righteousness in the Remission
of the Sins of the Believers and their Infants, whose Sin or Sins he had bore
away in Promise, and was now come in Act to bare away in Person their Sins, as
a Lamb slain in the determinated Council of God before the World was.

Therefore John being the Son of a Priest, might not begin his Ministerial
Office according to the Law (not then abolished) until he was Thirty years of
Age, Numb. 4. 3. The Lord Jesus (as Man being but Six Months younger) was
Baptized so soon as John began his Ministry; and this was the reason why Christ
was not Baptized until he was about Thirty years old. So that this Plea from
Christ's being not Baptized until he was a Man grown, is Insufficient to prove
that Infants are not to be Baptized: thus we see what Windings and Turnings, by
any Color or vain Deceit, these People lie in wait to deceive by, who turn
away their Ears from the Truth, and be turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 4.

Another Pretense is, they plead the order of words, go Teach and Baptize; so
that from hence by carnal Reason, without respect to the Analogy of Faith,
according to the Doctrine of Baptism, they infer, That no one is to be Baptized
until he is capable to understand Doctrine. If the order of words would
satisfy these People, we read, John did baptize in the Wilderness, and
preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. Here
by this Scripture we see the order of words runs, John Baptized and Taught;
as elsewhere it is written, Go Teach and Baptize. To contend about words we are
forbidden, but commanded to contend for the Faith once given to the Saints.
Then for a ready way to understand the order of words in this matter, we must
begin at the Root, the Figure, or Forerunner of Water Baptism, namely,
Circumcision; the one coming in room of the other, as they both signified one
and the same Benefit to Believers, and their Seed in Christ, who was Baptized
and Circumcised for us; in the one, to fulfill all Righteousness, imputing his
Righteousness to Believers and their Infants, as by that Sign Washing away
their Sins in his Blood; the other in disburdening them of their Sins; as by
Col. 2. 11, 12. is proved, Matt. 3. 15. Romans 1. 5.

Therefore, as before showed, of all Actual Sinners, Actual Repentance and
Confession of Faith God required, before they might be Circumcised; for Abraham
and the Proselyte Gentiles, first by the word were called to Repent, God having
given them also Faith to believe in Christ, who was yesterday and to day, and
the same for ever; no other name given under Heaven, that ever any Soul can be
saved by, from Wrath to come: Now when such had Actually sinned and repented,
and believed, then were they Circumcised, as a Seal set on them of the
Righteousness of their Faith in Christ, who by his Circumcision, when come in
the Flesh, should disburden them of their Sins, as before proved by Col. 2. 11,
12. with Romans 4. 11. and because it was the pleasure of God, that as Infants
are Sinners not by their own Act, but by the Actual Sin of Adam, and so by
original Corruption still derived from Father to Children, therefore as the
Free Grace of God was, in the Gospel, preached to Adam and Abraham, That Christ
came to take away the Sin of the World, as before proved, Infants were guilty
of; and Romans 5. 12. Christ having bore away the Sin from Infants when the Sin
of their Parents was bore away, is the reason that the Infants of old were
Circumcised without Actual Confession of Faith and Repentance, and after were
commanded to be taught.

Then by the order of words, some as Actual Sinners were first to be taught,
before either Circumcised or Baptized; and others their Seed in Infancy, as for
the reasons before given, first Circumcised and after Taught, as now Baptized
and after Taught, Deuteronomy. 3. 12, 13. Ephesians. 6. 4.

And thus we see the order of words are reconciled, that John is said to
Baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptisin of Repentance; and the
Apostles preached Repentance and after Baptized: So that there is no warrant to
keep Infants from Water Baptism until they repent. Thus the Anabaptists
Doctrine is not of God, but a Point of their natural Faith: Seeing then it is
clear, that as Infants were first accepted into the Covenant of Grace in
Christ, with their Believing Parents, and then Circumcised, as by Deuteronomy. 29. is
proved, that first the Parents with their Little ones, entered Covenant with
the Lord, even the same Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, v. 13. and
afterward were Circumcised at Gilgall (Joshua 5. 3.) by Joshua, who was a
Circumcised Person of them that came out of Egypt; and then the Children were
taught what God had done for them, and what he did require of them as they grew
up, Genesis 18. 19. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and 11. 19. Prove. 22. 6. So that the Infants then
born, when God accepted them with their Parents into the Covenant of Grace with
himself; as also the Infants after born, their Parents were to bring with them;
in the Feast of Tabernacles, as it is written, Gather the People together, Men
and Women, and Children, and thy Str^^gers that is within thy Gates (joined
with Israel in Covenant with the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13.) that they may
hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God; and that their
Children which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to serve the Lord
your God, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13.

Even so are Parents now to bring their Children with them to the Congregation,
to hear the Law of God opened and explained, though as yet they may not have
known any thing, as it is written, Ye Fathers bring up your Children in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. For whatsoever things were
written afore-time, were written for our (the whole Church of Gods) Learning,
That they, through Patience and Comforts of the Scriptures, might have hope,
for them and their Children, Romans 15. 4. as says the Prophet, Who should arise
and declare them to their Children, that they might set their hope in God, and
not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments, Psalm 78. 6, 7.

Now that Israel were, with their Children, in the Covenant of Grace, is
evident; for if the Believing Gentiles and their Infants, were grafted into the
same Olive Tree, from which the Unbelieving Jews, with their Infants, were
broken off; and that when the Unbelieving Jews, as the Apostle teaches, shall,
by Grace, be Grafted in again to (what) but their own Olive Tree, Romans 11. 24.
that is, into Christ, by the Covenant of Grace, from whence they were broken
off, by not believing Christ in the Promise, when come to be their Savior, as
Christ said to the Jews, If ye believe not that I am he (to wit, the Seed of
the Woman promised) ye shall die in your sins, John 8. 24. but Peter in his
first and second Sermons to these Jews broken off from the visible Covenant of
Grace in Christ, know, if they were of the Election, they should yet obtain
Mercy; so shall they, with their Infants, be received of God in Christ. See
Romans 11. 7. for says the Apostle to the Jews (upon their being pricked in
their Hearts, and their embracing of Christ for their Savior) The Promise is
unto you and unto your Children, Acts 2. 39. Ye are the Children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham,
and in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed, unto you first,
God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away
every one of you from his Iniquities, Acts 3. 25, 26.

Here we see God has not cast away the Infants of his People, but as by
Unbelief some of the Jews were broken off, and their Infants with them; so when
such Actual Sinners believed, they and their Infants were grafted into the True
Olive Christ, by the Covenant of Grace again; and hereupon was that
Gospel-Promise fulfilled, as it is written, I will multiply them, and they
shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small: Their
Children also shall be as afore-time, and their Congregation shall be
established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them, Jer. 30. 19, 20.

Thus God ever had great esteem of the Lambs of his Fold, as appears in a day
of Sore Calamity, when the Lord called for a Fast, who but the Infants must be
Assembled with their Parents; as it is written, Blow the Trumpets in Sion,
sanctify a Fast, call a Solemn Assembly, gather the People, Sanctify the
Congregation, Assemble the Elders, gather the Children and those that suck the
Breast. Then says the Lord, Let the Priest say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and
give not thy Heritage to reproach. (Here we see Gods People are Men, Women and
their Sucklings and Little ones, the Heritage of the Lord their God,) Joel 2.
15, 16, 17. Will not these Anabaptists say, what Sense had Sucking Infants in
that work to seek the Lord? As much Sense as God required of them; but because
they were his Redeemed ones, with their Parents unto whom the Promises did
belong, therefore they were comprehended within the Benefit of the Promise, in
the Church of God, being a part of the Lords People, O Spare thy People, O
Lord; and God was their God, not by any other way but by the Covenant of Grace
in Christ, who takes away their Sin from them, the Sin of the World, Romans 5.
16.

Again, in a like day of Fast, when the Heathens came to invade the Land, King
Jehosaphat proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah, as it is written, all Judah
gathered themselves together to ask help of the Lord; now all Judah were Men
and Women and their Little ones; as it is written, And all Judah stood before
the Lord with their little ones, their Wives and their Children, 2 Chronicles. 20.
4, 13. Thus Children, with their Parents, the Lord calls for them in his
Service, that as Christ is a Mediator for them, so they are included in the
Prayers of the Church as they are a part of the same. Now let these Men show,
when Infants of Believing Parents were shut out from the Covenant of Grace,
before they, with Cain, Ishmael and Esau, by their own Actual Sins, made a
Separation between the Lord and them, while their Parents were steadfast with
the Lord in his Covenant which they were bound to keep with: Their Children,
that the Generations to come might know them, even the Children that should be
born, who should arise and declare them to their Children, that they might set
their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments,
Psalm 78. 6, 7.

Now with what Face can the Anabaptists say, The State of all Infants is
Secret; what word have they for it? no word of God, but like Men relying on the
word of Mortal Men, as B. Keach does, on his Author Dr. Tailor, who says, God
may have many ways to magnify his Grace through Jesus Christ, to them which we
know not of; to which he adds, And what have you to do with the Secrets of
God? who made you one of his Privy Council? Gold Refined, page 143.

Answ. Paul was one of Christ's Privy Council, and he tells us the State of
Infants is not Secret, for by Nature they are all Children of Wrath, all sinned
in Adam, and so are under Death and Condemnation: Is this Secret? the Apostle
Peter tells us, the Promise of the Gospel belongs to Believers and their
Children; Christ tells us in answering a question, his Disciples asked him,
who was greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, the Church. Jesus calls a little
Child, such as played in the Streets of Jerusalem, Zech. 8. 4, 5. and set him
in the midst of them, and declared that that Child of his Kingdom was in the
State of the Converted, and the Humble and Believing; so that if they were not
in like State, they should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 18. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

In Derision of all this, whatsoever the Prophet, or Christ in Person, or his
Apostles have said, concerning the Happy State of the Infants of his People, B.
Keach says, Page 144. What Faith is in Infants? and therefore in Derision of
them, against the very Testimony of Christ, says, Is it the Faith of the
Church? or is it an imputive Faith, or is it a dogmatical Faith? or is it a
Physical, or Metaphysical, or Hyperphisical Faith, etc.

Answ. Cannot a Child have the beginning of the Seed of Faith in the Bud,
unless the Acts of Faith be made manifest? I may answer him with Mr.
Ainsworth's words against the Anabaptists, never yet answered by any of them,
(Ainsworth's Censure on a Dialogue of the Anabaptists, Page. 52.) How do they
reason against the Light of Gods Word, and even against Nature it self; for if
some Brutish Person should plead thus; a Man is a Living Creature that has a
reasonable Soul; and the proper Affections of a Man, as he is a Man, are the
Faculties of Understanding, of Reasoning, of judging and discerning True and
False, Good and Evil; of Approving or Improving; of Willing or Nilling; of
Speaking, Numbering, etc. Now let them that affirm Infants are born Men, as
Christ does, John 16. 21. prove that Infants do understand, do think, remember,
judge, discern Good and Evil, approve, will speak, etc. or else they say
nothing: Were not such a Disputer to be hissed at, who requires the Actual Use
and Manifestation of Humane Affections and Faculties in Infants, which are in
them but potentially, and in the Seed and Beginning. And because they cannot
declare these things by their Works, therefore he denies them to be of the
Generation of Mankind, or born Men into the World; or that they have the
Faculties of Men at all in them any manner of way. Even so they reason against
the Grace of Christ in Infants, his work of Regeneration in them, (as Christ
says of the Children of his Kingdom, that they are converted, humble and
believe in him) because they cannot actually manifest the Effects of
Regeneration and Fruits of Faith (as did Timothy when grown up) as in Elder
Persons, who by reason of Age, have the use of their Senses exercised to
discern both Good and Evil. And here I desire to know, says Mr. Ainsworth, of
the Anabaptists; First, When they think that Children (who in their opinion are
born without any Sin) begin to be Sinners? Whether at two, three, five or seven
Years? And when they can justly reprove a Child for Sin? If it show in Word,
Deed or Gesture, any thing contrary to the Law of God; as if it Swear, Curse,
Lie, Disobey Parents, take another's Goods, be Froward, Angry or the like. Yea,
let any of them tell (if he can) when he himself fell from his Innocence, and
became a Sinner, being none before (as they account) by what Act of
Transgression, of what Commandment? for it is Strange, that an Innocent Man
should fall from his Innocence, and know not when nor how. Secondly, Whether
any Child, so soon as it begins to be a Sinner (an Actual Sinner) has not a
Remedy for the Sin by Christ; and so whether it is not capable of Repentance,
Faith, Regeneration, etc. and consequently of Baptism, (the Sign of Remission
of Sin;) so soon as it is a Sinner; and at what Age any of them have Baptized
their Children unto Remission of Sins; for Parents are commanded to bring up
their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. This they
cannot do aright, unless they know when first they begin to Sin, and
consequently when they begin to Believe; for if they blame a Child for Sin,
while it is an Innocent, they commit Iniquity. If they keep a Child from
Christ, and Christian Baptism, when it is a Repentant and Believing Sinner
(which may be so soon as it is a Sinner) they wrong most Sinfully, to coudemn
that which Christ justifies. These things ought to be considered by all that
Fear God.

And therefore before we conclude this Query, I cannot but observe the Folly of
the Anabaptists; and in particular B. Keach, how he despises those that prove
by Grounded Reasons from Gods Word, the Right the Infants of Believers have to
Water Baptism, because they show not a plain Text in the New Testament, in so
many literal words, Baptize your Children; as of old, Circumcise your Children.
And therefore he charge them (Gold Refined, P. 69.) to reflect upon the
Honor, Care and Faithfulness of the Lord Jesus; as if they rendered him less
Faithful than Moses. For, says he, Can any thing reflect more upon the Care,
Honor and Faithfulness of Christ, etc. than this. If he should neglect to
speak out his Mind and Will to us, to be so Careless, that Sorry Man is forced
to try his Wits to supply that which is wanting, or defective in his word; and
when he has done all, he leaves it as doubtful as he found it, in the Judgment
of Indifferent Men. Did Moses deal thus with the Children of Israel? No, no;
how careful was he to deliver every Law, Statute and Ordinance exactly; and in
particular the Passover. So B. Keach says.

Answ. Methinks this Man, together with the rest of his Brethren, in their late
Narrative, Page 16, 17. may by their own Ground, wherewith they charge others
to reflect upon the Care, Honor and Faithfulness of the Lord Jesus, be moved
to look on themselves, in that they are forced to try their Wits for want of so
many plain literal words in Christ's Testament, Remember to keep Holy the first
day of the Week, for the Performance of Religious Worship; as there is in Moses
Writings, Remember to keep Holy the Seventh day.

I say, they may see how, while they in their own Sense charge others to
reflect on the Care, Honor and Faithfulness of Christ, they themselves are
forced to try their Wits, by Reasons drawn from Christ's Testament, to prove
that which they grant is defective and wanting, by a plain Law as aforesaid, to
keep Holy the first day for Religious Worship. Therefore to turn that on
themselves, which they take to be the way of Faith, to keep the first day Holy
for Religious Worship, shall be as sufficient a Rule of Faith by their own
Grant, for us to prove by grounded Reasons from Christ's Testament, the Command
for Baptizing of Infants, as there is for keeping the first day Holy for
Religious Worship, without so many literal words: As for Example,

Their first Question or Reason is, for the keeping the first day: Whether it
be not the Duty of all Christians and Churches of Christ, to observe the
Lord's Day, or the first Day of the Week, in the Worship and Service of God,
both in Public and Private? They answer to their own question; it is concluded
in the Affirmative; (their reason is) because we find that day was set apart
for the Solemn Worship of God, by our Lord Jesus, and his Holy Apostles,
through the Infallible Inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

We likewise answer, It is concluded in the Affirmative, That that which was
once commanded by God to be observed, and never, by the same Lawgiver, yet
abrogated, is still to be kept and observed, Deuteronomy. 22. 32. But the Command to
set the Sign and Seal (Genesis 17. 12, 13.) or Token of Gods Mercy in Christ, on
the Believers and their Infants, was never yet repealed, but only the Sign and
Seal, or Token changed, from Circumcision to Water Baptism; even as the Seventh
day time is changed from the Seventh day to the First day of the Week, by the
Lord Jesus and his Holy Apostles, through the Infallible Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit.

Again they say, another reason is for keeping the first day, because the Son
of God was made manifest in the Flesh, had Authority to make a Change of the
Solemn day of Worship, being Lord of the Sabbath, Matt. 12. 10. Mark 1. 28.
Luke 6. 5.

By like reason we say, Christ was manifested in the Flesh, (Heb. 3. 6.) the
Son of God, and (Phil. 2. 11.) Lord of his own House, had power to change the
Seal of the Covenant; who altered not, but (Romans 15. 8.) confirmed the Promises
in the Covenant (by his being Circumcised) to the Believers and their Infants.
Now, to be sealed with the Sign Water Baptism, by the same Authority which we
believe Christ changed the Seventh day to the First day, to be kept Holy for
Religious Worship.

Again, whereas they say, it is manifest our Blessed Lord and Savior rose on
that day, as having completed and confirmed the Work of our Redemption, Matt.
28. 1. Mark 16. 2. Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1. whereby is laid a Foundation of the
Observation of that day.

By like reason we say, that for all whom Christ, by his Resurrection, has
completed and confirmed the work of their Redemption; he has laid a
Foundation thereby, for Sealing the same unto them, by that visible Sign of
Pardon, or Remission of their Sins, Water Baptism; but that Christ has
confirmed and completed Redemption, for the Believers and their Seed in
Infancy, before is largely proved in this third Query. Therefore these are to
be Baptized, Baptism by Water being cast upon them; as is at large proved to be
Gods way in the first Query; and by like grounded reason brought from
Scripture, as they now do, to keep the first day of the Week Holy for Religious
Worship to God.

Again they say, our Lord on that day appeared to his Disciples, teaching and
instructing them, and Blessing them, giving them their Commission, breathing on
them the Holy Ghost, Luke 24. John 20.

Answ. If the Blessing of Christ to his Disciples, with his Spiritual Blessing
of the Pardon of their Sins, who died for them, and on that day rose again for
their Justification, be a reason, why we should keep the first day Holy; it is
a like reason why Infants of Believers are to be Baptized, seeing the visible
Sign of the Remission of their Sins, in or by the Blessing of Christ bestowed
on the Infants of his Kingdom, Water Baptism is to be Administered on them,
because Christ died for their Sin, and rose on the first day for their
Justification, because they are of the Kingdom of God, Luke 18. 16. in which
time of the Forty days, Christ spoke to them of all things pertaining to his
Kingdom, Acts 1.

Again, if it be a reason, as they say, why we should keep the first day Holy,
because our Lord Jesus remained with his Disciples Forty days after his
Resurrection, and spoke to them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God;
and if they question not but he then gave them command, about the Observation
of the Lords day, Acts 1. 3.

Answ. Seeing the Lord Jesus in the Forty days he was with his Disciples, after
his Resurrection, spoke to them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God;
and that the time for Worship is one thing pertaining to the Kingdom, because
there is a Time and Season for every work; and that therefore there is no
question but he gave command about keeping the first day Holy. Even so there is
likewise no question but he gave command concerning all things else pertaining
to his Kingdom, as aforesaid; and the Infants of his People Christ himself has
said are of his Kingdom: There is no doubt, seeing he Blessed them with the
Pardon of their Sin, as well as he Blessed their Parents, but that he gave a
command they should be Baptized as well as their Parents, seeing Water Baptism
was to be Administered on all that had their Sin by the Blessing of Christ
pardoned (Acts 3. 26.) as it is written, Be baptized every one of you for the
remission of sins, for the promise, to wit, of the Pardon of Sins, in the
Blessing of Christ, is to you and unto your Children. So that by the
Anabaptists own grant, seeing Christ was Faithful in his House, as a Son, he
did not omit the commanding of the visible Sign of Remission of Sins,
Water Baptism, to all the Blessed in his Kingdom, no more than he omitted a
command for the keeping the first day Holy for Religious Gospel Worship;
because he was Faithful in his House as a Son, as Moses was as a Servant, Heb.
3.

Moreover, whereas they grant that the day of Pentecost was the first day of
the Week, Acts 2. 1. and seeing the Apostles Baptized 3000 on that day, there
is no question but that Christ gave command that they should Baptize on that
day; as in their Sixth Reason in their Narrative they say and grant the first
day was solemnly observed by the Churches, as appears in Acts 20. 7. with the
Solemn Duties then performed; and that we have no Example of the Churches then
Assembling together, to celebrate all the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus peculiar
to them, but on the first day of the Week, mark that therefore.

If the Practice of the Primitive Churches in the Purest of Times, be the Rule
for Gospel Churches ever since to follow their Examples (1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.) as it
is, and that all the Ordinances are to be celebrated on the Lords day, which
Practice of the Churches is by the Anabaptists granted in their Narrative, to
be an evident plain Demonstration of its being a Day set apart for Religious
Worship, by the Will and Command of the Lord Jesus, as if it had been expressed
in the plainest words: How is it then (seeing Water Baptism is a part of
Spiritual Worship, as they grant, and an Ordinance when first performed after
Christ's Resurrection, on the Lords day, in the Church-Assembly, where was no
River nor Pond) that the Anabaptists Baptize after their way of Dipping on any
Working-duy, out of the Church Estate when Assembled, when as by the Example of
a Church-Practice at Jerusalem, in the Purest of Times, whose Example all
Churches are to follow, that then, when the Church was Assembled to perform
other parts of the Worship, then Water Baptism was performed in the
Congregation: Which is a plain Demonstration, that they were not Baptized by
Dipping, but by casting Water on the noble part of Mankind, which represents
the whole Person; as before in the first Query is proved.

Therefore tho the Apostles and Evangelists, by an extraordinary call, Baptized
in any place where any were Converted, yet that any ordinary Officer, as Pastor
or Teacher, chosen and ordained by a particular Congregation, Baptized any
other where, but in the Congregation, at the same time when all other
Ordinances are to be performed in Worship, as they grant, therefore it is not
lawful by the Anabaptists own grant, for any to Baptize on any other day but
the Lords day, and then to be done in the Assembly with other parts of Worship;
forasmuch as they say, the first day was solemnly observed by the Churches, as
appears by Acts 20. 7. with the Solemn Duties then performed, and that we have
(say they) no example of the Churches then Assembled together, to celebrate all
the Ordinances of our Lord Jesus peculiar to them, but on the first day of the
Week.

Now let the Reader judge, whether the Charge given by these Men, against such
as by Scriptures grounded Reasons, prove it lawful to Baptize the Infants of
Believers without so many literal words in Christ's Testament, Baptize your
Children: Seeing they by the same way, allow and endeavor by grounded Reasons
from Scripture, to prove the first day of the Week, to be the only day to keep
Holy for Gospel Worship; when as in the Testament of Christ, there wants so
many literal words, Remember to keep Holy the first day; as of old, Remember to
keep Holy the Seventh day. Who is it now? I say, they or we that reflect upon
the Care and Honor and Faithfulness of our Lord and Blessed Savior. Because,
say they, did Moses deal thus with the Children of Israel. No, no, how careful
was he to deliver every Law, Statute and Ordinance exactly and particularly, in
or about the Ordinance of the Passover; that now they are forced to try their
Wits to supply that which is wanting, in their Sense, to prove the first day to
be kept Holy in the Worship of God. Therefore seeing that they allow it lawful
in themselves to do that, which in things of like nature they condemn in
others. Let these Men hear what the Lord Jesus says to such like Spirits,
(Mat. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5.) With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with
what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again: And why beholdest thou
the Mote in thy Brothers eye, but considerest not the Beam that is in thine own
eye, thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own eye, and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers eye.

And again, as we do believe the next immediate time after the Work of the
Creation of the World, was the time God in the Fourth Commandment commanded to
be kept Holy until a new Creation was made, wherein God in Christ his word,
created new Heavens and a new Earth, Isaiah 65. 17. Rev. 21. 1. Isaiah 51. 16.
namely, new Heavenly Ordinances; the old as Figures of Christ to come, now by
Christ's Death abolished (Heb. 9. 23.) which were for a time commanded to be
kept, by the Second Commandment; as now the Lord Jesus, we hear by a Voice
from the Throne of God, says, Behold I create all things new; to wit, new
Ordinances, a new Ministry, a new Maintenance, and a new Time to be kept Holy,
and a new People, called a new Earth, the Gentiles called to the Faith,
Fellow-heirs, and of the same Body with the Believing Jews, Partakers of his
Promise in Christ by the Gospel: And therefore it is written also (Ephesians. 3. 6.
Romans 15. 9, 10. Romans 11. 24. with Jer. 11. 16.) Rejoice ye Gentiles with his
People, who were wild by nature, are now by a new Creation in Christ Jesus,
Grafted, contrary to nature, into the good Olive Tree, with the Believing Jews
and their Children; so that if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches; the Root
being Gods Love in Christ, in the Covenant of Grace to us and our Children, as
of old to Abraham and his Seed, the Believing Jews and their Children; so now
to the Believing Gentiles and to our Children, who are Holy by virtue of the
Holy Covenant which God made with Abraham and his Seed in their Generations, if
so as they grew up they continued with Isaac in the Faith. So that the next
immediate time, after Christ by his Death had confirmed the Holy Covenant with
many, Dan. 9. 27. to wit, with Believers and their Seed in Infancy, was the
time to be kept Holy, even the first day of the Week: So that although the
Figurative Ordinances be abolished, together with the old time next after the
first Creation, by the Death and Resurrection of the Lord of the Sabbath: Yet
as by the Moral Equity of the Second Commandment, the new Ordinances for
Gospel Worship are to be kept without adding to, or diminishing from, by any
Mortal Man; even so by the Moral Equity of the Fourth Commandment, the first
day, the next immediate time after the new Creation, is to be kept Holy for
Gospel Worship, to be believed by all Christians by grounded Reasons from
Scripture; as by like equality by grounded Reasons from Scripture, is to be
believed the Right the Infants of Believers have to Water Baptism. And
therefore let them be ashamed ever hereafter, to speak against, or deny, that
Reasons from Scripture are not sufficient to prove the Right the Infants of
Believers have to be Baptized. And this leads to the Fourth Query.

Query 4. Who are they that the Lord Christ has ordained in his Gospel to the
Worlds end, to be the Administrators of Water Baptism, and the Lords Supper?

To this Query Ben. Keach says, in Page 20, 21. of his Book: That the
Administration, or Act of Water Baptism, was not tied up to the Apostles, or to
the more ordinary Ministers; but that any Faithful gifted Disciple might
Administer it as well as they; nor does the Efficacy of Baptism depend in the
least upon the Quality of the Person Administering of it, whether it be Paul,
Apollo or Cephas, or any other Disciple much inferior to them in Capacity or
Office, it is no matter; for Ananias, a private Disciple, Baptized; and Philip,
who was no other than a Deacon, or Overseer of the Poor, Baptized many in
Samaria, Acts 8. So that we find in the Primitive times, the Simple Act of
Baptism was a Work Inferior, Servile and Subservient to that of Preaching the
Gospel.

Answ. The Lord Jesus in the Commission, Go ye and teach all Nations, Baptizing
them, was after Christ's Resurrection given to Men in Office only.

Unless the Anabaptists think, that the Apostles were no Officers, but Common
Disciples, as anon it will be proved is their Judgment, and that they look upon
the Apostles in the work of Baptizing, but only to be Gifted Disciples. So that
when these Men Err in any one of the Fundamentals in Christ's Building (with
respect to the Ministry) it being overthrown, the whole work must needs be a
Babel of Confusion, as will appear; for no Man can maintain an Erroneous
Principle, but he must violate either Faith or Order. As first, in this
particular, for Ben. Keach to affirm, That the Simple Act of Baptism was a work
Inferior, Servile and Subservient to that of Preaching of the Gospel. This Man
seems not only to cross the very Order in Nature, and much more in Grace. For
in earthly Covenants it matters not what hand writes the Conditions, if he be
judged capable thereof: Yet heed is to be taken in a special manner, that the
Sign or Seal to it, be fixed by the Person that has Authority to do it; as the
very Nature of Sealing to Covenants Civil or Spiritual, the Holy Scripture
shows, John 3. 33. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. Jer. 32. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 9. therefore
what care is to be taken, what Hand Administreth the Setting to of the Hand in
the Signing and Sealing of our Everlasting Covenant? of which Water Baptism is
one, wherein is contained all the Promises of Gods Love in Christ, to us and
unto our Children, to confirm the revealed things, that, the Scripture says,
belongs to us and unto our Children (Deuteronomy. 29. 23.) of the Remission of our
Sins here, and of our Eternal Inheritance in Heaven hereafter. Now then, to the
Law and to the Testimony, they that speak not according to it, there is no
light in them, Isaiah 8. 20.

Therefore, though it was lawful for any Gifted Brother (Acts 13. 15. 1 Cor.
14. 29, 31. Heb. 5. 12. 1 Peter 4. 11.) or Man in Israel, as now it is in the
Churches, under the Gospel, to expound the Scripture: Yet, as of old, the
Sealing Ordinances were commanded of God, to be done by Men in Office; which
the Apostle Paul confirms in these words, For no Man takes on him the Office
of Priesthood, (Heb. 5. 4.) but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So that
for breach of order, as well as in other matters, whatsoever was written before
time, is written for our Learning (Romans 15. 4. Psalm. 102. 13.) to warn all,
that none presume, without Office, to do the work belonging peculiarly to an
Officer; least Gods Judgment in Soul, and Blindness of Mind and Body, fall on
them, as it did on Corah, Dathan and Abiram (Numb. 16. 16.) who sought to
overthrow Gods Order appertaining to Offices (as the Anabaptists do, as
aforesaid) like they of old to Gods Ministers, that they take too much upon
them. For so they of old charged Moses and Aaron, as the Anabaptists now do the
Apostles, upon the same Grounds with like pretense, seeing all the Congregation
are Holy, and so many gifted Brethren, Famous in the Congregation: Why may not
they Administer the Sealing Ordinances, as well as you, the Ministers of the
Lord. Surely, if the right Eye of these Men were not blinded (Zach. 11. 17.)
they might see that John for his Office was Surnamed the Baptist, foretold of
by the Prophet in Holy Scripture, and not for his Preaching only, but in
special by name, called John Baptist (Matt. 3. 1. Luke 7. 20. John 1. 31.) for
Baptizing. So that we see at the first Institution of Water Baptism,
established for a Gospel Ordinance, after Christ's Death and Resurrection (Acts
2. 38, 39.) as a Sign and Seal of the Benefit of the New Testament, for the
Remission of Sins, was commended by the Lord, and given to his peculiar
Messengers, the Apostles called Ambassadors (2 Cor. 5. 20.) and such as were
endued with Gifts to work Miracles: These Master Builders having given order
for the Ordaining of Officers by the Churches, for to Administer the infealing
Ordinances, namely, Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper by Pastors and Teachers,
Titus 1. 5. Acts 14. 23.

Thus we see why the Anabaptists would be called Baptists, because all would be
Baptizers, and John a Baptist: Yea, and do hereupon hold it lawful, for an
unbaptized Person to Baptize himself; and herein they pretend to a higher
Commission than John Baptist. Therefore,

And now at random, without due Consideration, has Been. Keach said, as
aforesaid, That the Efficacy of Baptism depends not, in the least, upon the
Quality of the Person Administering of it. Ben. Keach Gold Refined, P. 20, 21.
As if John was an ordinary Person; whom the Scripture says, Among those that
were born of Women, there was not a greater Prophet than John the Baptist,
Matt. 11. 11.

Moreover, the Jews well knew that Water Baptism was a great Ordinance, that
was adjoined to Circumcision, as Mr. Henry Ainsworth, in his Annotations on
Genesis 17. shows out of the Jews Records; How that every Proselyte that joined
himself to God, and his Church, by the Covenant of Grace in Christ, (for by no
other Covenant was ever any Soul reconciled to God.) So that the Hebrews write,
That every Proselyte that joined himself, was Baptized, Circumcised, and
brought a Sacrifice. So that Circumcision and Baptism then was not done by any
ordinary Person, less than Gods Minister by Office. Therefore the Jews made no
question of the Ordinance of Water Baptism in it self. But the question they
put to John was (John 1. 25.) Why Baptizest thou, if thou be not the Christ,
nor Elias, nor that Prophet? By which it appears, that they held it unlawful
for any ordinary Teacher in Israel to Baptize, but a Prophet of God, or at
least a Ministerial Officer. And so we have reason to believe now, in the
Administration of Gods Sealing Ordinances, Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
that no Man, but a Minister by Office, as Pastor or Teacher, can or may
Administer it without Sin (since extraordinary Officers are ceased, as Apostles
and Evangelists) unless we hold the Baptism of Water, after Christ's
Resurrection, inferior to the Baptism of John.

For most clear it is, that the Sacraments of the Old Testament were
Administered by peculiar Men, called of God thereunto: As the Ark in the Water,
being a Figure of Baptism, built by Noah (1 Peter 3. 20, 21.) a Priest and
Preacher of Righteousness. Circumcision Administered by Abraham, a Prophet (Genesis
17. 13.) Patriarch and Priest, the private Passover, by the Elders and Fathers
of Families, the public Passover, at the place the Lord had chosen;
Administered by the Priests and Levites; and to this day, the Priests among the
Jews Circumcise all their Male Children in Germany and other places. So when
Christ the Master (Matt. 26. 26.) did eat the Passover with his Disciples, He
it was that took the Bread, Blessed and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples.
These things the Apostle Paul urged to be minded in the Church of God at
Corinth, and so to all Churches, that order be kept in the Performance of all
Gods Ordinances; for God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace as in all
Churches of the Saints; and therefore has commanded, that all things be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40.

Again, For to what purpose are Officers chosen, as in the Old and New
Testament? But that some special work belongs to them, which Men out of
Office may not (no, not under never so good intent) presume to do, (2 Chronicles.
13. 11.) as did Uzza, which cost him his Life, but he that is called of God. So
that whereas it is before objected by Ben. Keach, that Philip Baptized, being
but a Deacon, which is a gross Mistake (Acts 21. 8.) for a Teacher to publish
in Print; wherein he has shown his gross Ignorance in so plain a case, if not
a willful Mistake, supposing his word was a Law to the Anabaptists; for we
read, when Philip Baptized, he was more than a Deacon, namely, a Minister of
the Word, and named expressly an Evangelist (Acts 21. 8.) which was one of those
extraordinary Offices given to the Churches for a time, as were the Apostles.
Besides Philip was (Acts 8. 26.) Authorized expressly to Baptize, and furnished
with Gifts, and working Miracles. Therefore no ordinary Person, as B. Keach
degradeth him, in saying, He was no other than a Deacon, or an Overseer of the
Poor, when Philip Baptized. This Error he had need to correct in his next.

Again, as concerning Ananias, he was no private Person, as B. Keach says, for
we read, he was by the Lord immediately called, and enabled to work Miracles
(Acts 22. 12, 13.) to wit, on Paul, before he Baptized him: And as touching the
Sects in Corinth, it gives light in this matter, for some followed Paul, some
Cephas, some Apollo, taking occasion, as it seems, by the Persons that
Baptized them, unto whom they leaned, more than unto others. Now if it were so,
that some of these were private Men, though as it has been proved they were
not, yet the Action of a private Man, in a work done by express command from
God (any more than Gideon (Judges 16. 25, 26.) in offering Sacrifice, which
belonged only to the Tribe of Levi, might be followed by any other of his
Brethren, of the Tribe of Manasseh.) Again, that any Man of Cyprus or Cyren
Administered Baptism, or the Lords Supper, cannot be, nor yet is, by the
Anabaptists, proved by any one Scripture; and as for Apollo, he was no private
Man, whom Paul joined with himself; nor Cephas, who either was Peter, or some
eminent Officer, a Planter and Minister, whom the Corinthians accounted as one
of their chief Teachers; therefore more than common Disciples, as B. Keach
faineth, out of his own Heart, which deceives him, and others that take his
bare word for proof, or rule to practice, of what he has written about
Baptism, either in the manner, or in the Administrator of it.

And what is to this end published lately, in a Narrative (Page 18.) of the
Anabaptists? but that they allow the high Breach of Gods order: Namely, That
other than Pastors or Teachers may Administer the Lords Supper. If so, then
what need is there of Men to be chosen into Office; or what need any care be
taken for Ministers Maintenance, who are chosen to wait upon their Ministry,
and have charge given them by the Holy Ghost, as Overseers of the Flock, Acts
20. But we see how little care these Men take, that all things among them be
done decently and in order, but have published, as aforesaid, rather that order
is not to be regarded; whereas they may remember, when for breach of order, for
presuming to do that work which God had enjoined to be done by Office, as
aforesaid, how Corah and his Company were swallowed up in the Earth, Numb. 16.
And for breach of order, how King Uzziah was (2 Chronicles. 26. 16.) struck with
Leprosy to the day of his death, presuming to do the Priest's work. Likewise
God destroyed Uzza a Levite, as aforesaid, who out of a good Intent, touched
the Ark (1 Chronicles. 13. 10.) to keep it from falling, which work only belonged to
the Priest's Office (Numb. 4.) to touch the Ark. These things being written for
our Admonition, upon whom the end of the World is come, 1 Cor. 10. 11.

How then dare the Anabaptists resolve in the Affirmative, in their Narrative
page 18. without any word dropped from Christ, or grounded Reason from
Scripture, that an Elder of one Church, may Administer the Ordinance of the
Lords Supper to another of the same Faith, being called so to do by the said
Church, though no Pastor, but as a Minister, that is neither Pastor nor Teacher
by Office, Necessity being only considered in the case, and produced no
Scripture to prove it, when as Necessity did not warrant Uzza in touching the
Ark, as aforesaid, Narrative, page 18. Now although B. Keach has set his Hand
to the aforesaid Narrative, as Lawful, without Command or Example, or true
grounded Reason from Scripture for it; yet in his Answer to an Argument brought
for Infants Baptism, nothing he will allow but a literal Command in such Term
of words he thinks fit: The Argument for Infants Baptism is this: There is
nothing in all the New Testament against Infants Baptism, says Mr. Smythies,
If indeed our Savior had declared, that Infants should not be Baptized; or if
we had read of the Apostles refusal of them. And there is no hint from any
express word from Christ, says Mr. Sidenham, or his Apostles, nor any Phrase
which does forbid such an Act.

B. Keach says, We will answer with Tertullian, for there is a certain Rule,
says he, If it be said it is lawful, because the Scripture does not forbid it,
it may be equally retorted, it is therefore not lawful, because the Scripture
does not command it. To which he farther adds, to back Tertullian, saying,
That which is done in the Worship and Service of God, without an express word
dropped from Christ or his Apostles, or any Phrase which does signify it is his
Will and Mind it should be done, is unlawful, and no better than Will worship,
Gold Resin'd, Page 146, 147.

Now will not the Reader mark how this Man is Yea and Nay; for what word is
dropped from Christ, that other besides Pastor or Teacher shall Administer the
Ordinance of Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper, since extraordinary Offices
are ceased, as Apostles Evangelists and the like (as he with others affirms)
that a Teaching Disciple may Baptize, and no word dropped from Christ for it:
Yet he grants Water Baptism to be a part of Gospel Worship; and that
whatsoever is done in Worship, without an express Command from Christ or his
Apostles, he grants is no better than Will Worship; therefore seeing there is
no word dropped from Christ, that any other, besides Pastor or Teacher, may
Administer the Lord's Supper; nor yet no other may Administer Water Baptism: It
is therefore Will Worship by his own grant, for any, being but a Teaching
Disciple, to Baptize. As likewise, when any among them, and not a Pastor or
Teacher, Administers the Lord's Supper, is likewise Will Worship, and so a high
Breach of Gods Order. So that Church which allows these things, has, as the
Lord complained, transgressed the Laws, and broken the Everlasting Covenant;
which Church or City is therefore called the City of Consusion Isa. 24. 10. the
very Name of Babylon, out of which Assemblies all Gods Elect are called out
from among them, Rev. 18. 4. Although they Boast and say, Lo here is Christ,
and Lo there is Christ, Christ says, Go not after them, Matt. 24. 23. for
where Order is not regarded nor kept, in either State Spiritual or Civil, there
is Consusion and every evil work.

Therefore let us take a view in Holy Scripture in Christ's last Will, namely,
of the orderly Performance of all Gods Holy Ordinances in Worship, according to
the Rules prescribed in the Testament of the Lord Jesus, as it is written, Let
all things be done Decently and in Order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Now because Order is
joined to Faith, therefore says the Apostle, For though I be absent in the
Flesh, yet am I with you in the Spirit joying, and beholding your Order and
Stedfastness of your Faith in Christ, Col. 2. 5.

Therefore as the Ordinances are several, every one having dependence on each
other; therefore Prayer being a Sanctifying Ordinance, (Numb. 10. 35. Col. 14.
4. 1 Timothy 4. 4. Acts 2. 42. and 6. 4. Matt. 26. 26, 27. Numb. 6. 23, 27.) the
Pastor or Teacher, when the Church is gathered together in some one place (1
Cor. 11. 29.) Sanctifies the Congregation by Prayer; and as Praises are next
unto Prayer, the whole Church Praising the Lord by Singing a Psalm of Holy
Scripture, even the words of the Prophets of old, 1 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9, 29.
Matt. 26. 26. Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. 2 Chronicles. 29. 29, 30. Rev. 15. 2, 3. This
being ended, the Pastor or Teacher gives Attendance to Reading (Exhortation
and Doctrine) having read some part of Holy Scripture, giving the Sense and
Meaning thereof; as likewise taking some Scripture, and teach or raise Doctrine
from the same, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Nehem. 8. 8. Phil. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 2. 13. Luke 4.
18, 21, 22. Cant. 4. 16. This being done, then the Prophets or Gifted Brethren
spoke by Memberal Right; as it is written, Quench not the Spirit. despise not
Prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20. Keeping order by one, two or three at most (1
Cor. 14. 24, 29.) as time will permit. This being done, the Church freely
contributing to the Maintenance of the Officers and Poor, the Deacons attending
thereto by Office, to gather the same, and as need requires, to distribute the
same, Acts 6. 2, 3, 5. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 8. 12. Prove. 27. 23. and 3. 18.
This being ended, the Ruling Elder, in the time of Christ's Regal Government in
the Church, Christ's Kingdom, together with the other Elders, Pastor and
Teacher, see that order be kept, being the time when any Persons desire to be
joined to Christ by Covenant (Jer. 50. 5. Acts 2. 47.) to judge of the work of
Grace in them, by their Profession, being approved by the whole Church; and
then are they to receive them into the Covenant, with their Children in Nonage
(Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12.) because the Promise is to them and unto their Children,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Acts 2. 39. in which time of Government, likewise if there be any
Complaint against any Members, for their Disorderly walking, or for Errors in
Faith, it is written, If they will not hear, to wit, private Admonition; and
so, if they will not be reclaimed at the first and second Admonition, to tell
it to the Church; and if they despise the Churches Admonition, to cast them out
in the Name of the Lord Jesus from the Communion of Christ in the Church, and
so from all the Benefit of the Promises in the Covenant, Rev. 4. 2. Isa. 9. 7.
Matt. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. Prove. 29. 1. This Ordinance being ended, if
any were received into Covenant in the time of Government, and had never been
Baptized into the Name of Jesus, then the Seal must be set on the Persons
received into Covenant, as a Sign of the Pardon of their Sins, being washed
away in the Blood of Christ, the Lamb, the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
called the Church Covenant, Zach. 9. 10. So that by Water Baptism Christ may be
made manifest both to Parents and their Infants, that he has bore away their
Sin or Sins, John 1. 29, 31. Heb. 8. 12. This Ordinance being ended, performed
by the Pastor or Teacher, then follows the Administration of the Lord's Supper;
as it is written, The Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion
of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we brake, is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ? For we being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are
all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The finishing of this
Ordinance is by singing a Psalm; the whole Action of the day in Worship,
finished by Prayer.

Thus as all grant every Ordinance in the Church-Assembly is to be performed on
the Lords day, as the Anabaptists also grant in their Narrative Page 17. in
these words, We have no Example of the Churches then Assembling together, to
celebrate all the Ordinances of our Lord Jesus peculiar to them, but on the
first day of the week. As before showed in their Reasons about keeping the first
day for Gospel Worship. Thus when Gods Holy Order is kept in the Practice, all
Gods Ordinances in his Church, his Kingdom, the Beholders thereof will say, God
is in them for a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25. and with this Admiration who is this
(Cant. 8. 5.) that thus follows the Captain of their Salvation (Heb. 2. 10.
in the Heavenly Warfare of his Gospel, Rev. 19. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.) whether
soever he goes before them in his Commands (Rev. 17. 14. Rev. 14. 4. 1 Cor.
11. 1. then will the Spouse of Christ appear Crowned with Twelve Stars walking
in the Apostles and Prophets Doctrine, Christ being the chief Cornerstone,
whose Righteousness is put on by Faith (Romans 13. 14.) looking forth as the
Morning (she is) Fair as the Moon, Clear as the Sun, Terrible (to all her
Enemies) as an Army with Banners, Cant. 6. 10. Rev. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. And this is
that Virtuous Woman (her Price is above Rubies) that looks well to the ways
of her Household, and Eats not the Bread of Idleness; her Children arise and
call her Blessed, her Husband also, and he praises her, Prove. 31. 10, 27, 28.

Now then where Gods Holy Order is not kept, there is Confusion and every evil
work; and what does Babel mean but Confusion? so is every City or Church, that
transgresses the Laws, or changed the Ordinances, or breaks the Everlasting
Covenant, called the City of Confusion. And this makes way to take in
consideration the Fifth Query; which is,

Query 5. Whether it be Lawful for any Man to Baptize himself?

In speaking to this Query, is showed, that from such an Administrator, the
English Anabaptists have successively received their way of Re-baptizing of
Adult Persons only, and excluding the Infants of Believers from the same, or
the Right to have Water Baptism Administered on them.

Therefore it may be expedient to give some Description of this first Baptizer
of himself, by Name John Smith, who by Profession was a Minister of the Church
of England; disliking thereof, went over into Holland, and joined himself to an
English Church at Amsterdam; at which time Mr. Henry Ainsworth was Teacher to
the said Church; now as it appears by Calvin, in his Institutions, there were
some in his time, called Anabaptists in Judgment, denying Infants Baptism, from
this Principle they then maintained, in denying original Sin; so that they
affirmed Infants were not born Sinners, and from hence they pleaded, there need
no Sign of Remission of Sins be Administered on them. Now this Error is confuted
in a word, If Infants were not born Sinners, then they could not dye until they
had Actually sinned, for the Wages of Sin is Death; but some Infants dye so
soon as born, therefore sinful by Nature, as in the third Query proved. But
since the Anabaptists have devised another Erroneous Doctrine, as before showed,
to deprive Infants of Water Baptism, that is, because they cannot profess Faith
and Repent, therefore they have, say they, no Right to be Baptized: This
likewise has been disproved, and also proved, that Infants being born Sinners,
the only thing which gives them Right to have Water Baptism Administered on
them, is Remission of their Sins in the third Query. A third Devise these
People have found to deprive Infants of their Right to Water Baptism,
persuading People of years they were not Baptized at all, if not Dipped or
Plunged in Water. This Error has likewise been refuted in the first Query.

And lastly, When the Anabaptists had framed so many Devices to deny all
Infants Baptism, they were confounded in themselves, what to do to begin
Baptizing in their way of Baptizing Adult Persons only, as Men and Women, there
being no such Administrator to be found for an unbaptized Person, (without an
immediate call from Heaven, as John Baptist had,) to Baptize. But one John
Smith, as aforesaid, being more desperately wicked than others, when being cast
out for Error out of a True Church, he Baptized himself, and then he Baptized
others, and from this Man the English Anabaptists have successively received
their new Administration of Baptism on Men and Women only.

And now let us take a small Description of this Man, as aforesaid, When he was
joined a Member to an English Church at Amsterdam, whose Wolvish Nature was hid
for a time; as it is written, For I know this (says Paul to the Church of God
at Ephesus) that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the Flock also of your own selves: Shall men arise speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20. 29, 30. Such a
Wolf was John Smith, for before he pleaded for Anabaptistry, he was so great an
Instrument of Satan, that he sought to deprive the Church of God he had joined
himself unto, of the use of the Bible; not only as not to be used before the
Eye, as not to be looked into in time of Worship, contrary to the Practice of
Christ and the Apostles, Luke 4. 16, 17 1 Timothy 4. 13. Ephesians. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 13.
but also that it was not lawful to make use of the Bible in any other Tongue
than that it was first written in.

Mr. Henry Ainsworth being Teacher in the aforesaid Church, and so well
acquainted not only with the Original Togues (that first the Scriptures were
given in) but also with the mind of Christ in the same; answered his Reasons
against the use of Translations, his main or principle Reason was this, as Mr.
Ainsworth says, That no Apocrypha Writing, but only the Canonical Scriptures,
are to be used in the Church in time of Worship; every written Translation is
an Apocrypha Writing, and is not Canonical Scripture; therefore every written
Translation is unlawful in the Church in time of Worship. Ainsworth's Defense
of Scripture, Page 1, 2.

Now says Mr. Ainsworth, Some time after he had published this Error, God
struck him with Blindness, that he could no longer find the door of the Church,
out of which he was gone by Schism, and which he had assaulted with Errors,
namely, our entering in by the Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed (as now
to the Faithful and their Seed) which has been as a Brazen Wall, against which
he has run himself to his utter Ruin, If God in Mercy raise him not up, and
now as a Man benumbed in mind, he cries out against, as contrary to his former
Faith and Profession, saying, Lo, we protest against them to be a False Church,
falsely Constituted in the Baptizing of Infants, and their own unbaptized
Estate, Defense of Scripture, Page 3. Thus Wine shows it self, in Mr. Smith,
to be a Mocker, and Strong Drink to be raging, while he has drunk the Wine of
Violence, Prove. 4. 17. proclaiming open War against Gods everlasting Covenant.
How contrary is this to his former Faith, he once seemingly, as it appears,
maintained with us, (says Mr. Ainsworth) as may be seen in his difference in
the Preface, for then he acknowledged the Ancient Brethren of the Separation
(as he calls us) are to be honored, for that they have reduced the Church to
the true Primitive Apostolic Constitution.

Now as one Error goes not alone, while Mr. Smith was seeking to deprive the
Church of God of the use of Translation, one of his Arguments he thus framed.
Children (says he) may read a Translation perfectly well, but Children cannot
perform any part of Spiritual Worship. Therefore reading a Translation is no
part of Spiritual Worship.

Mr. Ainsworth's Answer is, Is not the praising of God a part of his Worship,
when the Children cried (Matt. 21. 15, 16. Psalm 8.) Hosannah in the Temple, to
the Son of David, Christ defends their Fact by Scripture, That out of the
mouth of Babes and Sucklings, God has made perfect his Praise.

But I will turn his own Weapon upon him; thus Mr. Smith Anabaptized himself
with Water, but a Child could have done Here Mr. Ainsworth says Mr. Smith
Baptized himself.
the like unto himself, who cannot perform (as he thinks) any part of
Spiritual Worship; and consequently it was Carnal Worship, and Service of the
Devil. If one should answer, though a Child could cast Water upon himself, and
utter such words as he heard Mr. Smith spoke, yet could he not preach or open
(Neh. 8. 8.) the Covenant, as did the Priests and Levites; therefore Reading
and Preaching being joined together, as Baptism with Water and Preaching; he
that condemns the one, because a Child can do it, condemns the other by
like reason. And Mr. Smith having thus written of Children (and done to
himself) the Babes and Sucklings, whose Souls he would Murder, by depriving
them of the Covenant, and visible Seal of Salvation in the Church, shall rise
up in Judgment, and condemn him at the last day; who is like a Brute Beast, as
the Apostle Jude calls some Men, Who spoke evil of those things which they
know not, but what they know naturally, as Brute Beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves, Jude ver. 10.

Now how like a Beast did Mr. Smith say, in his Writing against Infants
Baptism, That an Infant is no more capable of Baptism than any unreasonable
Creature. And what differs Mr. Keach's words, who says in Page 164. of his
Book, Gold Refined, That Flocks and Herds were Baptized in the Clouds and in
the Sea, as well as Children. When as the Apostle says, all our Fathers were
Baptized who were not Beasts, but that part of Mankind, of whom Christ came; as
it is written, Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the Flesh,
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Romans 9. 5, 6.

Again Mr. Smith formed an Argument for the warrant of Baptizing of himself.
Thus as Mr. Clifton has published in his Christian Plea, Page 181, 182. in
these words: There is as good warrant for a Man Churching himself, for two Men
singly are no Church, jointly they are a Church; so two Men may put Baptism
upon themselves. Again says Mr. Smith, A Man cannot Baptize others into a
Church, himself being out of the Church, or being no Member. But such was the
State of Mr. Smith when he Baptized himself, he was then cast out of the Church
whereof Mr. Ainsworth was Teacher: So we see out of his own Mouth Mr. Smith
condemned himself and his Practice.

Moreover Mr. Jesop in his Discovery of the Errors of the Anabaptists (who some
time as he says walked with them) says, If I should demand of you your
warrant, for a Man to Baptize himself, I much marvel where you would find such
a Practice in all the New Testament of Christ, it would be too hard a Task for
you: Although Mr. Smith first Baptized himself, and then he Baptized Mr.
Helvish and John Murton with others: See Mr. Jesop's Discovery of the Errors of
the English Anabaptists, Page 65.

Now as in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, every Truth shall be
established; so then Mr. Henry Ainsworth, and Mr. Clifton, and Mr. Jesop, have
testified in their Books published, that Mr. Smith Baptized himself, and from
such an Administrator the Anabaptists have successively received their way of
Baptizing Adult Persons only, and excluding the Infants of Believers from the
Benefit thereof; and because their Reasons for this Practice of theirs, are but
carnal, as before is proved, therefore wanting Scripture Evidence for their
Practice, some of late have published in the first Epistle to Mr. Cary's Book,
namely Mr. Kiffing, John Harris, Richard Adams, Robert Steed, Ben. Keach, a
False report against three worthy Servants of Jesus Christ; wanting help, as
appears, to maintain their way of Anabaptistry, their words are these:

And since that God has been pleased to raise up many Learned Men, namely, Dr
Ames, Mr. Ainsworth and Dr. Owen, with others who have Learnedly and with much
clearness and strength of Argument, made it appear, that a true visible
Gospel Church is to consist only of such as are Saints by profession, and who
give up themselves to the Lord, and one to another, by solemn Agreement, to
practice the Ordinances of Christ.

The cause surely must be very bad, in these Men's own Eyes, unless they are
given over to blindness of Heart, to make Falsehood their Refuge, as will
clearly appear concerning these three Men's Judgment, published to the World,
touching the State of the Children of Believers.

Dr. Ames has written, That a particular Church or Congregation is a Society
of Faithful ones, or Believers, knit together mutually in a special Obligation,
or Bond, in order to the constant exercise of the Communion of Saints among
themselves. And further says, Children of Believers, who are in the
Church Fellowship, are to be reckoned Members of the Church, 1 Cor. 7. 14. your
Children are Holy, for they are partakers of the same Profession with their
Parents; yet Children are not so perfect Members of the Church, so as that they
can expect acts of Communion, or may be admitted to partake of all the
Privileges of the Church, unless a growing Faith appear in them, but are not
to be excluded from those Privileges which appertain to the beginning of
Faith, and entrance into the Church Doctrines. In Medul. Theol. Lib. 1. chapter
32.. 6.. 12.. 13.

Mr. Henry Ainsworth says, Children of Believers, when they are born of their
Parents, and all are born Infants, are all in the Covenant with their Parents,
and were of old to be Circumcised, are now to be Baptized; if the Children be
of years when their Parents enter into Covenant; either they assent, and enter
into Covenant with them, or they dissent and enter not; so Ishmael, Abraham 's
Child, being taught of his Father to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. and
not disobeying; he was with his Father Circumcised at thirteen years of Age,
Genesis 17. 25. likewise all Children now, assenting unto, and walking in the
Faith with their Parents, are to be Baptized at what Age soever; but when
Ishmael fell from his Obedience, then was he cast out of Abraham 's House, and
was no longer counted for Abraham 's Seed, but in Isaac was his Seed called:
Ishmael was still Abraham 's Seed, and Child in Nature, according to the Flesh,
but he continued not still a Child of the Covenant, Gal. 4. 29, 30. nor Abraham
's Seed according to the Promise; even so if Children of Believers now, being
of understanding, do refuse the Faith of Christ, and fall from it, they are to
be kept out of the Church, or cast out from it; and so the Seal of Grace and
Salvation belongs not to them, Ezekiel. 18. 24. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Matt. 3. 7, 9,
10. As it belongs to all the Infants of the Faithful, and to all their
Children of what Age soever, if they receive the Faith of Christ and abide in
it with them. And these Men (meaning the Anabaptists if they think we hold
Children are to be Baptized, because they are our Children by Nature (for so
they are Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.) but they are Holy, and so have the Seal
of Salvation, because God has graciously accepted them into his Covenant with
our selves, and keeps them in it, until they fall from Faith and Obedience of
Christ, even as we our selves continue in the Covenant, while we continue in
the Christian Faith, and no longer, 2 Timothy 2. 12. As we are the Children of the
first Adam, and so are Sinners, Disobedient, Unrighteous, and under
Condemnation; but as we are the Children of the second Adam Christ, we are all
Holy, made Obedient, Righteous, and Heirs of Salvation, according to the
Apostles Doctrine, Romans 5. 12, 21. See Mr. Henry Ainsworth's Censure upon a
Dialogue of Infants Baptism, Page 67, 68.

Dr. Owen says, Children do belong unto, and have an Interest in the Parents
Covenant, not only in the Promise of it, which gives them Right unso Baptism,
but in the Profession of the Church Covenant, which gives them a Right unto all
the Privileges of the Church, whereof they are capable, until they voluntarily
relinquish their claim unto them. Dr. Owen, The true Nature of a Gospel Church,
Chap. 1. 14, 16.

Now will not Mr. Kiffin, Mr. Harris, Mr. Adams, Mr. Steed, Mr. Keach, call
back their words which they have set their Hands to, in the Preface to Philip
Cary's Book, of their evil here, and embrace the Truth these Men have testified.

In the mean time, let the Prudent Reader judge, whether the forenamed Persons
have any Grounds to publish to the World, that these Men, Dr. Ames, Mr.
Ainsworth, Dr. Owen, should Learnedly, and with much clearness and strength of
Argument, make it appear, that a true visible Church is to consist only of such
as are Saints by Profession. The contrary by their own writing does clearly
appear, That Infants are in Covenant, and so visible Members of the Church; so
that it is a bad cause, when the Anabaptists are necessitated to belly such
worthy Men to maintain their Errors. And surely it is a bad cause, when as the
Scripture says, how some Men may confess that they make Lies their Refuge,
Isaiah 28. 15. in making the World believe a false Report, when the Men are not
alive to speak for themselves; yet that their Works, like others, spoke for
them, how little they favored the way of Anabaptistry, when nothing less, as
farther appears in the last words of Mr. Ainsworth's Book, called, A Censure
upon a Dialogue of the Anabaptists (never yet by them answered) says, That it
was Christ's last Farewell to his Disciples, when he Blessed them, Luke 24. 50.
being the Sum of the Gospel, Gal. 3. 8. that in Abraham 's Seed, that is
Christ, all Nations shall be Blessed; this Grace Abraham 's Infants had, this
Grace Christ gave to little Children, Luke 18. 16. and so the same he has
vouchsafed to continue unto us, and to our Children, throughout their
Generations, preserving us and them from the Curse of Anabaptistry; whereby so
many Errors are dispersed, Scriptures wrested, and Souls perverted unto
Destruction.

Moreover, how apparently true it is, that in the Anabaptists denying
Infant Baptism, many Scriptures are perverted, and Souls destroyed by such as
press that Baptism in the World, which they have received from their
Administrator, John Smith, Baptizing of himself, ^n^ yet is condemned by Ben.
Keach in his Book Page 147. in these words, as aforesaid, Water Baptism, says
he, is a part of Instituted Worship and Service to God; so that whatsoever is
done in Worship and Service to God, without an express word dropped from Christ
or his Apostles is Will Worship. Now until he can prove it lawful for a Man to
Baptize himself, by some word dropped from Christ or his Apostles, it is
Will Worship, and so not from Heaven or from God; therefore Ben. Keach's
Baptism, which he and the rest have received from their Administrator John
Smith, who Baptized himself, is Will Worship, and so not of God, and to be
Abhorred of all Christians, because he grants it is Will Worship forbidden of
God, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. Isaiah 1. 12.

Moreover, seeing then the Anabaptists Baptism is not of God, and the Baptism
received in Infancy they deny, then is there no true Water Baptism remaining
among them; and thus at once all Gospel Ordinances by their Doctrine must
cease, and the whole Building of Christ must fall to the Ground. Now whither
must we go for Counsel in this Distress? Surely, but as the Prophet says, To
the Law and to the Testimony; so we should go for Counsel to none but to God,
his Gracious Spirit blowing upon the Sails of our Faith, whereby we shall
safely pass through all these Difficulties, into an Orderly Practice of the
Gospel, in the Enjoyment of all Christ's Ordinances.

For after the deep Apostasy, after the Apostles Decease, we hear a Voice
saying, Arise, measure the Temple, the Altar and the Worshippers, Rev. 11. 1.
therefore He that has ascended up on High, has not left his Church destitute
of Counsel at any time; for although the Lord, for the Judgment of the World,
and Trial of his Servants, and Manifestation of his Power, did suffer his
Church or People, to wit, Judah, to be captivated by the Babylonians of old,
and now since his Churches or People, captivated by the Spiritual Babylonians;
yet, as of old, a right way was found, for the restoring the due and orderly
Practice of all Gods Ordinances, without the help of Man's Inventions; so that
the Lords Building was finished, without a Stone of Babel for a Corner, or for
a Foundation; so that although the Spiritual Babylonians said like their
Ancestors, Raze it even to the Foundation. Yet we have a perfect Rule to the
Practical Performance of all Gods Ordinances, if we take Gods Counsel for
direction, as aforesaid, To the Law and to the Testimony; they that speak not
according to it, have no light in them, Isaiah 8. 20.

Now then as Water Baptism came in place of Circumcision, as has been before
proved, we then after a deep Apostasy, must take our Directions from the one to
the other; let us then see, whether we can find in Scripture, any President for
retaining Gods Ordinance done in Apostasy, not to be repeated, when as nothing
but the Ordinance is retained, only the Evil or Disorder purged away by
Repentance as it was concerning Circumcision. Therefore we read in the days of
Hezekiah, that the Church of God was fallen into deep Apostasy, as the Divine
History does show, 2 Chronicles. 30. chap. the like we read in Josiah's time, and
after in Ezra and Nehemiah's time, in which State of Apostasy they still
Circumcised their Children, so that when they returned to God, to walk with him
by Faith, in keeping his Commands in his Worship, they did not repeat their
Circumcision, but the Evil, through Gods Mercy, was Purged by Repentance, and
so they were admitted to the Passover, for no uncircumcised Person might eat of
the Passover, Exodus 12. 48. so now no unbaptized Person must eat of the Lords
Supper. This being a President for all Christians, when returning out of deep
Apostasy, the Baptism then received in Apostasy, ought not to be repeated any
more than Circumcision. Seeing it has been proved, that both Circumcision and
Water Baptism are Signs and Seals to one and the same Covenant of Grace in
Christ, to wit, (Romans 4. 11.) of the Righteousness of Faith in the Remission of
Sins by the Blood of Christ, Col. 2. 11, 12. For although Water Baptism and
Circumcision were no Seals of Gods Favor and Mercies, but rather Judgments to
them of old, as now, so long as they remained in Sinful Idolatry, for it will
be granted by all, that Gods Covenant in the Blessings thereof, continues with
any Church or People, no longer than they remain in his true Faith and
Obedience, in walking with God according to his written word, Rev. 2. and 3.
chap. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2, 3. So then, as of old, upon a return of Gods Elected
ones, even they and their Children out of Apostasy, they did enter into the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, as it is written, They shall ask the way to Zion,
with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten, Jer. 50. 5. This was
fulfilled in Ezra and Nehemiah's days, when they came out of Babylon by
Families; yet they were not again Circumcised, but having separated themselves
from the Filthiness of the Heathen of the Land, (Ezra 6. 21, 22.) and were
joined to the Lord by renewing their Covenant, did keep the Feast of the Lord,
and so were admitted to the Passover, which no uncircumcised Person might eat
of, Exodus 12. 48.

Obj. If any say, Circumcision once done, could not be repeated, the Foreskin
being once cut off, could not be cut again.

Answ. The Apostle Paul answers this Objection in these words; Is any Man
called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised: Is any called in
Uncircumcision? let him not become circumcised, 1 Cor. 7. 18. By which it
appears that the Foreskin might be gathered again by the Art of Surgery,
as Historians show, Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 12. chapter 6.

So then the way of God is clear by proportion, from Circumcision to
Water Baptism, both received in Apostasy: That as Judah, when in Babylon, they
Circumcised, as in the Spiritual Babylon Water Baptism was, and still is,
practiced; that as God accepted of his People of old, only renewing their
Covenant with the Lord, even so all whom God calls out of the Spiritual
Babylon, God only requires that the Lords Covenant be renewed, he made with
their Ancestors that were once in the Lords Covenant; and so that People once
Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is
not to be done again. And this Ben. Keach grants from his Author's words
Elten on Col. 2. 11. Page 291. who says, That Baptism is the Sacrament of
Incision, or ingrafting into Christ, Sealing up our setting into Christ, which
is only once done, never after to be done again, Gold Refined, Page 178.

So then there is a difference to be made, when an Ordinance of God is done,
and not done at all, or done and not rightly done; for if in Judah's Apostasy,
as aforesaid, they Circumcised, as the Christians in Apostasy Baptized, the
Error in the one being repented, if so in the other.

Now because the Anabaptists have not in this matter, taken Counsel of Gods
Word, but followed their own Spirits, they have run themselves into Confusion,
some in Baptizing themselves, others receiving their Baptism from them, and
others of them, all crying out against Romes Baptism, because so many Additions
is joined therewith; and therefore they say it is no Baptism, when as it may be
easily proved, that we English People received not our Baptism from Rome, but
from the Britains or Welsh, the first Inhabitants of this Nation, who, as
Historians say, received the Gospel Ten years before the Gospel was preached at
Rome, as Mr. Jones in his Book Entitled, Rome no Mother Church to England,
Sect. 4. Page 123.

Besides the General Agreement of Histories, for in the year of Tiberius the
Emperor, Gildas affirms, That Britain received the Gospel: Further he says,
That Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Philip the Apostle from France to Britain,
about the Year of our Lord 63. and remained in Britain all his days; who, with
his Fellows, laid the first Foundation of the Christian Faith amongst the
British People: Acts and Monum. Book 2. p. 95. Gildas Lib. de vict. Aurelii
Ambrosius.

2. Tertullian testifies, How the Gospel was dispersed abroad by the Sound of
the Apostles, Tertull. con. Judeus (as was the Commission to all Nations,) as
the Apostle Paul writes to the Colossians, The Gospel which ye have heard, and
which was preached to every Creature which is under Heaven, Col. 2. 23. so that
some of all Nations, (for so they Sung Praises to God, and the Lamb, saying,
Thou have redeemed us by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and
People, and Nation, Rev. 5. 9.) and there reckons up Medes, Parthians and
Dwellers of Mesopotamia, Jury, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Egypt,
Pamphilia, with many more: At length comes to the Coasts of ^he Morians, and
to all the Borders of Spain and France; and among the rest, recites all the
parts of Britain, and reports them to be subject to Christ.

Again Origin says, that Britain did consent to the Christian Faith:
Nesiphorus says, that Simon Zelots did spread the Gospel of Christ to the West
Ocean, and brought the same into the Isle of Britain: Origin. Hom. 4. in Ezech.
Nic. Lib. Cap. 40.

Again the Scots did celebrate their Easter in the time of the Abbots of
Clunick, not after the Roman manner, but after the Greeks; which argues they
received the Faith, but not from Rome.

Also it appears by a Letter of Elutherius Bishop of Rome, written to Lucius
King of Britain, Anno 169. that Lucius had received the Faith in this Land,
before he sent to Elutherius for the Roman Laws; for so the words of the Letter
purport, which are these, Ye have received of late, through Gods Mercy, in the
Realm of Britain, both the parts of the Holy Scripture, out of them, by Gods
Grace, take ye a Law, and by that Law, through Gods Sufferance, Rule your
Kingdom of Great Britain, Anno 169.

By these and like Testimonies it appears, that the Baptism received first in
this Land, was in a true Church, and this Scripture was fulfilled, The Isles
shall wait for thy Law; as Christ has expounded it, The Gentiles shall trust
in thy Name, Isa. 42. 4. with Matt. 12. 21.

And again, one while the Anabaptists will not have Water Baptism to succeed
Circumcision, as visible Seals to one and the same Covenant, for then they
suppose they shall grant, that if Infants had Right of old to be Circumcised,
by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, they must confess (if they would speak
truth) that Infants have Right to be Baptized, by virtue of the same Covenant:
But when it will serve their turn, then they will grant Water Baptism came in
place of Circumcision in this thing; for, say they, Circumcision initiated
Members into the Jewish Church, and now Water Baptism initiateth Members into
the Gospel Church: And thus they are Yea and Nay, but to let them know that no
Person had Right to be Circumcised, until he was first in Covenant with the
Lord, as Abraham was a Believer in Covenant before Circumcised: And further it
is proved, that all Israel, the Males, except Caleb and Joshua, were
uncircumcised Persons, when they, by the Covenant of Grace in Christ, were
established to be the Lords People, Deuteronomy. 29. and after Circumcised by Joshua,
Josh. 5. Chap. So now first Members are joined to the Lord, with their little
ones, and by virtue of Gods Free Grace in Christ, their Sin or Sins are
pardoned; and then the Sign, Seal of the Covenant, or Token of Remission of
Sins, is to be set on the Believers and their Seed, Acts 2. 38, 39. largely
proved in the third Query.

Moreover, as no uncircumcised Person might eat of the Passover, even so no
unbaptized Person might or may eat of the Lord's Supper. Now this the
Anabaptists will grant, that the Lord's Supper came in room of the Passover;
yea, and so did Water Baptism come in room of Circumcision; for if 1 Cor. 5.
Chap. proves the one, then Coll. 2. 11, 12. proves the other: And as no Man
might eat of the Passover, until all his Males were Circumcised, even so no Man
may eat of the Lord's Supper, until all his Children in Nonage are Baptized, but
for want of the due informing of the Congregations in these and suchlike
things.

Note what a Confusion some Congregations allow among them who are mixed, some
are for Baptizing their Infants, and some are not; some are for having
themselves rebaptized by the Anabaptists, some are not: Yea, and some in
Congregational Churches are rebaptized, and some are not; and these all join
together in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, which is a high breach of Gods
Order, and so a great Sin. See here what Confusion is this, sowing diverse Seeds
in the Lords Vineyard or Garden, his Church; when as no Persons might eat of
the Passover, until all their Male-Infants were Circumcised; even so by
equality, no Person ought to partake of the Lord's Supper, until their Infants
are Baptized.

Again, no unbaptized Person may eat of the Lord's Supper, as no uncircumcised
Persons might eat of the Passover, or such as were not accounted so; but the
Females were accounted Circumcised; for no uncircumcised Person might go into
the Temple, but Women did, and so were accounted Circumcised, wanting that part
of the Body. Now then, he that denies his Baptism, received in Infancy, to be
sufficient Baptism, in his Belief or Judgment, when he is rebaptized, he
says, all his Brethren are all unbaptized Persons (in his Judgment) and they
that do stand firm to their Baptism received in Infancy, do say, he that is
rebaptized, and by a false Administration denies his Baptism received in
Infancy, must acknowledge he is no Baptized Person fit to partake with in the
Lord's Supper, seeing he denies also Water Baptism to be Administered on his
Children: Yet these so differing in their Faiths, and so contrary to the Order
of God, do both in Confusion together partake of the Lord's Supper: These
Confusions call for Judgment to come on Churches. Many other things might be
here inserted of Disorders in Churches, but it will not be proper at this time,
to this Subject.

Therefore ought all Churches of Christ, when any Man and Woman come to join
themselves, there to Christ, the Head of the Body the Church, by entering into
an everlasting Covenant, never to be forgotten, that they bring their Children
with them, as Christ said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such are the Kingdom of God, Luke 18. 16. Now concerning what
has been said, B. Keach proposes by way of Objection; That as if one of
themselves should say, Since the Practice of Baptism in Water was lost in the
Apostasy, How could it be restored again without a new Mission? He makes this
answer, The Children of Israel had, for many years, lost the Ordinance of the
Feast of Tabernacles; yet by reading in the Book of the Law, there was such a
thing required; They immediately revived it, and did as they found it written,
without any new Mission, or extraordinary Prophet, to Authorize them so to do;
even so ought we to act Gods word, being a Warrant sufficient to justify us in
so doing. Gold refined, page 23.

To which I reply, That Water Baptism was not lost, by Baptizing with Water;
but God had his true Church, who lived and reigned with Christ, in the Practice
of his Holy Ordinances, under Sufferings (all the time of the Beasts Reign) in
the Spiritual Babylon: As we read Rev. 20. 4. So that only in the Spiritual
Babylon, Water Baptism was lost, by Baptizing with Water; for they Baptized in
Water, as in Rome this day is showed, by dipping every one three times in
Water. Bellarm de Bapt. l. 1. c. 25. to c. 27.

2. As Water Baptism is herein clearly proved to succeed Circumcision, and as
Water Baptism was not lost, nor neglected by the Suffering Christians, under
the Affliction they went through, by the Spiritual Babylonians; even so
Circumcision likewise was not lost, under all the Sufferings Judah underwent by
the Temporal Babylonians.

3. As to the Feast of Tabernacles, which Ben. Keach says, was lost from
Isreal's keeping the same in Babylon: He might know that was because they were
bound to keep the Feast of Tabernacles no where but at Jerusalem; so that it
was not lost, but omitted, because they could not go to Jerusalem to keep it.
And whereas he says, By reading in the Book of the Law, there was such a thing
required, they immediately revived it (when they came to Jerusalem) and did as
they found it written, without any new Mission, or extraordinary Prophet, to
authorize them so to do; even so ought we, says he, to act Gods word, being a
warrant sufficient to justify us in so doing.

Now Water Baptism before showed, was not lost, by Baptizing with Water, no more
than Circumcision was of old; but had it been lost, as Ben. Keach supposes,
then the reviving of it again, without a new Mission, as his Parallel is, from
the Feast of Tabernacles, or without an extraordinary Prophet to authorize them
so to do. But to the first, had Israel, thinks he, no extraordinary Prophet to
direct them to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, according to the Law written;
Ezra was Gods Priest, who expounded the Sense and true Meaning of the Law:
Besides there were Prophets in Babylon, as Daniel, Ezekiel, Haggai and
Zachariah; and what thinks he, were not these extraordinary Prophets, Penme^
of parts of the Holy Scriptures, moved by the Holy Ghost. But seeing whatsoever
of Gods Holy Ordinances by just hinderance may cease in Practice; yet when
revived, Ben. Keach grants they must be revived, both of old and now, as it
is found written; and then it will be a sufficient warrant to justify any so
to do, I grant. Now let me ask B. Keach this question.

Whereas he says, Baptism in Water was lost; Then, by his own grant, according
to the word written, it must be revived. And where is it there written, in
Christ's Testament, that a Man must dip himself in Water? As John Smith did, the
first Beginner, or Reviver, of the English Anabaptists. Let him show such a
word in Scripture, and it will be a sufficient warrant to justify so doing;
and until then, their reviving of Baptism, by a Man's dipping himself, has no
warrant in Gods word in either Testament; and I am sure John Smith was no
extraordinary Prophet of God, nor ordinary, as herein is showed, but one that
dis-separated himself from a true Church, sensual, having not the Spirit, and
after cast out. And how little of the Spirit has that Man, even such a one as
Ben. Keach, who makes a Mock or De^ision of Gods Ordinance of Baptism,
Administered on our Fathers, says the Apostle, when the Clouds poured out Water
on them, as says the Prophet. Concerning which Baptism Ben. Keach says, If
that was Baptism, viz. the Clouds raining upon them, the People may save their
Money, and never go to a Minister more to Christen their Children; for it is but
to carry them abroad when it Rains, and they will be so Baptized; and it will
be as true Baptism no doubt, Gold Refined, page 61.

Surely this Man, thus making a Mock at Gods Ordinance, may be reckoned among
the Mockers of the Apostles Doctrine, Jude v. 17, 18, 19, 10. as it is written,
Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be Mockers in the last
time; and these because they have not the Spirit, speak evil of those things
which they know not, but what they know naturally as brute Beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves. If this Man was not one of them, he would not
have dared to be so bold, as to say, Flocks and Herds, Exodus 12. 38. that went
through the Sea (when our Fathers were, says the Apostle, Baptized, 1 Cor. 10.
1, 2.) were doubtless Baptized as well as Children, under the Cloud and in the
Sea; and now to say again, to carry Children out when it raineth, is as true
Baptism as Israel had under the Cloud. Yet notwithstanding he has so
contemptuously spoken of the Baptism in the Cloud and in the Sea; yet he says,
that Baptism was a Type or Figure of Gospel-dipping; but how will this Man's
words hang together, one while he says Beasts and Unbelievers were Baptized as
well as Children; whatsoever was a Type or Figure has its Substance; If the
Beasts were Baptized in the Sea, what did it typifle such Beastly Men, surely,
that withstood Paul's Doctrine at Ephesus, as it is said, He fought with Beasts
at Ephesus after the manner of Men: as such Beasts of Men as Jude speaks of,
That speak evil of the way of Faith which they know not of, and would exclude
Infants out of Christ's Kingdom, as they do Infants from being our Fathers then,
as the Apostles calls them, Romans 9. 5.

Again, whereas he says, The Baptism in the Cloud, and in the Sea, was a
Figure of Gospel-dipping, if so, then Men, Women and Children must be Baptized
standing on dry ground, for so it is said, They stood in the Sea, or place
where the Water had been, on dry ground; but the truth is, it was a Figure of
Gospel-Baptism, by casting, pouring or sprinkling Water on the Head and Face,
the noble part, that represents the whole Person; and whereas Infants were
Baptized in the Figure, it tipisied the Right they have now, as before proved in
the third Query.

Now having proved by the Testimony of Holy Scripture, What Baptism is; The end
wherefore it was ordained; What it is that gives any Soul Right to it; Who is
a true Administrator of it; And what a High Breach of Gods Order it is for any
Person to Baptize himself. The next thing is, farther to prove by Holy
Scripture, that the Covenant the Church of Israel was established in, to be the
People of God, and the Lord to be their God; was the Covenant of Grace in
Christ; and that it was not as the Anabaptists say, a Carnal Covenant: And also
in particular, to prove that the Covenant which God made with Abraham and his
Seed, Genesis 17. 7. and with Israel when they came out of Egypt, Exodus 19. 5, 6.
and again renewed with all Israel Men and Women and their little ones, Deuteronomy.
29. 10, 11. that they were no parts of the Covenant of works, as Mr. Carry
affirms, but the everlasting Covenant of Grace in Christ now confirmed to all
Believers and their Infants, Romans 4. 11. Col. 2. 11. as shall be further proved.

I shall first lay down the Doctrine of the Anabaptists, being the Ground and
Foundation their whole Fabric is built upon: To begin with the Father of the
English Anabaptists, Mr. Smith, who says in his Book called, The Character of
the Beast, P. 16. That the Church of Israel was a Carnal People, had a Carnal
Covenant, or promise of Carnal things.

2. Mr. Danvers, his apt Scholar, affirms in his Treatise of Baptism, Page
144. That Circumcision initiated a Carnal Seed into a Carnal Church, and gave
them Right to Carnul Ordinances; and that Trees and Fruit were as capable of
Circumcision as Children at eight days old, P. 173, 175.

Mr. Carry says, That she Covenant God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. and the
Covenant God made with Israel, Exodus 19. 5, 6. and the same renewed in Deuteronomy.
29. are but three Additional parts of the Covenant of works made with Adam
before his Fall, Solemn Call, Page 120.

Mr. Keach says, That Children were admitted Members of the Jewish Church, is
granted; and it is also evident, that God has now quite pulled down that House
of his (I mean that National Church, State, and broke up House keeping) and
turned the Bondwoman, and her Son, the Fleshly Seed, Servants and Infants all
out of doors; the natural Branches are broken off, and God has built a new, a
Glorious and more Spiritual House, into which he admits none as his household
Servants, to dwell in his Spiritual Family, but Believers only, or such as
profess so to be, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and that the old House, the Jewish Church State,
with all the Appurtenances, Rights and Privileges of it, is pulled down, and a
new one built, into which Infants are not to be admitted, as is very evident
from what the Apostle speaks, Heb. 7. 12. which must needs include
Circumcision, with all the Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to it: And
therefore as Infants Church membership came in with the Law of Circumcision, so
it went out, and was disanull'd with it; They were, it is true, of the Household
of old, but it was by a positive Law: Show us the like now, and you do your
business, or else you say nothing. Gold Refined, Page 113.

This being the Ground and Foundation of the Faith of these Men, on which their
whole Fabric of Anabaptistry is erected; I shall therefore speak to each of
them particularly, and first as touching Mr. Smith's words concerning the State
of the Church of Israel, where he affirmed, That the Church of Israel was a
Carnal People, had a Carnal Covenant, or promise of Carnal things. I shall
first set down Mr. Henry Ainsworth's Answer which he gave him; not only to the
aforesaid words, but also to what Mr. Smith farther said, namely, The
Israelites did worship to Repentance, we worship from Repentance; first Men
declare their Repentance, and then we receive them into Communion, to worship
with us; with them (to wit, in the Jewish Church) says he, first Men were
received into typical Communion, and then they were trained up to Repentance
and Faith in Christ, etc. Parallel Page 30.

Mr. Ainsworth answers, These and the like distinctions Mr. Smith fetches
out of his own Heart, not from the word of God; for although there be
differences many between them and us, as touching the outward Rights and
Services ended and abolished by Christ, as the Epistle to the Hebrews shows;
yet as touching the Substance of their Religion, Worship, Constitution, etc. as
tonching Repentance, Faith, Reconciliation to God, etc. There was no such
difference as Mr. Smith faineth, (for) the Church of the Jews, they had the Law
to show them their sin, and to bring them to Christ, so have we the Church
under the Gospel, Matt. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or
the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, Romans 3. 30, 31. Seeing
it is one God which shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the
Uncircumcision through Faith, do we then make void the Law through Faith, God
forbid, yea we establish the Law. Romans 7. 7. What shall I say then, is the Law
Sin, God forbid; I had not known Sin but by the Law: For I had not known Lust,
except the Law had said thou shall not Covet, (James 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.) Thus the
Law is of the same use to us now, as it was to the Church of the Jews; We have
the Gospel to show us our Righteousness by Christ, without the works of the
Law, so had they, Heb. 4. 2. for unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as
unto them; see Levit. 26. 42, 45. Luke 54. 55. 72. 73. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 12, 13, 14.
Romans 10. 5, 6, 8. Genesis 15. 6. Psalm 32. 1, 2. with Romans 4. 6. etc. 1 Cor. 10.
1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. Chap. 11. only in the manner of Administration of the Law and
Gospel, there be Differences manifested: Ainsworth's Defense of Scripture, Page
119.

In which Answer of Mr. Ainsworth's is proved these things: 1. That the Church
of Israel had the very same use of the Law we now have, to show them and us our
Sins, that we, as well as they, might be lead to Christ.

2. They had the same Gospel to show them, as us, our Righteousness in Christ,
without the works of the Law.

3. They had Ordinances for Worship which figured Christ to come; which they in
believing and looking for his coming, offered in Faith, Heb. chap. 11. so
worshipped they the Father in Spirit and in Truth; as Christ said to the Woman
of Samaria, Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, for Salvation
is of the Jews; but the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth, John 4. 22, 23, 24. and such Worshippers were the Church
of the Jews (though not all) as in the Gospel Church many were reproved for
seeking to be justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 3. Therefore as well they
of the Circumcision, as others, the Apostle testifies worshipped God in the
Spirit, though not all, as it is written, For we are of the Circumcision which
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the Flesh, Phil. 3. 3. And thus in the Church of Israel, many were
Righteous, walking in all the Ordinances of the Lord blameless, waiting by
Faith (for Christ) in the Promise to come, the Consolation of Israel, as it is
written, of old Simeon, when Christ was born and brought into the Temple, He
then took him up in his arms and blessed God, and said, Lord now let thou
thy Servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all People; a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel. So likewise Anna, she
coming into the Temple at the same Instant, gave Thanks likewise to the Lord,
and spoke of him (to wit, of Christ) To all them who looked for Redemption in
Israel, Luke 2. 25, 28, to 39. Rev. 3. 4.

These things being duly observed, let the impartial Reader judge, whether the
Church of Israel were a Carnal People, or had a Carnal Covenant, and Promise of
Carnal things, as Mr. Smith feigneth; or whether the Church of Israel were not
such, that worshipped the Father in Spirit and in Truth under the Covenant of
Grace by Faith, serving God, although under Figurative Ordinances, for the hope
of the Promise made of God to the Father, Acts 26. 6, 7. yea, believing that it
was not the Blood of Bulls and Goats that could take away Sin, Psalm 40. 6. and
51. 16. Heb. 10. 4. but it was the Blood of Christ the Lamb of God, the true
Sin-offering, 2. Cor. 5. 21. that on him was laid the Iniquity of us al, Isaiah
53. that shall be saved: As John has proclaimed, Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world. Therefore what an Erroneous Doctrine is it,
that John Smith and Mr. Danvers have laid, to build the way of Anabaptistry
upon, to deprive the Infants of Believers from the Right they have now to the
Sign of the Remission of their Sin Water Baptism. And not only so, but by their
Doctrine they Damn the Infants of all Gods People of old, if the Covenant the
Church of Israel were accepted into, with their Children, was no other than a
Carnal Covenant; for a Carnal State is opposite to a Spiritual State; as the
Apostle proves Romans 8. 6, 7. for to be carnally minded is Death, but to be
Spiritually minded is Life and Peace; because the Carnal Mind is Enmity against
God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, so then
they that are in the Flesh cannot please God. Now if the Church of Israel was
in no better State, and had but a Carnal Covenant, their State was Death and
Damnation, for as much as there is no Eternal Life but in the Covenant of Grace
in Christ, John 17. 3. so the Church is not the World which Christ prayed for,
ver. 9.

But that the Church of God, from the day the Gospel was Preached to Adam, and
he and his Wife believed in Christ to come, they had the Covenant of Grace,
whereby God was the God of the Faithful and their Seed; so that the Gospel
first Preached to Adam, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents
Head, is the same Gospel the Apostles taught, as it is written, And the God of
Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. And this glad
Tidings is summed up in these words of the Everlasting Gospel Covenant made
with Abraham and his Seed; as it is written, Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish
my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee;
which Covenant, together with that in Exodus 19. 5, 6. that in Deuteronomy. 29. Mr.
Carry affirms to be but three several Additions to the Covenant of Works made
with Adam before the Fall; so no part of the Covenant of Grace in Christ.

Now for as much as Mr. Carry and others, when they seek to pervert the
Scripture from its true Sense or Meaning, as before has been showed, concerning
the Sense of the word Baptize; so here concerning the word Everlasting
Covenant. Mr. Carry says, in P. 126, 127. of his Book Solemn Call: It is true
(says he) the Covenant of Circumcision is called also an Everlasting Covenant;
but that can be understood in no other Sense (Mark that bold Affirmation, in no
other Sense) than that wherein the Priesthood of Aaron and his Sons under the
Law, which was called an Everlasting Pristhood, Exodus 40. 15. which we know to
be now abolished; as likowise the Covenant with Phineus was called the Covenant
of Everlasting Priesthood, Numb. 25. 13. which yet is now also done away.

I shall in the first place, seeing Mr. Ainsworth has given Annotations on the
word Everlasting, give the Reader his Exposition on Genesis 17. 7. Everlasting
Covenant of Eternity. Although the outward Signs and manner of dispensing this
Covenant were Temporary and changeable, as Circumcision into Water Baptism,
Col. 2. 11, 12. yet the Covenant it self remains one in Substance for ever,
being established by the Blood of Christ the great Pastor: As it is written,
Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, the
great Sheepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13. 20. In opposition to this Truth, Mr. Carry says, Mr. Pool tells us,
the word Olam rendered for ever, does not always signify Eternity, but a long
continuance, as is evident (says he) from Genesis 17. 13. and Exodus 40. 16.

Answ. That the word Everlasting in Genesis 17. 7. the following words prove it,
that the word Everlasting there signifies Eternity, without End; for as much
as the word Everlasting Covenant was to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed
after thee; which is the Sum of the Gospel; and that this was not for a time,
as was the word Everlasting, with reference to Priesthood, that which pointed
to Christ to Fulfill or Abolish; but to be a God was the Covenant of Eternity,
without end, namely, the Everlasting Covenant, sealed by the Blood of Christ,
first shed, when he was Circumcised, and after at his Death, called the Blood
of the Church Covenant, Zach. 9. 11. as it is written, By the Blood of thy
Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no water.
Thus the Covenant of Eternity was to be a God, the first glad Tidings the Lord
Christ, after he had finished the work of our Redemption, sent by Mary to
Christ's Disciples, Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and unto your God, John 20. 17. And
again, to all the Churches is this Message sent, They shall be my People, and
God himself shall be with them and be their God, Rev. 21. 3. So then to call
this Everlasting Covenant to be a God to the Faithful, and their Seed,
Temporary, is to call Light Darkness, and to deny the Faith of the Gospel by
making it Temporary: So they abuse the word Everlasting, as they have done the
Sense of the word Baptize, proved in the first Query.

To which we may add Mr. Ainsworth's Notes on the word contained in this
Everlasting Covenant, the Covenant of Eternity, Genesis 17. 7. namely, To be a
God, or for a God unto thee, that is, thy God, as the Greek translateth it.
Herein consists the Power and Life of the Everlasting Covenant, whereby God
himself, his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, etc. is applied unto Man for
Blessing and Salvation, and we are by Adoption made the Children of God. For ye
are the Temple of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. And I will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. For Blessed is the People, whose God Jehovah is,
Psalm 144. 15. And they shall be delivered out of Miseries, Rev. 21. 3, 4. And
raised up from the Dead, Matt. 22. 31. For I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, ver. 32. Wherefore God is not ashamed to be
called their God, for he has prepared for them a City, Heb. 11. 16.

Now for Mr. Carry to call that Covenant, wherein God is by Christ's Blood
reconciled to be the God of his People, a part of the Covenant of Works, is no
less Error, than to destroy the Gospel, and so make void the Comfort of
Mankind: By which it is evident that the Doctrine on which Anabaptistry is
built, is a Soul-destroying Doctrine, until he can prove this is not Gospel, I
will be a God to thee, and unto thy Seed, Genesis 17. 7. And ye shall be my
People, and I will be your God, Jer. 30. 22.

But to help this Man, and others deceived by him, that they may see, if it be
the Will of God, how they are deceived, in that they consider not the end why
Christ was Circumcised, for it was not a Covenant of Works, but a Covenant of
Grace, which Circumcision sealed to the Believers and their Children, both Jews
and Proselited Gentiles; even as the Apostle teaches, it was to confirm the
Promises in the Covenant of Grace in Christ, to the Believing Jews and Gentiles
and their Children; as it is written, Romans 15. 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ
was a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God (namely the Gospel, the
Truth of the Gospel) to confirm the Promises made to the Fathers. And what
greater Promise in the Gospel, than to be a God to them and their Children; as
it is written, Jer. 30. 22, 24. And ye shall be my People, and I will be your
God: In the latter days ye shall consider it. And in Chap. 31. 1. At that time,
says the Lord, will I be the God of all the Families of Israel, and they shall
be my People. This is the Mercy in the Everlasting Covenant, which Circumcision
Sealed, both to the Believing Jews and Gentiles, before and since Christ came
in the Flesh: And therefore by the Apostle, both Believing Jews and Gentiles
are called upon to Glorify God for his Mercy to them, in the Benefit of
Christ's being Circumcised. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the
Circumcision for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made to the Fathers.
And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy, as it is written, For
this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.
And again, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his People, Romans 15. 9, 10.

So then, as aforesaid, says Mr. Ainsworth, Although the Signs of this
Covenant Genesis 17. 7. were changeable, namely, Circumcision into Water Baptism,
yet the Covenant is the same in the Life, and Power, and Blessing in it. As the
Apostle teaches the Gospel Churches, saying, Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye
are circumcised, with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. (Mark that, how
great the Gospel Churches Mercy is, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh (for them) by the Circumcision of Christ.) This Benefit Spiritual could
not be, if Circumcision had been but a Seal or Sign to the Covenant of Works;
for then Redemption had not been by Free Grace, but by Works; but here we see
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith and Holiness, both which
are confirmed to all Believers and their Infants by Christ, being Circumcised;
which shows that the Covenant sealed to the Faithful and their Seed, of old,
was the Covenant of Grace in Christ; for the Law, John 1. 17. was given by
Moses, to make manifest Sin and Sinners, but the Grace of Remission of Sin was
by Christ in the Covenant; that God will pass by, for Christ's sake, the Sins of
his People, and be their God, and they shall be his People, is the Everlasting
Covenant of the Gospel to Abraham and to his Seed in their Generations, as now
to the Believers and their Seed. Genesis 17. 1. Gal. 4. 28.

Again, another Shift Mr. Carry uses, to prove that Covenant to be no part of
the Gospel Covenant, because Mr. Carry says, in Page 106. of his Solemn Call,
The Covenant of Grace has no Conditions of Obedience required.

Answ. Then there was never yet any Gospel Covenant given to Mankind; for is
not the Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, Obedience commanded that all
Christians shall do now as of old, as these Scriptures show, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4.
James chap. 2. and does not Christ say to his, Ye are my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you, John 15. And again, If a man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him; and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him, John 14. 23. And again, Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates into the City, Rev. 22. 14. for, says Christ, Not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that
does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 7. 21. This Obedience is
not to merit but to manifest our Love by our Obedience; if otherwise, for any
to obey the Commands of God, either of old or now, seeking thereby
Justification in the sight of God by the Work done, makes either the Law or
Gospel to themselves a Covenant of Works: And this is clear, by the Lords
driving Man out of the Garden, after he was restored by Faith in Christ, in the
Promise from Death to Life: The Lord placed at the East of the Garden of Eden,
Cherubins and a Flaming Sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the
Tree of Life, that Man should no more have Hope to live for ever by his own
Act; for our Life is hid with Christ in God, for his Obedience, by keeping the
Law for us; but our Obedience is only, that by it we know we love the Children
of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 2. For if there
be no Conditions of Obedience in the Gospel Covenant to this end, then there
must be no Ordinances kept and performed; why then do the Anabaptists plead for
the Act of Profession of Faith? or why do they Baptize, as they call Dipping,
or break Bread, cast out Offenders, or lay a part to the Maintenance of the
Poor or Teachers, or any other Duty, each is a Work of Obedience they suppose
to the Command of Christ; as likewise to suffer for his Name sake; relieve
those that are Imprisoned for Christ's sake, for the Saints are to do all works
of Mercy, and all works of Love, or else it is their Sin, as James and John
teaches us, what are the works of Faith, and Love, James 2. 14, to 26. 1 John
2. 17, 18. as aforesaid, And by This we know that we love the Children of God,
when we love God and keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 2. Yet in all this work
of Faith, there is nothing exspected of Merit by the Children of God, by the
work done; as by Matt. 25. 34, to 40. appears. Then shall the King say unto
them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World; for I was an hungered and ye
gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye took
me in; naked and ye clothed me; I was sick and ye visited me; I was in prison
and ye came unto me. Then shall the Righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when
saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? or when
saw we thee a stanger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or when
saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee. And the King shall answer
and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Thus although
the work of Faith to Brethren must not be neglected, no more than any other
Duty in Gods Service, yet the Saints account that no work of Merit, as by their
answer to Christ is manifest; yet says the Apostle, God is not unrighteous to
forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in
that ye have ministered to the Saints and do minister. These things truly
weighed, we may see how grossly Mr. Carry has sought by many Devises, to prove
the Everlasting Covenant which God made with the Faithful and their Seed, Genesis
17. 7. to be no Covenant of the Gospel, to the great dishonor of God, and
grief of all that fear God. Next as concerning Exodus 19. 5, 6. That it is no
part of the Covenant of works, as Mr. Carry would have it, the contrary is
proved by the ver^ words it self in the Covenant, the Apostle Peter being the
Interpreter; for had that been a part of the Covenant of works, the Apostle
Peter could not, as he has applied the Grace of God contained therein to the
Gospel Church, unless Mr. Carry can prove, that by the Covenant of works, the
Children of Israel were made a Kingdom of Priests, a holy Nation, a peculiar
Treasure to the Lord; as Peter applies it to the Gospel Church; but if he has
no other reason to prove it a part of the Covenant of works, than because
Obedience is required, he is before answered.

But it will be a hard matter for him to prove, that Mankind since the Fall,
was by the Covenant of works made unto God a Kingdom of Priests; or as Peter
has it, a Royal or Kingly Priesthood; the contrary is evident, that the People
of God are made, not by a Covenant of works a Kingdom of Priests, but of Grace,
as the Song of the Redeemed confirms, Rev. 5. 9, 10. And they sung a new
Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof;
for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation; and have made us unto our God,
Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on Earth. First, over our Sins and
Corruptions, that they have no Dominion over us, Romans 6. 14. The Lord Christ,
having subdued our Iniquities, Micah 7. 19. So having a part in the first
Resurrection, we shall Reign with Christ. 2. By overcoming our selves, which is
greater than all Earthly Conquest, according to the Scripture, He that is slow
to Anger, is better than the mighty Man; and he that rules his own Spirit, is
better than he that wins a City, Prove. 16. 32. 3. Our overcoming the World,
is in not loving it, 1 John 2. 15. and to keep our selves unspotted from it,
James 1. 27. Patiently for Christ's sake bareing the Reproaches in it, 1 Cor.
4. 9, 13. so shall we be more than Conquerors, Romans 8. 37. And this is the
Victory. that we overcome the World even our Faith, 1 John 5. 4. ^4. Over
Satan, by resisting him steadfast in the Faith, 1 Peter 5. 9. So shall we, by
the Power of Christ, overcome him by the Blood of the Lamb, and word of his
Testimony, Rev. 12. 11. So shall we tread Satan under our Feet shortly, and
judge the World and Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. As Noah condemned the World by
Faith, in preparing an Ark to the saving of his House the Church of God, and
Preaching Christ our Righteousness by Faith in the Promise, and so became an
Heir to reign with Christ in Glory, in Heaven for evermore, Heb. 11. 7. Romans 8.
17.

Thus as Christ is King and Priest on his Throne, in the Kingdom of his
Mediatorship in his Church, Zach. 6. 13. Rev. 4. 3. and 15. 3. from whom this
Grace comes to his Saints, by applying unto us his Sufferings, Death, Burial,
Righteousness, Resurrection, and Glorious Victory over Sin, Death and Hell, to
be ours, Isaiah 53. 4, 5. Romans 4. 25. For so he has made us Kings and Priests
unto God even his Father, Rev. 1. 6. So that as the Covenant of Grace was one
to the Church of Israel of old, as now to us Gentiles, as it is written, I the
Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep
thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a light of the Gentiles,
Isa. 42. 6. So have we the same Faith the Church of Israel had, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
Psalm 116. 10. only their Redemption was under the Performance of Figurative
Ordinances, as the Epistle to the Hebrews shows; yet both the Churches now,
and of old, all under the same Benefits of Grace; as they were a Kingdom of
Priests, so are we a Royal or Kingly Priesthood; as they were a Holy Nation, so
are we; as they were a peculiar Treasure to the Lord above all People, so are
the Churches now a peculiar People, Exodus 19. 5, 6. 1 Peter 2. 9. As they were
called out of Egypt, the Figure of our Captivity by Sin, so are we called out
of the Spiritual Egypt, Exodus 4. 22, 23. Rev. 11. 8. As the very Names of the
Five Books of Moses have their Titles to note the things contained in them, as
Mr. Ainsworth in his Epistle to the Five Books of Moses says: Genesis, that
is, Generation, which ends with the going down of Israel into Egypt, in which
we have the Image of the Natural Man, fallen from God into the Bondage of Sin.
2ly. In Exodus, or Departure, is the Type of our Regeneration and State revived
by Christ, so was the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17. revived Exodus 19. 5, 6. 3ly.
As in Leviticus, the Sacrifices in the Service of God, the shadow of our
Mortification, shows; whilst we are made Sacrifices unto God, Romans 12. 4ly.
Numbers, the Sign of our Spiritual Warfare, whereunto we are mustered and armed
to Fight the Good Fight of Faith. 5ly. Deuteronomy, or the Repetition of the
Doctrine of Sanctification and Preparation, to enter into our Heavenly Canaan,
after Moses Death, by the Conduct of Jesus the Son of God. By all which it
appears, although God lead his People under Tipes and Shadows, pointing to
Christ, yet the proper end of the Law taught Israel the Worship of God in
Spirit and in Truth, Deuteronomy. 5. 7, 8. and 6. 4, 5, 6. as the truly Godly in
Israel well knew and confessed, see and read Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Psalm 40. 6. and
51. 6, 16. compared with Romans 10. 8, 9.

Again, what the Nature of the Covenant Exodus 19. 5, 6. was, the Prophet
Jeremiah shows, speaking to Judah in reproving the Church for Breach thereof,
when as by that Covenant Exodus 19. 5, 6. they were planted a noble Vine, wholly
a right Seed, but by Apostasy they were turned into a strange Vine, (Jer. 2.)
the Vine is Christ, unto whom they were espoused to him their Head, and they
were Branches by this Covenant (John 15.) made in the Wilderness, Acts 7. 38.
Members of his Body the Church, as it is written, Thus says the Lord, I
remember thee, the kindness of thy youth; the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the Wilderness. Israel was Holiness unto the Lord, and
the first fruits of his Increase; all that devour him, shall offend; evil shall
come upon them, says the Lord, Jer. 2. 2, 3.

Now where do we read, that by any other Covenant than that of Grace, Israel
were espoused or married to the Lord: The Angel of Gods Presence, who went
before them in the Wilderness Isaiah 63. 9. and was also their Rearward, for by
no other Covenant, but that of Grace, are a People made the First Fruits unto
the Lord; as we read Israel by this Covenant of Grace in Christ was; as James
says to the Christians, that they were a kind of the First Fruits of his
Creatures, James 1. 18. We likewise read that Christ's redeemed ones Rev. 14. 4.
are called the First Fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb. These Spiritual
Mercies were never given to any People by a Covenant of Works, but by the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, from whence only arises these Privileges, to be
a Kingdom of Priests, a Holy Nation, a Chosen Generation, the First Fruits unto
God and the Lamb.

Moreover, the Lord, when treating with Judah in her Apostasy by Ezekiel,
puts her in mind of his Mercy to their Forefathers, when he brought them out
of Egypt, when they were polluted with the Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. 20. so that
their Estate was like the State of the Heathen Canaanites, the worst of People,
in which sinful State, when no Eye pitied them, then by the Free Grace of God
in Christ, the Lord had Compassion on them; as it is written, Ezekiel. 16. 6, 8.
When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: Yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in
thy blood, Live. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy
time was the time of Love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: Yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into Covenant with thee, says
the Lord, and thou becamest mine.

Which Covenant of Free Grace is one and the same with Deuteronomy. 29. and Jer. 2. 2.
and Exodus 19. Genesis 17. for all agree in one, by which they were become the
Lords People, and God to be their God, even a God to them and their Seed, not
only then born, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Ye stand this
day all of you before the Lord your God; your Captains of your Tribes, your
Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of Israel, Your little ones, your
Wives, and thy Stranger that is within thy Camp (Profelites Exodus 12. 48.) from
the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water: That thou (to wit, as one
Mystical Body of Christ, the Church in the Wilderness, Acts 7.) should enter
(or pass) into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath (of which
Covenant by Oath Christ was Mediator, Heb. 7. 2.) which the Lord thy God makes
with thee this day: That he may establish thee to day for a People unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, (namely, unto thee and thy Seed,
thy Infants or little ones) as he has sworn unto thy Father, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob: Neither with you only do I make this Covenant, and this
Oath, but with him that stands here with us this day before the Lord our God;
but also with him that is not here with us this day; that is, the Children then
unborn; as appears by the same Covenant aforesaid, Ezekiel. 16. 8. compared with
ver. 20, 21. wherein God reproves them, among other things, for offering their
Infants to their Idols, saying, Moreover thou have taken thy Sons and thy
Daughters, whom thou have borne unto me: Thou have slain my Children: By all
which it appears, that the Covenant God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. to be
a God to him, and to his Seed or Children, is the same with Exodus 19. 5, 6. and
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. which is confirmed both by the Prophet Jeremiah,
chap. 2. 2, 3. and by Ezekiel, chap. 16. and the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and the Apostle John, Rev. 5. 9, 10. to be no parts of the Covenant of Works,
or of the Law; so that it is a gross Mistake in Mr. Carry, to parallel the word
Everlasting Covenant concerning Aarons Priesthood, Exodus 40. 15. with the
Everlasting Covenant to be a God unto the Believers and their Seed, the most
glorious Gospel-promise in the word of God, for how dreadful is the contrary to
the Apostate Israelites, and now to all Apostate Christians, For ye are not my
People, and I will not be your God, see and read Hosea 1. 9. and then see the
change (Hosea 1. 10.) by the Covenant of Grace in Christ, compared with 1 Pet.
2. 10. 1 John 3. 1. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. for what was the happy Estate that moved the
Patriarch Noah to say, Blessed be the God of Shem, Genesis 9. 26. this proves
that the Faithful in the Church, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace in Christ,
had God to be their God, which farther appears by the contrary, to such that
were not visibly under the Covenant of Grace, they are said to be Strangers
from the Covenants of Promise without hope, and to be without God in the World;
but when accepted into Covenant with God in Christ, they are no more Strangers
and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God. Ephe. 2. 11. 13. 19.

This Grace and most special Blessing of the Church of God, was not by a
Covenant of Works, as was given to Adam before his Fall, for Man was never more
to be credited upon his own word; therefore God drove Man out of the Garden,
and placed at the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a Flaming Sword
which turned every way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life, that Man should
not attempt entrance by his own Works, because such is the Spirituality and use
of the Law and the Doctrine thereof, which terrifieth the Conscience, and by
the Works thereof no Flesh can be justified, Romans 3. 20. and therefore the Law
served to drive Men unto Christ, that they might be made Righteous by Faith,
Gal. 3. 24. See Ainsworth on Genesis 3. 24.

And therefore Christ was not a Surety to his Father, for Man to keep a
Covenant of Works, or of the Law, of which Aaron's Priesthood was; but Christ
was Surety to his Father of a better Covenant for his Redeemed ones, as the
Apostle teaches, Heb. 7. even of that Covenant that was confirmed by Oath;
such was the Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham, and after with his Seed in
Deuteronomy. 29: 10, 11, 12, 13. whereby the Lord was a God to them and their little
ones.

Now let me ask Mr. Carry, and his Brethren that have set their hands to their
Narrative aforesaid, what Covenant that was the Church of Israel had (that they
say, under this present Suffering, they may say in the words of the Church of
old) though All this is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, neither
have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, Psalm 44. 17, 18. Will they say this was
a Covenant of Works, then the Anabaptists suffered not for Christ's sake, but
for to Merit by the Work done; but if we will believe the Apostle, concerning
the Covenant the Church of Israel suffered under, it was the Covenant of Grace,
even the same Covenant the Primitive Christians suffered, for as it is by the
Apostle gathered from Psalm 44. (to Comfort the Gospel Churches under their
Sufferings) As it is written, For thy sake (that is, for Christ's sake) are we
killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8.
36.

Now let these Men show what was the Covenant of Grace the Church of Israel
had, into which their Infants were accepted, with their Parents; but even the
same Covenant of Salvation the Churches now are in under the Gospel, the
Promise therein was to them and their Infants, as now to us and our Infants; as
these Scriptures show, Gen: 12. 3. in which the Families are Blessed in Christ
called in Genesis 17. 7. Generations, in Exodus 19. 6. a Holy Nation; and by Peter,
a Holy Nation, a chosen Generation, 1 Peter 2. 9. So that the State of the
Church of the Jews was laid on a sure Foundation, Christ in the Gospel-Promise
first to Adam, then to Abraham, and so to his Seed the Church of Israel; and
now on the same Foundation are all Gospel-Churches built. So then how
erroneously has Been. Keach affirmed, as aforesaid, in Page 113. of his Book
Gold Refined, That God has quite pulled down that House of his (I mean says
he) the National Church State, the Jewish Church, and broke up Housekeeping,
and turned the Bondwoman, and her Son, the fleshly Seed, Servants and Infants
all out of doors.

To which I answer, with the words of Christ concerning the State of the Jewish
Church, For Salvation is of the Jews, John 4. 22. Now if Salvation be of the
Jews, then the State of the Church of the Jews was founded on Christ, for there
was never but one Foundation laid, on which the Church of God was and is
builded; in all Ages, and this is Christ, as it is written, For other
Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is, Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.
11. If then Christ be the Foundation of Faith laid in the Gospel Promise
preached to Adam, and that the Jews had the same Covenant of the Gospel as we
have; as it is written, Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well
as unto them: Then if this Foundation, in which the Church State in all Ages
was built on, is pulled down, the Anabaptists Church State have not Christ for
its Foundation, as in truth it has not; for if the Anabaptists Church State
had Christ for its Foundation, then they must confess the State of the Jewish
Church had Christ for the Foundation of their Faith, as it had, else they could
not be Saved; for so it is written to the Church of Israel, as now to the
Gospel-Churches, Behold I lay in Sion for a Foundation, a stone, a tried stone,
a precious corner stone, a sure Foundation; he that believes shall not make
haste, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 3. On this Foundation the Church of Israel was
built, else Salvation could not come out of Zion; as it is written* There shall
come out of Zion a Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans
11. 26. with Isaiah 59. 20. but the Church of Israel was called Zion, because
her State was the Covenant of Grace; as it is written, Say unto Zion, Thou art
my People, Isa. 51. 16. And again, Praise thy God, O Zion, Psalm 147. 11. O
Zion, that brings good Tidings, Isa. 40. 9. Now by no other Covenant than
that of Grace, did the Lord say, For the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired
it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
desired it, Psalm, 132. 13, 14. Therefore it is said to the Church of the Jews,
Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy
King comes unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon
an Ass, and upon a Colt the Fool of an Ass. Zach. 9. 9.

Now because some of the Church of the Jews rejected Christ, that he should not
reign over them, this does not prove God has destroyed the Church State called
Zion; no sure, the Church State remained with the Faithful and their Seed; for
it were they that welcomed their Salvation into his Kingdom, see the third
Query; and from the day the Gospel preached to Adam, promised, a Deliverer
should come out of Zion, was Christ the Foundation laid; which Church State,
from the day Christ in the Promise, was laid, in the Covenant of the Gospel in
Zion, can never be removed; as it is written, Look upon Zion, the City of our
Solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle
that shall not be taken down, not one of the Stakes thereof shall ever be
removed, neither shall any of the Cords thereof be broken. But there the
glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers and Streams, wherein
shall go no Gally with Oars, neither shall gallant Ships pass thereby. For the
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Law giver, the Lord is our King, he will
save us. -- The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the People that dwell
therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity, Isa. 33. 20, 21, 22, 24.

Now are we commanded to look upon Sion, the City of God, the State of Grace,
the Church of God in all Ages was built on: Yea, let us look and see, that unto
no other Gospel-State of Salvation are the Gospel-Churches come unto, than to
this Mount Sion, the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and unto
the innumentable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and unto the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things than
that of Abel, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. And again, those that have the eye of Faith
may see, as it is written, And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on Mount Sion, and
with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written on
their Foreheads: Even all Gods Sealed number, who by Faith in the Covenant of
Grace in Christ, Gods Israel, both Jews and Gentiles who came out of great
Tribulation, washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb,
Rev. 14. 1. and 7. 4, 9, 14. Now if, as is proved in this Treatise, that we
Gentiles have no other Foundation for our Salvation than Christ in the
Gospel-Promise to Adam and Abraham, and that the Church of Israel had (the
same) to build their Faith upon, and that the Gentiles Churches stand by Faith,
on the same State of Grace Mount Sion the Church of Israel did; and that in the
same House or Church of God, Moses was Faithful as a Servant, Christ is over
the same House of his as a Son; therefore how near to Blasphemy is it, for any
to say, God has quite pulled down that House of his, that National
Church State of the Jews, when as Peter says, (from the Covenant of Grace,
Exodus 19. 5, 6.) the Church under the Gospel were a Holy Nation, upon the same
Grounds as Israel were a Holy Nation, as was Gods way in his Free Grace in all
Ages, that in Christ all Families shall be Blessed, as aforeshewed in the third
Query, The Believers, the Blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring (or Buds)
with them. Now they that shall deny Israel of old had not the same Covenant of
Life and Salvation as we now have, into which they and their Infants were
accepted, go about to destroy the Gospel preached to Abraham, that in Christ
all Families are Blessed; in that B. Keach says, God has quite pulled down
that House of his by Families, when as by Families, written by Moses, Genesis 12.
3. Peter expounds Kindreds, Acts 3. 25. and who be the nearest Kindreds but
Children, and these the Apostle calls Nations, Gal. 3. 8. as before proved in
the third Query, to whom the Blessing in the Gospel belongs, Zech. 2. 11.
Matt. 28. 19.

In the next place to examine the Scriptures Ben. Keach brings to prove God
has pulled down the Church State of the Church of old, and turned Infants out
of doors; his first is 1 Pet. 2. 5. from whence says he, God has now built
him a new, a glorious, and more Spiritual House, into which he admits none,
as his Household Servants, to dwell in his Spiritual Family, but Believers only,
or such as prefess so to be.

Answ. As to the Persons whom God admits into this House, Peter says, They
are a Holy Nation, a Chosen Generation; the same, namely, that the Church of
Israel were; Believers, and their Seed in Infancy, let the Reader compare word
for word, Exodus 19. 5, 6. with 1 Pet. 2. 9. and then judge who we are bound to
believe, he that speaks as Peter did by the Holy Ghost, or B. Keach, who
without respect to Moses or Peter's words, presumptiously says, None are
admitted into the Church now, but Actual Believers. His words are contrary to
Matt. 18. 6.

2. The other Scripture that is brought to prove that God has pulled quite
down the State of the Church of the Jews, and turned the Infants out of doors,
is Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change of the Law. Which, says he, must needs include Circumcision, with all
the Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to it; and therefore as Infants
Church membership came in with the Law of Circumcision, so it went out, and was
disannulled with it; they were, it is true, of the Household of old, but it was
by a positive Law; show us the like now, and you do your business.

Answ. Two things I observe in B. Keach's words aforesaid; First, he grants
by the coming of Christ, there is a Change of the Priesthood; so is there also
of the Law contained in the Ceremonial Ordinances, which were both Figures of
Christ; as it is written, Having abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2. 15. And these were those
things which were to be removed, as it is written, And this word yet once more
signified the removing of those things that (may be) or are shaken, that those
things which cannot be shaken may remain, Heb. 12. 27. And what are those
things which cannot be shaken, namely, the Church State of the Jews, as
aforesaid, Mount Sion, the State of the Covenant of Grace, Christ's Kingdom,
which cannot, says the Apostle, be moved, and therefore by him set in
opposition to the Law, Exodus 20. given on Mount Sinai to terrify Sinners; for
the Church of Israel had not only the Law to show them their Sins, but also God
gave them his good Spirit to instruct them, Neh. 9. 20. with the Gospel, to
walk with God by Faith in Christ, Heb. 11. chap. so that the difference between
the Jewish Church and now, they had Figurative Ordinances to teach them Christ
to come, we have Gospel Ordinances to teach us he is come; so that although God
has given more of his Spirit in these latter days, yet it is but the same
Spirit the Church of old had; so that without ground it is, for B. Keach to
say, God has quite pulled down the Church State of the Jews, and built him a
more Spiritual: Surely a double measure of the Spirit did not make the Prophet
Elisha not Elisha, 2 Kings 2. 9. no more than a double measure of the Spirit
make the State of the Gospel Church not the same State the Church of Israel
had; so that the Kingdom, or Spiritual State by the Covenant of Grace, the
Jewish Church had, was never yet pulled down, although many of them rejected
Christ, the chief Cornerstone: And Therefore from such, the Kingdom (says
Christ) shall be taken away (not pulled down) and given to a Nation (to wit,
the Gentiles) bringing forth the Fruits thereof, Matt. 21. 43. And therefore
the Lords Vineyard, his Church, was not destroyed or pulled down, but let out
to other Husbandmen which should render to the Lord the Fruits in their
Season, Matt. 21. 41. And therefore says the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.
28. concerning the Kingdom of Christ, that cannot be shaken; we having received
a Kingdom that cannot be moved, even Mount Sion, on which Christ, from the day
the Covenant of the Gospel was preached to Adam and embraced, the Kingdom of
Christ was established in Adam's Family; then Christ first sat King on the Holy
Hill Sion, Psalm. 2. 6. for all were redeemed in Adam's Loins, as they fell in
him; and Romans 5. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 22. after the Flood, Christ's Kingdom, as before
showed, remained in Noah's Family, although some Apostatized; then God chose
the Posterity of Blessed Shem, of whom Abraham came; and God was pleased that
of the Seed of Abraham's Body Christ should be born; yet a Promise was made,
that God would persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem, as was
fulfilled, when the Gentiles were grafted into the Olive Tree, the State of the
Jewish Church, the Covenant of Grace in Christ, from which some Jews, for their
unbelief, were broken off, Romans 11. chapter So then here was no new Covenant, no
new Olive Tree, no new Kingdom, or new Church State; no, nor were the Infants
of Christ's Kingdom ever yet shut out, Luke 18. 16. as Mr. Keach dreameth to
deceive his Reader.

2ly, he has also dreamed that Infants Church Membership came in with the Law
of Circumcision; if People are not willing to be deceived by him, they may see
Gods word for the contrary, for no Person was ever joined to the Lord by
Circumcision, but by Covenant, Jer. 50. 5. as it is written, Let us join our
selves it the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. And so
Abraham was in Covenant with the Lord some years before Circumcision was
instituted, Genesis 12. 3. and when Children were born to Abraham, as after to the
Believing Jews, they were born to the Lord, because they were joined to the
Lord by Covenant, and the Lord was their God, and God called them his Children,
so that all Infants born in Covenant, must be eight days old before they were
Circumcised, Genesis 17. 12. As in the Wilderness by Deuteronomy. 29. before their
Infants were Circumcised, both Parents and their Infants were joined to the
Lord, and established by Covenant to be the Lords People; so that as Infants
Church Membership came not in with Circumcision, so Infants Church Membership
went not out when Circumcision was abolished; but as the Covenant before proved,
was the same, Circumcision and now Water Baptism Seals, the Covenant
remains, together with the Subjects, Believers and their little ones: the
Covenant, never yet by any word of God abolished, nor yet the Infants born in
Covenant, shut out of doors, that is, our of Gods Covenant, so long as the
Parents abode in the Faith, and the Children continued therein. Therefore at
Random B. Keach falsely affirms, through his gross mistake, to say, that
Infants Church Membership came in not till Circumcision was instituted, and
that by the Act of Circumcision they were joined Members, this were to put the
Seal to, before the Covenant is entered into; to the divertment of all order in
sealing Covenants. So then when he can prove Infants were joined Members by
Circumcision, then he may have some color to say, that Infants were no longer
Members than Circumcision remained; but Circumcision was a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. the Covenant for which the Seal was
ordained, was the Covenant of Grace, the word of Faith, wherein is contained
the Promises of the Pardon of Sins and eternal Life, now confirmed by the
Circumcision of Christ, as before proved, and now Water Baptism set in place
thereof, by the Authority of Christ the only Lawgiver in Worship, Isaiah 33.
22. James 4. 12.

Neither will his third proof by similitude taken from Act of Parliament help
him in his Assertion aforesaid; For, says he, show us a positive Law for
Infants Church Membership. Now the word of God is plain; that Infants were
Church Members from the day Adam was restored, so soon as Infants were born, as
before proved in the third Query. For if all Infants sinned in Adam's Loins,
when Adam was restored they were restored in his Loins; and when born, they
were born in the Gospel Covenant; by which the Church of God was established in
Adam's House; so that the Children born in Covenant, were born to the Lord,
whom the Lord called his Children; for none out of the Covenant of Grace are
visibly the Lords Children: Therefore how carnally does he reason against
Children in these words; For evident it is, that what Privileges soever are
given to any Persons by an Act of Parliament, which said Law was to continue in
force for so long time and no longer; when that time is expired, and another
Parliament makes a new Law, wherein many things are contained that were in the
first; but those certain Privileges given to those Persons in the former Law,
are left out in the latter Act; it would not be a Folly for any of them to
plead those Privileges, by virtue of a Law that is gone, and not now in force.
This being a carnal Argument, like his carnal Faith.

In answer hereunto his Comparison is Odious, a Parliament is an Earthly Kings
Great Council, who makes Laws and he signeth them: But, says the Scripture,
who has been the Lords Counselor to direct him, Romans 11. 34. to give Laws to
his Church, or to order all things in that State. So then, as has been proved,
as touching the State of the Infants of Believers, since the day they were
restored in Adam's Loins, and when born, born to the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 20, 21.
Blessed with their Parents, with Remission of Sin, Isaiah 65. 23. Acts 3. 25,
26. there has been no word of God to dispriviledge them (so long as they
continue in the Covenant of Grace) of whatsoever Privileges they ever had; no,
nor yet have these Men by any word of God showed, when or wherein they have
been turned out from the Promises in the Covenant of the Gospel, which they
call out of doors; for the things which only have been removed or abolished,
given from the beginning, concerning what God had given to his Church to keep
and observe, were only those things which were shadows of good things to come
by Christ; but Infants in Gods Covenant were no Shadow or Figure to be
abolished; no, nor the Baptizing of Infants any of Babylon's Rubbish, as Mr.
Keach, with others, affirm in the first Epistle to Mr. Cary's Book: No, nor yet
is Infants Baptism a Cornerstone that supports the An-Antichristian Fabric,
by unsavory words, as Mr. Carry affirms in his Epistle to his Solemn Call; but
it is one of the Glorious Tokens of Gods Love to his People and to their Seed,
that as Christ has taken away the Sin of such Infants, Christ's Name should be
set on them in Water Baptism, that they are his, bought or redeemed, because
Christ washed away their Sin, with his precious Blood, the small Vessels in his
House, who welcomed their Lord into his Kingdom, that as they were included of
old in the precious Stones in Aaron's Breast Plate, with their Parents, Exodus
28. 15. to 21. so are they now, by Christ our High Priest, presented before the
Lord with their Parents, a Holy Seed, a Holy Nation, a chosen Generation, 1
Pet. 2. 9. shining among the Precious Stones which the Foundations of the Walls
of the City, the Church of God, is garnished withal, Rev. 21. 18, 19, 20. as
the Church of Israel was; that as by Tribes Israel went up to Jerusalem, even
by Families to be presented before the Lord, both Fathers, and Mothers, and
Children, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11, 12, 13. Psalm 122. 1, 2, 3, 4. to praise the Lord,
Psalm 148. 12, 13. Exodus 12. 26, 27. for now as Vessels great and small, the
Glory of Christ's Kingdom, Isaiah 22. 24. does likewise shine among the lively
Precious Stones in Christ's Spiritual Building, crying Hosannah to Christ their
Lord, while the Anabaptists, not only in Errors in their Faith are polluted,
but also garnished with the Shame to Nature; as Ben. Keach for one, when he
beholds himself in a Glass, how he wears Woman's covering, the Shame to Man,
Nature, which at this time I should not have mentioned, but for this reason,
because he, with other Teachers in their Narrative, among other things
proposed, debated and resolved in the Affirmative, That it is a shame for a Man
to wear long Hair and Perriwigs, and especially Ministers, 1 Cor. 11. 14.
Narrative, Page 14.

Now what kind of Teacher is this Man, that shall condemn in words that he
allows in himself by Practice, Romans 14. 15. he is one of those Teachers the
Apostle reproves, as it is written, Thou that teach another, teach thou
not thy self, Romans 2. 21. Thou that make thy boast of the Law (even the Law
of Nature) through breaking the Law dishonorest thou God, ver. 23. Hear what
the Lord says to such Teachers; What have thou to do to declare my Statutes,
or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee? Psalm 50. 16, 17. of such the
Lord complained, concerning his People their Leaders have caused them to err,
and they that are led by them are destroyed, Isaiah 9. 16.

Now are not these like the Teachers the Lord complained of, of old, that would
seem to reprove Sin, but says the Lord, They healed the hurt of the Daughters
of my People slightly, Jer. 8. 11. So have these Men in their Narrative
reproved this Sin, the shame to Nature slightly. And therefore for the help of
all that desire to be informed in this Particular, there is to be had where
this Book is sold, a Treatise on that Subject under these particular Heads.

God's Holy Order in Nature, which Man and Woman were Created in, truly Stated
and Explained. Proving,
First, THat Man is Head of the Woman, and how Woman is made in Subjection to
Man her Husband.

Secondly, That God gave unto Woman a Sign in Nature, differing from Man, to
teach her she is the Glory of Man her Husband, and this Sign is called Glory to
Woman, and Shame to Man's Nature.

Thirdly, That Man is Commanded by the Law of Nature, and Written Law of God,
not to wear Woman's Glory, because he is the Image and Glory of God.

Fourthly, Therefore, that Man that wears Woman's Glory, by so doing says he
is not the Glory of God, nor Woman the Glory of Man her Husband.

Fifthly, Therefore, that Christian Men durst not Live in the breach of Gods
Order in Nature, for the space of 1600 Years, is proved both by Scripture and
History.

Sixthly, And that the Kings and Queens of England, together with all
Magistrates under them, as also Fathers and Masters of Families, and likewise
the Ministers or Teachers of the People, were careful, that both themselves and
all under their charge, for the space of 500 Years, kept Gods Order in Nature,
as here proved.

Seventhly, When the Duty began to be omitted by Magistrates and Guides of the
People in this Nation, in themselves and those under their charge, is showed,
to the great dishonor of God the Creator, a Shame to Nature, and a Reproach to
the Christian Religion.

Books Printed for and sold by William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Folio.
BOok of Martyrs, in 3 Vol. Willets Synopsis Papismi. -- on Genesis and Exodus.
Charleton's Physiologia. Extravagant Sheepherds a Romance. Love and Revenge, a
Romance, by James Hayward Hart's Diet for the Diseased. Reconciler of the
Bible. Bishop Smith's Sermons. Spanish Bawd. Rycaut's History of the Turkish
Empire. Nani's History of the Affairs of Europe. Violet's Proposals for calling
to account all Committee Men, Sequestrators, Treasurers and
Custom-Commissioners, Collectors of Monthly Assessments, and all that have been
entrusted in the Publick-Revenues. Ben. Johnson's Bartholomew Fair, Staple of
News, and the Devil is an Ass.
Quarto.
Jackson's Concordance. Hooker's Souls Preparation. Hooker's Souls Humiliation.
History of Prince Arthur Complete. Bolton's General Directions for Comfortable
walking with God. Feltham's Resolves. White on the Sabbath. Heylin's History of
the Sabbath. Sibbs on Hosea. Cooper's Heaven Opened, on Romans 8. 1. Dodd on the
Lords-Prayer. Chapman on the 117 Psalm. Dodd and Cleaver on the Ten
Commandments. Spiritual Armor to defend the Head from the Superfluentness of
Negatives.
Octavo and Twelves
Instructions in the Art of Grammar. Government of the Tongue. Janua Linguarum
Vestibulum. Reserata. Scudder's Christian daily walk. History of the Great
Mogul, first and second Part. Hopton's Concordance of Years. J. de Lunas
Spanish Grammar. Monarchy Asserted by a Committee of Parliament in Speeches.
Nomen clatura, English, Latin and Greek. Bagshaw's Rights of the Crown of
England. Leigh's Description of England. Nosse Te Ipsum, a Poem by Davies.
Ladies Calling. Waraeus de Antiquitatibus Hiberniae. Pantoni Apparatus
Theologiae. Epicurus's Morals, English. Humes Jacob and Boaz, or the Steadfast
and Unwavering Christian. Ward of Wit, Wisdom and Folly. Brough's Sacred
Principles in Welsh. Beverley's Great Soul of Man. Vines on the Sacrament.
Gourdon's Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae. Dent on the Revelations. Continuation of
Sidney's Arcadia. Four General Heads, Christian Religion Surveyed and
Explained. Hieron's Dignity of Preaching, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Chetwind's Historical
Collections. Crashaw's Meat for Men, or Service on the Sacrament. Sharp's
Midwifery. Merry Drollery Complete. Ross Virgilius Evangelizans. Textoris
Epistolae. Tullii de Officiis. Bnuworth of the French Disease. Knowles
Rudiments of the English Grammar. Nasmith's Divine Poems. Ramsey of Poisons.
Stewards Catholic Divinity. Lucius Florus in English. Boteler of War in
Marches, Battles and Sieges. Hill's Natural and Artificial Conclusions. St.
Bernard's Meditations. English Dictionary and Expositor. Third part of the
Bible and New Testament. Countess of Kents Rare and Select Secrets in Physic
and Chyrurgery.
FINIS.

