GOD'S REVENGE AGAINST The Enemies OF THE CHURCH.

Written by T. W.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

1 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3. And Samuel said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee
to be King over his people, over Israel: Now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the Lord. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I remember what
Amaleck did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came out of
Egypt. Now go and smite Amaleck, and utterly destroy all that they have, and
spare them not, but slay both man and woman, Infant and suckling, Oxen and
Sheep, Camels and Asses.
TIme was when Amaleck would have destroyed Israel; Time is now in my Text,
when Israel shall destroy Amaleck. Go, and smite Amaleck, and all that they
have.

God will revenge the injuries that are done unto his Saints; Anger may sleep,
but it cannot die. Though it be four hundred year after, God will call the
wicked to account: Their posterity shall be heirs of their curse, as well as of
their lands. Whom God has destined to destruction, he will raise up
Instruments to effect his own Decrees: Whom God employs, he will enable them to
that piece of service about which he sets them. When God does for man, he
expects that man should do for God. The power he gives us, he intends we should
employ in his service. If God gives Saul the dignity of a King, it is fit that
Saul should yield him the duty of a servant. And Samuel said unto Saul, God
sent me to anoint thee, etc. Now therefore hearken thou to the voice etc.

These words may be generally dichotomized into two parts.

1. A commemoration of what God has done for Saul, made him King; And Samuel
said unto Saul, God sent me to anoint thee to be King over his people, over
Israel.

2. A Declaration of what God would have Saul do for him, in these words, Now
therefore hearken thou unto the voice, etc.

In the commemoration we observe two things; 1. By whose ministration Saul was
made King, by Samuel says the Text; And Samuel said unto Saul, God sent me.
Secondly, After what manner he was enstated in that office; by being Anointed
thereunto: God sent me to anoint thee to be King, etc.

In the Declaration of what God would have Saul do for him, we observe three
things.

1. The form of the Injunction, in these words, Now therefore hearken thou unto
the voice of the words of the Lord.

2. The ground of this Injunction, the remembrance of an injury; I remember
what Amaleck did to Israel when he came up from Egypt, etc.

3. The Commission granted in it, Go and smite Amaleck, etc. The handling of
the Text will discover the several branches of each particular. I begin with
the first general, a Commemoration of what God had done for Saul, made him
King; and therein by whose ministration he was so made, by Samuel's: And Samuel
said, God sent me.

God sent me: It was not so, for Saul was sent to Samuel, and not Samuel to
Saul, so we find it 1 Samuel 9. 16.

I answer, Sending does not always imply a local motion, but sometimes a mental
direction; God's Prophets are no less said to be sent, when they directed their
Prophesies to a place, then when they brought them. It is the delivery of their
message, rather then their personal moving, that speaks them sent: I am sent to
thee with heavy Tidings, says the Prophet Ahijah to the wife of Jeroboam
coming to him; though the good old man moved neither from his house nor seat,
so we read 1 Kings 14. 6.

So is Samuel here said to be sent to anoint Saul, not so much in reference to
any external motion, as to that prophetique instinct, whereby he was commanded
to anoint Saul when he came unto him. But Saul in coming to Samuel to receive
his Royal Unction, Expositors upon my Text say, was a Type of wicked and
ambitious men, seeking after the outward honor and dignity of the world. From
whence no^e.

They that are least worthy of honor, are commonly most desirous of it, and
seek after that honor which the more* deserving accepts* not of, without being
sought unto.

Never had pride so much worth, as true worth has humility. There is no
dignities so high, which ambition makes not the mark of its own merit: no
advancement so mean, which humility thinks not to overbalance its desert.
Every one thinks himself worthy of that honor whereunto he aspires; yea
therefore aspires to it, because he thinks himself worthy of it.

Lucifer could not be chief among the Angels, but he will also be as high as
God himself: Ero ut Altissimus, I will be like the most High, Isa. 14. 13.
Behold, O Lucifer, thousands of Angels minister unto him, and ten thousand
stand before him: While all the rest are standing, Lucifer must needs be
sitting; I will sit in the Mount of the Congregation, Isa. 14 14. O Lucifer! If
thou had any priority of order, thou had none of Nature; if thou had
higher endowments then thy fellows, yet but the same identity of Being: If thou
were chief in the service of God, yet not exempted from it: For, Are they not
all made ^inistring Spirits? so says St Paul, Heb. 1. 14. O proud and
ambitious spirit! Had thou rather be without God, then under him? Had thou
rather be chief in hell* then not as chief in heaven? Know then, that thou
shall be tumbled into hell, Isa. 14. 15. And he that would sit in a Throne by
himself, Judge of his own Angels excellency, shall stand before men to be
judged for his Devils contumacy: so says St Paul, Know ye not that we shall
judge the Angels? 1 Cor. 6. 3.

But let me draw down your thoughts from heaven to earth: None of Gideons sons
so much affected Sovereign Power over Israel as Abi^^lech, not younger then
his brethren so much in years, as in worth: The name of Judge was enough for
his valiant father; nothing but the Title of King would suit with his ambition,
Judge. 9. 2. None before him usurped Sovereign power over Israel, none that came
after him was less worthy of it: He was illegitimate in his birth, but
execrable in his actions. The blood of seventy of his Brethren must seal the
Crown faster to his head.

Absolon too, thought he had had as much worth as beauty, his Father's crown
would better befit his head, which yet had more hair then wit: There is no wit
against the counsel of God, who had designed Isreal's crown for a wiser head; so
we read 2 Samuel 7. 13. But what say we next to the Scribes and Pharisees, of
whom our Savior says, That they love to sit in the chief places in the
Synagogues, Mat. 23. 6. If their sitting there did become their gravity, sure I
am, their love to fit there did betray their vanity. These are those ambitious
affections which are figured in Saul, in coming (though unwillingly) to receive
his holy Unction; which is the second thing observed in this first general; the
manner how he was enstated into this Sovereign Office, by being anointed
thereunto with oil: God sent me to anoint thee to be King, etc.

As the Office of a King does enstate him with power, for the administration of
Justice, so his anointing to that Office with Oil, which is ever held for a
Type of mercy, does admonish him to exercise that power with lenity and mercy.

Hence Note, That the very acts of Justice, must be tempered with Mercy; and
the rigor of the one, mitigated with the lenity of the other. Punishments must
nor take their measure from that guilt which did occasion them. The Father of
mercies may be our soul-melting president in this particular. The very Devils
are not tormented so much as they deserve. For why should we limit the power of
his wrath? Woe, and woe, would be the damned in hell, if mercy were confined to
heaven and earth; yea even in hell does his mercy triumph over his justice, and
abates of the measure of their deserved pains, though not of the continuance.

But let us more safely adore the temporal acts of his Justice: Here mercy I am
sure interposes, not more willing to mitigate our deserved punishments, then
unwilling to inflict what he does: so says the Prophet, Lam. 3. 33. The grief
which he takes at the misery of men, shows his unwillingness to proceed against
them; for, his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, says the Text, Judge.
10. 16. as if he that did afflict, were no less affected then the people that
were afflicted. So violent is the heat of this holy contention between his
mercy and his justice, that it kindles repentings in him: My heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together: Hos. 11. 8. As if the Prophet
should have said, Justice can no sooner get a resolution of vengeance, but in
comes mercy, and turns performing into repenting; and repenting, into
forgiving: but lo justice provoked by man's continuance in sin, returns, and
assisted by truth, begets another repenting of that forgiving; and then the
sentence of judgment is given forth; according as it is written, Within forty
days, and Ninive shall be destroyed; when lo before it can be executed, it is
revoked; his heart turns within him, and the turning of his heart, stays his
hand.

Nay more, when Justice does prevail, and God does punish, mercy tryumphs even
in that justice: Because Justice will not turn it self into mercy, mercy will
turn it self into justice; and that which was justice in the punishment,
becomes mercy in the amendment that is wrought by being punished. Even the acts
of justice shall serve to set forth the power of mercy in their happy effects.
How many that had run to the very gates of hell in in their prosperity, have
been brought home again by adversity, and set in their right way again to
heaven. God exercises his justice, that he may make way for his mercy: It Is
our benefit he intends by punishing, and not our ruin. This mercy then which
God does exercise in and among his works of justice, is a divine rule for all
earthly Potentates to walk by, signified in my Text to Saul by the oil, (an
emblem of mercy) wherewith he was anointed to that Kingly Office* God sent me
to anoint thee to be King over his people, over Israel: Now therefore hearken
thou to the voice of the words of the Lord, etc. which is the second general, A
Declaration of what God would have Saul do for him, wherein we have first the
form of the Injunction, Now therefore hearken thou, etc.

Wherein each word has its weight. Now, Now therefore: Now therefore hearken
thou: Now therefore hearken thou (not to the words, but) to the voice of the
words of the Lord.

Now. This particle Now, has a peculiar Emphasis; as if he should have said, O
Saul! Thou did sin before in offering up forbidden sacrifice, cap. 13. 9. thy
detrusion from the Throne of Israel was threatened then, Now therefore take
heed, offend no more, but hearken to. Note hence.

Present obedience may revoke that judgment, which reiteration of sin may make
inevitable.

If God's [ Now] be not observed, man's [ Now] may either never come, or come
too late. Esau may shed tears for the loss of his blessing, but together with
his blessing, he does but lose his tears; for, he found no place for
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, says St Paul, Heb. 12.
17. There is a promise made to unfeigned penitence, but there is none made for
it.

Some say the Devils should be saved, if they would, or could repent; but there
can be no ground for that assertion: and my reason is, for that repentance can
expiate no sin, for which God has not better satisfaction in the death of
Christ, and Christ died not for the Devils. That repentance which is built upon
faith in a personal application of Christ's merit, is only saving, and this
repentance is given only unto Abraham's children, whose seed the Redeemer of
the world took. But what difference is there between men and devils, if the
devils cannot expiate their sins by repentance, and man will not? They are less
abhorred that neither do nor can, then they that can, and do not: If therefore
the devils neither can repent, nor if they did, could be saved by it, they are
then worse then devils who may repent, and may be saved by it, and yet will not
but continue in sin. We may sin as men, but if we do not desist from it as
Christians, we cannot persevere in it but as devils: Sad is their condition,
and full of horror, whose hearts are not smitten with their sins, as well as
their ears, whose resolutions are not convinced, as well as their consciences.
It were better for these to have died soon in their sin, then to have lived
longer to it, they may be a little longer in hell, but they would be a great
deal less tormented; for in living to fulfill the measure of their iniquity,
they do but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath: Who sees not then the
danger (I say) not so much of falling into sin, as in lying in it. It is just
with God to deny repenrance to them, when it is begged, who wilfully neglect it
when it is proffered. It is just that they that run on in sin without care,
should die without cure.

Nor is it less difficult for the Leopard to change his spots, then the
Aethiope his skin. I mean by the Leopard (which is a beast speckled with the
different spots of white and black) that kind of sinner that is neither
constant in good nor bad, but sometimes white, by retracting of his sins,
sometimes black, by re-acting, and falling back into the same. By the Aethiope,
who is wholly black, I mean, that sinner which goes on and perseveres in sin.
Though there be the same difficulty for either to recover out of their sins,
yet there may be difference in the condition of the sinner; for reciduation
into sin, is worse then continuance; for it is no marvel, if they that never
felt the horror of sin, can continue in it; if they that have, can return unto
it: If they found no horror in sin, why did they forsake it? If they did, why
do they repeat it? If the first acts of sin struck any terror, what a work will
the reiteration make in the conscience? If one devil at first could so disturb
the soul, that it could never rest, till he had been cast out, and its self
been swept with the besome of mortification, and garnished with many Christian
graces, what confusion will he, with the addition of seven more worse then
himself, make in the soul if he returns? It is better never to have known the
way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment. 2. Pet. 2. 21. If it were not wicked to consult with Witches, why
did Saul destroy them? If it were, why did he afterward seek unto them? Surely
his former destroying them, is set down, to note his greater impiety in his
after seeking unto them. Knowledge of sin, heightens the guilt of the sinner;
and reiteration, both the guilt and judgment of known sins. And therefore sin
no more (^aith our Savior) lest a w^rse thing happen to you. God easily
forgets our past sins, if the addition of more makes him not remember and recall
them: But if they do, he deals with us, as some mothers with their children,
call them to a reckoning for all together: Which Samuel does here emphatically
infinuate in my Text, by this particle Now. Saul was before for his
disobedience threatened the rejection from his Kingdom; which sentence present
obedience may revoke. Now therefore hearken. Which brings me to the next term
of weight, the illative particle [ therefore] Now therefore; as if Samuel
should have said, O King! God has done for thee, now therefore thou must do
for God. The Note that I observe from hence is this.

There is nothing more pleasing then a pious gratitude.

Obligations and transgressions are proportionable. By how much the more we are
bound to serve God, by so much the more vile we are if we do it not. The
foresight of our sins, and abuse of them, cannot stop the current of God's
present favors: but those favors which do not prevent sin, do aggravate it.
Go up (says God to Moses) thou and the people; the vulgar translation renders
it, Tu, and populus tuus, Thou, and thy people; and the following words render
it the more probable, where God ascribes their eduction from Egypt also unto
Moses; whom thou have brought up out of Egypt, Exodus 33. 1. But how comes
Israel, whom God had in so many relative and respective terms appropriated to
himself, how come they on the sudden to be Moses his people, and charge? Surely
Moses his prayer (who was also the Mediator of the Law) which only preserved
them a people, made them his people: Now God will no longer be the God of his
people, then they are the people of their God: Nor would he go up with them
himself, but there was a mystery in the reason, I will not go up, lest I
should destroy them, Exodus 33. 3. But yet he would send an Angel with them: but
what do I read? Will not God go up lest he should destroy them? And yet will he
send an Angel? What shall we say then? Is there more mercy in an Angel, then in
God? God forbid, Not more mercy in an Angel, but less danger to the people; for
that high favor, and holy benefit of his divine presence, would but heighten
their sin, and at once both hasten and aggravate their judgment: It is mercy
to the wicked to withdraw his temporal mercies from them; because those
benefits which do not more excite men to serve the Lord, does the more excite
God to punish the men. He will measure out a portion of wrath, answerable to
his abused favors: And in this respect an Angel's conduct was more safe for a
rebellious people, then God's.

The punishment must be proportionable to the sin: To speak morally, there can
be no sin more odious to God then ingratitude, because all his favors are
wholly undeserved. Those favors deserve most of us, of which we are least
deserving. Can we challenge any interest in the God of love, when that love of
God which has done so much for us, cannot persuade us to do what we can for
God? Are his benefits so much above the ability of our deserving? And shall our
desert be below the ability of our performing? It Is true, we are not able to
pay so much obedience as we owe, yet let us not owe what we are able to pay:
But make Samuel's Ergo in my Text, become ours too in resolution, and resolve
it thus in our selves: many are the blessings which we have received from God,
and therefore we will hearken to the voice of his words. Which brings me from
the illative particle, Therefore, to the personal, Thou: Now therefore hear^en
thou; even thou O King! Thou that art honored with Royal Dignity, though
others less endeared, less indebted, may fail of their duty yet do not thou,
Hearken thou. The Note is this.

The highest pre-eminence calls for the exactest obedience. For,

1. Men are better taught by the eye then the ear, and are brought to practice
sooner by imitation then persuasion, and do rather follow the instructor, then
his instructions. God commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac* not to try his
obedience, but to prove it. God did not want experience, but posterity example.
Abraham had been unworthy to be the father of the faithful, if he had not left
his children an example of his obedience, as well as precept.

2. Eminency of place calls for obedience; as first, for being example of good
to others: so secondly, for controuling evil in others. They only may justly
reprove a sin, which may not justly be reproved for it. Otherwise wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, says St Paul. They carry (like
Urias) the letters of his own death, the sentence of their own condemnation,
that prescribe that obedience which they do not practice. Nor are they more
pernicious to themselves then others; for in that they pull down by their
lives, what they build up by their lines; while men are more ready to follow
their example, then instruction; they do but make the people also more knowing
to their greater destruction.

3. It is not only, either for example, or for liberty of controuling evil in
others, that requires obedience in men of eminency; but also out of gratitude
to God. He is unworthy to be master of a family, who is not the most godly in
it; nor they either of Civil or Ecclesiastical honor, whom sanctity does not
more adorn then their dignity: The devil would not part with honor to Christ,
without doing homage for it; and shall God to man? Or rather, would the devil
have worship done to him for his fained promises, and shall not God for real
performances. God gave man dominion over all his works, and writ his
Sovereignty in the majesty of his countenance, but sealed his donation with a
precept of obedience; man broke the Seal, and made the Writing of no validity.
The Government both of heaven and earth was given to Christ, but even he too
must bear it upon his shoulders, Isa. 9. 6. that is, he must submit to the Law,
and to the will of God, in dying for the sins of men; For so it is written, In
the volumn of thy book, that I should do thy will, O God: Yea, I am content to
do it: and so became obedient un^o death, the death of the Cross: And for this
cause, God has exalted him, and given him a name above all names; Phil. 2. 9*
Exaltation is ever either the reward of obedience, or else the condition. Saul
had done no remarkable service of obedience, why he should be made King, yet he
was made King, that he might do it. God sent me to anoint thee to be King; Now
therefore hearken thou to the voice of the words: He does not say to the Word
of the Lord, as if it were spoken but now; but hearken to the voice of the
words of the Lord, because there were formerly several words, or divine
oracles, as Exodus 17. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 17. which did enjoin upon Israel this piece
of service, which was reserved for a trial of Readiness obedience. The observation
hence is this.

The more often and earnestly Precepts are pressed in holy Writ, the greater
care is required in performing them, and the heavier judgment incurred in
neglecting them.

The dignity of the person that commands, makes the breach of the smallest
precept no small offense; how then will he be observed in his more severe
edicts? Take an instance.

What command is more often, and with greater protestation and zeal commended
to our practice, then an holy observation of the Sabbath? What precept violated
with greater rigor of punishment, Adam did not more slightly forfeit heaven
then his posterity do eagerly pursue the earth. Heaven being lost, which only
can satisfy the desires of men, the world is only affected, which never can.
Even innocent Adam must till the ground, Gen, 2. 15. but in sorrow must he eat
thereof, as the curse of his sin, Genesis 3. 17. And yet, the sinful sons of Adam,
as if they would recompense the loss of heaven, with the gain of the world, by
a piece of the divel's Chemistry, turn their necessity into delight, and make
their curse their blessing; with such sweet content piercing themselves through
with many sorrows, while they will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 10. though they forfeit
for it, truth, honesty, grace, heaven, yea and Jesus Christ. For this cause,
God foreseeing the propension of man's will, allured with the false beauty of
temporal felicity, would be wholly addicted to heap up these earthly treasures,
and find no leisure for heavenly employments, bound us to the obedience of this
command, with a more frequent pressing it, and by threatening the violation
thereof with unavoidable death.

Remarkable is the story of the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day;
remarkable, not so much in regard of the punishment that was inflicted, but in
regard of them that did inflict that punishment: And let all the people stone
him with stones, Numb 15. 35. Not some, but all the people: Every one must have
a stone to fling at the offender, that so every one might learn not to
transgress that Law, the breach whereof themselves had been the punishers. If
the terror of the death might affright them, their own hands dipped in the
offenders blood might make them no less ashamed, then afraid to commit that sin
which themselves had so severely punished.

As in this case of the Sabbath, so in all other crimes may the proposition
hold; that a more sharp chast^sement is due to them, whom a more often pressing
does not excite to a more strict obedience: which that Samuel might gain from
Saul, he minds him of former words, wherein this service was commanded, Hearken
not to the word, but to the voice of the words of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord.

Whom the new Testament calls the God of peace, in the Old, was styled the Lord
of Hosts. The whole Creation,* Men, Angels, and the other creatures, are God's
armies, sent forth to subdue his enemies: The very Stars in their course fight
against Sisera, Judge. 5. God is called thus and thus, according to his several
attributes: His Attributes are distinguished in the notion of men, by their
proper actions; from these attributes producing actions answerable each to the
same, are these Titles derived. Thus great and miraculous actions, speaks him a
God of power. Acts of punishment, a just God. Acts of grace, a God of mercy:
and Acts of victory, the Lord of Hosts, from whom Samuel here brought a
Commission; Thus says the Lord of Hosts. And what was that?

I remember what Amaleck did. I remember. Whence note.

All the actions of the wicked are recorded in the book of God's remembrance.
Penitently to remember our own sins, is the readiest way to abolish them. The
fight of this ^erpent cures the sting. Because the Saints sets their sins
before their face, God casts them behind his back, God will not hereafter
afflict them for their sins, whom their very sins do here afflict. If hell were
appointed for sinners, yet not for those who make their sins as an hell to
them; as he did who prayed, O bring my soul out of hell! that is, from the
state of sin.

It Is contrary with the wicked, they forget God, and with him, the sins they
commit against him: Some wash away the remembrance of their sins in their
drunken Bowls, as did Balshazzar, Dan. 5. Some feast away the remembrance of
them, in luxurious riot, so did Dives, Luke 15. Some fiddle away the
remembrance of them, so did they in Job, They take the Tabret and the Harp, and
delight in the found of the Organ, Job 21. 12. Some sport away all thoughts of
sin, They spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go down to death, Job 21.
13. Some bury the remembrance of sin in their worldly cares, so do the greedy
Misers of the earth. Some choke the remembrance of them with a false hope, that
God himself takes no notice of them, Tush, say they, Does God perceive it? Is
there knowledge in the most high? Yes, desperate sinner, God does see them, he
records them all, and in his time of vengeance, will remember it too. I
remember what Amaleck did.

Why did the Angel go about Jerusalem in the appearance of a man, with a
Writers Inkhorn by his side, Ezekiel. 9. 11. but to note, that if he did not
according to the Letter of the Text; write down all their sins, yet to signify
they were as certainly remembered as if they were.

All holy and divine Attributes make up but one God. All the operations of
those attributes, tend but to accomplish one infinite Will, and terminates in
glorifying him. His glory is incomprehensible, and so are the ways whereby he
does promote it. Those ways which are most unlikely in the apprehension of man,
do most advance that glory. Nothing did more startle the faith of the ancient
Prophets, then the prosperous success of the wicked: Why does the way of the
wicked prosper? Why are they in wealth that rebelliously transgress? cries
Jeremiah, cap. 12. 2. Why does the wicked oppress the man that is more
righteous then himself? is the complaint of Habbakuk, cap. 1. 13. as if they
should say, Can God be jealous for his glory, and let them prosper so, who thus
polute it? Is God righteous that takes vengeance on the wicked? Shall man glory
in his wickedness, and shall God sit down with the dishonor they do unto his
name thereby? But cease, O man, whose breath is in thy nostrils, is the reward
of thy faith so far above thine understanding, and must the trial of it be only
in things below it? Does the wisdom of God infinitely surmount thine
apprehension, and must the proceedings thereof be only limited to it? If God be
God, be thou a man. Can thou search into the secrets of his mercy, which
withholds the present execution of his justice, in expectation of repentance?
Think not that mercy too great, which had it been less then infinite (and so
above the apprehension of a finite creature) had left thee wholly to justice?
Can thou search into the secrets of his justice, which raises glory to it
self out of abused mercy? Think not his justice too slow, which had it been
more speedy, had cut thee off (thou best of men) from the benefit of mercy.
Do thou see a man slight the Ordinances of God, and pass by his gracious call
with neglect and scorn, to outbrave his conscience with a bold admittance of
any sin, to aggravate his sin with hateful circumstances, in contempt of
goodness, to be a graduate in ungraciousness, and to wallow in his uncleanness;
as if he were as void of fear, as he is of grace; as if he were as far from
judgment, as he is from remorse. O the dreadful, and no less secret effects of
divine justice. Present impunity makes this man secure, security more
outrageous: Because judgment is not speedily executed on the wicked, therefore
are the hearts of the children of men set on mischief, says the Scripture. It
was Eves impunity (if I dare suppose it) more then her example, that induced
Adam to eat the forbiden fruit, He saw her eat that morsel which God had
forbidden her, but he did not see her die, as God had threatened her. Methinks
I hear Adam thus reasoning within himself: If the injunction were laid upon her
as well as me, why should the penalty be inflicted on me, and not upon her? I
may well hope I shall not die for eating that, which I see her eat, and live. If
Absolon had died for murdering Ammon, he had never rose out of his grave in
rebellion against his Father. The wicked fear not that vengeance which they
presently feel not, till they suddenly feel what they feared not. Because God
winks at the sins of the ungodly, they think he is blind, and sees them not:
Because they mind not God's judgments, they think God minds not their sins:
They remember not God's judgments because he defers them, and God defers them,
because he would more severely remember them. I remember what Amaleck did,
which is the next point; wherein two things.

1. What Amaleck was? 2. What he did?
1. What Amaleck was? He was the posterity of Esau, the brother of Jacob, who
was father to Israel, to whom Amaleck did this wroag.

The first opposition then which Israel received, was from their consin
Germans. To have been the ringleaders of mischief, is no small aggravation of
the crime: The example is as bad as the crime. Every one may serve to set
forward a mischief, which has neither skill nor courage to attempt it. What
shall Israel expect from the Amorite a stranger, that is first injured by
Amaleck a brother? To receive hurt from them which ought to help, is a double
injury. No bonds of Nature can restrain the mischievous proceedings of bloody
men. Self-interest, and envy, know no difference of persons, but oftentimes
produces the bitterest enmity between the nearest allies, as here between
Israel and Amaleck: But if the Law of Nature had linked Amaleck to Israel, the
election of grace had appropriated Israel to God. Isreal's natural relation to
Amaleck, did aggravate Amalecks injury to Israel; Isreal's spiritual relation to
God, shall heighten God's revenge against Amaleck, for that injury done to his
Israel. I remember what Amaleck did to Israel. And what was that? He laid wait
for him in the Wilderness, as he came up out of Egypt.

He laid wait for him.

The wicked want nothing but opopportunity to do mischief; What they cannot
effect by force, they will endeavor by fraud. Amaleck is a true Metatype of
the devil, whose subtlety must prevail more then his power. The devil may roar
like a Lion, but he cannot hurt; he may seek to devour, but cannot assure it:
Not what he will, but what he is permitted, is done by him: yet his malice
shall still feed his hope. The devil may as well cease to be, as not do like
one. Though it be to his greater confusion in disappointment, he will yet
attempt; and hopes to facilitate that by his treachery, which he cannot by his
strength.

Of him it was Amaleck learned to lay wait for Israel as he came out of Egypt:
For no sooner can a soul go forth in resolution and endeavor, from the Egypt
of the world, to the Canaan of heaven, but that infernal Amalekite lays snares
to entrap it.

He that could not endure that man should continue in the state of innocence,
does with greater despite behold his return unto it. It is a greater vexation
to be foiled by a foe overthrown before, and whets the desire to a more hopeful
encounter. If one devil be expelled, he will seek to regain his possession,
with the assistance of seven more. Pharaoh cannot endure that Israel should
serve a greater Lord then himself, nor the devil a better. Pharaoh thinks them
strait idle in his service, if they have any leisure to think of serving
another, and will increase their tasks, to divert their thoughts. No sooner
could Gideon make peace with Joshua, bnt all his neighbor Kings make war
against him: No sooner can a soul enter into a peace with God, by holy
resolutions of amendment, but the devil strait attempts to corrupt the
affections thereof; love of gain, fear of scoffs, desire of pleasures, in a
joint conspiracy work together, to break off those resolutions. I am the Lord
thy God, so begins the Law; but while this Law was writing, the devil stirred
up the people to force Aaron to make them a golden god: While the true God was
writing them a Law, they made a Law to set up a false God. The devil did hope
God would hold them unworthy of his holy Law, that had not the patience to stay
the writing of it.

Nor seeks he more to deprive us of the helps of piety, then to hinder the
increase. It is the sad complaint of many a poor soul, that they never meet
with more occasions to call them aside, then on those days which precedent
intentions had devoted more solemnly with fasting and prayer to humble their
souls before their God. Holy purposes, if deferred, are likely lost: But its a
false necessity that crosses that unum necessarium of Mary, which is the only
true one, what ever occasion it is, or outward necessity, that diverts us from
our holy purposes, it is but an Amalekite that lies in wait by the way as thou
go from Egypt, to thy heavenly Canaan, thou must subdue it; thou must
destroy it in this spiritual warfare, as here Saul was in this temporal; Go and
smite Amaleck, and all that they have: which is the last thing, The Commission
granted from the Lord of Hosts: Wherein see

First the matter of it, Destroy Amaleck.

Secondly, The extent of it. 1. Generally, All that they have. 2. Particularly,
Man and Woman, i. e. of all states, degrees, and conditions, Infants and
Sucklings, Beasts and all.

The Observation hence is this.

Divine vengeance knows no difference of persons, spares neither the high for
their state, nor the weaker for their Sex, nor the young for their nonage, nor
the very beasts for their want of reason, which makes them in themselves
uncapble of finning.

1. Not the high for their state. No outward dignity can be privileged from
impunity; nay, the dignity of the person, adds to the indignity of the crime,
and makes him obnoxious to the greater judgment: The reason given, is, Because
the sins of the great are exemplary. Great men, if sinners, are like to the
devil, who with his tail drew down the third part of the stars with him, Rev.
12. 4. Who ever knew an holy Court, and a wicked Prince? Or to speak nearer to
our selves, who ever knew a virtuous family, and a profane master? His plenty
corrupts him, and he the rest. They are afraid to appear good, if he upon whom
they depend hates to be so* They think he will hate them too, if they be not
like unto him. A bad example is sooner followed, then a good one: It is this in
Governors, whether public or private, that maintains sin in the world, which
it at once both secures, and feeds. Men think they may safely do that, which
they see those practice, who ought to punish it. It is the just retribution of
God, that if they who ought, do not punish sin, should be more severely
punished for it: they attract the guilt of many, by whom many are made guilty:
All shall suffer for their own sins, but he shall suffer as much as many, whose
example made many sinners. How justly did Dives fear the augmentation of his
own, by his brothers coming into the same torments, whose example might bring
them to it: With what bitterness did he entertain the thoughts of their coming
to increase his flames, which he already found so intolerable? How much better
had it been for him to have begged his bread with Lazarus on earth, then to beg
water of him in hell?

What a corrasive must it needs be to the penitent soul of David, to hear
Nathan say, Thou have made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme? O holy David!
I have heard thee sometimes say, Thou would destroy all the wicked of the
Land? Shall those wicked now learn by thee to be more vile? That thou which
have so often sang praises to the name of God, should cause others to
blaspheme that name! For what will they say? Is this the servant of the God of
Israel? Can that Law of God be an holy Law, whose chief Professors commit such
unholy acts? Such needs must be the Law, as the lives of them that do embrace
it do declare, Men sure are such as they are taught to be: If their God were
holy, his people would be holy too; he cannot well be good, that has such
wicked servants. If great men therefore be greater examples of impiety, a
greater measure of punishment must be their due, which divine justice will
surely pay.

Indeed it is no less requisite that the Divine nature should be uucapable of
sinning, then impossible for it to be subject to it: for if it be necessary
that sin should be punished, it is as necessary, that it should be punished by
him who cannot sin. Where there is subjection to a capacity of sinning, there
can be no certainty of immunity from falling into it: where there is no
necessity of immunity from it, there can be no necessity of punishing it; for
how shall any (especially eternally) punish that, whereof himself may possibly
be guilty, if he should be subject to it?

Hence it is, that neither men nor Angels can punish sin; a derivative power
they have, but not a primitive, they may have it from God, but not from
themselves; they may be executioners of punishment, but not imposers. The Elect
Angels indeed, and beatified Saints cannot sin; but they have this happiness by
their confirmation in Christ, and not by the soundness of their own nature: The
one have sinned while they were here, the other might have done even there.

To God then only it belongs to punish sin, not only as it is committed against
him, but as it is he that could not possibly have sinned. And now to bring it
home, as he is God, and cannot sin, and therefore only may, so as he is God, he
cannot but punish sin, and therefore will, in whomsoever he finds it. He spared
not the Angels, says S. Jude: If sin seizes upon the nature of Angels, the
nature of Angels shall be subjected even to actual torments for that sin: As it
is written, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And as a worthy light of our Church says, In vain were that light
prepared for the Devil, if the Divel's nature could not be tormented in it. But
as for us men, God did more to redeem us, then he did to make us. If then God
spared not the Angels, which* sinned only against their creation, how much less
will he not spare man that sins against so great redemption, treading under
foot the Son of God; as if the blood of the Covenant, wherewith we were
sanctified, were an unholy thing. Heb. 10. 29. Again, If he spared not the
Angels for their heavenly excellency, much less will he spare man for his
earthly dignity; whom their impiety of life does condemn, their eminency of
place shall not absolve. It Is the works of men that God accepts, and not their
persons. He that would not accept of a crown for himself, will never accept of
another for it. For, Tophet is prepared of old, even for the King is it
prepared, Isa. 30. ult And so hateful was Readiness partiality in this respect,
that for sparing the King of Amaleck, he lost the Kingdom of Israel, if not of
heaven to himself. Thus you see, first he spares not the high for their state.

Secondly, Not the weaker for their Sex: Slay man and woman too.

Women. The original matter of woman, whereof she was composed, was more pure
then that of man, yet was the woman first in the transgression, and not the
man. Before their fall, she was an help meet for him, not subject to him; but
after her fall, lest she should abuse that equality which she had before, to
the like seducement, she must submit to the dominion of her husband, Genesis 3.
16. That as in her equality she first induced him to sin, whereby he merited
eternal death, so in her subjection, she should be obnoxious to the penalty of
his sin, even to a temporal death; and therefore slay man, yea and woman too.

Thirdly, He spares not the young for their nonage. Such as are the Parents,
such usually are the children; not that the very sins of the Parents are by
nature transfused into the children, but do insensibly steal upon them, by
being daily inured to them, which at length by custom turns to another
nature. It is therefore just with God, to root the whole race of them, whom he
foresees will be inheritors of their fathers enmity against his Church. So Noah
about to curse his Son Cham, pronounced not the curse in the name of Cham, but
Canaan his sons son.

Noah by a prophetique spirit foresaw Canaan would be heir of his Fathers sin,
and therefore subjected him to his fathers curse. Nay, righteous Jonathan must
be dispossessed for his fathers disobedience. God's judgments are always deep
and secret, but ever just: He takes away the righteous young for their greater
good, he takes away the wicked young for their lesser torment; and therefore
s^ay man, woman, yea infant and suckling too.

Oxen and Sheep, etc.

It is the endowment of reason that gives a capacity of sinning: The creature
is void of reason, and therefore free from sin, yet must be slain. The
unreasonable creature, though in it self void of sin, yet in detestation of the
sinner whom it serves, is made obnoxious to temporal punishment. If the devil
in the serpent induce Eve to sin, the instrument is cursed, in hatred of the
sin occasioned by it. In the destruction of the old world by the universal
deluge, why should the beasts, creeping things, and fowls of the Air, perish by
the waters, but because they received their food from that earth wherein man
had corrupted their ways Genesis 6. 7. As therefore Beasts in general cannot sin,
yet subjected to the curse of man's sin; so neither in particular had these
Amalekitish cattle any hand in the offense done to the Israel, yet must be
destroyed for their owners sakes, who had* So severe is God's vengeance against
the enemies of his Church, even total destruction, both of them and theirs. In
God's due time Amalecks portion shall be theirs. Even so, O Lord, let all thy
enemies perish, that thy Church may have rest,

Amen.
FINIS,

