A Fifth LETTER, Concerning the Sacred Trinity; IN ANSWER To what is Entitled,
The Arians Vindication of himself against Dr Wallis's Fourth Letter ON THE
TRINITY.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, 1691.

A FIFTH LETTER Concerning the Sacred Trinity.
SIR,
I Have met with an Answer to my Fourth Letter. It is not Long, and my Reply
shall be but short. There is very little in it concerning the Merits of the
Cause, (save that he resolves to hold the Conclusion:) and as to Personal
Reflections, or Disdainful Expressions, I do not think fit to trouble the
Reader with a long Reply. For those, I think, do not hurt me so much, as him
that uses them.

He is not pleased, page 1. that I said, I had Argued Calmly, without
Scurrillous Language, or Reproachful Terms. And I appeal to the Reader, whether
it be not so. Nor does he deny it. And if his Language were so too, he needed
not to have made the Reader an Apology, to excuse his Expressions, that he
might avoid the Character of a Common Railer, p. 1.

But, he says, Abating the little Subtilties and Artifices, incomparably witty,
there is not the least Grain of weight in my Letter. Of this the Reader is to
be Judge, both as to the Weight, and as to the Wit.

He says, It seems, a Socinian wrote against me. (True. And it seems he knew
it: For he cites him.) And that himself wrote as an Arian. I think he should
rather have said, He wrote, first as a Socinian (in his first Ten pages,) and
then as an Arian, (in the other Ten.) For I do not find any thing, till toward
the end of his Tenth page, whereby I could judge him other than a direct
Socinian. And I think it will so appear to any other Reader.

He takes to himself the name of Unitarian; by which I do not find the Arians
were wont to be called. But it is a new Name which the Socinians have taken up,
to distinguish themselves both from Us, and from the Arians. For the Arians are
rather Pluritarians, as holding more Gods than One. And the Book to which
himself refers us, p. 4. is entitled, The History of the Unitarians, otherwise
called Socinians. And, in p. 11. where he first mentions the Arians, he does
introduce it with a Preface, minding me, that I write against Arians as well as
Socinians: As having, till then, spoke for the Socinians only, not for the
Arians. And even in his tenth page, (toward the beginning of it) what had been
said of the Socinians by name, and of Socinus in particular, he takes to
himself, as if one of that Party. He seems (says he of me) to insinuate an
aspersion on US, that WE believe not Angels.

He tells us now, p. 3. He does believe them; and I will suppose also, that he
does believe the Soul's Immortality. But, when he there says, that I bring a
World of Arguments to prove the Immortality of the Soul; he mistakes again. For
those Arguments were brought against Socinus, not to prove the Soul's
Immortality; but, that the Soul, in its separate condition, was capable of Pain
or Pleasure: which Socinus denied.

For requital to this, he tells me, he had a good mind to prove the Existence
of a Deity, for that he had heard of some men of the Profession of the Church
of England, that have almost been Atheists at the heart. And truly if he should
do so, I should not think it much amiss: For I have heard, the same suspected
of some Socinians.

He now tells me, p. 2. He never was a Socinian in his Life. Of what he had
been in the former part of his Life, I had said nothing. (For I knew no more
what it was, than who he is.) But (p. 37.) of what he was in the beginning of
his Discourse. And it is plain he there writes like a direct Socinian (as was
showed but now,) though as an Arian some time after.

He tells me (p. 2.) that he is neither the Socinian, nor his Friend, who
assisted in his first Book. Neither did I say, that he is: but, that he might
be for ought I knew. But whether he be or not, it is the same thing to me; for I
am yet to fight in the dark with I know not whom.

He says, He is not concerned to defend Socinus, or any man who has dropped
imprudent words. Nor did I require it of him. And, whether he were, or were not
the same man who wrote before; yet, since here he acts another Person, I left
it free for him (p. 1, 2.) to decline, if he pleased, what was said before; to
grant what was there denied, or deny what was there granted.

But then, he thinks, p. 1. I should not charge him with writing
Contradictions, because such things may possibly be found in the others Answer.
Nor do I. (This is only a piece of his wonted Artifice of Mis-reciting me.) I
tell him indeed, it is hard to please them both, when they do not agree amongst
themselves? And I did observe, (and argue from it) what he grants, though the
other had denied it. But I never charge him with what the other had said. And
(if he look it over again) he will find, that I did not confront him (to show
thence a contradiction) with what the other had said: But did confront what
himself had said in his ten first pages, with what he says in the other ten.
And it is manifest, that in the first ten, he acts the Socinian; and in the
latter ten, the Arian. But, in whether of the twain he acts his own part, it
was not easy to determine; till he now tells us, he is an Arian.

He had argued, p. 8, 14. That the Trinity are Persons, as really, and as
properly, and fully personally distinct, as Three Angels. And each Person (both
Son and Holy Ghost by name) complete and entire in himself, with as complete
Personal distinction as that in Men and Angels. From whence when I inferred his
owning the Personality of the Holy Ghost: He fearing, it seems, he had
over-shot himself, now tells us, p. 4. just as much as becomes on Arian. But if
he own him to be as much a Person, as a Man, or Angel is a Person: it is as
much, or perhaps more, than we need contend for in this point.

I had charged him also with mis-reciting me in many other things. As when I am
introduced (very often) as talking of Two Gods, Three Gods, Personal Gods, of
adding several Persons to our one God, and the like; (according as here also,
he says, p. 7. that I say, you your self own Two Gods, and why may not I then
Three?) when he knows very well, this is not my Language; nor is any thing of
all this said by me. To this he now says, p. 5. It Is true enough he does so;
but that he does it by Inference. But he should then speak it as his Inference,
not cite it as my words.

I might have taken notice (amongst a great many gross mistakes,) that where I
had mentioned, the Lords and Commons of England, declaring the Prince of
Orange, to be King of England, France and Ireland; he mis-recites it, p. 4.
King of England, Scotland, and France; as if the Parliament of England, had
taken upon them to dispose of the Kingdom of Scotland, and not that of Ireland.
But of this, and a many more, I passed over, without reflecting on it. Because,
in his Language, he is so very negligent and careless, (and otherwise
obnotions) that it were endless to reflect on all.

But I was obliged to take notice (because it quite alters my Argument) of what
he says, p. 4. that I say, Three sides make one Cube, etc. which is neither
true, nor are they my words. I argued not from three sides, but from the three
Dimensions of a Cube. This he calls Trifling; and would persuade us that side
and dimension, differ no more than Muting and -- his other word, which is
fitter for his mouth than mine. But though he perhaps know-no difference
between them; yet he should not have cited it as my words (and say, that I say
so, when I did not.) For I ought to know better; and that a Cube has six
sides, though but Three Dimensions. Nor did I argue from the six sides, but
from the Three Dimensions. Yet I can forgive him this (rather than when he does
it wilfully) though it mis-recite my Argument: Because I believe it to be out
of pure Ignorance, not of Malice.

He does not like, p. 6. either This, or any other Simile's; and would have me
no more to insist upon them. (But he must excuse me from taking his advice
herein, unless he understood it better, than, by what was now said, he seems to
do.) Because, if he be not mistaken (as I think he is) they are very far from
my purpose. That is, He thinks, they do not prove the Trinity. True: These,
alone, do not prove it (nor was it intended they should.) But they prove (what
they were brought to prove) that it is not a Contradiction, or Inconsistent
with Reason, that there may be three somewhats (which we call Persons) that are
but one God. And thus much he had before granted, and does now again confirm
it, p. 3, 4. It Is true indeed (he says) I cannot say that there is a
Contradiction in holding that there may be three Persons in God. For, says he,
There be two sorts of Contradictions; The one Express, the other Employed. I
cannot say, there is a Contradiction in holding it: Because I have not the
Definition of the word God so exact, as to raise an implied contradiction: And,
for an express contradiction, I do not pretend to it. If therefore there be no
Contradiction, either Express, or Implied: It is what I was to prove.

But, says he, The dispute shall not end here. He will be allowed the
Privilege (and no body does deny it him,) to fetch in the First Commandment, to
define the word God. With all my heart. I was never against it. (For what he
says, more than once, p. 3, 4. that I meanly cry, he flies to Scripture, is but
another piece of his wonted Art of mis-reciting. There is nothing to that
purpose in any thing of mine.) I do sometime blame him for changing the state
of the Question: As, when he would have me prove by Reason, that It is so: I
tell him, That is not the Question, (nor is that to be proved by Reason:) The
Question is, whether there is any thing in Reason, why it cannot be so. Now,
let him keep to the Question; and then, if he think he can prove, from
Scripture, that it is Inconsistent with Reason, for Three somewhats to be One
God; or, that it is a Contradiction, for God the Creator, and God the Redeemer,
and God the Sanctifier, to be the same God; or, that it is Impossible for the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, to be One and the
same God: Let him try his skill. And, let him make what use he can of the First
Commandment, to Define the word God, so as to prove this a Contradiction. But,
when he had claimed this Privilege, (and no body does deny it) He makes no use
of it for any such Definition.

The truth is, I had already granted him, from that Commandment, (p. 23, 24,
25, 28, 29.) more than he was willing I should grant: That we are to have NO
OTHER GOD (Great or Little, Equal or Unequal,) but the Lord God of Israel.

Yes, says he; There is one Supreme God, another Creature-God; But that this is
not to have Two Personal Gods. How so? If these be Two Gods, and each of them a
Person, (complete and entire of himself; as really, and properly, and fully,
and personally distinct, as a Man or Angel, as he had before told us at p. 8.
14.) they must needs be Two Personal Gods. But we, according to the First
Commandment, acknowledge but One God; and those three somewhats (whom in a
metaphorical sense we call Persons) not so to be distinct as to become Three
Gods.

He hopes however to avoid the First Commandment, by saying that, though they
be Two Gods, they are not two Gods Coequal, p. 5. and that they worship the
Son, not: with supreme Worship; with Mediation, not Adoration, p. 6. What he
means by his two Worships; of Mediation, and Adoration; I do not well
understand: unless they be new Names for Doulia and Latria. Nor do I remember,
that I have before heard of a worship of Mediation. That Christ is our
Mediator, I know; but did not know that he is our Worshipper.

And what does he think of the Israelites, when they Worshipped the Golden
Calf? Surely they did not think this Calf to be Coequal with the Supreme God.
Nor did they think it to be (Deus natus) a God by Nature; but (Deus factus) a
Made God: (for themselves had made it, just before:) Yet I never knew, that
this did excuse them from Idolatry.

He does not own Christ to be the True God, (for such there is but One, the
only true God,) nor yet a false God; but a Mean between both, p. 6. Now it is
true, the Heathen had (their Deos medioxumos) their Middling Gods: But I never
knew that we could worship such, without Idolatry. Thou shall Worship the Lord
thy God (the Supreme God) and Him ONLY shall thou serve, was our Savior's
Doctrine, Mat. 4. 10. And St. John expressly calls him the True God, 1 John 8.
20. (not a Middling God, between True and False) and therefore the same God
with the Father, the Only true God.

To that Character of Christ, Rev. 1. 8, 11. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, (the First and the Last) says the Lord, which IS and
WAS and is TO COME, the Almighty. He says, This style is given him in
opposition to Gods simpler one, I AM. But he should have observed, that the
same title is, at ver. 4. given to God, in Contradistinction to Christ, (...),
etc. And if it were there a Character of the Supreme God, it is so here. And if
he think the simpler term (...), I AM, to be more expressive of the Supreme
God; we have that also Emphatically given to Christ, Romans 9. 5. (...), He which
IS, or the Being, over all; the Supreme Being.

To what further I had brought, p. 30, 31, 32, 33. to prove him to be the
Supreme God, the same God with the Father, (not a Middling, or Titular God,) he
makes no Reply: which therefore stands as it was; nor need I repeat it, because
it may be read there. And it is so full and clear, that I need add no more to
it.

To what I had said of Ioh. 17. 3. To know Thee (not Thee Only, or Only Thee,)
the Only True God. He says, He has Answered already. And I have already
Replied; nor need I repeat it. Their Argument from thence is just in this form:
The God of Abraham is the only true God; therefore, not the God of Isaac, or
the God of Jacob. Yes, say I, the God of Isaac, and the God of Israel, is the
same God, but under another consideration. So here; God the Creator (or God the
Father) is the Only true God; therefore not God the Redeemer, nor God the
Sanctifier. Yes; God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, is the same God, the
only true God. In like manner, Ier. 16. 14, 15. It shall no more be said, The
Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;
But, The Lord lives, that brought up the Children of Israel out of the North
Country. Now, says the First Commandment, I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt; Thou shall have No Other God but Me: Therefore
not the God which brought them out of the North Country. Yes, say I, even this
God also. Which is not another God; but the same God; though considered as the
Author of another Benefit.

There be many other things, both in his first and second Paper (his Answer and
his Vindication) which lie very open to be Reflected on, if it were worth the
while: But I think, I have said enough already; and, he thinks, too much, (that
I have been too stiff, too hard with him, p. 8.) which things I shall therefore
omit, to save my self, and the Reader, the labor.

But three things he calls me to account for omitting; His Reproof of my false
Idea of the Personality of God, the Impossibility and Blasphemy of his
Incarnation, and of the Death of God, p. 8. Now when I had proved the things to
be True; I thought that had been a sufficient Answer, to his calling them
False, Impossible, and Blasphemous. For they are never the more so, for his
calling them so. And I know not what further Answer he should expect, unless he
would have me say, It Is foul-mouthed Blasphemy in him, to call it Blasphemy.
But if I should answer him all along at this rate, according as his language
deserves; we should, instead of Disputing fall to right down Railing; which is
the Character he was afraid of, page 1.

However (to gratify him once more,) That by the Word, Joh. 1. is meant,
Christ, himself owns: and, That this Word was God from the beginning; That he
made the World, and all things; and that without him was not any thing made
which was made; (and therefore, say I, Himself was not made; unless our Arian
would have us think, He made Himself) That this God, is the Supreme God, we
have proved at large, (if he deny it to be proved, we must leave it to the
Reader to judge of the Arguments:) and this Word was made Flesh. (I hope I need
not tell him, that to be made Flesh, and to be Incarnate, is all one; for every
one understands this who know that Caro carnis is Latin for Flesh.) Therefore
this is no Blasphemy.

Again; That God in Christ suffered and died; and that we are Redeemed by the
Blood of God, he had before told us, p. 13, 14. That this is the True God, we
have proved at large (as was but now said;) Therefore the Death of God (that
is, of him that was God as well as Man,) is no Blasphemy.

Yet again; I do not take his Reproof (as he calls it) to be a Proof, that my
Idea of Personality is False. And therefore I did not think it deserved an
Answer; having proved the thing before. Yet I thought I had Answered it (as
much as it need to be answered) when (at my page 36.) I told him (nor does he
deny it) that he seemed well pleased at his p. 20. that I owned the word Person
to be but Metaphorical; though at his p. 7. (which is the Reproof he means) he
did not like it. For tid after page 7. he acted the Socinian, and did not come
to act the Arian, till afterward; and then he seemed, at p. 20. to like it well
enough.

I shall yet add somewhat more upon that point, which if it may not satisfy
him, (who seems to intimate p. 8. that he will not be satisfied,) may give some
further satisfaction to the Reader.

The word Person (persona) is originally a Latin word; and does not properly
signify a Man (so as that another person must needs imply another Man,) for
then the word Homo would have served, and they needed not have taken in the
word Persona: But rather, one so Circumstantiated. And the same Man, if
considered in other Circumstances (considerably different,) is reputed another
Person. And that this is the true notion of the word Person, appears by those
noted Phrases, personam induere, personam deponere, personam agere, personam
sustinere, sustineo unus tres personas, and many the like in approved Latin
Authors. Thus the same Man may at once sustain the Person of a King and of a
Father; if he be invested both with Regal and Paternal Authority. Now because
the King, and the Father, are for the most part not only different Persons but
different Men also (and the like in other cases) hence it comes to pass, that
another Person is sometimes supposed to imply another Man: but not always, nor
is that the proper sense of the word. It is Englished in our Dictionaries, by
the state, quality, or condition, whereby one Man differs from another: and so,
as the Condition alters, the Person alters, though the Man be the same. Our
Schoolmen of later Ages, do sometimes apply the word Persona to Angels as well
as Men; but even that is but Metaphorical; nor do I find that it ever was so
used, in approved Latin Authors, either for Angels, Genii, or their Heathen
Gods; but for the different state or condition of Men only.

Now when the same Man does thus sustain two Persons, as that of a King, and
that of a Father; he may as to one thing act as a King, by his Regal Authority;
as to another thing as a Father, by his Paternal Authority. And these
Authorities, may be in subordination one to the other, though the Man be the
same. And what is done in either capacity, may indifferently be said to be done
by the Man, or by the King: (as that David, or the King, pardoned Absalom;) and
in like manner, by the Man, or by the Father.

This being the true and proper notion of the word Person, we are next to
consider what it is to signify in the present case. Where we are to consider,
that the word Person is not applied in Scripture to these three so called: It
is not there said, These three Persons are one, but only These three are one.
It Is but the Church's usage that gives to these three somewhats, the name of
Persons.

And therefore our Arian was much mistaken, when he tells us, p. 20. that the
word Person is the Hinge of the Controversy. The Hinge of the Controversy, is
that notion concerning these three somewhats, which the Fathers (who first used
it) did intend to design by the name Person. So that we are not from the word
Person to determine what was that Notion; but, from that Notion which they
would express, to determine in what sense the word Person is here used. And if
the word Person do not well fit that sense; all that can be thence inferred, is
no more, but that they have made use of an Unfit Name to express their Notion.
It is no more but as if a Cruel Pope take the name of Clement; or a wicked one
the name of Pius; or if a Man be named Willson, whose Father's name was Thomas.
And in all such cases, certitudo Rei tollit errorem Nominis. And if we know who
is the Man designed by such a Name, it is a Ridiculous exception, to say, This
is not the Man, because that Name does well agree with his Nature.

Now Two of these Three being represented in Scripture, as Father and Son; and
this Father said to Beget the Son, and all these in a sense metaphorical; (not
in such sense as those words do properly signify amongst Men;) they thought it
not unfit (in continuation of the same Metaphor) to call them Persons. Because
as the word Person does properly agree to the relations of Father and Son in a
proper sense; so does the word Person in a metaphorical sense, to the Father
and Son so taken metaphorically; and the word Beget, by a like Metaphor.

When therefore it is certain, that the Notion which the Ancient Fathers had
concerning these Three, which in a metaphorical sense they called Person, was
this, That there is a Distinction between them, greater than that of the Divine
Attributes, but not so great as to make them Three Gods: it is manifest that
they took the Metaphor, not from that abusive sense of the word Person, when
(amongst us) it is put for Man; but from that proper sense of the word Persona,
wherein it signifies the State, Condition, Office, or Relation of a Man, as
variously circumstantiated with reference to others; whereof the same Man may
sustain more than One. As when David, was the Son of Iesse, the Father of
Solomon, and the King of Israel. So if we say of any, that he is a Person of
Honor, a Person of Worth, and a Person of Interest: That same Man may be all
this, without becoming Three Men.

Now this our Arian may call this (if he please) a Quirk, a Criticism, an
undermining the very Idea of the word Person, as he did in his, p. 7, 15, 17.
(or may neglect it, if he pleases:) But the sober Reader (who understands it
better) will have better thoughts of it.

And therefore I shall not take his advice, p. 7, 8. to say that God is the
name of an Office, that so he might know how to attack me, (as he says,) which
while I talk so warily, he knows not how to do. I say, God is the name of the
Nature; but if he will have Christ to be the name of an Office (the Mediatory
Office,) and the Comforter, or even the Creator, the Redeemer, the Sanctifier,
to be names of Work or Office, it will not be much amiss.

Now, when I had said this Doctrine of ours is as old at least as the New
Testament, (because I can prove it from thence;) he will have it (p. 5.) no
older than the disputes of Alexander and Athanasius; which the Primitive Church
knew nothing of. But he bars Quotations all along. And therefore I must not
prove it (to be known to the Church before that time,) but leave it to the
Judgment of Readers versed in Church History, whose word must pass in this
case; his or mine.

To his Question, p. 6. Did the Jews ever hear of it before Christianity? I
think they had some Intimations of it, as they had of the Resurrection: But not
so clearly (either of them) as to be generally understood of all; nor so fully
as in the New Testament. And I think it was from those notices of it amongst
the Jews, that not only Plato derived much of his Philosophy, but other
Heathens also much of their Mythology; though they did much disguise, and
sometimes Ridicule the notices they had thence, as our Arian now does that of
the Trinity. But this is not the business now before us.

Toward the close, he is so kind as not to desire Arianism to be imposed on
others, any more than Trinitarianism on him, p. 8. But neither is this business
before us; who are but Disputants, not Lawmakers.

But so constant he means to be to his cause, that he will be content to be
persuaded out of his Name with his Opinion. (I think there is reason why he
should change his Opinion, but as to the changing of his Name, he may use his
discretion.) But having said much (that he might not be thought to desert it)
he thinks it advisable to drop the cause. Which he may, if he please, and leave
it to the Reader to judge of what is said.

I conclude as he does; It is impossible but offenses will come; but woe unto
him through whom they come. It were better for him that a Millstone, etc.

Febr. 14. 1690/1. Yours, etc. I. Wallis.

Advertisement.
THE Life of Faith, in Two Sermons to the University of Oxford, at St. Mary's
Christ-Church, Oxford; On January 6. 168frac34;, and June 29. following: By the
same Author, Dr. John Wallis. Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside.


