Infants Baptism from Heaven, OF Divine Institution.

BEING A Brief yet Satisfactory Answer to some Objections made by Hercules
Collins, in his Book Entitled, Believers Baptism from Heaven, Infants Baptism
from Earth, etc. against certain Truths proved in a Book Entitled, Baptism
Anatomized. Propounded in five Queries, by THO. WALL.

VIZ.

1. What Water Baptism is? 2. What is the end for which it was Instituted? 3.
What gives Right to it? 4. Who are the true Administrators of it? 5. Whether
it be Lawful for a Man to Baptize himself?
WHEREIN The Right that the Infants of Believers have to Water Baptism is
vindicated: The Duty of Believing Parents in that Matter asserted: And that by
the contrary Tenet and Practice, they ought themselves to be excluded from the
Lord's Supper, is plainly and fully proved.

And wherein is also proved, That the Covenant which God made with Abraham,
Genesis 17. and with Israel, Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. are the Covenant of Grace in
Christ, and not part of the Covenant of Works made with Adam before his Fall.

London, Printed by G. Croom, for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with Acts of
Parliament, Speeches, and other sorts of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also
Books of Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, etc.
M DC XC II.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE Faith of our Lord Jesus, called the Precious Faith, the Faith of God's
Elect, in them compared to a Building, Jud. v. 20. which Faith always depends
upon the written Word of God, called therefore the Word of Faith, Romans 10.
Deuteronomy. 30. first preached to Adam and after to Abraham, in which Word of Faith
Christ is Lord in Sion, a chief Cornerstone, a sure Foundation, on which
Foundation all God's Elect build Gold, Silver, precious Stones; when others
build Wood, Hay and Stubble: Now they that build Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
are such whose Faith is built upon the Foundation or Doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets, Christ the chief Cornerstone, joining their Doctrine in one
Harmony together, in every Article of the Christian Faith, to be tried by that
Fire, the seven Lamps, the seven Spirits of God before his Throne in his
Church, to the Law and to the Testimony, the Gospel made manifest by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, which by the Testimony of Christ is confirmed,
sending all that heard him, to search the Scriptures of the Prophets to try his
Doctrine by; and so did the Apostles, as by the Example of the Bereans, who
searched the Scriptures daily, to wit, of the Prophets, to see whether those
things were so as the Apostles taught: If Christians would do so now, they
should see clearly the Doctrine of Anabaptistry (concerning the State of the
Infants of Believers refuted, in this following Discourse, as before in my Book
Baptism Anatomized) is but Wood, Hay and Stubble, and will not endure to be
tried in the Fire of God's Word and Spirit, because what they teach out of
Christ and the Apostles Writing in the New Testament, is not proved by them to
be agreeable to the Doctrine of the Prophets, as in all their Writing does
appear, as in particular now the Eleventh Chapter of H. Collins's Book, where
in the Title he boasts, that it is a sufficient Answer to my Book; yet as
concerning all he has said in the Eleventh Chapter, not one Scripture he
brings out of the Prophets to confirm the Sense of any word he brings out
of the Writings of Christ or his Apostles, about the Doctrine of Baptism, to
disprove the Right the Infants of Believers have, as I have proved both by the
Doctrine of the Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles, to Remission of Sins,
and so to Water Baptism; and therefore I affirm the Doctrine of Anabaptistry in
this Point now controverted, is neither Gold, Silver nor precious Stones built
on Christ, the sure Foundation, but Wood, Hay, Stubble; so that till this Man,
with the rest of his Brethren, prove what he asserts against the Truth, I have
proved in my Book, by one Harmonious Agreement of the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, and lay aside their present Spirit of Insolence, he must be ranked
amongst Boasters, as it is written, Whosoever boasts himself of a False Gift (or
Gift of Falsehood) is like Clouds and Wind without Rain, Prove. 25. 14. as Jude
has noted such Teachers, v. 12. they are without Water carried about of Winds,
Trees without Fruits, raging Waves of the Sea foaming out their own Shame,
wandering Stars, no fixed Guides to poor Souls, speaking Evil of those things
(to wit, of Faith) which they know not, but what they know naturally as Brute
Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves; therefore the Apostle Peter
has warned the Churches, that as there were False Prophets among the People of
Old, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. even so there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable Heresies, privily, meaning as Christ has warned of
such pretending to be Sheep; in Sheeps Clothing, in the outside, so covering
their false Doctrine with the Name of Christ, to deceive many, who by their
privy or secret Doctrine, steal into the Minds of Persons, so as Ravening Wolves
destroy Souls. Now seeing we are warned of these Dangers, try the Spirits as
before showed, believe none in what they teach in any Article of Faith, unless
they prove their Doctrine as aforesaid, by the Harmonious Agreement of the
Doctrine of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, which yet the Anabaptists
have not done, nor do in any of their Writings against what has been published
by many worthy Servants of Jesus Christ, concerning the Right the Infants of
Believers have by the Free Grace of God, in Christ to Remission of Sins, and so
a right to Water Baptism. So shall I conclude with the Council of the Lords
Servants to the Churches, Prove all things, hold fast that which is good,
abstain from all appearance of Evil, believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits or Doctrine as before showed, whether they are of God, because many False
Prophets are gone out into the World: From all such the Lord preserve his
Chosen, which is and shall be the earnest Prayer of him who is thine in the Lord

Thomas Wall.

Infants Baptism from Heaven, of Divine Institution, etc.
IN my former Book, Entitled Baptism Anatomized, and now further Confirmed, is
showed the Vanity of some Objections made by Hercules Collins, in the Eleventh
Chapter of his Book, Entitled Believers Baptism from Heaven, Infants Baptism
from Earth, etc. which said Book he sent me with this Challeng, Come, and stand
before the Bar of God's word, and make Answer.

Having perused his Book, I find it no Christian Answer, but a Compound of
unsavory carping scurrilous Language, and Goliah-like, boasting, as one puffed up
in his Fleshly Mind, raging against the Truth, which I have asserted,
concerning the Right the Infants of the Israel of God have by Free Grace in
Christ, to Remission of Sins, and so to the Visible Sign thereof, Water Baptism
to be administered on them.

And whereas he says in the Title of his Eleventh Chapter, that it contains
a brief, but sufficient Answer to my Book, Baptism Anatomized; he begins
after this vaunting manner, I Query, 1. Whether this Man does not act against
the Light of Conscience, Experience and Holy Scripture, when he asserts
Indefinitely the Infants of Believers, have by the Free Gift of God in the
Covenant of Grace, a Right to Remission of Sins, and so a Right to Baptism?

To this he makes this Answer by way of Query, as his only reason to oppose
the Truth aforesaid, his words are these, Had Cain, Ismael, Esau, Absalom,
Samuel's Sons of Belial, all Children of Believers, a right to Remission of
Sins?

To which I reply first, he says I assert Indefinitely, that the Infants of
believers have, etc. By by the word indefinitely, he means without limit or
bound; this is false, for let him show in what Page, in all my Book I have
asserted any thing otherwise but according to God's Revealed Will concerning
the absolute Right that Insants of Believers have by the free Grace of God in
the Covenant of Grace to remission of Sins, by giving place to God's secret
Election, if they (to wit Infants of Believers) continue like Abel, Isaac,
Jacob, Timothy, and the like, in the way of Faith and Holiness, they shall be
Saved. See p. 32. Baptism Anatomized.

Secondly, If Hercules Collins his Doctrine be a Truth, that because some of the
Infants of Believers prove not to be of the Election by their evil Fruits, when
grown up, as appeared in Cain, Ismael, etc. that therefore we must conclude
from thence, that none of the Infants of Believers have a Visible Right by the
free Gift of God in the Covenant of Grace, to remission of Sins, and so now in
these last days to Water Baptism, then this will follow, That because some
actual Believers, as Simon Magus, Demas and the like, fell away after they had
been Baptized with the Visible Sign of remission of Sins, that therefore all
the rest of the Believers in the Apostles days had no Right to the Remission of
Sins, and so no Right to Water Baptism.

But to come nearer to Hercules Collins, the Persons Men and Women of his
Society, being in their Way Baptized, and in his Judgment, had right to
Remission of Sins, and some of these in time do fall into gross Sin, as to deny
even the Ordinance of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, as not to be administered
at all; as likewise into other gross Sins, Will he conclude that all the rest
of his Society because some are become so wicked, have no right to Remission of
Sins, and so no right to Baptism? If the former Reason of his be true against
Infants of Believers, the latter is true against Elder Persons: And thus this
Man at once has granted by his not giving place to God's Election, that no
Persons among themselves have right to Remission of Sins, and so no right to
Water Baptism, for no other reason but because some of them prove Wicked; and
therefore he must never Baptize any hereafter, until he can enter into God's
secret Decree, to know who only are the Elect that shall never fall totally
away after Baptized. And thus the Wicked Man is Snared in the works of his own
hands, (Selah) that is, (O mind this well.) This might serve for a sufficient
Answer to his whole Book, until he by acknowledging the Truth, which I have
asserted, deliver himself out of this Snare that he is fallen into, which he
laid for others, that because some Infants, as Elder Persons, visibly in
Covenant with the Lord, afterward do fall away, that therefore all the rest
have no right to Remission of Sins. But I shall proceed further in laying open
more of his Folly: If it prove not a benefit to this Goliah-like Boaster, it
may be a Warning to others to beware of the Doctrine of Anabaptistry.

In which Book he further says in Page 109. Query the Second, Whether there is
not good ground given to believe in reading a great part of this Book, from
Page 25. to 41. and 168. that he is of Origen's Opinion, the whole World may be
saved at last, and then why not the Devils too? For says he in Page 168. If
all Infants Sinned in Adam, when Adam was restored, they were restored in his
Loins, and when Born, they were Born in a Gospel Covenant, Page 26. God freely
forgave Adam, and his Posterity in him, their Sin.

Reply, In the 24. Page of Baptism Anatomized, I have showed from Romans 5. 12.
how Sin came into the World, as it is written, wherefore as by one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for
that (or in whom) all have Sinned; thus the Apostle proves, that what I
asserted is Truth, that all Infants Sinned in Adam's Loins.

Secondly, In Page 25. I showed the manner or way God was pleased to restore
those two sorts of Sinners, the one Actual, as Adam and Eve, the other Passive,
who in Infancy by Original Corruption, derived Sin, and by Imputation charged
on them: Therefore because Adam and Eve had actually and willingly Sinned, it
was the Pleasure of God, that not only our first Parents, but also all actual
Sinners in all Ages should Repent and actually profess Faith in Christ before
they were accepted into Covenant with the Lord, and have remission of their
Sins. Now, because the Infants of such were only Sinners by Imputation, as
aforesaid, through Original Corruption, and not by their own Act, God was
pleased, and still is pleased, and that of free Grace, to pass by the sin
charged on Infants, when the sin of their Parents was Pardoned; and therefore
the Children born in the Covenant of Grace, are by the Lord called his
Children, accounted born unto him, Ezekiel. 16. 8, 20 and 21. And forasmuch as
Children are by the Scripture called a Man's Family, Genesis 10. 32. God being
pleased that in Christ Families shall be Blessed, therefore the Lord says, not
only before the Law, but in the time of the Law, and also in the latter days,
he will be the God of all Families of his Israel, that is, the Israel of God,
namely Believers and their Infants, whether Jews or Gentiles; the truth hereof
is confirmed by the Apostle in these words, writing not to the whole World, but
to true Churches separated from the World; wherefore as by the Offense of one,
namely the first Adam, Judgment came upon all Men, for a Child born is called a
Man, Genesis 4. 1. Joh. 16. 21. even so by the Righteousness of one, namely
Christ, the second Adam, the free Gift came upon all Men unto Justification of
Life; for as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of one, many shall be made Righteous: Now, because when Adam and Eve
were restored by Grace in Christ, I affirmed as the Apostle does, that as their
Infants were sinners by their Parents sinful Action, so by the Obedience of
Christ the second Adam, their Infants were made Righteous, their Infants being
their Family; so in Christ as the Gospel promises, Families shall be blessed
with the Pardon of sin. Now, because the sinful World was first in one Family,
Adam and his Seed, he should beget, and these according to God's Revealed Will,
were Redeemed, so are we only to Judge, giving place to God's secret Decree.
Hercules Collins cries out against me, that I hold all the Seed of Adam shall
be Saved, notwithstanding all their actual Transgressions, because it was, and
still is from the day Adam was Restored, to restore the actual Believers and
their Infants, and so to judge of their Estate until any prove themselves as
Cain did, not to be of the Election by their wicked Works. These things duly
weighed, how gloriously does this Truth shine through the Scriptures, that God
was, and still is in Christ Reconciling the World to himself; by Families, not
every individual Family in the World to himself, but some Families out of all
Nations, as that Evangelical Song by the Church in the Praise of Christ, says,
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation; So that hence it was, when the Lord sent Paul to preach
the Gospel in the City of the Corinthians, the Lord told him, saying, I have
much People in this City, not all the City, but some out of all by Families,
forasmuch as the Lord by his Free Grace acknowledges himself as aforesaid, to
be the God of Families, and promises that they shall be his People; so that
all such gathered into Churches, the Apostle in his Epistles call them Elect,
according to their visible State in Covenant, whereas God only knows who are
his, according to his secret Decree, which we are not to meddle with, because
the Scripture says, concerning the Church of God, consisting of Men, Women and
their little ones, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our Children for
ever: Therefore according to Gods revealed Will, Children with their Believing
Parents, are called a Holy Nation, a Chosen Generation, Exodus 19. 5, 6. 1 Pet.
2. 9. until either Parents or Children manifest themselves to be in a Reprobate
Estate, as did Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Simon Magus and Demas, who were all visible
Members in Covenant for a time called Saints, until they by their Evil Works
were hardened in Sin, and so cast out, as was Cain, etc. as Solomon says, He
that, being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy: Thus the Children in Gods Covenant, in time are known by
their Doings, whether their Works are Pure or Right; but H. Collins mixeth Gods
secret Decree with his revealed Will, making no difference between them, and so
seeks to overthrow the Doctrine of Election, notwithstanding he has set his
Hand to a Narrative, dated Sept. 3. 1689. wherein he then owned the Doctrine of
Personal Election and Perseverance, but now he denies this Doctrine, in that he
rejects all the Infants of Gods Covenanted People, to have by the Free Gift
of God in the Covenant of Grace, a Right to Remission of Sins, and so a Right
to Baptism; because when grown up, some prove Wicked, as aforesaid. Therefore I
have proved in Baptism Anatomized, Page 28. That as Sin entered into the World
by Families, so Christ came to Redeem Fallen Mankind by Families; as by many
Examples, first Adam's Family, and likewise Noah and Abraham's; and also
Isreal's Families, as in Jer. 31. 1. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. is showed; and also many
Families of the Gentiles as well as Jews, all by Families joined to the Lord in
Church Fellowship in the Apostles days, as witnesses all their Epistles the
word Kindred, by Families or Household, which were Baptized, as is largely
proved in Baptism Anatomized, Page 65. etc. And thus the Reader may see, how he
falsely accuses me, to deceive his Reader to be of Origen's Opinion, by what I
asserted from Romans chapter 5. but he makes and confesses himself to be the Man
guilty of that Opinion of Origin, in that he asserteth from Romans 5. that the
whole World may be Saved: His words are these in Page 109. Now we know, says
H. Collins, the whole World is Adam 's Children, then the whole World is in the
Covenant of Grace, and if in the Covenant of Grace, for any thing I see, the
whole World may be Saved.

And that H. Collins is of Origen's Opinion, is further confirmed, in that he
still denies the Doctrine of Election, by charging me that I tell a Lie in the
Name of the Lord, because I said Cain, Ishmael, Esau, etc. were for a time
visibly in Covenant, visibly under the Promise of Pardon of their Sins, and
after were cast out of the Covenant of Grace, when grown Wicked as the
Scriptures show.

For what, says H. Collins, have Believers Infants Remission of Sins sealed
unto them; yet no Remission? will Men tell a Lie in the Name of the Lord, to
tell us that Baptism is a Sign of Remission of Sin; and yet tell us, that very
Person may be Damned? are not these Self-contradictions, and Contradictions of
Holy Scripture, which says, Whom God Justifies and Pardons, them he
Glorifieth, Romans 8. 30.

Reply. How is this Man benumbed in his Understanding, for that he knows not
how to divide the Word aright, but goes on making no difference between Gods
secret Decree, Romans 8. 30. and his revealed Will, Romans 9. 6. in his written
Word, Romans 10. 17. therefore he tells not me only, but the Apostles, that
they tell a Lie in the name of the Lord, for they according to God's revealed
will Baptized some for the Remission of Sins, and after said to some of the
same Persons in effect it was no sign of Remission to them, as for Example in
the Judgment of the Apostle Peter, Ananias with Saphira his Wife were
Believers, and had Remission of Sins, and were baptized, Acts 4. 32. with chapter
5. 1. Yet Peter said to Ananias afterward, Why has Satan filled thine heart
to lie to the Holy Ghost; and the like may be seen; for that many in the
Apostle John's time, who were in the visible Communion of Saints in Churches,
and for a time called by the Apostle Saints, having a sign of Remission of
Sins, Water Baptism administered on them therefore; by H. Collins his Doctrine,
the Apostle John also told a Lie in the name of the Lord, when he said
concerning some that were Visible Members, they went out from them because they
were not of them, for says John, if they had been of us, that is, of the
Election, for so the Apostles according to Gods revealed will in his written
Word, count all the Churches Elect Persons, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
they would, no doubt, have continued with us, and not have rent themselves from
the Body, but they went out that they might be made manifest, they were not all
of us; even so, Cain, Ismael, Esau, etc. were in the Church, and in the
Judgment of Man for a time a Holy Seed, as was Demas a holy Person, therefore
concerning Demas one while the Apostle wrote in Commendation of Demas to the
Colossians, Col. 4. 14. Luke and Demas greet you, and to Philemon, verse. 24.
Demas, Lucas my fellow laborers, yet afterward writes to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present World; again, in the
Judgment of Philip, Simon Magus was a Saint, a Believer, and had the sign of
Remission of his Sins, Water Baptism administered on him; now did Peter tell a
Lie, does Hercules Collins think to say afterward, Judging him by his Fruits,
that he was in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity, and had no part
nor lot in that matter? surely this Man, Hercules Collins, is utterly unfit to
take Charge of Souls, that thus by his Doctrine charge the Apostle to be a
Liar; Thus, as a blind Leader of the blind, he leads the People into Bypath
out of the way of Understanding the Scriptures a Right, for no other end but to
maintain Falsehood against the Right Infants of the God of Israel have to
Remission of their Sins, and so aright to the visible Seal thereof,
Water Baptism.

Moreover he says in P. 110, There are but two ways of being in Covenant,
absolutely or conditionally; no Believer dares say all his Infants Seed are in
the Covenant of Grace absolutely, for then they must all be saved; but we see
that Abraham had an Ishmael, Isaac an Esau, David an Absalom, Samuel Sons of
Belial, so that they cannot be Baptized under this consideration.

Reply, As no Believer dares say, nor did I ever say his Infants Seed are in
the Covenant of Grace absolutely according to God's Secret Decree, because that
is only known to God, so no Man dares say, all visible actual Believers are in
the Covenant of Grace absolutely, which God only knows therefore Hercules
Collins teaches and grants that no actual Believers may be Baptized under
that consideration, because he dares not say all actual Believers are in the
Covenant of Grace absolutely; and thus he has again put an end to the
Administration of Water Baptism until he knows who the Persons be that are
absolutely in the Covenant of Grace, and in the mean time, let all consider how
this Man dissemblingly owned the Doctrine of Election when he put his hand to
the Narrative aforesaid.

And therefore how contrary to God's revealed Will, does Hercules Collins take
upon him to judge secret things concerning the state of Believers and their
Infants, and so censuring all Infants, contrary to what the Scripture says,
namely, that they are the blessed of the Lord, speaking of Believers and their
Offspring, or Buds with them, Esa. 65. 23. A Godly Seed, Mal. 2 15. A holy
Seed, Ezra 9. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Children of the Promise, Gal. 4. 28. Children of
the Covenant, Acts 3. 25. Yet this Man presumptuously for want of the Fear of
God, says in his Book Page 82, as if he knew God's secret Council, Those who
Baptize Believers, Baptize Christians; but those who Baptize Infants, Baptize
Heathens; all Children of Wrath by Nature before, born again, his Proof is,
Ephesians. 3. 2.

Reply, The Apostle having showed what the state of Heathens is, Ephesians. 2. 12. To
be without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from
the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World; and this
is the state H. Collins accounts Believers Infants to be in, yea, and their
own Children to be Heathens in this woeful Estate; yet this Man has the face so
brazened over, as to say, that I, in Page 3, falsely say, if not maliciously,
that the Anabaptists deny Infants to be Redeemed with Christ's Blood; if as
aforesaid, he says, They that Baptize Infants Baptize Heathens, then what is
the state of a Heathen but to be without God and Christ, out of the visible
Promise of the Pardon of Sin, as they account their Children, and not in the
Covenant of Grace? how can such Infants be in the visible state of the Redeemed
by the Blood of Christ, by H. Collins his Doctrine, let the Spiritual Man judge:
Again he says, in Page 113, that I say they reckon their own Children dying in
Infancy, by their own Judgment are lost and perish to all Eternity; see how H.
Collins confirmed my words against them. First, in that he says all Infants
Baptized are Heathens, that is, without Christ as before showed.

2ly. In Page 87. of his Book he says, All Infants Baptized are not in the
Covenant of Grace. In his Parallel; now let him show since the Fall, whether
there is any Salvation promised to any Soul out of the Covenant of Grace; until
then, he concludes all Infants are Damned, because he says all Infants are
Heathens. Again in the same Page he further says in his Parallel, all Infants
of Believers do not receive Remission of Sins: Then I would know of him how
Infants can be saved, without their Sins are pardoned: Therefore that word
pierced the Heart of H. Collins, that I said from their own Doctrine in my Book
Baptism Anatomized, Page 1. That the Anabaptists reckon their own Children
dying in Infancy, by their own Judgment, lost, and perish to all Eternity,
being out of the visible Covenant of Grace: Which put him upon such streights
which way he might take to clear himself of this Just Censure, upon this Cursed
Doctrine, concerning the visible State of Infants: The way he has taken, is by
devising a Lie against me, saying, Is not this Man's Doctrine agreeable to the
Church of Rome 's, and the Council of Carthage, who decreed, If any asserted
Baptism did not take away Original Sin, they should be Anathematized? Now I ask
this Man, where and in which Page of my Book I have given the least grant, that
Baptism washes away Sin, any otherwise than being the Sign of Remission? but
the contrary I always affirmed, That every Soul that shall be saved, has his
Sins washed away in the Blood of Christ, and that Water Baptism is but a Sign
thereof, see Baptism Anatomized; but my words aforesaid have so wounded him,
whether for a savor of Life unto Life, or a savor of Death unto Death to him,
God knows, which has forced him to oppose his former words, when he
accounted Infants, Heathens, out of the Covenant of Grace: Now to say in
opposition pretended to me, but rather to Rome's Doctrine and not mine,
concerning the Council of Carthage, saying, Water in Baptism washes away
Original Sin. We, says he, can tell you a better way of washing away of
Original Sin, by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Infants dying in
Infancy.

And thus the Reader may see how this Man has fought with his own shadow. H.
Collins's carnal reason being laid down, he has granted the Truth I contend
for from Romans chapter 5. that as Sin entered into the World by the Sin of the first
Adam, Romans 5. 12. into Families, even so to all Believers and their Infants,
according to Gods revealed Will, their Sin is pardoned in the second Adam
Christ by Families, Romans 5. 18, 19. and so as Christians we are to judge of
them jointly redeemed with their Parents, until either Fathers or Mothers, or
their Children, when grown up, do prove themselves, by their evil Fruits, to be
otherwise than of the Election, as the Apostle observes in his Exhortation to
the Gospel-Churches from the Church in Adam's Family, that so long as they
abide in the Belief of the Promise in Christ, (the Seed of the Woman) their
Savior, to wit, if they continue in this Faith, and Charity, and Holiness,
with Sobriety, they, both Parents and Children, shall be saved, as did Adam and
Eve and their Children Abel and Seth, Noah and his Children Shem and Japhet,
Abraham and his Child Isaac, and Isaac and his Child Jacob, and Jacob and his
Children; and so many the like in other Families in Scripture, as God promised
in his Gospel, Genesis 12. 3. that in Christ Families should be Blessed, not only
in former days, but also in the latter days now under the Gospel confirmed by
Christ's Blood; At that time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the
Families of Israel, whether Believing Jews or Gentiles, with their Children;
compare Jer. 31. 1. with the former 30. chapter who in Gal. 6. 16. are called the
Israel of God. And whereas H. Collins says I falsely assert, viz. That the
English Anabaptists receive their Baptism from one John Smith, they should have
showed and proved the contrary, and that they receive their Baptism from him, I
showed in a small Treatise long ago on that Subject, Printed 1669. P. 45. in
which I also inserted what I heard, that one Mr. Spilsbury should go to Holland
to be Baptized of this Smith, and so brought it into England. From which I then
inferred, as I do now, if you can prove the Beginning or Receiving your Baptism
from no better or lawfuller an Administrator, than for a Man to Baptize
himself, or from one that in his own Judgment was not Baptized, nor a Member of
a true Church; for him, I say, to begin to Baptize, and then the Party he
Baptized to Baptize the Person that Baptized him, I say is not from Heaven, but
contrary to all Scripture, and true gathered Consequence from the same in their
own Judgment; for as Water Baptism is confessed by the Anabaptists to be a part
of Gods Worship, see Mr. Keach's Book Gold Refined, P. 147. in these words,
Water Baptism is a part of Instituted Worship and Service of God, so that
whatsoever is done in Worship and Service of God, without an express word
dropped from Christ or his Apostles, is Will Worship. Therefore by their own
Grant, the way they came by their Baptism is Will Worship, and so Idolatrous,
until they can prove it lawful for a Man to Baptize himself, or that an
unbaptised Person should Baptize another, and then that Person so Baptized,
should Baptize him from whom he received his Baptism; but such a Practice is no
more lawful, than for Nadab and Abihu to offer Incense with other Fire than the
Fire from Gods Altar, and so is no better than Rome's Trumpery, that came out
of the Smoke of the Bottomless Pit; and also for any to confine the Word
Baptize, to signify only to Dip, opposes the Apostles Doctrine in 1 Cor. 10.
1. but agrees with the Doctrine and Practice of Rome, as Bellarmine affirms
de Imag. 1. 2. chapter 29. viz. That every one they Baptize, they Dip three times
in Water, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now
though Gods Judgments are not so frequently inflicted on Men's Bodies for breach
of Gods order as of old, yet God gives them over, that presume above what is
written, to strong Delusions, to believe a Lie, because they received not the
love of the Truth that they might be saved, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. And will not the prudent Reader duly
weigh these things? And whereas he says, If I will give some of them a
meeting, they will prove they received not their Baptism from John Smith. I
answer, the Matter is now public; but when I desired to debate this Point at a
private Conference in Hounsditch, it was refused by them; for when I asked Mr.
Kiffin, being informed that he had been a Member of the People called the
Ancient Separation falsely called Brownists, and had taught among them, and then
was for Baptism in Infancy, I say for the reason aforesaid, I asked him in the
presence of some Ministers there, and many People, this question, Seeing he had
renounced his Baptism received in Infancy, that he would be pleased to prove by
the word of God, how he orderly came by a better? The Gentleman very civilly
said, Seeing I asked a reason of his Faith, he was bound to give it
accordingly; he spoke so long as he pleased, and in the conclusion of his words
concerning the Administration of Water Baptism by whom, came to Matt. 28. Go
teach all Nations Baptising them; from which he inferred, that the Apostles did
not Baptize as Apostles, but as common-gifted Disciples. I asked him if he had
ended his Speech: He said yea. I was going to give my answer, in proving that
the Commission in Matt. 28. 20. was given to Men in Office, and to no other;
and before I could say almost a word, up started Mr. Keach, being present, and
said, They came not to hear me. So that Mr. Kiffin and he, with others, went
immediately out of the Room, and refused to hear my Answer. And seeing how I
was served, I left the Five Queries in Writing, now in Baptism Anatomized,
printed in my Book, with one in the House, desiring that they might be given to
Mr. Keach, and so they were. I being gone, soon after I came home, Mr. Keach
sent one to me, with a Book Entitled, Gold Refined, and the Messenger said, it
was an Answer to the Five Queries; and now having begun this Work, so public
in Print, and proved in Baptism Anatomized, P. 90 to 106. that it is contrary
to Gods Word, for any out of Office to Baptize, it is too late to talk of a
Dispute by word of Mouth, especially considering how uncivilly I was served by
them before; and the matter is now become public, that all may judge for
themselves what is Truth. I shall in the way I have begun, God helping me,
maintain the Interest of Christ's Honor, not only in his Holy orderly
Performance of his Ordinances, but in the Redemption of the Babes of his
Kingdom, who when he came into the World, according to the first
Gospel-promise, he was manifested in the Flesh an Infant, born a Savior for
Infants as well as for actual Sinners; and when he appeared in his public
Ministry, owned them to be Subjects of his Kingdom, and took them up in his
Arms and Blessed them, and they welcomed him into his Kingdom, crying Hosanna
to the Son of David; as I have showed more fully in my Book Baptism Anatomized.
Subjects they were and still are, and in the last great day, when all shall
stand before him, namely, great and small, he will say to them on his right
Hand (Sheep and Lambs) Come ye Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World, Matt. 25. 34. In the mean
time Infants of Gods Covenant have Angels in this Life to attend them, Matt.
18. 10. as Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. declared by the Lord Jesus to be
with their Believing Parents in the State of the Converted, Humble and
Believing, if the Word of the Lord Jesus may be believed before the word of any
that say as aforesaid, That Infants are out of Gods Covenant, and so Heathens.
Again in P. 116. he says, That I say in the Preface, they ground their Doctrine
on Nature, and plead Right to Gospel Ordinances by the Act of Man. Answer, I
have showed in my Book, what Mr. Keach has asserted in these words, That there
is nothing less than Profession of Faith that can give any Soul, Young or Old,
Right to Water Baptism. I have given my answer to it in Query 3. p. 38 to 44.
which is too long to insert here, therefore I desire the Reader to read p. 38
to 44. in my Book, seeing H. Collins has made no answer to it.

Again, H. Collins says, I would insinuate Page 3. That in Baptism a Person is
wholly Passive, which is by me fully proved in Baptism Anatomized, and not by
H. Collins in his Book refuted: For is it not said, John Baptized, Philip
Baptized; by whom the whole act in Baptism was done, by the Administrator,
proved in my Book aforesaid, Page 3, to 20. and not by him refuted. And whereas
he says, I Nickname them in calling them Anabaptists. Answer, I have showed
it is no Nickname: And because they name themselves Baptists, they cannot
prove to themselves that Title, whereas, all Christians Names must be called
after Christ's Name, Christians, and not after John Baptist's Name, or Paul, or
Cephas's, as Paul shows in 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. unless they were Baptized in
John or Paul's Name: Now whereas you say, if John was called John the Baptist
because he Baptized, why may not those be so called that follow his Practice,
Page 2. Answer, Did not the Apostles Baptize as well as John, yet no Title by
it belonged to them? Christ himself was Baptized, yet not called by any,
Baptist. And whereas you say, the Calvinists are so called from Calvin, and
Lutherans from Luther, yet should not those Names be owned by them, unless they
had been Baptized in their Names; so that when you shall disown to be called
Baptists, and own your Baptism, in Infancy, and not Re-baptise again, then to
call you Anabaptists, is a Nickname. You refer me to Page 64, 65. but say
nothing to purpose there, but only you say, we know but one Baptism. Answer, No
more do we own but one Baptism in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, then all that are Baptized in Christ's Name, whether
Fathers, Mothers or Children, ought not to be Baptized again, because they were
Baptized in Christ's Name, although in Apostasy, as I have proved in P. 119 to
121. of my Book Baptism Anatomized. Again H. Collins says, P. 119. That I will
have Baptism a pouring of Water on the Face. By way of answer he tells me, I
am to know pouring is the most proper word which could be used for the Holy
Spirits proceeding, because it is above with God in Heaven, and we upon Earth
below; here he grants the Signification of the word Baptism, may be
understood in its natural Sense, a pouring. 2ly. I answer, the word Baptize in
its proper signification, is best explained by the Spirit of God, to which H.
Collins agrees to be a pouring, and therefore we ought so to understand it as
it is opened to us by God, as I have showed in my Book, P. 3 to 11. and seeing
you grant that you own but one Baptism, P. 116. if there be but one as there
is, then the natural signification of the word must be one, arising from one
and the same word; then Water out of the Clouds, God himself being the
Administrator, Water was poured on the Persons, even then our Fathers, says
the Apostles, were Baptized standing in the Sea, where the Water had been on
dry foot; so John when he Baptized, we have showed the Persons Baptized may be
said to be in the Water or Sea, when but standing at the brink, where sometime
the Water had flowed, P. 7. according to the Pattern showed him from on high,
as you grant to be by pouring, even so John Baptising with Water, must agree in
one by pouring, as by casting Water on the Persons Head or Face; seeing I have
proved in my Book, P. 11. that the Face represents the whole Person. Now tell
me what Example had John otherwise to follow, than the way of pouring, seeing
in the Spiritual Baptism, it is granted by you, as you say, I am to know
pouring is the most proper word could be used, therefore the meaning of the
word Baptize, is poured or pouring; then as there is but one Baptism, which
likewise you grant, the manner in the Administration must be one and the same,
as all coming down from above on the Person, poured or cast on the Person,
either in the Spiritual or Water Baptism; so John Baptized with Water as they
were Baptized with the Spirit, by pouring or casting Water on the noble part,
Head or Face. And because I have so fully proved this in my Book, I refer the
Reader to it, to read Baptism Anatomized, from P. 3. to 21. and so shall
conclude this particular, as Peter in another case did, Whether shall we
believe God or Men, concerning the use and signification of the word Baptism,
let the Wise Judge.

Again, whereas H. Collins says, That I charge B. Keach, P. 80. in my Book,
with the whole Assembly of Baptized Believers, as they call themselves, that
they were forced to try their Wits for want of literal words, Remember to keep
Holy the first day.

Answ. I disprove not the whole Assemblies Arguments, but have added more in my
Book to confirm them, that the first day is now to be kept Holy, and not the
Seventh: But I blame all those that will allow one Point as an Article of their
Faith, to be proved by true gathered Consequence from the holy Scripture, and
not in another; all such prove themselves not upright in Heart, but Partial;
for was it not B. Keach that derided us, that we were forced says he, to try
our Wits to prove Infants Baptism, although by true grounded Reasons from God's
Word we have proved it without the help of Man's Natural Wit, which all your
Wits cannot disprove: Again, you say, I quarrel because you do not Baptize
always on the Lord's day; I tell you affirm that which you Practice not.
Answer; I set down in my Book, your own words Page 85. 87. from your Narrative,
P. 17. which are these, That although the holy Apostles and others that were
Preachers, took their opportunities to preach the Word on the Jewish Sabbath
day, and other days of the Week, when they had convenient opportunities
afforded them; yet we have, say you, no Example of the Churches then Assembling
together to celebrate all the Ordinances of our Lord Jesus peculiar to them;
but on the first day of the Week (Reader mark that) which manifest practice of
theirs, say you, is evidently as plain a demonstration of its being a day set
apart for Religious Worship, by the Will and Command of our Lord Jesus, as if
it had been expressed in the plainest words: Wherein you grant, that the Example
of the Churches, and the manifest Practice of theirs in the purest of Times, is
evidently a plain demonstration that the Lord's day is the time of Worship to
administer God's Ordinances, and that it is the Will and Command of our Lord
Jesus so to do: Then why blame you me for telling you that you do not
administer the Sealing Ordinances on that day only, which Christ has Ordained?
therefore it is your evil in condemning your self by your Practice, seeing the
first Church-meeting was on the Lord's day, Acts 2. when they did Baptize and
break Bread, and Paul stayed at Troas several days, Acts 20. 6, 7, until the
first day came about, to perform the Ordinances of Worship, even in the Sealing
Ordinances and the Example of the Churches, all being commanded to keep that
day holy in the practice of God's Ordinances, is therefore not to be neglected:
So then you have well said, but practice not the Example of extraordinary
Officers by you to be granted, is not the Church's Pattern to Baptize any day;
but the Example of the Primitive Churches in the purest of Times, is for all
Churches to follow, as they were commanded by the Apostles. Now then, when else
but on the first day of the Week, were the Churches to perform God's
Ordinances, as the Will and command of our Lord Jesus? 2ly. As you in your
Narrative have asserted, and yet you blame me for telling of you, you plead for
that you practice not, you say in P. 69. I insist upon the Order of words, Mat.
3. I Baptize to Repentance: In answer you say, see your Book, Page 54, 55, 56.
Your answer there is if you were only Sprinkled in Infancy you were never yet
Baptized, seeing your answer is not to the disproving of what I have laid down:
I refer the Reader to my Book, because in in your answer you run away from the
Matter, and tell us of such as were Baptized, that Repentence was required of,
we grant that such as never were Baptized in the Name of Christ, whether Men or
Women, who had actually sinned, of such God requires actual Repentance, this
is granted by me, and proved at large in my Book, Page 70, to 72, yet no way
hinders the Infants of such to be Baptized that are Sinners, not by their own
act, but by Imputation; and whereas you say, if I were only Sprinkled in
Infancy, I was never Baptized; I have refuted this in my Preface, third Leaf,
in these words, showing, as in the Lord's Supper, it is not the quantity of
Bread and Wine, more or less, but the right apprehension of it, and sincere
Affection to the thing signified, so it is not the quantity of Water cast on
the passive Subject Baptized with Water, which is but one by the visible Sign
of Washing away of Sin in the Blood of Christ, which in the Spiritual Baptism
is likewise signified by Sprinkling with the Blood of Christ, namely with the
Imputation of the benefit of Christ's Death to Sinners, whether actual or
imputative, all visibly in the Covenant of the Gospel. H. Collins further
says, That is a false Argument so largely insisted upon in my Book, Page 44.
If Persons have a right to Remission of Sins, they have a right to the Sign
Baptism; this Argument I have answered fully in Baptism Anatomized, in Page 36,
37. yet I find no answer by him to this matter; but it is H. Collins way to
object against what I lay down and make no answer to that I have asserted in my
Book, that is, Infants are born Sinners, and cannot be Saved but by Christ's
pardoning their Sin, and all that have the Testimony from God's Word, that
their Sins are pardoned, have a right to the Sign of Remission, Water Baptism;
again, Whereas H. Collins opposes what I say in Page 43. from Acts 15. 10.
that Infants are Disciples. Answer, The Jews which believed were pressing, that
the Gentiles should keep the Law of Moses, and be Circumcised, which Law
required not only the Father, but also the Male Children to be Circumcised; for
of old when a Proselite Gentile was joined to the Church of Israel, he was to
Circumcise all his Males, see Exodus 12. chapter even so in Acts 15. those who were
required to be Circumcised by the Jews, was the same the Law required before,
namely, the Father and his Male Children, therefore the answer of the Apostle
was accordingly, why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples,
that is, on the Fathers and the Children? so that it is clear, that in Acts 15.
here Children with their Parents are called Disciples, which is, Scholars;
therefore the Law of God bound the Parents to bring their Children with them to
hear the Law before they had understanding, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. after they
were Circumcised, as we are now commanded to teach our Children after Baptized,
proved in my Book. As touching a Woman's partaking of the Lords Supper, you show
no other command than is consirmed by Consequence, which I never denied, but
the Evil lies at your door, seeing you allow a Consequence in one thing and
not in another, and therefore partial; for although the Woman be included in
the Man, and Woman is said to believe, yet she must have actual Faith before
she be fitly qualified to take and eat at the Lords Table; yet you cannot see
how the Promise of God includes the Children in Infancy to the Believing
Parents, to have the Sign of Remission of their Sins set on them; although this
Truth shines in the Scripture, for God says, I will be a God to thee and to
thy Seed; by reason the Seed in Infancy are Sinners by Imputation, but that it
is not in that Sense, I will be a God to thee and to thy Wife, for both are
actual Sinners, and both must actually believe, and Blessed is the People whose
God is the Lord; not Men and Women only, but their Infants with them, in
Scripture called the Lords People, Psalm. 33. 12. which Blessing is the Pardon
of Sin, for Infants are as well capable of the Pardon of Sin in Infancy, as in
Infancy they were of the Sin derived from their Parents charged on them; and
this they take no notice of by way of answer. Again H. Collins says, whereas
he tells the World, P. 16, 17. Though the Scripture say they Baptized in Enon
because there was much Water, it would not be enough to dip half the Body in:
And further says, I suppose he never was there, but speaks by an implicit
Faith. Answer, I not only gave you in my Book Reasons for what I said from the
Scripture, which you answer not, but gave you two Histories, Sandy's and The
Travels of the Patriarchs: But say you, How will a little Water Figure out the
Death, and Burial, and Resurrection of Christ? Answer, As well as a little Skin
of the Superfluous Flesh cut off in Circumcision, for Water Baptism and
Circumcision had one and the same Benefit in Christ's Death, signified thereby,
as it is written, Col. 2. 11, 22. in whom also ye are Circumcised with the
Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism; wherein also
ye are risen with him, through the Faith of the Operation of God; so to cover
the Face which represents the whole Person with Water, the Person has the
Sign of Christ's Death signified to him for the Condemnation, for Sin by the
Law is compared to a Vail over the Face, signifying Death, 2 Cor. chapter 3. until
Christ take it away, as was the manner among Men, a Sign of Death was to cover
the Face, as the History of the Book of Esther shows, Then said the King,
concerning Hamon, Will he force the Queen also before me in the House? As the
word went out of the King's mouth, they covered Hamon 's face. Again H.
Collins, P. 14. says, That I say the Person is not Baptized but the Clothes,
and these things are not becoming Modesty to discourse of; let that vain Man
know, we do not Baptize the Clothes in the name of the Blessed Trinity, but the
Person. Answer, The Face represents the Person, the Forehead being the place
Gods Name is said to be writ on, Rev 22. 4. signifying the bold Profession of
the Gospel, that is, the place whereunto the Seal is to be set, as I have
largely showed in Baptism Anatomized, P. 12. which you answer not, and so
deceive your Reader, by Objections and carping at words only; for in Sealing
Gods Covenant with Mankind, it is written, Genesis 9. 17. This is the Token of the
Covenant which I make between me and you; I do set my Bow in the Cloud; and
this Token of Gods Covenant is of Grace in Christ, see Genesis 9. 11. Isa. 54. 9,
10. Rev. 4. 3. set in the Cloud, not spread all over the Cloud; so in the Seal
or Token of Gods Covenant of Grace in Christ, with Abraham and his Male
Children, in which the Females were included, My Covenant, says God, shall be
in your Flesh for an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17. 11, 13. not Circumcised all
over, but on a part for the whole, as if the whole Man was Circumcised, called
the Circumcised Person; so likewise in the Seal, Sign or Token of Gods
Covenant, for the Remission of Sins by the Blood of Christ, washed away by the
Blood of Sprinkling, now signifying in the Ordinance of Water Baptism
administered on the Person, for a Sign not all over, but on one part, the
principal part, the Forehead and Face, which (as I have largely proved in
Baptism Avatomized) represents the whole Person, the Forehead and Face, being
the place whereby the open and bold Profession of Christ's Name, as aforesaid,
or Gospel, the Word of God is held forth, for where should the Seal be set, but
to that part of Man, where Gods Covenant or Name is said to be set or written?
therefore as in all Covenants between Man and Man, the Seal for Confirmation is
set or fixed but to one part of the Conditions, and not spread all over,
although it confirms the whole, Jer. 32. 9. to 14. Thus if this Man would
take Council of God's Word, then neither he nor others would lean to their own
Understanding to limit the word Baptism in the Administration to their own
mistaken Sense; for as it was so it is a Sign and Seal of Mercy in Christ to
Sinners, set on one part of the Person, agreeable to all Sealings, a part being
sealed to represent the whole: Hereby the Contention about words would cease,
as about the Signification of the word Baptism, as this Man and others do, who
confine it to one Sense, contrary to the Apostles explaining the word Baptism,
1 Cor. 10. and the agreeing in harmony with the Spiritual Baptism; for as the
Person is Passive in the Spiritual Baptism, it being poured on, as proceeding
from above, even so John's Baptism was from Heaven, or from above, therefore to
be poured on the Person; for as no Person puts the thing to be Sealed to or
upon the Seal, but the Seal is set on the thing Sealed, which to understand in
your sense of the Word, overthrows Order, and it sets up your selves to be
only Sealed, and all others you make them Un-baptized, and so that they have no
right to partake of the Lord's Supper, but are deprived of all God's Ordinances
in your Sense.

Now let the Reader judge who is the vain Man, that would not in the
administration of Baptism, avoid uncomliness; is it this Man or I? let the
Prudent Judge. Again in Page 21. where it is asserted by me, that many of the
Three Thousand whom the Apostles Baptized, Acts 2. 39. were Children, seeing
the Pardon of sin is by the Apostle Peter applied to Children, H. Collins's
answer is, O horrible perverter of the Word of God! These Children whom he
speaks of were no more as yet Baptized than the Gentiles, which were a far off,
Uncalled: Suppose some of their Children were Baptized, it must be Believing
Children, not Infants; my Child is my Child tho thirty or forty years Old: You
cannot think the Apostles would go beyond their Commission, to Baptize any
ignorant Infant. Answer, We read it was a part of the work of Christ's Priestly
Office in the Redemption of Mankind to have Compassion on the Ignorant, to wit,
Infants, whom he blessed with the pardon of their sins, Acts 3. 26. And
therefore because Water Baptism is the sign of Remission of Sins, on that
consideration, the Infants of Believers have Right to Water Baptism. And for
maintaining this truth, he cries out against me, saying, O how Sophistically
does this Man Reason! And a^^n he says in answering what I have said, Page
140, to 162, of Baptism Anatomized, in vindication of the Covenant which God
made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. Exodus 19. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. to 14. to be the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, and not the Covenant of Works; he refers me to Mr:
Cary's Solemn Call. What an absurd thing is this, to refer me to that which I
have already Answered? and instead of Answering me his Malice ^^ so great
against me, that he says of me, Is he not Felo 'de se? a Self-Destroyer? Yet
this I am fully persuaded of, that neither he nor Mr. Carry, nor yet any of his
Principle shall be able to destroy or refute by God's Word, the truth which I
have Published in the name of the God of Families, concerning the Right to
remission of Sins, to the Believers and their Infants, and also the right they
have to the Sign thereof, Water Baptism; notwithstanding he boasts that his
Book is an Answer not only to Mr. Ainsworth's Censure upon a Dialogue of the
Anabaptists, and would make the World believe these following words were my
Censuring of them, no^ (...) my Book, Page 113. out of Mr. Ainsw^^^^^ Book; his
words are these, It was Christ's last Farewell to his beloved Disciples, to lift
up his hands and Bless them, Luke 24. 50. And it is the sum of the Gospel, that
in Abraham's Seed all Nations shall be Blessed: This Grace Abraham's Infants
had; this Grace Christ gave to little Children, and the same he vouchsafes to
contin^^ unto us and our Children throughout their Generations, preserving us
and them from the Curse of Anabaptistry, whereby so many Errors are dispersed,
and Souls perverted to Destruction.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul
's Churchyard.
In Octavo.

GReek and Roman History, Illustrated by Coins and Medals. By O. W.

Instructions (...) Art of Grammar.

Baptism Anatomized: Being Propounded in Five Queries, viz. 1. What
Water Baptism is. 2. What is the End for which it was Instituted? 3. What
gives Right to it? 4. Who are the true Administrators of it? 5. Whether it be
lawful for a Man to Baptize himself?


