A Brief LETTER From a Young OXONIAN To one of his late Fellow-Pupils Upon the
Subject of MAGNETISM.

LONDON: Printed for S. Keble at the Sign of the Turks-Head in Fleet Street,
1697.

A Brief LETTER From a Young OXONIAN, etc.
SIR,
SInce my last Opportunity of Discoursing with you, (which is now some Months
past) my Thoughts have run continually upon the Subject we were then engaged
in, which was the Nature of Magnetism; and what with the dignity of the Matter
and the Indearments of the Party who argued so Rationally upon it, whereof the
one facilitated the remembrance of the other; I have hardly talked of any thing
else waking, nay, (as I am told) sleeping too, and all this at last without the
success that might justly have been presumed of such frank endeavors; but that
you may know how much I am the wiser, and be diverted by my Example from
lavishing too great a Portion of time upon such Gordian-knots, I have ventured
to send you the sum of my Acquisitions. It is a Question which we know has
employed and proved too hard for the Pens of the most eminent Philosophers, and
is to be ranked among those Mysteries of Nature, which neither the thoughtful
Ancients, the laborious Schoolmen, nor our acute Virtuosi, could ever make a
complete Discovery of: Not but that the Peripatetick is verily persuaded he has
seen farther into it than other People, as long as he can answer your demands
with Occult quality or its elder Sister Substantial form; and if this does not
lay it all bare, what does? there is says he, very gravely, something whereof
we cannot with confidence affirm any thing, which either within the Magnet or
from without, disposes it in such and such a manner; and then there is another
what do you call it, with which according to the Determination of its Poles, it
attracts or repels a Body Congenial; and think you Sir, this answer is not very
worthy of a Philosopher? Others have entertained an Opinion, that the Magnet
accomplishes its Operations by the Emission of Effluviums out of its own
Continuum; and this the Learned have so Rationally disproved already, that I
shall think it sufficient, if not superfluous, to offer but one Objection
against it, which shall be grounded upon the Nature and Structure of the
Lodestone. It is to be remembered that as that Stone is for the most part
fetched out of Iron-mines and fostered in Beds of Iron Ore; so in its Nature it
scarce varies from that Metal, save in the eminence of one Quality which is
Compactedness; for although in other Qualities it dissents from Iron, as in its
Gravity, Inductility, and Microporosity or littleness of Pores, yet in these it
rather differs from the Metal consequentially than essentially, since the
Original and Fountain of them seems to be the Quality of Compactedness, for the
comprehension of more univocal matter in less Space, which is but a Periphrasis
of Compactedness unecesarily required to gravity; and then as for its
Inductility, it is confessed that the most compact and heavy of all known Bodies
which is Gold, is the most Ductile and Malleable, but it is not reasonable to
conclude from thence, That the most Ductile and Malleable Bodies are always the
most compact and ponderous; Ductility or Malleableness as I conceive, requiring
no more than that the Parts should be of such a Figure as would be least
impatient of those Impressions, suppose of an Aequilateral Quadrangular
Superficies, whereas such a similitude and correspondency of Parts seems not to
be absolutely necessary to a Bodies becoming heavy and compact, so their
Connection and Union be but such as admits of the smallest Interstices and
Pores; not but a coincident Figure of Parts, such as that I just mentioned an
Aequilateral Quadrangular, contributes much to Compactedness, for which reason
all Architects take care their Materials be of such a form. But the parts of
the Lodestone are in all probability so far from Aequilateral-Quadrangulars,
that they are rather to be supposed of a Branchy straggling Figure as the Parts
of Iron, yet because those Branches are better and closer Plaited and Connected
one with the other than those of Iron, which are so loosly disposed as to be
even thorough fares for Heterogeneous Matter, they become more Inviolable and
Inflexible than those of the latter; nor is there any farther occasion to prove
as much of the Tenuity of its Pores. seeing therefore the Magnet and Iron have
so near an Affinity as to be in respect of Magnetism, two Species of the same
Genus, and their difference chiefly to consist in the Dignity and Degrees of
some Accidents, on account of which Iron may be reputed an imperfect and
Bastard Load stone, and the Lodestone the most pure and noble Iron; there will
be found but few Phenomenon which may not be attributed to both indifferently,
wherefore it ought to be a general Prolegomenon in disputes upon this Subject,
That Magnetism, not of the Magnet only properly so called, but of all
Magnetical Bodies is the Theme. Magnetical Bodies being therefore naturaly
unapt for Malleableness and Ductility, though one Species less so than another;
it will follow that notwithstanding they are tight and compact, yet that the
Parts of them are of no Quadrangular regular shape, but on the contrary of a
straggling Branchy one, though strongly Interwoven and Connected; whence it is
Demonstrative that the Effluviums of Magnetical Bodies flow not from within
themselves, for by such a Procession and Expiration, it is certain there must
be a very considerable and visible expense of the Parts: for though slightly
considering the matter, it may be answered that the Evaporating Particles are
few and slender, yet when their mutual Dependence and Concatenation is weighed,
it will appear that one single Particle cannot escape without the attendance of
its whole Chain, so that in a short time there would necessarily succeed a very
sensible and obvious decay of Parts; and this may suffice you for the
Confutation of the Opinion of Perspiration. I shall not worry you with the rest
of those Hypotheses and Notions which some Men's Brains have teem'dwith; such as
the Influence of the Stars, or the entire Magnetism of the Earth and the like,
which instead of giving a light into the Question, is but mere building new
Extravagancies and Errors upon our Antecedent Ignorance. I have therefore only
a Word to say to Des Carts and the Materia Pennata Men, and so shall go on to
perform my promise. The latter of them seem to be offenders against all Reason
and Rule too; it is a received Maxim or Postulatum among Philosophers, That
Entities without a necessity are not to be Multiplied, and if so, then
certainly are those Philosohers to blame, who have invented a new Species of
Matter, of an unaccountable extract and production to effect those Operations
which another Species of Matter, the existence whereof is evidently known has
Power to effect. But as for the Ingenious Des Carts, it were an unpardonable
piece of Ignorance and Envy, not to acknowledge his Hypothesis to be the most
satisfactory and adequate Account hitherto Published; but yet as a Man's having
good Eyes when he walks in the Dark, will not save him from stumbling some
times, so neither could the Perspicacity of this great Man, ensure him from
many mistakes in the trace of so profound a Secret. For not to mention to one
who knows them so well, the many perplexities which the Learned have discovered
in his Philosophical Principles, although the reality of his Magnetical System
must unavoidably stand or fall with those Principles: I say not to mention any
thing of this; there are yet some difficulties observable in the System it
self; take one for all, for his Instruments, he supposes a sort of fine Matter
to issue out of both Poles of the Earth after such a manner, that those that
come from one Pole take a compass round the Superficies of the Earth and enter
in again at to other, which matter he has Denominated Corpuscula Striata,
because of the Strias impressed upon it by being drained through the Apertures or
Interstices necessarily left-between the contacts of the Globuli of his second
Element; This matter he supposes to be a Species of his first Element, which he
defines thus, Quoe tantam vim habet agitationis, ut aliis Corporibus occurrendo
in minutias indefinitae parvitatis dividatur, and figur as suas ad omnes
Angulorum, abijs relictorum angustias implendas, accommodet; It is, says he, so
agil a kind of Matter as upon encountering other Bodies, to dash into
innumerable Particles, and conforms it self to the Spaces which are left
between those Bodies. but how is it possible to conceive, That Matter of so
easy and yiedling a Nature should not be as Susceptive of an Impression from,
and as conformable to the Pores of Bodies compounded of third Elementary
Matter, in the number of which are Magnetical Bodies, as it is to the
Interstices of the Globuli of the second Element, which if it be, then cannot
it act with any force or impulse, but must glide ineffectualy through the
Passages of the Magnet, and like a winding Stream comply with the Luxuriancy of
its Channel; nor will it avail to say that this Matter upon approaching the
Poles of the Magnetical Body is Congregated, and Acts with an united force,
since we cannot see why it should more readily congregate and confederate upon
such an accession than before or after it, unless, which this Learned
Philosopher I am sure will not admit, it is Collected by some Sympathetical
Attraction of the Magnetical Body. thus Sir, you see one Difficulty, and were
it needful perhaps I could make you sensible of many more; but I am unwilling
to attempt a Dispute, which would be as endless as the Ropings of the
Welchman's Toasted Cheese. Now be pleased to hear what I can say for my self.

It is apparent that there can be no such thing as Motion without an Impulse,
and that upon such an impulse a Motion greater or less must ensue; from whence
we gather that all Magnetical Bodies require some Impellent to enable them to
perform those various Feats and Operations observable in them; and here an
Inquiry will arise, were we shall meet with an Agent confessedly existent in
Nature, neither too gross not too feeble, but in all respects qualified for
such undertakings, Corpuscula Striata or Pennata, as has been already shown,
are Fabulous or Impotent if not both, and the daily Testimonies of Men's Eyes
assure them that no visible Conspicuous Agent is in the Cause; of necessity
therefore it must be something of a midling kind between these two, which
cannot be any other than the Ethereal or Subtle Matter incorporated in the
Atmosphere of our Terraqueous Globe, which Matter by the diurnal Motion of the
Earth is rapidly devolved from West to East perpetualy: Now you will presently
wonder, I do not doubt, how that which moves from West to East should direct
any Magnetical Body so as that its Poles should point directly North and South,
but have a little Patience. The existence of such Ethereal Matter I am
confident you will not call in Question, and that it is endu'd with a
Scrutinous penetrating Nature may, were it not trivial, be Demonstrated from
the very end and essence of it; but still this Agent suffers under the
Imputation of Insufficiency and Variability equally with that of Des Carts,
and considered by it self undoubtedly it does so, but considered with
Circumstances as the Precipitance of its Motion, the Disposition of the Parts
of its Patient and the like, it will answer your Expectation and Demands. Thus
the Wind can manage the Sails of a Windmil, and turn them round with ease, but
has no Power upon a Rock or a Mountain; from hence it is evident therefore that
this Agent must be driven with a due force of Motion, and also that the Patient
must have some of its Parts adapted for receiving and suffering the Impulse.
Whoever takes a just estimate of the Earths Celerity in her diurnal Motion,
must be convinced that the Violence of such a Motion is able to effect great
things, and whoever remembers that the Motion of the Ethereal Matter about the
Earths Superficies must be proportionably quicker as that is Degrees fluider,
must also be satisfied of the abilities of such Matter to penetrate all the
accessible passages of those Bodies, which occur in its course and to rage and
aestuate in them, if they be not very regular and open.

Having thus obtained an Agent; there are two things next to be examined, the
one is whether this Agent when it is free and uninterrupted is capable of such
an Administration; The second is, Whether though it be so of its self, yet
external Diversions and Disturbances may not frustrate and evacuate its
Influence, which Queries being both Answered, I hope no further difficulties
will remain. In order to clear the first, I must give you to understand that
many of the Particles of Magnetical Bodies are like so many Tendrils or little
Springs, Taper and Tortuous, which in regard of the Internal Disposition and
Posture of Magnetical Bodies, and the many anomalous Ramosities into which the
Parts of them spread themselves, I may expect to be easily granted. The Body of
the Ethereal Matter therefore rushing into the Pores of the Magnetical Bodies,
and there laboring to exert its self on all sides, and obtain a free Passage
or a convenient Receptacle, distends and explicates these little Springs which
lie ranged in one and the same order, from this Pole to that Pole of the
Magnetical Body, the consequence of which distention can not be a direct
Progressive Motion of the Body, because then all parts of these Springs must
equally resist the Impulses of the Ethereal Matter, but being of a Taper form,
larger and stronger toward the Radix of them than toward their Summity or
Cuspis, (forgive my Pedantry where I cannot help it,) the finer and weaker
parts of them suffer a readier or more forcible Expansion or Diastole than the
larger and radical, whereupon ensues insted of a Progressive Motion a Deflexion
or Distortion of the Springs themselves, and of the Continuum to which they
adhere. For instance, If the Radix of the Spring of a Watch were fastened to a
piece of Wood or Iron, when the Summity or lesser Parts of that Spring were
distended and displayed, it would not carry the Wood or Iron at the end of it
in a direct Motion to any Point just before it, but it would turn and move it
round within the Limits of the same Area, on which it lay before the
Terminating weaker Parts were expanded; and this Distention may very easily be
effected by the Vehemence and Agitation of the Ethereal Matter, which (to make
a gross Comparison) Acts as vigorously upon them as the Wind in a crop of Corn,
or among the sprigs of Trees. When therefore the Poles of Magnetical Bodies are
thus deflected to the Points of North and South, the equal urgency of the
Influx of the accessory Ethereal Matter upon all Parts of the Magnetical Body,
destroys the Strength of the Impression, and stays its Motion at just that
Instant; for it must be remembered that the sides of the Magnet have not Pores
fit to receive the Ethereal Matter, which therefore upon impaction flows round
it in a Vortical manner, as shall be better explained hereafter. So the first
dificulty disappears, the second follows, Whether though our Agent be
capacitated, yet external Diversions and Disturbances may not frustrate its
Influence. The Cartesians I hope will not be the Men that start this Quere,
their Doctrine of the Loadstone laboring under the same or a worse
disadvantage; for if external Commotions as of the Wind, etc. can confound the
order and irritate the Operation of our Ethereal Matter, whose Motion is so
certain, regular, strong and unintermitted; what will become of their
Corpuscula Striata or Pennata, they being not only obnoxious to accidental
Ruffles and Perturbations, but continually thwarted and Transverst by this flux
of our Subtle Matter? But I am persuaded we are both out of danger from Storms
of every kind, and need not shrink at the rage of Whirlwinds and Hurricans, for
such is the minuteness and velocity of our Agents that they make their way
through all Opposition: like an Arrow in the Air, or a good Keel through the
Waves, or as the Sunbeams directly dart through the Atmosphere many times when
it is vexed and tossed with the Winds; which last Similitude carries the most in
it, on account of the vicinity between the matter of the Sunbeams and our
Subtle or Ethereal Matter; And thus we are past the two Impregnable Wards of
this Enchanted Labyrinth.

You will look perhaps that I should examine all the instances and Energies of
Magnetical Bodies, and should solve every particular Phenomenon by this
Hypothesis, but if you do you will be deceived, for I am not yet so prodigal of
my Time or of my Paper, which of late is very considerably risen, as I suppose
you have e're this experienced, and therefore am of Opinion that the
explication of these Five Properties following may suffice.

First, the Magnet (for now we come to particular cases) if it be unrestrained
and have its just Liberty, will turn about till its North Pole directly answers
the South Pole of the Earth, and its South Pole the North Pole of the Earth: Of
which conversion I need not repeat to you the cause, having already so lately
and largely spoke of it.

Secondly, If two Magnets lie at a convenient distance one from the other, and
their Poles be disposed for their Accession, as when the North Pole of the one
faces the South Pole of the other, or the South Pole of the one faces the North
Pole of the other, they will close, and if their Poles are laid just contrary
wise they mutually retreat, for you must know the Ethereal Matter which
effects to move in a Mathematicaly Circular Line, upon invading the sides of
the Magnet, finding few or no Pores to receive it, the main course or grain of
the Pores lying extended from Pole to Pole, deviates from its regular Line of
Motion and flowing round all parts of the Magnets Superficies, falls into a
kind of Vortex on all sides of the enclosed Body; when therefore two Magnets
are situate at such a distance off each other that the intermediate Space is
too close and narrow to Transmit the influxes of so much of the Ethereal
Matter as is carried round the approximated Poles of both Magnet's, the
Influxes unite and generate one Vortex common to them both, which cannot come
to pass but at the same time the deviation of the Ethereal Matter from its
regulare line of Motion will increase, and consequently with it its Propensity
to recover it again, whereupon must ensue a stronger Impression and Protrusion
than ever upon the exterior Poles of both Magnets, they being the Points of
its widest deviation, and to their Impression the Magnets giving way immediately
close, so that the nearer they lie to one another, the stronger is the
Impression upon their exterior Poles, the weaker the resistance of the
Interposing Matter, the fuddainer their Concourse, and the firmer their
Unition, and vice versa. The requisiteness of their Dinominal Poles facing one
another is plain, because that Position which is natural to them, separately
considered, cannot but be the most suitable for their Unition; and the reason
of their flying one another when their Cognomininal Poles are Approximated is
this. The Central Parts of the Vorticle wherein both Magnets are immersed,
conform as in all Vortexes whatsoever to the Motion of the exterior Parts, and
that is as we have just observed, a Deviation or Distraction or equal Division
of the Vortex it self toward either Point North or South, and such by
consequence must the distribution be of the Central Parts of the Vortex, and
therefore acting with equal strength on both sides, if those of one side, that
is toward the Polar parts of the Magnet, on one side meet with so disagreable a
Texture of Parts, as obliges them to retire unsuccesful, and those which act on
the other side or toward the Polar parts of the opposite Magnet are more mildly
received, as it will be when their Denominal Poles are placed over against one
another, this would be apt to drive away one of the Magnets from the other,
were not the Impression of the external Parts of the same common Vorticle more
powerful than that of such Central Parts; but when the Cognominal Poles of both
Magnets face each other, the Impression of the Central Parts of the Vortex on
both sides will be equal, and their mutual renitency will as easily overpower
the Impression of the external Parts of the Vortex, as a Man that should be to
bend the Body of a young Tree, though with one Hand singly he were not able to
move it, yet when he set his other Hand against the Body of another Tree of
equal growth, would find it in his power to bend them both. The following
Draught will Illustrate this.



Thirdly, If two Magnets be duly disposed, one will support and sustain the
other in the Air, as also a Magnet will in like manner sustain a piece of Iron,
which is very easily accounted for, the second Phenomenon being well
understood, for being first united in the manner there described, their
Cohaesion must be as valid and tenacious by reason of the pressure of the
Ethereal Matter upon their Superficies, as is the Cohaesion of two Polished
Marbles through the compression of the External Air; and the same is to be said
of Iron, which as was hinted before to you, seems to be but a Bastard Loadstone.

Fourthly, A Loadstone will Communicate its Faculties and Affections to Iron:
for you are to remember that Iron is of a Congenial Nature with the Magnet it
self, and that therefore it requires but a little Modification to render it
completely Magnetical, which Modification it under goes from the Loadstone as
it lies in its proper posture, for although the Loadstone does not then abound
with or discharge the Ethereal Matter in such Plenty as when it is laid with
it Poles East, and West, yet a more moderate Concoction and Ebullition of the
same kind of Matter continues, which Concoction being effected among the
Springs of the Magnet, the Ethereal Matter which is agitated and Concocted
must of necessity receive such a peculiarity of Motion as the Passages lying
among and between those Springs will Model it into, and issuing out of the
Magnets Poles in such a Motion it enters the Pores of the Applicated Iron,
where finding at once a larger Liberty (the Pores of Iron being more lax than
those of the Magnet) and also new Recruits of other Ethereal Matter, which
enters the large Pores of Iron at all parts of it alike till such Iron is
Magneticis'd, it aestuates with greater vigor, joins forces with the Ethereal
Matter that it finds in the Iron, Communicates to it the same Species of
Motion, and both in Conjunction, Purge, Polish, Frame, and in all respects
prepare those Particles of the Iron which are capable of being wrought into
Magnetical Springs, and when by such a course they are wrought into those
Springs, the Iron becomes completely Magnetical; for as the Coadjution of the
Cock is required toward the Perfectionating those Seminal Principles the matter
whereof rests in the Ovary of the Hen, and without such Coadjution would prove
at best Abortive: so there appears a necessity of the Irons receiving the
influx of the Ethereal Matter, which was Modeled in the Magnet, to beget such
a Motion of its own Ethereal Matter as might complete its Magnetism, which
Analogy I think fairly explains the whole Supposition.

Fifthly, Magnetical Bodies are divested of their Qualities either by Rust or
Excandefaction, or if they are confined any length of time to a forced and
violent Position: The first partly Corroding, partly Distempering, and partly
Incumbering the little Springs; the second utterly destroying them, and the
third suffering Malignant and Heterogeneous Matter to disturb and Choke them.

So much good Friend, for our Physical consideration of Magnetical Bodies, for
I am very loath to examine all those other Phenomenon, which patienter
Naturalists in better times have enumerated, especially since those already
discussed are the most difficultly solved of any of them. If you are angry to
see coarse Fare garnished with such variety of hard Words, which I must confess
is a fault much in vogue among our Philosophers, and after all is no more than
a Vacuum Disseminatum in their Books, I must e'n tell you I could not help it;
Delicacy of Subject and Newness of Notion (such as it is) would have it so; nor
can I take offense if my Opinion in a Matter whereof many have wrote much to
little purpose, merit not your Approbation. To feed my imagination with hopes
of success after the disappointments of such Heroes of Philosophy, were as
Saucy and Presumptious, as it would have been in one of Hercules's Wives to
pretend to beat her Husband after he had Conquered his twelve Labors; nay, so
little do I promise my self of any thing like it, that I am very apt to believe
all our Inquiries into the Causes of Magnetical Operations are next to
desperate, and will ever be so. Indeed the All-wise Author of Nature seems to
have designed them not so much Objects of our Curiosity, as matter of our
Admiration, and I might add of our Imitation; for where is there that Emblem or
Hieroglyphick which in so lively Colors represents the Passions and Morals of
Mankind? The Malicious and Quarelsome World see themselves Mocked while they
behold two Stones fly on another for no other Reason than an innate Natural
Aversation. again the Covetous may blush to see in the manner of the Magnet's
Communication the Picture of one at Home, who instead of spending any part of
his Treasure upon himself, spends himself wholly upon that. again it is
perpetual Affection of the same Points of the Hemisphere, exposes the Ambitious
and Voluptuous, whose Souls are so linked to Greatness and Pleasure, that they
seem to have forfeited the Privilege of a free Will. On the other Hand it
tacitly teaches Rational and Sober Men the necessity of directing their Designs
and Actions all to one end, and in Order thereto of preserving a mutual
Unanimity amongst themselves. As therefore the Magnet seems primarily, and
especially to be deputed to this Moral use, for in the whole Republic of
Nature, there is not an inanimate Body more edifying, nor certainly an animate
more inscrutable, so does it discharge this function in a manner most punctual
and at the same time most unintelligible. and in this Instance as in many
others, the Commodiousness and Utility of the Phenomenon compensate for their
Latency and Obscurity; for as for those artificial Purposes we have taught it
to serve, particularly in Navigation, they do not appear to have been the
Genuin and Natural ends of it they being altogether Precarious and Contingent;
so that the study of its Instructions is much more safe and benificial than the
study of its Construction* and did Philosophers observe this Rule in all their
Philosophical enquiries, it would make much more for the credit of their
Profession, and be of greater advantage to Mankind in general; we should have
less of their Errors and more of their Reason; and that Science which has lost
its Reputation by its Fallacies and Presumptions, would by these means more
than recover it; nay, doubtless a clear Knowledge of the true uses of things,
would give us a better Light into the Nature of them, then their Nature gives
us into the uses of them. But I decline the Prosecution of this Argument as
having been so Particularly and Elegantly managed in the Case before you, by a
learned Gentleman of the last Age; this only I will add, That whether any or
all our Disquisitions of this kind succeed or fail, we shall have still new
Motives of expressing our Praise and Veneration to the Almighty Lord of all
things; our Praise when they succed for his having permitted the Children of
Men to know so much of the Methods of his Providence, and our Veneration where
they fail. For who can do other than adore and revere the infinite Power and
Wisdom of the Creator, When the noblest of humane Faculties are not able with
the nicest Inspection to make any satisfactory discovery of the Frame and
Constitution of the Creature. Let therefore that Orizon with which we lately
terminated our Discourse, conclude this Letter. That the Omnipotent Author of
all things would bestow on his Rational Creatures with their Knowledge a
proportionable largess of Grace to use it to his Honor and Glory, and our own
Spiritual Improvement. I hope all our Friends in the Country thrive.

March 16, 1696/7. I am, Sir, Yours, etc.

FINIS.

