At a Meeting of the Council of the Royal Society, January 28. 1674/5.
ORDERED,

THat a Discourse, made before the Royal Society, the 12 th of November 1674.
by Dr. John Wallis, concerning Gravity and Gravitation, grounded on
Experimental Observations, be Printed by the Printer of the Royal Society.

BROUNCKER, Pres. R. S.

A DISCOURSE OF Gravity and Gravitation, GROUNDED ON EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS:
Presented to the Royal Society, NOVEMBER 12. 1674.

BY JOHN WALLIS, D. D. A Member of that SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.



A DISCOURSE OF Gravity and Gravitation, GROUNDED ON EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS,
Presented to the ROYAL SOCIETY, The 12th of November, 1674.
IN Compliance with the Commands of this Royal Society, in order to the
promoting of Experimental Philosophy, to present you a Philosophical Discourse,
either grounded on, or leading to, Experiments; the Subject I have chosen for
this Discourse, is that of Gravity: the Being and Effects of which, is no
otherwise known to us than by Experience, or Discourse grounded thereupon.

The Subject is copious, and therefore I must single out some few Experiments
out of a great many: And they shall be the most simple and unperplexed in their
kind, that the Inferences may be the more clear and perspicuous; and such
Experiments only, as are either commonly known, or have already been made
before You, or may easily be, whenever you please.

I will not dispute the Nature of Gravity or Gravitation, what or whence it is;
whether from a Quality within, or a Pressure from above, or a Magnetic
Traction from below: But shall take for granted (what every days Experience
testifies) that there is, (at least in this our Sublunary World) such a thing
as Gravity and Gravitation; whereby those we call Heavy Bodies, have a natural
Propension to move downwards (toward the Earth, or its Center) if not hindered
by some more Potent, or at least an Equivalent, Strength.

This Motion downward, we call Descent; the Endeavor so to move, we call
Gravitation; and the Principle from whence this Endeavor proceeds, we call
Gravity. And things are said to be more or less Heavy, as they have more or
less of Gravity: Which may be understood, either Extensively, according to the
Quantity of it; as when we say a Pound is heavier than an Ounce, though that be
Feathers, and this be Lead: Or Intensively, according to the Degree; as when we
say, that Lead is heavier than Cork, or Quicksilver than Water; that is,
gradually heavier, proportionably heavier (bulk for bulk) or (as it is now wont
to be called) Specifically heavier.

I say, the Endeavor thus to move, I call Gravitation; though by reason of
some Impediment, there be not any actual Descent. (And it is allowed me, by
those from whom in some other things I differ, that not only Motus, but
Conatus ad motum, is properly Gravitation.) Which I thought necessary thus to
define, that I be not misunderstood in the sequel. But I add further, this
Endeavor of Descent, implies an Aversness to Ascent, with equal force; and
that the one and the other are equally the Effects of Gravitation.

This Gravitation, or endeavor to descend, is one kind of Strength; and may be
opposed not only by a contrary Gravitation, but by any opposite strength
whatsoever; whether by way of Impediment only, or of contrary Force. For,
though there be diverse kinds of Strength; yet they are all thus far
Homogeneous, as to be compared each with other, as equal or unequal, greater or
less, and that in any Proportion.

Thus the Gravitation of the Scale A (in Fig. 1.) may be opposed, or hindered
of its Effect, by a contrary Gravitation at B, (supposing all the tackle strong
enough;) or by a Force under it, which Thrusts it up; or by a Force above it,
which Pulls it up, (or does at least endeavor so to do;) as, for Instance,
that of a man's Hand. Every of which, being contrary Forces, if equal to that of
Gravitation at A, will stop its Descent; if less, they will Retard it; if
greater, they will force it upwards: Not by making it cease to Gravitate; but
by defeating the Effect of that Gravitation.

But it is opposed also by the Strength and Stiffness of the Beam; (for if that
either break or bend, A descends:) And by the Strength, though not the
Stiffness, of the Strings that hold it, (for if they either break or stretch,
the weight will descend, at least in part;) or by the Hardness, Strength, and
Solidity of the Floor or Table on which it rests; which, if strong enough, will
support it; or, if the Medium be Viscous, this viscosity (which is a degree of
solidity) will at least retard its Descent. All which do oppose it, not as
contrary Forces, but only as bare Impediments: Which, if strong enough, do
hinder the Descent; but, though more than so, do not Thrust it up.

But if the Medium be supposed perfectly Fluid, in every Point, without any
aversness to separation; it may Hinder, or Retard the Descent of A, by a
contrary Force, or contrary Gravitation, (it self also endeavoring a Descent
by its own Gravity, or at least to preserve its Station, against an Ascent;)
but not as a bare Impediment from its Solidity, Firmness, or aversness from
Separation; which is supposed to be none. It has a resistance to Motion, not,
to Separation. And of such Heavy Fluides, I intend principally to discourse,
and of Solid consistent Bodies, only with reference unto such.

If it be objected, That there be no such perfectly fluid Bodies; but that
those which we call Fluides, are either made up of very fine, but disunited,
Atoms, (each having its own shape and figure, though very small) as the
Atomists suppose; or at least in some degree Unctuous and Viscous: I will not
dispute that point, as not now necessary; but only express what it is I mean by
Fluid or Liquid Bodies; and the nearer any thing comes to such a condition, the
nearer it is to perfect Fluidity. And where such Viscosity is very little and
undiscernable, we consider it as none at all. And even that which is, if it be
not stronger than the incumbent weight can break, it does not wholly hinder the
Descent, but only retard it: The weight sinks, though not so fast.

Now, there is in all Heavy Bodies (whether Firm or Fluid) and in every part of
them a Prospensity, not only to a Direct Descent, but (if that cannot be
obtained) to an Oblique Descent, according to any Declivity. (For a River will
run down-hill, and so will a Bowl also; and a sloping Pole, if not supported,
will fall obliquely.) Which I the rather note, because I find some to put a
great stress on the Lateral Gravitation of Fluides, as peculiar to them;
without taking notice, that the same is common to Solides also: The difference
being but this; in Fluides the parts be separable, but not in Solides: But the
Tendencies are in both the same.

Now, of Fluid Bodies it is that I intend principally to speak. Of which the
first and great Phoenomenon is this, That they will (if undisturbed) reduce
themselves, by their own weight, to a Level; that is, to an Horizontal Plain,
or what as to sense is such; and will so continue, if either not pressed at
all, or equally pressed on all parts.

As if the surface, by any means, be Undulous, as ABAB, (in Fig. 2.) the
Prominences at A, will sink to fill up the Cavities at B, till all come to the
Level of LE. And this they will do, partly by spreading abroad, and flowing
into those Cavities as lower places: And partly (the whole being fluid) by
pressing down what is under A, and pressing up what is under B (in Fig. 3.)

For though only the former of these would happen in case all under LE (in
Fig. 4.) were a firm Solid surface, (like as when water overflows the dry
ground, and fills up all the furrows;) and only the latter, in case such
Prominences (whether one or more) were contained within Solid Pipes, (in Fig.
5.) so as that they could not flow laterally into the adjacent Cavities: Yet in
the present case, where both occasions happen, both Causes will operate.

For Nature does not work by Election, but ad ultimum virium, and all the ways
it can, where one does not oppose the other. And like as if a Vessel have two
holes, the one at the side, the other at the bottom; the water will run out at
both: So the Prominences at A, being not hindered of either, will partly by
lateral Fluxion, partly by direct Depression, fill up the Cavities of B (in
Fig. 5.)

It Is true, That a Solid Body, having opportunity of both, because (by reason
of the coherence of parts) it can move but one way, will move that way only
which is most Declive: But a fluid Body, being partible in every Point, divides
it self every way, as there is opportunity.

Now, such fluid Body being thus reduced to a Level, if undisturbed, it will so
remain (in Fig. 6.) For there be now no Prominences, as at A, (in Fig. 2.) to
sink or flow down; nor Cavities, as at B, to receive them: Nor is any part of
it more pressed than other, whereby that should sink, or this rise.

But if at some part, as at D, (in Fig. 7.) by weight or other force, it be
pressed, but not in others; or more at D, than at others; it will at D subside
or be depressed, and rise elsewhere, (in Fig. 8.)

And what is thus showed of the Level LE, holds equally of any other Level, as
F G. within the Fluid, at what depth soever, (in Fig. 8.) If all parts of it be
equally pressed, it keeps its level; but if some parts of it be more than
others, those will subside, and these rise: because the weaker force must give
way to the stronger.

The like happens in a Siphon inverted, (in Fig. 9.) where if the water be
higher in the one leg at A, than in the other B, that will sink, and this rise,
till they come to a Level at LE: And when so, it will there rest, if there be
no other force to put it in motion. So in an Ewer, ( Fig. 10.) or other Vessel
with a nose; the water in the Vessel (if higher) will sink it self, till that
in the nose be raised to the same height; if that in the nose be higher, this
will sink, and that rise, till they come to a Level at LE.

The Reason of it (if we do not study to perplex the Phenomenon) is very
evident: Because, while the Fluid (supposing it uniform) stands at the Level
LE, no part of the same Horizontal Plain, at what depth soever, is more pressed
than other, whereby it should be enabled to thrust any other out of place. Upon
the same account, that of two Scales equally charged, neither can descend, or
force up the other; but do mutually sustain each other in Equipois, and are at
rest. For though both do Ponderate, yet neither does Preponderate. And no Power
is able to over-bear another Power, unless stronger than it.

But in case the Fluid be higher at A than at B, the parts under A are more
pressed than those under B; and therefore those thrust these away. On the same
account, that if the Scale A be heavier charged than B, though both press
downwards; yet the heavier prevails, and forces up the lighter. For, of
contrary Powers, the greater always over-powers the lesser.

It will yet be not amiss, (that I may not in the sequel be mistaken) to give
notice by the way, That what I have said of this Level in Heavy Fluides, is not
so to be understood, as if this Level were in all cases Mathematically exact:
For, though it ought so to be, if nothing else did intervene than what we have
hitherto taken into consideration; yet many times some little accidents do
disturb it: As, when a Drop of water, on a dry board, keeps a unequal Figure,
either because of some little Viscosity therein, or as shunning the contact of
that dry surface; and Quicksilver in a Glass-Pipe, or like Vessel, will have a
visibly unequal surface, as shunning the contact of the Glass; and the like
would happen in water, if the glass were greasy. And contrary-wise, the
surface of water in such a clean Vessel would be rather concave; and so, I
suppose, would be the surface of Quicksilver if the Glass were gilded within,
because of its easy application of it self to Gold. It is observable also,
that water in very slender Pipes, will rise visibly higher than the surface of
that in the broad Vessel; because the Air can more conveniently apply its
pressure on that broader Vessel, than in the slender Pipe. And Fluides will
many times, upon motion, retain an Undulation, or dancing up and down,
sometimes above, sometimes below, the true Level, for a considerable time
before they rest: Upon a like reason, that a Pendulum will swing back and forth
beyond the Perpendicular on either side, not by its weight simply considered,
(which would rest precisely at the Perpendicular, without rising on the other
side,) but by reason of its contracted Impetus. But these and other little
inequalities, which are to be accounted for from diverse accidents, we here
neglect; and consider only, what would be the result of the Gravity and
Fluidity, freed from such other Accidents, too copious here to be insisted on.
Our meaning therefore is, that (setting aside other Accidents) a Fluid Body,
will, by its Gravity, reduce it self to such a Level; and being so reduced,
will so by counterpoise preserve it self, if not disturbed by other Force.

But it is here objected, That water upon water does not Gravitate, (and the
like of other not-springy Fluides;) because an Element (say they) does not
gravitate in its own place. And, for instance, they tell us, That a man under
water, feels not the weight of the water over him, (in Fig. 11.)

Before I directly answer this Objection, I have this to say to the Principle
they allege: That the intendment thereof at first, was no more but this; That
the tendency of a heavy Body, being to the Earths Center; when there it is, its
Heaviness (if not otherwise pressed) will not endeavor any further motion;
(for, to move further, were to move from the Center:) And accordingly, if the
tendency of any other Body be to a certain place, as its term; when there it
is, that Principle will not endeavor a motion from thence; (for, so to do,
were to move contrary to its own nature:) And if it be carried further, it must
be from some other cause, (as when a Pendulum swings beyond the perpendicular,
it is not from weight simply considered, which would there have stayed; but
from an Impetus imnpressed by a precedent motion.) And thus far that Principle
is just and good. But the Objection perverts it to a sense never intended by
the first Introducers.

Next, I would ask; What is meant by the Waters own Place? And particularly,
Whether water in a Pond, artificially contrived on the top of a Tower, be in
its own Place? If so, then, though a hole were in the bottom, it ought not to
run out. If not in its own place, then the Reason fails; for even there a Diver
shall no more feel the weight of the water, than if in the Thames. So that it
is not its being in its own Place, but somewhat else, that makes the weight not
to be felt.

To avoid this therefore, and the like Instances; they now explain their
meaning to be, That it does not Gravitate on any thing which is not
specifically lighter than it self. And to this Explication it is that we are to
apply our Answer.

But neither will this hold. For it is manifest (to use an ordinary Instance)
that a Vessel pierced near the bottom, (in Fig. 12, 13.) will run with a fuller
and stronger stream, than if at the middle, or near the top; and more when it
is full, than when half out, or almost empty. Which argues a Pressure of the
upper parts upon those near the vent.

And to say, they press not on the intermediate parts, but only on the Air
without; is a mere evasion. For the remoter parts of the water cannot press
that Air, but by pressing that which is between; like as in a crowd, he that is
at a distance cannot thrust him that is at the door, but by thrusting those
that are between: And, with a Pole, we cannot thrust that at the end of it, but
by thrusting the Pole: Nor, with a Rope, draw that which is fastened to it, but
by drawing the Rope.

Where yet there is a signal difference between Trusion and Traction. In
Trusion, it suffices, that the thing be contiguous, though there be no
Connection; but in Traction there must be a Connection, and that strong enough;
else the string will break, and the weight not follow. And though a Heap of
Sand will suffice to press down the Scale; yet a Rope of Sand will not serve to
draw it up. And therefore Mr. Line's Funiculus (in his Explication of the
Torricellian Experiment) must have somewhat of Texture (as well as Contiguity)
to give it strength; without which it will not be able to sustain the weight of
the suspended Quicksilver. But certainly, if the parts of a Fluid be able to
Draw one another, much more will they be able to Thrust one another; that is,
the one to Gravitate upon the other.

It is therefore much more conceivable (in the inverted Siphon) how the water
at A (Fig. 9.) should thrust up that at B, than how the Air at E ascending,
should draw up the water at B, and thereby draw down that at A. For, in the
first case, there needs only a Contiguity; in the latter, there must be a
Connection of all the Parts. And therefore if we should allow, that Mr. Line's
Funiculus, or Rope of Sands, if granted, would equally solve the Phenomenon,
by way of Traction; yet, since the Hypothesis of Trusion (as is acknowledged)
will do it also; it is much rather to be chosen than that of Traction, by a
Rope of (Sands, shall I call it, or a Rope of) Nothings.

But further, it is confessed by a very learned Author, the Author of two
Treatises; the one entitled, An Essay touching the Gravitation or
Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies; the other, Observations touching the
Torricellian Experiment, (who is pleased to conceal his Name) that defends the
Funiculus, and denies our Hypothesis; that not only Water, but even Oil in the
Pipe A, (Fig. 5.) will force up the water at B: And if (the Pipe being empty)
Oil were poured on B, it would force up water into the Pipe A; not to a Level,
but to an Equipois; that is, (as his own words are) to such a proportion of
height in the Tube, as will countervail the weight of a like Cylinder of oil;
and gives the same reason for it, that we do; The disparity of pressure causing
Motion or Elevation of the water, in that part nor equally pressed. So that
here, a lighter Body does Gravitate on a Heavier; Oil, upon Water: And that not
only ad pondus, but ad motum, as Himself admits; that is, (in our Language) it
does not only Gravitate, but Pregravitate; not only Weigh, but Outweigh.

So that here, the notion of a Fluid not Gravitating on a Heavier than it self,
or one as Heavy, is quite destroyed.

And it is manifest also, that not the Level, but the Equipois, is that which
is here attended. For the surface of the Oil without the Pipe, because
specifically Lighter, will be somewhat Higher than that of the Water within it;
and just so much as to make up the Equipois. And, contrary-wise, if that in the
Pipe were Oil, and that without it were Water; that within the Pipe would be
higher, and in such proportion higher.

The same would be, if that at B were stagnant Quicksilver, and that in the
Pipe A were Oil or Water, or some Lighter Fluid. A pound of Water poured into
the Pipe, would it self stand higher, (because it would take up more room;) but
would raise the stagnant Quicksilver just as high, as if a Pound of
Quicksilver had been poured on; without any respect had to the specific
Gravity or Levity

And a Ship laden, ( Fig. 8.) will draw just as much water, if laden with so
many hundred weight of Timber, as with so many hundred weight of Lead; though
that be Lighter, and this Heavier, than a like quantity of Water

And a piece of Wood ( Fig. 7.) though Lighter than Water, yet does not float
on the very top, but sinks so far into the Water, till it possess the place of
so much Water, as is of equal Weight with it self; that is, till the Horizontal
Plain, passing by the bottom of the Wood, be in all places Equally pressed,
partly with Wood, partly with Water.

Which being known Experiments, and confessed on all hands, do quite destroy
the notion of Non-Gravitation of Fluids on what is not specifically Lighter
than themselves. And himself grants, ( Essay, p. 14.) that Air in a Bladder,
does Gravitate on Water.

To avoid the Pressure of these Evidences; it is now alleged, That the Oil or
Water in the Pipe A, (in Fig. 5.) though not intrinsecally Heavier, yet its
Higher Position gives it an Accidental weight more than that in the Vessel; and
hence it comes to pass, that That does depress This.

But he does not consider, that this does destroy the whole design of his
second Chapter; which is to prove, That C does not Gravitate on D, nor D on E,
in Fig. 14; that is, that the Upper parts of the Water do not Gravitate on the
Nether. Whereas, if merely a Higher Position will make it Gravitate; and that
not only ad pondus, but ad motum also; then must the Water be in perpetual
Motion, (the Upper parts still pressing away the Nether, like as, on another
account, it happens in Boiling Water; I mean when the Fire is under it: for, if
it be heated by Fire above it, the case is much altered;) which perpetual
Motion, the said Author there urges as a great Absurdity. Yet I am not
ignorant, that Mr. Boil is indeed of opinion, That in all Fluids the minute
parts are in continual motion; (making this the specific nature of Fluidity,
as contradistinct of Fixedness;) but that is on another account, and concerns
not this Point at all. It is not therefore Safe for our Antagonist, to ascribe
it only to the Accidental Weight of an Higher Position. Nor is it Sound so to
do. It Is true, that a different Position may give to the same Weight a
different Ponderation:

As, for Instance; a Weight at G, (in Fig. 15.) will Ponderate more than at H;
not, because Higher; but, because, at G, it is to descend directly; but, at H,
on an Oblique Plain; which abates its Force, and does more abate it as it is
more Oblique.

And a Weight at rest in F or E, is of less Force to move the Balance, than
when from A it falls to E; and less there than when it is fallen to F; and even
this less, than if it had been violently thrown down: Because, in the latter
cse, there is a greater contracted Impetus.

Again, at E or F, it will Ponderate more than at I or K; because those
suspended at A, are at a greater distance from the Center C, than those
suspended at D: The different Position, in all these, and many other the like
cases, giving to the same Weight an Accidental additional Force.

But a Higher Position, merely because Higher, gives no such advantage at all:
The Weight at E being but just of the same force, as at F; and at I, as at K.
For the length or shortness of the String on which it hangs, does not at all
alter the Weight: As is agreed by all; and Experience testifies.

The Reason therefore of this Phenomenon is not, because that at A in a higher
Position, is of a greater Weight than a like quantity at B: But, because the
parts at C, (in Fig. 5.) are more pressed than those at B; (as bearing the
weight of CA, which B bears not:) whereby C is pressed down, and B thereby
pressed up.

BUt, against this Explication, he brings an Experiment on which he lays great
weight. A Porringer filled with Lead, etc. which in the Air, as at A, weighed
78 ounces; weighed in the water about 68 ounces; and the same Weight it held
(with some inconsiderable difference, which he excuses) whether at C, the
depth of 40 or 25 inches; or at D, the depth of but 12, or scarce 1 inch, (Fig.
16.)

Where he attempts the account of two Phenomenon: First, Why it weighs less in
Water than in Air? And Secondly, Why it weighs alike at several depths in Water?

Why it should weigh less in Water than in Air, he ascribes to the Resistance
and Crassitude of the Water: And he tells us elsewhere, that, if we strike with
our hand the surface of Water, we shall find its Resistance not much less than
if we struck a Board.

By which, if he mean the Viscosity, or Resistance to Separation, he speaks not
to the present purpose: For, as to that, it is to be so far considered as a
Firm Body, not a Fluid, which is that we are now speaking of.

But if he mean, a Resistance to be displaced, and thrust upward, to make way
for the Porringers descent; he says just the same thing with us: For such
Resistance is properly Gravitation; and does countergravitate to that of the
Porringer, and take off so much of its Praegravitation. Just as when the Scale
B, ( Fig. 16.) by its Gravitation resists the descent of A; because A cannot
Descend without the Ascent of B, to which by reason of its Gravitation it is
averse. And because the Porringer cannot descend but by thrusting up so much
Water, the Water must needs give so much resistance to this Descent, as it
gives to its own Ascent; that is, so much as the weight of the Water that must
Ascend; and has just the same effect as if so much Water were put into the
Scale B. And just so much, the Porringer weighs less in the Water than in the
Air.

And as to what he says of the great resistance which the hand finds, when we
strike hard on the Water; we are to consider, not only the Weight of the
Water, but the Swiftness requisite to make way for the Hand moving so Fast:
Like as if a Weight of 10 pounds hang in the Air by a Thread; the least touch
of the finger will move it, slowly: But, to move it 10 times so Fast, will
require a force 10 times as strong: And, if you strike it hard with a swift
stroke of the hand; that which made very little resistance to a gentle touch,
will considerably withstand the stroke of a swift hand: Not, because the Weight
is 10 times heavier than before, or does 10 times as much resist Motion; but
because it does 10 times as much resist a Motion 10 times as Swift. Now, so
much Strength as is requisite to move so much Water with so much Swiftness as
is necessary to make way for so swift a Motion of the hand; so much resistance
must the Water give to such a stroke, from its own Gravity, without the
assistance of the supposed Crassitude or Viscosity. But when in the present
case we consider, how much the Porringer weighs in Water; we consider only,
whether it Remove so much Weight, though never so slowly; not, with what
swiftness it will remove it; and, as to that, a very little weight more than
what it moves will suffice.

But his main Objection lies in the other Point, That the Porringer weighs as
heavy at D, the depth of 12 or but of 1 inch; as at C, the depth of 25 or 40
inches, ( Fig. 16.)

And just so, say I, it ought to be. For every thing weighs in Water just so
much as its Weight is heavier than so much Water. As, for Instance, if the
Plain dd, ( Fig. 16.) be in all parts equally pressed; it is, confessedly, the
same as if not pressed at all: (for, so long, there is no reason why one part
should rise, rather than another:) And so it would be if D were just as heavy
as so much Water. But if D be heavier, then is that part of it overcharged,
just so much as D is heavier than so much Waters as would fill the place if
this were absent: And therefore, if not relieved by so much Weight in the Scale
B, it will sink. And just so much will serve at C; that is, it must weigh
equally, whether at the depth of C, or D, or any other depth.

But, says he, if the incumbent Water do Gravitate on D, it will more
Gravitate on C, because at a greater depth.

True, it does so: But, as the pressure at C is greater than at D; so is the
Counter-pressure at ch more than at d; and just so much more. So that whatever
was the Pregravitation at D, must be the Pregravitation at C also. (And it is
the Pregravitation only, that is Weighed.) Just as when the Scale A outweighs
B by 5 ounces, and into each Scale you put 10 Pounds; it will yet outweigh, but
just 5 ounces, as it did before. So that his Argument from this Experiment,
will not hold against us.

And the Solution he gives, will hold as little. It is (says he) because the
Porringer drives up no more Water out of its Place at the one Station, than at
the other.

But this is a mistake. For while the Pillar a C, (Fig. 16.) to make room for
the Porringer, drives away the Water from C to ch, that at ch thrusts up all
above it as high as a, to make room for it self; as a D does all that over d:
So that the Water displaced, is not the same in both. And therefore the
Porrigner, if not assisted by the incumbent Water, would not equally weigh in
different depths; contrary to his own Experiment. Which therefore makes against
himself.

But the great plausible Objection is, that a Man under Water feels not the
weight of it. And why (says he) but because Man's body being heavier than so
much water, the water does not Gravitate on it.

But this Reason is (as the Schools speak) non causa pro causa.

If the Question were, Why the water does not Raise the Body, (as it would do
so much Wood;) the Reason had been good; Because so much water does not press
downward more than the Body does; and therefore is not able to press it away.

But when the Question is, Why a man does not Feel it; that is, Why he is not
Hurt by it, or put to Pain; the Answer, Because specifically Lighter, will not
serve. For,

1. A Man, by this Reason, should not feel the weight of Wood, because
proportionably lighter than himself: Yet we find a Man will as much sink under
a Load of Wood, as a Load of Lead, if of equal Weight. And if it be said, This
is, because, though the Man be not, yet the Air about him, is Lighter than that
Wood: I say, it is so; but this should therefore cause only a Lateral Pressure
on that Air, not a Direct Pressure on the Man. And, though a Man stood up to
the neck in Water, he should yet find the burden of the Wood laid on his
shoulder; notwithstanding that both the Man, and all about him, be
Proportionably heavier than Wood. And he shall equally feel it, as if it were
an equal Weight of Lead, if both be above the Water. So that the circumjacent
Air, is not that which makes the Wood weigh upon the Man.

2. Though the whole Man be Heavier than so much Water; yet many Parts of him
are Lighter; and would, of themselves, swim in Water, (though, by their
Connection with some Heavier, they be made to sink; like Wood tied to a piece of
Lead:) Now all these Parts, at least, ought to feel Pain, if the specific
Gravity were the only cause of Indolency: But do not.

3. A Man immersed in Quicksilver, which is a Heavier Fluid, though he would
thereby be boyed up, yet would he no more feel the incumbent Weight, than a
like weight of Water. And, though the Experiment cannot so conveniently be made
in Quicksilver as in Water; yet as to part it may be made, by thrusting the
Hand into Quicksilver, which shall no more be pressed by it, than if thrust
into an Equivalent depth of Water; that is, about 14 times as deep. And Flies,
or other small Animals, immersed in Quicksilver, are not thereby pressed to
death, but do safely emerge to the Top. So that it is but a Fancy to think,
that only the Proportional or Specific Lightness of the Water, is the cause
of that Indolence, since Liquids Proportionably heavier, if not Positively
heavier, will be felt as little.

4. Let us suppose an inverted Siphon, ( Fig. 17.) filled from A to B with
Quicksilver; from thence to C with Water, so high as to balance the
Quicksilver at A. If now Oil (which is Lighter than either) be poured on A; I
ask, Whether the Quicksilver at A will not be thereby depressed, and that at B
and C raised? Certainly it will. But why? The Oil cannot (by their Principles)
Gravitate on AB, because this is Quicksilver: Nor yet (as they speak)
mediately upon BC, for even this is Water, and therefore heavier than Oil: No,
nor on the Air above C; for the Oil at DA is already lower than it, and
therefore cannot affect to possess its place. It should therefore, by their
Principles, not gravitate at all, since there is nothing below it lighter than
it self, on which it should gravitate: Yet gravitate (we see) it will, and
thrust out of place that whole Body ABC; notwithstanding (if that be
considerable) the higher Position of C, and its greater Specific Heaviness.
And all this while the Animal in BC shall remain unhurt, notwithstanding there
be not only Gravitatio ad Pondus, but Gravitatio ad Motum too.

So that the notion of Non-Gravitation on a Fluid not specifically Lighter than
it self, is quite out of doors.

And the truth is, supposing ABC to be in Equipoise, the superfusion of AD will
equally depress A, whatever the Liquor be, if the Weight be equal. And Ounce
weight, will still be an Ounce weight; and an Ounce weight will just so much
depress the Quicksilver, whether it be an Ounce of Wine, Water, Oil, or
Quicksilver; (that is, just so much as to thrust half that Weight, out of the
Leg AF, Fig. 17. into the Leg FC;) without any regard had to the specific
Gravity or Levity of the Liquor AD, which, as to this Point, is of no
consideration at all. And if the higher Position of D above A be thought of
moment; the higher Position of C above both must be so too. And there will be
nothing steady to fix upon, but, that the Positive Weight of DF being (at least
in Proportion to the bigness of the Pipe) more than that of FC; that will
thrust this away, till they come to an Equipoise.

It Is true, that, if the specific Gravity of the Liquor AD, were greater than
that of the Quicksilver in AB; there would, upon another account, have been
some difference: Because then, the Heavier Liquor being upmost, it would not
only press upon, but press into, the Body of the Lighter; and they would by
little and little shift places; (as when Water is poured upon Wine, that will
by little and little sink to the bottom, and this rise:) Because, by such
Descent, each Particle thrusts up a Lighter Body than it self. But, if the
Upper be Lighter; though it press on the Hevier, it cannot press into the
Heavier, without thrusting up a Heavier Body than it self. And this, I suppose,
if they will consider their own Notion, is that they mean, when they say, A
Lighter Body does not gravitate on a Heavier.

And if so much Oil were poured on A, as to thrust the Quicksilver beyond F;
some of that Oil would pass by it, into the other Leg, as high as C.

And, in such Cases as these, the specific Gravity or Levity is considerable:
But not as to the Case in hand; where an Ounce of Oil poured on A, shall
depress it just as much as an Ounce of Quicksilver would do; and thrust up C
just as High.

Beside this, (of Non-Gravitation on a Heavier Body;) the same Learned Author
has two Expedients for salving the Indolence of a Man under Water, or his not
feeling Pain by the Weight of it.

The First is this: Supposing a Brick-work, as in Fig. 18. but without Mortar;
if some few Bricks were taken out of the bottom, there would not hereupon sink
a Pillar of that Base, but only a Kind of Pyramid; the rest being, in manner
of an Arch, mutually supported. And thence he supposes, that those middle
Bricks did not bear the Weight of a Column, but only of a Pyramid. Which
Pyramid if taken away, the rest would not gravitate upon that Cavity. And in
like manner he supposes it must be, if, for Bricks, were Grains of Wheat; yea,
of Sand; and, consequently, of lesser Particles; and, even those of Water;
which he supposes would thus support each other, without gravitating on those
under them.

But he proceeds upon several mistakes.

First, he supposes, That, because those middle Bricks being taken away the
rest do not fall; therefore, when they were there, they bore nothing of that
Weight. Which is just as if he should argue, Because, when a Beam (in Fig. 19.)
is supported by three Posts, if the middle Post be removed, it will not fall;
therefore, while it was there, it did bear nothing of the Beams Weight: Or,
Because a Table, (in Fig. 20.) supported by five or six Legs, will stand,
though any one of them be taken away; therefore that Leg did bear nothing: And
consequently, (because that Leg is any Leg) therefore none of them did bear any
Weight: Whereas, while all were there, each did bear its part, and thereby ease
the rest; which, in the absence of one, must now bear the more. And if the
whole space under it were filled up with such Supports, (or, which would be
Equivalent, an entire Body of that breadth,) each would bear (without any
considerable difference) just so much as what is just over it. And such is the
case of Fluids. Only this I add, That if one of the Legs should be too weak to
bear its Proportional part, yet if the rest be as much more than able to bear
their; that weak one will not break, being relieved by the rest.

Secondly, Admitting that in Brik-work it would so be; yet it is only upon
this account, Because those parts of the Bricks which hang over, are coherent
with the parts supported, and cannot fall without breaking the Brick: But, if
they were as easily separable part from part, as Brick from Brick, (which is
the case of Fluids;) those parts would fall, as well as the middle Bricks: And
consequently, not a Pyramid, but a Column, or rather more.

Again, Thirdly, Whereas he argues, from Bricks to Grains of Wheat, and from
thence, to Sands, etc; The Consequence will not hold. For the shorter his
Bricks are, the less will hang over in each Layer. As if now, for Instance,
each Brick lie two Inches over; if the Bricks were but half so long, each would
lie over but one Inch; and consequently (supposing their thickness the same,)
the Pyramid on that Base would be twice as great (because twice as tall;) and
still, as the over-hangings decrease, that Pyramid increases; till at length,
when those over-hangings come to nothing (which is the case of Fluids,) the
Pyramid becomes a Column, or even more than so. And if, in a Heap of Wheat,
Fig. 21. (as here in a Pile of Bricks,) he remove so much of the bottom; he
will find, that instead of a Pyramid on that Base, there will fall down more
than a Column (part of an inverted Pyramid:) And the more such Heaps approach
to the nature of Fluids; the more will it be so. So that, by this Argument (if
there were not another Expedient, of which I shall speak by and by,) the lower
parts must bear, not less, but more, than the Column incumbent on them. And, if
he found it otherwise in a Tube filled with moist Calice-Sand; this was not,
because that above did not gravitate; but because it was so wedged in, that it
could not fall. Which, in perfect Fluids, we are not to suppose.

Lastly, He does, by this Explication, destroy his own Hypothesis. For he
grants, in a Pail of Water (for Instance,) that all the Parts, as well upper as
lower, do gravitate on the Bottom, though not each on other: Whereas, if those
upper Parts be so supported (as in his Brick-Arch) as not to Gravitate on the
Cavity; much less will they gravitate on the Bottom, under that Cavity. And if,
as he supposes, a great Heap of Wheat would not break an empty Egg-shell; it
is not, because the Wheat wants Weight, or Gravitation; but because the Grains
are so entangled as not to fall right down, (like as in a heap of Bushes, one
would bear up another, though all do gravitate:) But in Liquids it is
otherwise; which we suppose partible in every Point.

But however, this of the Egg-shell happen to prove; it serves not his
Hypothesis at all. For, the Air in the Egg-shell, being Lighter than the Wheat
that lies on it; this ought to gravitate (by his own Principles,) and to break
the Egg-shell. If, by Arch-work, the Egg-shell be defended; this is not for
want of Gravitation; but because that Gravitation is surmounted by a greater
Strength. Like as when a great Weight hangs on a strong Tack; or a heavy Scale,
supported by as great a Weight in the other, or by a support underneath; and a
thousand other the like Accidents.

His other Expedient is, from the Lateral Pressure which he supposes all
Fluids to have; whereby he supposes the Perpendicular Pressure to be abated.

But here he proceeds upon a mistake also. For, though it be very true, that
Water will flow upon a Declivity; yet not as Fluid, but as Heavy. For we see a
Bowl runs down a Hill, though not a Fluid, but a Solid, Body. And a broad
Solid, lying on a narrow Pillar, (in Fig. 22.) has in every part a Lateral
Pressure as well as Water; and, if it be cut in the midst, will fall off on
either side, as Water would do. And, when it does not; the reason is not a want
of Propension, but because this Lateral Propension is checked or impeded by a
Greater strength of Cohesion; like as its Perpendicular Propension is checked
by that greater strength of the Pillar. And like as the Pillar, if too weak,
will break under the Perpendicular Weight; so, if the strength of Cohesion be
less than its Lateral Propension, the Solid will divide as a Fluid would do. As
when a Solid breaks by its own Weight, (in Fig. 23.)

On the contrary; Water in a Pail (or other Vessel,) though a Fluid, has its
Lateral Propension Restrained by the sides of the Vessel (as by a greater
strength,) but does not Lose it; and, if the sides chance not to be strong
enough, will break through; does at least endeavor it, though they be strong
enough.

So that, both in Solids and Fluids, each Particle has its Lateral Propension,
as well as Perpendicular; though it be sometimes restrained, or overpowered;
there, by the Cohesion of Parts; here, by the Strength of the Sides: but (in
both Cases) if those Strengths be too weak, that Propension prevails.

Now, as this Lateral Propension of Fluids, is kept in by the Sides of the
Vessel, as to the utmost parts of it; so, as to the inner parts of it, they
keep in each other. The Lateral Pressure of A, (Fig. 24.) is sustained by that
of B; and this by that; not as by Greater, but as by Equal Strengths. For A
cannot thrust away B, without thrusting up a Body as Heavy as it self; nor B
thrust away A.

So that, the Lateral Pressure of the Parts being mutually sustained each by
other, and the Perpendicular Pressure by the Parts under it; hence it comes to
pass, that those under-parts bear only the Pressure of a Column, and no more;
(which is the Expedient that I intimated but now.) And therefore, in the Heap
of Wheat, but now mentioned, though, upon an aperture in the Bottom, more fall
down than such a Pillar, (because, when that is gone, the Lateral Pressure of
the rest does operate,) yet, while that Pillar was there, that part of the
Bottom did bear no more but it.

But if these Expedients of his do not serve; What is the Reason (you will ask)
that the Man under Water, feels not the Weight of it?

I would Answer, First, That it is not agreed, that, at a great depth, a Man
shall feel no Pain at all. And I hear, that Mr. Gratrix having contrived a way
of taking breath, at a great depth under Water, through long Pipes reaching to
the top of it; yet found his breast there so compressed by the water, that he
could not draw breath. But, in small depths of water, I do not deny but that a
Man may remain for some time without any considerable Pain.

The Reason, I judge, is this; Because the man encompassed by a Fluid, (whether
specifically Heavier or Lighter than himself, it makes no matter,) is equally
pressed on all sides; and thereby suffers no luxation of Parts; and,
consequently, no sense of Pain. But upon the luxation or laceration of any
part, especially a Nervous part, Pain arises. Hence it is, that our Flesh
feels not the hardness of our Bones, because so fitted thereunto as to suffer
no luxation or laceration by it: But, if the Bone be broken or dislocated, we
shall then find it to hurt us; and feel it hard and sharp.

And though the Body, by such compression, may be contracted into a less room,
by reason of the Air, Blood, and other springy Liquids; yet these being all
uniformly pressed, without any tearing of the Nervous parts, he suffers nothing
of Pain from it.

And hence it is, that the Egg-shell, (but now mentioned,) though pressed by a
Body specifically Heavier than it self, (by which therefore, according to their
Principles, it ought to be crushed,) receives no prejudice, because equally
pressed on all sides: Which it does the more easily sustain by reason of its
round form, in the nature of a continued Arch. And we find, in experience, that
a Round Glass, though but of equal thickness, will bear a much greater Pressure
from without, than from within; and more than if it were flat-sided; and more,
if the Pressure be of all sides, than if but in some only. All which concur in
the Egg-shell so situated: But if pressed only upon one side, a less Pressure
would break it.

I add also, That though in perfect Fluids there be no such Arching; yet in a
Heap of Solids (as that of Wheat) something there is of that nature; and the
more, as those Grains be bigger, and conveniently shaped; and may therefore
help to bear the burden: Like as 4 or 5 Legs, in the Table we mentioned, if
strong enough, will supply the defect of one weak one; which therefore is not
broken, though not strong enough of it self to bear its part. But the more any
such Heap approaches to the nature of a Fluid, the less is there room for such
Arching; and, in perfect Fluids, none at all.

Hence it is also, that a Sponge, though Lighter than Water, and Flaccid also,
will not yet (though fastened to the bottom of a Vessel) be crushed together by
the Weight of the incumbent Water; Because the Water within its Pores does bear
out the sides with as great a strength, as that without would press them in.
And the like we see, when the Lungs, taken out of Animals, are immersed in
Water.

And the same account serves, for the pressure of Air on Animals. The Air
within, pressing as strongly outward (by its Spring,) as that without, presses
inward; there is no hurt to the Animal at all. And, contrary-wise, the pressure
of the Air into the Mouth and Throat, does not break open his Breast or Belly,
because balanced with as great a Pressure without.

But if a Hand or Arm, be put into the Air-Pump, and the Air about it pumped
out, that there be a failure of the outward Compression to balance that within
the Arm; the Spring of that within it, will put the Arm to a great torture, (as
diverse of this Society have found by experience.) And many Animals, by that
means, have been killed within the same Pneumatick Engine, in a much shorter
time, than would have been for want of Respiration only.

The like is seen in the breaking of Glass Bubbles hermetically sealed, and of
Lambs Bladders, in the same Pneumatick Engine, upon the Subtraction of the
Ambient Air; as also the boiling of warm Water, and the strange expansion of
Blood into Bubbles, upon such Subtraction of Air; and many the like
Experiments, made by Mr. Boil (an Honorable Member of this Society) in that
Pneumatick Engine of his Invention.

But while I name these, I do anticipate what I am next to handle; which is the
Compression of Springy Bodies.

WE have been hitherto discoursing of such Fluids principally as Water is
supposed to be; that is, Fluids incapable of Compression, because not Elastical
or Springy.

But Springy Fluids, such as we suppose the Air to be, may by an incumbent
Weight, not only suffer a Trusion (as Water may) into another Place, (as from
A to B and E, in an open Pipe, in Fig. 17:) but a Compression, into a less
place. As for Instance, if the Pipe be close stopped at C, (or Hermetically
sealed,) so as AB be Water, and BC Air, or other Springy Fluid; a superfusion
or addition of the Weight AD (whether Fluid or Solid,) will raise B to E, and
contract the Air BC into the space EC; that is, so much as till the Spring in
CB, (which was a Strength equivalent to the Pressure of AB,) becomes (by this
Contraction) equivalent to the Pressure of DB. And if more yet be superfused on
D, CE will be yet more contracted, and so onwards; the strength of the Spring
being still made equivalent to the pressure of the Weight. For, while the
Spring CB is too weak; the Weight (being a greater strength) will thrust it
closer: And, if CE be too strong, it will (as a greater strength) thrust away
that Pressure: And can never rest, but when the strength of the Spring is just
equivalent to the Pressure.

So in Solids: If (for Instance) a Room or Vessel be filled with Wool as high
as BB, (Fig. 25.) and more Wool or other Weight (whether Heavier or Lighter
than Wool) be laid on, as to AA; the Wool shall be depressed to LE; and more
yet, if more Weight be laid on.

And in like manner, if BCB be Air, and this pressed, either by the incumbent
Air AB (supposing Air to be heavy,) or by a Solid Weight or Force, so close on
all sides, as that the Air cannot pass by or through it.

And, this being granted; the Torricellian Experiment (with others of the same
nature) is, confessedly, solved by the Pressure of the Air; which was anciently
thought to be by a Fuga vacui. For, if the Air be heavy, it must Gravitate;
that is, endeavor a Descent (as other Heavy Bodies do,) and actually Effect
it, if not opposed by at least as great a strength. And the Spring of the Air
(allowing it to have a Spring) must always be of such a Texture, as is
equivalent to the Weight or Force which it bears.

Now, as to the Weight of Air, or its Positive Gravity, the Peripatetick
Philosophy does not acknowledge it; but takes it to be Positively Light, and
consequently to endeavor an Ascent. And some others say the same, not only as
to Air, but as to all Heavy Bodies. And whereas we suppose in them a Positive
Gravity; and that what we call Levity is but comparatively so, being only
Gravity in a less degree; they take Levity to be Positive, and Gravity to be
but a less Degree of Levity; and, consequently, those Heavy Bodies, not to
Affect a Descent, but to be Thrust down by Bodies more Light, which more
strongly affect a Higher Place.

But against these (the one and the other) I apprehend (as to Philosophy) these
Inconveniences; which, to me, seem cogent Arguments.

If this Motion up-ward be natural; it must be either an Aversness from the
Center, as the Terminus a quo; or a Propension to some other Place, as the
Terminus ad quem.

If they say the Former; it is true, that then B ought to move from C, in
Perpendicular Lines, as CBA, (Fig. 26;) and the Phenomenon does not contradict
it. But if the first intendmnent of nature be, not to be here; without any
Positive tendency, where to be; it seems much more intelligible, that somewhat
should Thrust it thence, (by somewhat more forcibly pressing between,) than
that it should Fly thence, without Affectation of any other Place.

But if they say, (as seems more rational, if Levity be the Positive
Principle,) that it is an Affectation of some Higher Place, suppose A: While B
is just between C and A, the motion ('it is true) would be in the Perpendicular
CBA, (as the streightest way thither:) But if it were any where else, as at D;
then its motion to A would not be in DCE the Perpendicular, but in DA an
oblique line. Which is contrary to all Experience: For the same Light body,
wherever it be, moves upward in a Perpendicular; as well as a Heavy body, in a
Perpendicular downward.

And if, to avoid this, they would say, That it moves not to a certain place,
as A or E, determinately; but to that place, whatever it be, that is just over
it: I say, this is not properly the moving To a place, (if it be indifferent
whether to A or to E;) but rather a moving From a place; that is, to be as far
from C as it can: Which is the former branch of the Supposition, and against
which we did before urge the former inconvenience. Which makes it not likely,
that there is any such thing as Positive Lightness at all; since it will be
hard to assign, what shall be the Terminus ad quem, which such a Mover aims at.

But waving this Argument from Philosophy at large; I shall argue from
Experiment, (as to the Air,) thus:

Suppose we Air in the Bladder AA, (Fig. 27.) of the same Tensure with the
External Air; and therefore such as will not (as they speak) Gravitate, or (as
I would rather say) Praegravitate thereon; nor yet Praelevitate; (being of the
same specifical Gravity or Levity with it:) If this be compressed into a less
room, as BB; it will then retain the same Quantity of Gravity or Levity as
before, (since all that Air is still here, with all its positive Quality:) But
(because now within less Dimensions) it will be Gradually, or (as now the
Language is) Specifically, more than before, Heavier or Lighter, according as
that Positive Quality was Gravity or Levity. (For, as the same quantity of
Heat, in lesser space, makes the subject Intensively Hotter; so the same
quantity of Heaviness, in a less Room, makes it Intensively Heavier; and, of
Lightness, Lighter.) But experience testifies (as is confessed) that compressed
Air is Intensively Heavier, or (as we now speak) Specifically Heavier, (and on
the Balance is found so to be;) not Lighter, than before. Therefore its
Positive Quality was Heaviness, not Lightness.

The Positive Gravity of the Air being thus evinced; and, consequently, that
the Air Ascends, only because it is Thrust up by Bodies more Heavy; (like as
Water rises upon the casting in of Earth, or other Heavier Bodies;) the
Torricellian Experiment, with other the like Phenomenon, are easily solved from
Statical Principles, without having recourse to a Fuga vacui.

For, admitting (as before) that (in a Vessel with a Nose; or a Siphon
inverted, Fig. 28, 29.) the Fluid at A, by sinking it self, will raise that at
B, to the Level LE; then, in case the Nose at B be not so high, the Liquor (if
not otherwise stopped) must needs run over. And, if any should say, the Reason
hereof is, Because the Air at B flies away (by its Levity) and the Water
follows to avoid a Vacuity; he would hardly be assented to by those, who see a
visible Weight or Force at A, to over-press it, and thrust it out.

And, for the same Reason, if the Nose or Pipe, before it comes to the height
of E, be recurvate, ( Fig. 30, 31.) and turned down to O; that which would have
run over at B; will now run out at O; being thrust up to B, by the Weight of A,
and falling down from thence, by its own Weight.

But in case A be lower than B, Fig. 32. (and the Fluid uniformly Heavy;) A
will not be able to drive it up to B, much less make it there run over, or turn
about to O: But, contrary-wise, if it were full to B, this would praeponderate,
and raise that at A.

Yet, if AC were a heavier Fluid, suppose Quicksilver; and CB a lighter, as
Wine or Water; the Effect would follow as before; till the greater Height of
CB, do countervail the greater Heaviness of AC.

And, contrary-wise, if AC be specifically lighter than CB, (Fig. 33.) suppose
that Water, and this Quicksilver; then must that be in such proportion Higher
than this, or else it will not rise to B, nor run out at O. But, if AC be
higher than in such proportion; the Effect will follow, from the
Praegravitation of A, without having recourse to a Fuga vacui.

And thus far the Ancients would agree with us. For they never fly to a Fuga
vacui, so long as there is visible Weight or Force to Thrust up the Fluid.

BUt that which gave occasion to introduce this Notion of Fuga vacui, were but
these Two Experiments, (and such as are reducible thereunto;) wherein, for want
of a Force to raise Liquids by way of Trusion, they had recourse to this of
Traction, ne detur vacuum.

The first that of Suction, in Pumps, Syringes, and other the like occasions.
The other is that of a Siphon, whereby Liquors are carried over considerable
heights above their Level.

For if the nose of a Syringe be immersed in Water, as at B, (Fig. 34.) and the
handle or Embolus be drawn back; the Water or other Fluid will follow it, from
B into D: Which being contrary to the nature of a Heavy Body, and no other
Force appearing to thrust it up; it was imagined, that Nature abhorred a
Vacuum, and this made the Liquor rise contrary to its particular Propension. To
which Fuga vacui (as it was wont to be called,) Linus of late (and some others
after him) have given the name Funiculus. And the like is to be said of all
sorts of Pumps, and other the like Engines, which draw Water by way of Suction.

And as to the Siphon; If the End C be immersed in Water, or other Liquor, (
Fig. 35.) though B, the top of the Siphon, be much higher than A, the surface
of the Liquor; yet, if O be lower than A, though it will not of it self begin
to run; yet, if by Suction or otherwise, it be set a running, this Current will
continue, till either A be sunk so low as to let in Air at C, or be lower than
the outward Orifice O. The reason whereof, say they, (since there appears not
any Force to thrust it up,) must needs be this; BO flowing out by its own
Weight, if CB did not follow it (contrary to the Propension of its own
Gravity,) a Vacuum must needs ensue; which therefore, they suppose, Nature does
abhor.

For Answer, I say, First, There being no other Foundation in Nature to prove
this Abhorrence, but only these Experiments; and this not otherwise known, but
being only invented as an Expedient to serve a turn: If we can otherwise solve
the Phenomenon, and show a Force which they did not think of; there will be no
need of this Expedient at all. And this Abhorrence must be either gratis
dictum, without any cogent proof; or some other evidence must be showed for it,
than those who did introduce it were aware of. For all the subsidiary proofs of
late invented, were not the grounds of introducing the opinion. And therefore,
without disputing, whether Nature can or cannot admit a Vacuum; I shall only
show, That there is no need of that Notion as to this business.

Next; That this Fuga vacui is not the cause of Water thus rising in a Pump or
Siphon, I thus argue. For, if so, it ought to hold to any height whatever. A
Pump (for Instance) must draw Water an hundred foot high; and a Siphon convey
Water over the highest Hills or Towers. For, the Argument equally holds,
whether the height of B, be two Foot, or two hundred Foot; if BO flow out, and
CB not follow, a Vacuum must ensue equally in either case.

And the Consequence of this Argument is so clear, that, in confidence thereof,
the Ancients did not doubt but that it would be so. None (that we know of,)
till Galilaeo's time, having ever questioned it; or assigned any determinate
height beyond which a Pump would not draw water, or over which a Siphon would
not convey it. And it was a surprising discovery, and wholly unexpected, when
(about the end of the last Century) it was first found out by experience, that
Water could not thus be drawn higher than about 34 Foot. I say, about 34 Foot
(not just so much) because that alters with the temperature of the Air. When
the Air is very light, it will not much exceed 32 Foot; when very heavy, it may
reach 35 Foot.

Which Experiment alone did evidently evince, that the supposed Fuga vacui, was
not of an Infinite, but of a Determinate, strength. Which put Galilaeo upon the
inquiry, Whether it were not from some other cause than Fuga vacui, that it
would be drawn so high, but not higher. And he happily lighted on this
Hypothesis, of the Counter-gravitation of the incumbent Air.

The same has been since improved by Torricellio (and others after him,) who
rationally argued, that if such Counter-gravitation of the Air, would
countervail the Weight of 34 Foot of Water; it ought in lighter Liquors
countervail a greater height; and a less height in Heavier. And found, upon
Experiment, that so it was: (If some little difference chance to be sometime
discovered; it is to be accounted for, from some different constitution of the
Air about us, or other little accidents, too many to be here recounted:) And
particularly, that, as Water would be so raised about 34 Foot; so Quicksilver,
to the height of about 29 inches and no more: (I mean 28, 29, or 30, as the
Airs temperature does vary.) Which agrees with the proportion of the specific
weight of those Liquids. (Quicksilver being near upon 14 times as heavy as
Water.) And, from him, the Torricellian Experiment takes its name.

The Experiment is thus administered, (in Fig. 36.) A Glass-Pipe closed at the
bottom, being filled with Quicksilver, and then inverted; the orifice being
stopped (with the finger or otherwise) till it be immersed in a Vessel of
stagnant Quicksilver, and then opened; If the height of the Pipe (above the
stagnant Quicksilver) be not more than 29 inches, or thereabouts, it will
remain full.

The cause hereof, say they, is, Ne detur Vacuum: For if the Quicksilver
should sink, there being no way for the Air to enter, there would ensue a
Vacuum, which nature abhors.

The cause, say we, is, Because the weight of the incumbent Air on A, (which we
have already proved to be Heavy,) is equivalent to the weight of 29 inches of
Quicksilver: Which therefore, being defended by the closed Glass (which we
suppose otherwise to be held firm,) from any other Pressure than its own
Weight, is by that Counter-pressure sustained.

But further: If the height of the Pipe above the stagnant Quicksilver be more
than about 29 inches; that in the Pipe will sink to that height, as at E,
leaving space above it in the Glass, void of Quicksilver: (But, whether filled
by any other imperceptible Fluid, we dispute not.)

The Reason why it so sinks, our Ancestors have not assigned; Because they were
not at all aware of this Phenomenon; but thought, that ( ne detur vacuum) it
would remain full, whatever the height of the Tube were.

Some Moderns (with Des Carts) that they might avoid a Vacuum, do imagine,
that a Materia subtilis (of which no Sense can make any dicovery) piercing the
Pores of the Glass, supplies that place. But, if it will so supply the place
above E, and give the Quicksilver leave to sink so low; why it might not as
well come-in to relieve the rest, and so give it leave to sink to A, I do not
find.

Others (with Linus) imagine, that the weight of 29 inches of Quicksilver does
stretch some part of its upper surface into a subtle matter, very thin, yet so
as to fill that seemingly void space; but, because a less weight will not serve
so to stretch it, it falls no lower; which stretched matter, like a Funiculus,
holds up the rest, ne detur vacuum. But, why this Weight should stretch some
very small part of it, so prodigiously thin, and not stretch the rest at all,
rather than give some moderate Tensure to the whole; they do not (that I
remember) assign any Reason.

Others, suppose this Funiculus to be made, not by stretching the upper part of
the Quicksilver; but by squeezing out the more subtle parts from the whole
body of it, which like a vapor fills that seemingly void space; but that less
than such a weight would not so squeeze it, and therefore it falls no lower.
But, why it should so fall out, that all Liquors whatever, of never so
different Texture, should by the same weight be thus dissolvable; and not
rather some require a greater, some a lesser weight thus to resolve or squeeze
them; they assign no Reason: Yet we find so it is, since that the lighter the
Liquor is, the greater height must be allowed, and in such proportion greater,
to make up an equivalent weight.

But the cause is, say we, (and it seems the most simple and unforced account,)
because the Counter-pressure of the Air, being equivalent to that of about 29
inches, so much it is able to sustain but no more; and just so much weight it
will sustain whatever the Liquor be, whether specifically Lighter or Heavier,
and whether of a more Firm or a Looser texture; and therefore to such a height
it sinks, but no lower.

And had the Ancients been aware of what we find; That the Air has a positive
Gravity; and, consequently, though it be but small in proportion to that of
other bodies, yet a great height of Air may countervail a lesser height of a
Heavier Liquor; (like as we see that a greater height of Water will countervail
a lesser height of Quicksilver:) They would not, I presume, have troubled
themselves with a Fuga vacui; but said roundly, That the weight of the Air at
its full height, is equivalent to that of Water at the height of about 34 foot,
and of Quicksilver, at about, 29 inches, and proportionably of other Fluids.
And consequently, when (in the Pump or Syringe) D by the Embolus or Sucker is
defended from the Airs Pressure, but A exposed to it (in Fig. 34.) this
Pressure on A, will raise, over B, so much weight of Water, Quicksilver, or
other Fluid, as is equivalent to that Pressure. In the same manner as (if A and
E were equally exposed to the Airs Pressure) a quantity of Oil, poured on A,
would have raised a weight of Water or Quicksilver equivalent thereunto.

The like account we give of the Siphon. The Pressure on A, (in Fig. 35.) will
raise the Fluid to the height of B, if not greater than what is before
described; and from thence to O, it falls by its own Weight: Yet so, that if O
were higher than A, the Airs Pressure at O, would thrust up O to B (supposing
the Pipe not so big, as that the Air could conveniently pass by the Liquor into
the Pipe,) and it would fall down to A by its own Weight. For now BO would less
gravitate than BA; while yet the Airs Pressure would be much the same on both.

There is yet a considerable Objection to be removed, viz. That Air in a closed
Vessel, though of no great height, pressing on A the surface of the stagnant
Quicksilver, ( Fig. 37.) will sustain as high a Pillar thereof in a closed
Tube, suppose AE, as if A were exposed to the open Air: Whereas yet the Weight
of AD within the Vessel, (defended by the Vessel from the Pressure of the
incumbent Air,) cannot be of equal Weight as if it had the whole height of the
Atmosphere.

But the Reason of this is, from the Airs Spring; which is always equivalent to
the Pressure lying upon it: And consequently, the Spring of the Air in its
ordinary constitution with us, must be equivalent to the Weight of the
incumbent Air. (For, if it were less, the Air incumbent would yet press it
closer; if it were more, the Spring would relax it self, by thrusting away what
presses it.) Which being so; the Air included with such a Spring, must
therefore press with as great a strength as is equivalent to such a Weight.
Like as, in other Springs, if ACB (in Fig. 38.) be pressed by the Weight D to
such a Tensure as to bear it; and then, this Spring so remaining, the Weight
were taken away, and our hand put in the place of it; it would press as hard
against the hand, as before it did to sustain the Weight; that is, with a Force
equal to that of the Weight it sustained: And if, thus bowed, it were put in a
Vessel, (in Fig. 39.) it would, with just the same Force, press against the
sides of it. And just so it is in the present Case; where the air so included
does press by its Spring, just with the same Force as was that of the incumbent
Air which gave it this Tensure.

It is yet the more evident, because if (by the Air-Pump) part of this Air be
pumped out, and thereby the rest less compressed; the Quicksilver in the Tube,
(in Fig. 37.) will sink from E to a lower Station, as to F or G; and so lower
and lower, as more and more Air is pumped out, and the Spring thereby relaxed:
That is, as the Spring grows weaker, so it is less able to support the Weight.

And this quite destroys the Evasions but now mentioned; That the seeming void
space is filled by a thin Substance, which can by the Weight of 29 inches of
Quicksilver, or 34 foot of Water, but not by less, be stretched to that
fineness; and that therefore it will sink to that height, but not lower.

For, by this last Experiment, when the Air is included with its ordinary
Tensure, it sustains the Quicksilver at the height of 29 inches; as if less
than that Weight were too little to stretch the Quicksilver into that supposed
fine substance: But, when that Air, by pumping, is weakened; it will sink to 20,
10, 5, yea less than 1 inch of height; as if now less than the Weight of 1 inch
were enough so to stretch it, as less than 29 inches would not do before. Yet
is no alteration, all this while, made in the Texture of the Quicksilver; but
in the Tensure of the Air only. It Is therefore from this different Tensure or
Spring of the Air, not from any difference in the Quicksilver, that it stands
sometime at a higher, sometime at a lower station.

And what has been thus said of this Torricellian Experiment, is easily
applicable to others of like nature. And it is confessed, that, as the notion
of Fuga vacui, or that of the Airs pressure, does stand or fall as to this
Experiment; so must it do as to the others also. I content my self therefore,
to have showed it in this; without expatiating to other particulars.

FINIS.

