PHYSIC FOR FAMILIES, DISCOVERING A safe Way, and ready Means, WHEREBY Every
one at Sea or Land, may with Gods assistance be in a capacity of Curing
themselves, or their Relations, in all Distempers or Extremities; WITHOUT Any
the Hazards, Troubles, or Dangers, over usual, in all other ways of Cure.

Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, but if thou
scornest, thou alone shall bear it.

London, Printed by J, Winter, And are to be sold by Robert Horn in Gresham
College Court, 1669.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
TO love our Neighbor as our selves, though it be very good, yet since it
signifies to make them as happy as our selves: Our judgments had need be right,
both as to our own, and their good: Or we may soon render them very miserable,
when we least intend it, by persuading them into the same path of ruin which
(through mistake) our selves would have taken for our preservation.

And therefore, that every well-willer may be truly qualified to be a friend,
nothing is more needful then to get Wisdom, and understanding in all the main
occasions of this life, that so as our affections make us apt and ready to
advise, our well digested Reason and Conscience may render our Counsel always
good, and profitable to those we give it.

And truly if in any thing these are useful Cogitations, they must needs be so
in those of Physic; wherein as there are vast differences, and smallest
Errors, often mortal, so unless those who in times of sickness are forward to
persuade, are not also in good measure able to distinguish what is safe and
powerful, from what is hazardous, painful, and dangerous both as to Methods, and
Medicines, their friendship would much better be snewed in silence, than in
speaking, or advising.

Which, yet, being but cold comfort; And that to get knowledge is every ones
duty, that they may be helpful in time of need. None should either stand averse
from endeavoring, or be discouraged in their hopes of obtaining so much skill
at least: As in an instant, to make a safe and rational choice where the
difference is so manifest; as in your serious reading of this Discourse will
plainly appear, even in this (hitherto) much obscured Science of Physic.

The Scripture says, a merry heart does good like a Medicine: And if so, in
true consequence, ought not the Operations and Effects of kindly and real
Medicines, to resemble those of a merry heart? certainly it can be no absur
dity to expect it.

Now, who knows not that a merry heart joined with virtue and prudence (for
such only the holy Scriptures can intend) performs all its good, by
insensibly dispersing a most lively and benign influence throughout the body,
to the joy, contentment, and felicity of the whole man, without any the least
disturbance, pain, or danger whatsoever?

And if Medicines are, or can be found, through whose friendly and powerful
operations, all sadness, and sickness, may without pain or trouble be totally
Expelled and Exstinguished, why should they not be known, sought after, and
cheerfully embraced?

But that there are such in being, having throwly perused this Discourse, you
will be well assured; and that they are securely to be trusted to for cure in
all cases. The manifold Instances of their real performances, will ascertain
past all scruple. And which thoroughly read, and noted in all particulars, will
soon enable you to cure your selves, or friends, and to find what is most proper
in those, or any other Distempers; and by their Marks you will really
distinguish them from such as are improper, hazardous or dangerous.

Their particular Titles, Virtues, and Uses, where to have them, and h^w to
order them, as necessity, or occasion requires, you will also clearly
understand.

And though men for the most part seldom value any thing, though never so
useful and precious, until they immediately need them. Yet experience will
tell you, it is neither safe nor prudent at such times to be to learn: But
rather to be aforchand with all necessary knowledge; To give due and just
regard to every thing according to its worth: And so to stand like wise and
wary persons, always provided and prepared in every Exigence and Difficulty of
Sickness or Distemper: To take the surest course, and to give the soundest and
most assured advice to Neighbors, Friends, and Relations in all their
extremities. It being in this as in all other parts of Wisd^m, abundantly more
happy, to be able to give, than to stand in need of Counsel.

And then, being rightly informed, if (as your judgments shall determine most
proper) you shall furnish your selves for your Families, your Journeys,
Veyages, or other occasions, with Gods blessi^^ you may set your hearts at
rest, as being better ena^led to administer safe and effectual relief, to your
selves, or Relations, then any other ways you could either hope or imagine.

An accommodation and happiness of no mean degree, not known to Foreign
Nations. And indeed, more worth than Jewels and richest Mines: for such in
truth and reality is speedy Restoration from tedious sickness to inestimable
health; without trouble, pain, or danger; the sole effect of these pure and
powerful Medicines: And could not but be generally so esteemed, did not
Collumbus still want a gown in England.

W. W. Healths Student.
Despicit? Nescit. At the Star in the Postern by little Morefields, Land.
PHYSIC FOR Families, etc.
THough the Example of the good Samaritan, in pouring Wine and Oil, into the
Wounds of the half-dead Traveller, should not expressly warrant a sole reliance
upon those Excellent Materials in all like cases, being not so determined by
Divine Authority; yet being both of them blessings of high account, Where their
Wine and their Oil increases, bringing gladness to man's Heart, and
Cheerfulness to his Countenance, of so safe, and so familiar a Nature, as to be
both substantially nourishing, and most delightful Diet. It cannot but imply
and persuade, that whatsoever is administered in times of sickness, or
extremity, should not only be highly virtuous, respecting the Distemper, but
also of so benign, pure, and truly Humane Temperature, that they may be taken
with as much security and delight, as the most wholesome and pleasant Diet: And
which if admitted into Diet, may be as advantageous to the conservation of
Healh and life, as in the most venomous Distempers they are unto recovery:
inducing also a belief, that until Medicine be so ordered, (let who will be the
confident prescribers) Physic; the great sustainer of mankind, is not in its
true exalted state, but in a sordid, low, and perplexed condition unfit for
Humane Constitutions, and not to be trusted in times of sickness and extremity.

And from such Contemplations as these, it has been that I have deemed nothing
proper to be given in sickness to any person, old or young, but what may be
safely, and profitably taken by those in health.

And if from hence, and out of my tender regard to the distressed and dismal
times of sickness, I have endeavored all I could, and bent all my Studies for
the obtaining of such kindly, and Powerful Medicines, as thereby safely to
avoid, and wholly to abandon all those troublesome, painful, hazardous, and
dangerous operations, and Ingredients too to usual in practice; (It being too
sad a time to add affliction to affliction) as I have much comfort therein; so
I conceive my charitable intentions, sufficiently justified by the Text: The
truly Christian Virtue eof Compassion, being as essentially needful in a
Physician, as in the most tender hearted Samaritan: and without an eminent
proportion whereof (what ever other parts or Arts abound) none ought, in
justice, to be owned as a competeut Helper, in times of such necessity.

Nor did I decline the common Road of Physic, for any other cause Imaginable,
but for its manifest uncertainty in Principles, Roughness, Harshness, and
Cruelty in Methods; Impropriety, Impotency, and danger in Medicines. Nor found
out any way to relieve my understanding, when first at so great a loss, but by
withdrawing my thoughts from out the wilderness of all the uncertain Notions
and Guesses of Philosophy, and giving them free liberty in the walks of
Scripture; Where the true Original of man, the sole subject of Physic (hid
from Philosophy) being apparent, and the sublimity of the true Humane
Temperature thence deducible; I soon discerned that all miscarriages in
Physic, proceeded from the admission of gross, virulent, and dangerous
materials into practice, together with other Rugged and Boisterous handling;
And for want of assimulating, all Helps, and Helpers in times of sickness, more
agreeable to the distinct purity of man's Nature.

Upon which, noting with great circumspection, every the least Glance, or
Luster, of this my surest Guider, the Scriptures, insinuating any spark of
instruction toward the appropriation and power of Medicines,. It was not long
before I apprehended a possibility of obtaining all Effects attainable in
Physic, solely by kindly and pleasant means, void of all noxious operations,
or mischievous Materials.

In persuance whereof, I concieve it very conducible to my end, to confine
every of my Medicines to such qualifications (of what specific intention
soever) as (being such) should necessarily answer all my aims and expectations;
and which since, proving in their performance accordingly, I have deemed it a
considerable advantage to the Science of Physic, to propose those their
peculiar qualities, as sure Marks of Real Medicines, whereby to distinguish
those which are fit and proper for Humane Constitutions, and Rational, to be
relied on in all cases, from those which are not, as by the sequel of this
Discourse will more fully appear.

An undertaking in the whole, of so strange a Difficulty, that I have many
times since wondered I was not astonished, and utterly disheartened at the first
conception.

Nevertheless, assisted as I have said, and (as I verily believe) with very
Effective Propensions in Nature, and with a Palate suitably exercised in the
Discerning of the Spirits, and bent to the Discovery of the Virtues of
materials, whereby all Compounds, as well as Simples, lay open to my
assistance, with a mind thus furnished, and prepared, resolving neither to
flatter, nor indulge my self in trifling insignificant Seize, nor to be
startled in so Worthy and Needful an Attempt, by any Difficulties; with due
Submissions, I proposed my End, made choice of Materials, wrought them into the
consistence and Qualities of real Medicines, satisfied my Palate in their taste,
proved them upon my self; and as cause required, either altered, or immediately
fixed them for general Use and Practice.

In which way of proceeding, in process of time, I became so happy, as to
satisfy my reason, in the Production of so large a variety of kindly and
powerful Medicines, so Equally proportioned to men's Natures, and so peculiarly
qualified for particular Distempers, as sufficed for all Occasions and
Necessities: And which ever since they had a being, have with that constancy
wrought so many remarkable Cures; that I now deem my self bound in duty to
propose them as the most proper Physic for Families, according to the Titles,
judging I should highly offend, if I should fail of my uttermost endeavor to
beget a right and through understanding of their performances.

And this, not only because of the manifest good they bring with them, in
theiruse (with safety) but also for that absolute exemption from all those
troublesome, painful, hazardous, and dangerous proceedings, with which the
general course of practice is sadly and grievously encumbred.

A brief view of the particulars whereof, may here be needful, that every one
may see and lay to heart, how much more dreadful, painful, and Dangerous the
afflicted times of sickness are thereby rendered, and what an unspeakable
happiness it would be both to all Conscionable, Compassionate Physicians, and
all considerate Patients to have such Medicines always in readiness, by which
all those Evils and Inconveniences may Safely, and securely be avoided.

The first of which molesters of the sick, in the usual course of practice, are
commonly Glisters; which how innocent and harmless soever they are esteemed,
are nevertheless attended with more Trouble and Danger then is considered: For
besides their pressing over hard upon the modesty of the more bashful natures,
and so Disturbing their minds, by the odd position and Distastful handling of
the body; they also expose very much to the taking, or increasing of Colds, and
exceedingly disorder, when Quietness and Sleep are most desirable. But how they
amaze with fears, when they one after another work not at all, as often befalls
to extreme prejudice, and how dreadfully they affright when they work too much,
as sometimes they do, in my apprehentsion deserves very much consideration;
Especially since in their mildest working, the state of the body and Distemper
may be such, as they may prove no less then mortal, by diverting and
withdrawing the Spirits from their more needful combating the venomous Cause of
the Disease, to this needless operation, and consequently leaving Nature
destitute in her greatest extremity.

Nor is the very manual part, how slight so ever the most make of it,
altogether free from the most feared effect. It having been known where a small
error in the Hand administering, has occasioned an incurable Ulcer; And
therefore all circumstances duly weighed, it must be deemed a very great
advantage to understand the use of such Medicines, as bring an absolute freedom
from all those Troubles, Hazards, and Mortal Inconveniences.

After Glisters, the next afflicter of the sick, is generally Bleeding, a
practice not so frequent in former, as in latter times, and both highly
commended, and every whit as much condemned by persons equally Learned; So that
in this, their Trumpet gives an uncertain sound, And some who are famous upon
Record, Esteemed it the more proper work of worthy Physicians to rectify
rather then draw and wast it in times of sickness, when Nature most needs its
assistance, of which cautious judgment also seem the Chinese and the Bannian
Physicians, but later times and Operators are at that pass, as if they made
little more of it then drawing of their breaths, and so they term it but
breathing of a Vein, though with their favor it be not so easily recruited,
and besides that many times the bleeders breath their last by it, or by
occasion thereof.

And truly, though those who usually order it, seldom make the observation; yet
for the most part, the persons concerned, and their Relations cast but Dismal
looks upon it, and address themselves thereunto, with much Dismay and Trembling
(oftentimes swouning away under the Bleeders hands,) as a thing of much
uncertainty and over much danger, the Event frequently so proving, not any one
proceeding in Physic, being more complained of, nor any whereunto the failing
of patients is more imputed; and that with justice too, for what worse can
befall afflicted Patients, overborn, and oppressed with the violent assaults of
some Venomous Distempers; then to have their main forces, their Spirits drawn
off from making those needful Defenses whereunto by Nature they are assigned,
and upon which it most depends for her preservation?

And what wonder is it, if soon after a little flattery and shadows of relief,
fuddain Dejections immediately follow thereupon, and sickness upon Nature thus
betrayed, prevail beyond all possibility of recovery, as (were Record^ kept
thereof) would be sadly seen in every weeks experience.

And as it is but small relief to show how many recover after bleeding; The
Course in it self being so hazardous, and of ten Mortal: so as little comfort
it is to show the ill, or rather odd Colors of the cooled and congealed Blood,
which is known to be but fallacious trifling, to amuse bewailing and
Disconsolate people, neither goodness, nor badness being at all ascertained
thereby.

And be it how it will, is generally the best friend the body has, and
consequently never to be separated; nor indeed is ever needful where such
Medicines are in readiness, as are Effectually qualified for Extinguishing of
the Venomous Causes of Diseases: And for Purifying and Rectifying both of the
Blood and Spirits, wherein chiefly consists the Worth or Ability of
Physicians, and the Reality and Excellency of Medicines.

And without which, upon every Exigence there is such Hurrying, Starting, and
Puthering, one while with a Glister, then with Bleeding, sometimes the Arm, the
Tongue, or other parts, and these suddenly again repeated, to the Extreme
affrightment of the afflicted Patient, and all his sad Relations; and all this
upon mere Casual, uncertain Grounds, as to what the issue may be, or whether
conducing to Life or Death: A hazard of a strange nature for Patients to
adventure the parting with, and loss both of their Blood and Spirits, upon
which Death so often follows, when the Physician runs none at all, Secundum
Artem, excusing even to the utmost scruple of Reputation, if not of Conscience,
which possibly may yet often suggest that they ought to have been provided, and
to have plied those (who so highly trusted them) with such really powerful and
benign Medicines, as they cannot but have heard and been assured to have
discharged the most, Violent, Venomous Distempers without this unmerciful
Experiment of bleeding; which also in the very action, through a small
miscarriage of the hand pricking a Nerve, has lost the use of an Arm or Hand,
and sometimes through an ensuing Gangrene proved utterly Destructive.

Why therefore, all these Particulars considered, this Bleeding, or bloody
practice should longer continue in repute, especially since so (...) Instances,
are so generally discoursed, viz. That after the many times bleeding of some
persons, the last fits of their Distempers immediately before death, were
(without any mitigation by all that wast of Blood) as vehement and Rigorous, as
in any time of their sickness, which instances in reason ought to remind every
conscionable Physician, and every prudent Patient of this important Truth, that
it is not this uncertain and uncomfortable course of bleeding; But the reality
of kindly and powerful Medicines, that (under God) is most hopefully to be
relied on for cure in all Extremities.

After bleeding, in the usual course soon follows Purging, but very ill
deserving, that plausible Title. Most of that mass of filthy matter,, which it
carries out of the body, being made by its own venomous qualities, and so in
former times was deemed more an Enemy, then a Friend in all its loosening
Operations, as working merely by violence, and disturbance of Nature, and that
also much alike upon the healthful, as upon the sick, and so could not be said
to work upon the Disease directly, but at random upon the body, and most often
to its prejudice.

Advising accordingly, that for discharging of Crudities (the causers of many
Diseases) recourse should be had to moderate Exercise and Recreation, rather
then to Purgative Medicines. And that because not only of their painfulness,
their efficacy being contrary to Nature, and for the most part venomous, but
also for that they are apt to root their poisonous qualities in the Body, and
withal, divert and draw away from the Members those kindly Juices which the
powers of nature require for their nourishment and subsistence; Yea and the
vital sp^^its also which maintain and comfort life.

Thus has this loosening way of Physic been frequently condemned; But if this
be not thought sufficient to extinguish its unhappy use, let but every one
concerned refer to their own observation, and without partiality note, with
what uncertainty these looseners perform their Office: As sometimes when but
three or four stools are only expected, it gives eight, ten, nay twenty, and
those frequently, with so much lothing to the taste, offensive nastiness to the
Nostril, and to the Brain of patients and all about them, as also with such
extremity of pains and gripings as are most intolerable, othertimes give never
so many Potions, Pills, Powders. Electuaries of these loosening qualities, yet
shall they not work at all to the terror both of Physician and Patient, yet
otherwhiles run out into such loosnesses as are never stayed, but with the
death of the taker.

And when working most kindly, and never so much ugly odd colored stuff
carried out, yet the Disease frequently not one jot abated, though the patient
be thereby extremely weakened, scarce able to stand: The body also drained, and
robbed of almost all its Radical moisture, much more apt to obstinate
obstructions, and so necessarily calls for more of such like miserable helpers,
which by frequent use perverts the best constitutions, sow the seed of new
Diseases, and confounds the whole course of nature.

And yet that this should be continued in perpetual practice, upon so very many
and great disadvantages, perplexities and dangers merely upon uncertainty, and
be justified by the practisers, be the event never so sad and Dismal, this
indeed is very mysterious, and too too like the mystery of

For who now adays remains in so much ignorance as not to know that Disease is
a more lively, active thing, then to reside amongst such muddy matter, as these
Purgers can possibly reach, being indeed of a more sprightly and and subtle
Nature, then to be discovered by the Eye, Hand, or Knife of the most skilful
Anatomists, and only liable to the disquisition of Reason, and an ingenious,
intimate conception; And so, not to be attempted by such blusterers, but by
Medicines issuing from the same Fountain, such as by their efficacious
friendilness to Nature, with quietness and safety, Extinguish venoms, and
enable her in all her faculties toward the clear discharge of all distempers;
And such being to be had, as in the sequel hereof will evidently appear, one
would think there were no need to persuade either Physicians or patients to
make an exchange where the differences of operation, and hopefulness of the
Event, are so plainly manifest.

Now, if Purging (as they call it) be thus justly chargable with so many evils
and mischiefs, what can be said in behalf of Vomiting the most Rugged,
Churlish, and cruel of Physic, tearing and rending, and torturing, both
Stomach, Bowels, Heart, Brain, Lungs, and Throat in so hidious a manner, as
hardly any corporal punishment can be imagined to exceed it in pain and misery.

And yet though often reiterated, as it often befalls in many Distempers to
intolerable torment, is never the less so uncertain in its Effects, as that no
relief with any certainty can be promised thereby, but fills distressed
patients one while with fears when it works not, and when it works, with
greater fears of working too much: There being sad Examples of both, viz. where
they have stayed in the body without any (expected) operation, and so destroyed
the patient: And also where the working has been so violent, and so continual,
as has never ceased, but with the Expiration of the sick.

And where these Extremes have not been, yet the failing of both men, women,
and children is so frequently ascribed to Vomits, that its wonderful they are
not Excluded quite out of use.

Besides, where Minerals are the main Agents in this unhappy work, it is
incredible how mischievous their present tortures, and after worse than mortal
inconveniences have proved, conveying and entailing most Horrid pains and
distempers from Generation to Generation, to all Posterity without hope of
remedy; which though in process of time are judged to proceed either from the
Scurvy, or foul Disease, and to end in Consumptions, or Kings Evil, yet driving
the inquiry back to its Root, generally it has been found, that the Original
Cause has much more justly belonged to unwholesome Purgers or Vomiters taken in
way of Physic.

And when with their violence they have thrown up never so great a quantity of
ugly ^opy or filthy stuff, which is often showed to Patients, and friends, as
if now the Disease must needs be wrought upon, and near its Extirpation, it
truly proves no more but the Venomous Nature of the Medicine; the Disease for
the most part rather advancing than retreating, and receiving rather an
addition of strength, then any mi^tgation from such mischievous helpers.

Seeing thus it generally is with Vomits; though sometimes they may perform
what may be taken for a good Office, yet since they do it not through any
benignity in them, but by disturbance, and the consequence being certainly
dangerous, why should so troublesome a mischief-working-operation be longer
retaind in practice, or be imposed as necessary upon distressed patients in
time of sickness? and not rather gladly remitted for such truly virtuous
Medicines, as through their powerful friendliness to Humane Nature, being taken
into the body, perform with ease and safety, only, what the present necessity
of the body requires: so as if the Disease be such as requires the emptying
of the Stomach, throws up, or carries downwards so much and no more but what
is requisite for promoting the most speedy recovery, without any possibility of
any after inconvenience, as has been the constant prevalence of those real
Medicines herein proposed; And in Reason may well deserve the serious thoughts
of all ingenious persons, before they are further engaged in ways so uncertain
and dangerous, though of never so long continuance.

The next prescription in Physic, is commonly Sweating, which is attempted,
either with the vulgar Waters, Electuaries, or Powders, or else with Mineral
Preparations, and had it not been for the known uncertainty and deficiency of
the former, there had been no recourse to the latter, which instead of proving
a sure Refuge in time of need, has generally treated the distressed with like
adulation, as hers who cut the locks, or struck a nail into the Temple,
frequently outsweating all the powers of Nature, or running madly out into
salivation, or perpetual spetting, which are the ordinary Extravagant Effects
of Quicksilver and Antimony, though under the most boasted Preparations, and
whereof there are so many sad stories, as needs a Vail to cover their
mischievous treacheries, and are more then enough, if but a little hearkened
after, to induce all rational persons, for ever to renounce both the giving and
taking of them into their bodies upon any occasion whatsoever.

Yet if there be any, who nevertheless will retain a confidence of the safety
of their preparations, see them take them themselves before you take them, and
then you have some assurance for your great adventure.

But for me who deem it irrational, that any thing should be given to the sick
which is not safe, and good for the healthful, and who am undoubtedly assured;
that there are Medicines as securely to be used in all Cases as Milk to
Children, which yet in the most desperate Cases, are full as speedy and as
certainly prevalent, as ever was pretended from those so extremely hazardous
and dangerous Minerals, and that too, with very little or no sweating at all,
but ever without Exhausting the spirits, drying or binding of the body, or any
other after inconveniences, having always in readiness plenty of such as
these, and approved for such by continual performances, I hope I may pass
without blame, though I retain my judgment, and press thus earnestly for an
exchange, where the advantage to every one is so manifestly weighty and
material.

The nexr sore troubler of the sick, are Vescicatories, or Raisers of small and
great Blisters, by irksome fretting, if not venomous Plasters, sometimes
flaying off all the skin from the backs, otherwhiles the shoulders, legs, or
wrists, the neck, head, etc. to extreme torments, especially when those raw
places are rubbed and irritated, for diversion of venomous inflammations,
hidious Curses and Excrations having been noted the impatient Effects of such
cruelties; of which Nature also are the use of Cupping Glasses, drawing of Silk
through the Neck-skin, Leeches; and Issues, all full of pain, hazard, and
danger; And as the Event proves them, frequently fruitless, as to the removal
of any Distemper, so are they wholly needless, where real Medicines are in
being, and must henceforth be accounted the more intolerable, since it is
known so many notable Cures have been performed without any such tedious
assistants, solely by such Medicines.

Then for cutting off the Hair, Capping and Plaistering the Head, they are all
but troublesome Operations to the sick, very seldom proving successful, either
in Consumptions, or for removal of inveterate pains, for which ends they are
most used, and with more advantage might be spared in liew of safe and powerful
Medicines.

And so also were it happy if Patients in like manner were rid of Opium, let
what will be said of its several Rectifications, for whether it be used in the
Ladanum, or otherwise; the Event is oftentimes so suddenly, and so
unexpectedly, and so unavoidably dangerous, that the knowledge of its aptness to
miscarry, as it has done with diverse, is more then enough to make every
Dispenser of it to tremble, during the whole time it is in the Patients body.
And therefore in reason should gladly be left and abandoned for ever, having
never since I have been furnished with the Medicines herein specified, though
in the most violent distempers, seen any occasion for the use of so critical
helpers, that instead of rest and sleep, like treacherous flatterers, stroke,
and stab, and give Death it self in the same instant, to the horror and
amazement both of Physicians and bewailing relations.

Which by truly good and real Medicines, might be safely avoided, such by their
efficacious prevalence against the venom of the Distemper in short time, not
failing to introduce an unenforced well proportioned sleep, not only void of
all possibility of danger, but without sickishness upon waking, afrer-dotages
weakness of the Nerves, or any dispiriting of the Animal Faculties, Palsies,
Vertigoes, Apoplexies, the frequent Issues of opumated Medicines.

And therefore though I am far from wishing so much evil to the Practisers with
Opium, that every of them should be obliged to take the same quantity which at
any time they prescribe: (which yet is one of the Rules I always bind my self
to in whatsoever I advise) yet I do heartily wish, that the whole Old Method of
Physic aforementioned in all the particulars of Glisters, Bleedings, Purgings,
Vomitings, Sweatings, by Minerals, Issues, Cuppings, Blisterings, etc. were all
so well and thoroughly opiated, stupefied, and laid asleep for ever, that they
might never more rise again in Reputation with Physicians, or ever more be
readmitted by distressed Patients.

But that both out of a most powerful ingenuity which most good Consciences are
full fraught withal; And out of a deep sense of the manifold mischiefs
incident to that way, would freely and fully forsake them all; and exchange
them for the use of such true, and real Helpers, as are known to perform the
utmost in all Cases that can be expected from Medicine; and that with so much
mildness and safety, as disturbs not, nor hazards the weakest in their
Operations.

And which, both by Physicians and ^^tients: And all persons, and Families, may
certainly be known to be such, and plainly to differ from all Medicines that
are not such: By these Marks following.

1. A truly benign Medicine, fit for the Sublime Humane Nature ought to be
liquid, transparently clear, pure and pleasant: (for reasons expressed in my
touchstone of Physic) so powerful, as to subdue the most violent Distempers,
and yet so mild, as the weakest women and children may partake thereof in any
case without hazard: And for assurance, the Prescriber is to take the same
quantity he gives upon any occasion.

2. All such kindly and real Medicines ought to be so qualified, that if taken
by Men, Women, or Children, in Health, shall no ways move their bodies, but
nourish and cherish them. But if by any in sickness, the same quantity from
their effectual friendliness to humane Nature in due time, shall either bind
or loosen, vomit, or stay vomiting; sweat, or restrain excessive sweating, give
rest in case of restlesness, or withold from immoderate sleep, as the instant
necessity of the body needs, or as conduces most to Recovery.

3. And lastly, They ought to be no perishable Commodities, which prove but
weak and defective helpers, but such as close stopped keep good for years in all
Climates without any Diminution of their virtues, never failing or decaying
upon their hands, who furnishes themselves therewith, either for Sea or Land,
or that rely and depend upon them for relief in any their occasions or
necessities.

These are the Marks which are sufficient for proof of the fitness or unfitness
of all Medicines whatsoever; and for detection of all such as may, and no doubt
will be counterfeiting of these, or at least some of them, as soon as they grow
into any Estimation, and are called for by the sick; Then who that practices
will be without some such spiritful preparation about them, that so it may be
thought they are not wanting in any thing for their recovery; and well it were
if it were so indeed: But being really such, they are then not to molest their
Patients, either with Purgings, Vomitings, Bleedings, Issues, Glisters,
Blisters, nor with any thing of Antimony, Quicksilver, or Opium, there being no
need of such hazardous and dangerous operations or operators, but are all
totally to be abandoned where there are Medicines of those absolute Marks and
Qualifications; so as if in the least they tamper one while with a Glister,
anotherwhile with a Purge or a Vomit, etc. though now and then they should give
a Dose, resembling such as these, it signifies just nothing, but that they
would seem to have as much as any, when at the same time, it is manifest they
themselves have no confidence therein, nor no dependence thereupon, but
according to their old Mode, are fain on all occasions to have recourse to
their old perplexed medlyes; therefore its good to be wary, and to note all
such Counterfeitters of Medicines, as but Counterfeit Practisers, more mindful
of their own reputations, then of the recovery of their Patients: the Marks are
few, easy to be minded, and to be applied wheresoever, or by whomsoever any
Medicines are presented and prescribed, and in reason should sway in every ones
Election or rejection accordingly.

Or however for my self, I shall never be ashamed to acknowledge, that it is to
these Marks solely that I have confined all my Medicines: And that for this
way; This untrodden Path in Physic, so acquired as I have expressed, I have
forsaken, and abandoned all the troublesome and dangerous courses, Materials,
Operations and Practices forementioned; and still see good cause to bless God
that ever I was Enabled to make so happy an Exchange, for the benefit of
mankind; at least to so many as the difference of those two ways, shall come
to be ingeniously and thoroughly considered. A difference so great, the one
bringing abundant troubles, pains, hazards and dangers, and attended with
weepings, woes and lamentations: the other with quiet, ease, safety,
hopefulness and cheerfulness: so that the profit of this Exchange in it self
rightly understood, cannot but appear inestimable and unexpressible, yet so
hardly (with many) are old ways left though never so painful and perplexed; Or
new ways embraced, though never so safe, easeful and free from all disturbance
(the aversness being generally whetted by some sinister interest) that without
perpetual insisting in a full discovery of the Advantages and disadvantages,
there would be no hope of Prevailing for such a condescension as in this
weighty Cause is agreeable to Truth and Reason.

But all things have their season; Evangelical Doctrine bringing nothing but
peace, though long opposed by the Legal, which brought nothing but terror to
the sin-sick Conscience, yet in time as truth prevailed, became clearly
victorious, both over the Law, and their Interest that would maintain it: And
so in time I doubt not, but it may also prove in this, as the difference once
comes to be rightly understood; for however Custom and Interest may have so
prevailed and enchained men's minds, as almost in every sickness, to reckon no
other, but that there is a necessity of undergoing all those painful, cruel,
dangerous, and mischievous practices and proceedings before recited; yet
certainly when they shall be serious in their thoughts, and plainly see that
there is another way in Physic Established upon more sure Foundations and
Principles, and another sort of Medicines arising from these Principles, which
cure with much more certainty, and yet wholly exempt from all terrors, pains,
and dangers, and that may by every one be known to be such by Evident Marks and
Characters, and by abundant Instances of Cures performed solely by such
Medicines, as in the touchstone of Physic plentifully appears: There will
then certainly be no place for opposition, nor need of farther Arguments to
persuade their cheerful Entertainment, nor to doubt a general adherence to
their assistance, by all Persons and Families.

For whose clear understanding, and more easy ordering of them to their own,
their Friends, and Relations, occasions in any Distempers or necessities.

I shall here acquaint them with their particular Titles, Virtues, and Uses,
with all requisite Circum stances as follows.
As 1. Refugium vitae.
Exceedingly behoveful and prevalent in all sudden frightful and confused
distempers, afflicting either the Head, the Breast, the Stomach, Bowels,
Mother, or any other part of the body, with, or without Vomiting, Looseness,
Gripings, to be given with confidence 2 or 3 spoonfuls, to Children, and from 6
to 12 spoonfuls to those of years, and at three hours may be repeated (or the
like quantity given again) and so as long as there is occasion, warm or cold,
at 8 s. the pint, in Colds, Surfets, Agues, Fevers, Convulsions; etc. is of
singular advantage.

2. Sanguis vitae.
In all Distempers of Stomach and Bowels, griping in the Guts, Surfets,
Vomitings, Agues, new Fevers; first signs or fears of the Pestilence, small
Pox, Measels, and in all such cases to be well heated; the Dose or quantity
from four spunfuls to 12. yea to six Ounces if need require, but for
conservation of health may be used cold familiarly, to a quarter or half pint
at a time, as every one pleases, the price is 2 s. the pint.

3. Adjutrix vitae.
For Appetite and Digesture; a pleasing Cordial for all times, the Dose from 2
to 6 or 8 Ounces; best between meals; is good also in any Spoon-meat, or drank
in Milk against Consumptions, the price is 2 s. the pint.

4. Vis vitae.
For Dropsy, Scurvy, Spleen, Wind, Gravel, Strangury, Stopage of Water, or of
the natural course, or in swellings from thence, or other sweatings; the Dose
from two to six Ounces, and at 4 hours may be repeated, and continued, till
occasion cease; Also may be familiarly taken for prevention of all such
Distempers, and for conservation of health and cheerfulness, at 3 s. the pint.

5. Succus vitae.
For Convulsions, Palsies, Falling Sickness, Motherfits, etc. the dose from two
to 4. and six ounces, and at 4 hours distance may be repeated (or taken in like
quantity again) and to be continued as long as occasion requires, at the pint
5 s. 4 d.

6. Lac vitae.
For Rickets, Worms, Green Sickness, Diseases of the Mother, and weakness, or
sikicshness of the stomach, the Dose is as the last, and to be repeated, and
continued as long as there is occasion, the price also is 5 s. 4 d. the pint.

7. Radix vitae.
In Coughs, shortness of breath, Vomiting, Looseness, Griping, pains in the Head
or Stomach, in Fevers also and Pestilence, or any occasion with, or without
Fevers, Agues, etc. The Dose from 2 to 6. Ounces, or larger quantities; and to
be repeated and continued as long as there is occasion, the pint is 6 s. note
that 3 small usual spoonfuls make an ounce.

8. Nutrix vitae.
For Consumptions, Defluxions, a great strengthner; also may be familiarly used
for preservation of health, strength, and cheerfulness, from 2 to 4, 6 or 8
ounces, the pint 8 s.

9. Salus vitae.
For all difficult Cases, Infectious, Feverish, Pestilential or Dangerous; in
Small Pox, Measels, Agues of all kinds, with Vomitings, Looseness, Gripings,
Virulent Scaldings, or Itchings over the body, sore Mouth, or Throat, violent
Coughings, Headache, or Toothach, with or without swellings; the Dose from 2 to
4, and 6 Ounces, and after 4 hours time to be repeated, and continued as there
is occasion, at 8 s. the pint.

10. Medulla vitae.
For Wastings, and all Weaknesses, especially in fears of miscarriage, of
singular efficacy against Consumptions, with, or without Oeavers; the Dose from
two to four and six ounces, but in Milk as warm as from the Cow, or in Oatmeal
and Milk; or any other Spoon-meat, as nothing is like pleasant, so also is
nothing a more powerful strengthner, or improver of Nature; two spoonfulls to a
mess suffiseth, at 12 s. per pint.

11. Deliciae vitae.
Against Sadness, Melancholy, a great reviver, and though the dose be from 2
to 4, and 6 ounces, yet half a spoonful held in the mouth a while, and after
swallowed generally, makes so great a cheerfulness in the most indisposed and
dejected as has been admired, and by perseverance, alters from a sad to a
cheerful constitution and conversation, the price is 20 s. the pint.

12. Stella vitae.
Very powerful in Swoonings, and all Extremities: As also for extinguishing
most virulent inflammations in any part of the body, arising from impure
venomous Causes, the Dose from 1 to 2, 4 and 6 ounces, as to the amazement of
some Arts-men; and observers has with safety, and wonderful success been even
daily taken by diverse; and so used, has been also very prevalent in pleuretick
shortness and suffocation of breath, in violent Vomitings, Looseness, Griping of
the Guts, stopping of the stomach, stoppage of Urine, and Strangury: And though
very high in Spirit and seemingly hot, yet is so safe and innocent, that the
smallest children partake thereof to great advantage, the price is 12 s. the
pint,

13. Ignis vitae.
Exceeding high in spirit, and of singular use in Lethargies, Vertigoes,
swimming of the Head, Dullness of sight, and (to the wonder of Art) in violent
Headake, and inflammation of the Eyes, with, or without swelling; The dose a
drop 2 or three to be held a while in the mouth, forcing it up into the head,
and then swallowing it: It being also a great Cordial, and to be repeated often
without intermission 4, 5 or six times together any time day or night, but
beast to bedward, the price is 16 s. per pint.

14. Flos vitae.
Fortifying the Breast, the Brain, and Memory, a recreative and refreshing
Cordial, a great reliever in business, and useful at all times, the Dose from 2
to 4 and 6 ounces, the price 3 s. the pint.

15. Elixar vitae.
For qualifying the blood, sharpness of Urine, and of virulent Ulcerating
humors, and shharp vehement pains in the body, the dose from 2 to 4, and six
ounces; at 6 hours time may be repeated, and constantly continued till occasion
ceases, the price is 3 s. the pint.

16. Vita vitae.
A general and powerful fortifier of all the natural, vital, and animal
faculties, and useful in all Cases, where there appears either deficiency in
breathing, or dejection of Spirits; The dose from half an ounce to 2 or 3
ounces, and after 3 hours may be repea^ed and continued as occasion inviteth,
the price is 10 s. the pint.

These are those of the first sort assigned for maintenance of health, and for
speedy relief and remedy in the first apprehensions of sickness and distempers.

But those which are as the Main-guard, and intended for subduing and
extinguishing the most violent, venomous, pestilential, and invererate
Distempers, and securely to be trusted to in all Extremities: Are as follows,

1. Vita Naturae: In Fevers, or feverish Aguish Distempers accompanied with
Jaundies, Faintness, Wind, or Crudities, or in those Distempers not Feverish:
Also in violent Headake, Tooth-ake, with, or without swellings; The Dose from
2, 3, 4 to 6 ounces; and at 6 hours may be repeated and continued as long as
there is occ^sion: Best a little warmed and in bed, (as also all of this sort
following) the price 9 d. per ounce.

2. Corona Naturae: In Sighings or Extreme Pensiveness, with, or without
Fevers, Agues, Pestilence, etc. The Dose and use as the former, at the ounce 2
s.

3. Servus Naturae: In Fevers, Agues, etc. with pain and heaviness of stomach;
The Dose and use as the first, at the ounce 9 d.

4. Comes Naturae: In all Feverish cases, with loss of Appetite, or other
faculties of the stomach; The Dose use as the first, at the ounce 6 d.

5. Ancilla Naturae: In stoppages of the stomach, Spleen or Liver, with, or
without Fevers, Agues, etc. The Dose and use as the first at the ounce 1 s.

6. Latex Naturae: In Fevers, Agues, etc. where Nature fails, and flesh abates;
The Dose and use as the first at 1 s. per ounce.

7. Vindex Naturae: In highest Fevers, Pestilence, Tertian or Quartan Agues,
with Vomitings, or Bloodyfluxes, pains in the Head, restlesness, Gout, Small
Pox, Measels; and where there is often provocation without Evacuation downward;
or in any other violent or Contagious Distemper; As also for furthering of
Childbirth; The Dose to Children from 1 spoonful to 2 or 3, to those of years
from 2 to 3, 4 or six ounces, and at 4 or six hours time may be repeated and
continued whilst there is occasion; Except where its taste is grown distastful:
And then to be supplied by either Vita naturae, or Clavis, or Corona, or any of
the rest, as reason may judge, the price is 9 d. the ounce.

8. Anima Naturae: In Hectic Fevers, Consumptions, weakness of the Nerves, and
Animal Spirits; The Dose and and use as the first, and to be continued as
occasion continues, at the ounce 1 s.

9. Athleta Naturae: In Fainting fits, shortness of Breath, violent Thirst,
Pestilence, Gout, or Fevers, Vomitings, Looseness, Gripings in the Guts, etc.
The dose and use as Vindex, and so to be repeated, and continued: at the ounce
1 s.

10. Flamma Naturae: In Fevers with Palsies, Appoplexes, Convulsions, Pains in
the Head, etc. The Dose from 1 to 2 or 3 spoonfuls to the younger,, to others
from 2 to 3 and 4 ounces, at 6 hours may be repeated and continued as there is
occasion, at 1 s. 3 d. the ounce.

11. Firmentum Naturae: In Hypocondriack Melancholy, infirmities of the Reins
and Bladder, Strangury, etc. with, or without Fevers, Agues, etc. The dose and
use as the first, at 1 s. the ounce.

12. Clavis Naturae: In Fevers, Agues, or Pestilence with stuffing of the
breast, Coughs, Toughness of Phlegm, Ptisick, Raspings of the stomach, Colic,
distempers of the Mother, Headake, or in those distempers without Fevers: The
dose and use as Vita naturae (or the first) at the ounce 9 d.

13. Requies Naturae: In Mother-fits, Vertigoes, Falling Sickness, Convulsions,
Lightness of the Head, and weakness of the Brain, with, or without Fevers,
Agues, etc. The dose and use as the first, at the ounce 9 d

14. Lumen Naturae: In the Running Gout, Scurvy, or sharp Rheumatick pains,
with or without Fevers, Agues, etc. the dose and use as the Vindex, at the
ounce 1 s.

15. Arcanum Naturae: A Balsamic Cordial to be sipt, or taken with a Liquorish
stick in Coughs, Consumptions, or any Distempers of the Breast or Lungs,
Clamminess of Phlegm, Soreness of Tongue or Throat, at the ounce 6 d.

16. And last, Catharticon Naturae: In impurity of the Blood, and oppression by
Crudities, with, or without Fevers, Agues, etc. The dose from 2 to 4 ounces, at
8 hours time may be repeated, and continued as there is occasion, at the ounce
9 d.

These are the Medicines which upon all occasions I have found abundatly
sufficient for all the Ends and Intentions of Physic, so that whosoever shall
thoroughly acquaint themselves therewith, and furnish themselves with due
quantities thereof, may not only easily and pleasantly and strength and vigor
to their usual Diet, plenteously replenish their continual wast and Expense of
Spirits, daily refresh themselves with real advantage to their health; Supply
all sudden Illness or Exigencies, without all fear of after Inconveniences;
but are thereby firmly enabled, with Gods blessing, to grapple with, and subdue
the most violent and most inveterate diseases whatsoever, which make up the
full scope of all Physical knowledge, and Medicinal performances.

And all these without any the hazards or dangers forementioned; Are alike
useful at all times and and seasons of the year, Winter, Summer, Spring, or
Autumn; safely and pleasantly to be taken by all persons in all states of
health, or degrees of weakness from the very Cradle to Oldest Age, without any
confinement to house, or Chamber (except in cases of Extremity,) without charge
of visits, or tedious attendance, and with all possible quietness and
hopefulness to the Patient.

All which are no seigned Delusions, but real Truths, as diverse who have long
time solely depended on their assistance, both for themselves and Families,
with absolute good success can sufficiently testify, reckoning withal, that
all circumstances duly considered, they are not the dearest, but the cheapest
of Physic.

Besides as never any harm could justly be imputed to any of them; so were they
never known to fail of Cure, where time proportionable to the constitution of
the body, and to the quality and degree of the Distemper, has been allowed,
and Directions followed accordingly.

But where Distemper has taken fast hold upon a body over worn with toil,
care, and business, aggravated by omission of timely medicines, and then tired
out, nay confounded with intricate and unwholesome Physic; and from one sort
of Medicine to another, until the Medicines have proved more mischievous, and
more inveterate then the first Disease; for Patients in such difficult Cases as
these, to think a months time (or so) sufficient for recovery, failing of
their hopes, rather taxes their own reason, then the validity of the Medicines.

And yet even in such forlorn undertakings, I have in very few days seen so
great and so good an alteration, that had it not been destroyed by too much
presuming thereupon, and thereby taking cold anew, and so loosing all that was
gained; There was sufficient to give assurance that time and perseverance in
their plenteous use would have perfected their work; all after deviations from
this course of Physic, and these Medicines never bringing the Patient to so
good a condition; Nor did I ever know them laid aside for any others, but there
was cause to wish they had not left them: But if ever it is in such cases as
these, that this saying is verified, That there are some who will be sick too
late, and well too soon: And makes me think of diverse unhappy Patients, when I
mind that saying, He found no steadfastness, no not in his Angels. Very few in
inveterate cases being apt upon utmost persuasive arments to give a tenth part
of time requisite; or having resolved to do it, that will be constant for half
the time; And this not always from an instability in the Patient, but most
unhappily from the odd officious Medlings of Visitants and Relations, who
though wholly void of true judgment in Physic, or in the differences between
what is, and what is not to be trusted to, are ever censuring the present
proceedings, and proposing one while this, another while that, boasting up
this, and commending another, as having speedily cured diverse in like cases
with very small charge.

A sort of friendship might very well be spared, and should a little more then
it does touch the Consciences of all such well meaning disturbers, if not
destroyers of these whom yet with all their hearts they earnestly desire should
be preserved, affectionate and zealous: errors being always most mischievous.

For my part, I can clearly affirm, that I never gave the smallest quantity of
those my Medicines to any person, in any case, but I heartily wished it might
prove a perfect Cure; And it is an absolute truth, that very many in a year
have been cured of such Distempers, some for the value of 6 d. some 12 d. and
sometimes a very little more, that probably in any other way, could not have
escaped a tedious fit of sickness, or a chargable course of Physic, and I am
never more joyed then when it is so.

Yet this does not argue that every one that falls ill should expect always the
like success, there being so vast a difference in Constitutions, and in the
nature of Diseases, in neglect of the instant use of means, and a while
deferring as alters the Case beyond imagination, and which unavoidably enforces
as great a difference in the difficulty and time of recovery.

But then, how Exceedingly much more does the Case differ when the Disease has
been of many years continuance, and so many various Physics used time after
time, that it is very presumable some of it may have been venomous, and
infinitely added to the malice of the Disease: Though in such Case I should not
despair of prevailing, in this way of safe and powerful Medicines; yet I should
blame my self excessively should I give any hope of success, but upon an
absolute promise from such patients of perseverance for at least so many
Months, if not twice the number, as they have been years afflicted, and admit
the charge of such a condescension, should amount to 10, nay 20 Crowns a
month, which I suppose would be the most, what a small thing were this to
persons of means and quality, to adventure in a course so safe, and withal so
hopeful, and after hundreds, if not thousands of pounds spent in vain, in ways
neither so safe nor rational, and in such hands as I am sure to gain the world,
would not defer a Cure one moment; That Instance in the Touchstone of Physic,
Of the Gentlwoman that was left hopeless by all her Physicians, after a long
time of using their utmost Endeavors, and she brought to nothing but skin and
bones, and her Disease triumphing over her weakness, when her sad Husband came
to me, desiring my assistance, had he scrupulously enquired whether I had ever
cured any one in so hopeless a condition, or endeavored to have confined me to
time, or been solicitous in what time I thought some hopes might appear, or
where about the charge of her Cure might be; It is very like I had never
undertaken her, as abhorring nothing more then such huckstering in cases of
sickness where there is ability: But he leaving all wholly to me, though by
reason of some relapse, it was some months before she went abroad, yet both he
and she were fully satisfied with all that was done, and God blessed it to her
wonderful recovery. All which I have thus Expressed, if possible to make all
persons concerned sensible how great a difference there may be in Distempers,
seemingly alike, and how much more time may be requisite for recovery of one
more then another; And to work them to a willing resignation of themselves, to
whomsoever they shall think meet to trust, and without scruple, or repining
either at Time or Charge, steadfastly to persevree, especially being engaged in
a way so safe, and with Medicines so kindly, and withal so powerful (as here
are solely intended) and, which by the Marks foregoing may easily be tried and
proved, whether they are so or not; but being such, there is all Encouragement
imaginable to persist with hope and cheerfulness.

Withal, the Patient must be sure, both in his Diet, and shunning all hazards,
to be helpful to his Physician, and most careful to observe all Directions,
Cautions and Circumstances advised, that being the only way to make the best of
what is taken, and to keep and not loose the smallest degree of improvement
obtained; for those who get and keep ground, though but by inches, are sure in
the end of victory.

But without resolving to persist in their use, (whether they are governed by
Patients themselves, or their relations on their behalf, or by Physicians) I
would not encourage any to begin with any of these Medicines; It being my
manner always to refuse the undertaking of any that I either doubt, or will not
promise to persevere with them, and strictly to adhere to Directions; upon
which being resolved, none need to fear success, Answerable either to the
Instances mentioned in the Touchstone of Physic, or to those Cures since
performed by them.

Some whereof to manifest that they are still the same both in Efficacy, and in
Performance, I shall here recite as follows.
1. A Gentleman about thirty years of age, upon an Extreme cold taken with
great pains over all his body, Headake, and stoppage at his stomach, I sent him
3 ounces of Vindex naturae, to be taken a little warmed last at night, which
quit him perfectly of his Distemper.

2. A Boy about 3 years old taken in so stupid a manner, as those who are said
to be struck with Death, as the Parents verily thought this Child; Being
somewhat far from me, they made use at first of some other means, but being
worse upon it, they sent to me, I sent him a small quantity of Radix, to be
given by a spoonful every hour, and 2 ounces of Salus for the night, to be
taken a little warm at twice, and continued for diverse days and nights, with no
appearance of prevailing in the least, yet depending solely upon these
Medicines, they sent to me daily; much and often they solicited me to allow a
Glister, which I durst not admit, the malignity being so obstinate, besides the
child had ordinary stools daily; at length I ordered 3 ounces of Athleta
naturae: Upon which there followed two or three sharp and loose stools,
whereupon he became perfectly well.

3. The Brother of this Child some 2 yeas older, was soon after taken very ill
also, and Feverish, but being instantly sent to, I ordered him 3 ounces of
Vindex, which proved to his absolute recovery: In all which Cases, or the like,
where thirst molesteth or is feared, I always appont White Wind Posset Drink to
be freely taken, made with a quarter of a pint of White Wind to a quart of Milk
(and not to exceed in Wine) and to use no other Drink, if they can be so
persuaded, but if not, then once in four or six hours to admit a draught of 8
shillings Beer with Sugar and a Toast, which I desire may be noted as a general
Rule, and not to be scrupled.

4. A young woman layn in, and well almost to the end of her month, upon a
sudden had no passage for her water; upon which I was sent to, her condition
being very much feared, I sent her half a pint of Vis vitae, which being given
her at twice warmed, within 3 hours time, she became perfectly well.

One almost 70 years of age, having contracted some foulness of stomach, and
sliminess in the Uriters, was unexpectedly taken with stoppage of water; which
he bore awhile as hopeing it might alter of it self, being not much provoked
nor pained, so eat and drank as usual; soon after, making trial he found the
stoppage to continue, and withal an unusual aptness to Vomit, which he gave way
unto, and brought up abundance without pain, which being ended, I ordered him
to drink a quarter of a pint of Stella vitae; which he did at one draught, half
an hour after, though otherwise well, yet still his water staid, whereupon I
ordered him totake a quarter of a pint of Vis vitae well warmed, which he drank
off at one draught, and so laid him down upon his bed, where he slept so soundy
for two full hours, that when he wak't, he thought it had been but half an
hour, and then trying to make water, it freely issued as at other times, and
troubled him no more.

6. An Elderly Gentleman frequently and vehemently troubled with Gripings, Wind
and Looseness, using much means in Physic, being by his Physician allowed the
use of Vis vitae, which generally he keeps by him always in readiness, never
fails of certain relief thereby.

7. His Wife generally troubled with Wind, and weakness of Stomach, having
recourse upon all occasions to the use of Sanguis vitae, renders her life very
secure and comfortable.

8. A Gentleman sufficiently able to distinguish of Physic, being in London,
his Wife being Extremely ill far off in the Country through a long crazed body,
and then afflicted with intolerable pains all over, with debility of stomach,
and all faculties, applied himself with very anxious solicitation to me, as
dreading her immediate loss; so consulting together, we agreed to send her a
quart of Radix vitae to take of in it continually, a little and little day and
night, which being taken, he received and brought me very joyful tidings of her
happy recovery.

9. Awhile after the same Gentleman desired my advice for a Gentlewoman, quite
stuffed up with Phlegm, and oppressed with an Extreme Cough, and defect of
Appetite; upon a little discourse we agreed she should have a pint of Radix, to
take a little and little all the day, and at bedtime 6 spoonfuls, and in the
night a liitle and little as she sound occasion, which through Gods goodness
perfectly recovered her.

10. A Gentleman about 30, highly Feverish with Vomiting, Thirst, and Headake,
and sore all over his body; I sent him 3 ounces of Vindex to be taken at
Bedtime, and to drink Whitewine Posset made as before is mentioned; this he
took, and next morning was much mended, and omitted to take any thing all that
day, but the day following I saw cause to send him 6 ounces of Lac vitae to
take by sips all that day, and 3 ounces of Vindex for bedtime, which enabled
him next day to come himself and give me thanks for so happy an alteration with
so little trouble and cost.

11. A Gentleman about 35, going out of London not very well, and far off in
the Country, oppressed with perpetual business even night and day, his Body
also being not of the firmest Constitution, fell into so Extreme a Fever, and
so confusedly ill all over, that to preserve himself, he was forced to make use
of such Helps and Helpers in Physic as the place afforded, which was not
despicable, yet availed nothing, upon which his Friends by his Order sends to
me his Condition, desiring me to send what I thought fit (for he was well
acquainted with my Medicines, and used never to travel without full quantities
of them) so I sent him a quart of Radix, and a pint of Vindex naturae: But so
obstinate a Distemper was hardly ever heard of, for though he had after this
much more and larger quantities of Radix, and of Vindex, Athleta, Lumen
naturae, and Vis vitae, and Salus vitae, all which he took always with very
much assurance of goo^, ^et by one occasion or other he was so often even upon
the point of Death, that I became afraid to open the Letters that came from his
Disconsolate friends. How it came to be thus, I could not certainly learn,
though some imputed it to diversity of advice, and proceedings of Physicians or
Chyrurgions near him, which unnoted by him, or his dearest Friends, might
perplex and nullify the operation of these Medicines: Nevertheless by Degrees
he gaind so much strength, or rather so much courage, as to resolve for London,
where with difficulty he arrived: But his residence being near to a Physician
his friend, and being then on the sudden Extreme ill, he fell into the general
course of Physic which held a long time, and had very various successes, very
much through a strange unchect liberty he took in Diet, helping himself
notwithstanding now and then with a large Bottle of Radex, and at length got so
much strength, as to adventure to refresh himself in the Country: But withal
depending so much upon my Medicines, that he caused to be sent immediately
after him, 7 pints of Vis vitae, and 2 pints more, before he came back, and
through mercy returned, so well as to pursue his occasions, and which has not
since failed him, and seems still to have as high, if not a more high Esteem of
these Medicines; and I believe he has good cause for it, or he would not as he
since has done, commended their use to his best Friends in all their
occasions. And I conceive under God ascribes unto them very much of his
preservation: It being also very presumable his recovery had been far sooner,
and more perfect, had he not been diverted, but solely depended on their
assistance.

12. A young Lad taken suddenly so Extreme ill and Feverish, that the Mother
knowing his weak nature doubted he could not live, twice two ounces of Vindex
for two nights given him, proved to his recovery.

13. The same Lad a while after fell into another Distemper lying continually
in a senseless stupid condition, I gave him 2 ounces of Vindex mixed with half
an ounce of Ignis vitae for one night, and the like for next night, which
perfectly cured him.

14. A young Gentlewoman always upon taking cold, and preternatural stoppages,
Extremely afflicted with sharp violent pains all over her body, but more
especially in her head, never failed of recovery by the use of Radix vitae, in
the daytime to the quantity of half a pint taken by little and little, and by
six ounces of Vita naturae, taken by two ounces a night, for three nights
together.

15. A young Boy far off in the Country, being accustomed to Extreme fits of
Crying, a Gentleman related to the Family noting how he writhed his body at
such times, told the Parents he was persuaded the Child was troubled about the
passage of his Water, and being well acquainted with my Medicines, advised the
use of Vis vitae, which being given day and night by little and little,
perfectly cured him, wherein they used about three pints, or two quarts at
most, which was no great cost for persons of Quality.

16. A youth about seventeen, strong and healthful, upon a sudden, without any
manifest cause, became Extremely ill, with violent pains in his head,
sickishness at his stomach, sore all over his body, with some Giddiness; it was
a time when the Small Pox was very rife; but he having had them, and my advice
instantly taken, I thought it best to arm, as if it might prove the Pestilence,
and so gave him three ounces of Vindex, and a good quantity of Radix to use
little and little, refreshing himself therewith continually: But for all this a
Vomiting seized him with Extreme thirst and restlessness, and binding of his
body, I wished his Kindred might be acquainted how he was, and to resolve what
course to take: But it fell out, the principal of them (within reach)
understood my way, earnestly desiring I would proceed, upon which I plied him
continually with Salus vitae, till at length the Small Pox plentifully appears,
and being ordered accordingly with due care, he soon began to feel his stomach
and strength so far, that he presumed one morning to rise without a fire in his
Chamber, or warming any of his Clothes, unknown to any body: This struck him
down, and the Wheals began to grow flat; Then his Friend who had the chief care
of him, being tome to Town, he began to be troubled that he was under an
unusual Course of Physic, ordering one of his own acquaintance to take the
charge of him: But this the youth refused, as being satisfied with the way he
was in, and so was the Physician to whose care he was referred which was
somewhat rare: So I fell to work a fresh with Vindex, Salus, Radix, and the
like, and in short time, recovered him to so much strength, as made him so fond
therewith, that one of his Familiars coming to visit him out of mirth and
sportfulness, he urged him to sing with him some merry Catch, but the party
disliking so simple a motion, fell into more seriousness with him, that he was
but newly escaped from as dangerous a Sickness as ever any did: that though he
were sure the worst was past, as for his part, he as yet was not, other
thoughts would better become him: But to deal plainly with you, said he, what
ever you think, there may be but a step betwixt you and Death, and therefore it
is fit you better prepare your self: But this well meant advice wrought so much
farther then he intended, that it had like indeed to have cost him his life,
making so deep an impression, that there was no persuasion of any possibility
of life, so that I was forced to redouble my Cordials, and others to convince
him, that there was no fear of his present Distemper: And that now he had
nothing to trouble his thoughts withal, but how to be thankful to God, and
walk worthy of so great a Deliverance: which at length cured and restored him:
But may serve for Caution, not to lay too much weight upon weak minds in times
of sickness, nothing being more killing then the affright of Death.

17. No sooner was he recovered, but the maid that attended him throughout his
sickness, fell Extremely ill, highly Feverish with intolerable Gripings, and
pains all over her body: But being plied with Vindex, Salus, and Radix, and at
length with Vis vitae in respect to stoppages, in four days she perfectly
recovered.

18. A Gentleman about 30. taken with vehement pains in his left side, with
stoppage of his breath, and thereby in such Extremity that he could hardly
speak, and then crying out he must either bleed or die: Yet when Bleeding has
given him no relief, or so little, that his misery has soon returned upon him:
A quarter of a pint of Vindex has clearly discharged the fit: And when in
process of time he has been troubled again in like manner, he has found
speedy remedy by a quarter of a pint of Stella, or at most half a pint: Other
times by as much of Refugium, for he has often been so afflicted, yet could
never be induced to condescend to any course for rooting out the cause of the
Distemper: And that because he found these remedies so certain: Now these being
Pleuretick Distempers, and which are not only accompanied with violent pains
and heat, and pass not off but with the avoidance of an abundance of thick
Phlegm, it would amaze an ordinary Artist, that Medicines so hot as these could
be so proper, and so succesful as these have proved in such Cases, and which
they often object to dissuade their use: But as their Objections proceed from
want of a due distinction between Virtuous and Vicious heats, so has their
constant good success baffled their Objections, the Patient being not to be
startled from what gives him most sure and certain Remedy, for their
Groundless, if not partial counsel.

19. Another Gentleman about 30. Extremely afflicted with a quartane Ague, to
quit himself whereof, he had run the whole course of Physic, but all in vain,
his cold fits being very turbulent and tedious, and his hot more long and
irksom, being accompanied with intolerable thirst, and followed with such
vehement Sweatings, as if he had been in a boiling Bath, which sweatings with
sickishness, also continued as much upon his well nights, as upon his ill: And
being much engaged in business which required his being abroad, he was full of
anxious thoughts what to do for relief. When one who had good experience of my
way, recommended him to me, so I gave him when he came unto me a draught of
Sanguis well heated, and a quarter of a pint of Vindex for his Fit, which
taking twice and not finding remedy he withdrew his hopes, and it being not my
manner to press any beyond their own minds, our Proceedings ceast for above a
week, he hearkening to his former Council, being possessed, that if any thing
carried off the Cause of so great disturbance, it must be Purging and Vomiting
Physic which rowsing all parts of the body, and voiding so great a mass of
ugly colored and nasty filth, the Ague or what ever it be must needs out at
last: Arguments indeed, with custom of knowing no better, so powerful as
deceives both the Learned and unlearned parts of the whole World, and therefore
no marvel if it retained this our perplexed Patient as long as he could stand,
or till he was almost off of his legs: But at length wearied and tired out,
Discoursing again with his friend, he told him he was to blame to Desist from
my way so soon, that he was certain it was a sure way, and if followed would
not fail: Why says he, why did he not tell me so then? He did, says his friend,
and I told you so too, but you regarded it not, besides says he, you are to
urge him to do his utmost, and to spare for no cost, if you mean to be cured,
and not to expect that he should press you; that having such a show of self
respect, as is abhorred by all ingenious Artists: Upon this he returns to me
again, and Earnestly desires me to do my utmost for him, that he would with all
his heart give twenty pounds to be cured of his Distemper. Whereupon I fell to
work amain, giving him Radix to carry always about him, and to drink it in good
quantity continually; Also to take every night at resting time 4 ounces of
Salus, and not to rise too soon in the morning: Then for his fit he was to take
a quarter of a pint of Vindex, either a little before, or just upon its
entrance: And in his hot fit to sip continually of Salus vitae: And if thirst
enforced, to relieve by White Wind Posset, or now and then with Table Beer, and
tossed and Sugar; so pursuing this course for about ten Days, the whole work was
finished, and he perfectly recovered; And this without spending much more of
his twenty pounds, then fifty shillings, so far have I ever been from putting
any to farther charge, than merely necessary, though it be very much to my
Encouragement to have the whole in all respects wholly referred to me; Nor with
me shall any over speed the worse for so doing, nor is any thing more improper
or absurd, than in sickness either to starve their Cause, or to trust to halves.

But though this Gentleman's Ague were quite discharged, and Strength and
Stomach restored, and all faculties in Due State and good Condition; Yet being
performed without Purging, Vomiting, Bleeding, Issues, or Blisters, or Sweaters
(Except such as restrained and put an end to his most violent sweating) this
seemed so strange a Mystery to those in whose hands he had been, that they told
him the work was but falacious, and could not be perfect, but would either
return upon him, or bring him into some more dangerous Distemper, and this he
would certainly find, if he did not speedily take some fit Purgative to carry
off the Relics; Now though this somewhat prevailed with him (as it does upon
most) yet he would be so ingenious, as to tell me what was said before he would
take any thing: I told him they were so accustomed to that course, that it was
no wonder they thought it necessary: But for him that had seen the Impotence of
their Purges, and Vomiters, as to the subduing of his Distemper; and the
powerfulness of those Medicines that did subdue it, for him to doubt that which
had performed so far above his hope, and upon which he found himself so
completely well, would leave Relics that must want the help of such nasty
miserable helpers, should give the least Ear, or yield in the least thereto,
would argue him a fit Subject to be played upon by every trifler, and never
more to be assisted by such benign Medicines, as when they had done his work,
must be made liable to so abominable Disparagement. Upon this he seemed fully
fortified against their charming; And when next they undertook him, and in
reply (to what he urged from my Discourse) said they did allow the Ague was
subdued and killed: But say they, admit you kill a Dog in your house, if you
let him lie there, and not quickly throw him out, he will soon make you weary of
your Habitation; Ergo, If you throw not your Dead Dog out, you must look to
quit your house before ye are aware. And this frighted him again to me with a
witness; I smiled to hear this Syllogistical Conclusion, and putting out a
Candle that was before us, I ask't him where was the flame, he said it was
Exstinguish't, I asked him whether there were any Danger to be feared from it;
he said no; I ask't him why? he said, because it was Extinguish't: I told him
so it was with his Ague, the Venom which caused all his various Disturbances
being also Extinguished by the Virtue and Efficacy of the benign and powerful
Medicines he had taken, whose good qualities were such, as to leave nothing
behind, but what they put Nature into an ability to Evacuate: And this
satisfied him; and it was well it did; for though it be the common Course, and
frequently passes without manifest prejudice, yet as here it was wholly
needless, so has it sometimes proved extremely pernicious: For,

20. A Child being very strangely ill, the Parents not knowing what to do, the
Mother advising with me, I gave her two ounces of Vindex, because, whether it
might prove the Measels, Smallpox, Fever, Pestilence, or Ague, the Medicine
was very proper. This being given to the Child by a spoonful every half hour:
The next Day the Smallpox appeared, after which being plied with Salus now and
then half a spoonful, they came out full, ripened, shaled off kindly, and the
Child perfectly well, very much to the joy of the Parents: But Neighbors and
Visitants, and Kindred were not so satisfied, and by all means the Child must
be Purged, or one Evil or other would certainly attend him, which at length the
Parents yielded to, so the Child was purged as they will needs still call it,
and very well upon it for a while, but soon after was taken with such strange
fits, as he was then thought to be bewitched, and was very like to have cost his
life: So here the imaginary Dead Dog was changed for a real tearing Bear, that
through its Venomous Nature tortured and toused the Child even to Death: And
yet this, nor any reason or Argument will prevail, but let one recover either
out of Pestilence, Fever, Ague, Smallpox, Meazels or Surfeit, the first thing
is thought on, oh by all means, the relics of the Distemper must be cast off
by some gentle Purge, or mischief follows, yea if ever the party be ill again,
it shall be sure to be ascribed to the want of Purging after such or such a
sickness: In such simple bondage both the weak and wise, remain even in this
inquisitive generation. In so much that two young ones by help of Salus vitae,
lately well recovered from the Small Pox: The person concerned in them, told me
he was so pelted by some of his Physical neighbors to Purge them, that though
it went against his own reason, yet he could have no quiet without it: So to be
sure from after claps, between them he gave last at night 3 ounces of Salus
vitae, to which under God, their so speedy recovery was justly to be ascribed:
And which is not only a good Medicine against a Dead, but a mad Dog too, if
need were, or it could never have performed in Pestilent Fevers, and all
venomous Distempers as it has done.

21. A Gentleman about 35. by over much toyling, traveling, and puthering in
business, not only for himself, which had been more then enough, but for help
of others involved in troubles; brought himself (by ill and Disorderly Diet,
and many times unwholesome Lodging) into so ill a habit of body, that at length
wrought it self into a most violent sickness and inflammation, which he sought
to remedy by the best of means and counsel he could get, under which he
continued so long, till his flesh, and strength, and stomach, utterly failed,
whilst his Distemper instead of abating, heightened, and increased upon him,
so that what further to do he knew not: In this sad condition he was
recommended to me about the beginning of Winter.

The first I gave him was a quarter of a pint of Stella vitae a little warm,
which he drank at one Draught, and about a quarter of an hour after, the same
quantity of Vis vitae well heated; upon which I wished him to sit down by the
fire, and either drowse or sleep; so he slept about an hour, and waked very
much refreshed, and with great Exemption from those Violent pains, and sharp
inflammations that afflicted him. And after this manner was he plied for some
14 days, in which time as his Distemper abated, his stomach and strength
advanced, and enabled him to pass currantly about his occasions, not staying
within Doors one hour for any thing he took, a convenience which he confessed
trebled the charge of his Cure.

After this I now and then for the nights gave him a quarter of a pint
sometimes of Salus, and other times Vindex, and Radix he used to carry about
him, to take of it at all times. So in process of time, and these powerful
Means, the vehemence and venom of the Distemper was wholly driven outward into
an Extreme Itch, with which being sometime much molested, I gave him of Elixir
vitae half a pint at a draught, and a quantity to take as much every night; And
so with the Expense of 3 pints, absolutely discharged that also; and then he
reckoned himself as well, and hearty as ever he was in his life.

Now though most of the Medicines he took were of that heat, especially the
stella as would have affrighted any Practiser whatsoever to have given one
quarter of the quantity he at any time took; yet during all the time, he never
found any inconvenience by heat or thirst, or binding of his body, but on the
contrary had stools much more then ordinary, and is become a Champion in
defense of their Real Virtues, against all suggestions he frequently met with,
from such as thought themselves loosers by this way of his happy recovery.

22. A young man taken very violently with griping in the Guts, and having
continued so for a considerable time, his friends applying themselves to me, I
sent him a quarter of a pint of Stella to be heated and drank off by him, and
it perfectly cured him.

23. About the same time also a Gentleman between 30 and 40, taken with a
violent Looseness, and Griping, the same quantity of Stella heated, absolutely
cured.

24. A Gentleman near sixty, much endangered by a Fever, and all usual means
prevailing nothing, sent to me, I sent him 4 ounces of Vindex Naturae to be
taken half at bedtime, and the rest within the night, and the like next night,
which recovered him perfectly.

25. A young Gentlewoman near the end of lying in upon some cold taken, was
extremely afflicted with Gripes, and Vomiting, I sent her 4 ounces of Vindex,
and as much next Day, and so she recovered.

26. A Gentleman about thirty, naturally of much life and Spirit, sorely
molested with a Quartan Ague, upon recommendation of a friend who had great
experience of my Medicines, earnestly desired my best assistance, and not to
spare for cost, so I plied him daily with Radix, and every night with Salus,
and with Vindex for his fit, and this for about 8 days at the least without any
sign of abatement, or remission, which as it was very much to his
discouragement, so it made me also amazed to think of it, and resolved, except
I suddenly heard better news from what I then sent him, to tell the party that
came between us, that certainly there was something in the business they had
not discovered, or that Exceeded all I could comprehend, and to wish him to
take some other Council, nothing being more trouble some to my mind, then to
see things go quite cross to my reasonable expectation, but for five days after
not hearing from him, I concluded he was either Dead, or had put him self into
other hands; But when I least expected, the messenger came to me, desiring me
to send him somewhat to support his spirits, as he went about his occasions, I
ask't what was become of his Ague, and found he was absolutely quit of it; The
party telling me that that night he took the last things I sent him he had 6 or
7 large stools which quite Discharged his Ague, and that ever since he had been
very well, only upon stirring a little faint: And truly this manner of effect I
have often noted in obstinate Distempers, for that which I always give being
not slight, insignificant, but powerful friends to Nature, cannot possibly be
utterly frustrate, but first or last must some way or other prevail for good,
as here by Purgation, so sometimes by Vomit, when their forces by frequent
repetition become so united, as not to be resisted; And this way of Operation,
as it has Established my hope in all I give; So may it be of good assurance to
Patients though for a time they see little or no alteration; For that which is
good in it self, and powerful, and taken in full quantity, frequently when
least looked for, produces even above, and beyond all hope Imaginable; And is
the peculiar blessing of Prudence, in Patients, and Perseverance under the use
of means so certainly safe, and so prevalent as these upon all occasions have
been approved.

But this Gentleman adventuring too much upon his mettle before confirmation of
his strength, before two months came to an end renewed his Ague; and being
much nearer to other means then mine, sell into the common Road of Physic,
under which in few days he ended his life, somewhat under the blame of his
Relations, for declining his own Reason and Experience, but is the usual fruit
of Instability, and Inconstancy.

27. A young Child so ill and stupid, that none knew what to what of it as the
manner is, was excused and laid upon toothing so long till help was almost too
late, the Father Disired my advice, so I ordered two ounces of Salus vitae to
be given by a spoonful every hour, which before it was quite taken, gave an
appearance to the small pox, and so he perfectly recovered.

28. A Gentleman far in the Country, having contracted a very ill habit of
body, with weakness of Stomach, and aptness to vomit; By the use of Vis for
days, and Salus for night, in less then a months time was restored to a far
better condition.

29. A Gentlewoman having a young Daughter very much languishing under a
Distemper and weakness, like that of the Green Sickness; by the use of three
quarts of Vis vitae (taken thrice every day between meals, and last at night) ^
spoonfuls at a time, recovered into a very good condition.

30. A Gentlewoman very much stuffed in her breast with Cough and shortness of
breath, by three quarts of Flos vitae taken thrice every day, and a little in
the night, became very well and hearty.

31. A Gentleman of somewhat a weak Constitution, through many occasions both
at home and abroad, subject to Heats, Colds, Weariness, and thereby frequently
to illness, and sometimes to very Dangerous fits of sickness, using in all such
times full and large quantities of Salus, Vindex, Stella and Radix, freely and
seriously professes, that he believes they have often, by taking the value of a
quarter of a pint saved him both a fit of sickness, and a chargable course of
Physic; And that in his extremity of sickness they have saved his life, when
it was in his judgment impossible for any other kind o^ Physic to have done
it, having seen to his grief, as he says, diverse of his friends fail and fall
under the best of the usual practice: And which has so confirmed his Opinion
of their safety and Efficacy, that he soly under God Depends upon them for
support of his no small Family, and whereby both to his Son and Servants, so
much has been performed both in Small Pox, and Griping of the Guts, and other
illness as might well make out many weighty instances: But where as in this
large Family they are always at hand, and in readiness, it is hardly credible
how frequent and how speedy very great Inconveniences are daily prevented.

But for this Griping of the Guts, which every week rose higher in the Bills of
Mortality, as many times to exceed an hundred, as I have never known any so
Distempered to fail under these Medicines; So I do verily believe they would
have proved a perfect Remedy to whosoever had relied upon them; And it troubled
me Exceedingly they were made no more use off in that Mortal Distemper, by
those who undertook its Cure, or that those who were concerned took no more
beed to them, whilst with a little consideration, and small Cost, they might
have cured themselves, which is the main intention of this Treatise.

32. A young Maiden, by overmuch toyling above her strength, taking cold, fell
into a Feverish Distemper, which stopping the course of Nature, strange pains
flew all over her Body, and into her head especially; Some Artist at hand
presently bleeds her, but that proving rather to the increase, then abatement
of her Distemper; I was desired to help what I could, I ordered 3 ounces of
Vindex naturae for the night, and half a pint of Vis vitae for the Day. And
this repeated next night, and next day, reduced her to a very good condition.

33. The Father of this young Maid, being tortured with violent pains of the
Srangury, and stoppage of his water, sending to me, I sent him only half a pint
of Vis vitae, which he had no sooner taken, but he found instantly a perfect
release, both from pain and stoppage, to his Extreme joy and satisfaction: But
this also is a Family long time used to a Dependence upon these Medicines, unto
which there belongs so many stories of Cures performed by them for young and
old, as would take up a larger room then is needful at this time.

34. An Elderly full bodied Woman, troubled, and almost strangled often with
stoppage of the stomach, and Vapors flying up into her breast and throat, has
not failed of relief by half a pint of Sangis vitae well heated, and drank off
in an hours time.

35. One about 27, of long time troubled with a vehement pain in his Legs, yet
nothing to be seen, having used sometimes one Plaster, and then another
instead of ease, redned and pimpled all over, swelling somewhat, but itching so
extremely, that by scratching became extremely painful and tedious to him;
Asking my advice, I smelt the Plaster, and found it too hot and rank, so I
ordered him to put no kind of Plaster any more to it, but to moisten a fine
Cloth or Linen stocking with fine Tallow dropped in fair Water, and to keep that
on till that Leg was like the other, which happily proved to be so in some five
or six nights: Then as to his inveterate pain, I gave him a pint of Elixir
vitae to take by a quarter every night last; and so with two pints more so
used, his pain became absolutely Extinguished; only with this I enjoined him
the forbearance of Wine, strong Drink, Cheese, large Meals, or any thing over
salt, or hard of Digestion, and to use none other Suppers, but Spoon-meat,
which perfected the work.

And this also begot a whole Family of Patients which though not many in
number, yet had many various occasions very remarkable, and very much to his
satisfaction, as on all opportunities he takes very much pleasure to
Demonstrate: And though often tempted, yet would never admit any other
Physician to come into his house.

36. A young sucking Child troubled with a Wind Rupture, and such
Convulsion-like fits, that the most able Physicians knew not what to make of
them, being thereby, and by various Physic brought almost past all hope of
recovery, my assistance was earnestly desired by his Parents to whom as being
their only Child he was very dear; I told them, that though there were no
certainty of it,, yet he might possibly be recovered, but then it must be by
perseverance in the use of fit means, which if they pleased to allow, I would
faithfully do my utmost, they said they were so well satisfied of my Integrity,
and the hopefulness of my way, that they would confine me neither in time nor
cost; Whereupon I advised 3 ounces of Vindex to be given, a spoonful every two
hours, and two spoonful in the time of his fits: This somewhat mitigated them,
but this not willingly taken but by force, put the Child almost into a fit
every time he took it, upon this, I changed it for Clavis naturae, which was
freely taken; And with which being plied for some two months, brought the
Child into a very perfect state of health, to the Exceeding joy of his Parents,
and all their Relations.

37. A Gentleman about 40, taken very ill and Feverish, and under much
perplexity whom to trust, upon some Encouragement of friends, and Discourse
with me, put himself into my hands, and in three Days by the assistance of
Radix vitae; to his wonder became perfectly well and hearty.

38. An Elderly Gentlewoman being taken with Extreme Gripes and Looseness,
seeking to me for help, missing of me, sell into other hands, but finding no
help, sent to me, so I sent her half a pint of Salus vitae to be taken at
thrice in 3 hours time, which restored her perfectly to her health.

39. One who had three young Children all at one time sick of Agues, I ordered
her a quart of Sanguis to be given to each of them a spoonful two or three (as
they would freely take) once in two hours, and Double the quantity in their
fits in which course with three Quarts they all recovered.

40. A Gentlewoman troubled often with Fevevers and Fits of the Mother,
generally recovered by Succus vitae.

Her Husband also afflicted with an Extreme Cough, which his neighbors would
frequently tell him it would be a Churchyard Cough, which is an unhandsome way
of Discouragement, wherewith many do a great deal of mischief to weak people,
by the use of Salus, Radix, Vindex, and Stella, perfectly recovered. And when
after much busseling in business, he had contracted a most inveterate Ague, by
these medicines also he recovered. Also a son of theirs that had such strange
Fits, that most that saw him in them, would judge him bewitched, by help of Salus
recovered. And a very young Child of theirs, taken with a most tearing violent
hooping Cough, by help of Succus vitae mixed with a third part of Refugium, soon
quitted the hooping: But then he fell into Convulsion Fits so fierce and
frequent, that they never saw, nor I ever heard the like, in so much as they
were out of all hope; yet so long as it lived would not omit the use of means,
desiring me to spare for nothing I thought might give it relief: Upon which I
ordered half a pint of Salus vitae, (the Child being Extremely hot; thirsty,
and Feverish also) to be given by a spoonful every half hour, so that was soon
spent, and an other, and a third also, and then long and slippery strong stools
succeeded, after which he soon perfectly recovered: But this being a Family
that is never without Sanguis for ordinary occasions; nor Lac vitae for worms,
Salus vitae, or Radix: I should be over large if I should recount all the
advantages they have recieved by them, and by which being taken in time, they
prevent many mischievous inconveniences.

41. A Gentleman about 30, having often recovered from threatening sicknesses,
and having seen his wife much assisted by them in time of Childbirth, and his
bothers Exceedingly relieved in Melancholy, and in Extreme Fits of the Gout,
is arrived to such an Esteem of their absolute and General fitness for man's
body, that he professes seriously to believe, that it would be much for man's
happiness to forsake all other, both Beer, Ale, and Wine, and even at meals,
and all other occasions to drink no other drink: And that had he the World at
will (as they say) he avouches he would do it, so this is a Family you will say to
the purpose.

42. A young Gentlewoman full of Difficulty in Childbirth, upon taking 2 ounces
of Vindex mixed with an ounce of the tincture of Saffron, (which I keep always
in readiness of an Extraordinary virtue) instantly became a happy Mother. But
toward the end of the Month, taking an Extreme Cold, was afflicted with
violent Gripings, and Faintings that they could hardly keep life in her; so
that she was fain to take in a little space 4 ounces of Vindex, and as much
Stella, which soon eased her, and after those half a pint of Radix, slowly
used, perfected her health.

43. Another young Gentlewoman full of Difficulty with her first Childbirth,
found also present help by the last mentioned Cordial in like occasions; and
indeed, by long and large Experience, stands as an undoubted assistant in all
such cases: This Child also proving somewhat sickly, and sometime Dangerously,
has never failed of speedy remedy, by Radix, Salus, Succus mixed with Refugium
when fits appeared, and is so confirmed, that both for her self, and husband,
and friends as far as she can persuade with them these Medicines are solely
depended on; and this not only because of these Successes, but when before
marriage she lived in much perplexity about the Small Pox, after she once
understood the almost certainty of recovery by my Medicines she cast all fear
away, and not much shunning the infection as she used to do, had them, but
using timely Salus vitae, was not sick at all (so much difference is there
between fear and not fear) and was well instantly. Then when being with child,
a bleeding took her, somewhat threatening, and other times fear of miscarriage,
having recourse to these, she became soon quit of her Distempers; So this also
proves another testimony, of their fitness to be Established Physic for
Families.

44. In the next place I should recount the manifold remarkable Cures performed
by them in another worthy Family, Being the same, where that strange recovery
of the young Gentlewoman, referred to before, and recited in the Touchstone of
Physic: But truly they are so many, that I choose rather to omit them all,
then to make so large an Enumeration, Especially considering how ready they
will be on any occasion, to aver their safety and Efficacy in all Cases,
wherein they ever used them; and it is a very considerable time, that they have
under God solely Depended upon them, even in all Extremities.

45. A Gentleman well seen in my Medicines, comes hastily to me for a Child
Exceedingly troubled with Convulsion fits, so as there was very small hope of
life, and said I, you will have me Engage, and so the Death of it (by those
that will neither understand you nor me) shall be imputed to what I sent it,
but he would have no Denial, so I sent two ounces of Succus mixed with an ounce
of Refugium, which given to the Child by spoonful and spoonful at near an hours
Distance, so prevailed, that the Child recovered, and had never any fit after
it.

46. A Gentleman and no stranger to Physic, nor to my way, his Wife being
Exceedingly and often afflicted with Mother-fits, and being to take a long
journey, gave her a pint of Refugium, for her relief in case of extremity; And
he told me afterward she thought it saved her life.

47. A Lad about fourteen or fifteen taken with a Violent pain and swelling in
his knee, had something given him to anoint it and a Plaster: but without any
ease or remission; his Mistress telling me of it, I gave her half a pint of
Sanguis vitae, advising it be taken one half that night hot in bed, and the
other half next night; she laugh't and said, this was Chirurgians work, what
could Sanguis do to a swelled knee, (she was one who for her self and Family had
long time solely Depended on my Medicines, and so I did believe she thought it
Chyrurgians work, or she had referred him to me at first) I told her 'twas no
great nor Difficult matter I advised, yet such as I hoped would answer her
desire, so it was given, and the venom being extinguish't, the swelling fell,
and the knee remained perfectly well as the other; And so I hope, neither I,
nor my Medicines shall ever be hit in the teeth with the chargableness of this
Cure: Nor shall I insist upon the manifold Cures performed for this Family,
where there is always a readiness to justify, That there is no physic so
proper for Families, as they are, at least in their judgments.

48. A Gentlewoman between 30 and 40, in Difficulty of Chidbirth, speedily
relieved by the Cordial before mentioned, but before the end of the month,
striving above strength to be a Nurse, fell into a most tedious Ague, of which
in about ten Days being cured, by the continual taking plenty o^ Radix in the
Day time, and Salus, or Vindex, or Clavis, or Vita naturae every night, and
sometimes Stella, and othertimes Refugium for her Fits; Being very well and
hearty for some time, became on the sudden Extremely afflicted with violent
pains all over her body, which because she was accustomed to Fits of the
Mother, and by all about her taken for those, had very may precious Cordials
given her for the same, yet not only without any the least mittigation, but
settled with such perpetual, and such intolerable pains in her stomach, that
greater could not be imagined, whereupon I inquired how it was with her, as to
her natural course, and found they had long time been absent, so then
immediately I caused her to take a pint of vis vitae in three hours time; upon
which in the midst and height of her torment she would fall fast asleep for
two hours together, and so by plying her day and night only therewith, in less
then a weeks time, no one could be in a more settled or healthful condition.

But she also is one of a Family, That from the youngest to the Eldest for all
occasions (and very many they have had) solely under God depends upon these
medicines, and very much to their satisfaction.

49. A Gentleman near 30, overwrought to compass matters of Importance,
admitting no deferment upon a journey in bad ways and weather, returned
somewhat ill, yet so as he was enforced next morning to begin another, when (as
one said after) there was some appearance of the Small Pox, yet then he must
go, or the opportunity ever lost, 'twas not far, but tedious through his
indisposition, and matters sorting to his mind, bore up for his return home,
but no sooner there, but head, and heart, and stomach most violently out of
order; so, as one who with his whole Family had long depended solely under God
upon my Mesticines; He took a large quantity of Salus, as upon half a pint in
three hours time, and last at night, 4 ounces of Vindex toward morning, his
wife perceived apparent signs of the Small Pox, but for fear of Discouraging
him forbear to speak of it, withal a violent looseness took him, which being
upon those Cordials could not have been hurtful, had he not in that case
through dislike of his attendant upon every occasion risen out of his bed, upon
which taking cold as the looseness increased, so the Pimples sank in, and an
Extreme Fever ensued; with head-ake, thirst, and restlesness, and which though
he took Radix, and Salus hourly, and every night last, Vindex, or vita or
Clavis, or Athlaeta, besides within night the Arcanum, Stella, Refugium, etc.
yet in three days time there was no vsiible remission, but rather advanced
toward lightness of head, with a Mouth and Throat, sore and scurft all over.
Besides my care, he had a Worthy and skilful friend that often visited him; But
seeing the course taken, preserved from Extremes, Did not in the least
interpose; at length noting how great a quantity he had taken, and the small
effect produced, being full of thoughtfulness, I grew jealous of my Medicines,
and proposed to mine; and his Worthy Friend, the use of Coolers, which upon
consideration was assented to, and preparations ordered: But upon this Resolve,
some reflecting upon the high venomous nature of the Distemper: That all along
he was admitted White Wind Posset Drink, and in four hours time a Draught of
Beer and Sugar, with a toast which moistened and cooled as much as consisted
with safety: that in all my undertakings I never saw cause to accuse my
Medicines, nor in this neither; For though his Looseness was staid in due time,
yet once in eight or ten hours he had constantly a well consisting stool; That
now if I should withdraw these, and fall to cooling Drinks, Ptisans or Juleps, I
might please the palate, but weaken nature, that only by the utmost strength
and virtue of my best Cordials could be enabled to go through with this
Conflict: Hereupon immediately I put into his hands near upon three quarters of
a pint of Salus, to take of it continually as much as he pleased, which liking
him very well, he followed it to purpose, sleeping very soundly for two hours
together, and waking cheerful and full of hope: Upon this also, upon little
Coughings he brought up large quantities of a thick ropy phlegm, like whites of
Eggs, which hardly parted from his mouth by plucking, and this frequently both
night and Day; During all which time, he took very large quantities of Radix,
Salus, Vindex, Arcanum, and the rest forementioned, sleeping conveniently, and
waking without sadness or sickishness: And upon a sudden seemed to himself so
well and courageous, that I wishing him to forbear speech, and Dispose himself
to rest, he laughed at me, and told me if I would not otherwise be convinced, he
would rise and come home to me, I wished him rather to believe me than himself,
and toward night he should try his strength in sitting up for his refreshment,
so I quieted him, but so that he would have a Chicken prepared for his Supper;
So when time came, his fancy helped him to rise pretty heartily, and with a
little help to move near the fire, where he would fain have been well, and
called for his Diet, but alas could not endure the smell, nor swallow one bit,
but changed in a moment, and so hasts to bed, where finding himself somewhat
refreshed, was not discouraged, but said he perceived he must have patience
awhile; so within a Day and a Night after, his Phlegm began to cease, his head
quieted, his thirst slak't, his mouth, and tongue, and throat cleared, and his
appetite c^ept gently upon him, and able to rise and sit up two and three hours
together, and to bed without faintness, and so in less then fourteen days from
the beginning, he perfectly recovered: For no sooner was the venom of the
Distemper subdued, but his strength came on amain, immediately, having not had
any thing done to weaken him by either Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, Blistering
or the like, as in such Dangerous Cases is usual, and to be often repeated: So
this was the strange end of his small Pox, being by the mighty Efficacy of
those Medicines forced upward and cast out, and though he purged no^ at all,
but as Cordials which he took every night after, for a week at least, purged
him, yet no ill effect followed, unless the peeling of his hands and feet
should be taken for one, which indeed witnesses rather the poisonous quality
of the distemper, and powerful benignity of the Medicine, then any remnants or
relics of malignity: And as this, through Gods mercy, thus happily ended, so
should all the advantages received by this Family from these Medicines: Were
there no other, they might very well pass for a current testimony, that they
very well deserve, in a most signal sense, to be styled, True and Real Physic
for Families; as I am sure they are always ready to testify.

50. A young Gentlewoman very big withchild, upon taking Cold, was so extremely
afflicted with continual violent Coughing, that her friends thought it
impossible but she must miscarry; but being well acquainted with these
Medicines, every time she cought, she took a good sup of Radix vitae, which
amounted to above a pint in one night, and so quitted her self both of her
fear, trouble, and danger, and this without any the least shadow of
inconvenience ensuing, either by burning, drying, or binding. And if this be
not an undoubted witness both of their safety and efficacy, the most diffident
being Judges, let no evidence henceforth be of any repute amongst Practitioners.

51. One about 50, of a full body, upon a fall bruising the knee, breaking the
skin, and swelling with much painfulness, plying her twice a day with Vis
vitae, and every night last with two ounces of Vindex, Salus, and Fermentum
naturae, in a weeks time was perfectly recovered.

52. A Maid, through Cold taken, and Stoppages, her face became so swelled and
pained, as was intolerable; but with Vis vitae for days, and Salus, and
Fermentum, and Radix for nights, in a weeks time she became very well in all
respects.

53. A Gentleman being very crazy after a tedious sickness, and yet by reason
of urgent business forced upon a long journey in dead of Winter, taking with
him half a pint of Salus vitae, reckoned it preserved him from many
inconveniences, that in probability might have caused some dangerous relapses.

54. A Gentlewoman between 30 and 40, apt through helping others, to run many
hazards in her own health, upon a great Cold was taken with violent Gripings
and Looseness, which hung upon her very tediously; at length she sent to me, and
I sent her half a pint of Refugium, to take half presently, and the rest three
hours after, both well warmed, which perfectly cured her.

55. A Gentlewoman between 20 and 30, taken with flying pains all about her,
and with extreme torture in her stomach, by the use of two half pints of Salus
vitae, so speedily recovered her, that what therewith, and former services they
have done her, she has freely voic'd them out, for the cheapest and most
powerful Physic in the world.

56. A Gentleman near 40, long afflicted with an Ague, being at length cured by
no ordinary Physic, but such as by forcible Vomits and Loosners, extremely
weakened him, so far as none had any hopes of his life: Having some knowledge of
my Medicines, from large experience of his friends, sent to me, desiring I
would well consider what might revive his drooping and sinking spirits; I sent
him a pint of Vis vitae, which perfectly raised and restored him.

57. A young Gentlewoman, after a miscarriage, being continually pained,
restless, and every way indisposed, using much of the most Artificial help, but
all in vain, desiring my assistance, by four ounces of Radix, and three ounces
of Vindex, became perfectly well.

58. A young Girl, so ill, that the Parents knew not what to think of her, and
using all usual means, but prevailing nothing, desired my advice; I gave two
ounces of Clavis, which given to the Child by a spoonful every hour, soon gave
an appearance to the Small Pox, which both came out, ripened, and shell'd off
without any further help, only all being over, something was expected to carry
off the relics; so I gave two ounces of Vindex for two nights, which perfected
the work to their satisfaction: For some there are who begin to distinguish
rightly between refining the Body and Spirits, by these sublime Medicines; and
defiling both by venomous Loosners, unjustly styled Purgers.

59. The like service these Medicines performed for a younger Child of the same
Parents; but this proving somewhat more threatening, Salus and Vindex were
employed to its complete recovery.

60. A Gentlewoman far gone with-child, surseiting upon what did not agree with
her, became extremely pained all over her body with Gripings, insomuch that she
was forced to use large quantities of Salus, Stella, Vindex, Radix, and Vita;
but being her former acquaintance, she took them always with good hope and
confidence; nor did they fail her, for through Gods blessing she in short time
recovered.

61. The young Children of this Gentlewoman also, upon many sore sicknesses,
being given frequently, not only Salus, Vindex, Radix, and the like, of their
mildness, but even Stella also, ever had good from them, without any the least
inconvenience, unto which appertains such a Mystery, as it is no wonder if our
capricious Arts-men censoriously say, they do not understand.

61. A young Lad, about 14, having a tedious Ague, his Master plying him with
Sanguis, heated for his Fits, and with Vis vitae for other times; in about a
weeks time discharged it.

62. A Gentleman about 30, by occasion of business, adding illness to illness,
thickened it into a most violent Fever, with violent pains in his head, vehement
thirst and soreness all over his body, with restlesness: I began with him with
three ounces of Vindex, for the first night, and the use of White Wind Posset,
and in the morning he found himself so well, that he rose out of bed; but
unhappily, for by occasion he ventured to the renewing of his Cold, and that
day was very much out of order; then for next night I gave him the same
quantity of Vindex, and next morning found himself so well, that friends coming
about business, he would needs rise, and did, to speak with them; and so again
lost all the advantage he had gained, and so rooted his Distemper, that for two
days and nights after the event was sadly feared: But every night I plied him
with Salus, or Vindex, and all day long with Radix, to take continnally; but
all prevailing very little, he grew much discouraged; yet following him so
close with the most powerful Medicines, the most threatening Signs were
withheld, and the worst that appeared somewhat abated, for he had rest and
evacuation, and his tongue, and throat, and thirst moderated; but as he seemed
to amend, it settled into a second day Ague, with a very bad Cold, and very long
and tedious hot Fits: But as this somewhat quitted the mortal fears of his
friends, so was I well satisfied I had it at that pass; for I account not any
Ague difficult, where (as here) the Patient is easily ordered, and willing to
give time, without limitation of cost: So every night I gave him three ounces
of Salus, and half a pint of Vis vitae, every day, to take by little and little
all day long; and for his Fits half a pint of Refugium to take well heated, one
half of it just before, or in the beginning of his Fit, and the rest at times
before it ended, and so by degrees his Fits were lessened, and his well days
and nights without headache, or sickness, and in short time at a final end,
without any thing, but some three nights two ounces of Vindex, to throw out the
dead or killed dog; and he immediately followed his occasions, free from all
faintness or infirmity, which would hardly have been so, had he bled, or
vomited, or purged, and been blistered; as in other hands he would have been,
though it might have cost him his life: But this good speed, as I take it, the
whole time being not above ten days, next to Gods blessing, is very much to be
imputed to the quiet resignment of this Patient (above most) to all directions
and cautions advised, especially after once he saw the least hazard or
adventure run him into inconvenience; and may stand, as an example of great
advantage and worthy to be followed by all sick persons, with all patience, and
prudent resolution.

63. This Gentleman's Wife, toward the end of her Childbirth month, taking a
great Cold, became very Feverish, and in short time extremely weakened; but
being followed awhile only with Radix vitae, she recovered perfectly, and far
beyond her own and her friends expectation. This was some months before her
Husbands sickness, and was very much the cause of his immovable stedfastness
in his reliance upon my advice, and Medicines.

64. A Gentleman about 24, forced much abroad in wet and slabby weather, taking
an extreme Cold, became fore all over his body, with Vomiting, Gripes, Headache,
and Aguish gripings in his bones; I was hastily sent to, and sent him four
ounces of Vindex, to take all (at twice) in half an hours time well warmed,
last at night; and next morning, to his wonder, he was as well as ever he was
in his life.

Also some months after, upon like occasion, falling just into the same
Distemper, the same quantity of the same Medicine as speedily and thoroughly
recovered him.

65. An Elderly Gentleman, far in the Country, subject to infirmities, with
Gravel, and pains about the Kidneys, by the continual use of Vis vitae, finds
constant relief, with reviving, and much cheerfulness.

66. A very young Child, extremely Feverish with a Cough, and brought so low,
that it was thought to be an Hectic, and that there was small hopes of its
life, by the use of Salus vitae, as half a spoonful every hour, the Child at
last had a large very black stool, and thereupon perfectly recovered: The
Parents had in the whole a Pint, but whether the Child took it all or no, I am
not certain; but if it did, it was very safe, and the cost not exceeding 8 s.
was but small to people of Quality.

67. A Gentlewoman about 40, being extremely out of order with pains in her
head, and vapors, as quite destroyed her stomach, and made her almost blind,
and stupidly senseless, and abundantly the worse for tampering with Physic; but
by the sole help of small quantities of Refugium vitae, frequently taken day
and night, she speedily and perfectly recovered; and so much to her wonder,
that now she will hear of no other Physic for her friends and Family, but
these Medicines.

68. A Gentleman so sore with Piles, that he could hardly go, or stand, or sit,
by taking every night, for a short time, two ounces of Vindex naturae,
perfectly recovered.

69. A Gentlewoman, far from London, troubled continually with sickishness of
stomach, and flying sharp pains all over her body, by three pints of Vis vitae,
taken by a quarter of a pint every day, between breakfast and dinner, and as
much between dinner and supper, perfectly recovered.

70. A Gentleman near 40, troubled with perpetual headache, and weakness of the
stomach, that he could hardly pass about his occasions, by the use of one quart
of Sanguis, was soon brought into a healthful condition.

71. A Gentleman between 30 and 40, being under a Surgeons hands for an extreme
Inflammation in his arm, a Brother of his observing how much he droopt in his
spirits, well knowing the safety and virtue of Salus, gave him half a pint,
which in short time he took, and found so much relief, both as to his Spirits
and Inflammation, that he thought it much expedited his cure, if not saved his
life: But this unknown to his Surgeon, who generally are so set in their way,
that they will not admit themselves the liberty of so much as supposing any
thing can be helpful in their undertakings, but what they are brought up in,
and accustomed unto, though its thought they have as much need as the
Physicians (who God knows have need too much) to enlarge their quarters, and
increase their contributions, of at least such safe Assistants as these have
every way approved themselves.

72. This Gentleman having a Daughter about 12, sorely afflicted with Feverish
Distempers and weakness, by the use of half a pint of Salus perfectly recovered.

73. An Elderly Gentlewoman about 60, overburdened with business, and so
subject to Heats and Colds, Watchings and Weariness, being taken at length with
extreme Vomitings, Gripings, and Looseness, and Lightness of Head; after having
used abundance of the best advice and Physic money could get, at least as she
thought, and being nevertheless worse and worse, and at last so ill, that she
had no hope of her life, being visited by a well known Friend, could hardly be
made to know her, so strangely confused were both her sight and understanding.
This Friend seeing her in this sad condition, put her in mind of my Medicines,
telling her, if she were free from other Physic, 'twas very likely, as bad as
she was, she might receive good by them: So she took her counsel, and had in
some three days three half pints of Refugium, which perfectly recovered her,
and immediately gave her liberty to follow her occasions.

74. Also a Gentlewoman after her Lying-in, being taken in so confused a
manner, that the most Skilful knew not what to make of it, nothing thriving
they gave, or could imagine, a Dear Friend of hers bewailing her condition,
where my Medicines were well known, was soon persuaded to take my advice: So I
gave her a pint of Refugium, to be taken, as I remember, by nine spoonful every
three hours, which perfectly recovered her, at the cost only of eight
shillings: So that henceforth its to be feared, Market Cry will alter, and
those who on all occasions have cried them as good, but dear, being put to
their shifts, must change their notes, and cry (what is more due to common
Medicines) They are too cheap to be good; or alas, what will they do to slur
them.

75. An Elderly Gentlewoman, troubled extremely with Gripings in her Bowels,
sending for my assistance, I sent her half a pint of Refugium, to take the one
third part well warmed as soon as it was with her, which would be about ten in
the forenoon, and another like part at four afternoon, and the remaining part
last at night, and this through Gods mercy perfectly cured her.

76. A young Girl about 4, so extremely troubled with a hooping Cough, as made
the blood fly out at her Nostrils, through the continual violence thereof; and
had also some Convulsion Fits: The Mother full of sadness telling me with
weeping, that just that day month she had buried a younger of the like
Distemper, and that she was even out of hope of this, having used all means she
could get, but all in vain; blaming her self, that she had not come sooner to
me, as having received much good from my Medicines, both before, and in the
sickness. I comforted her all I could, and gave her near four ounces of Succus
and Refugium, mixed 2 parts Succus and one Refugium, to give the Child two
spoonful every hour: Next day she came to me rejoicing, and took as much more,
nothing at all doubting her recovery, and through Gods goodness sped
accordingly.

77. A Sea Captain, being much encouraged by one who had great experience of my
Medicines, took a large quantity for his Voyage, of several sorts, and diverse
of them of the higher prizes, as 8 s. and 12 s. the pint, which fell out very
happily for him, the place where he arrived being a very hot Climate, and at
that time extremely afflicted with the Calenture, insomuch that whatsoever good
he might do for others, with great joy he ascribes his own preservation from
that threatening and mortal Distemper, under God, to their assistance. And being
asked how they kept in so hot a Country, he said, every whit as good as at
first; which being a further confirmation of their durable qualities, still
proves them as fit for Sea, as for Land; as useful in Foreign Countries as our
own; and for persons traveling every way, as for fixed and settled Families.

78. One about 30, who was extremely surfeited by eating, long and exceedingly
disturbed thereby, was perfectly recovered by half a pint of Sanguis, half
taken about 4 afternoon, and the other half last at night, well warmed.

79. A Gentlewoman about 22, very long afflicted with pains in her stomach,
head, and loss of appetite, by the use of three quarts of Sanguis vitae, taken
by nine spoonfuls every forenoon, between breakfast and dinner; and as much
every afternoon, between dinner and supper, perfectly recovered.

80. A Merchants Child, under long Feverish Distempers, after very much means
of Physic fruitlesly used, perfectly recovered by twice four ounces of Salus
vitae, taken by three spoonfuls every three hours.

81. A Child about 3 years old, almost past hope, through a Fever and Surfeit,
and bad Physic, past all hope of the Parents' recovered, by twice three ounces
of Salus vitae, taking two spoonful every hour till it was spent, Whitewine
Posset being its constant Drink.

82. A strong busling working man, taking an extreme Cold, and surfeited by
drinking Small Beer; his Workmaster that employed him finding him apt to give
ear to slight Medicines, so as it was like to run out into a desperate and long
sickness, and having always by him in readiness, for the use of his Family,
large quantities of the best of my Medicines, told him plainly, if he would
take of them, and no other, he would spare for no cost in his behalf; but if
not, he would immediately send him home to his friends. So the man taking
plenty of Stella, Vindex, and Salus, in one day and nights time became
perfectly well.

83. A young Gentlewoman, being far gone of her first Child, illish and sickish
often, upon apprehension of very near danger, taking a fright, grew so il, as
al her friends doubted an immediate miscarriage; but her Husband always
furnished with Stella, etc. prevailing with her to take two ounces, completely
settled her.

I hope the Reader will not think much of his pains in casting up the charge of
these Cures, for satisfying the charitable repinings of such Artists, as still
sighingly bewail the dearness of my Medicines: For indeed this last, out of
which how much money they would fetch, let those judge who are used to the
costliness of their Visits, the length of their time, and largeness of their
Bills, this no inconsiderable Cure cost 18 pence, that before it about 5 s. N.
81. 3 s. N. 80. 4 s. N. 79. 12 s. N. 78. 1 s. proportionable whereunto
distempers rightly stated: The rest also will rato pro rato appear, and well
applied, might prove a fit remedy for such, as in their hearts wish they were
dearer, though with their tongues they thus play the Bo-peep Lap-wings: for
every one knows what will not lie.

84. A young Merchant, extremely weakened and dejected by the violent griping,
tearing pains of Vomiting and Looseness, insomuch that he exceedingly doubted
how it would go with him, desiring my advice. A friend of his also being very
ill likewise, I gave him a full half pint of Stella; he drank the far greater
part himself, and his friend the rest; but such an alteration did it
immediately make in him, that in an instant he fell into discourse, with that
freedom and cheerfulness, as if he had quite forgot his sickness, or had not
been sick at all. And so also was it with his friend; and both perfectly
recovered, without any after complaint or inconvenience; and this at 6 s. was
thought no hard bargain.

85. A Gentlewoman about 30, grievously tormented with Gripes, and Looseness, by
half a pint of Salus, taking half at ten in the forenoon, and the rest last at
night, perfectly recovered: and about a week after, taking Cold again, and
falling into the same distemper, by the like quantity again recovered, and
continued in health; nor was this thought dear, though both Cures cost 8 s.

86. A Gentlewoman newly brought to bed, troubled overmuch with after-pains
and vapors, I sent her hal^ ^ pint of Radix, and four ounces of Refugium, the
Radix she was to sip of continually, and three spoonfuls of Refugium, in case
of any violent fit, in the use whereof she found immediate help, passing
through her time very healthfully and comfortably; which bears a material
testimony, both for their Innocence and Efficacy, when in so tender a case they
proved so effectual; the charge of both also not exceeding the sum of 5 s.
which was not thought unreasonable.

87. A Child new born oppressed with Phlegm, by the use of two ounces of Arcanum,
mixed with one ounce of Radix, half a spoonful every hour given, ceased to be
farther troubled.

88. An ingenious Gentleman, long time troubled with melancholy, and in hope
of recovery, tired out with Physic, being by his Friend possessed of my own, and
my Medicines lity, put both himself and his Purse freely into my Cere: I was
the best Husband I could for him, and yet was forced, except I would trifle out
my Trust, between the 10th and 25th of March, to put him to full three pound
cost, but so much to his contentment and recovery, that I never took more joy,
then to note his Noble and generous rejoicing in the pleasantness of his
Medicines, wondering that things so pleasant could be so efficacious as he found
them. This Cure was performed by a quart of Radix, and a pint of Salus,
delivered the 10th day of March, the Radix for the day, and the Salus for the
night. The 15th day I sent him a mixture of Stella vitae, and Succus vitae, the
quantity of a quart; the 17th a pint of Salus; the 25th a mixture of Spirit of
Saffron, with four ounces of Arcanum naturae, to the quantity of a quart, and
eight ounces of Salus vitae for nights; and this last proportion lasted him
four days: So I reckon twenty days completed the work, which was thought
could not have been less then so many weeks; nor did he limit me to any time,
nor did I promise him within any compass, so far have I ever been, and I doubt
not ever shall be, from abusing the confidence or trust of any; and am
confident this Cure would not have been thought dear, had it cost ten times the
value it did.

89. A Gentleman in a very violent Fever, sending to me about one in the
afternoon, I sent him a pint of Radix vitae, to take a quarter of it presently,
and three hours after as much more, and at Bedtime the like, and to keep the
rest as he saw occasion: But he being well acquainted with my Medicines, and
knowing my advices ever rather short then over, made more have, and took it all
by seven that evening: He had upon it five or six stools, the Original cause
being a Surfeit; but by this he was instantly and fully cured, and on the
sudden made hungry, that before could not have eaten any thing: And so was it
with him in N. 84.

90. One who by overmuch have bruised her Breast, and long ill thereof,
received very much comfort by the use of one pint of Vindex naturae.

91. One in her Lying-in, though well Laid, yet falling into dreadful pains,
and thence into a violent Fever, and Lightness of Head, with thirst; and after
some remission, by the use of my medicines, a desperate melancholy seizing
upon her; yet being continually plied with Refugium, Vis, Salus, and Radix, a
little after her month perfectly recovered: Cost 30 s.

92. Her Nurse, about the time of her recovery, having tired her self with care
and watching, and falling into extreme griping of the Bowels, by one half pint
of Sanguis taken at twice, perfectly recovered.

93. The Child also during the Mothers illness, being often dangerously
distempered, was still reduced to a hopeful state by Radix, Salus, etc. and is
in a very good condition.

94. A Gentlewoman near 30, extremely afflicted with a second day Ague, and
wearied with Physic, was by a Friend who had esteem of my Medicines,
recommended to my care; her Husband telling me, if I could cure her in short
time, 'twas like she would take what I sent her, else not: I told him, I never
set, nor was not used to be set any time; so if he thought good to refer her to
me, and follow my advice, I made no difficulty, with Gods help, to cure an
Ague: He said he had cause to bethink himself aforehand, having very lately
paid off a Bill of above twenty pound for Physic for himself, and he would be
loath his Wife should fall into such handling, she having had too much of it her
self already: I told him, 'twas more his business then mine, and he might do as
he pleased: But the Gentleman that brought him said, he knew me better, then
so, as to my clearness in the undertaking, and that she should be ruled by me;
so I fell to work, with Salus for every night, and Vis for every day; and
sometimes Salus for the Fit, and other times Refugium, and in about eight days
cured her, with the cost of 22 s. to their wonder and great contentment; and
this without Visit, sight of her, or her water, or any troublesome operation.

95. One between 50 and 60. observing a numness beginning in his fingers, and
unaptness about his wrists, upon taking a pint of Salus, by two ounces every
night, became well settled, and free from that threatening Infirmity.

96. A Child about 4 year old, worn and wasted extremely with a violent Ague,
recommended to me by the Gentlewoman last aforementioned, cured perfectly, by
much the same means and time, to very great satisfaction.

97. A Gentlewoman big with-child, taken with most violent Gripings, with
Vomiting and Looseness, depending day and night solely upon these Medicines, as
Stella, Vindex, Salus, Radix, and taking plenty of them, in very few days
perfectly recovered, without any detriment in her doubtful condition.

98. A Gentlewoman about 40, troubled with tedious pains in her Head, Stomach,
Back, and sore all over her body, and wearied out; and as by her discourse, I
judged, much injured by unwholesome Physic, with a pint of Refugium, taken by
two ounces every night, perfectly recovered, to her joy and admiration.

99. One near thirty, stopped in his Nostrils, with loss of smelling, a fleshy
fl^p, as he discoverd it, troubling the part; I gave him two ounces of Ignis
vitae, and ordered him frequently to hold about 3 drops in his mouth a good
while before he swallowed it; and to wet a little Wool with Ignis, and put it
up to the place affected, and keep it till the heat was much spent, and then to
renew it. He did thus from the 11th of May, till the 7th of June 1669. when his
stoppage was cleared* his sm^lling restored, and the loosend Filme fixed in due
order; he took as much more, in hope by the use of it to strengthen his sight,
which began to be very weak, the cost was 4. s.

We had much discourse how I should be succesful in a Distemper so unusual; And
I told him I was often troubled with Questions, whether I had ever seen or
cured this or that Distemper, to very little purpose, though those that put it,
think themselves very wise and wary in it, and build much upon it: There being
a time when the greatest Practiser had not cured any one Distemper, so that it
was not so much what he had seen or cured, but how well he was furnished with
knowledge, and Medicines for all occasions, which thosewho were troubled with
distempers, were principal to consider, because those of upright consciences
will never undertake any thing but what they judge they are wholly provided for.

100. A Gentleman about 40, long time troubled with a second day Ague, and
Extremely weakened thereby, with loss of Appetite, and restlesness upon his well
days; Desiring my help, with the cost of 30. s. in the Medicines
forementioned, in about 10 days time perfectly recovered, to his great
contentment, having much business depending on him.

101. A Child, his friends hopeless of life, so violently was it troubled with
Vomiting, Looseness, and Gripings; by the use of small quantities of Vindex, as
a spoonful once in two hours, and of Radix other whiles a spoonful in few days
was thoroughly recovered.

102. A Child Extremely molested with Gripes, Looseness, Cough, and spice of
Convulsion fits; with two Ounces of Salus, and 2 ounces of Refugium mixed with
Succus vitae, was presently recovered.

103. A Mother and her Daughter by stoppages, and Vapors, exccedingly pained
in their Head, Back, and Stomach, with violent Gripings in their Bowels,
recovered by half a pint of Vis vitae.

104. A Child of six years old, taken with pains all over the body, with
tremblings in her hands, loss of Appetite, and violently burning, which proved
very Difficult, yet in four days time with the cost of 10 s. perfectly
recovered.

105. One near 50, taken with a twisting pain upon his Loins that he could
hardly go, and not without great painfulness; taking at one draught a quarter
of a pint of Stella vitae well heated, immediately was restored to his strength
and walking, he took as much more home with him for night, which confirmed the
work.

106. A Gentlewoman near 40, taken with a violent pain in her shoulder, all
along her Arm, and most part of both made raw by Plasters, her hand very much
swollen, stiff, and pained: I I gave her whilst she was with me 6 ounces of Vis
vitae, she took it slowly and by degrees; And for that night 3 ounces of Vindex
naturae, which remitted much of the pain and smelling; Next night 3 ounces more
of the same Discharged the whole Distemper, and perfected the Cure.

107. One upon a^ most Dreadful Surfeit under pains, Fever, and restlesness, by
twice 4 ounces of Refugium perfectly recovered.

108. A young man earnestly desired me to give his friend something to comfort
him in an Extreme Illness, reckoning up so many sad Effects he lay under, as
more could hardly have been, had he been taken with the Pestilence, withal
telling me they had sent for a Doctor; I told him I must then be excused for
sending any thing thither, and so I Dismis'd him: Some days after he comes to
me again, telling me he had been bled, and Purges given him, but without
stools, or any amendment, Vomited all he took, was extreme thirsty and
restless. And that he earnestly desired to have of my Medicines, being resolved
to take nothing else, 'twas a Family understood them very well, so I sent four
ounces of Vindex half for bedtime, and the rest with in the night; next Day he
had stools, and in all respects much amended; next night he took as much more,
which quit him of all his Distempers, and next night 4 ounces of Radix vitae,
perfected his Cure.

109. A young Gentlewoman very little recovered out of a violent looseness,
occasioned by a Surfeit, somewhat unexpectedly was very well brought to bed of a
very hopeful Child, but within 3 days time became so Disturbed in her head, and
all over her body, that Pestilential madness could hardly Exceed it, yet at
worst had so much remembrance of the good she had often received by these
Medicines, that as she took freely of them, so would she hear of nothing else,
and though some about her, and some visitants shook their heads, when they saw
her continue long under her Extremities, giving out Cautions and words of
Discouragements, at the use of so great a quantity of hot things as they would
call them, fearing she would fall under rhem: Yet through Gods goodness they
proved her preservation, when in all probability any other way had been her
ruin.

110. And her Child soon changing, and into a green and ill coulored Looseness,
and through neglect of giving Salus and Radix, according to the Fathers order,
as deeming it over hot, and altogether improper for the Child, and so gave
according to other Directions, such insignificant things as Children frequently
suffer by, and so long, till this Child became so weak as not to stir a foot or
finger, or open its Eyes for a Day together, to the Parents and my Extreme
torment, to see such pernicious wilfulness in ignorance, nor had the Child
possibly escpaed, but that it pleased God, when all hope was almost past, a
Gentleman and his wise coming in kindness to visit the Gentlewoman; both of
them having had Extraordinary Experience of the safety and Effectualness of the
Medicines in manifold dangerous cases: I took the opportunity to desire them to
acquaint her (who had sole charge of the Child) with what they knew, touching
the fitness and innocence of Salus and Radix in this case, which they did so
thoroughly, that my persuasions, which till then were fruitl^ss, prevailed so
far, That throughout that night there was given to the Child every two hours a
spoonful of Salus, which by the morning had brought the Child into so hopeful a
condition, that afterward my Directions were exactly and without scruple
followed, under which it so thrived, that in short time proved a perfect and
joyful recovery both of the mother and her little daughter.

Many more instances of their performances I might here recite, were not these
more then sufficient to satisfy the ingenious, that their virtues are still
fresh, permanent, and prevalent; not of a dying or a declining nature, (as
diverse boasted Medicines have proved) but of so constant, lively, and
efficacious performance, as gives just encouragement to believe they can never
fail any rational expectation in any disease whatsoever.

And as it is from this undoubted assurance of their innocence and efficacy
that I have thus frequently pressed their use, the very same reason still
urges me thus far further to affirm, that in this important cause of health,
or for the disconsolate times of sickness: It is not possible (in my
apprehension) for any to do themselves or their Relations a greater good, Than
to be constantly furnished with such of them, as in their rational observation
of their virtues, They shall judge most requisite for their occasions: Yea even
Practisers of Physic, how hardly soever they may br^ng their minds to it,
ought in special manner thoroughly to consider their powerful benignity, and in
tender respects to the weighty trust reposed in them, freely and fully to
direct their use (thereby avoiding all the troubles and dangers of other
Physic) until from their own Studies they are provided of Medicines of like
benignity: Which yet they are to know, will never be compassed whilst they
give esteem to so many insignificant Notions, and conceptions, referring to
Principles, Methods and Medicines, set so high a value upon Antimony,
Quicksilver, and Opium, are so little acquainted with the true humane
temperature, and so regardless of the improvement of their pallats to the
discerning the proprieties and Spirits of Materials, without serious regard,
and conformation whereunto the A^tist sails but by a bought or borrowed and
imaginary wind without Needle or Compass, and never arive at any worthy
production.

Besides, where Nature gives not promptitude, and as (one instances well) a
Teeming Constitution though Art and Learning may abound, pertinent invention
will be to seek, and new Discoveries fail, as the compleatest Laboratories do
frequently manifest: The native genius, being the Artsmans Alkahest and of more
worth than that so much talked of rarity was ever yet to any, for any
commanding medicine as yet appears (except in boast) from its assistance. Or
rather like unto the Archeus to one that had the Alchahest, in forming his
pa^lat how to distinguish of every part laid open to view, and whereof rightly
to choose, and regularly to dispose, for the advance of cure.

The want of which native Energie, has in studens been the occasion that
Chemistry has lately abounded to its own disparagement, yielding nothing
comparable to the noble countenance given unto it: For who now will not be a
Chemist, whether Nature has fitted him thereunto or not: So the famous Orator
would needs make his son an Orator, but long labor in vain, Taught him his
native temperature was not for it: And, if after his Father was gone, he should
at any time need an Orator: He was to make use of another Fancy brain and
Eloquence, and which he might do without disparagement, for no man makes
himself. He that wants an Excellent Musician seeks for one Naturally so
adicted: And if the most Exquisite Mathematitian thinks no disparagement to
make use of Instruments made by another hand, and invented by another head, why
should a Physician deem himself dishonored to make use of the long approved,
safe Productions of another man's Invention, especially considering, that no
Science (so material unto man) depends so wholly upon native promptitude as
this of Medicine: There being no Rule unto Conception, nor Instruction to
direct the Pallats Election: Upon which the whole of all Improvements
necessarily depends.

When all men are alike, every one will produce a like, but till then, one will
still need another aid.

He that in this Warfare will use no weapons, but such as he knows how to make
himself, would hardso venture upon a Combat were his own life concerned: But I
shall leave this to the sole persuasion of time, though I daily see manifest
inconveniences, for want of their general reception into practice. And so I
return to my advice for Families.

Whom yet I Iwould willingly, and fully possess of this important Truth, before
I put a period to this Discourse: viz. That how ever it be taken (and justly)
for a great happiness to be recovered immediately by safe means upon a sudden
illness: And reckoned (upon good grounds) like life, from the death, to be
raised to health and strength, from a tedious and dangerous fiit of sickness,
by safe and kindly Medicines, free from all hazards and disturbance (unto both
which most remarkable ends in Physic, the Medicines before proposed are
effectually adapted) yet is there no benefit or advantage so desirable, or in
it self so truly valuable, as where by a timely providence and foresight, you
make use of them to keep you in constant health and cheerfulness, where-unto I
verily believe there is not any thing so proper, or so effectually prevalent,
being used according as before is specified: nor any thing that does more highly
commend their qualifications, it being no common strain of Virtue, for the same
particulars to be so powe^ful as to subdue the most violent Distempers, and yet
so familiar as to be a most pleasant strengthner, and fortifier against all the
ordinary assaults of time and accidents. And (which compleats the wonder of
their virtue) as small quantity in sickness does as effectually, and as
speedily relieve one constantly using them in times of health, as it does those
who never before knew or took them: At so true an amity are they with humane
nature, and so matertally do they differ from all other Physical Preparations.

And as I have deemed these very worthy your se rious notice, so also that you
heedfully observe the vast difference between those who recover out of any
considerable sickness, having run the usual Tract of Physic, and those who are
raised from the beds of sickness by these kindly Medicines: How pale, weak, and
crazy the one, long languish, liable to relapses upon every small occasion, if
not to worse Distempers arising from the unhappy remains of unwholesome Physic:
Whilst the other are no sooner discharged from their main Distemper, but in a
manner, immediately their Strength, Stomach, Courage, and countenance, return
at once without fear of any after inconveniences; And may well appear a
circomstance of no mean consideration to manifest the difference of the means
and Medicines.

And having thus far disburthened my reason of so many important thoughts which
I judged worthy the knowledge in this weighty cause of Physic, upon which man's
happiness so much depends, wherein my principal aims have been, to make the
differences of the usual Physic: And that which I here propose so apparent,
that every capacity may be enabled to make their choice accordingly.

For perfecting this work, having been somewhat large in showing the stilness,
quietness, safeness and untroublesome way of cure by my really benign
Medicines, very much resembling the operations and effects, not of Terrestrial,
but of Celestial Influences, for a more evident witness of their difference,
and to put this main point past all dispute.

I shall here present the whole Entire Process (of no mean Physician, but) of a
most learnred Doctor Engaged in the undertaking of a Cure, and by himself
published in Print, as what he deemed most laudable, though the success was
doubtful.

And wherein is chiefly to be minded, what before I have expressed. Touching the
trouble, hazard, danger, and ill Events of Purging, Vomiting, Bleeding,
Glisters, Blisters, etc. And the happiness of that way by which all those are
safely and securely avoided. His own Relation verbatim, being as follows.

RIVERIV'S Observations, page 36, 37, etc.
The Distempers Denominated; Tisick, Inflammation of the Lungs, and Palpitation
of the Heart.

ON the 8th of April 1632. The Widow of Monsi. Sejelory of Mon' Pelier,
Starting out of her bed at midnight thinly clad to the window, was presently
taken with great shortness of breath, like a Fit of the Tisick, with a Cough,
spitting of blood, a Fever, and readness of Face; I being sent for, caused a
vein to be opened in her right arm, and 8 ounces of blood being taken away, her
shortness of breath presently ceased. Afterward a Laxative Glister was
injected, and a Julep given her of Red Poppy water, Sirrup of Violets, Sal
prunellae, and Confectio de Hyacintho.

On the ninth day at ten in the forenoon. I visit her again, and find her in a
Fever, troubled with a Cough, and spitting of bloody matter; also she felt a
heavy weight in the middle of her breast with an inward burning, and pricking
in many parts of her Chest. I cause her to be let blood in her left arm, and
that the Glister, and Julep should be repeated, to anoint her breast with Oil
of Violets, and that she lick frequently some Sirrops of Violets; after the
blood-letting she was presently eased and that sense of weight and burning in
her Chest were ^bated. At five in the Evening the same day, conceiving that
vapors arose from beneath, and humors into her Chest, which that shortness of
breath did sufficiently declare; I cause her to be let blood in the Saphena
Vein, after which she was also better; The night following she took the
foresaid Julep again, she slept but little.

On the tenth day in the morning she was better, her Fever and other Symptoms
were very remiss. About the third hour of the Evening she had a coldness in her
extreme parts, with a light sweat in her Feet, and palms of her hands, after
that an a^^te Fever, her pulse very much expressed, and the sense of heaviness
in her chest very much augmented. Dr. Ranchinus the Chancellor was called to
Consultation, who conceived, that it was a Pluerisie, arising from inflammation
of the Mediasticum, and by common consent she was Let blood in her right Arm to
seven ounces, after which also she was better. The other Medicines were
continued, also Frictions, Ligatures, and Cupping-glasses were applied to her
lower parts.

On the eleventh day, which was the third of her sickness, moved with what I
had observed in another Disease of the same patient, in which she was afflicted
by turns, with a Flux of her Belly joined with a Tenesmus, and a Catarrh
falling upon her breast, So that as often as her looseness stopped, she was
grievously afflicted with her Catarrh, and when her Flux recovered, her Catarrh
presently ceased; The humor falling into her breast, being drawn downwards, I
conceived that a Purge would do her most good, which I made after this manner.

Take leaves of B^gloss and Lettice of each one handful, Tamarind, ha^^ ^^
ounce, Liquorice ^h^ee dr^^s, Violet flowers, (...) Pugil, boy all to ^our
ounces, in the strained Liquo^ dissolve one dram of Rubarb, infused in Beglo^^
water with yellow Sanders Manna, and firrup of Roses of each one ounce, make
all into a potion, which she took in the morning, and voided much Phlegmatic,
Wheyish, sharp, and stinking matter, nevertheless the Disease was more violent
toward the Evening than formerly, yet her Pulse was not oppressed as before,
and the weight in her breast was less; But she felt a pain about her right
Chanel bone, which increased by handling the same, she slept little that night,
she took Emulsions frequently.

The fourth day of her Disease, and the twelfth of the month, when as in the
morning her Fever and the pain in her Chanel bone continued. Dr. Ranchinus was
again called to Consult, and besides the foresaid Symptoms, a great palpitation
of the heart, which appeared also in her right Hypocondrium, also in her right
side; but it lasted not long there. But about her heart it continued, and did
beat like a Hammer violently, she was again Let blood in her right Arm. And an
Ovntment was appointed for the part pained, and Remedies to revel the humors
to the lower parts: About Evening the Disease was again exasperated, and the
Palpitation continued, some hours after she did sweat a little all her body
over, by which she was a little eased; But her Palpitation and Fever continued
as before, when we began to suspect that Vapors did arise from her Womb we
prescribed her a Glister for the Mother, Frictions, Ligatures, and
Cupping-glasses to be applied to her lower parts, Emplastrum Hystericum was
applied to her Navel; and a Julep was given her, to assist her sweating, of
Scabious and Carduus water with Bezoar stone, and half an ounce of Orange
flower water in regard of her womb. In the night she had three large stools of
stinking corrupt matter: after midnight she slept quietly till morning.

On the fifth day of the Disease, I found her in the morning with a small
Fever, without any oppression in her breast, or any pain, and with very little
Palpitation of heart, about Evening she did sweat a little, and was better
afterward. After she had voided her Glister, her palpition was augmented, her
Fever became more intense, and she was pretty well in the Night.

On the sixth day, all things were as before, in the Evening Cupping-glasses
were applied with scarrificaton which did her good.

On the seventh day her Courses began to flow plentifully, by which means all
Symptoms were verymuch abated.

On the eighth day she was better.

On the ninth day she had a light looseness joined with a Tenesmus, by which she
voided few Phlegmatic excrements, and before that looseness, she vomited much
bitter stuff, the Humors were prepared with temperate aperitives.

On the tenth day, which was the eighteenth day of the Month her looseness was
less, at night it stopped quite, ^he had no Fever, and after that she plainly
amended.

On the 29. of the said Month of April, when she felt her helf exceeding well,
and was busy about her household oc^asions, as she was sitting in a Chair, she
fell suddenly to the ground and died.

Her body being opened, her Mediastinum was found full of wheyish blood, which
peradventure, the Membrane being broken toward the upper part of the Lungs,
and pressing the same, and the Aspera Arteria, might suddenly choke her,
moreover the whole substance of the Lungs was found full of purulent matter,
exceeding heavy: Also her left Testicle was as big as a small Egg, of a
blackish color, and as it were Gangrenated, yea and as soon as it was opened,
there leapt out of the middle of her Testicle, a certain matter like a
Nut-kernel, and very like a putrisied clotter of blood; we conjectured that to
have been the cause of her Mother-fits, to which she was very much subject, yea
peradventure the Palpitation of her heart arose from thence, viz. From the
filthy vapors ascending from that part.

Here you have a very smooth Story, yet of so unquiet, rugged, pe^plexed, and
disconsolate a handling of a sick and Diseased body, that to one accustome^
solely to mild and gentle ways in Physic, as nothing seems more cross to
reason, so truly hardly any thing more grievous, or more justly to be lamented,
for although the Relation of five times bleeding of one in her sad Condition,
and diverse times Glisters, Ligatures, Cuppings, and Scarrifications, and
purgings be here very plausibly delivered, as if the Fears, Troubles and
Disturbances, these Attending were not at all felt, or thought on by the
Patient, yet whoever sensibly considers the many tossings, and turmoilings this
sick and tender person was exercised withal, during her ten Days sickness, can
hardly avoid believing, but that it was even without any other Distemper,
sufficient to have brought any weak person to their end, or far toward it, nor
can I but firmly apprehend, That if any Patient taken as is here expressed,
should for such a time be Discreetly plied with Refugium, Vindex, Salus, Vita
naturae, Clavis or Radix, being all strengthners of Nature, and of Power to
subdue the venomous causes of Distempers, I say so plied, I can hardly see it
possible, but that recovery must necessarily follow.

And therefore, truly the course taken, was, and is still to be bewailed, and
much the Rather because in this ye are to reckon, that ( ex ungue Leonem) you
have a full prospect of the generally approved Practice of Physic, The
Essence, Quintessence, and masterpiece, not of a learner, but of a Teacher,
and most Reverent Author and Doctor in the Science, such as who ever follows,
may Authentically subscribe Secundum Artem to all their Prescriptions and
Proceedings, for which they are both praised, and liberally pai'd too; And
wherewithal their patients (speed how they will) must be contented.

And yet, who so blind, as with half an eye does not see what extreme
uncertainty this Learned person was at, throughout his whole Engagement in this
Distemper; how slenderly discerning of the Cause how weakly judging of the
alterations; how insensible of the Patients mollestations by Glisters,
Blisters, etc. how regardless of her loss of blood and Spirit, which though
very fruitless, yet often repeated, of how little use his Learning, and former
reading seemed herein, how insignificant all his former opening and Anatomising
of Bodies appeared here, where he was afresh fain to open his Patient to learn
what her Disease was; And being opened, how meanly he Guesses, taking notice
merely of apparent, defects of Parts, (which are but Effects) without any
consideration of the cause thereof, which indeed is the Disease, and
indiscernable, but by the Intellectual eye of the understanding: Also how
poorly he was furnished with Medicines, of so mean, casual, and hazardous
qualifications, as not in the least strengthened but weakened nature, through
which she fell. So that the whole considered, to any rational conscience I
think there will appear a cause, for all I have said or done, In this weighty
affair of Physic and Medicines; and cannot but judge that the World h^d been
infinitely more happy, had it with the resignation of Judaism and Gentilism for
Christianity, at the same time, both questioned, reformed, and exchanged, their
groundless, hazardous, and rugged Physic, for what had been more pure,
peaceable, and more suitable to that sublime and healing Doctrine.

But it does not appear to have then been thought of, nor ever since to any
considerable purpose, for though Chemistry has struck in with large and fu^l
pretenses, and filled our heads with new Bookish Terms, and Notions, yet have
they afforded us scarce any thing but vapouring Fancies, Mysteries, and
Riddles, the proper issue of Vainglorious and Superstitious Reformers, who
though very bad Leaders, themselves, being led by Quicksilver and Antimony,
have had the fortune yet, to be both admired and followed by every Student in
this useful Art; But with so little Fruit, not one Master Medicine yet
appearing, that it would amaze ones Reason even to astonishment; But that vain
windy hopes, and ostentous shows or shadows, have ever been of more esteem then
substances, and useful realities, but if hence forward it should be better, I
to this piece will deem my self a debtor.

And so in time I doubt not will others also acknowledge, for however some may
still shamefully persist even against the testimony of so many instances, one
while to fright people from their use upon pretense of their heat, and
otherwhiles to accuse them of impotency by reason of their mildness, yet have I
not found all Doctors so partially inclined. I here being one, and he neither
young nor mean, who having tasted all with very much attention and satisfaction
openly affirmed, that in producing that Catalogue of Medicines, so qualified,
as the particulars imported, and the instances manifested, I had done a more
real service to Physic, then either Hippocrates Galen, Paracelsus, Vanhelmont,
or any other he had ever Read or Heard of. And that could He Produce them in
that perfection I did, he would not stay many days in England. I told him his
meaning, and the place he aimed at, and he confessed I guessed right, but I
thuoght the place that bred them best deservd them, though but for their sakes
who esteem them equal to this high Encomium, how Ironically soever given.

And to double this single Wonder, one also there is who for years has laid
the main weight of his Practice upon their Assistance, to his full satisfaction
in all sorts of Distempers, and I believe would hardly be drawn to practice
without them, yet never asked what one Particular was in any of them; his taste
and assurance of me at first being his warrant, but now uses them with the
same confidence and familiarity as I do, or as if they were his own
preparations, suspicions, being poor and abject, in casee of so great a trust.

Another Grave and Learned person of high Degree in Art, tasting and wondering
at their so unexpected qualifications, to his extreme contentment, did not, as
others, vainly dignifie himself by spurting out Latin or Greek Sentences,
Enquire whether I had travailed, or at what University I had studied. As if
right Reason were not alike in every Language, and in every place on this side,
or beyond the Seas, being indeed, more or less, as it is Diligently,
Circumspectly, Pertinently, and Honestly exercised. But that grave Gentleman
asked such a Question, not of me neither, (so truly civil was he) but of a
By-stander, which when I was told, pleased me abundantly, to find one prudent
Question amongst so many others, frequently obtruded upon me, very much showing
the vast difference of the inward furniture of men, and ministering matter to me
of very grateful contemplation.

Some other such like Congratulatory Testimonies I might further alledg, did I
lay much weight upon them, but in this Case it being with Medicines as with
men, if their performances commend them well and good, and for those the
instances are thoroughly to be considered, if these speak in their
commendations, all other praises, though thank-worthy, are but supernumerary.

However upon the whole, here is Ars longa abbreviata, a Physic tendered to
general use, and fair Example that needs feel no Pulses, regards not Urines,
Critical Days, Climacterical years, state of the Moon, or position of the
Stars, sight of the Patient, visits, Diagnosticks, nor Prognostics; That
troubles not the head about Circulation, Chilification, or Sanguification, That
values not Anatomy, as the to discovery of Diseases, nor the four, nor the
three, nor the five Principles, nor the Doctrine of Fermentation, nor the fine
spun Thread of Atoms, as any whit advantageous to Cure. That is not beholden to
any Book or Books of Philosophy, or Physic for its production, otherwise then
to Discern the weaknesses of what had been so highly, but causelessly admired:
That stands not obliged to any Chemical or Laboratory Instructers, nor esteems
of their numerous terms of Art, but as wit seldom fruitful in Excellencies,
without which Chemistry like Honor without Virtue, is but a mere Name to brag
withal, as most make on it.

A Physic yet, which is the first has dared to be brought within compass, and
to be liable to be tried whether true or false, fit, or unfit for the Sublime
Nature of man, by certain and undeceivable marks, few and easy to be
understood, Whose Principle is from above, in Qualification suited to the true
humane Constitution, and powerfully Efficacious for Extirpation, and
Extinguishing the venomous Causes of Diseases, that is not at any time either
unsafe or unseasonable, and keeps good for years in all Climates.

And yet a Physic, as the Discourse plentifully shows, that without any
trouble or danger to the sick, may more rationally then any other, be
confidently relied on for Cure, in all Cases and Extremities.

Why then, A Physic bringing so many large Exemptions to the Sick: And that
acquits Physicians from so many encumbrances and perplexities, both in their
studies and practice, should not with all cheerfulness, and freeness be
suitably entertained, Conscience in time will judge: with which being much
satisfied, I shall here put a period to all farther Expostulation or
Expectation: Referring the issue of all my Endeavors, To that Wisdom which
governs the World; and which ought to bear Rule, above all partial interests,
in all the Thoughts, Words, Actions, and Consciences of all Mankind, whether
Rational, Learne^, or Unlearned, Single, or in Societies: And whereunto most
humbly, and most freely, I shall ever wholly submit.

W. W.
At the Star in the Porstern by little More-fields.
FINIS.
Licensed June 10th 1669.

Roger L' Estange.


