Some REMARKS UPON A SPEECH MADE TO THE GRAND JURY For the County of MIDDLESEX,
CONCERNING THE Execution of PENALTIES UPON THE Churches of Christ, Which
worship God in MEETING HOUSES, For their so doing.

And may serve for an Answer to part of the Order of the JUSTICES, Jan. 13. to
the same purpose.

In a Letter to Sir W. S. their Speaker.

For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, in this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self.

But if ye bite and devour one another, Take heed that you be not consumed one
of another,

Gal. 5.14, 15. But it is evident by the sad experience of Twelve Years, that
there is very little fruit of all those forceable courses, [many and frequent
ways of coertion.] Kings Declaration, March 15. 1672.

LONDON, Printed for Elea. Harris. 1682.

SIR,
SINCE Your Speech made at the Session of the Peace, to the Grand Jury there,
is by your, and the rest of the Justices Order Printed and Published, I hope
you will not take it ill, that a private person gives his Opinion concerning
it, especially considering, that your modesty has premised, you should discover
that weakness which by your silence might have been concealed.

Sir, As for that worthy Character you give of your self, your Generosity and
Public Spirit abstracted from all private considerations whatsoever, Your
proof and protestation of it, I have this to say, that you are to me much a
stranger. I am unwilling to make enquiry into your life and actions, and
therefore shall give as much credit to what you say, as one can reasonably give
to him that praises himself -- but could not vindicate himself in the Eyes of
the Commons of England in Parliament: Otherwise I should have wondered that a
Gentleman (who had approved himself to his Country, by the experience of so
great a number of years, and in two Parliaments of such different
qualifications (wherein every Member was tried oftener and more severely than
the purest Gold) of such excellent Integrity, Parts and Virtues, should be
neglected in the Three late Parliaments. The Country is not wont in these cases
to cast of those that have done them eminent Services; sure I am there was a
very great number of the same persons in all these Parliaments, and in the
greatest honor and esteem by those that elected them, and by others also.

In the next Paragraph, you tell us, This Kingdom is at present under very sad
circumstances; and upon enquiry into the cause, you say (and I think boldly
enough) we have lost the Jewel of Government. I perceive Sir W.S. may say what
he pleases; but I doubt it would have been dangerous for a Grand Inquest to
have writ. Billa vera upon such a presentment. What! His Majesty upon the
Throne in Peace, and yet the Government lost! It is dreadful, like Belshazzar's
Hand writing upon the Wall. Mean Mean, God has numbered thy Kingdom and
finished it. I hope Sir, you are no skilful State Physician: God forbid you
should in this Diagnostick. You may if you please see more to this matter in
the Courant of Dec. 23. I expected next the proof of your Assertion, but you
defer that, and tell us of our Princes mercy in the Act of Oblivion. I suppose
there is no man in England, that understands things to any purpose, that is not
sensible of His Majesty's Grace in the Act of Oblivion, wherein he had the
council of his Parliament; but there are a sort of Men that labor much to turn
the Act of Oblivion into an Act of Remembrance; there is no Act that ever the
King Passed, more grievous to them than that; and the reason is not, because
the King has Pardoned His Enemies, but because they cannot by his power wreck
their malice upon their hated Neighbors. I am persuaded Sir, when you consider
the sad state of the Kingdom better, you will find that Men's envy at their
Neighbors Liberty and Enjoyments, and a strange ill will they foster against
them, is the great cause of our sad Divisions. It is not because the Government
is lost, but because it is not lost, that men rage as they do. There are not a
few who long for nothing more than the confusion of the Government; for they
reckon that the only way to effect their Revenge, than which nothing would more
rejoice their hearts. Nay, they could well be content to undergo the hazards of
a Combustion in prospect of the Satisfaction they hope for in conclusion, by
the Ruin of their Maligned Neighbors and Countrymen. And the true reason why
they believe so little of the Popish Plot, is because the Discovery of it
justifies the fears of those they have so long scorned upon that account. I
must acknowledge the Papists and their dissembling Agents have wrought strongly
upon these passions, and have at length raised them to such a height, that, in
my Opinion, they cannot be allayed without a Parliament, which I take to be a
part of the Government. But if a Popish Successor come first, (which God of his
great mercy prevent) I cannot think that those enraged People, who have already
made use of Subornations and Perjuries to shed blood by, will stick at a
Parisian Bartholomew Feast, if they can find no readier way of destroying those
they hate.

You go on in setting forth the Goodness of His Majesty's Government (which is
an odd way of showing the Government to be lost.) He takes nothing from any
man, does not oppress the meanest of His Subjects, nor interposeth His
Authority to obstruct Justice. We joyfully grant all this, and more concerning
the King; but we cannot excuse his Ministers; your last long Parliament found
cause to complain of diverse Public Grievances, to provide Laws against some,
and to charge one Great Man with High Treason in many particulars.

Next you tell us, the mischief of the loss of the Government, but all your
instances, instead of proving we have no Government, prove the quite contrary,
that we have a good Government. For no man can take a pair of Shoes or any
thing else out of a Shop, without payment, but he is punished for it, if he can
be found out, and no Government can punish those that are concealed, Been
vixit, qui been latuit. Nor can any man pass through Lombard Street, and supply
his Pockets without good consideration. Indeed we have heard of some that took
a great many Hundred Thousand Pounds out of Lombard Street upon good
consideration, which was afterward made invalid; but His Majesty was
graciously pleased to grant an Equivalent; but I read in some Public Prints,
of obstructions in the issuing of that Equivalent, which yet I am far from
imputing to the King, but know not how to defend all his Ministers.

In the beginning of your next Period you tell us, that God Almighty knew this
[the calamities of being without Government] when he created man, and therefore
gave him a Law by which he should live and govern himself and printed it in his
heart called the Law of Nature, etc. This is a surprising way of discourse; for
the natural import of it is this, Viz. That to prevent the mischief of being
without Government, God had made every man his own Governor; so that he has no
need of any other Government. Again, It proceeds somewhat incoherently: God
knew when he created man what evils he would incur notwithstanding the Law of
Nature in his heart, if there was not also an outward Government; therefore he
gave him the Law of Nature, and printed it in his heart. I suppose Sir, you
spoke extemporary, but I then wonder you should be against extemporary Prayers
and extemporary Sermons, and use an extemporary Speech upon such a Solemn
Occasion.

You proceed, If man had attended to this Law, there would have been no
contentions or quarrels, no nor fears and jealousies, which are the Devils
Engines to batter down the peace of the World; but the Devil made man forget
his God -- and grow to such wickedness, that God swept them away by an
universal Deluge, etc. Here is a special remark upon Fears and Jealousies in
the Old World: but I find no such mentioned in the Holy History; it was past
that, The Mighty Men executed according to their Lusts, so that the Earth was
filled with violence effectually, and if they feared it before it came upon
them, they had cause enough, and those fears were not in vain. It seems it was
in your mind to expose the Phrase of Fears and Jealousies, and therefore you
must needs bring it in here by Head and Shoulders. But if you please to call to
mind some of the Addresses of your Loyal Long Parliament, you will find they
did not abhor from such like expressions. In their Address against the Duke of
York's Marriage, Octo. 31. 1673.
they pray His Majesty To relieve his good subjects from those fears and
apprehensions which they ly under, from the progress had been made in the
Treaty. And they further say, We greatly fear, etc. That for another Age at the
least, this Kingdom will be under continual apprehensions of the Growth of
Popery, and the danger of the Protestant Religion.

In their Address of March 1677/8 they advise His Majesty, That for the
satisfying the minds of his good Subjects, who are much disquieted with the
apprehensions of the dangers arising to this Kingdom from the Growth and Power
of the French King, etc. I could cite you more of this kind, but my resolved
brevity hinders.

Thus Sir, You were a Member of that Loyal House of Parliament, which had the
Presumption to tell His Majesty of the Fears and Jealousies of his good
Subjects: but what is the matter now, after a horrid Popish Plot against His
Majesty, and a great many Plots against his good Subjects, that now it must be
a breach of the Peace to talk of Fears and Jealousies? I fear Sir, you have
taken it ill you were not chosen in these late Parliaments, and that you are
fallen out both with Parliament and People upon that score.

You go on: This Rebellion [of Corah] you may observe as all other Rebellions
almost that I have heard of, began upon the pretense of Religion and Liberty.
Here you have a mind to expose the Terms of Religion and Liberty, as before you
did Fears and Jealousies, and you pick out the Rebellion of Corah, as a
singular instance of the prevalence of the Devil in that Tract of time between
Noah and our blessed Savior: One would have thought that the Kings of Egypt
keeping in Bondage, and evil entreating the Children of Israel Four Hundred
years together, who at last commanded the Male Infants to be killed, and upon
their demand in the name of the Lord God, and upon their petition to him for
liberty of Religion, increased their affliction and bondage, forcing them to
make Bricks without Straw, and still exacting the same Tale of Bricks as
before, beating them if they performed it not; and the King said, Ye are idle,
ye are idle, therefore ye say, Let us go and do Sacrifice to the Lord. And
Pharaoh hardened his heart to such a degree, that God raised him up or made him
stand to show his power, and that his Name might be declared throughout all the
Earth. One would have thought I say, that this example af Wickedness against
the Law of Nature, and Gods stupendous Vengeance that pursued the Egyptians to
almost their utter destruction for the same, should have been as ready to your
mind as the Rebellion of Corah; I hope you do not think that Moses and the
People of Israel, being Subjects to Pharaoh, were therefore Rebels for being of
another Religion, and craving-liberty upon that account. But now I think on it,
this of Corah was brought in as an instance of great Sin after the Law of
Nature was written in two Tables; but he must be wonderfully sagacious, that
can find in the Law of Nature or Ten Commandments, that the Priesthood was to
be entailed to the Sons of Aaron, and none else of Levi's Family, of which
Corah was. Under favor, I think this was a Rebellion against a special
Revelation as Readiness aso was, when he destroyed not King Agag and the Cattle
with the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. A proper example is this of Corah, to be urged
by the Pope against those Princes and others that Rebel against him as High
Priest upon earth of all Gods People. But Religion and Rebellion must be made
to depend one upon another: a neat way of making Atheists; and when all is done,
I reckon it a very false Notion, That all Rebellions almost you have heard of,
began upon pretense of Religion and Liberty; for take we but a view of the Wars
and Rebellions that have been in England since William the First, and how few
of them have began upon pretense of Religion and Liberty, in comparison with
them that have been commenced upon pretense of Title to the Crown? The bloody
Contest between the Houses of York and Lancaster alone lasted about a Hundred
Years. And the Wars of our English Kings in France, which dured long, and
brought great desolation upon that Country, had the same ground; perhaps you
will not call these Rebellions except Religion had been pretended; but that
were to beg the Question. And if you respect the Wars occasioned and fomented
by the Pope, he will fairly tell you that all his Wars are of a Priestly
Sovereign against Rebels and Heretics. But that which lies coucht in these two
passages is, That to fear the coming in of Popery by a Popish Successor to the
subverting our Religion; and to be jealous of our Liberty from a series of
Treasonous actions in great men against the Government, is a breach of the
Peace, and at least bordering upon Rebellion.

Next you are pleased to make merry with Appeals to the People [ Excellent
Arbiters in matters relating to Government] Methinks Sir, you come too near the
Declaration against the Two last Parliaments, and manifold Addresses of the
Justices and some Grand Juries and a great many Buroughs, that were easily
taken with it.

You seem Sir, to be a little out in your Divinity, whilst you introduce God
Almighty in Creation, Giving Man a Law, and printing it on his heart, and by
our Lord Christ restoring that Law, by instruction, and the sending of Bishops
to govern the Church by Ceremonies, and Liturgies, which have the Sanction of a
Parliament, whereas Gods giving his Laws into Men's minds, and writing them in
their hearts, is made both by the Prophet Jeremy and the Divine Author to the
Hebrews, the special Promise and Privilege of the New Covenant, whereof Christ
is Mediator. And if Christ has not written his Laws in men's hearts by the
Gospel, Sir Wm's Argument does equally justify all the Papists of Spain,
Italy, France, etc. as the Protestants of the Church of England, and equally
condemn the Protestants in those Countries, as the Dissenters here in England;
for they have their Bishops by a continued Succession as well as we, and they
have their Ceremonies and Liturgy (called the Mass) as well as we; and these
have the Sanction of their Parliaments; the agreement both of Kings and People,
as well as ours. Thus Sir, you have made Popery as much the Religion of Christ
as Protestantism, and justify all Persecutions of Christians, that are made by
Bishops and Laws. The French King is beholding to you for vindicating him in
his present Persecution of the poor Protestants, to whom yet (thanks be to God
and the King) we give entertainment.

But when you seriously think of, this Establishment by Bishops, and the
agreement in Parliament, It raises your admiration how any man can think
himself hardly dealt with, when he is required to comply with that which he
has before agreed. Pray Sir, were you never on the Negative side in any Law
that was passed in those Parliaments wherein you sat? if you were, then you
did not agree to that Law, now suppose that that Law had been the Law of
conformity to the Mass, as it was in Queen Mary's days, would you have thought
your self obliged to have yielded obedience to it, because you were over Voted?
Sir, Sanctions of King and Parliament cannot make a thing good, which in its
nature is not so: neither can it make an indifferent thing lawful to me, if I
in my Conscience think it otherwise, for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.
Christ has not given Bishops to be Lords over his Heritage, which they will be,
if you give them power to make Laws and enforce them against the Conscience of
Believers, in things not necessary to be determined, and much less in things
already otherwise determined in the Doctrine of Christ.

You admire again, That any should think it reasonable that Public
Conventicles should be permitted in opposition to the said Established
Government. I have said something before that is applicable to this, to allay
this admiration. I add, that many Conventiclers do think their Pastors to be
Bishops (...), or Overseers (as your self note) which they are as much obliged
to obey, as if there were an Humane Law for it.

Again, Some are greatly offended at the rancour and bitterness they perceive
in many high-flown Men of the Church, against those that dissent from them, who
would have those severe Laws executed against them, whilst in the mean time,
they are not more certain of any thing, than that they heartily desire their
own Salvation, and endeavor honestly to find out, and to walk in the right way
to it; and hence they are most certain it is contrary to the mind of Christ,
any of his Followers should punish them for their Meeting together in his Name,
in pursuance of those ends; and consequently that Church that does so, offends
against a Fundamental Point of Christian Practice, for they have the like
persuasion concerning the Integrity of others that differ from them, as they
have of themselves, and are therefore sure, that if they be so, they can no
more execute Penalties upon them, than they upon others. They ought to have the
same love and respect for them, as they have for Conformists; and to do unto
them as they would have them do unto themselves, if they be otherwise minded,
they offend both against the Law of nature and the Law of Christ. If either
they or the Dissenters offend against the necessary Principles and Laws of
Government, though it be never so much their consciences so to do, they deny
not the Magistrates right to punish them: but they are certain this is none of
those cases. It is an excellent passage of the late Lord Chief Justice, Sir
Matthew Hale p. 1308. bserved in his Life, relating to the Quakers; He
considered Marriage and Succession as a right of nature (there is the same
reason of other rights of nature) from which none ought to be barred, what
mistake soever they might be under in the Points of Revealed Religion. Surely
the public meeting together to worship God is a natural right; which therefore
men ought not to be deprived of, though they mistake in the circumstances of
their so meeting and worshipping But I will leave the defense of public
meetings to public prints, specially I refer you to the Conformists Plea for
the Nonconformists, the first and second parts; for that in reason should be
read by you with less prejudice, than those things they say in their own behalf.

You cannot understand, but that the Conventiclers allow their teachers both
Infallibility and Supremacy: what Sir, more then you allow to your Bishops? you
would not have said this, but that you had a mind to make an odious Parallel
between Papists and Dissenters. But who knows not, that Dissenters do all
maintain this as the great principle of Protestantism, viz. That every man
ought to be satisfied in his own Judgment concerning his Religion, and not to
pin his faith upon any man, or number of men, further than they are persuaded
from the infallible word of God. And this is the chief reason why they frequent
gathered Churches, and not Parish Churches; and sometimes go from one
Congregation to another, as they find it more conducing to the great end of
their eternal Salvation.

You say, The Romish Church is an united body, and not to be withstood but by
another united body, and if the people were united and reconciled to this true
Protestant Church of England, it was not possible that Popery should prevail
here.

First Sir, The people are so far united to this Church, that they have the
same Faith, and the same Doctrine for Substance; and they worship God in no
other manner than is allowed by the practice of the Church of England; so that
I would fain be informed what better capacity the Church of England would be
in, if all come to the Parish Church, than She is now. If there was not one
Protestant Dissenter in England, how would that hinder a Popish Successor from
bringing in Popery? We see that under our present Protestant Prince (to whom
God grant a long and happy R^ign) we can scarce keep our selves from being
overrun and destroyed by Assassinations, Sham-Plots, and Suborned witnesses,
with other Engines of mischiefs, to which the parish Church men, as well as
others, are equally Subject: we see that even in the Church it self, they have
raised a strong enmity, Witness Doctor Fowler, and Gregory Prebends of
Gloucester.
one against another, according as they are either more fierce against
Protestants, and more moderate against Papists, or on the contrary more
moderate to Protestants, and more zealous against Papists; what then would be
done under a Popish Successor? should all Dissenters be reconciled to the
Church, would that extinguish the animosities among the Bishops and other
Clergy and Laity (as they call 'um) of the Church it self? I pray consider it.

Our Divisions, you say, give boldness to the common enemy to make attempts
upon us; you say very true, for whilst he sees a party that pretends to the
Church, so desperately mad against those (whether in the Church or out of it)
that being deeply concerned for their Religion, King and Government, are
zealous against the Papists and their Fautors, it cannot but encourage the
Papists to go on in their Devilish Plots and machinations against us. Is It not
wonderful, that since the discovery of a most horrid Popish plot against all
Protestants, some of that name that were gentle before, should now be violent
in the prosecution of their Brethren? as if the Dissenting Protestants were to
be punished for the Popish plot. O unhappy Titus! had thou suffered the
popish Plot to proceed to effect, thou might have reap't a great share in
the profits of their success: But now thou have discovered their Treachery and
saved thy King and Country, thou art scorned, and reproached; thou art in
jeopardy of thy life every hour, either by assassination or false accusation!
And thy wretched Country is in worse circumstances to withstand the Popish and
Malicious enemies of its Religion and Government than before.

The Luxury and Security of Asia -- gave Alexander the Great hopes of Conquest,
Ergo, Our worshipping of God, some in Churches, some in Meetings, encourages
the French King: A natural consequence; Did the French carry on their War the
worse, because they permitted Protestants, though at the same time they made
War against Protestants? but he is afraid of it for the future; and must we
needs tread in his steps, and act by his Policies: surely he that prosecutes
Protestants with Penalties for being so, does the Pope and French King's Work;
for what can they desire more at present? And I heartily wish That the ill
consequences, which may easily be foreseen to arise therefrom, to use your
words, may prevail with men that pretend to love their King and Country, and
Religion, not to be guilty of any thing that will bring ruin upon them: For
when they have ruined the Dissenters, they will next fall upon those of the
Church that favor them, and when they are ruined, it will be easy for a
Popish Successor either to turn them to Popery, or ruin the remainder.

As for the Diberty you say they have -- according to Law, of exercising
Religion in their own Houses.

First, That is denied where Protestants are prosecuted to Confiscation of
their Estates, as Popish Recusants for not going to Church.

And Secondly, The same Passions and Councils that now endeavor to suppress
their Meetings, would then prosecute them as Rioters for meeting above Three
besides the Family, to do an unlawful action, as I have known it done by some
of your Bench.

It is easily said by you, rather Humor than Conscience, when they will yet
offend against the Law, by these Public Conventicles, [but they would be very
glad to find it such an humor, as they could correct with satisfaction to
Conscience; it would be a great ease to their minds, besides the advantage to
their outward concerns] which are so destructive to the Peace and Safety of the
Kingdom. There was a time when His Majesty was pleased to declare, That it was
evident by the sad experience of Twelve Years, that there is very little fruit
of all those forceable courses [many and frequent ways of coertion] And
therefore (says he) We do now issue this Our Declaration, as well for the
quieting, of the minds of Our good Subjects in th^se points, for inviting
Strangers, in this conjuncture, to come and live under us, and for the better
encouragement of all to a cheerful following of their Trades and Callings, from
whence we hope, by the blessing of God, to have many good and happy advantages
to our Government: As also for preventing for the future, the danger that might
otherwise arise from private Meetings and Seditious Conventicles. His Majesty
you see Sir W. was not then of your mind, after Twelve Years Experience and
Observation, that Public Conventicles were so destructive to the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom, but the very contrary. What tho His Majesty was
graciously pleased to Cancel that Declaration, at the Humble Request of His
Loyal Long Parliament, because it did not ground it self upon a Legal
Authority; yet I hope His Majesty's Reason and Judgment expressed in it, may be
of weight to the Justices of Middlesex and London too; especially when the
Opinion of the Commons of England in Parliament concurs with it; [besides who
knows that if there be any Favorite at Court, who designs against the people
(as there seldom wants such as cannot endure the breath of a Parliament) he or
she has the recommendation of Justices, which therefore being their creatures,
must serve their ill purposes? and how easy it is for one or two such Justices
to get the approbation of the Bench to their nomination of Jurymen, and then
woe be to the People] for they declare in their Vote of Luna 10. Januar 1680.
That it is the Opinion of this House, that the presecution of Protestant
Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weakening of the Protestant Interest, an encouragement to Popery, and DANGEROUS
to the Peace of the Kingdom. Now I am clearly of Opinion, that the King and
Commons of England together, their Judgment is rather to be taken in this
matter than Sir W.S's. and all the Bench of Justices assenting.

You will say perhaps, that the Popish Plot, since the time of His Majesty's
Declaration, discovered, has rendered them unworthy of that Toleration; I grant
it, but what have the Dissenters done to confute the King's Judgment in this
point; I hope that Toleration was not given for the sake of the Papists alone;
so that because They cannot have benefit by His Majesty's Reasoning, No body
else shall; that were a hard thing to impute to our Sovereign: However it was,
I presume Sir W. and his Fellow Justices did not Then put in execution the
penal Statutes against Dissenters, neither for some years afterward; such
Deference did they give to His Majesty's reason, tho his Authority was
withdrawn! Public Conventicles were not then thought so destructive to the
Peace and Safety of the Kingdom; And I know nothing the Dissenters are guilty
of, but a strong desire and earnest endeavor to keep out Popery, Tempora
mutantur. But you would have called it hypocrisy in a Presbiterian to alter
his voice thus, the reasons remaining the same.
which they think cannot be done, if a Popish Successor be let in; and in this
they follow the Judgment of three several Houses of Commons in Parliament. And
now I am speaking of the Declaration for Indulgence, I pray Sir, what shall
hinder a Popish Successor from setting forth such another Edict with more ample
graces to the Roman Catholics, whereby they shall not only have the liberty of
Public Meetings; but also access to Parish Churches, and all this by virtue of
That Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical matters, which is not only inherent in
him, but has been declared and recognized to be so by several Statutes and
Acts of Parliament; as in the said Declaration; what tho His present Majesty
was graciously pleased to recall his Declaration, do you think the Popish
Successor would do so? And if he should command such an Indulgence, I am
persuaded never a Justice of Middlesex, would dare (as Sir James Hales in Queen
Mary's days) to put the Laws in execution against them. Poor Sir James, who had
merited highly of the Queen, yet suffered deeply for his Legal Zeal, and I
doubt is too sad an example to be followed, however zealous men are now against
Protestants.

It follows in your Speech, [ these public conventicles] are not suffered in
any Country or Kingdoms as I know of* I have no measure of your knowledge, but
there was not long since published in English a piece, entitled: The Religion
of the Dutch, the Author pretends himself a Protestant: what credit is to be
given him I know not, but I know that in many things he gives a very exact and
true account: He says p. 14. There is an express prohibition of allowing any
other Religion then the Reformed in the Provinces, and yet (says he) we there
find the public exercise of another Religions [so he is pleased to call
different meetings of those that differ in some opinions] besides the Reformed;
there are Roman Catholics, Lutherans, Brownists, Independants, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Socinians, Arrians, Enthusiasts, Quakers, Borelists, Armenians,
Muscovites, Libertins and others; I suppose you will scarce find so many sorts
of public meetings here in England.

Having thus showed the weakness of these reasons, upon which you built your
discourse, there appears no cause why you should so patheticaly adjure men for
Gods sake, and their own to lay aside these public Conventicles etc. Neither
that you should say, They are one cause and a great one of our present
troubles; or that you should invite the Bench and Grand Jury kindly to agree
together in the remedy of this evil: Moreover, If according to the 9th Article
of the Church of England, these Conventicles or some of them be Congregations
of faithful men, in which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments
duly administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same; then are they, visible Churches of Christ,
and they that punish them for so doing, do unkindly agree in persecuting the
Churches of Christ, which Christians ought to be very wary of. Take heed Sir,
you are not infallible.

The next thing you recommend, is the Consideration of Juries, and the Statute
of 3. Hen. VIII. An Act of Reformation of Impannels for the King, Touching
which I shall leave you to the consideration of a paper, set out some Months
ago in an answer to a Speech of yours also printed upon this Subject. The
subtility and mighty endeavors of the Papists, to divert People from the
prosecution of themselves, have raised a great enmity in a party or faction
against the body of the people, represented in 3 Parliaments; The City of
London which has the choice of Sheriffs for London and Middlesex are careful
to choose such Sheriffs as they can trust, and that are not of that party:
whereas the Justices of Middlesex or some of them by their Abhorring,
Addressing and the like actions appear to be too favorable to that faction;
and therefore the Citizens had rather by much the choice of Juries should be in
the Sheriffs than in the partial Justices, especially at this time, when their
Liberties, Lives and Religion are in such eminent danger from Sham-plots,
Subornations and Perjuries, the preservation of all which concerns we owe under
God and his Majesty to our honest Sheriffs. It looks strangely that out of
about 50 persons of the Panel, (against one man of which the Justices cannot
object any thing that may argue untrue demeanor in the Sheriff in his return)
the Justices should not find 13 to make a Grand Jury, without putting in other
of their own nomination. I appeal to the next Parliament, whether the security
and liberty of the People of England be not at this time more in danger by the
Justices, than by the Sheriffs. I might observe upon other parts of your
Speech: but I presume I have done enough already to show the weakness of your
reasoning. I hope you will please to consider things over again, and to pardon
the freedom, taken by one that has due respects for you, and has learned to
pass by the errors of men, being conscious of his own fallibility, but would
gladly have malice and ill will rooted out.

SIR, Your very Humble Servant J. W.

POSTSCRIPT.
ALL considering People will now see that Conventiclers are not punished and
ruined for holding Conventicles, but for being zealous for the Protestant
Religion and Government by advice of Parliament, against Popery and Clandestine
Arbitrary Councels. Their Prosecutors know it to be so. I fear there are some
Justices of the Peace and others who either by their ill management, or
otherwise in the late unhappy Wars suffered themselves and party to fall into
the hands of their enemies, which would now under color of Law and after
oblivion take revenge upon those few of them that survive, by ruining the whole
party of Non-conformists. They, like Haman, think it below them to crush
Mordecai alone, except they involve the whole people of the Jews in that
destruction. But let them remember there is a God that judges the earth: His
Kingdom rules over all in spite of them. He can deliver, and if he will not,
they suffer in a very good cause, for a good conscience toward God, and for
what has been declared to be reasonable by the King, and by the Commons of
England in Parliament.

FINIS.

