To the NOBILITY, CLERGY, and GENTRY of the City and County of GLOUCESTER.
ABEL WANTNER Citizen of GLOUCESTER, and Inhabitant of MINCHEN-HAMPTON in the
County aforesaid etc. most humbly certifieth
THAT for this Twelve years past he has made it his great Business and Design
to Collect the Antiquities and other remarkable Observations of his Native City
and County into one entire Volume; which through Gods assistance will be ready
(by this next Michaelmas Term) for the Press; being a large Encomiastick
History of the City and County of Gloucester, in Folio.

Now for the better Information and Encouragement of all Gentlemen and others,
that are willing to promote the completing of so good and useful a work (by
way of Subscription) the Author has here inserted a brief abstract of the most
remarkable Heads therein contained, purposely to satisfy the curiosity of many,
who possibly otherwise might seem unwilling to Subscribe, before they know the
Subject matter on which it treats.

Be pleased therefore to observe, That First you have the Original Foundation
of that once most stately Fabric, the ancient Abbey, or Monastry of Gloucester,
with its continuation till Canutus the Dane.

Secondly, You have a Compendious Memorial of the now Cathedral Church of
Gloucester, with the Names of each Founder, and how Endowed, with the variety
of other remarkable passages, from Edward the Confessor, to King Henry the
Eighth.

Thirdly, You have its Ordained constitution into a Bishops See, with their
prescript Rule of Living; their yearly Stipends, and other allowances, the time
when every Bishop and Dean was Consecrated, and Instald, to the late unhappy
Wars: with several other things relating thereunto.

Fourthly, You have its particular Dimentions, both within and without, with an
account of all Statues, Monuments, Memorials, and Coats of Arms therein
contained, with the Articles (of the Chapter) of that Foundation, the supposed
valuation of every Minister, and other men's Places belonging thereunto, by the
year; with the names of every Bishop and Dean, Archdeacons, Chancellors, and
Prebends, that have been since His Majesty's Restoration to this present year,
with most of their Coats of Arms.

Fifthly, You have the Original Denomination and Building of the Village,
Borough, and City of Gloucester, and by whom augmented and increased, trac't
through the ancient Britains, Romans etc. to the Second year of King Richard
the Third: Begun with variety of Historical Relations, and continued with
sundry remarkable and Modern Observations, briefly compiled out of the most
approved Authors, as well before as since the Conquest.

Sixthly, You have a particular Survey of the Strength and Fortification of the
City of Gloucester before its demolishments, with a compendious narrative of
the River Severn.

After this you have a general Survey of the whole City by way of Delineation,
with the Ancient Names of every Street and Lane, the Description of the
demolished Churches where they stood, and to what Parishes they are now annexed.

Seventhly, You have a particular description of every Parish Church now
standing in the City, with an account of all Statues, Monuments, Memorials, or
Coats of Arms therein contained, and what Charitable Gifts are bequeathed to
the Poor of every Parish.

Eighthly, You have an account of all Hospitals, Almshouses, Free-Schools, and
other Charitable Endowments within the City, with the Names of their Founders,
and how many Poor people each of them entertaineth, and what yearly, or weekly
Allowance any of them have; and when, and by whom most of the chiefest and
eminent places in all the City were built, with many other memorable
Observations relating thereunto.

Ninthly, You have the Constitution of its Government, their Number and
Assistants, their usual manner of Electing and bringing home of the Mayors etc.
the Extention of the Mace, and many other remarkable passages, with an account
of the Names and Coats of Arms of all those Noble and Potent Princes that have
been dignified with the Honorable Titles of Earls and Dukes of Gloucester, with
the Ancient and present Arms of the City.

And Lastly, You have the Names of every Mayor, from its first being made a
City, to the Restoration of His sacred Majesty: and from thence to this
present year, you have the names of every Mayor and Sheriff, with most of their
Coats of Arms.

So much for the City.

NOW as for the general Description of the County; First you have the
particular Division thereof, according to Ecclesiastical order, branched forth
into Ten Deanaries, briefly compiled into Eight Columns: In the First, you have
an Alphabet of every Parish Church and Chapel belonging to every Deanary in
the County, and to what Abbey, Monastry, or other Religious House it formerly
belonged.

In the Second, you have the Names of the present Patrons; in the Third the
Names of each Minister, in the Fourth the supposed Valuation, in the Fifth
their Tenths, in the Sixth their Procurations, in the Seventh, their
Penticosts, and in the Eighth, their Synodals.

Secondly, you have a particular division of the whole County according to the
common, or civil Jurisdiction, principally separated into Four Divisions, which
is afterward drawn into Thirty Hundreds, and Lastly subdivided into Parishes,
Hamlets, and Tythings; all Alphabetically.

Thirdly, you have an Account of every Market Town, as it lies within its
Respective Hundred, with it is Original Denomination, how Situated, Extended and
Bounded, either with Hills, Rivers, Woods or Commons; the Constitution of their
Goverments, the Antiquity of their Charter; Lords of the Manors, and the
particular Trade, or Commerce on which each Town depends, and how far distant
it lies from the next adjacent Markets.

Fourthly, you have the Description of every Church belonging to each Market
Town, by whom, and when, some of them were built, and to what Saint Dedicated;
with an account of all Statues, Monuments, Memorials and Coats of Arms
contained in any of them, and to what Family they belonged etc.

Fifthly, To the intent that the Pious and Charitable Endowments of all well
disposed Christians, for and toward the Relief of their poor distressed
brethren, may be publicly recorded to future posterity, I have here inserted a
Catalogue of most if not all the Hospitals, Almshouses, Free-Schools, and
other good and commendable Gifts, bequeathed either to Church, or Poor, in any
Market Town or Village, within this County; with the names of each Donour, and
how many poor People every such Hospital or Almshouse does entertain, and what
weekly allowances, and other privileges they have, and what every
Schoolmaster and Usher (if any) have by the Year, and by whom paid.

Sixthly, You have a particular Survey in every Hundred, of all Roman and
Mercian Fortifications, Saxon Rampires, and Danish Camps, with the
signification of those Piles of Rubbish Earth, called Barrows, and what has
been found under many of them; as also your Checker-work Pavements, Stouphs,
Numismata's, Veins of Ore, Quarries, and variety of Solid Stones, found up and
down many places in this County etc.

Seventhly for the better preservation of the Honor, and Antiquity of the
Nobility and Gentry of this County to further Ages, I have, at the end of the
Forest Division, inserted an Alphabet of all his Majesty's present Justices of
the Peace of this County, their Seats and Coats of Arms.

Eighthly, At the end of Kistgate Division, you have the Names, Seats, and
Coats of Arms, of all the High-Sheriffs, and Knights of the Shire, that have
been in this County since His Majesty's most happy Restoration.

Ninthly, at the end of the Seven Hundreds Division, you have an account of the
Names, Seats and Coats of Arms of all the Knights, Barronets, and Knights of
the Bath, belonging to this County, and when most of them were either, Doub'd,
or Created.

Tenthly for the better Illustration of the Work, you have at the end of
Barkley's Division, the Names, Seats, and Titles of Honor appertaining to the
greater Luminaries of the County viz. the Viscounts, Barons, Lords, Earls,
Marquesses and Dukes, gradually ranked, according to their Ascending Qualities,
with their Shields of Honor, Mantlings, Supporters, and Motto's, displayed by
precious Stones.

Eleventhly you have a small Tract of the Military Jurisdiction, and Discipline
of this County; to which is annexed a List of all His Majesty's Commissioned
Officers that now are, according to their several places of Command in a
Regimental Order.

Twelfthly, you have an Alphabet of the private Gentlemen's Names, Seats, and
Coats of Arms.

And last of all, you have the Original Denomination, Situation, Enlargements,
and Continuation, with sundry other remarkable Observations of the Famous City
of BRISTOL, from its first Foundation, to the late Unhappy Wars etc.

THE Subscription Money for, and toward the Completing of this design, is Ten
Shillings, and when the Subscriber has received a Book, well bound and
handsomely covered, he is to pay Ten Shillings more.

The Author assures you that he will Print no more Books than what are
Subscribed for and those shall be Printed on very good Letter and Paper.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
NOT willing to give the least distaste to any person whatsoever; some little
and immaterial things in my former Proposals, I have now thought good to omit;
and for your better encouragement toward the promoting of this work; (which is
now according to my Proposals ready for the Press this Michaelmas, 84.) I have
here given you the Names of those Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen who have
already Subscribed. And whereas I gave notice of another small Book, wherein is
an Alphabet of all the Markets and Fairs with directions from every Market Town
to most places in the County not exceeding 3 Miles etc. to be given gratis to
each Subscriber; these are to acquaint them that it shall be annexed to the
Folio; and that the Coats of Arms of the Noblemen and Gentry shall be Graven in
Copper Plates, and before the Book a Graven Frontispiece.

Mar. WORCESTER 2 Bish. GLOVCESTER 2 Sir Rob. Yeomans K^ and Bar. Sir Edw.
Bathurst Baroner. Sir Tho. Cutler. Sir Rob. Atkins Ju. 2 Sir Fran. Jernagen
Bar.
Phillip Shepperd Esquire Tho. Smith Esquire Rob. Coderington Esquire George Raymond Esquire
James George Esquire Rob. Pleydel Esquire Rowland Wood. Henry Window. William Denis Esquire
Tho. Master Esquire
Henry Brett. Charles Savage. Charles Smith. James Stephens. Robert Sandford.
Joseph Morwent. James Gastnell. Tho. Hodges. Walter Eastcourt. John Hodges.
John Ferrers. John Phillips. Tho. Willett. Just. Morse. John Phillips Sen. John
Barksdale. John Jefferis. Jun. John Driver. John Buck. William King. Nath.
Driver. Tho. Oldfield. Tho. Stephens. George Small. Thomas Small. Nath. Paul.
Archilas Daunte. James Twyford. Tho. Webb. Nath. Friend. James Michel. Miles
Sandys. Nathaniel Gwynn. Rich. Caple. Denis Huntington. Edward Hill. Tho.
Liddiard. Daniel Small. Tho. Small Ju. John Lysons. Peter Heily. Joseph Brown.
Joseph Jackson. Giles Stedman. Giles Eastcourt. Henry 'Dutton. Thomas Hooper.
Richard King. John Cox. John Eliss.



