A letter desiring a just end merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of
Ireland, given about the end of October 1660. to the then Marquess, now Duke of
Ormond, and the second time Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom.
My Lord,
SInce I had the honor of speaking last to your Excellence, I reflected (by
occasion pf several Discourses had this week with Persons of quality) on the
daily increase of the Fears and jealouies of my Countrymen: Which is the
Reason, That instead of waiting on you this morning about private Concernments,
(as I intended) I chose rather out of my unalterable affection to your self, to
give first this Paper, and therein my thoughts and my desires relating to the
Public, that is, to your self and to His Majesty, and his Kingdom of Ireland.

My Lord, I thought fit to tell you, That considering the general fear seized
already almost on all the Nobility, Gentry, and others here of that Nation, and
reflecting on the vast difference betwixt my own belief and theirs, it seems to
me, I behold (in us particularly, who have for so many years so much relied on
your word and virtue) somewhat fulfilled, not unlike the mysterious extinction
of all the Lights to one in the Ceremony of Tenebra in holy week. For, my Lord,
I observe in the generality of the Catholics of Ireland here, even (I say) of
those who have been so long as well your constant believers as your passionate
sticklers, a dimnesse and darkness seizing their judgments; even your fastest
friends heretofore, losing at present their faith of your future appearance for
tnem, and hopes of their delivery by you at any time evermore: Some through
ignorance of State affairs, and intrigues obstructing as yet: others through
inconsideration of those ways you take much wiser, though slower, than folly
and rashness could chalk out: and some out of prejudice or an evil passion,
which blinds them and makes them abuse the timorousness and cre^lity of all
they can; to lessen your esteem and your dependencies, all they are able.

My Lord, these are thoughts, which more and more trouble me daily: because I
have daily new occasions to reflect on them. And therefore would no longer but
give ^n your Excellence, even in this method and in writing, that they might
take the deeper impression; as very much concerning you, since your own
welfare, and the Kings and Peoples (in my judgment) very much depends on a good
esteem of so great a Minister, as your great deserts have made you.

But with all, My Lord, I will give your Excellence my most earnest, and most
humble desires that you delay no longer than shall be necessary, to clear these
clouds of darkness: and clear them in this present conjunctuve, by an
effectual demonstration of that justice and favor you intended the Catholics
of Ireland in your Articles of 48. then they so freely put themselves and their
power into your hands. I am not ignorant that some have after transgressed in a
high nature. But you know, my Lord, there are many thousands of Protestants in
the three Kingdoms, who have been far more hainously criminal, both against
his Majesty and against his Father ^f blessed memory, (...) who have
contributed, or intended as little for bringing home his Majesty, as the most
wickedly principled of the Roman Confederates of Ireland. And we all know (my
Lord) that all the Protestants are not only pardoned (except a very few of the
most immediate Regicides) but equalled in all capacities with his Majesty's
most faithful and approved subjects. Yet if these unfortunate Catholic
transgressors must be alone, in this general Jubilee of the three Nations, held
unworthy to rejoice in the Kings restoration; if they alone, besides their
most grievous and most unparalled sufferings under tyranny these eight or
nine years past, must anew suffer, and yet a ^re heavy judgment, under the
most clement Prince on earth; if they alone must experience all the rigor of
his laws and judicatures for their offenses after the Peace (...) (which
offenses however criminal were not bloody) your Excellence may be nevertheless
pleased to consider the Transplantation cannot be continued on any ^ch account,
nor on any other which may stand either with those Articles, or with the equity
of the Laws, and much less with the justice of a Prince whom God ^h restored
to redeem the oppressed from the yoke of tyranny, to lead captivity captive,
and give gifts to men. And your Excellence may be further pleased to consider
^t the Corporations generally cannot be excluded on this account, nor on any
other may stand with his Majesty's gracious concessions in these Articles.
Neither do I ^ink there can be any reasons of State may accord with the
dictates of a good conscience to exclude them. I confess, my Lord, the
undutifulnesse of some, two or three ^dventure, deserved punishment, and
Limerick severe one. But this, my Lord, is long since inflicted by the hands of
God and man. The plague and famine, the ^d and gibbet, even by the power of
tyrants destroyed them, and revenged your quarrel; though, I am sure, you are
more divinely principled than to mind your own ^enge on any. Besides, my Lord,
your Excellence knows there have been very many faithful subjects in these
towns, even in the most criminal of them.

My Lord, you are more just than to involve the just in the punishment of the
wicked. God himself, whose power cannot be limited by Laws, would not punish
the just, not even when he was most incensed by the most criminal Cities that
ever stood on earth. He assured the Prophet Jeremy, That could he find but one
just man in all Je^ (when most sinful and reprobate, and by his revenging
justice designed for a general desolation) he would single out that man from
the wicked and save him (for (...) our translation reads) nay, for his sake be
merciful to the whole City (if your Translation be right.) When the crying
sins of Sodom and Gomorrha forced open the floodgates of heaven to power down
those prodigious flames of fire and brimstone, we read in Genesis, yet would
not the justice of God permit execution, before he had (...) in a place of
safety one just man that was found in Sodom. And, which is yet more observable,
was further pleased to assure Abrabam, That he was so far from intending to
involve the just in the destruction of the wicked, That if in these great
places designed for so great vengeance, he could find but even ten just men, he
would for their sake pardon all the rest, that is, not Sodom alone, but the
five Cities, and the whole Pentapolitane region annexed. My Lord, our gracious
King has in imitation of this ^y of God, pardoned for some just men's sake all
the Protestant Cities of his Dominions. And will He not pardon the miserable
remainders of one poor Catholic (...)? or two? or three at most? if perhaps
there be so many that have any way offended. I am sure, whatever their offense
has been, it has been these many years (...) sufficiently punished: and has
been, even of the most criminal, incomparably less than what may be charged on
most of all his Majesty's Protestant Cities. And I am sure there have been the
very worst of them, and in the most disobedtent more than fifty (the greatest
number Abraham proposed for mercy to Sodom) just men (I say) to his Majesty,
and your Excellence; then which you take no further cognizance of justice in
this particular. And what besides, may render them unfit objects of the
general mercy, if not perhaps their Religion? Which nevertheless, being so
Christian, and allowed by Articles, can be no exception. Yet, it
notwithstanding all (...), the few and miserable Survivors and Heirs of the
dead in the general desolation, must suffer again, and under his royal
justice: I beseech you (my Lord) Let not ^bles of Sylla and Marius, Let not
their general proscriptions or confiscations be renewed on this occasion, or
affixed in the Courts and Judicatures of the British ^archy. Let not these
bright days of universal joy, be rendered to the Irish Catholics alone dark,
sad, and dismal. Nor let these days be infamously memorable ^sterity for a
distinction so unequal. Even the greatest and worst of Delinquents, amongst the
Catholics of Ireland, even of those very Corporations or Cities, that have
been most refractory, were so far from being Regicides, or any way inclined
unto them, (and only such, and but very few of such, because only some of the
(...) immediate actors, have been hitherto thought fit to be excluded a share
in this joy) that they have fought against them even to despair: and fought
against them (...) England and Scotland and the Protestants of Ireland, wholly
deserted the Royal (...) and f^ht against them at well in def^nce of his
Majesty's rights, as under ^e of his subjects; till at last by long sieges, and
multitudes overpowred, and through Gods unsearchable judgments, and their
desertion by friends abroad, and (...) divisions they lost themselves and their
Country.

Nevertheless, my Lord, far be it from my thoughts to desire the obstruction of
any lawful and honest course may be justly taken to secure the peace of that
Country from national dangers; if any such can be in our days from the
Catholic Natives. What I humbly beg is, That if these Catholics must be
always so unfortunate as (...) thought unworthy his Majesty's graces and
favors to Protestants that fought against him, when they fought for him, or of
such as he vouchsafes; even Presbyters, ^baptists, Quakers, Fist-monarchy-men,
Independents (the greatest enemies to regal power in some tenets, wherein the
Roman Catholics are the surest friends) (...) Majesty may be at least
graciously pleased to let them have the benefit of his Concessions articled
with them. And what I beg, my Lord, is That his Majesty not so much regard the
power of our Adversaryes as the justice of our cause. My Lord, their power is
no greater at this time, than his Majesty is pleased to continue or make it.
There a huge difference betwixt their influence on the meaner Officers and
common Soldiers now, and that it was in the time of the Long Parliament, or in
the days of tyranny and anarchy. In a word it will signify a mere nothing, if
once uncommissioned by his Majesty, and the common Soldiers paid.

However, My Lord, their power cannot be so dangerous, as their unjust demands
of biased interest and pretended zeal, if complied withal by his Majesty, and
by a ^h so notorious and so great of our Articles. For, besides that such
proceedings would, in all probability, estranange the hearts of the Irish
Catholics from his Majesty, and by a consequence of reason (how strange soever
this may appear at first sight) kindle and raise in all judicious Protestants
who have ever fought in any of his Domini^ either against himself, or against
his Father, even in the very Demanders (how much soever blinded at present by
proper interest) perpetual jealousies, and distrusts ^f their own safty,
notwithstanding any Declaration from Breda, or Acts of Westminster passed in
this present Parliament: they would (which is most of all to be feared as (...)
of evils, and may Providence divert it in obstructing the cause) turn the heart
of God from our good Prince, and bring his judgments on him. My Lord, never,
^ver did public breach of public faith escape very public and very dreadful
judgments, even in this world, I mean. Histories profane. and sacred are full
of (...) examples of both kinds. And for the peoples breach, our Irish Nation
these fourteen years past so wonderfully scourged beyond almost all example,
for their breach of their first articles, those of forty six, with you (my
Lord) will be recorded in after ages as one of the saddest. But for a Princes
transgression fo this nature, and judgments following, even such as are
infallibly known to have been for this only cause inflicted, and by God's own
immediate execution for the greatest part, and the rest by his good will and
pleasure, that of the 21. of the 2. of Samuel is pertinent and formidable, The
very first of faithful Kings, elected by Gods immediate ordina^, anointed by
God's immediate commandment, appointed by him Ruler of his peculiar people and
Champion on earth of his Church against Insidels; even this belo(...)d of God
for a time, this dear darling of Heaven for some years, no sooner attempted
against Articles, on the poor Gibeonites, and their four Cities, but those
(...) fearful and Examplar judgments, recorded by Samuel, were decreed against
him, and, for this very fact alone, against his posterity, and against the
whole King(...)ome of Israel. Neither could all the miseries of his own life
after, nor the ignominy of his own death, and of the best of his children,
which followed very soon, nor the army of God perishing with him by the swords
of Idolaters, expiate this public breach of public Articles. Not although
they were his own Subjects with whom he (...)roke, and not Subjects only, but
slaves born, and by covenant; nor slaves alone, but Amorites, whose Towns and
Lands, and fortunes had been the free gift of God (...)o the Children of
Isreal, in his promise to Abraham 700 years before, and long after appropriated
the second time unto them by the Law of Moses, and by his particular command
for extirpation of the ancient Inhabitants, and of the Amorites by name, and
for never entering any League or Peace or Covenant with them. Not although these
Gibeonites, when they articled by their Predecessors, were Insidels, enemies or
one true God, and their articles made with true believers, and believers
infallibly such, and not with Saul, but with Josue, 300 years before the Reign
of Saul, and never by him ratified. Nor although, what is more observable,
these articles were obtained of Joshua through his ignorance of the people that
treated with him, and by their lies and circumvention of him. Nor finally,
although these Articles were assented unto by Joshua only, and his twelve chief
Captains; the whole multitude (concerned in this business) not consenting
otherwise; as appeared within three days after the Conclusion, by their
general murmur against the Prince. My Lord, none of all these extenuating
circumstances, nor altogether, not even backed with zeal for the people of God
(the Scripture nothing particularly that Saul sought to slay the Gibeonites in
his zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah) no excuse, no pretense whatsoever
could obtayn so much mercy of the great Justicier of Heaven, as to inflict the
punishment of this article-breaking on the person of Saul alone; not even
together with his beloved Jonathan's, or on his Legions, and People in his own
days only. The vengeance of God must pursue his Posterity and Kingdom, long
after his death, and for this cause alone. A mortal Famine of three years
continuance must consume the twelve Tribes of Israel, even in the reign of his
Successor; and for this very Sin only, as God himself revealed to holy David.
Nor would the Famine cease, till by David's commandment seven of Readiness
Children and Nephews were delivered to the Gibeonites; and by the hands of
these very men whose Articles he broke, crucified alive upon a Mountain, to
expiate this public and horrid sin, even in the face of the Sun. May
Providence, and the Kings Righteosness, and your sage Counsel (my Lord)
obstruct all occasions of reflecting on this (and so many other examples of
God's revenge of Article-breaking) any further than that the best of Kings may
see the worst of evils attending the Counsels of our Adversaries: and that
their power, whatever it be, cannot be so dangerous as their demands against
our Articles.

My Lord, I conclude here, but with my hearty wishes, That in the House, and at
the Councels of our great King, your Excellence may both appear and approve
your self hereafter what you are in part already, another Joseph. That by the
best of Advices you may preserve the best of Princes, and all his people of so
many different Nations of the British Monarchy. May it be so, my Lord! And may
the ^cks of Ireland in particular owe you a great Deliverance! as I cannot but
confidently expect from you in due time; for my light in the triangle cannot be
extinguished. But (my Lord) may not innocent beloved Benjamin alone, nor
friendly Reuben only, but even Simeon and Levi, and their Accomplices against you
heretofore, have (...) to bless God for you hereafter. May they all find in
effect, that you have the bowels of Joseph to forgive and compassionate them,
and his power to deliver them, and his faith to believe, That God permitted
their evil against you, even in forcing you twice away from them, of purpose to
preserve you for their good; and that you might return, even this second time,
their great Deliverer. Propitious Heaven, and your own good Genius, my Lord,
second my wishes! And may your faithful Believer see with his own eyes the
full accomplishment (...) that he may employ all his days after, and all his
Labors in consecrating to Posterity your Name, with this Elogium of Joseph,
The Savior of his Brethren, and of his Country, and of all the People. And
these are the hearty wishes of ( My Lord)

Your ^ellency's most humble, most obsequious, and most devoted Servant, P. W.


