Vera Effigies Reverendi Patris ROBERTI SANDERSON Lincolniensis Episcopi, AEt.
76


THE LIFE OF Dr. SANDERSON, LATE Bishop of Lincoln.

Written by IZAAK WALTON.

To which is added, Some short Tracts or Cases of Conscience, written by the
said Bishop.

ECCLES. 3.

Mysteries are revealed to the meek.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott. 1678.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, AND HONORABLE, GEORGE Lord Bishop of Winchester,
PRELATE of the GARTER, And one of His Majesty's Privy Council.
My Lord,
IF I should undertake to enumerate the many favors and advantages I have had
by my very long acquaintance with your Lordship, I should enter upon an
Employment, that might prove as tedious, as the Collecting of the Materials for
this poor Monument, which I have erected, and do dedicate to the Memory of your
beloved Friend Dr. Sanderson: But though I will not venture to do that; yet I
do remember with pleasure, and remonstrate with gratitude, that your Lordship
made me known to him, Mr. Chilingworth, and Dr. Hammond, men, whose Merits
ought never to be forgotten.

My Friendship with the first was begun almost Forty years past, when I was as
far from a thought, as a desire to outlive him; and farther from an intention
to write his life: But the wise Disposer of all men's lives and actions has
prolonged the first, and now permitted the last; which is here dedicated to
your Lordship (and as it ought to be) with all humility, and a desire that it
may remain as a public Testimony of my Gratitude,

My Lord, Your most affectionate Old Friend, and most humble Servant, Izaak
Walton

THE PREFACE.
I Dare neither think, nor assure the Reader, that I have committed no Mistakes
in this Relation of the Life of Dr. Sanderson; but am sure, there is none that
are either wilful, or very material. I confess, it was worthy the employment of
some person of more Learning and greater Abilities than I can pretend to; and I
have not a little wondered that none have yet been so grateful to him and
Posterity, as to undertake it. For it may be noted, That our Savior has had
such care, that for Mary Magdalens kindness to him, her Name should never be
forgotten: And doubtless, Dr. Sanderson's meek and innocent Life, his great and
useful Learning, might therefore challenge the like endeavors to preserve his
Memory: And it is to me a wonder, that it has been already fifteen years
neglected. But, in saying this, my meaning is not to upbraid others (I am far
from that) but excuse my self, or beg pardon for daring to attempt it. This
being premised, I desire to tell the Reader, that in this Relation I have been
so bold, as to paraphrase and say what I think he (whom I had the happiness to
know well) would have said upon the same occasions; and, if I have erred in
this kind, and cannot now beg pardon of him that loved me; yet I do of my
Reader, from whom I desire the same favor.

And, though my Age might have procured me a Writ of Ease, and that secured me
from all further trouble in this kind; yet I met with such persuasions to
begin, and so many willing Informers since, and from them and others, such
helps and encouragements to proceed, that when I found my self faint, and weary
of the burden with which I had laden my self, and ready to lay it down; yet
time and new strength has at last brought it to be what it now is, and
presented to the Reader, and with it this desire; That he will take notice,
that Dr. Sanderson did in his Will or last Sickness advertise, that after his
death nothing of his might be printed; because that might be said to be his,
which indeed was not; and also for that he might have changed his opinion since
be first writ it. And though these Reasons ought to be regarded, yet regarded
so, as he resolves in that Case of Conscience concerning rash Vows, that there
may appear very good second Reasons, why we may forbear to perform them.
However, for his said Reasons, they ought to be read as we do Apocriphal
Scripture; to explain, but not oblige us to so firm a belief of what is here
presented as his.

And I have this to say more, That as in my Queries for writing Dr. Sanderson's
Life, I met with these little Tracts annexed; so in my former Queries for my
Information to write the Life of venerable Mr. Hooker, I met with a Sermon,
which I also believe was really his, and here presented as his to the Reader.
It is affirmed (and I have met with reason to believe it) that there be some
Artists, that do certainly know an Original Picture from a Copy; and in what
Age of the World, and by whom drawn: And if so, then I hope it may be as safely
affirmed, that what is here presented for theirs, is so like their temper of
mind, their other writings, the times when, and the occasions upon which they
were writ, that all Readers may safely conclude, they could be writ by none but
venerable Mr. Hooker, and the humble and learned Dr. Sanderson.

And lastly, I am now glad that have collected these Memoirs, which lay
scattered, and contracted them into a narrower compass; and, if I have by the
pleasant toil of doing so, either pleased or profited any man, I have attained
what I designed when I first undertook it: But I seriously wish, both for the
Readers, and Dr. Sanderson's sake, that Posterity had known his great Learning
and Virtue by a better Pen; by such a Pen, as could have made his Life as
immortal as his Learning and Merits ought to be.

I. W.
May the 7th. 1678.
LEt the Life of Dr. Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln, with the Letters and
Tracts at the end thereof, and Mr. Hooker's Sermon, be printed.

WILL JANE, Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of
London.
THE LIFE OF Dr. Robert Sanderson, LATE Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
DOctor Robert Sanderson, the late learned Bishop of Lincoln, whose Life I
intend to write with all truth and equal plainness, was born the nineteenth day
of September, in the year of our Redemption 1587. The place of his birth was
Rotheram in the County of York; a Town of good note, and the more for that
Thomas Rotheram, sometime Archbishop of that Sea was born in it; a man, whose
great wisdom, and bounty, and sanctity of life, have made it the more
memorable; as indeed it ought also to be, for being the birth place of our
Robert Sanderson. And the Reader will be of my belief, if this humble Relation
of his Life can hold any proportion with his great Piety, his useful Learning,
and his many other extraordinary endowments.

He was the second and youngest Son of Robert Sanderson of Gilthwait-hall in
the said Parish and County, Esquire by Elizabeth one of the Daughters of Richard
Carr of Buterthwate-hall, in the Parish of Ecclesfield in the said County of
York, Gentleman.

This Robert Sanderson the Father, was descended from a numerous, ancient, and
honorable Family of his own Name: for the search of which truth, I refer my
Reader, that inclines to it, to Dr. Thoriton's History of the Antiquities of
Nottinghamshire, and other Records; not thinking it necessary here to engage
him into a search for bare Titles, which are noted to have in them nothing of
reality: For Titles not acquired, but derived only, do but show us who of our
Ancestors have, and how they have achieved that honor which their Descendants
claim, and may not be worthy to enjoy. For if those Titles descend to persons
that degenerate into Vice, and break off the continued line of Learning, or
Valor, or that Virtue that acquired them, they destroy the very foundation
upon which that Honor was built; and all the Rubbish of their Vices ought to
fall heavy on such dishonorable Heads; ought to fall so heavy, as to degrade
them of their Titles, and blast their Memories with reproach and shame.

But our Robert Sanderson lived worthy of his Name and Family: Of which one
testimony may be, That Gilbert, called the Great Earl of Shrewsbury, thought
him not unworthy to be joined with him as a Godfather to Gilbert Sheldon, the
late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; to whose Merits and Memory Posterity (the
Clergy especially) ought to pay a Reverence.

But I return to my intended Relation of Robert the Son, who began in his Youth
to make the Laws of God, and Obedience to his Parents, the rules of his life;
seeming even then to dedicate himself, and all his Studies, to Piety and Virtue.

And, as he was inclined to this by that native goodness, with which the wise
Disposer of all hearts had endowed his: So this calm, this quiet and happy
temper of mind (his being mild, and averse to oppositions) made the whole
course of his life easy and grateful both to himself and others: And this
blessed temper, was maintained and improved by his prudent Fathers good
Example, and by frequent conversing with him; and scattering short Apothegms
and little pleasant Stories, and making useful applications of them, his Son
was in his Infancy taught to abhor Vanity and Vice as Monsters, and to discern
the loveliness of Wisdom and Virtue; and by these means, and God's concurring
Grace, his knowledge was so augmented, and his native goodness so confirmed,
that all became so habitual, as 'twas not easy to determine whether Nature or
Education were his Teachers.

And here let me tell the Reader, That these early beginnings of Virtue were by
God's assisting grace blessed with what St. Paul seemed to beg for his
Philippians, namely, Phil. 1.6.
That he that had begun a good work in them, would finish it. And Almighty God
did: For his whole life was so regular and innocent, that he might have said at
his death (and with truth and comfort) what the same St. Paul said after to the
same Philippians, Chap. 3.17.
when he advised them to walk as they had him for an Example.

And this goodness, of which I have spoken, seemed to increase as his years
did; and with his goodness his learning, the foundation of which was laid in
the Grammar School of Rotheram (that being one of those three that were founded
and liberally endowed by the said great and good Bishop of that Name.) And in
this time of his being a Scholar there, he was observed to use an unwearied
diligence to attain learning, and to have a seriousness beyond his age, and
with it a more than common modesty; and to be of so calm and obliging a
behavior, that the Master and whole number of Scholars loved him, as one man.

And in this love and amity he continued at that School till about the
thirteenth year of his age; at which time his Father designed to improve his
Grammar learning, by removing him from Rotheram to one of the more noted
Schools of Eaton or Westminster: and after a years stay there, then to remove
him thence to Oxford. But, as he went with him, he called on an old Friend, a
Minister of noted learning, and told him his intentions; and he, after many
questions with his Son, received such Answers from him, that he assured his
Father, his Son was so perfect a Grammarian, that he had laid a good foundation
to build any, or all the Arts upon; and therefore advised him to shorten his
journey, and leave him at Oxford. And his Father did so.

His father left him there to the sole care and manage of Dr. Kilbie, who was
then Rector of Lincoln College: And he, after some time and trial of his
manners and learning, thought fit to enter him of that College, and after to
matriculate him in the University, which he did the first of July 1603. but he
was not chosen Fellow till the third of May 1606. at which time he had taken
his Degree of Bachelor of Arts; at the taking of which Degree, his Tutor told
the Rector, That his Pupil Sanderson had a metaphysical brain, and a matchless
memory: and that he thought he had improved, or made the last so by an Art of
his own invention. And all the future employments of his life proved that his
Tutor was not mistaken. I must here stop my Reader, and tell him, that this Dr.
Kilbie was a man of so great learning and wisdom, and so excellent a Critic in
the Hebrew Tongue, that he was made Professor of it in this University; and was
also so perfect a Grecian, that he was by King James appointed to be one of the
Translators of the Bible: And that this Doctor and Mr. Sanderson had frequent
Discourses, and loved as Father and Son. The Doctor was to ride a Journey into
Darbyshire, and took Mr. Sanderson to bear him company: and they going together
on a Sunday with the Doctor's Friend to that Parish Church where they then
were, found the young Preacher to have no more discretion, than to waste a
great part of the hour allotted for his Sermon in exceptions against the late
Translation of several words (not expecting such a hearer as Dr. Kilbie) and
showed three Reasons why a particular word should have been otherwise
translated. When Evening Prayer was ended, the Preacher was invited to the
Doctor's Friends house; where, after some other Conference, the Doctor told
him, He might have preached more useful Doctrine, and not filled his Auditors
ears with needless Exceptions against the late Translation; and for that word,
for which he offered to that poor Congregation three Reasons, why it ought to
have been translated, as he said; he and others had considered all them, and
found thirteen more considerable Reasons, why it was translated as now printed:
and told him, If his Friend, then attending him, should prove guilty of such
indiscretion, he should forfeit his favor. To which Mr. Sanderson said, He
hoped he should not. And the Preacher was so ingenious as to say, He would not
justify himself. And so I return to Oxford. In the year 1608. ( July the 11
th.) Mr. Sanderson was completed Master of Arts. I am not ignorant, that for
the attaining these Dignities, the time was shorter than was then, or is now
required; but either his birth, or the well performance of some extraordinary
exercise, or some other merit, made him so: and the Reader is requested to
believe that 'twas the last; and requested to believe also, that, if I be
mistaken in the time, the College Records have misinformed me: But I hope
they have not.

In that year of 1608. he was ( November the 7 th.) by his College chosen
Reader of Logic in the House, which he performed so well, that he was chosen
again the sixth of November, 1609. In the year 1613. he was chosen Sub-rector
of the College, and the like for the year 1614. and chose again to the same
Dignity and Trust for the year 1616.

In all which time and employments, his abilities and behavior were such, as
procured him both love and reverence from the whole Society; there being no
exception against him for any faults, but a sorrow for the infirmities of his
being too timorous and bashful; both which were, God knows, so connatural, as
they never left him. And I know not whether his lovers ought to wish they had;
for they proved so like the Radical moisture in man's body, that they preserved
the life of Virtue in his Soul, which by God's assisting grace never left him,
till this life put on immortality. Of which happy infirmities (if they may be
so called) more hereafter.

In the year 1614. he stood to be elected one of the Proctors for the
University. And 'twas not to satisfy any ambition of his own, but to comply
with the desire of the Rector and whole Society, of which he was a Member; who
had not had a Proctor chosen out of their College for the space of sixty years
(namely, not from the year 1554. unto his standing;) and they persuaded him,
that if he would but stand for Proctor, his merits were so generally known, and
he so well beloved, that 'twas but appearing, and he would infallibly carry it
against any Opposers; and told him, That he would by that means recover a right
or reputation that was seemingly dead to his College. By these and other like
persuasions he yielded up his own reason to theirs, and appeared to stand for
Proctor. But that Election was carried on by so sudden and secret, and by so
powerful a Faction, that he mist it. Which when he understood, he professed
seriously to his Friends, That if he were troubled at the disappointment, 'twas
for theirs, and not for his own sake: For he was far from any desire of such an
Employment, as must be managed with charge and trouble, and was too usually
rewarded with hard censures, or hatred, or both.

In the year following he was earnestly persuaded by Dr. Kilbie and others, to
renew the Logic Lectures which he had read some years past in his College:
and that done, to methodize and print them, for the ease and public good of
Posterity. But though he had an aversness to appear publicly in print; yet
after many serious solicitations, and some second thoughts of his own, he laid
aside his modesty, and promised he would; and he did so in that year of 1615.
And the Book proved, as his Friends seemed to prophecy, that is, of great and
general use, whether we respect the Art or the Author. For Logic may be said
to be an Art of right reasoning: an Art that undeceives men who take falsehood
for truth; enables men to pass a true Judgment, and detect those fallacies
which in some men's Understandings usurp the place of right reason. And how
great a Master our Author was in this Art, will quickly appear from that
clearness of method, argument, and demonstration, which is so conspicuous in
all his other Writings. He who had attained to so great a dexterity in the use
of reason himself, was best qualified to prescribe rules and directions for the
instruction of others. And I am the more satisfied of the excellency and
usefulness of this his first public Undertaking, by hearing that most Tutors
in both Universities teach Dr. Sanderson's Logic to their Pupils, as a
Foundation upon which they are to build their future Studies in Philosophy. And
for a further confirmation of my belief, the Reader may note, That since his
Book of Logic was first printed, there has not been less than ten thousand
sold: And that it is like to continue both to discover truth, and to clear and
confirm the reason of the unborn World.

It will easily be believed that his former standing for a Proctors place, and
being disappointed, must prove much displeasing to a man of his great wisdom
and modesty, and create in him an aversness to run a second hazard of his
credit and content; and yet he was assured by Dr. Kilbie, and the Fellows of
his own College, and most of those that had opposed him in the former
Election, that his Book of Logic had purchased for him such a belief of his
Learning and Prudence, and his behavior at the former Election had got for him
so great and so general a love, that all his former Opposers repented what they
had done; and therefore persuaded him to venture to stand a second time. And
upon these and other like encouragements, he did again, but not without an
inward unwillingness, yield up his own reason to theirs, and promised to stand.
And he did so; and was the tenth of April, 1616. chosen Senior Proctor for the
year following, Mr. Charles Crook of Christ-Church being then chosen the
Junior.

In this year of his being Proctor there happened many memorable accidents;
namely, Dr. Robert Abbot, Master of Balial College, and Regius Professor of
Divinity (who being elected or consecrated Bishop of Sarum some months before)
was solemnly conducted out of Oxford toward his Diocese, by the Heads of all
Houses, and the chief of all the University. And Dr. Pridiaux succeeded him in
the Professorship, in which he continued till the year 1642. (being then
elected Bishop of Worcester) and then our now Proctor Mr. Sanderson succeeded
him in the Regius Professorship.

And in this year Dr. Arthur Lake (then Warden of New College) was advanced to
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells: A man of whom I take my self bound in Justice
to say, That he made the great trust committed to him, the chief care and whole
business of his life. And one testimony of this truth may be, That he sat
usually with his Chancellor in his Consistory, and at least advised, if not
assisted in most sentences for the punishing of such Offenders as deserved
Church Censures. And it may be noted, That after a Sentence for Penance was
pronounced, he did very warily or never allow of any Commutation for the
Offense, but did usually see the Sentence for Penance executed; and then as
usually preached a Sermon of Mortification and Repentance, and so apply them to
the Offenders, that then stood before him, as begot in them then a devout
contrition, and at least resolutions to amend their lives; and having done
that, he would take them (though never so poor) to dinner with him, and use
them friendly, and dismiss them with his blessing, and persuasions to a
virtuous life, and beg them to believe him: And his Humility, and Charity, and
other Christian Excellencies were all like this. Of all which the Reader may
inform himself in his Life, truly writ and printed before his Sermons.

And in this year also, the very prudent and very wise Lord Elsmere, who was so
very long Lord Chancellor of England, and then of Oxford, resigning up the
last, the right Honorable, and as magnificent, William Herbert Earl of
Pembroke, was chose to succeed him.

And in this year our late King Charles the First (then Prince of Wales) came
honorably attended to Oxford; and having deliberately visited the University,
the Schools, Colleges, and Libraries, He and his Attendants were entertained
with Ceremonies and Feasting suitable to their Dignity and Merirs.

And this year King James sent Letters to the University for the regulating
their Studies; especially of the young Divines: Advising they should not rely
on modern Sums and Systemes, but study the Fathers and Councils, and the more
Primitive Learning. And this advice was occasioned by the indiscreet inferences
made by very many Preachers out of Mr. Calvin's Doctrine concerning
Predestination, Universal Redemption, the Irresistibility of God's Grace, and
of some other knotty Points depending upon these; Points which many think were
not, but by Interpreters forced to be Mr. Calvin's meaning; of the truth or
falsehood of which, I pretend not to have an ability to judge; my meaning in
this Relation being only to acquaint the Reader with the occasion of the King's
Letter.

It may be observed, that the various accidents of this year did afford our
Proctor large and laudable matter to relate and discourse upon: And, that
though his Office seemed, according to Statute and Custom, to require him to
do so at his leaving it; yet he chose rather to pass them over with some very
short Observations, and present the Governors, and his other Hearers, with
rules to keep up Discipline and Order in the University; which at that time was
either by defective Statutes, or want of the due execution of those that were
good, grown to be extremely irregular. And in this year also, the Magisterial
part of the Proctor required more diligence, and was more difficult to be
managed than formerly, by reason of a multiplicity of new Statutes, which begot
much confusion; some of which Statutes were then, and others suddenly after,
put into a useful execution. And though these Statutes were not then made so
perfectly useful, as they were designed, till Archbishop Laud's time (who
assisted in the forming and promoting them;) yet our present Proctor made them
as effectual as discretion and diligence could do: Of which one Example may
seem worthy the noting; namely, That if in his Night-walk he met with irregular
Scholars absent from their Colleges at University hours, or disordered by
drink, or in scandalous company, he did not use his power of punishing to an
extremity; but did usually take their names, and a promise to appear before him
unsent for next morning: And when they did, convinced them with such
obligingness, and reason added to it, that they parted from him with such
resolutions as the man after God's own heart was possessed with, when he said,
Psalm. 34.11
There is mercy with thee, and therefore thou shall be feared. And by this, and
a like behavior to all men, he was so happy as to lay down this dangerous
employment, as but very few, if any have done, even without an Enemy.

After his Speech was ended, and he retired with a Friend into a convenient
privacy; he looked upon his Friend with a more than common cheerfulness, and
spoke to him to this purpose. I look back upon my late employment with some
content to my self, and a great thankfulness to Almighty God, that he has made
me of a temper not apt to provoke the meanest of mankind, but rather to pass by
infirmities, if noted; and in this Employment I have had (God knows) many
occasions to do both. And when I consider how many of a contrary temper, are by
sudden and small occasions transported and hurried by Anger to commit such
Errors, as they in that passion could not foresee, and will in their more calm
and deliberate thoughts upbraid, and require repentance: And Consider, that
though Repentance secures us from the punishment of any sin, yet how much more
comfortable it is to be innocent, than need pardon: And consider, that Errors
against men, though pardoned both by God and them, do yet leave such anxious
and upbraiding impressions in the memory, as abates of the Offender's content:
When I consider all this, and that God has of his goodness given me a temper
that has prevented me from running into such enormities, I remember my temper
with joy and thankfulness. Psalm. 1 30.
And though I cannot say with David (I wish I could) that therefore his praise
shall always be in my mouth; yet I hope, that by his grace, and that grace
seconded by my endeavors, it shall never be blotted out of my memory; and I
now beseech Almighty God that it never may.

And here I must look back, and mention one passage more in his Proctorship,
which is; That Gilbert Sheldon, the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, was
this year sent to Trinity College in that University; and not long after his
entrance there, a Letter was sent after him from his Godfather (the Father of
our Proctor) to let his Son know it, and commend his God-son to his
acquaintance, and to more than a common care of his behavior; which proved a
pleasing injunction to our Proctor, who was so gladly obedient to his Fathers
desire, that he some few days after sent his Servitor to entreat Mr. Sheldon to
his Chamber next morning. But it seems Mr. Sheldon having (like a young man as
he was) run into some such irregularity as made him cautious he had
transgressed his Statutes, did therefore apprehend the Proctor's invitation as
an introduction to punishment; the fear of which made his Bed restless that
night; but at their meeting the next morning, that fear vanished immediately by
the Proctor's cheerful countenance, and the freedom of their discourse of
Friends. And let me tell my Reader, that this first meeting proved the
beginning of as spirituala friendship as human nature is capable of; of a
friendship free from all self ends: and it continued to be so, till death
forced a separation of it on earth; but it is now reunited in heaven.

And now, having given this account of his behavior, and the considerable
accidents in his Proctorship, I proceed to tell my Reader, that this busy
employment being ended, he preached his Sermon for his degree of Bachelor in
Divinity, in as eligant Latin, and as remarkable for the matter, as has been
preached in that University since that day. And having well performed his other
Exercises for that degree, he took it the nine and twentieth of May following,
having been ordained Deacon and Priest in the year 1611. by John King, then
Bishop of London, who had not long before been Dean of Christ-Church, and then
knew him so well, that he became his most affectionate Friend. And in this
year, being then about the 29th. of his Age, he took from the University a
License to preach.

In the year 1618. he was by Sir Nicholas Sanderson, Lord Viscount Castleton,
presented to the Rectory of Wibberton, not far from Boston, in the County of
Lincoln, a Living of very good value; but it lay in so low and wet a part of
that Country, as was inconsistent with his health. And health being (next to a
good Conscience) the greatest of God's blessings in this life, and requiring
therefore of every man a care and diligence to preserve it, he, apprehending a
danger of losing it if he continued at Wibberton a second Winter, did therefore
resign it back into the hands of his worthy Kinsman and Patron, about one year
after his donation of it to him.

And about this time of his resignation he was presented to the Rectory of
Boothby Panel in the same County of Lincoln; a Town which has been made
famous, and must continue to be famous, because Dr. Sanderson, the humble and
learned Dr. Sanderson, was more than 40 years Parson of Boothby Panel, and
from thence dated all, or most of his matchless Writings.

To this Living (which was of less value, but a purer Air than Wibberton) he
was presented by Thomas Harrington of the same County and Parish, Esquire who was a
Gentleman of a very ancient Family, and of great use and esteem in his Country
during his whole life. And in this Boothby Panel the meek and charitable Dr.
Sanderson and his Patron lived with an endearing, mutual, and comfortable
friendship, till the death of the last put a period to it.

About the time that he was made Parson of Boothby Panel, he resigned his
Fellowship of Lincoln College unto the then Rector and Fellows: And his
resignation is recorded in these words: Ego Robertus Sanderson per, etc.

I Robert Sanderson, Fellow of the College of St. Mary's and All Saints,
commonly called Lincoln College, in the University of Oxford, do freely and
willingly resign into the hands of the Rector and fellows, all the Right and
Title that I have in the said College, wishing to them and their Successors,
all peace, and piety, and happiness, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

May 6. 1619

Robert Sanderson.

And not long after this resignation, he was by the then Bishop of York, or the
King, Sede vacant, made Prebend of the Collegiate Church of Southwell in that
Diocese; and shortly after of Lincoln by the Bishop of that See.

And being now resolved to set down his rest in a quiet privacy at Boothby
Panel, and looking back with some sadness upon his removal from his general
Acquaintance left in Oxford, and the peculiar pleasures of a University life;
he could not but think the want of Society would render this of a Country
Parson the more uncomfortable, by reason of that want of conversation; and
therefore he did put on some saint purposes to marry. For he had considered,
that though marriage be cumbred with more worldly care than a single life; yet
a complying and prudent Wife changes those very cares into so mutual a content,
as makes them become like the Sufferings of St. Paul, Colos. 1.24.
which he would not have wanted, because they occasioned his rejoicing in them.
And he having well considered this, and observed the secret unutterable joys
that Children beget in Parents, and the mutual pleasures and contented trouble
of their daily care and constant endeavors to bring up those little Images of
themselves so, as to make them as happy as all those cares and endeavors can
make them: He having considered all this, the hopes of such happiness turned
his faint purpose into a positive resolution to marry. And he was so happy as
to obtain Anne, the daughter of Henry Nelson Bachelor in Divinity, then Rector
of Haugham in the County of Lincoln (a man of noted worth and learning.) And
the Giver of all good things was so good to him, as to give him such a Wife as
was suitable to his own desires; a Wife, that made his life happy by being
always content when he was cheerful; that divided her joys with him, and abated
of his sorrow, by bearing a part of that burden; a Wife, that demonstrated her
affection by a cheerful obedience to all his desires, during the whole course
of his life; and at his death too, for she outlived him.

And in this Boothby Panel he either found or made his Parishioners peaceable,
and complying with him in the decent and regular service of God. And thus his
Parish, his Patron, and he lived together in a religious love, and a contented
quietness. He not troubling their thoughts by preaching high and useless
notions, but such plain truths as were necessary to be known, believed, and
practiced, in order to their salvation. And their assent to what he taught was
testified by such a conformity to his Doctrine, as declared they believed and
loved him. For he would often say, That without the last, the most evident
truths (heard as from an enemy, or an evil liver) either are not, or are at
least the less effectual; and do usually rather harden, than convince the
hearer.

And this excellent man did not think his duty discharged by only reading the
Church Prayers, Catechizing, Preaching, and administering the Sacraments
seasonably; but thought (if the Law or the Canons may seem to enjoin no more,
yet) that God would require more than the defective Laws of man's making, can
or does enjoin; the performance of that inward Law, which Almighty God has
imprinted in the Conscience of all good Christians, and inclines those whom he
loves to perform. He considering this, did therefore become a law to himself,
practicing what his Conscience told him was his duty, in reconciling
differences, and preventing Lawsuits, both in his Parish and in the
Neighborhood. To which may be added his often visiting sick and disconsolate
Families, persuading them to patience, and raising them from dejection and his
advice and cheerful discourse, and by adding his own Alms, if there were any so
poor as to need it; considering how acceptable it is to Almighty God, when we
do as we are advised by St. Paul, help to bear one another burden, Ga. 6.2.
either of sorrow or want: and what a comfort it will be, when the Searcher of
all hearts shall call us to a strict account for that evil we have done, and
the good we have omitted, to remember we have comforted and been helpful to a
dejected or distressed Family.

And that his practice was to do good, one Example may be, That he met with a
poor dejected Neighbor that complained he had taken a Meadow, the Rent of
which was 9 l. a year; and when the Hay was made ready to be carried into his
Barn, several days constant rain had so raised the water, that a sudden Flood
carried all away, and his rich Landlord would bate him no rent; and that unless
he had half abated, he and seven children were utterly undone. It may be noted,
That in this Age there are a sort of people so unlike the God of mercy, so void
of the bowels of pity, that they love only themselves and children; love them
so, as not to be concerned, whether the rest of mankind waste their days in
sorrow or shame; People that are cursed with riches, and a mistake that nothing
but riches can make them and theirs happy. But 'twas not so with Dr. Sanderson;
for he was concerned, and spoke comfortably to the poor dejected man; bade him
go home and pray, and not load himself with sorrow, for he would go to his
Landlord next morning, and if his Landlord would not abate what he desired, he
and a Friend would pay it for him.

To the Landlord he went the next day; and in a conference, the Doctor
presented to him the sad condition of his poor dejected Tenant; telling him how
much God is pleased when men compassionate the poor: and told him, That though
God loves Sacrifice, yet he loves Mercy so much better, that he is pleased when
called the God of mercy. And told him, the riches he was possessed of were given
him by that God of mercy, who would not be pleased, if he that had so much
given, yea, and forgiven him too, should prove like the rich Steward in the
Gospel, that took his fellow servant by the throat to make him pay the utmost
farthing. This he told him. And told him, That the Law of this Nation (by which
Law he claims his Rent) does not undertake to make men honest or merciful; but
does what it can to restrain men from being dishonest or unmerciful, and yet
was defective in both: and that taking any Rent from his poor Tenant, for what
God suffered him not to enjoy, though the Law allowed him to do so, yet if he
did so, he was too like that rich Steward which he had mentioned to him; and
told him that riches so gotten, and added to his great Estate, would, as Job
says, prove like gravel in his teeth, would in time so corrode his Conscience,
or become so nauseous when he lay upon his Deathbed, that he would then labor
to vomit it up, and not be able: and therefore advised him, being very rich, to
make Friends of his unrighteous Mammon, before that evil day come upon him: But
however, neither for his own sake, nor for God's sake, to take any Rent of his
poor dejected sad Tenant, for that were to gain a temporal, and lose his
eternal happiness. These and other such reasons, were urged with so grave and
so compassionate an earnestness, that the Landlord forgave his Tenant the whole
Rent.

The Reader will easily believe that Dr. Sanderson, who was himself so meek and
merciful, did suddenly and gladly carry this comfortable news to the dejected
Tenant; and will believe, that at the telling of it there was a mutual
rejoicing. 'Twas one of Job's boasts, Job 31.
That he had seen none perish for want of clothing: and that he had often made
the heart of the widow to rejoice. And doubtless Dr. Sanderson might have made
the same religious boast of this, and very many like occasions. But since he
did not, I rejoice that I have this just occasion to do it for him; and that I
can tell the Reader, I might tire my self and him in telling how like the whole
course of Dr. Sanderson's life was to this which I have now related.

Thus he went on in an obscure and quiet privacy, doing good daily both by word
and by deed, as often as any occasion offered it self; yet not so obscurely,
but that his very great learning, prudence, and piety were much noted and
valued by the Bishop of his Diocese, and by most of the Nobility and Gentrey of
that Country. By the first of which he was often summoned to preach many
Visitation Sermons, and by the latter at many Assizes. Which Sermons, though
they were much esteemed by them that procured and were fit to judge them; yet
they were the less valued, because he read them, which he was forced to do; for
though he had an extraordinary memory (even the Art of it) yet he had such an
inmate, invincible fear and bashfulness, that his memory was wholly useless, as
to the repetition of his Sermons as he had writ them, which gave occasion to
say, when they were first printed and exposed to censure (which was in the year
1632) That the best Sermons that were ever read, were never preached.

In this contented obscurity he continued, till the learned and good Archbishop
Laud, who knew him well in Oxford (for he was his contemporary there told the
King ('it was the knowing and conscientious King Charles the I.) that there was
one Mr. Sanderson, an obscure Country Minister, that was of such sincerity,
and so excellent in all Casuistical learning, that he desired his Majesty would
make him his Chaplain. The King granted it most willingly, and gave the Bishop
charge to hasten it, for he longed, to discourse with a man that had dedicated
his Studies to that useful part of learning. The Bishop forgot not the King's
desire, and Mr. Sanderson was made his Chaplain in Ordinary in November
following, 1631. And when they became known to each other, the King did put
many Cases of Conscience to him, and received from him such deliberate, safe,
and clear solutions, as gave him great content in conversing with him: so that
at the end of his months attendance, the King told him, He should long for the
next November; for he resolved to have a more inward acquaintance with him,
when that month and he returned. And when the month and he did return, the good
King was never absent from his Sermons, and would usually say, I carry my ears
to hear other Preachers, but I carry my conscience to hear Mr. Sanderson, and
to act accordingly. And this ought not to be concealed from Posterity, That the
King thought what he spoke: For he took him to be his Adviser in that quiet
part of his life, and he proved to be his Comforter in those days of his
affliction, when he apprehended himself to be in danger of Death or Deposing.
Of which more hereafter.

In the first Parliament of this good King (which was 1625.) he was chosen to
be a Clerk of the Convocation for the Diocese of Lincoln, which I here mention,
because about that time did arise many disputes about Predestination, and the
many Critical Points that depend upon, or are interwoven in it; occasioned, as
was said, by a disquisition of new Principles of Mr. Calvin's (though others
say they were before his time.) But of these Dr. Sanderson then drew up for his
own satisfaction such a Scheme (he called it Pax Ecclesia) as then gave
himself, and has since given others such satisfaction, that it still remains
to be of great estimation among the most learned. He was also chosen Clerk of
all the Convocations during that good Kings reign. Which I here tell my Reader,
because I shall hereafter have occasion to mention that Convocation in 1640.
the unhappy long Parliament, and some debates of the Predestination Points, as
they have been since charitably handled betwixt him, the learned Dr. Hammond,
and Dr. Pierce, the now reverend Dean of Salisbury.

In the year 1636. his Majesty then in his Progress took a fair occasion to
visit Oxford, and to take an entertainment for two days for himself and
honorable Attendants, which the Reader ought to believe was suitable to their
dignities: But this is mentioned, because at the King's coming thither Dr.
Sanderson did attend him, and was then (the 31 of August) created Doctor of
Divinity; which honor had an addition to it, by having many of the Nobility of
this Nation then made Doctors and Masters of Art with him: Some of whose names
shall be recorded and live with his (and none shall outlive it.) First Dr.
Curle and Dr. Wren, who were then Bishops of Winton and of Norwich (and had
formerly taken their degrees in Cambridge) were with him created Doctors of
Divinity in his University. So was Merick the Son of the learned Izaak
Causabon; and Prince Rupert (who still lives) the then Duke of Lenox, Earl of
Hereford, Earl of Essex, of Barkshire, and very many others of noble birth (too
many to be named) were then created Masters of Arts.

Some years before the unhappy long Parliament, this Nation being then happy
and in peace (though inwardly sick of being well) namely in the year 1639. a
discontented party of the Scots Church were zealously restless for another
Reformation of their Kirk Government; and to that end created a new Covenant,
for the general taking of which they pretended to petition the King for his
assent, and that he would enjoin the taking of it by all of that Nation: but
this Petition was not to be presenred to him by a Committee of eight or ten men
of their Fraternity, but by so many thousands, and they so armed, as seemed to
force an assent to what they seemed to request; so that though forbidden by the
King, yet they entered England, and in their heat of Zeal took and plundered
New Castle, where the King was forced to meet them with an Army; but upon a
Treaty and some concessions, he sent them back (though not so rich as they
intended, yet) for that time without bloodshed: But oh, this Peace and this
Covenant were but the forerunners of War and the many miseries that followed:
For in the year following there were so many chosen into the long Parliament,
that were of a conjunct Council with these very zealous, and as factious
Reformes, as begot such a confusion by the several desires and designs in many
of the Members of that Parliament, and at last in the very common people of
this Nation, that they were so lost by contrary designs, fears and confusions,
as to believe the Scots and their Covenant would restore them to their former
tranquillity. And to that end the Presbyterian party of this Nation did again,
in the year 1643. invite the Scotch Covenanters back into England: and hither
they came marching with it gloriously upon their Pikes, and in their Hats, with
this Motto, For the Crown and Covenant of both Kingdoms. This I saw, and
suffered by it. But when I look back upon the ruin of Families, the bloodshed,
the decay of common honesty, and how the former piety and plain dealing of this
now sinful Nation is turned into cruelty and cunning, I praise God that he
prevented me from being of that party which helped to bring in this Covenant,
and those sad Confusions that have followed it, And I have been the bolder to
say this of my self, because in a sad discourse with Dr. Sanderson I heard him
make the like grateful acknowledgement.

This digression is intended for the better information of the Reader in what
will follow concerning Dr. Sanderson. And first, That the Covenanters of this
Nation, and their party in Parliament, made many Exceptions against the Common
Prayer and Ceremonies of the Church, and seemed restless for a Reformation: And
though their desires seemed not reasonable to the King and the learned Dr.
Laud, then Archbishop of Canterbury; yet to quiet their Consciences, and
prevent future confusion, they did in the year 1641. desire Dr. Sanderson to
call two more of the Convocation to advise with him, and that he would then
draw up some such safe alterations as he thought fit in the Service Book, and
abate some of the Ceremonies that were least material, for satisfying their
consciences; and to this end they did meet together privately twice a week at
the Dean of Westminster's House (for the space of 3 months or more.) But not
long after that time, when Dr. Sanderson had made the Reformation ready for a
view, the Church and State were both fallen into such a confusion, that Dr.
Sanderson's Model for Reformation became then useless. Nevertheless, his
Reputation was such, that he was in the year 1642. proposed by both Houses of
Parliament to the King then in Oxford, to be one of their Trustees for the
settling of Church affairs, and was allowed of by the King to be so; but that
Treaty came to nothing.

In the year 1643. the 2 Houses of Parliament took upon them to make an
Ordinance, and call an Assembly of Divines, to debate and settle some Church
controversies (of which many were very unfit to judges:) in which Dr. Sanderson
was also named; but did not appear, I suppose for the same reason that many
other worthy and learned men did forbear, the Summons wanting the King's
Authority. And here I must look back and tell the Reader, that in the year
1642. he was ( July 21.) named by a more undoubted Authority to a more noble
employment, which was to be Professor Regius of Divinity in Oxford; but though
knowledge be said to puff up, yet his modesty and too mean an opinion of his
great Abilities, and some other real or pretended reasons (expressed in his
Speech, when he first appeared in the Chair, and since printed) kept him from
entering into it till Octobor 1646.

He did for about a years time continue to read his matchless Lectures, which
were first de Iuramento, a Point very difficult, and at that time very
dangerous to be handled as it ought to be. But this learned man, as he was
eminently furnished with Abilities to satisfy the consciences of men upon that
important Subject; so he wanted not courage to assert the true obligation of
Oaths in a degenerate Age, when men had made perjury a main part of their
Religion. How much the learned world stands obliged to him for these and his
following Lectures de Conscientia, I shall not attempt to declare, as being
very sensible, that the best Pens must needs fall short in the commendation of
them: So that I shall only add, That they continue to this day, and will do for
ever, as a complete standard for the resolution of the most material doubts in
Casuistical Divinity. And therefore I proceed to tell the Reader, That about
the time of his reading those Lectures (the King being then Prisoner in the
Isle of Wight) the Parliament had sent the Covenant, the Negative Oath, and I
know not what more, to be taken by the Doctor of the Chair, and all Heads of
Houses: and all other inferior Scholars of what degree soever, were all to
take these Oaths by a sixed day, and those that did not, to abandon their
College and the University too, within 24 hours after the beating of a Drum;
for if they remained longer, they were to be proceeded against as Spies.

Dr. Laud then Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, and many
others, had been formerly murdered by this wicked Parliament, but the King yet
was not; and the University had yet some faint hopes that in a Treaty then in
being, or pretended to be suddenly, there might be such an Agreement made
between King and Parliament, that the dissenters in the University might both
preserve their Consciences and Subsistence which they then enjoyed by their
Colleges.

And being possessed of this mistaken hope, That the Parliament were not yet
grown so merciless as not to allow manifest reason for their not submitting to
the enjoined Oaths, the University appointed twenty Delegates to meet,
consider, and draw up a Manifesto to the Parliament, why they could not take
those Oaths but by violation of their Consciences: And of these Delegates Dr.
Sheldon (late Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley
(now Bishop of Winchester) and that most honest, and as judicious Civil Lawyer,
Dr. Zouch, were a part, the rest I cannot now name; but the whole number of the
Delegates requested Dr. Zouch to draw up the Law part, and give it to Dr.
Sanderson, and he was requested to methodize and add what referred to reason
and conscience, and put it into form: He yielded to their desires, and did so.
And then after they had been read in a full Convocation, and allowed of, they
were printed in Latin, that the Parliaments proceedings and the Universities
sufferings might he manifested to all Nations; and the Imposers of these Oaths
might repent, or answer them: But they were past the first; and for the latter,
I might swear they neither can, nor ever will. And these reasons were also
suddenly turned into English by Dr. Sanderson, that those of these three
Kingdoms might the better judge of the Loyal Parties sufferings.

About this time the Independants (who were then grown to be the most powerful
part of the Army) had taken the King from a close to a more large imprisonment,
and by their own pretenses to liberty of Conscience, were obliged to allow
somewhat of that to the King, who had in the year 1646. sent for Dr. Sanderson
Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sheldon (the late Archbishop of Canterbury) and Dr. Morley
(the now Bishop of Winchester) to attend him, in order to advise with them, how
far he might with a good Conscience comply with the Proposals of the Parliament
for a Peace in Church and State; but these having been then denied him by the
Presbyterian Parliament, were now allowed him by those in present power. And as
those other Divines, so Dr. Sanderson gave his attendance on his Majesty also
in the Isle of Wight, preached there before him, and had in that attendance
many, both public and private Conferences with him, to his Majesty's great
satisfaction. At which time he desired Dr. Sanderson, that being the Parliament
had proposed to him the abolishing of Episcopal Government in the Church, as
inconsistent with Monarchy, that he would consider of it, and declare his
judgment: He undertook to do so, and did it; but it might not be printed till
our King's happy Restoration, and then it was. And at Dr. Sanderson's taking
his leave of his Majesty in this last attendance on him, the King requested him
to betake himself to the writing Cases of Conscience for the good of Posterity.
To which his answer was, That he was now grown old, and unfit to write Cases of
Conscience. But the King was so bold with him, as to say, It was the simplest
answer be ever heard from Dr. Sanderson; for no young man was fit to be a
Judge, or write Cases of Conscience. And let me here take occasion to tell the
Reader this truth, not commonly known, that in one of these Conferences this
conscientious King told Dr. Sanderson, or one of them that then waited with
him, That the remembrance of two Erro^^ did much afflict him, which were, his
assent to the Earl of Strafford's death, and the abolishing Episcopacy in
Scotland; and that if God ever restored him to be in a peaceable possession of
his Crown, he would demonstrate his Repentance by a public Confession and a
voluntary Penance ( I think barefoot) from the Tower of London, or Whitehall,
to St. Paul's Church, and desire the people to intercede with God for his
pardon. I am sure one of them told it me, lives still, and will witness it. And
it ought to be observed, that Dr. Sanderson's Lectures de Juramento were so
approved and valued by the King, that in this time of his imprisonment and
solitude, he translated them into exact English, desiring Dr. Iuxson (then
Bishop of London) Dr. Hammond, and Sir Thomas Herbert (who then attended him)
to compare them with the Original. The last still lives, and has declared it,
with some other of that King's excellencies, in a Letter under his own hand,
which was lately showed me by Sir William Dugdale, King at Arms. The Book was
designed to be put into the King's Library at St James's, but I doubt not now
to be found there. I thought the honor of the Author and the Translator to be
both so much concerned in this Relation, that it ought not to be concealed from
the Reader, and it is therefore here inserted.

I now return to Dr. Sanderson in the Chair in Oxford, where they that complied
not in taking the Covenant, Negative Oath, and Parliament Ordinance for Church
Discipline and Worship, were under a sad and daily apprehension of Expulsion;
for the Visiters were daily expected, and both City and University full of
Soldiers, and a party of Presbyterian Divines, that were as greedy and ready
to possess, as the ignorant and illnatur'd Visiters were to eject the
dissenters out of their Colleges and Livelyhoods: But notwithstanding Dr.
Sanderson did still continue to read his Lecture, and did to the very faces of
those Presbyterian Divines and Soldiers, read with so much reason, and with a
calm fortitude make such applications, as if they were not, they ought to have
been ashamed, and begged pardon of God and him, and forborne to do what followed.
But these thriving sinners were hardened; and as the Visiters expelled the
Orthodox, they, without scruple or shame, possessed themselves of their
Colleges; so that with the rest, Dr. Sanderson was (in June 1648.) forced to
pack up and be gone, and thank God he was not imprisoned, as Dr. Sheldon, Dr.
Hammond, and others then were.

I must now again look back to Oxford, and tell my Reader, that the year before
this expulsion, when the University had denied this Subscription, and
apprehended the danger of that Visitation which followed, they sent Dr. Morley,
then Canon of Christ-Church (now Lord Bishop of Winchester) and others, to
petition the Parliament for recalling the Injunction, or a mitigation of it, or
accept of their Reasons why they could not take the Oaths enjoined them; and
the Petition was by Parliament referred to a Committee to hear and report the
Reasons to the House, and a day set for hearing them. This done, Dr. Morley and
the rest went to inform and fee Counsel, to plead their Cause on the day
appointed: but there had been so many committed for pleading, that none durst
undertake it; for at this time the Privileges of that Parliament were become a
Noli me tangere, as sacred and useful to them, as Traditions ever were, or are
now to the Church of Rome, their number must never be known, and therefore not
without danger to be meddled with. For which Reason Dr. Morley was forced, for
want of Counsel, to plead the Universities Reasons for not compliance with the
Parliaments injunctions; and though this was done with great reason, and a
boldness equal to the Justice of his Cause; yet the effect of it was, but that
he and the rest appearing with him were so fortunate, as to return to Oxford
without commitment. This was some few days before the Visiters and more
Soldiers were sent down to drive the Dissenters out of the University. And one
that was at this time of Dr. Morley's pleading a powerful man in the
Parliament, and of that Committee, observing Dr. Morley's behavior and reason,
and inquiring of him, and hearing a good report of his Morals, was therefore
willing to afford him a peculiar favor; and that he might express it, sent for
me that relate this Story, and knew Dr. Morley well, and told me, He had such a
love for Dr. Morley, that knowing he would not take the Oaths, and must
therefore be ejected his College, and leave Oxford, he desired I would
therefore write to him to ride out of Oxford when the Visiters came into it,
and not return till they left it, and he should be sure then to return in
safety; and that he should without taking any Oath or other molestation, enjoy
his Canons place in his College. I did receive this intended kindness with a
sudden gladness, because I was sure the party had a power, and as sure he meant
to perform it, and did therefore write the Doctor word; and his Answer was,
That I must not fail to return my Friend (who still lives) his humble and
undissembled thanks, though he could not accept of his intended kindness; for
when the Dean, Dr. Gardner, Dr. Pain, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, and all the
rest of the College, were turned out, except Dr. Wall, he should take it to
be, if not a sin, yet a shame to be left behind with him only. Dr. Wall I knew,
and will speak nothing of him, for he is dead.

It may be easily imagined, with what a joyful willingness these self-loving
Reformers took possession of all vacant preferments, and with what reluctance
others parted with their beloved Colleges and Subsistence: but their
Consciences were dearer than their Subsistence, and out they went; the
Reformers possessing them without shame or scruple, where I will leave these
Scruplemongers, and make an account of the then present affairs of London, to
be the next employment of my Readers patience.

And in London all the Bishops Houses were turned to be Prisons, and they
filled with Divines, that would not take the Covenant, or forbear reading
Common Prayer, or that were accused for some faults like these. For it may be
noted, That about this time the Parliament set out a Proclamation to encourage
all Laymen that had occasion to complain of their Ministers for being
troublesome or scandalous, or that conformed not to Orders of Parliament, to
make their complaint to a Committee for that purpose; and the Minister, though
100 miles from London, should appear there and give satisfaction, or be
sequestered; (and you may be sure no Parish could want a covetous, or malicious,
or cross-grained complainant:) by which means all Prisons in London, and in
some other places, became the sad habitations of Conforming Divines.

And about this time the Bishop of Canterbury having been by an unknown Law
condemned to die, and the execution suspended for some days, many of the
malicious Citizens fearing his pardon, shut up their Shops, professing not to
open them till Justice was executed. This malice and madness is scarce
credible, but I saw it.

The Bishops had been voted out of the House of Parliament, and some upon that
occasion sent to the Tower, which made many Covenanters rejoice, and believe
Mr. Brightman (who probably was a a good and well meaning man) to be inspired
in this Comment on the Apocalypse, an Abridgment of which was now printed, and
called Mr. Brightman 's Revelation of the Revelation. And though he was grossly
mistaken in other things, yet; because he had made the Churches of Geneva and
Scotland, which had no Bishops, to be Philadelphia in the Apocalypse, the Angel
that God loved; and the power of Prelacy to be Antichrist, the evil Angel,
which the House of Commons had now so spued up, as never to recover their
dignity: Therefore did those Covenanters approve and applaud Mr. Brightman for
discovering and foretelling the Bishops downfall; so that they both railed at
them, and rejoiced to buy good pennyworths of their Land, which their Friends
of the House of Commons, did afford them as a reward of their diligent
assistance to pull them down.

And the Bishops power being now vacated, the common people were made so happy,
as every Parish might choose their own Minister, and tell him when he did, and
when he did not preach true Doctrine: and by this and like means several
Churches had several Teachers, that prayed and preached for and against one
another; and engaged their hearers to contend furiously for truths which they
understood not; some of which I shall mention in the discourse that follows.

I have heard of two men that in their discourse undertook to give a character
of a third person; and one concluded he was a very honest man, for he was
beholding to him; and the other that he was not, for he was not beholden to
him. And something like this was in the designs both of the Covenanters and
Independants (the last of which were now grown both as numerous and as powerful
as the former:) for though they differed much in many Principles, and preached
against each other, one making it a sign of being in the state of grace, if we
were but zealous for the Covenant: and the other, that we ought to buy and sell
by a Measure, and to allow the same liberty of Conscience to others, which we
by Scripture claim to our selves; and therefore not to force any to swear the
Covenant contrary to their Consciences, and loose both their Livings and
Liberties too. Though these differed thus in their conclusions, yet they both
agreed in their practice to preach down Common Prayer, and get into the best
sequestered Livings; and whatever became of the true Owners, their Wives and
Children, yet to continue in them without the least scruple of Conscience.

They also made other strange Observations of Election, Reprobation, and
Free Will, and the other Points dependent upon these; such as the wisest of the
common people were not fit to judge of: I am sure I am not; though I must
mention some of them historically in a more proper place, when I have brought
my Reader with me to Dr. Sanderson at Boothby Panel.

And in the way thither I must tell him, That a very Covenanter and a Scot too,
that came into England with this unhappy Covenant, was got into a good
sequestered Living by the help of a Presbyterian Parish, which had got the true
Owner out. And this Scotch Presbyterian being well settled in this good Living,
began to reform the Churchyard, by cutting down a large Ewe Tree, and some
other Trees that were an ornament to the place, and very often a shelter to the
Parishioners; who excepting against him for so doing, were answered, That the
Trees were his, and 'twas lawful for every man to use his own as he, and not as
they thought fit. I have heard (but do not affirm it) That no Action lies
against him that is so wicked as to steal the winding sheet of a dead body
after it is buried; and have heard the reason to be, because none were supposed
to be so void of humanity, and that such a Law would vilify that Nation that
would but suppose so vile a man to be born in it: nor would one suppose any man
to do what this Covenanter did. And whether there were any Law against, him I
know not; but pity the Parish the less for turning out their legal Minister.

We have now overtaken Dr. Sanderson at Boothby Parish, where he hoped to have
enjoyed himself, though in a poor, yet in a quiet and desired privacy; but it
proved otherwise: For all corners of the Nation were filled with Covenanters,
Confusion, Comittee-men and Soldiers, serving each other to their several ends,
of revenge, or power, or profit; and these Committeemen and Soldiers were most
of them so possessed with this Covenant, that they became like those that were
infected with that dreadful Plague of Athens; the Plague of which Plague was,
that they by it became maliciously restless to get into company, and to joy (so
the Historian Theucidides.
says) when they had infected others, even those of their most beloved or
nearest Friends or Relations; and though there might be some of these
Covenanters that were beguiled, and meant well; yet such were the generality of
them, and temper of the times, that you may be sure Dr. Sanderson, who though
quiet and harmless, yet an eminent dissenter from them, could not live
peaceably; nor did he: For the Soldiers would appear, and visibly disturb him
in the Church when he read Prayers, pretending to advise him how God was to be
served most acceptably: which he not approving, but continuing to observe order
and decent behavior in reading the Church Service, they forced his Book from
him, and tore it, expecting extemporary Prayers.

At this time he was advised by a Parliament man of power and note, that loved
and valued him much, not to be strict in reading all the Common Prayer, but
make some little variation, especially if the Soldiers came to watch him; for
then it might not be in the power of him and his other Friends to secure him
from taking the Covenant, or Sequestration: for which Reasons he did vary
somewhat from the strict Rules of the Rubric. I will set down the very words
of Confession which he used, as I have it under his own hand; and tell the
Reader that all his other variations were as little, and much like to this.

His Confession.

O Almighty God and merciful Father, we thy unworthy Servants do with shame and
sorrow confess, that we have all our life long gone astray out of thy ways like
lost sheep; and that by following too much the vain devices and desires of our
own hearts, we have grievously offended against thy holy Laws both in thought,
word and deed; we have many times left undone those good duties, which we might
and ought to have done; and we have many times done those evils, when we might
have avoided them, which we ought not to have done. We confess, O Lord, that
there is no health at all, nor help in any Creature to relieve us; but all our
hope is in thy mercy, whose justice we have by our sins so far provoked: Have
mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders: spare
us good God, who confess our faults, that we perish not; but according to thy
gracious promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, restore us
upon our true Repentance into thy grace and favor. And grant, O most merciful
Father, for his sake, that we henceforth study to serve and please thee by
leading a godly, righteous, and a sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name,
and the eternal comfort of our own souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In these disturbances of tearing his Service Book, a Neighbor came on a
Sunday, after the Evening Service was ended, to visit and condole with him for
the affront offered by the Soldiers. To whom he spoke with a composed patience,
and said; God has restored me to my desired privacy, with my wife and
children, where I hoped to have met with quietness, and it proves not so; but I
will labor to be pleased, because God, on whom I depend, sees it is not fit for
me to be quiet. I praise him, that he has by his grace prevented me from
making shipwreck of a good Conscience to maintain me in a place of great
reputation and profit: and though my condition be such, that I need the last;
yet I submit, for God did not send me into this world to do my own, but suffer
his will, and I will obey it. Thus by a sublime depending on his wise, and
powerful, and pitiful Creator, he did cheerfully submit to what God had
appointed, justifying the truth of that Doctrine which he had preached.

About this time that excellent Book of the King's Meditations in his Solitude
was printed, and made public: and Dr. Sanderson was such a lover of the
Author, and so desirous that the whole world should see the character of him in
that Book, and something of the cause for which they suffered, that he designed
to turn it into Latin: but when he had done half of it most excellently, his
Friend Dr. Earl prevented him, by appearing to have done the whole very well
before him.

About this time his dear and most intimate Friend, the learned Dr. Hammond,
came to enjoy a conversation and rest with him for some days, and did so. And
having formerly persuaded him to trust his excellent memory, and not read, but
try to speak a Sermon as he had writ it. Dr. Sanderson became so complyant as
to promise he would. And to that end they two went early the Sunday following
to a Neighbor Minister, and requested to exchange a Sermon; and they did so.
And at Dr. Sanderson's going into the Pulpit, he gave his Sermon (which was a
very short one) into the hand of Dr. Hammond, intending to preach it as 'twas
writ; but before he had preached a third part, Dr. Hammond (looking on his
Sermon as written) observed him to be out, and so lost as to the matter, that
he also became afraid for him; for 'twas discernable to many of the plain
Auditory: But when he had ended this short Sermon, as they two walked homeward,
Dr. Sanderson said with much earnestness, Good Doctor give me my Sermon, and
know, that neither you, nor any man living shall ever persuade me to preach
again without my Books. To which the reply was, Good Doctor be not angry; for
if I ever persuade you to preach again without Book, I will give you leave to
burn all those that I am Master of.

Part of the occasion of Dr. Hammond's visit was at this time, to discourse Dr.
Sanderson about some Opinions, in which, if they did not then, they had
doubtless differed formerly; 'twas about those knotty Points, which are by the
Learned called the Quinquarticular Controversy; of which I shall proceed, not
to give any Judgment (I pretend not to that) but some short Historical account
which shall follow.

There had been, since the unhappy Covenant was brought, and so generally taken
in England, a liberty given or taken by many Preachers (those of London
especially) to preach and be too positive in the Points of Universal
Redemption, Predestination, and those other depending upon these. Some of which
preached, That all men were, before they came into this world, so predestined
to salvation or damnation, that 'twas not in their power to sin so, as to lose
the first, nor by their most diligent endeavor to avoid the latter. Others,
That 'twas not so; because then God could not be said to grieve for the death
of a sinner, when he himself had made him so by an inevitable decree, before he
had so much as a being in this world; affirming therefore, that man had some
power left him to do the will of God, because he was advised to work out his
salvation with fear and trembling; maintaining, that it is most certain, every
man can do what he can to be saved; and that he that does what he can to be
saved, shall never be damned: And yet many that affirmed this, would confess,
That that grace, which is but a persuasive offer, and left to us to receive or
refuse, is not that grace which shall bring men to heaven. Which truths, or
untruths, or both, be they which they will, did upon these or the like
occasions come to be searched into, and charitably debated betwixt Dr.
Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Pierce (the now Reverend Dean of Salisbury) of
which I shall proceed to give some account, but briefly.

In the year 1648. the 52 London Ministers (then a Fraternity of Ston College
in that City) had in a printed Declaration aspersed Dr. Hammond most heinously,
for that he had in his Practical Catechism affirmed, That our Savior died for
the sins of all mankind. To jnstifie which truth, he presently makes a
charitable Reply (as it is now printed in his Works.) After which there were
many Letters past betwixt the said Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, and Dr. Pierce,
concerning God's grace and decrees. Dr. Sanderson was with much unwillingness
drawn into this Debate; for he declared it would prove uneasy to him, who in
his judgment of God's decrees differed with Dr. Hammond (whom he reverenced and
loved dearly) and would not therefore engage him into a Controversy, of which
he could never hope to see an end: but they did all enter into a charitable
disquisition of these said Points in several Letters, to the full satisfaction
of the Learned; those betwixt Dr. Sanderson and Dr. Hammond being printed in
his Works; and for what past betwixt him and the Learned Dr. Pierce, I refer my
Reader to a Letter annexed to the end of this Relation.

I think the Judgment of Dr. Sanderson was by these Debates altered from what
it was at his entrance into them; for in the year 1632. when his excellent
Sermons were first printed in 4o. the Reader may on the Margent find some
accusation of Arminius for false Doctrine; and find, that upon a review and
reprinting those Sermons in folio in the year 1657. that accusation of Arminius
is omitted. And the change of his judgment seems more fully to appear in his
said Letter to Dr. Pierce. And let me now tell the Reader, which may seem to be
perplexed with these several affirmations of God's decrees before mentioned,
that Dr. Hammond, in a Postscript to the last Letter of Dr. Sanderson's, says,
God can reconcile his own contradictions, and therefore advises all men, as the
Apostle does, to study mortification, and be wise to sobriety. And let me add
further, that if these 52 Ministers of Sion College were the occasion of the
Debates in these Letters; they have, I think, been the occasion of giving an
end to the Quinquarticular Controversy, for none have since undertaken to say
more; but seem to be so wise, as to be content to be ignorant of the rest, till
they come to that place, where the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open.
And let me here tell the Reader also, that if the rest of mankind would, as Dr.
Sanderson, not conceal their alteration of Judgment, but confess it to the
honor of God and themselves, then our Nation would become freer from
pertinacious Disputes, and fuller of Recantations.

I cannot lead my Reader to Dr. Hammond and Dr. Sanderson where we left them at
Boothby Panel, till I have looked back to the long Parliament, the Society of
Covenanters in Sion College, and those others scattered up and down in London,
and given some account of their proceedings and usage of the late learned Dr.
Laud, then Archbishop of Canterbury. And though I will forbear to mention the
injustice of his death, and the barbarous usage of him, both then and before
it; yet my desire is, that what follows may be noted, because it does now, or
may hereafter concern us, namely, That in his last sad Sermon on the Scaffold
at his death, he having freely pardoned all his Enemies, and humbly begged of
God to Pardon them, and besought those present to pardon and pray for him; yet
he seemed to accuse the Magistrates of the City, for suffering a sort of
wretched people, that could not known why he was condemned, to go visibly up
and down to gather hands to a Petition, That the Parliament would hasten his
Execution. And having declared how unjustly he thought himself to be condemned,
and accused for endeavoring to bring in Popery (for that was one of the
Accusations for which he died) he declared with sadness, That the several Sects
and Divisions then in England (which he had labored to prevent) were like to
bring the Pope a far greater harvest, than he could ever have expected without
them. And said, these Sects and Divisions introduce profaneness under the
cloak of an imaginary Religion; and that we have lost the substance of Religion
by changing it into Opinion; and that by these means this Church, which all the
Jesuits machinations could not ruin, was fallen into apparent danger by those
which were his Accusers. To this purpose he spoke at his death: for this, and
more of which, the Reader may view his last sad Sermon on the Scaffold. And
it is here mentioned, because his dear Friend Dr. Sanderson seems to demonstrate
the same in his two large and remarkable Prefaces before his two Volumes of
Sermons; and seems also with much sorrow to say the same again in his last
Will, made when he apprehended himself to be very near his death. And these
Covenanters ought to take notice of it, and to remember, that by the late
wicked War began by them, Dr. Sanderson was ejected out of the Professors Chair
in Oxford; and that if he had continued in it (for he lived 14 years after)
both the Learned of this and other Nations, had been made happy by many
remarkable Cases of Conscience, so rationally stated, and so briefly, so
clearly, and so convincingly determined, that Posterity might have joyed and
boasted, that Dr. Sanderson was born in this Nation, for the ease and benefit
of all the Learned that shall be born after him: But this benefit is so like
time past, that they are both irrecoverably lost.

I should now return to Boothby Panel where we left Dr. Hammond and Dr.
Sanderson together, but neither can be found there. For the first was in his
Journey to London, and the second seized upon the day after his Friends
departure, and carried Prisoner to Lincoln, then a Garrison of the Parliaments.
For the pretended reason of which Commitment, I shall give this following
account.

There was one Mr. Clarke, the Minister of Alington, a Town not many miles from
Boothby Panel, who was an active man for the Parliament and Covenant; one
that, when Belvoire Castle (then a Garrison for the Parliament) was taken by a
party of the King's Soldiers, was taken in it, and made a Prisoner of War in
Newark, then a Garrison of the Kings; a man so active and useful for his party,
that they became so much concerned for his enlargement, that the Committee of
Lincoln sent a Troop of Horse to seize and bring Dr. Sanderson a Prisoner to
that Garrison; and they did so. And there he had the happiness to meet with
many, that knew him so well as to treat him kindly; but told him, He must
continue their Prisoner, till he should purchase his own enlargement by
procuring an Exchange for Mr. Clarke then Prisoner in the King's Garrison of
Newark. There were many Reasons given by the Doctor of the Injustice of his
Imprisonment, and the Inequality of the Exchange, but all were uneffectual: For
done it must be, or he continue a Prisoner. And in time done it was upon the
following Conditions.

First, that Dr. Sanderson and Mr. Clarke being Exchanged, should live
undisturbed at their own Parishes; and of either were injured by the Soldiers
of the contrary party, the other having notice of it, should procure him a
Redress, by having satisfaction made for his loss, or for any other injury; or
if not, he to be used in the same kind by the other party. Nevertheless, Dr.
Sanderson could neither live safe, nor quietly, being several times plundered,
and once wounded in three places; but he, apprehending the remedy might turn to
a more intolerable burden by impatience or complying, forbore both; and
possessed his Soul in a contented quietness, without the least repining. But
though he could not enjoy the safety he expected by this Exchange, yet by his
Providence that can bring good out of evil, it turned so much to his advantage,
that whereas his Living had been sequestered from the year 1644. and continued
to be so till this time of his Imprisonment, he, by the Articles of War in this
Exchange for Mr. Clarke, procured his Sequestration to be recalled, and by that
means enjoyed a poor but contented subsistence for himself, wife, and children,
till the happy Restoration of our King and Church.

In this time of his poor, but contented privacy of life, his Casuistical
learning, peaceful moderation and sincerity, became so remarkable, that there
were many that applied themselves to him for Resolution in Cases of Conscience;
some known to him, many not; some requiring satisfaction by Conference, others
by Letters; so many, that his life became almost as restless as their minds;
yet he denied no man: And if it be a truth which holy Mr. Herbert says, That
all worldly joys seem less, when compared with showing mercy or doing
kindnesses; then doubtless Dr. Sanderson might have boasted for relieving so
many restless and wounded Consciences; which, as Solomon says, are a burden
that none can bear, though their fortitude may sustain their other Infirmities:
and if words cannot express the joy of a Conscience relieved from such restless
Agonies; then Dr. Sanderson might rejoice, that so many were by him so clearly
and conscientiously satisfied; for he denied none, and would often praise God
for that ability, and as often for the occasion, and that God had inclined his
heart to do it, to the meanest of any of those poor, but precious Souls, for
which his Savior vouchsafed to be crucified.

Some of those very many Cases that were resolved by Letters, have been
preserved and printed for the benefit of Posterity; as namely, 1. Of the
Sabbath. 2. Marrying with a Recusant. 3. Of unlawful Love. 4. Of a Military
life. 5. Of Scandal. 6. Of a Bond taken in the King's Name. 7. Of the
Engagement. 8. Of a rash Vow.
But many more remain in private hands, of which one is of Symony; and I wish
the World might see it, that it might undeceive some Patrons, who think they
have discharged that great and dangerous trust, both to God and man, if they
take no money for a Living, though it may be parted with for other ends less
justifiable.

And in this time of his retirement, when the common people were amazed and
grown giddy by the many falsehoods and misapplications of Truths frequently
vented in Sermons; when they wrested the Scripture by challenging God to be of
their party, and called upon him in their prayers to patronize their Sacrilege
and zealous Frenzies, in this time he did so compassionate the generality of
this misled Nation, that though the times threatened danger, yet he then
hazarded his safety by writing the large and bold Preface now extant before his
last 20 Sermons (first printed in the year 1655.) In which there was such
strength of reason, with so powerful and clear convincing applications made to
the Non-conformists, as being read by one of those dissenting Brethren, who was
possessed with such a spirit of contradiction, as being neither able to defend
his error, nor yield to truth manifest (his Conscience having slept long and
quietly in a good sequestered Living) was yet at the reading of it so awakened,
that after a conflict with the reason he had met, and the damage he was to
sustain if he consented to it (and being still unwilling to be so convinced, as
to lose by being over-reason'd) he went in haste to the Bookseller of whom
'twas bought, threatened him, and told him in anger, he had sold a Book in which
there was false Divinity; and that the Preface had upbraided the Parliament,
and many godly Ministers of that party for unjust dealing. To which his Reply
was ('it was Tim. Garthwaite) That 'twas not his Trade to judge of true or false
Divinity, but to print and sell Books; and yet if he, or any friend of his
would write an Answer to it, and own it by setting his Name to it, he would
print the Answer, and promote the selling of it.

About the time of his printing this excellent Preface, I met him accidentally
in London in sad-coloured clothes, and God knows, far from being costly: the
place of our meeting was near to little Britain, where he had been to buy a
Book, which he then had in his hand; we had no inclination to part presently;
and therefore turned to stand in a corner under a Penthouse (for it began to
rain) and immediately the wind rose, and the rain increased so much, that both
became so inconvenient, as to force us into a cleanly house, where we had
Bread, Cheese, Ale, and a Fire for our money. This rain and wind were so
obliging to me, as to force our stay there for at least an hour, to my great
content and advantage; for in that time he made to me many useful observations
with much clearness and conscientious freedom. I shall relate a part of them,
in hope they may also turn to the advantage of my Reader. He seemed to lament,
that the Parliament had taken upon them to abolish our Liturgy, to the scandal
of so many devout and learned men, and the disgrace of those many Martyrs, who
had sealed the truth and use of it with their blood: and that no Minister was
now thought godly that did not decry it; and, at least, pretend to make better
Prayers ex tempore: and that they, and only they that could do so, prayed by
the Spirit, and were godly; though in their Sermons they disputed, and
evidently contradicted each other in their Prayers. And as he did dislike this,
so he did most highly commend the Common Prayer of the Church, saying, The
Collects were the most passionate, proper, and most elegant expressions that
any language ever afforded; and that there was in them such piety, and that so
interwoven with instructions, that they taught us to know the power, the
wisdom, the majesty, and mercy of God, and much of our duty both to him and our
Neighbor; and that a Congregation behaving hemselves reverently, and putting
up to God these joint and known desires for pardon of sins, and praises for
mercies received, could not but be more pleasing to God, than those raw
unpremeditated expressions, to which many of the hearers could not say Amen.

And he then commended to me the frequent use of the Psalter or Psalms of
David; speaking to this purpose, That they were the Treasury of Christian
Comfort, fitted for all persons and all necessities; able to raise the soul
from dejection by the frequent mention of God's mercies to repentant sinners;
to stir up holy desires; to increase joy; to moderate sorrow; to nourish hope,
and teach us patience, by waiting God's leisure; to beget a trust in the mercy,
power, and providence of our Creator; and to cause a resignation of our selves
to his will; and then (and not till then) to believe our selves happy. This he
said the Liturgy and Psalms taught us; and that by the frequent use of the last
they would not only prove to be our souls comfort, but would become so
habitual, as to transform them into the image of his soul that composed them.
After this manner he expressed himself concerning the Liturgy and Psalms; and
seemed to lament that this, which was the Devotion of the more Primitive times,
should in common Pulpits be turned into needless debates about Free Will,
Election, and Reprobation, of which, and many like Questions, we may be safely
ignorant, because Almighty God intends not to lead us to Heaven by hard
Questions, but by meekness and charity, and a frequent practice of Devotion.

And he seemed to lament very much, that by the means of irregular and
indiscreet preaching, the generality of the Nation were possessed with such
dangerous mistakes, as to think, They might be religious first, and then just
and merciful; that they might sell their Consciences, and yet have something
left that was worth keeping; that they might be sure they were elected, though
their lives were visibly scandalous; that to be cunning was to be wise; that to
be rich was to be happy, though their wealth was got without justice or mercy;
that to be busy in things they understood not, was no sin. These, and the like
mistakes he lamented much, and besought God to remove them, and restore us to
that humility, sincerity, and singleheartedness, with which this Nation was
blessed, before the unhappy Covenant was brought into the Nation, and every man
preached and prayed what seemed best in his own eyes. And he then said to me,
That the way to restore this Nation to a more meek and Christian temper, was to
have the Body of Divinity (or so much of it as was needful to be known) to be
put into 52 Homilies or Sermons, of such a length as not to exceed a third or
fourth part of an hours reading; and these needful Points to be made so clear
and plain, that those of a mean capacity might know what was necessary to be
believed, and what God requires to be done; and then some applications of trial
and conviction: and these to be read every Sunday of the year, as infallibly as
the blood circulates the body; and then as certainly begun again, and continued
the year following: and that this being done, it might probably abate the
inordinate desire of knowing what we need not, and practicing what we know, and
ought to do. This was the earnest desire of this prudent man. And, O that Dr.
Sanderson had undertaken it! for then in all probability it would have proved
effectual.

At this happy time of enjoying his company and this discourse, he expressed a
sorrow by saying to me, O that I had gone Chaplain to that excellently
accomplished Gentleman, your Friend, Sir Henry Wootton! which was once
intended, when he first went Ambassador to the State of Venice: for by that
employment I had been forced into a necessity of conversing, not with him only,
but with several men of several Nations; and might thereby have kept my self
from my unmanly bashfulness, which has proved very troublesome, and not less
inconvenient to me; and which I now fear is become so habitual as never to
leave me: and by that means I might also have known, or at least have had the
satisfaction of seeing one of the late miracles of general learning, prudence,
and modesty, Sir Henry Woottons dear Friend, Padre Paulo, who, the Author of
his life says, was born with a bashfulness as invincible, as I have found my
own to be: A man whose fame must never die, till virtue and learning shall
become so useless as not to be regarded.

This was a part of the benefit I then had by that hours conversation: and I
gladly remember and mention it, as an Argument of my happiness, and his great
humility and condescension. I had also a like advantage by another happy
conference with him, which I am desirous to impart in this place to the Reader.
He lamented much, that in many Parishes, where the maintenance was not great,
there was no Minister to officiate; and that many of the best sequestered
Livings were possessed with such rigid Covenanters as denied the Sacrament to
their Parishioners, unless upon such conditions, and in such a manner as they
could not take it. This he mentioned with much sorrow, saying, The blessed
Sacrament did, by way of preparation for it, give occasion to all conscientious
Receivers to examine the performance of their Vows, since they received their
last seal for the pardon of their sins past; and to examine and research their
hearts, and make penitent reflections on their failings; and that done, to
bewail them, and then make new vows or resolutions to obey all God's Commands,
and beg his grace to perform them. And this done,the Sacrament repairs the
decays of grace, helps us to conquer infirmities, gives us grace to beg God's
grace, and then gives us what we beg; makes us still hunger and thirst after
his righteousness, which we then receive, and being assisted with our
endeavors, will still so dwell in us, as to become our satisfaction in this
life, and our comfort on our last Sick-beds. The want of this blessed benefit
he lamented much, and pitied their condition that desired, but could not obtain
it.

I hope I shall not disoblige my Reader, if I here enlarge into a further
Character of his person and temper. As first, That he was moderately tall; his
behavior had in it much of a plain comeliness, and very little (yet enough) of
ceremony or courtship; his looks and motion manifested affability and mildness,
and yet he had with these a calm, but so matchless a fortitude, as secured him
from complying with any of those many Parliament injunctions, that interfer'd
with a doubtful conscience. His Learning was methodical and exact; his wisdom
useful; his integrity visible; and his whole life so unspotted, that all ought
to be preserved as Copies for Posterity to write after; the Clergy especially,
who with impure hands ought not to offer Sacrifice to that God, whose pure eyes
abhor iniquity.

There was in his Sermons no improper Rhetoric, nor such perplexed divisions,
as may be said to be like too much light, that so dazles the eyes that the
sight becomes less perfect: But there was therein no want of useful matter, nor
waste of words; and yet such clear distinctions as dispel'd all confused
Notions, and made his hearers depart both wiser, and more confirmed in virtuous
resolutions.

His memory was so matchless and firm, as 'twas only overcome by his
bashfulness; for he alone, or to a friend, could repeat all the Odes of Horace,
all Tully's Offices, and much of Iuvenal and Persius without Book; and would
say, The repetition of one of the Odes of Horace to himself was to him such
music, as a Lesson on the Viol was to others, when they played it to
themselves or friends. And though he was blessed with a clearer Judgment than
other men; yet he was so distrustful of it, that he did over-consider of
consequences, and would so delay and reconsider what to determine, that though
none ever determined better, yet, when the Bell tolled for him to appear and
read his Divinity Lectures in Oxford, and all the Scholars attended to hear
him, he had not then, or not till then, resolved and writ what he meant to
determine; so that that appeared to be a truth, which his old dear Friend Dr.
Sheldon would often say, namely, That his judgment was so much superior to his
fancy, that whatsoever this suggested, that disliked and controlled; still
considering and reconsidering, till his time was so wasted, that he was forced
to write, not (probably) what was best, but what he thought last. And yet what
he did then read, appeared to all hearers to be so useful, clear, and
satisfactory, as none ever determined with greater applause. These tiring and
perplexing thoughts begot in him an aversness to enter into the toil of
considering and determining all Casuistical Points; because during that time,
they neither gave rest to his body or mind. But though he would not be always
laden with these knotty Points and Distinctions; yet the study of old Records,
Genealogies, and Heraldry, were a recreation, and so pleasing, that he would
say they gave rest to his mind. Of the last of which I have seen two remarkable
Volumes; and the Reader needs neither to doubt their truth or exactness.

And this humble man had so conquered all repining and ambitious thoughts, and
with them all other unruly passions, that, if the accidents of the day proved
to his danger or damage, yet he both began and ended it with an even and
undisturbed quietness: always praising God that he had not withdrawn food and
raiment from him and his poor Family; nor suffered him to violate his
Conscience for his safety, or to support himself or them in a more splendid or
plentiful condition; and that he therefore resolved with David, That his praise
should be always in his mouth.

I have taken a content in giving my Reader this Character of his person, his
temper, and some of the accidents of his life past; and more might be added of
all: But I will with sorrow look forward to the sad days, in which so many good
men suffered, about the year 1658. at which time Dr. Sanderson was in a very
low condition as to his Estate: And in that time Mr. Robert Boil (a Gentleman
of a very Noble Birth, and more eminent for his Liberality, Learning, and
Virtue, and of whom I would say much more, but that he still lives) having
casually met with, and read his Lectures de Iuramento, to his great
satisfaction, and being informed of Dr. Sanderson's great innocence and
sincerity, and that he and his Family were brought into a low condition by his
not complying with the Parliaments injunctions, sent him by his dear Friend Dr.
Barlow (the now learned Bishop of Lincoln) 50 l. and with it a request and
promise: The request was, That he would review the Lectures de Conscientia,
which he had read when he was Doctor of the Chair in Oxford, and print them for
the good of Posterity; (and this Dr. Sanderson did in the year 1659.) And the
Promise was, That he would pay him that, or a greater sum if desired, during
his Life, to enable him to pay an Amanuensis, to ease him from the trouble of
writing what he should conceive or dictate. For the more particular account of
which, I refer my Reader to a Letter writ by the said Dr. Barlow, which I have
annexed to the end of this Relation.

Toward the end of this year 1659. when the many mixed Sects, and their
Creators and merciless Protectors, had led or driven each other into a
Whirl-pool of Confusion: when amazement and fear had seized them, and their
accusing Consciences gave them an inward and fearful intelligence, that the God
which they had long served, was now ready to pay them such wages as he does
always reward Witches with for their obeying him: When these wretches were come
to foresee an end of their cruel reign, by our King's return; and such
Sufferers as Dr. Sanderson (and with him many of the oppressed Clergy and
others) could foresee the cloud of their afflictions would be dispersed by it:
Then, in the beginning of the year following, the King was by God restored to
us, and we to our known Laws and Liberties; and a general joy and peace seemed
to breath through the 3 Nations. Then were the suffering Clergy freed from
their Sequestration, restored to their Revenues, and to a liberty to adore,
praise, and pray to God in such order as their Consciences and Oaths had
formerly obliged them. And the Reader will easily believe that Dr. Sanderson
and his dejected Family rejoiced to see this day, and be of this number.

It ought to be considered (which I have often heard or read) that in the
Primitive times men of learning and virtue were usually sought for, and
solicited to accept of Episcopal Government, and often refused it. For they
conscientiously considered, that the Office of a Bishop was made up of labor
and care: that they were trusted to be God's Almoners of the Churches Revenue,
and double their care for the poor: to live strictly themselves, and use all
diligence to see that their Family, Officers, and Clergy did so: and that the
account of that Stewardship must at the last dreadful day be made to the
Searcher of all hearts: and that in the primitive times they were therefore
timorous to undertake it. It may not be said that Dr. Sanderson was
accomplished with these, and all the other requisites required in a Bishop, so
as to be able to answer them exactly; but it may be affirmed, as a good
preparation, that he had at the Age of 73 years (for he was so old at the
King's return) fewer faults to be pardoned by God or man, than are apparent in
others in these days, in which (God knows) we fall so short of that visible
sanctity and zeal to God's glory, which was apparent in the days of primitive
Christianity. This is mentioned by way of preparation to what I shall say more
of Dr. Sanderson; and namely, That at the King's return Dr. Sheldon, the late
prudent Bishop of Canterbury (than whom none knew, valued, or loved Dr.
Sanderson more or better) was by his Majesty made a chief Trustee to commend to
him fit men to supply the then vacant Bishoprics. And Dr. Sheldon knew none
fitter than Dr. Sanderson, and therefore humbly desired the King that he would
nominate him: and that done, he did as humbly desire Dr. Sanderson that he
would for Gods and the Churches sake, take that charge and care upon him. Dr.
Sanderson had, if not an unwillingness, certainly no forwardness to undertake
it, and would often say, He had not led himself, but his Friend would now lead
him into a temptation, which he had daily prayed against; and besought God, if
he did undertake it, so to assist him with his grace, that the example of his
life, his cares and endeavors, might promote his glory, and help forward the
salvation of others.

This I have mentioned as a happy preparation to his Bishopric, and am next to
tell that he was consecrated Bishop of Lincoln at Westminster the 28 th of
October, 1660.

There was about this time a Christian care taken, that those whose Consciences
were (as they said) tender, and could not comply with the Service and
Ceremonies of the Church, might have satisfaction given by a friendly debate
betwixt a select number of them, and some like number of those that had been
Sufferers for the Church Service and Ceremonies, and now restored to liberty;
of which last some were then preferred to power and dignity in the Church. And
of these Bishop Sanderson was one, and then chose to be a Moderator in that
debate: and he performed his trust with much mildness, patience, and reason,
but all proved uneffectual: For there be some propositions like jealousies,
which (though causless, yet) cannot be removed by reasons as apparent as
demonstration can make any truth. The place appointed for this debate was the
Savoy in the Strand: and the Points debated were, I think, many; some affirmed
to be truth and reason, some denied to be either; and these debates being then
in words, proved to be so loose and perplexed, as satisfied neither party. For
sometime that which had been affirmed was immediately forgot or denied, and so
no satisfaction given to either party. But that the debate might become more
useful, it was therefore resolved that the day following the desires and
reasons of the Non-conformists should be given in writing, and they in writing
receive Answers from the conforming party. And though I neither now can, nor
need to mention all the Points debated, nor the names of the dissenting
Brethren: yet I am sure Mr. Baxter was one, and am sure what shall now follow,
was one of the Points debated.

Concerning a Command of lawful Superiors, what was sufficient to its being a
lawful Command; this Proposition was brought by the confirming Party.

That Command which commands an act in it self lawful, and no other act or
circumstance unlawful, is not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for two Reasons, which he gave in with his own hand in
writing thus: One was, Because that may be a sin per accidens, which is not so
in it self, and may be unlawfully commanded, though that accident be not in the
command. Another was, That it may be commanded under an unjust penalty.

Again, this Proposition being brought by the Conformists, That Command which
commands an act in it self lawful, and no other act whereby any unjust
penalty is enjoined, nor any circumstance whence per accidens any sin is
consequent which the Commander ought to provide against, is not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for this reason then given in with his own hand in
writing, thus: Because the first act commanded may be per accidens unlawful,
and be commanded by an unjust penalty, though no other act or circumstance
commanded be such.

Again, this Proposition being brought by the Conformists, That Command which
commands an act in it self lawful, and no other Act whereby any unjust
penalty is enjoined, nor any circumtance whence directly or per accidens any
sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against, has in it all
things requisite to the lawfulness of a Command, and particularly cannot be
guilty of commanding an act per accidens unlawful, nor of commanding an act
under an unjust penalty.

Mr. Baxter denied it upon the same Reasons.

Peter Gunning.

John Pearson.

These were then two of the Disputants, still live, and will attest this; one
being now Lord Bishop of Ely, and the other of Chester. And the last of them
told me very lately, that one of the Dissenters (which I could, but forbear to
name) appeared to Dr. Sanderson to be so bold, so troublesome, and so illogical
in the dispute, as forced patient Dr. Sanderson (who was then Bishop of
Lincoln, and a Moderator with other Bishops) to say with an unusual
earnestness, That he had never met with a man of more pertinacious confidence,
and less abilities in all his conversation.

But though this debate at the Savoy was ended without any great satisfaction
to either party, yet both parties knew the desires, and understood the
abilities of the other much better than before it: and the late distressed
Clergy, that were now restored to their former rights and power, did at their
next meeting in Convocation contrive to give the dissenting party satisfaction
by alteration, explanation, and addition to some part both of the Rubric and
Common Prayer, as also by adding some new necessary Collects, and a particular
Collect of Thanksgiving. How many of those new Collects were worded by Dr.
Sanderson, I cannot say; but am sure the whole Convocation valued him so much,
that he never undertook to speak to any Point in question, but he was heard
with great willingness and attention; and when any Point in question was
determined, the Convocation did usually desire him to word their intentions,
and as usually approve and thank him.

At this Convocation the Common Prayer was made more complete, by adding 3 new
necessary Offices; which were, A form of Humiliation for the murder of King
Charles the Martyr; a Thanksgiving for the Restoration of his Son our King; and
for the baptizing of persons of riper age. I cannot say Dr. Sanderson did form
or word them all, but doubtless more than any single man of the Convocation;
and he did also, by desire of the Convocation, alter and add to the forms of
Prayers to be used at Sea (now taken into the Service Book) And it may be
noted, That William, the now right Reverend Bishop of Canterbury, was in these
employments diligently useful, especially in helping to rectify the Calendar
and Rubric. And lastly it may be noted, That for the satisfying all the
dissenting Brethren and others, the Convocations Reasons for the alterations
and additions to the Liturgy, were by them desired to be drawn up by Dr.
Sanderson; which being done by him, and approved by them, was appointed to be
printed before the Liturgy, and may be known by this Title, -- The Preface: and
begins thus -- It has been the wisdom of the Church --.

I shall now follow him to his Bishopric, and declare a part of his behavior
in that busy and weighty employment. And first, That it was with such
condescension and obligingness to the meanest of his Clergy, as to know and be
known to them. And indeed he practiced the like to all men of what degree
soever, especially to his old Neighbors or Parishioners of Boothby Panel; for
there was all joy at his Table when they came to visit him: then they prayed
for him, and he for them with an unfeigned affection.

I think it will not be denied but that the care and toil required of a Bishop,
may justly challenge the riches and revenue with which their Predecessors had
lawfully endowed them; and yet he sought not that so much, as doing good both
to the present Age and Posterity; and he made this appear by what follows.

The Bishops chief House at Buckden, in the County of Huntington, the usual
Residence of his Predecessors (for it stands about the midst of his Diocese)
having been at his Consecration a great part of it demolished, and what was
left standing under a visible decay, was by him undertaken to be erected and
repaired; and it was performed with great speed, care, and charge. And to this
may be added, That the King having by an Injunction commended to the care of
the Bishops, Deans, and Prebends of all Cathedral Churches, the repair of them,
their Houses, and augmentation of small Vicarages; He, when he was repairing
Bugden, did also augment the last, as fast as Fines were paid for renewing
Leases: so fast, that a Friend taking notice of his bounty, was so bold as to
advise him to remember, he was under his first fruits, and that he was old, and
had a wife and children yet but meanly provided for, especially if his dignity
were considered. To whom he made a mild and thankful answer, saying, It would
not become a Christian Bishop to suffer those houses built by his Predecessors,
to be ruined for want of repair; and less justifiable to suffer any of those
that were called to so high a calling as to sacrifice at God's Altar, to eat
the bread of sorrow constantly, when he had a power by a small augmentation to
turn it into the bread of cheerfulness: and wish' d, that as this was, so it
were also in his power to make all mankind happy, for he desired nothing more.
And for his wife and children, he hoped to leave them a competence; and in the
hands of a God, that would provide for all that kept innocence, and trusted his
providence and protection, which he had always found enough to make and keep
him happy.

There was in his Diocese a Minister of almost his Age, that had been of
Lincoln College when he left it, who visited him often, and always welcome,
because he was a man of innocence and open-heartedness: This Minister asked the
Bishop what Books he studied most, when he laid the foundation of his great and
clear Learning? To which his Answer was, That he declined reading many; but
what he did read, were well chosen, and read so often, that he became very
familiar with them; and said they were chiefly three, Aristotle's Rhetoric,
Aquinas's Secunda Secundae, and Tully, but chiefly his Offices, which he had
not read over less than 20 times, and could at this Age say without Book. And
told him also, the learned Civilian Doctor Zouch (who died lately) had writ
Elementa jurisprudentiae, which was a Book that he could also say without Book;
and that no wise man could read it too often, or love, or commend too much; and
told him these had been his toil: But for himself, he always had a natural love
to Genealogies and Heraldry; and that when his thoughts were harassed with any
perplexed Studies, he left off, and turned to them as a recreation; and that his
very recreation had made him so perfect in them, that he could in a very short
time give an account of the Descent, Arms, and Antiquity of any Family of the
Nobility or Gentry of this Nation.

Before I give an account of Dr. Sanderson's last sickness, I desire to tell
the Reader that he was of a healthful constitution, cheerful and mild, of an
even temper, very moderate in his diet, and had had little sickness, till some
few years before his death; but was then every Winter punished with a Diarrhea,
which left him not till warm weather returned and removed it: And this
distemper did, as he grew elder, seize him oftener, and continue longer with
him. But though it weakened him, yet it made him rather indisposed than sick,
and did no way disable him from studying (indeed too much.) In this decay of
his strength, but not of his memory or reason (for this distemper works not
upon the understanding) he made his last Will, of which I shall give some
account for confirmation of what has been said, and what I think convenient to
be known, before I declare his death and burial.

He did in his last Will give an account of his Faith and Persuasion in point
of Religion and Church Government, in these very words:

I Robert Sanderson Dr. of Divinity, an unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, and
by the providence of God Bishop of Lincoln, being by the long continuance of an
habitual distemper brought to a great bodily weakness and faintness of spirits,
but (by the great mercy of God) without any bodily pain otherwise, or decay of
understanding, do make this my Will and Testament (written all with my own
hand) revoking all former Wills by me heretofore made, if any such shall be
found. First, I commend my Soul into the hands of Almighty God, as of a
faithful Creator, which I humbly beseech him mercifully to accept, looking upon
it, not as it is in it self (infinitely polluted with sin) but as it is
redeemed and purged with the precious blood of his only beloved Son, and my
most sweet Savior Jesus Christ, in confidence of whose merits and mediation
alone it is, that I cast my self upon the mercy of God for the pardon of my
sins, and the hopes of eternal life. And here I do profess, that as I have
lived, so I desire, and (by the grace of God) resolve to dye in the Communion
of the Catholic Church of Christ, and a true Son of the Church of England;
which, as it stands by Law established, to be both in Doctrine and Worship
agreeable to the Word of God, and in the most, and most material Points of
both, conformable to the faith and practice of the godly Churches of Christ in
the primitive and purer times, I do firmly believe: led so to do, not so much
from the force of custom and education (to which the greatest part of mankind
owe their particular different persuasions in point of Religion) as upon the
clear evidence of truth and reason, after a serious and unpartial examination
of the grounds, as well of Popery as Puritanism, according to that measure of
understanding, and those opportunities which God has afforded me: and herein I
am abundantly satisfied, that the Schism which the Papists on the one hand, and
the Superstition which the Puritan on the other hand, lay to our charge, are
very justly chargeable upon themselves respectively. Wherefore I humbly beseech
Almighty God, the Father of Mercies, to preserve the Church by his power and
providence, in peace, truth, and godliness, evermore to the worlds end: which
doubtless he will do, if the wickedness and security of a sinful people (and
particularly those sins that are so rise, and seem daily to increase among us,
of Unthankfulness, Riot, and Sacrilege) do not tempt his patience to the
contrary. And I also farther humbly beseech him, that it would please him to
give unto our gracious Sovereign, the Reverend Bishops, and the Parliament,
timely to consider the great danger that visibly threatens this Church in point
of Religion by the late great increase of Popery, and in point of Revenue by
sacrilegious enclosures; and to provide such wholesome and effectual remedies
as may prevent the same before it be too late.

And for a further manifestation of his humble thoughts and desires, they may
appear to the Reader, by another part of his Will which follows.

As for my corruptible Body, I bequeath it to the Earth whence it was taken, to
be decently buried in the Parish Church of Bugden, toward the upper end of the
Chancel, upon the second, or (at the farthest) the third day after my decease;
and that with as little noise, pomp, and charge as may be, without the
invitation of any person how near soever related unto me, other than the
Inhabitants of Bugden; without the unnecessary expense of Escocheons, Gloves,
Ribons, etc. and without any Blacks to be hung any where in or about the House
or Church, other than a Pulpit Cloth, a Hearse Cloth, and a Mourning Gown for
the Preacher; whereof the former (after my Body shall be interred) to be given
to the Preacher of the Funeral Sermon, and the latter to the Curat of the
Parish for the time being. And my will further is, That the Funeral Sermon be
preached by my own Household Chaplain, containing some wholesome discourse
concerning Mortality, the Resurrection of the Dead, and the last Judgment; and
that he shall have for his pains 5 l. upon condition, that he speak nothing at
all concerning my person, either good or ill, other than I my self shall
direct; only signifying to the Auditory that it was my express will to have it
so. And it is my will, that no costly Monument be erected for my memory, but
only a fair flot Marble stone to be laid over me, with this Inscription in
legible Roman Characters, Depositum Roberti Sanderson nuper Lin^^lniencis
Episcopi, qui obiit Anno Domini MDCLXII. and aetatis suae septuagesimo sexto,
Hic requiescit in spe beatae resurrectionis. This manner of burial, although I
cannot but foresee it will prove unsatisfactory to sundry my nearest Friends
and Relations, and be apt to be censured by others, as an evidence of my too
much parsimony and narrowness of mind, as being altogether unusual, and not
according to the mode of these times; yet it is agreeable to the sense of my
heart, and I do very much desire my Will may be carefully observed herein,
hoping it may become exemplary to some or other: at least howsoever testifying
at my death (what I have so often and earnestly professed in my life time) my
utter dislike of the flatteries commonly used in Funeral Sermons, and of the
vast Expenses otherwise laid out in Funeral Solemnities and Entertainments,
with very little benefit to any, which (if bestowed in pious and charitable
works) might redound to the public or private benefit of many persons.

I am next to tell, that he died the 29 th of January, 1662. and that his Body
was buried in Bugden the third day after his death; and for the manner, that
'twas as far from ostentation as he desired it; and all the rest of his Will
was as punctually performed. And when I have (to his just praise) told this
truth, That he died far from being rich, I shall return back to visit, and give
a further account of him on his last Sickbed.

His last Will (of which I have mentioned a part) was made about three weeks
before his death, about which time finding his strength to decay by reason of
his constant infirmity, and a consumptive cough added to it, he retired to his
Chamber, expressing a desire to enjoy his last thoughts to himself in private,
without disturbance or care, especially of what might concern this world. And
that none of his Clergy (which are more numerous than any other Bishops) might
suffer by his retirement, he did by Commission empower his Chaplain, Mr.
Pullin, with Episcopal Power to give Institutions to all Livings or Church
Preferments, during this his disability to do it himself. In this time of his
retirement he longed for his Dissolution; and when some that loved him prayed
for his recovery, if he at any time found any amendment, he seemed to be
displeased, by saying, His Friends said their Prayers backward for him: and
that 'twas not his desire to live a useless life, and by filling up a place
keep another out of it, that might do God and his Church service. He would
often with much joy and thankfulness mention, That during his being a
Housekeeper (which was more than 40 years) there had not been one buried out
of his Family, and that he was now like to be the first. He would also often
mention with thankfulness, That till he was threescore years of Age, he had
never spent 5s. in Law, nor (upon himself) so much in Wine: and rejoiced much
that he had so lived, as never to cause an hours sorrow to his good Father; and
hoped he should die without an Enemy.

He in this retirement had the Church Prayers read in his Chamber twice every
day; and at nine at night some Prayers read to him and a part of his Family out
of the Whole Duty of Man. As he was remarkably punctual and regular in all his
studies and actions; so he used himself to be for his Meals. And his dinner
being appointed to be constantly ready at the ending of Prayers, and he
expectcting and calling for it, was answered, It would be ready in a quarter of
an hour. To which his reply was, A quarter of an hour? Is a quarter of an hour
nothing to a man that probably has not many hours to live. And though he did
live many hours after this, yet he lived not many days; for the day after
(which was three days before his death) he was become so weak and weary of
either motion or sitting, that he was content, or forced to keep his bed. In
which I desire he may rest, till I have given some account of his behavior
there, and immediately before it.

The day before he took his bed (which was three days before his death) he,
that he might receive a new assurance for the pardon of his sins past, and be
strengthened in his way to the new Jerusalem, took the blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of his, and our blessed Jesus, from the hands of his Chaplain
Mr. Pullin, accompanied with his Wife, Children, and a Friend, in as awful,
humble, and ardent a manner, as outward reverence could express. After the
praise and thanksgiving for it was ended, he spoke to this purpose; Thou, O
God, took'st me out of my mothers womb, and have been the powerful Protector of
me to this present moment of my life; thou have neither forsaken me now I am
become grey-headed, nor suffered me to forsake thee in the late days of
temptation, and sacrifice my Conscience for the preservation of my liberty or
estate. 'Twas by grace that I have stood, when others have fallen under my
trials: and these mercies I now remember with joy and thankfulness; and my hope
and desire is, that I may die praising thee.

The frequent repetition of the Psalms of David has been noted to be a great
part of the Devotion of the Primitive Christians: The Psalms having in them not
only Prayers and holy Instructions, but such Commemorations of God's Mercies,
as may preserve comfort, and confirm our dependence on the power, and
providence, and mercy of our Creator. And this is mentioned in order to
telling, that as the holy Psalmist said, Psalm. 119. 147.
that his eyes should prevent both the dawning of the day and the night
watches, by meditating on God's word: so 'twas Dr. Sanderson's constant
practice every morning to entertain his first waking thoughts with a repetition
of those very Psalms, that the Church has appointed to be constantly read in
the daily Morning Service; and having at night laid him in his bed, he as
constantly closed his eyes with a repetition of those appointed for the Service
of the Evening, remembering and repeating the very Psalms appointed for every
day; and as the month had formerly ended and began again, so did this Exercise
of his Devotion. And if his first waking thoughts were of the World, or what
concerned it, he would arraign and condemn himself for it. Thus he began that
work on earth, which is now his employment in heaven.

After his taking his Bed, and about a day before his death, he desired his
Chaplain, Mr. Pullin, to give him Absolution: And at his performing that
Office, he pulled off his Cap, that Mr. Pullin might lay his hand upon his bare
head. After this desire of his was satisfied, his Body seemed to be at more
ease, and his mind more cheerful; and he said, Lord, forsake me not now my
strength fails me, but continue thy mercy, and let my mouth be filled with
thy praise. He continued the remaining night and day very patient, and thankful
for any of the little Offices that were performed for his ease and refreshment;
and during that time, did often say the 103 Psalm to himself, and very often
these words, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed where true joy is to
be found. His thought sseem'd now to be wholly of death, for which he was so
prepared, that that King of Terrors could not surprise him as a thief in the
night; for he had often said, he was prepared, and longed for it. And as this
desire seemed to come from Heaven; so it left him not, till his Soul ascended
to that Region of blessed Spirits, whose Employments are to join in consort
with him, and sing praise and glory to that God, who has brought them to that
place, into which sin and sorrow cannot enter.

Thus this pattern of meekness and primitive innocence changed this for a
better life. It Is now too late to wish that my life may be like his; for I am
in the eighty fifth year of my Age; but I humbly beseech Almighty God, that my
death may; and do as earnestly beg of every Reader to say Amen.

Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man in whose Spirit there is no guile.

Postscript.
IF I had had time to have reviewed this Relation, as I intended, before it
went to the Press, I could have contracted some, and altered other parts of it;
but 'twas hastened from me, and now too late for this impression. If there be a
second (which the Printer hopes for) I shall both do that, and upon
information, mend any mistake, or supply what may seem wanting.

I. W.
Dr. PIERCE's LETTER.
Good Mr. Walton,
AT my return to this place, I made a yet stricter search after the Letters
long ago sent me from our most excellent Dr. Sanderson before the happy
Restoration of the King and Church of England to their several Rights; in one
of which Letters more especially, he was pleased to give me a Narrative both of
the rise, and the progress, and reasons also, as well of his younger, as of his
last and riper Judgment, touching the famous Points controverted between the
Calvinians and the Arminians, as they are commonly (though unjustly and
unskilfully) miscalled on either side.

The whole Letter I allude to does consist of several sheets, whereof a good
part has been made public long ago by the most learned, most judicious, most
pious Dr. Hammond (to whom I sent it both for his private, and for the public
satisfaction, if he thought fit) in his excellent Book, entitled [A Pacifick
Discourse of God's Grace and Decrees, in full accordance with Dr. Sanderson:]
To which Discourse I referr you for an account of Dr. Sanderson, and the
History of his Thoughts in his own handwriting, wherein I sent it to Westwood,
as I received it from Boothby Panel. And although the whole Book (printed in
the year 1660. and reprinted since with his other Tracts in Folio) is very
worthy of your perusal; yet for the Work you are about, you shall not have need
to read more at present, than from the 8 th to the 23 th page, and as far as
the end of. 33. There you will find in what year the excellent man, whose life
you write, became a Master of Arts. How his first reading of learned Hooker had
been occasioned by certain Puritanical Pamphlets; and how good a preparative he
found it for his reading of Calvin's Institutions, the honor of whose name (at
that time especially) gave such credit to his Errors. How he erred with Mr.
Calvin (whilst he took things upon trust) in the sublapsarian way. How being
chosen to be a Clerk of the Convocation for the Diocese of Lincol, 1625. He
reduced the Quinquarticular Controversy into five Schemes or Tables; and
thereupon discerned a necessity of quitting the Sublapsarian way (of which he
had before a better liking) as well as the Supralapsarian, which he could never
fancy. There you will meet with his two weighty Reasons against them both; and
find his happy change of Judgment to have been ever since the year 1625, even
34 years before the World either knew, or (at least) took notice of it. And
more particularly his Reasons for rejecting Dr. Twiss (or the way He walks in)
although his acute, and very learned and ancient Friend.

Sir, I pray note, That all that follows in the Italian Character, are Dr.
Sanderson's own words, excellently worthy, but no where else extant; and
commend him as much, as any thing you can say of him. T.P.
I now proceed to let you know from Dr. Sanderson's own hand, which was never
printed (and which you can hardly know from any, unless from his Son, or from
my self) That, when that Parliament was broken up, and the Convocation
therewith dissolved, a Gentleman of his Acquaintance, by occasion of some
discourse about these Points, told him of a Book not long before published at
Paris ( A. D. 1623.) by a Arriba.
Spanish Bishop, who had undertaken to clear the Differences in the great
Controversy De Concordia Gratiae and Liberi Arbitrij. And because his Friend
perceived he was greedily desirous to see the Book; he sent him one of them,
containing the four first Books of twelve which he intended then to publish.
When I had read (says Dr. Sanderson in the following words of the same Letter)
his Epistle Dedicatory to the Pope ( Greg. 15.) he spoke so highly of his own
Invention, that I then began rather to suspect him for a Mountebank, than to
hope I should find satisfaction from his performances. I found much confidence,
and great pomp of words, but little matter as to the main Knot of the Business,
other than had been said an hundred times before, to wit, of the coexistence of
all things past, present, and future in mente divina realiter ab aeterno, which
is the subject of his whole third Book; only he interprets the word realiter
so, as to import not only praesentialitatem objectivam (as others held before
him) but propriam and actualem existentiam. Yet confesses it is hard to make
this intelligible. In his fourth Book he endeavors to declare a twofold manner
of God's working ad extra; the one sub ordine Praedestinationis, of which
Eternity is the proper measure; the other sub ordine Gratiae, whereof Time is
the measure. And that God works fortiter in the one (though not
irresistibiliter) as well as suaviter in the other, wherein the Freewill has
his proper working also. From the Result of his whole performance I was
confirmed in this Opinion, That we must acknowledge the work of both (Grace and
Freewill) in the conversion of a sinner. And so likewise in all other events,
the Consistency of the Infallibility of God's foreknowledge at least (though
not with any absolute, but conditional Predestination) with the liberty of
man's will, and the contingency of inferior causes and effects. These, I say,
we must acknowledge for the (...): But for the (...), I thought it bootless for
me to think of comprehending it. And so came the two Acta Synodalia Dordrectana
to stand in my Study, only to fill up a room to this day.

And yet see the restless curiosity of man. Not many years after, to wit A.D.
1632. out comes Dr. Twiss his Vindiciae Gratiae; a large Volume purposely writ
against Arminius. And then notwithstanding my former resolution, I must needs
be meddling again. The respect I bore to his person and great learning, and the
long acquaintance I had had with him in Oxford, drew me to the reading of that
whole Book. But from the reading of it (for I read it through to a syllable) I
went away with many and great dissatisfactions. Sundry things in that Book I
took notice of, which brought me into a greater dislike of his Opinion than I
had before. But especially these three: First, that he bottometh very much of
his Discourse upon a very erroneous Principle, which yet he seems to be so
deeply in love with, that he has repeated it (I verily believe) some hundreds
of times in that work: to wit this, [That whatsoever is first in the intention
is last in execution, and e converso.] Which is an Error of that magnitude,
that I cannot but wonder, how a person of such acuteness and subtilty of wit
could possibly be deceived with it. All Logicians know, there is no such
universal Maxim as he builds upon. The true Maxim is but this, Finis qui
primus est in Intention, est ultimus in Executione. In the order of final
Causes, and the Means used for that end, the Rule holds perpetually: But in
other things it holds not at all, or but by chance; or not as a Rule, and
necessarily. Secondly, that, foreseeing such Consequences would naturally and
necessarily follow from his Opinion, as would offend the ear of a sober
Christian at the very first sound, he would yet rather choose not only to admit
the said harsh Consequences, but professedly endeavor also to maintain them,
and plead hard for them in large Digressions, than to recede in the least from
that opinion which he had undertaken to defend. Thirdly, that seeing (out of
the sharpness of his wit) a necessity of forsaking the ordinary Sublapsarian
way, and the Supralapsarian too, as it had diversely been declared by all that
had gone before him (for the shunning of those Rocks, which either of those
ways must unavoidably cast him upon) he was forced to seek out an untroden
Path, and to frame out of his own brain a new way (like a Spider's web wrought
out of her own bowels) hoping by that device to salve all Absurdities could be
objected; to wit, by making the glory of God (as it is indeed the chiefest, so)
the only end of all other his Decrees, and then making all those other Decrees
to be but one entire coordinate Medium conducing to that one end, and so the
whole subordinate to it, but not any one part thereof subordinate to any other
of the same. Dr. Twiss should have done well to have been more sparing in
imputing the studium Partium to others, wherewith his own eyes (though of
eminent perspicacity) were so strangely blindfolded, that he could not discern,
how this his new Device, and his old dearly beloved Principle (like the Cadmean
Sparti) do mutually destroy the one the other.

This Relation of my passed thoughts having spun out to a far greater length
than I intended, I shall give a shorter account of what they now are concerning
these points.

For which account I referr you to the following parts of Dr. Hammonds Book
aforesaid, where you may find them already printed. And for another account at
large of Bishop Sanderson's last Judgment concerning God's Concurrence or
Non-concurrence with the Actions of men, and the positive entity of sins of
commission, I referr you to his Letters already printed by his consent, in my
large Appendix to my Impartial inquiry into the Nature of Sin..68. p. 193. as
far as p. 200.

Sir, I have rather made it my choice to transcribe all above out of the
Letters of Dr. Sanderson which lie before me, than venture the loss of my
Originals by Post or Carrier, which (though not often, yet) sometimes fail.
Make use of as much, or as little as you please, of what I send you from
himself (because from his own Letters to me) in the penning of his life, as
your own Prudence shall direct you; using my name for your warranty in the
account given of him, as much or as little as you please too. You have a
performance of my promise, and an obedience to your desires from

North-Tidworth, March 5. 1677/8; Your affectionate humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.

THE BISHOP OF LINCOLN'S LETTER.
My worthy Friend Mr. Walton,
I Am heartily glad, that you have undertaken to write the Life of that
excellent person, and (both for learning and piety) eminent Prelate, Dr.
Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln; because I know your ability to know, and
integrity to write truth: and sure I am, that the life and actions of that
pious and learned Prelate will afford you matter enough for his commendation,
and the imitation of Posterity. In order to the carrying on your intended good
work, you desire my assistance, that I would communicate to you such particular
passages of his life, as were certainly known to me. I confess I had the
happiness to be particularly known to him for about the space of 20 years, and
(in Oxon) to enjoy his conversation, and his learned and pious Instructions
while he was Regius Professor of Divinity there. Afterward, when (in the time
of our late unhappy confusions) he left Oxon, and was retired into the
Country, I had the benefit of his Letters; wherein (with great candor and
kindness) he answered those doubts I proposed and gave me that satisfaction,
which I neither had, nor expected from some others of greater confidence, but
less judgment and humility. Having (in a Letter) named two or three Books writ
( ex professo) against the being of any original sin; and that Adam (by his
fall) transmitted some calamity only, but no Crime to his Posterity; The good
old man was exceedingly troubled, and bewailed the misery of those licentious
times, and seemed to wonder (save that the times were such) that any should
write, or be permitted to publish any Error so contradictory to truth, and the
Doctrine of the Church of England, established (as he truly said) by clear
evidence of Scripture, and the just and supreme power of this Nation, both
Sacred and Civil. I name not the Books, nor their Authors, which are not
unknown to learned men (and I wish they had never been known) because both the
Doctrine, and the unadvised Abettors of it are (and shall be) to me Apocryphal.

Another little story I must not pass in silence, being an Argument of Dr.
Sanderson's Piety, great Ability and Judgment as a Casuist. Discoursing with an
Rob. Boil, Esquire.
honorable Person (whose Piety I value more than his Nobility and Learning,
though both be great) about a Case of Conscience concerning Oaths and Vows,
their Nature and Obligation; in which (for some particular Reasons) he then
desired more fully to be informed; I commended to him Dr. Sanderson's Book De
Iuramento: which having read (with great satisfaction) he as'kd me, if I
thought the Doctor could be induced to write Cases of Conscience, if he might
have an honorary Pension allowed him, to furnish him with Books for that
purpose? I told him I believed he would: and (in a Letter to the Doctor) told
him what great satisfaction that Honorable Person (and many more) had reaped
by reading his Book De Iuramento; and asked him, whether he would be pleased
(for the benefit of the Church) to write some Tract of Cases of Conscience? He
replied, That he was glad that any had received any benefit by his Books: and
added further, That if any future Tract of his could bring such benefit to any,
as we seemed to say his former had done, he would willingly (though without any
Pension) set about that work. Having received this Answer, that honorable
Person (before mentioned) did (by my hands) return 50 l. to the good Doctor
(whose condition then (as most good men's at that time were) was but low) and he
presently revised, finished, and published that excellent Book De Conscientia.
A Book little in bulk; but not so if we consider the benefit an intelligent
Reader may receive by it. For there are so many general Propositions concerning
Conscience, the Nature and Obligation of it, explained and proved with such
firm consequence and evidence of Reason, that he who reads, remembers and can
(with prudence) pertinently apply them Hic and nunc to particular Cases, may
(by their light and help) rationally resolve a thousand particular doubts and
scruples of Conscience. Here you may see the charity of that Honorable Person
in promoting, and the Piety and Industry of the good Doctor in performing that
excellent work.

And here I shall add the Judgment of that learned and pious Prelate concerning
a passage very pertinent to our present purpose. When he was in Oxon, and read
his public Lectures in the Schools as Regius Professor of Divinity, and by the
truth of his Positions, and evidences of his Proofs, gave great content and
satisfaction to all his hearers; especially in his clear Resolutions of all
difficult Cases which occurred in the Explication of the subject matter of his
Lectures; a Person of Quality (yet alive) privately asked him, What course a
young Divine should take in his Studies to enable him to be a good Casuist? His
answer was, That a convenient understanding of the Learned Languages (at least
of Hebrew, Greek and Latin) and a sufficient knowledge of Arts and Sciences
presupposed; There were two things in humane Literature, a comprehension of
which would be of very great use, to enable a man to be a rational and able
Casuist, which otherwise was very difficult, if not impossible. 1. A convenient
knowledge of Moral Philosophy; especially that part of it which treats of the
Nature of Humane Actions: To know, quid sit actus humanus (spontaneus, invitus,
mixtus) unde habent bonitatem and malitiam moralem? an ex genere and objecto,
vel ex circumstantiis? How the variety of Circumstances varies the goodness or
evil of humane Actions? How far knowledge and ignorance may aggravate or
excuse, increase or diminish the goodness or evil of our Actions? For every
Case of Conscience being only this -- Is this action good or bad? May I do it,
or may I not? He who (in these) knows not how and whence humane Actions become
morally good and evil, never can ( in Hypothesi) rationally and certainly
determine, whether this or that particular Action be so. 2. The second thing,
which (he said) would be a great help and advantage to a Casuist, was a
convenient knowledge of the Nature and Obligation of Laws in general: To know
what a Law is; what a Natural and a Positive Law; what is required to the Latio,
dispensatio, derogatio, vel abrogatio legis; what promulgation is antecedently
required to the Obligation of any Positive Law; what ignorance takes off the
Obligation of a Law, or does excuse, diminish or aggravate the transgression:
For every Case of Conscience being only this -- Is this lawful for me, or is it
not? and the Law the only Rule and Measure, by which I must judge of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of any Action: It evidently follows, that he, who
(in these) knows not the Nature and Obligation of Laws, never can be a good
Casuist, or rationally assure himself (or others) of the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of Actions in particular. This was the Judgment and good counsel
of that learned and pious Prelate; and having (by long experience) found the
truth and benefit of it, I conceive, I could not without ingratitude to him,
and want of charity to others, conceal it. -- Pray pardon this rude, and (I
fear) impertinent Scrible, which (if nothing else) may signify thus much, that
I am willing to obey your Desires, and am indeed

London, May 10. 1678 Your affectionate Friend, Thomas Lincoln.

ERRATA.
In the Preface, Page the last, after that read I.

In the Life, P. 20. l. 5. for renew, r. review. p. 26. l. 16. for warily, r.
rarely. p. 30. l. 13. for relate, r. dilate. p. 37. l. 11. for cautious, r
conscious. p. 58. l. 10 for inmate, r. innate. p. 63. l. 5. for predestination,
r. predestinarian. p. 126. l. 4. for complying, r. complaining. p. 161. l. 1.
for propositions, r. prepossessions.

Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT Concerning SUBMISSION TO Usurpers.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott, MDCLXXVIII.

Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT Concerning SUBMISSION TO USURPERS.
SIR,
WHEREAS you desire to know what my judgment and practice is concerning the
using or forbearing the established Liturgy (either in whole, or in part) in
the public Service of God, and Office of the Church: If it be any satisfaction
to your Friend, I shall fully acquaint you what my practice is (whereunto if my
own Judgment be not conform, I am, without all excuse, my own condemner) and
upon what considerations I have, according to the variation of the times,
varied from my self therein.

So long as my Congregation continued unmixt with Soldiers, as well after as
before the Promulgation of the Ordinance of the two Houses for the abolishing
of the Common Prayer, I continued the use of it, as I had ever formerly done in
the most peaceable and orderly times, not omitting those very Prayers, the
silencing whereof I could not but know to have been chiefly aimed at in the
Ordinance ( viz.) three for the King and Queen and Bishops; and so I did also
though some Soldiers were casually present, till such time as a whole Troop
coming to Quarter in the Town (with a purpose to continue a kind of Garrison or
Head-quarter among us) were so enraged at my reading of it the first Sunday
after they came, that immediately after Morning Service ended, they seized upon
the Book, and tore it all in pieces. Thence-forward during their continuance
there for full six months and upwards ( viz.) from the beginning of November
till they were called away to Naseby Fight in May following, besides that for
want of a Book of necessity I must, I saw that it also behoov'd me, for the
preventing of farther Outrages, to wave the use of the Book for the time, at
least in the Ordinary Service; only I read the Confession, the Lord's Prayer,
all the Versicles, and the Psalms for the day. Then after the first Lesson in
the Forenoon Benedictus or Iubilate; and in the Afternoons Cantate. After the
second Lesson also, sometimes the Creed, sometimes the Ten Commandments, and
sometimes neither, but only sang a Psalm, and so to Sermon. But in all that
while, in the Administration of the Sacraments, the Solemnization of Matrimony,
Burial of Dead, and Churching of Women, I constantly used the ancient Forms and
Rites to every of them respectively belonging, according to the appointment in
the Book; only I was careful in all the rest to make choice of such times and
opportunities as I might do them with most secrecy, and without disturbance of
the Soldier. But at the Celebration of the Eucharist I was the more secure to
do it publicly, because I was assured none of the Soldiers would be present.

After their departure I took the liberty to use either the whole Liturgy, or
but some part of it, omitting sometimes more, sometimes less upon occasion, as
I judged it most expedient in reference to the Auditory, especially if any
Soldiers, or other unknown persons happened to be present. But all this while
the substance of what I omitted I contrived into my Prayer before Sermon, the
phrase and order only varied, which yet I endeavored to temper in such sort,
that any person of ordinary capacity might easily perceivve what my meaning
was, and yet the words left as little liable to exception or cavil as might be.

About two years ago I was advertised (but in a friendly manner) by a
Parliament man of note in these parts, that at a public Meeting at Grantham,
great complaint was made by some Ministers of the Presbyterian Gang, as I
afterward found, of my refractoriness to obey the Parliaments Order in that
behalf. The Gentleman told me withal, That although they knew what my judgment
and practice was, yet they were not forward to take notice of it before
complaint made, which being now done in so public a manner, if they should not
take notice of it, the blame would lie upon them. He therefore advised me to
consider well what I had to do, for I must resolve either to adventure the loss
of my Living, or to lay aside Common Prayer; which if I should continue after
complaint and admonition, it would not be in his power, nor in the power of any
Friend I had to preserve me. The effect of my then Answer was, That if the case
were so, the deliberation was not hard: I having long ago considered of the
case, and resolved what I might do with a good Conscience, and what was fittest
for me in prudence to do, if I should ever be put to it ( viz.) to forbear the
use of the Common Prayer Book so far as might satisfy the letter of the
Ordinance, rather than forsake my Station.

My next business then was to be-think my self of such a course to be
thenceforth held in the public work in my own Parish, as might be believed
neither to bring danger to my self by the use, nor to give scandal to my
Brethren by the disuse of the established Liturgy. And the course was this, to
which I have held me ever since.

I begin the Service with a Preface, and an Exhortation inferred to make
Confession of Sins; which Exhortation I have framed out of the Exhortation and
Absolution in the Book, contracted and put together, and expressed for the most
part in the same words and phrases, but purposely here and there transplac'd,
that it might appear not to be, and yet to be the very same.

Then follows the Confession it self in the same Order; it was enlarged only
with the addition of some words, whereby it is rather explained than altered.
The whole frame whereof, both for the fuller satisfaction in that particular,
and that you may conjecture what manner of addition and change I have made
proportionably hereunto (yet none so large) in other parts of the holy Office,
I have here underwritten.

O Almighty God and merciful Father, we thy unworthy Servants do with shame and
sorrow confess, that we have all our life long gone astray out of thy ways like
lost sheep; and that by following too much the vain devices and desires of our
own hearts, we have grievously offended against thy holy laws both in thought,
word, and deed. We have many times left undone those good duties which we might
and ought to have done, and we have many times done those evils, when we might
have avoided them, which we ought not to have done. We confess, O Lord, that
there is no health at all, nor help in any Creature to relieve us; but all our
hope is in thy mercy, whose justice we have by our sins so far provoked. Have
mercy upon us therefore, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable Offenders: Spare
us good Lord who confess our faults, that we perish not, but according to thy
gracious promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, restore us
upon our true Repentance into thy grace and favor. And grant, O most merciful
Father, for his sake, that we henceforth study to serve and please thee by
leading a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name, and
the eternal comfort of our own Souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After the Confession the Lord's Prayer with the Versicles, and Gloria Patri,
and then Psalms for the Day, and the first Lesson: After which in the Forenoon,
sometimes Te Deum, (but then only when I think the Auditory will bear it) and
sometimes an Hymn of mine own, gathered out of the Psalms and Church Collects,
as a general Form of Thanksgiving (which I did the rather, because I have noted
the want of such a Form as the only thing wherein the Liturgy seemed to be
defective). And in the Afternoon, after the first Lesson the 98 th. Psalm, or
the 67 th. then the second Lesson, with Benedictus or Iubilate; after it in the
Forenoon and Afternoon a singing Psalm. Then follows the Creed, with Dominus
Vobiscum; and sometimes the Versicles in the end of our Letany [ From our
Enemies defend us] if I liked my Auditory, otherwise I omit the Versicles.
After the Creed, and instead of the Letany and the other Prayers appointed in
the Book, I have taken the substance of the Prayer I was wont to make before
Sermon, and disposed it into several Collects or Prayers, some longer and some
shorter, but new modeled into the language of the Common Prayer Book much more
than it was before. And in the Pulpit, before Sermon I use only a short Prayer
in reference to the hearing of the Word, and no more. So that upon the matter,
in these Prayers I do but the same thing I did before, save only that what
before I spoke without Book, and in a continued Form in the Pulpit, I now read
out of a written Book broken into parcels, and in the reading Desk or Pue.
Between which Prayers and the singing Psalms before the Sermon, I do also daily
use one other Collect, of which sort I have for the purpose composed sundry,
made up also (as the former) for the most part out of the Church Collects, with
some little enlargement or variation; as namely, the Collects Adventual,
Quadragesimal, Paschal, or Pentecostal, for their proper seasons; and at other
times Collects of a more general nature, as for Pardon, Repentance, Grace, etc.
And after one or more of them in the Forenoon, I usually repeat the Ten
Commandments, with a short Collect after them for Grace to enable us to keep
them.

This has been my practice, and is like still to be, unless some happy Change
of Affairs restore us the liberty of using the old way again, or it be made
appear to my Understanding by some able charitable Friend, That I therein have
done otherwise then I ought to have done: For I may say, that I have not yet
met with any thing in Discourse, either with my own Reason or others, of
sufficient strength to convince me that I have done any thing, but what may
stand with the Principles as well of Christian Simplicity as Prudence.

There are but three things, that I know of, that are of any consideration
opposed, viz. 1. The Obligation of the Laws. 2. The Scandal of the Example. 3.
The unseemly symbolizing at least with Schismatics, if not partaking with them
in the Schism.


1. Law. Object. 1.
The first and strongest Objection (which I shall therefore propose to the most
advantage of the Objector) is that which is grounded upon the Laws, and their
Obligation: For it may be Objected, That every humane Law rightly established,
so long as it continues a Law, obliges the Subject (and that for Conscience
sake) to the observation thereof in such manner and form as in the same Law is
prescribed, and according to the true meaning and intention of the Lawgiver
therein. That a Law is then understood to be rightly established, when it
contains nothing but what is honest and lawful, and is enacted by such person
or persons as have full and sufficient authority to make Laws. That a Law so
established continues a Law, and is so in force, till it be either Repealed by
as good and lawful Authority, as that by which it was made, or else antiquated
by a long continued uninforc'd disuse with the tacit or presumed consent of the
Lawgiver. That the Act printed before the Common Prayer Book, and entitled (
An Act for the Uniformity) was such a Law, being it was established in a full
and free Parliament in peaceable times, and ratified by the Royal Assent, That
it still continues in force, and being not yet Repealed, but by such persons as
(at least in the Opinion of those that maintain the Dispute) for want of the
Royal Assent, have not a sufficient right or authority to do such an Act, nor
disused but of late times, and that by enforcement, and as is presumed, much
against the mind of the Lawgiver. That therefore it still retains the power of
obliging in part of Conscience; that power being so essential and intrinsecal
to every Law, quatenus a Law, that it can in no wise be severed from it.

And that therefore no Minister publicly officiating in the Church, can with a
good Conscience either omit any part of that which is commanded by the
aforesaid Law, or use any other Form than what is contained in the foresaid
Book, but must either use the Form prescribed in the Book, or else forbear to
officiate.

The Answer to this Objection (granting all in the Premises besides) depends
upon the right understanding of that which is affirmed concering the Obligation
of the Laws according to the intention of the Lawgiver; Answ.
which if it should be understood precisely of that particular, actual, and
immediate intention which the Lawgiver had declared by the words of the Law
(in which sense only the Objection proceeds) will not hold true in all cases.
But there is supposed besides that, in Lawgiver, a more general, habitual, and
ultimate intention of a more excellent and transcendent nature that the former,
which is to have an influence into, and overruling power over all particular
Laws ( viz.) an intention by the Laws to procure and promote the public good.
The former intention binds, when it is subservient to the latter, or consistent
with it, and consequently binds in ordinary cases, and in orderly times, or
else the Law is not a wholesome Law. But when the observation of the Law, by
reason of the conjuncture of circumstances, or the iniquity of the times
(contingencies which no Lawgiver could either certainly foresee, or if
foreseen, sufficiently provide against) would rather be prejudicial than
advantageous to the Public; or is manifestly attended with such
inconveniences and sad consequents to the Observers, as all the imaginable
good that can redound to the Public thereby, cannot in any reasonable measure
countervail: In such case the Law obliges not, but according to the latter and
more general intention only; even as in the operations of nature, particular
Agents do ordinarily move according to their proper and particular
inclinations; yet upon some occasions, and to serve the ends and intentions of
universal nature (for the avoiding of some things which nature abhors) they are
sometimes carried with motions quite contrary to their particular natures; as
the Air to descend, and the Water to ascend for the avoiding of vacuity, etc.
The common received Maxim (which has been sufficiently misapplied, and that
sometimes to very ill purposes since the beginning of these unhappy divisions)
in the true meaning of it looks this way, Salus populi suprema Lex: the
equity of which Maxim, as it leaves in the Lawgiver a power of dispensing
with the Law (which is a suspending the Obligation thereof for the time in
respect of the proper and particular intention) so he shall see it expedient in
order to the public good; so it leaves in the Subject a liberty upon just
occasions (as in cases of great exigency, and for the preventing of such
hazards and inconveniences as might prove of noisome consequence to the
Public) to do otherwise than the Law requires. And neither is the exercise of
that power in the Lawgiver to be thought an unreasonable Prerogative, nor the
use of this liberty in the Subject an unreasonable presumption; inasmuch as the
power of dispensing with particular Laws is such a Prerogative, as without
which no Commonwealth can be well governed, but Justice would be turned into
Gall and Wormwood: Nor can the Supreme Governor, without forfeiture of that
faithfulness which he owes to the Public Weal, divest himself thereof.

And he that presumes of the Lawgivers consent to dispense with him for the
Observation of the Law in such needful cases (where he has not the opportunity
to consult his pleasure therein) presumes no more than he has reason to do.
For it may well be presumed that the Lawgiver, who is bound in all his Laws to
intend the safety of the Public, and of every member thereof in his due
proportion, has no intention by the strict observation of any particular Law,
to oblige any person, who is a Member of the Public, to his destruction or
ruin, when the common good is not answerably promoted thereby: Upon which
ground it is generally resolved by Casuists, That no Constitution (merely
humane) can lay such Obligation upon the Conscience of the Subject, but that we
may (according to the exigency of circumstances) do otherwise than the
Constitution requires, provided it be done extra casum scandali and
contemptus, i.e. without either bewraying in himself any contempt of the
Authority of the Lawgiver by his carriage, or giving any just occasion of
scandal to others by his example in so doing.

I have been somewhat the longer in explaining this point, not only for the
better clearing of the present doubt, but also in respect of the usefulness of
this consideration for the preventing and removing of many scruples that may
happen to conscientious men in such times as these, wherein so many things are
(and are like to be) commanded and forbidden contrary to the established Laws,
and those (as they are persuaded) yet standing in force. The best rule that I
know to guide men in their deliberations and actions in such emergent cases
(according to what has been already delivered) is advisedly and impartially to
weigh the benefit and inconveniences, as well on the one side, as on the
other, as they stand in relation unto the Public Good: and if after such
examination and comparison made, it shall then evidently (or but in the
judgment of probability) appear, that the Observation of the Law, according to
the proper intention of the Lawgiver therein, though with hazard of Estate,
Liberty, or even life it self, has a greater tendency to the Public Good, and
the preservation of church or Commonwealth in safety, peace, and order, than
the preventing of the foresaid hazards, or other evil consequents, by doing
otherwise than the Law requires, can have; or (which comes to one) if the
violating of the Law shall then to be more prejudicial to the public Good,
than the preservation of the Subject's Estate, Liberty, or Life can be
beneficial hereunto: In such case the Subject is bound to hazard all he has,
and undergo whatsoever inconveniences and calamities can ensue thereupon,
rather than violate the Law with contempt of that Authority to which he owes
subjection.

But if it shall (after such comparison made) evidently (or but more probably
than the contrary) appear, That that preservation of such a persons Life,
Liberty, Estate, would more benefit the Church or Commonwealth, than the
punctual observation of the Law at that time, and with those circumstances,
would do; it were an unseasonable, unreasonable, and pernicious scrupulosity
for such a person to think himself in such a case obliged for the observing of
the Law (perhaps but once or twice) with little or no benefit to the Public,
to ruin himself, whereby to render himself unuseful and unserviceable to the
Public for ever hereafter.

To bring this Discourse home, and to apply it to the business now under
dispute. Suppose we ten, twenty, or One hundred godly Ministers, well affected
to the established Liturgy, and actually possessed of Benefices, with the
Charge of Souls thereto belonging, should, thinking themselves in Conscience
obliged to the use of the whole Form of the Book, as is by the Act appointed,
without any addition, omission, or alteration whatsoever (notwithstanding the
present conjuncture of Affairs) resolve to use the same accordingly, it would
be well considered what the effects and consequents thereof would be.

Besides other evils, these three are visible, which must all unavoidably
follow one upon another, if any body shall be found (as doubtless within short
time there will be found one or other) to inform and prosecute against them.

1. The utter undoing of so many worthy persons, fit to do God and his Church
good service, together with all those persons that depend upon them for their
livelihood, by putting the fruits of their Benefices, wherewith they should buy
themselves bread, under Sequestration.

2. The depriving of those persons of the opportunity of discharging the duties
that belong unto them in their Ministerial Calling, in not permitting them,
after such Sequestration, to teach or instruct the people belonging to their
Charge, or to exercise any thing of their Function publicly in the Church.

3. The delivering over the Sheep of Christ, that lately were under the hands
of the faithful Shepherds, into the Custody of ravenous Wolves, when such
Guides shall be set over the several Congregations, as will be sure to
mis-teach them one way or other ( viz.) either by instilling into them
Puritanical and Superstitious Principles, that they may the more securely
exercise their Presbyterian Tyranny over their Judgments, Consciences, Persons,
and Estates, or else by setting up new Lights before them, to lead them into a
maze of Anabaptistical confusion and frenzy.

These consequents are so heavy to the Sufferers, so certain to ensue upon the
use of Common Prayer, and so much without the power of the Lawgivers (in this
state of Affairs) either to prevent or remedy, that it is beyond the wit of man
what benefit to the Public can accrue by the strict observation of the Act,
that may in any proportion countervail these mischiefs. In which case, that man
must needs suppose a strange austerity in the Lawgiver, that dares not presume
of his consent to disoblige him (for the time) from observing the same. It
would be also well considered, Whether he that by his own over-nice
scrupulosity runs all these hazards, be not (in some measure) guilty of his own
undoing, of deserting his station, and of betraying his flock, and do not
thereby lose much of that comfort which a Christian Confessor may take in his
sufferings, when they are laid upon him by the Hand of God, and not pulled upon
himself by his own hands. And more I shall not need to say as to that first
Objection.

The next thing objected is, Object. 2. Scandal.
The danger of the Scandal that others might be ready to take at the Example,
who seeing the Law so little regarded by such men (men that have Cure of Souls,
and perhaps also of some eminency and esteem in the Church, and whose Example
will be much looked upon) will be easily encouraged by this Example to set
light by all Authority, and to take the liberty to obey and disobey the Laws of
their Sovereign at their pleasure.

But this Objection, after we are once satisfied concerning the former, need
not much trouble us. For, 1. It seems an unreasonable thing in cases of great
Exigence (such as we now suppose) that the fear of scandalizing our weak
Brethren (which is but Debitum charitatis only) should lay upon us a peremptory
necessity of observing the Law punctually, whatsoever inconveniences and
mischiefs may ensue thereupon: when the duty of Obedience to our known
Governors (which is Debitum justitiae also, and therefore more Obligatory than
the other) does not impose that necessity upon us; as has been already shown.
2. Besides, Arguments drawn from scandal in things neither unlawful nor
(setting the reason of Scandal aside) inexpedient, as they are subject to
sundry frailties otherwise, so they are manifestly of no weight at all, when
they are counterpois'd with the apparent danger of evil consequents on the
other side. For in such cases there is commonly equal danger (if not rather
something more) of Scandal to be taken from the Example the quite contrary way.
We may see it in debating the point now in hand: It is alleged on the one
side, That by laying aside the use of the Common Prayer, men that are over
scrupulous will be encouraged to take a greater liberty in dispensing with the
Laws (to the despising both of Laws and Governors) than they ought. And why
may it not, by the same reason, be as well alleged on the other side, That by
holding up a necessity of using the Common Prayer, men that have tender
Consciences may be induced to entertain scruples (to their utter undoing, and
to the destruction of their people) when they need not? 3. But that in the
third place, which comes up home to the business, and takes off the Objection
clearly, is this, That in judging Cases of scandal, we are not so much to look
to the event, what it is, or may be, as to the cause, whence it comes. For
sometimes there is given just cause of Scandal; and yet no Scandal follows,
because it is not taken: Sometimes scandal is taken, and yet no just cause
given: and sometimes there is both cause of Scandal given, and Scandal taken
thereat. But no man is concerned at any Scandal that happens to another by
occasion of any thing done by him, neither is chargeable with it farther than
he is guilty of having given it. If then we give Scandal to others, and they
take it not, the whole guilt is ours, and they are faultless. If we give it,
and they take it, we are to bear a share in the blame as they, and that a deep
share; ( Vae homini, Woe to the man by whom the offense comes, Matthew. 18.7.)
But if they take offense when we give none, it is a thing we cannot help, and
therefore the whole blame must lie upon them.


Wherefore, if at any time any doubt shall arise in that case of Scandal, How
far forth the danger thereof may obligue us to the doing or not doing of any
thing proposed; The Resolution will come on much the easier, if we shall but
rightly understand what it is to give Scandal, or how many ways a man may
become guilty of scandalizing another by his Example.

The ways (as I conceive) are but these four.

1. When a man does something before another, which is in it self evil,
unlawful, and sinful. In which case, neither the intension of him that does it,
nor the event as to him that sees it done, is of any consideration: For it
matters not whether the doer has an intention to draw the other into sin, or
not; the very matter and substance of the action being evil, and done before
others, is sufficient to render the doer guilty of having given Scandal, though
neither he had intention himself so to do, nor was any other person actually
scandalized thereby: because whatsoever is in its own nature evil, is of it
self, and in its own nature scandalous, and of ill Example.

Thus did Hophni and Phineas, the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 17.22.
give Scandal by their wretched profaneness and greediness about the
Sacrifices of the Lord, and their shameless abusing the Women. And so did David
also give great Scandal in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 12. 14. Here the Rule
is, Do nothing that is evil, for fear of giving Scandal.

2. The second way is, when a man does something before another with a direct
intention and formal purpose of drawing him thereby to commit sin. In which
case neither the matter of the action, nor the event is of any consideration:
For it makes no difference as to the sin of giving Scandal, whether any man be
effectually enticed to commit sin or not thereby; neither does it make any
difference, whether the thing done were in it self unlawful, or not, so as it
had an appearance of evil, and from thence an aptitude to draw another by the
doing of that (by imitation) which should be really and intrinsecally evil. The
wicked intention alone (whatsoever the effect should be, or what means soever
should be used to promote it) suffices to induce the guilt of giving Scandal
upon the doer. This was Ieroboam's sin, in setting up the Calvos, with a formal
purpose and intention thereby (for his own secular and ambitious ends) to
corrupt the purity of Religion, and to draw the people unto Idolatrous Worship.
For which cause he is so often stigmatized with it, as a note of Infamy, to
stick by him whilst the World lasts, being scarce ever-mention'd in the
Scripture, but with this addition, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel
to sin. Here the Rule is, Do nothing, a good or evil, with an intention to give
Scandal. 3. The third way is when a man does something before another, which in
it self is not evil, but indifferent, and so according to the Rule of Christian
Liberty, lawful for him to do, or not to do, as he shall see cause (yea, and
perhaps otherwise commodious and convenient for him to do) yet whereas he
probably foreseeth that others will take Scandal, and be occasioned thereby to
do evil. In such a case, if the thing to be done be not in some degree
prudentially necessary for him to do, but that he might, without very great
inconvenience or prejudice to himself or any third person, leave it undone: He
is bound in Charity to his Brother's Soul (for whom Christ died) and for the
avoiding of Scandal, to abridge himself in the exercise of his Christian
Liberty for that time, so far as rather to suffer some inconvenience himself by
the not doing of it, than by the doing of it to cause his Brother to offend.
The very Case which is so often, so largely, and so earnestly insisted upon by
St. Paul. See Romans 14.13,21. Romans 15.1, 3. 1 Cor. 87, 13. 1 Cor. 9.12, 15, 19,
22. 1 Cor. 10.23.33. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that may be reasonably
forborne, whereat Scandal will be taken. 4. The last way is, when a man does
something before another, which is not only lawful, but (according to the
exigencies of present Circumstances) pro hic and nunc very behoofful, and even
prudentially necessary for him to do, but foreseeth that the other will be like
to make an ill use of it, and take encouragement thereby to commit sin, if he
be not withal careful, as much as possibly in him lies, to prevent the Scandal
that may be taken thereat: For, Qui non prohibet peccare, cum potest, jubet. In
such case the bare neglect of his Brother, and not using his utmost endeavor
to prevent the evil that might ensue, makes him guilty. Upon which
consideration stands the Equity of the Judicial Law given to the Jews, Exodus
21. 33, 34.
which ordered, That in case a man dig a Pit for the use of his Family, and
looking no farther than his own convenience, put no cover upon it, and leave it
open, whereby it happens his Neighbors Beast to fall thereinto and perish, the
owner of the Pit is to make it good, inasmuch as he was the occasioner of that
loss to his Neighbor, which he might and ought to have prevented. Here the
Rule is Order the doing of that, which may not be well left undone, in such
sort that no Scandal (so far as you can help it) may be taken thereat.
To apply this. The thing under debate, viz. the Action proposed to present
enquiry is, The laying aside the Common Prayer, being enjoined by Law, and
using instead thereof some other Form of Church Service of our own devising.
And the Enquiry concerning it is, Whether it may be done with a good Conscience
in regard of the Scandal that is given, or at least may be taken thereat, Yea
or No?

Now forasmuch as in this Enquiry we take it for granted, That the thing to be
done is not in its own nature simply evil, but rather in this state of affairs
prudentially necessary; and that they who make scruple at it upon the point of
Scandal, have not the least intention of drawing other of the Laws into
contempt, or their Brethren into sin by their Example. It is manifest that
three of the now mentioned Cases, with the Rules to each of them appending, are
not pertinent to the present Enquiry. But since the last of the four only
proves to be our Case, we have therefore no more to do for the settling of our
Judgments, and quieting of our Consciences, and the regulating of our Practice
in this Affair, than to consider well what the Rule in this Case given obliges
us unto; which is not to leave the Action undone for the danger of Scandal,
which (besides the Inconveniences formerly mentioned) would but start new
Questions, and those beget more to the multiplying unnecessary Scruples in
infinitum: But to order the doing of it so, that (if it were possible) no
Scandal at all might ensue thereupon, or at least wise not by our default,
through our careless or undiscreet managery thereof. Even as the Jew that stood
in need to sink a Pit for the service of his House or Ground, was not (for fear
his Neighbors Beast should fall into it, and be drowned) bound by the Law to
forbear the making of it, but only to provide a sufficient cover for it, where
he had made it. The thing then in this Case is not to be left undone, when it
so much behooves us to do it; but the Action to be carried on (for the manner
of doing, and in all respects and circumstances thereunto belonging) with so
much chariness and tenderness, moderation and wisdom (to our best
understanding) that the necessity of our so doing, with the true cause thereof,
may appear to the World, to the satisfaction of those that are willing to take
notice of it; and that such persons as would be willing to make use of our
Ensample to do the same thing, where there is not the same necessity, may do it
upon their own score, and not be able to vouch our practice for their excuse;
which how it may be best done for particular directions, every charitable and
conscientious man must ask his own discretion. Some general helps thereunto I
shall lay down in answering the next Objection, where they would fall in again
not improperly, and so stop two Gaps with one Bush.

The last Objection is that of Shism. Object. 3. Schism.
The Objectors hold all such persons as have opposed either Liturgy or Church
Government, as they were by Law established within this Realm, for no better
than Schismatics; and truly I shall not much gainsay it. But then they argue,
That for them to do the same thing in the public worship of God that
Schismatics do (and for doing whereof especially it is that they avow them
Schismatics) would (as they conceive) involve them in the Schism also, as
partakers thereof in some degree with the other: And their Consciences also
would, from Romans 14.22. condemn them either of hypocrisy, in allowing that in
themselves, and in their own practice, which they condemn in others; or of
uncharitableness, in judging others as Schismatics for doing but the same
thing which they can allow themselves to practice. For all that such persons,
as they call Schismatics, do in this matter of the Church Service, is but to
leave out the Churches Prayers, and to put in their own. Or say, this should
not make them really guilty of the Schism they so much detest, yet would such
their symbolizing with them seem at least a kind of unworthy compliance with
them, more than could well become the simplicity of a Christian, much less of a
Minister of the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
whose duty it is to shun even the least appearance of evil. Besides, that by
so doing they should but confirm such men in their Schismatical Principles and
Practice.

This Objection has 3 Branches. To the first whereof I oppose the old saying,
Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem; which, although spoken quite to another
purpose, yet is very capable of such a sense which will very well fit our
present purpose also.

I Answer therefore in short. To do the same thing that Schismatics do
(especially in time of Confusion, and till things can be reduced unto better
Order, and when men are necessitated thereunto to prevent greater mischiefs)
does not necessarily infer a partaking with them in Schism, no, nor so much as
probably, unless it may appear upon probable presumption otherwise, that it is
done out of the same Schismatical Spirit, and upon such Schismatical Principles
as theirs are.

The other two Branches ( viz. That of seeming compliance with Schismatics,
and That of the ill use they make of it to confirm them in their Schism) do
upon the matter fall in upon the aforesaid point of Scandal, and are in effect
but the same Objection, only put into a new dress, and so have received their
Answer already. And the only remedy against both these Fears (as well that of
Scandal, as this of Schism) is the same which was there prescribed, Even to
give assurance to all men, by our carriage and behavior therein, that we do
not lay aside Common Prayer of our own accord, or out of any dislike thereof,
neither in contempt of our rightful Governors, or of the Laws, nor out of any
base compliance with the Times, or unworthy Secular own ends, nor out of any
Schismatical principles, seditious designs, or innovating humor; but merely
enforced thereunto by such a necessity, as we cannot otherwise avoid in order
to the Glory of God, and the Public Good, for the preservation of our
Families, our Flocks, and our Functions: And that with the good leave and
allowance (as we have great reason to believe) of such as have power to
dispense with us and the Laws in that behalf.

This if we shall do bona fide, and with our utmost endeavors, in singleness
of heart, and with godly discretion, perhaps it will not be enough to prevail
with either the censure of inconsiderate and inconsiderable persons, or the ill
use that may be made of our Example, through the ignorance or negligence of
some ( scandalum pusillorum) or through the perverseness and malice of others (
scandalum pharisaeorum) as the Schools term them: But assuredly it will be
sufficient in the sight of God, and the witness of our own hearts, and to the
Consciences of charitable and considering men, to acquit us clear of all guilt,
either of Scandal or Schism in the least degree. Which we may probably do by
observing these ensuing, or such other like general Directions (The liberty of
using such meet accommodations, as the circumstances in particular Cases shall
require, evermore allowed and reserved). viz. 1. If we shall decline the
company and society of known Schismatics, not conversing frequently or
familiarly with them, or more than the necessary affairs of life, and the rules
of Neighborhood and common civility will require; especially not to give
countenance unto their Church Assemblies, by our presence among them, if we can
avoid it. 2. If we shall retain, as well in common discourse, as in our Sermons
and holy Offices of the Church, the old Theological and Ecclesiastical terms
and forms of Speech, which have been generally received and used in the
Churches of Christ, which the people are well acquainted with, and are wholesome
and significant, and not follow our new Masters in that uncouth affected garb
of Speech, or Canting Language rather (if I may so call it) which they have of
late taken up, as the signal distinction and characteristical note of that,
which in that their new Language they call The Godly Party, or Communion of
Saints. 3. If in officiating we repeat not only the Lord's Prayer, the Creed,
the ten Commandments, and such other passages in the Common Prayer Book, as
(being the very words of Scripture) no man can except against; but so much of
the old Liturgy besides, in the very words and syllables of the Book, as we
think the Ministers of State in those parts wherein we live will suffer, and
the Auditory, before whom we officiate, will bear; since the Officers in all
parts of the Land are not alike strict, nor the people in all Parishes alike
disaffected in this respect. 4. If, where we must of necessity vary from the
words, we yet follow the Order of the Book in the main parts of the holy
Offices, retaining the substance of the Prayers, and embellishing those of our
own making, which we substitute into the place of those we leave out, with
phrases and passages taken out of the Book in other places. 5. If, where we
cannot safely mention the Particulars mentioned in the Book (as namely in
praying for the King, the Queen, the Royal Progeny, and the Bishops) we shall
yet use in our Prayers some such general terms, and other intimations devised
for that purpose, as may sufficiently convey to the understanding of the people
what our intentions are therein, and yet not be sufficient to fetch us within
the compass of the Ordinance. 6. If we shall in our Sermons take occasion now
and then, where it may be pertinent, either to discover the weakness of the
Puritan Principles and Tenets to the people; or to show out of some passages
and expressions in the Common Prayer, the consonancy of those Observations we
have raised from the Text, with the Judgment of the Church of England: or to
justify such particular passages in the Letany, Collects, and other parts of
our Liturgy as have been unjustly quarell'd at by Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, or other (by what Name or Title soever they are called) Puritan
Sectaries.


Thus have I freely acquainted you both with my practice and judgment in the
Point proposed in your Friend's Letter. How I shall be able to satisfy his or
your judgment in what I have written, I know not; however, I have satisfied
both your desire and his in writing, and shall rest

Your Brother and Servant in the Lord, Rob. Sanderson.

PAX Ecclesiae.

BY THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD ROBERT SANDERSON, LATE Lord Bishop of
Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott 1678.

PAX ECCLESIAE.
ALL the Decrees of God are eternal, and his Counsels therein unsearchable. In
Eternals there is neither prius, nor posterius; and ergo considered in
themselves, and as they are in God, all the Decrees of God concerning the whole
course of man's salvation, are simul and semel; and because eternal, ergo also
coeternal. Yet considered either in regard of their Objects, or respectively to
our apprehensions, there must some order be conceived among them, whereby one
may be said to be before or after another ordine naturae, and ordine
intelligendi. For as in order of nature the intention of the end is before the
deliberation concerning the means, the causes before the effect, the subject
before the properties and accidents, etc. so we are not able to conceive of the
Decrees of God, unless we rank them in some such order, as seems most
agreeable to the condition of their proper objects; as ex. gr. those wherein
the end, or cause, or subject is decreed, to be ordine intelligendi before
these, wherein are decreed the means, effects, or accidents. But because the
Counsels of God herein are incomprehensible and unsearchable to our weak and
finite understandings, it hence comes to pass, 1. That they who have the
greatest serenity of natural understanding, and the largest measure of Divine
Revelation withal, must yet confess the unfathomed depth of the judgments and
ways of God, which are abyssus multa, rather to be admired than searched into;
so as they are not to hope or look after such a way of opening these Mysteries,
as shall be quietativa intellectus, so totally and absolutely, but that some
difficulties will still remain, to make us cry out with St. Paul, O altitudo!
Otherwise these great and hidden Mysteries of God should be no Mysteries. 2.
That men, who cannot content themselves to be wise according to sobriety,
whilst they have thought by searching into the Counsels of God, to bring the
Mysteries of Faith within the comprehension of Reason, have become vain in
their imaginations, and enwrapped themselves unawares in perplexed and
inextricable difficulties: for the unwinding themselves where-from, they have
been afterward sometimes driven to devise and maintain strange Opinions, of
very perilous and noisome consequence, which hatch been the original of most
Heresies and Schisms in the Church. 3. That men also of sober Understandings,
and keeping within the due Bounds of their Gifts and Callings, yet by reason of
the great difficulties of the things themselves, have much differed, and still
will do in their Judgments and Opinions one from another, in the ordering of
God's Decrees concerning man's Salvation, each man abounding in his own sense,
and following that way which seems to him clogged with the least and fewest
difficulties, according as he apprehends them; although perhaps in rei
veritate, or at the least in the apprehension of another man, those very
difficulties may be more and greater. Hence the many differences among the
Protestants, between Lutherans and Calvinists; among the Romanists between the
Jesuits and Dominicans and each of these again subdivided; concerning
Predestination and Reprobation; the power of man's Free Will; the necessity,
efficacy, and extent of Divine Grace; the concurrence of Grace with Free Will;
the universality and application of Christ's Death, and some other Points of
like nature.


The Premises considered, that amid, and notwithstanding all this variety of
Opinions, there may yet be preserved in the Church the unity both of Faith and
Charity, these few things seem to me to be of profitable and important
consideration.

1. That particular Churchs would be as tender as may be in giving their
definitions and derminations in such Points as these; not astricting those that
live therein determinately either to the affirmative or negative, especially
where there may be admitted a latitude of dissenting without any prejudice done
either to the Substance of the Catholic Faith, or to the Tranquillity of the
Church, or to the Salvation of the Dissenter. In which respect the moderation
of the Church of England is much to be commended, and to be preferred, not only
before the Roman Church, which with unsufferable tyranny binds all her
Children, upon pain of Damnation, to all her Determinarions, even in those
Points, which are no way necessary to Salvation; but also before sundry other
Reformed Churches, who have proceeded further this way than our Church has
done.

2. When by reason of the important contentions and wranglings of Learned men
in particular Churches, about Points yet undetermined therein, differences
shall be so far prosecuted, as to come to open sideings, and part-takings, and
factions (as it happened in the Netherland Churches between the Remonstrantes,
and Contra-Remonstrantes) so as for the composing of the differences, and the
maintenance of the public Peace and Tranquillity of the Church, it shall be
needful for those Churches Synodically to determine something in those Points;
that yet they would then also proceed no farther in their determinations, than
the present necessity should enforce them; not requiring men (specially in
points of lesser consequence) to give, and by Oath, subscription, or other like
means, to witness their express positive assent to such determinations; but
permitting them to enjoy their own private Opinions in their own private
Bosoms, so long as they keep them to themselves, and do not by venting them
unseasonably, disquiet the peace of the Church therewithal.

3. That Catechisms, for so much as they are intended for the instruction of
Children and ignorant persons in the first Principles of Christian Religion,
should not be farced with School-points and private Tenets; but contain only
clear and undoubted Truths, and such as are necessary unto Christian
Edification either in Faith or Life: The rest either altogether omitted, or but
occasionally and sparingly touched at, and not positively, and doctrinally, and
conclusively delivered before the Church have agreed upon them.

4. That private men would endeavor for so much ingenuity, as 1. To other men's
speeches and writings (especially where they intend to discourse but exoterice
and popularly, not accurately and dogmatice) to afford a favorable
construction, without taking advantage at some excesses in modo loquendi, or
exceptions at some improprieties and acyrologies, so long as they are Orthodox
in the main Substance of their Discourse. 2. Not to obtrude any Tenet, as the
received Doctrine of any particular Church, which either is not expressly
contained in the public Confession of that Church, or does not apparently
result thence by direct and immediate consequence; though the wit of man make
it seem at length, and by continuance of discourse to be probably deduced
therefrom. 3. In their own Writings to observe formam sanorum verborum, and to
abstain not only from suspected Opinions, but as much as may be also from
phrases and speeches obnoxious to ill construction. For first it is not enough,
much less a thing to be gloried in, for a man to be able by subtilty of wit to
find loop-holes how to evade, and by colorable pretenses to make that, which
through heat of passion, or violence of opposition has fallen from him
unadvisedly, to seem howsoever defensible: but he should have a care to suffer
nothing to pass from him, whereat an ingenuous and dispassionate Adversary,
though dissenting from him in Opinion, should yet have cause to take distaste
or exception. And besides, it were a thing of very dangerous consequence in the
Church, if every man should be suffered freely to publish whatsoever might by
some strain of Wit be made capable of a good construction, if of it self it
sounded ill and suspiciously: For so Notions of Popish, or Puritanical, or
other Heretical, Schismatical Opinions might unawares be conveyed into the
minds, and impressions thereof insensibly wrought in the hearts of men, to the
great damage of the Church, and prejudice to the Truth. 4. To acknowledge
freely, and readily to revoke whatsoever either error in re, or misprision in
testimonio, or exorbitancy in modo loquendi, has passed from their Pen, when
it shall be fairly showed them, and their Judgments convinced thereof, rather
than to seek to relieve themselves by excuses, colors, or evasions. 5. That
private men in particular Churches, who dissent in points yet undetermined by
the Church, should not uncharitably entercharge each other with Heresy or
Schism, or any such like imputation for so dissenting, so long as they both
consent to the whole Doctrine and Discipline in the said Church maintained and
established. As ex. gr. in the Points now so much debated among the Divines of
the Church of England between the Calvinists and Arminians (for I must take
liberty for distinctions sake to express them by those names they usually
bestow the one upon the other) Why should either those men on the one side be
branded with Popery, who misliking Calvin's Opinion, rather choose to follow the
Arminian; or those on the other side with Puritanism, who finding less
satisfaction in the way of Arminius, rather adhere to Calvin? so long as both
the one and the other do entirely, and freely, and ex animo subscribe to the
Articles of the Common Prayer Book, and that of Consecration, and do not rent
the Unity, or disturb the Peace of the Church by those differences.


II. Periculum Schismatis.
Forasmuch as here in England the differences, which before were but private
concerning the Points of Arminianism, have been of late so far brought upon the
public Stage, by occasion of the passages betwixt Mr. Mountague and his
Opposers, as that a dangerous Schism is like to ensue thereupon, unless by the
goodness of God, and the Wisdom of the Church and State, it be speedily
prevented: Those general Directions now already laid down for the preservation
of the Churches Peace, will not reach home for the securing of our peace, and
preventing farther evils, as the case now stands with us; but it is needful
the Church should interpose herein, both by farther Explanation of her Doctrine
in the points questioned, and by the Exercise of her Discipline upon such
persons as will not rest in her determinations. And this necessity will the
more appear, if we consider upon what advantages the Arminian party has, and
yet does gain strength to it self, viz. 1. The weakness of sundry of those
Exceptions, which were taken at Mr. Mountague's Answer to the Gagge, by those
that first openly engaged themselves for that business; which has not only
brought prejudice to their persons, but also given disadvantages to the Cause,
even in those Exceptions which were just and material. 2. The publishing of Mr.
Mountague's Appeal with Allowance, which both has given confidence to sundry,
who before were Arminians, but in secret, now to walk unmasked, and to profess
their Opinions publicly in all Companies, and that with some disdain of
opposition; and does also encourage sundry others to show an inclination to
that side, which they see to be countenanced in such public sort. 3. The
plausibleness of Arminianism, and the congruity it has in sundry Points with
the Principles of corrupt Nature, and of carnal Reason. For it is a wonderful
tickling to flesh and blood, to have the powers of Nature magnified, and to
hear it self flattered, as if she carried the greatest stroke in the work of
Salvation; especially, when these soothings are conveyed under the pretense of
vindicating the dispensations of God's Providence from the Imputation of
Injustice. 4. The harshness of that Opinion which Calvin and Beza are said to
have held, and many Learned men in our Church are said to have followed,
concerning the Decrees of Reprobation and Election, without respect had to Adam
in the one, or to Christ in the other; whereas the inconveniences, which
either do ensue, or seem to ensue upon the Opinion, may be fairly waved another
way, and yet without Arminianism. 5. The manifold cunning of the Arminians to
advance their own party, as viz. 1. In pleading for a liberty for every man to
abound in his own sense in things undetermined by the Church, that so they may
spread their own Tenets the more freely; whereas yet it is too apparent by
their writings and speeches, that their intent and endeavor is to take the
benefit of this liberty themselves, but not to allow it to those that dissent
from them. 2. In bragging out some of their private Tenets, as if they were the
received established Doctrine of the Church of England, by forcing the words of
the Articles or Common Prayer Book to a sense, which appears not to have been
intended therein, as Mr. Mountague has done in the Point of falling from
grace. Whereas the contrary Tenet, viz. of the final perseverance of the
righteous in grace and faith, may be by as strong evidence every way, and by as
natural deducement collected out of the said Books, as shall be easily proved,
if it be required. 3. In seeking to derive envy upon the opposite Opinions, by
delivering them in terms odious, and of ill and suspicious sound; as viz.
irresistibility of grace, irrespective decree, etc. whereas the soberer Divines
of the opposite party ordinarily do not use those terms, nor yet well approve
of them, unless understood cum grano salis. But themselves rather are so
exorbitant in their phrases and terms, as it were well if a good quantity of
Salt could so correct some of them, as to render them, if not wholesome, at
least savoury. 4. Which is the most unjust and uncharitable course of all the
rest, and whereby yet I verily think they have prevailed more than by all the
rest, in seeking to draw the persons of those that dissent from them into
dislike with the Sat, as if they were Puritans, or Disciplinarians, or at
least that way affected. Whereas 1. The Questions in debate are such, as no way
touch upon Puritanism, either off or on. 2. Many of the Dissenters have as
freely and clearly declared their Judgments, by preaching and writing against
all Puritanism, and Puritanical Principles, both before and since they were
interessed in these Controversies, as the stoutest Arminian in England has
done. I am not able to pronounce absolutely neither of other men; but so far as
has occurred to my observation, I dare say it, I find more written against the
Puritans, and their Opinions, and with more real satisfaction, and upon no less
solid grounds, by those that have, and do dissent from the Arminian Tenets,
than by those that have or do maintain them. Could that blessed Archbishop
Whitgift, or the modest and learned Hooker have ever thought, so much as by
dream, that men concurring, with them in Opinion, should for some of these very
Opinions be called Puritans?




III. Series Decretorum Dei.
Sithence most of the differences now in question do arise from the different
conceits which men have concerning the Decrees of God about man's Salvation,
and the execution of those Decrees; it could not but be a work of singular use
for the composing of present, and the preventing of farther differences, if
some learned and moderate men (all prejudice and partiality laid aside) would
travel with faithfulness and sobriety in this Argument, viz. to order those
Decrees consonantly to the tenor of Scripture, and the Doctrine of the ancient
Church, as to avoid those inconveniences into which the extreme Opinions on
both hands run. For, considering often with my self, that the abettors of
either extreme are confirmed in their Opinions, not so much from the assurance
of their own grounds, as from the inconveniences that attend the opposite
extreme: I have ever thought that a middle way between both might be fairer and
safer to pitch upon, than either extreme. What therefore upon some agitation of
these Points, both in Argument with others upon occasion, and in my private and
serious thoughts, I have conceived concerning the ordering of God's Decrees,
desiring ever to keep my self within the bands of Christian sobriety and
modesty, I have at the request of some Friends here distinctly laid down, not
intending hereby to prescribe unto other men, nor yet to tie my self to mine
own present Judgment, if I shall see cause to alter it; but only to present to
the abler Judgments of some learned Friends that way, which has hitherto given
me better satisfaction than any other, and which I have not yet observed to be
subject to so great difficulties and inconveniences, neither in the substance
of the matter, nor in the manner of explication, as the ways, which either the
rigid Calvinists, or the Arminians have taken. Quaere then, whether or no the
Eternal Decrees of God concerning man's Salvation may not be conveniently
conceived in this order, viz. That he decreed 1. To make himself glorious by
communicating his goodness in producing powerfully, and ex nihilo, a world of
Creatures, and among the chiefest of them Man, endued with a reasonable soul,
and organical body, as a vessel and subject capable of grace and glory. 2. To
enter into a Covenant with this reasonable Creature (commonly called the first
Covenant of Works) to bestow upon him life and glory, if he should continue in
his obedience; but if otherwise, then not only to be deprived of the
blessedness covenanted, but also and instead thereof to be punished with actual
misery and eternal death. 3. After this Covenant made, to leave man in manu
consilij sui, by the free choice of his own will, to lay hold either on life by
obedience, or by transgression on death. 4. To permit man thus left to himself
to fall into sin, and so to cast himself out of that Covenant into a state of
misery, and corruption, and damnation; with a purpose in that permission to
serve himself of man's fall, as a fit occasion whereby to magnify himself, and
his own glory yet farther, in the manifestation of his infinite both justice
and mercy. 5. That the whole Species of so noble a Creature might not perish
everlastingly, and without all remedy, to provide for mankind ( pro genere
humano) a most wise, sufficient, and convenient means of reparation, and
redemption, and salvation, by the satisfactory and meritorious death and
obedience of the incarnate Son of God, Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever. 6.
In this Jesus, as the Mediator, to enter into a second Covenant with Mankind
(commonly called the New Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace) that whosoever
should lay hold on him by a true and steadfast Faith, should attain remission
of sins, and eternal life; but he that should not believe, should perish
everlastingly in his sins. 7. Lest this Covenant should yet be ineffectual, and
Christ die in vain, because left to themselves, especially in this wretched
state of corruption, none of the Sons of Adam could de facto have repented and
believed in Christ, for the glory of his grace, to elect and cull a certain
number of particular persons out of the corrupted lump of mankind, to be
advanced into this Covenant, and thereby entitled unto Salvation; and that
without any cause or motive at all in themselves, but merely ex beneplacito
voluntatis, of his own free grace and good pleasure in Jesus Christ,
pretermitting and passing by the rest to perish justly in their sins. 8. To
confer in due season upon the persons so elected, all fit and effectual means
and graces needful for them unto Salvation, proportionably to their personal
capacities and conditions; as namely, 1. Upon Infants that die before the use
of Reason, the Sacrament of Christian Baptism, administered and received in the
Name and Faith of the Chuch, with Sacramental grace to such persons, as for the
want of the use of Reason never come to be capable of the habitual or actual
graces of Faith, Repentance, etc. we are to judge to be sufficient for their
Salvation. 2. Upon men that come to the use of Reason sooner or later, such a
measure of Faith in the Son of God, of repentance from dead works, of new and
holy obedience to God's Commandments (together with final perseverance in all
these) as in his excellent wisdom he sees meet, wrought and preserved in them
outwardly by the Word and Sacraments, and inwardly by the operation of his holy
Spirit shed in their hearts, whereby sweetly and without constraint, but yet
effectually, their understandings, wills and affections are subdued to the
acknowledgment and obedience of the Gospel; and both these are done ordinarily,
and by ordinary means. 3. Into some men it may be, and extraordinarily
(especially in the want of ordinary means) God may infuse Faith, and other
Graces accompanying Salvation, as also ( modo nobis incognito) make supply unto
Infants unbaptized some other way, by the immediate work of his Holy and
Almighty Spirit, without the use of the outward means of the Word and
Sacraments. Of which extraordinary work we cannot pronounce too sparingly; the
special use whereto it serves us, being the suspending of our Censures, not
rashly to pass the Sentence of Damnation upon those Infants, or Men, that want
the ordinary outward means, since we are not able to say, How God in his
infinite power can, and how in his rich mercy he has, does, or will deal with
them.
9. Thus much concerning the salvation of those whom God has of his free grace
elected thereunto. But with the Reprobates, whom he has in his justice
appointed to destruction, he deals in another fashion; as concerning whom he
has decreed either 1. To afford them neither the extraordinary, nor so much as
but the outward and ordinary means of Faith: Or else 2. In the presence of the
outward means of the Word and Sacraments to withhold the inward concurrence of
his enlightening and renewing Spirit to work with those means, for want whereof
they become ineffectual to them for their good, working upon them either
malignantly, so as their hearts are the more hardened thereby in sin and
unbelief, or infirmly, so as not to work in them a perfect Conversion, but to
produce instead of the gracious habits of Sanctification, as Faith, Repentance,
Charity, Humility, etc. some weak and infirm shadows of those Graces, which for
their formal semblance sake do sometimes bear the name of those Graces they
resemble, but were never in the mean time the very true Graces themselves, and
in the end are discovered to have been false, by the want of perseverance.



IV. Vtilitas hujus Seriei.
This way of ordering the Decrees of God, besides that it seems to be
according to the mind of the Scriptures, and to hold correspondency more than
any other, as well with the writings of the ancient Doctors of the Church,
especially of St. Augustine and those that followed him, as with the present
Doctrine contained in the Articles and Liturgy of the Church of England: It
has also three notable commodities, viz. 1. Hereby are fairly avoided the most
and greatest of those inconveniences into which both extremes run, or at the
least which either extreme presses sore upon the opposite extreme. The
Arminian accusing the rigid Calvinist as a betrayer of the justice of God, for
placing the Decree of Reprobation before that of Adam's fall; and being again
accused by him as an Enemy to the grace of God, for making the efficacy thereof
to depend upon man's free will. Whereas both the glory of the justice of God,
and the efficacy of the grace of God, are preserved entire by following this
middle way. For, 1. There can lie no imputation upon the justice of God, though
he have reprobated some, and elected others, who were both equal in the sinful
mass of corrupt nature; rather his mercy is to be magnified, in that he has
not reprobated all: Which if he had done, his justice must yet have stood
clear, though examined but even at the Bar of Humane Reason, for so much as all
had deserved to be Reprobates, and that most justly for their sin in Adam. They
that make the Decree of Reprobation to precede all respect to the fall, are put
to many difficulties how to express themselves so as to avoid cavil; and much
ado they have to assert the Decrees of God from being howsoever unjust, being
enforced to succor the justice of God, by flying to that absolute right and
power he has in and over the Creature: whereas this way cutteth off an hundred
of those Cavils the Arminians commonly use, and justifies the proceedings of
our most righteous God in all respects so clearly, that his justice, both in
the Decrees themselves, and in the execution thereof, is not only apparent, but
also illustrious and glorious. 2. No impeachment is done to grace by magnifying
nature, or to the efficacy of grace, by enlarging the powers of Free Will. For
whereas in very truth the Arminians cannot, with all their subtle distinctions,
and nice modifications escape it; but, when they have done and said what they
can, they must stand guilty of symbolizing with the Pelagians both in their
Principles and Conclusions, in giving man's will (and not God's grace) the
chiefest stroke, and the deciding, and last determinating, and casting power in
the work of conversion: by this way the will of man is so freed from all
coactive necessity in the coversion of a sinner, as that yet the effect it self
depends not upon the determination of the will, as the immediate and prime
cause, but upon the efficacy of grace powerfully enclining the will thereunto.
2. Sundry passages in the Scriptures, and in the writings of the Fathers,
which have in them some appearance of contradiction, may by following this way
be easily reconciled, and the sense of those passages oftentimes preserved even
to the letter, which by those that take the extreme ways, cannot be done so
handsomely, nor without imposing upon the words a more remote and improper, if
not sometimes a strained and enforced sense; as viz. 1. Those places that speak
of election, as in, and by, and through Christ, making him the foundation of
that also, as of every other grace, with those that speak of it, as issuing
from the mere free pleasure and absolute will of God. 2. Those places that
extend the fruit of Christ's death, and the benefit of the new Covenant to the
whole world of mankind, with those that restrain them to the Elect only. 3.
Those places that ascribe the whole course of man's salvation, from his first
calling unto grace, until his final consummation in glory, to the sole
effectual working of the Holy Ghost, with those that attribute something or
other therein, more or less, to the power and exercise of man's Free Will. 4.
Those places that speak of the acts of justification and sanctification, or of
the habits of faith, and love, and other inherent graces, as peculiar to the
Elect only, with those that speak of them as common to the Elect with
Cast-aways. 5. Those places that speak of the said gracious habits as
permanent, as neither subject to a total intercision, nor possible to be
finally lost, with those that speak of them as casual, and such as may be lost,
either finally or totally, or both. 6. Those places that speak of obduration,
occecation, etc. so as if the blindness that is in the minds, and hardness that
is in the hearts of wicked men were from God, with those that impute such
blindness and hardness in men unto the wilfulness of their own corrupt hearts.
3. Hence may be received good light for the cutting off of some, the
moderating of other some, and the resolving of the rest of those questions
which are now most in agitation, not only in the Church of England, but in many
foreign Churches also, both Popish and Reformed, as viz. amongst others, these;
1. Whether Christ was ordained a Mediator in the intention of God for mankind
indefinitely, or universally for all mankind, or only for the Elect? 2. Whether
all mankind have title to the second Covenant, and to the Promises and
Conditions therein proposed, or the Elect only? 3. Whether the wicked, who are
both disobedient and unbelievers, come under the sentence of Condemnation
formally, for their disobedience unto God in the breach of the first Covenant,
or for their unbelief, in not resting upon Christ and the Promises of the new
Covenant? 4. In what comprehension man is to be considered as the Object of
Predestination? 5. Whether or no God did elect men unto Salvation in a certain
and determinate number. 6. Whether or no in electing men unto salvation God had
respect unto Christ? 7. Whether in electing some, and rejecting others, God was
moved to decree as he did, from the faith or infidelity of the persons, or from
any other thing whatsoever foreseen in them? 8. Whether the decrees of Election
Reprobation be absolute and peremptory, and inalterable, by Gods determination
of them to a certain effect; or so conditional and indeterminate, as that the
performance, or nonperformance of something required on our part, may either
establish or annull them? Quod est quaerere, Whether an elect person, by
disobedience and unbelief, can cut off himself from the Covenant of Grace, as
to be damned; or a Reprobate by faith and repentance, so lay hold on the
Covenant, as to be saved? 9. Whether a man by the power of his Free Will can
lay hold on Christ by faith, and convert himself from sin by Repentance and new
Obedience, without the grace of special illumination from the holy Spirit of
God? 10. Whether the right use of naturals be any cause to induce God to confer
upon any man sufficient Grace for his Conversion? 11. Whether the same grace of
spiritual illumination, which is sufficient and effectual for the conversion of
one man, can in the same measure be effectual to another for his conversion?
12. Whether the efficacy of the grace of conversion depend upon the
determination of man's Free Will, so as by resisting to make it ineffectual?
13. Whether justification and sanctification be proper to the Elect only? 14.
What measure of assurance we have concerning the justification of Infants born
of Christian Parents, and rightly baptized, before they come to the use of
Reason to commit actual sin? 15. What measure of assurance we have concerning
the salvation of such Infants, so baptized, if they die before they come to the
use of Reason? 16. Whether a person once truly justified by his own actual
faith, and sanctified with the Spirit of holiness, can fall wholly from the
state of grace, into the state of sin, in a total loss of faith, and other
habitual graces? 17. Whether a person so justified and sanctified, can at the
last fall away finally, and be damned?



Concerning all which, and sundry other Questions of like nature and use,
albeit it would require a large Treatise to give them but a right stating, much
more a just discussion, yet the due consideration of the nine Points premised
in the former Section, concerning the order of God's Decrees, may give us some
light into them all; if not so far (especially in some of them) as to settle
our judgments in a certain and infallible resolution, yet so far at least, as
to keep our understandings within some competent bounds of sobriety and truth,
that we neither lose our selves in curious Enquiries to little purpose, nor
suffer our judgments to be envenomed with the Poison either of rank Pelagian
heresy, or SemiPelagian popery, or quarter- Pelagian and Arminian novelty.

Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT IN ONE VIEW FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF THE CHURCH.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott. 1678.

Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT IN ONE VIEW.
Quest. HOW far we may indulge good and godly men of tender Consciences
dissenting from us in liberty of Conscience.

Answ. First, besides that all parties pretend to godliness, Papists,
Anabaptists, and what not? (even the late sprung up generation of Levellers,
whose principles are so destructive of all that order and justice by which
public societies are supported, do yet style themselves, as by a kind of
peculiarity, The Godly:) And that secondly, it is the easiest thing in the
world, and nothing more common, than for men to pretend conscience when they
are not minded to obey. I do not believe thirdly (though I am well persuaded of
the godliness of many of them otherwise) that the refusal of indifferent
Ceremonies enjoined by lawful authority, is any part of their godliness; or any
good fruit, evidence, or sign thereof. But certain it is fourthly, that the
godliest men are men, and know but in part; and by the power of godliness in
their hearts, are no more secured from the possibility of falling into error
through ignorance, than from the possibility of falling into sin through
infirmity. And as for tenderness of Conscience fifthly, a most gracious blessed
fruit of the holy Spirit of God, where it is really, and not in pretense only,
nor mistaken, (for sure it is no very tender Conscience, though sometimes
called so, that straineth at a Gnat, and swalloweth a Camel:) it is with it, as
with other tender things, very subject to receive harm, and soon put out of
order. Through the cunning of Satan, it dangerously exposes men to temptations
on the right hand; and through its own aptitude to entertain and to cherish
unnecessary scruples, it strongly disposes them to listen thereunto so long,
till at the last they are overcome thereof. Needful it is therefore, that in
the public teaching the errors should be sometimes refuted, and the
temptations discovered: And this ever to be done seasonably, soberly,
discreetly, and convincingly; and when we are to deal with men whose
Consciences are (so far as we can discern) truly tender, with the spirit of
meekness and compassion. For tender things must be tenderly dealt withal, or
they are lost. I know it is not always so done; nor can we expect it should.
All preachers are neither so charitable, nor so prudent, nor so conscientious
as they should be: And they that are such in a good measure are men still; and
may be transported now and then through passion and infirmity, beyond the just
bounds of moderation.

Quest. Whether good men should be suspended from the exercise of their
ministry, and deprived of their livelihood for Ceremonies, which are on all
hands acknowledged indifferent: and indeed in comparison to the work of the
ministry are but trifles, however some men dote on them?

Answ. Let Ceremonies ( secondly) be as very trifles, as any man can imagine
them to be; yet obedience sure is no trifle. They mis-state the Question, when
they talk of pressing Ceremonies. It is obedience (formally) that is required:
Ceremonies not otherwise pressed, than as the matter wherein that obedience is
to be exercised. If a master appoint his servant to do some small matter that
he thinks fit to have done, though in it self of no great moment; yet he will
expect to be obeyed: and it is great reason he should. If in such case the
servant should refuse to do the thing appointed, because he has no mind
thereunto; and should receive a check or correction for such refusal: could he
either sufficiently excuse his own fault, or reasonably complain of his master
for dealing hardly with him, by saying the thing was but a trifle? Is it not
evident, that the thing which made the master angry, and the servant an
offender in that case, was not ( precisely and formally) the leaving of the
thing undone, (which, had it not been commanded, might have been left undone
without any fault or blame at all;) but the refusing to do it, when he that had
a right to his service commanded him? Wherefore thirdly, that which is said of
some men's doting so extremely on Ceremonies, might have been well enough
spared. I know no true Son of the Church of England, that doteth upon any
Ceremony, whatsoever opinion he may have of the decency or expediency of some
of them. If any do, let him answer for himself. Among wise men, he will hardly
pass for a wise man, that doteth upon any. Nor will he, I doubt, prove a much
wiser man, that runs into the contrary extreme, and abhors all. It is true
fourthly, that there have been long and unkind quarrels about these things;
More is the pity! but where is the fault? To whom is the beginning, and to whom
the continuance of a quarrel rather imputable? to him that demands his right?
or to him that withholdeth it from him? For this is the plain Case in short;
The Bishops ( under the King) require obedience to the Laws Ecclesiastical;
these men refuse to give it. So began the quarrel at first, and upon the same
terms it continued. If the Obedience challenged were indeed due to these Laws,
then did our Brethren both begin the quarrel, and hold it on: if it were not,
then must the whole blame lie upon them that claimed it unjustly, and not upon
them. So that in the winding up of the business, the whole Controversy will
devolve upon this point, Whether to the Laws Ecclesiastical obedience be due or
not? For the right determining whereof (for so much as it is confessed on all
hands, that Obedience is due to lawful authority commanding lawful things) two
other points are to be resolved; the one cocerning the authority by which the
Constitutions were made; the other concerning the lawfulness of the things
therein required: The Presbyterians of the Kirk flatly and directly deny both:
Ours, less forward to declare their opinion in the former point, have chosen
rather to stand upon the latter only. And so the point in issue is briefly
this, Whether the things commanded (and particularly the Ceremonies) be lawful,
yea or no.

When for decency, order, or uniformities sake any Constitutions are made
concerning Ceremonies, there is the same necessity of obeying such
Constitutions, as there is of obeying other laws made for the good of the
Commonwealth, concerning any other indifferent things. That such necessity,
either in the one or the other, arises not properly from the authority of the
immediate lawgiver; but from the Ordinance of God, who has commanded us to
obey the Ordinance of men for his sake. That such necessity of obedience,
notwithstanding the things remain in the same indifferency as before; every
way, in respect of their nature and quoad rem (it being not in the power of
accidental relations to change the natures of things) and even in respect of
their use, and quoad nos, thus far, that there is a liberty left for men, upon
extraordinary and other just occasions, sometimes to do otherwise than the
Constitution requires, extra casum scandali and contemptus: A liberty which we
dare not either take our selves, or allow to others, in things properly and
absolutely necessary: Upon which very account (I mean the consideration of the
indifferency of the things in themselves) and upon which account alone it is,
that many of the Episcopal (that is to say, the true English Protestant)
Divines, who sadly resent the voting down of the Liturgy, Festivals, and
Ceremonies of the Church by so many former Laws established, heartily desired
heretofore the continuance, and as heartily still wish the restitution, and are
(by God's help) ready with their Tongues, Pens, and Sufferings to maintain and
justify the lawful use of the same; do yet so far yield to the sway of the
times, and are persuaded they may with a good Conscience so do, as to forbear
the use thereof in the public worship, till it shall seem good to those that
are in place of Authority, either to restore them to their former state (as it
is well hoped, when they shall have duly considered the evil consequents of
that Vote, they will) or at leastwise, and in the mean time to leave them
arbitrary, for men, according to their several different judgments, to use or
not to use, which seems but reasonable, the like favor and liberty in other
kinds having been long allowed to almost all other sorts of men, though of
never so distant persuasions one from another. Lastly, That all Laws made
concerning Ceremonies or other indifferent things, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, are mutable: and as they were at first made by humane
authority, so may they from time to time be by humane authority abrogated and
repealed. And then and thenceforth they lose their obligation, whereby the
necessity of yielding obedience thereunto wholly cease and determines; and
the things thereby commanded or prohibited return to their primitive and
natural indifferency, even in their use also, and in respect of us.

But in the Case of our Church now it is far otherwise: Cap, Surplice, Cross,
Ring, and other Ceremonies, which are the matter of our differences, though
they be things indifferent for their nature, and in themselves; yet are not so
for their use, and unto us. If the Church had been silent, if Authority had
prescribed nothing herein, these Ceremonies had then remained for their use, as
they are for their nature, indifferent, Lawful, and such as might be used
without sin; and yet Arbitrary, and such as might be also forborne without sin.
But men must grant (though they be unwilling, if yet they will be reasonable)
that every particular Church has power for decency and orders sake, to ordain
and constitute Ceremonies: which being once ordained, and by public Authority
enjoined, cease to be indifferent for their use, though they remain still so
for their nature; and of indifferent become so necessary, that neither may a
man without sin refuse them, where Authority requires, nor use them, where
Authority restrains the use.

Neither is this accession of necessity any impeachment to Christian Liberty,
or insnaring of men's Consciences, as some have objected: For then do we ensnare
men's Consciences by humane constitutions, where we thrust them upon men as if
they were Divine, and bind men's Consciences to them immediately, as if they
were immediate parts of God's worship, or of absolute necessity unto Salvation.
This Tyranny and Usurpation over men's Consciences the Pharisees of old did, and
the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and we justly hate in her,
equalling, if not preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of God. But our
Church (God be thanked) is far from any such impious presumption; and has
sufficiently declared her self by sosolemn protestation, enough to satisfy any
ingenuous impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these ceremonial
constitutions, she has no other purpose, than to reduce all her children to an
orderly conformity in the outward worship of God; so far is she from seeking to
draw any opinion, either of divine necessity upon the constitution, or of
effectual holiness upon the ceremony. And as for the prejudice which seems to
be hereby given to Christian liberty, it is so slender a conceit, that it
seems to bewray in the objectors a desire, not so much of satisfaction, as
cavil. For first, the liberty of a Christian to all indifferent things is in
the mind and conscience, and is then infringed, when the conscience is bound
and strained, by imposing upon it an opinion of doctrinal necessity. But it is
no wrong to the Liberty of a Christian man's conscience, to bind him to outward
observation for orders sake, and to impose upon him a necessity of Obedience.
Which one distinction of Doctrinal and Obediential necessity well weighed, and
rightly applied, is of it self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point.
For, to make all restraint of the outward man in matters indifferent an
impeachment of Christian liberty, what were it else, but even to bring flat
Anabaptism and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond to subjection
and obedience to lawful authority? I beseech you consider, wherein can the
immediate power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers over their
inferiors consist, or the due obedience of inferiors be shown toward them,
if not in these indifferent and arbitrary things? For, things absolutely
necessary, as commanded by God, we are bound to do, whether human Authority
require them or no: and things absolutely unlawful, as prohibited by God, we
are bound not to do, whether humane Authority forbid them or no. There are none
other things left then, wherein to express properly the Obedience due to
superior Authority, than these indifferent things. And if a Father or Master
have power to prescribe to his child or servant in indifferent things, and such
restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian liberty in them, why should any
man, either deny the like power to Church Governors, to make Ecclesiastical
constitutions concerning indifferent things? or interpret that power to the
prejudice of Christian liberty? And again, secondly, Men must understand, that
it is an error to think Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things merely
indifferent; I mean in the general. For howsoever every particular Ceremony be
indifferent, and every particular constitution arbitrary and alterable; yet
that there should be some Ceremonies, it is necessary necessitate absoluta,
inasmuch as no outward work can be performed without ceremonial circumstances,
some or other: and that there should be some constitutions concerning them, it
is also necessary (though not simply and absolutely, as the former, yet ex
hypothesi, and) necessitate convenientiae: Otherwise, since some Ceremonies
must needs be used, every Parish, may every man would have his own fashion by
himself, as his humor led him, whereof what other could be the issue, but
infinite distraction and unorderly confusion in the Church? And again, thirdly,
to return their weapon upon themselves, if every restraint in indifferent
things be injurious to Christian liberty, then themselves are injurious, no
less by their negative restraint from some Ceremonies, Wear not, Cross not,
Kneel not, etc. than they would have the world believe our Church is by her
positive restraint unto these Ceremonies of wearing, and crossing, and
kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let themselves that are parties
judge, whether is more injurious to Christian Liberty, public Authority by
mature advice commanding what might be forborne, or private spirits, through
humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be used; the whole Church imposing the
use, or a few Brethren requiring the forbearance of such things as are
otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, for forbearance.

But they say, our Church makes greater matters of ceremonies than thus, and
prefers them even before the most necessary duties of preaching and
administering the Sacraments; inasmuch as they are imposed upon Ministers under
pain of Suspension and Deprivation from their Ministerial Functions and
Charges. First, for actual Deprivation, I take it, unconforming Ministers have
no great cause to complain. Our Church, it is well known, has not always used
that rigor she might have done. Where she has been forced to proceed as far
as Deprivation, she has ordinarily by her fair, and slow, and compassionate
proceeding therein, sufficiently manifessed her unwillingness thereto: and
declare her self a Mother everyway indulgent enough to such ill-nurtured
Children as will not be ruled by her. Secondly, those that are suspended or
deprived, suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt: For, howsoever
they would bear the world in hand, that they are the only persecuted ones, and
that they suffer for their consciences; yet in truth they do but abuse the
credulity of the simple therein; and herein (as in many other things) jump with
the Papists, whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent from. For as
Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out that they suffer for Religion, when
the very truth is, they are justlty executed for their prodigious Treasons, and
felonious or treacherous practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the
Brethren pretend they are persecuted for their consciences, when they are
indeed but justly censured for their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of
lawful authority. For it is not the refusal of these Ceremonies they are
deprived for, otherwise than as the matter wherein they show their contempt: It
is the contempt it self, which formerly and properly subjecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of authority,
though in the smallest matter, deserves no small punishment; all authority
having been ever solicitous (as it has good reason) above all things to
vindicate and preserve it self from contempt, by inflicting sharp punishments
upon contemptuous persons in the smallest matters, above all other sorts of
offenders in any degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared the first
and main difference betwixt the case of my Text, and the case of our Church, in
regard of the matter; the things whereabout they differed, being every way
indifferent, ours not so.

The determination of Superiors may and ought to restrain us in the outward
exercise of our Christian liberty. We must submit our selves to every Ordinance
of man, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and it is necessary we should do so; for
so is the will of God, ver. 15. Neither is it against Christian liberty if we
do so; for we are still as free as before: rather if we do not so, we abuse our
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, as it follows there, ver. 16. And St.
Paul tells us we must needs be subject, not only for fear, because the
Magistrate carries not the Sword in vain; but also for conscience sake,
because the powers that are, are ordained of God. This duty, so fully pressed
and so uniformly by these two grand Apostles, is most apparent in private
societies. In a family, the Master, or pater familias, who is a kind of petty
Monarch there, has authority to prescribe to his children and servants in the
use of those indifferent things whereto yet they, as Christians, have as much
liberty as he. The servant, though he be the Lord's freeman, yet is limited in
his diet, lodging, livery, and many other things by his Master; and he is to
submit himself to his Master's appointment in these things, though perhaps in
his private affection he had rather his Master had appointed otherwise: and
perhaps withal in his private judgment, does verily think it fitter his Master
should appoint otherwise. If any man, under color of Christian liberty, shall
teach otherwise, and exempt servants from the obedience of their Masters in
such things; St. Paul in a holy indignation inveigheth against such a man, not
without some bitterness, in the last Chapter of his Epistle, as one that is
proud, and knows nothing, as he should do, but doteth about questions and
strife of words, etc. ver. 3, 5.

Now look what power the Master has over his Servants for the ordering of his
family, no doubt the same at the least, if not much more, has the supreme
Magistrate over his Subjects, for the peace of the Commonwealth, the Magistrate
being pater patriae, as the Master is pater familias. Whosoever then shall
interpret the determinations of Magistrates in the use of the Creatures to be
contrary to the liberty of a Christian; or under that color shall exempt
inferiors from their obedience to such determinations; he must blame St. Paul,
nay, he must blame the holy Ghost, and not us, if he hear from us that he is
proud, and knows nothing, and doteth about unprofitable Questions. Surely,
but that experience shows us it has been so, and the Scriptures have
foretold us that it should be so, that there should be differences, and
sidings, and part-takings in the Church: A man would wonder how it should ever
sink into the hearts and heads of sober understanding men, to deny either the
power in Superiors to ordain, or the necessity in Inferiors to obey Laws and
Constitutions, so restraining us in the use of the Ceratures.

Neither let any man cherish his ignorance herein, by conceiting, as if there
were some difference to be made between Civil and Ecclesiastical Things, and
Laws and Persons in this behalf. The truth is, our liberty is equal in both;
the power of Superiors for restraint equal in both, and the necessity of
obedience in Inferiors equal to both. No man has yet been able to show, nor I
think ever shall be, a real and substantial difference indeed between them to
make an inequality: But that still, as Civil Magistrates have sometimes, for
just politic respects, prohibited some Trades, and Manufactures, and
Commodities, and enjoined other some, and done well in both; so Church
Governors may upon good considerations (say it be but for order and
uniformities sake) prescribe the times, places, vestments, gestures, and other
ceremonial circumstances to be used in Ecclesiastical Offices and Assemblies:
As the Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem, in Acts 15. laid upon
the Churches of the Gentiles for a time a restraint from the eating of blood,
and things sacrificed to Idols, and strangled.

Thus we see our Christian liberty unto the Creatures may without prejudice
admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it, and namely from the
three respects, of Christian Sobriety, of Christian Charity, and of Christian
Duty and Obedience. But now in the comparing of these together, when there
seems to be a repugnancy between one and another of them, there may be some
difficulty: and the greatest difficulty, and which has bred most trouble, is
in comparing the cases of scandal and disobedience together, when there seems
to be a repugnancy between Charity and Duty. As for example; Suppose in a thing
which simply and in it self we may lawfully, according to the Liberty we have
in Christ, either use or forbear; Charity seems to lay restraint upon us one
way, our weak brother expecting we should forbear, and Duty a quite contrary
way, Authority requiring the use: in such a case what are we to do? It is
against charity to offend a brother; and it is against Duty to disobey a
superior. And yet something must be done; either we must use, or not use;
forbear, or not forbear. For the untying of this knot (which, if we will but
lay things rightly together, has not in it so much hardness as it seems to
have) let this be our seventh Position. In the use of the Creatures, and all
indifferent things, we ought to bear a greater regard to our public
Governors, than to our private Brethren; and be more careful to obey them,
than to satisfy these, if the same course will not in some mediocrity satisfy
both. Alas, that our Brethren, who are contrary minded, would but with the
spirit of sobriety admit common Reason to be umpire in this case: Alas, that
they would but consider what a world of contradictions would follow upon the
contrary opinion, and what a world of confusions upon the contrary practice.
Say what can be said in the behalf of a brother, all the same, and more may be
said for a Governor: For a Governor is a Brother too, and something more; and
Duty is Charity too, and something more. If then I may not offend my Brother,
then certainly not my Governor; because he is my brother too, being a man, And
a christian, as well as the other is. And the same charity that binds me to
satisfy another Brother, equally binds me to satisfy this. So that, if we
go no farther, but even to the common bond of charity, and relation of
brotherhood, that makes them equal at the least; and therefore no reason, why
I should satisfy one that is but a private brother, rather than the public
magistrate, who (that public respect set aside) is my brother also. When the
Scales hang thus even, shall not the accession of magistracy to common
brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common charity in me, be enough to cast it
clear for the magistrate? Shall a servant in a Family, rather than offend his
fellow servants, disobey his Master? And is not a double scandal against charity
and duty both (for duty implies charity) greater than a single scandal against
charity alone? If private men will be offended at our obedience to public
Governors, we can but be sorry for it: We may not redeem their offense by our
disobedience. He that takes offense where none is given, sustaineth a double
person, and must answer for it, both as the giver and the taker. If offense be
taken at us, there is no woe to us for it, if it do not come by us; Woe to the
man by whom the offense comes: And it does not come by us, if we do but what
is our duty to do. The Rule is certain and equitable; The respect of private
scandal cease, where lawful authority determines our liberty; and that
restraint which proceeds from special duty, is of superior reason to that
which proceeds but from common charity.

Quest. Whether the King and Parliament ought to impose any more upon us in
matters of Religion, than is imposed in the Scripture? or whether every one
ought not to be left to serve God according to his best apprehensions out of
the Scripture?

Answ. The Opinion is, that to do any thing at all without direction from the
Scripture is unlawful and sinful. Which if they would understand only of the
substantials of Gods worship, and of the exercises of Spiritual and
supernatural graces, the assertion were true and sound; but as they extend it
to all the actions of common life whatsoever, whether natural or civil, even so
far as to the taking up of a straw, so it is altogether false and indefensible.
I marvel what warrant they that so teach have from the Scripture for that very
Doctrine; or where they are commanded so to believe or teach. One of their
chiefest refuges is the Text we now have in hand; but I shall anon drive them
from this shelter. The other places usually alleged speak only, either of
divine and supernatural truths to be believed, or else of works of grace or
worship to be performed, as of necessity unto salvation; which is not to the
point in issue. For it is freely conscised, that in things of such nature the
holy Scripture is, and so we are to account it, a most absolute sufficient
direction. Upon which ground we heartily reject all humane traditions, devised
and intended as supplements to the doctrine of faith contained in the Bible,
and annexed as Codicils to the holy Testament of Christ, for to supply the
defects thereof. The question is wholly about things in their nature
indifferent; such as are the use of our food, raiment, and the like, about
which the common actions of life are chiefly conversant: Whether in the choice
and use of such things, we may not be sometimes sufficiently guided by the
light of reason and the common rules of discretion; but that we must be able
(and are so bound to do, or else we sin) for every thing we do in such matters,
to deduce our warrant from some place or other of Scripture.

Before the Scriptures were writ ten, it pleased God by visions, and dreams,
and other like revelations, immediately to make known his good pleasure to the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and by them unto the People: which kind of revelations
served them to all the same intents and purposes, whereto the sacred Scriptures
now do us, viz. to instruct them what they should believe and do for his better
service, and the furtherance of their own salvations. Now as it were
unreasonable for any man to think, that they either had or did expect an
immediate revelation from God every time they eat, or drank, or bought, or
sold, or did any other of the common actions of life, for the warranting of
each of those particular actions to their Consciences; no less unreasonable it
is to think, that we should now expect the like warrant from the Scriptures for
the doing of the like actions. Without all doubt the law of nature, and the
light of reason, was the rule whereby they were guided for the most part in
such matters, which the wisdom of God would never have left in them or us, as
a principal relick of his decayed image in us, if he had not meant that we
should make use of it for the direction of our lives and actions thereby.
Certainly God never infused any power into any creature, whereof he intended
not some use. Else, what shall we say of the Indies and other barbarous
Nations, to whom God never vouchsafed the lively Oracles of his written word?
Must we think that they were left a lawless people, without any Rule at all
whereby to order their actions? How then come they to be guilty of
transgression? For where there is no law, there can be no transgression. Or how
comes it about that their consciences should at any time, or in any case,
either accuse them, or excuse them, if they had no guide nor rule to walk by?
But if we must grant they had a Rule (and there is no way, you see, but grant
it we must;) then we must also of necessity grant, that there is some other
Rule for humane actions besides the written word; for that we presupposed these
Nations to have wanted. Which Rule, what other could it be than the Law of
Nature, and of right reason, imprinted in their hearts? Which is as truly the
Law and Word of God, as is that which is printed in our Bibles. So long as our
actions are warranted either by the one or the other, we cannot be said to want
the warrant of God's Word: Nec differet Scriptura an ratione consistat, says
Tertullian; it mattereth not much from whether of both we have our direction,
so long as we have it from either.

You see then those men are in a great error, who make the holy Scriptures the
sole rule of all humane actions whatsoever. For the maintenance whereof, there
was never yet produced any piece of an argument, either from reason, or from
authority of holy writ, or from the testimony either of the ancient Fathers, or
of other classical Divines of later times; which may not be clearly and
abundantly answered, to the satisfaction of any rational man not extremely
fore-possessed with prejudice. They who think to salve the matter by this
mitigation, that at leastwise our actions ought to be framed according to those
general rules of the law of Nature, which are here and there in the Scriptures
dispersedly contained (as viz. That we should do, as we would be done to; That
all things be done decently and orderly, and unto edification; That nothing be
done against conscience, and the like) speak somewhat indeed to the truth, but
little to the purpose. For they consider not, First, that these general rules
are but occasionally and incidentally mentioned in Scripture, rather to
manifest unto us a former, than to lay upon us a new obligation. Secondly, that
those rules had been of force for the ordering of men's actions, though the
Scripture had never expressed them; and were of such force before those
Scriptures were written, wherein they are now expressed. For they bind not
originally qua scripta, but qua justa; becuase they are righteous, not because
they are written. Thirdly, that an action conformable to these general Rules
might not be condemned as sinful, although the doer thereof should look at
those rules merely as they are the dictates of the law of nature; and should
not be able to vouch his warrant for it from any place of Scripture, neither
should have at the time of the doing thereof any present thought or
consideration of any such place. The contrary whereunto, I permit to any man's
reasonable judgment, if it be not desperately rash and uncharitable to affirm.
Lastly, that if men's actions done agreeably to those Rules are said to be of
faith, precisely for this reason, because those rules are contained in the
word: then it will follow, that before those particular Scriptures were
written, wherein any of those Rules are first delivered, every action done
according to those rules had been done without faith (there being as yet no
Scripture for it) and consequently had been a sin. So that by this Doctrine it
had been a sin (before the witing of S. Matthew's Gospel) for any man to have
done to others, as he would they should do to him; and it had been a sin
(before the writing of the former Epistle to the Corinthians) for any man to
have done any thing decently and orderly; supposing these two Rules to be in
those two places first mentioned: because (this supposed) there could then have
been no warrant brought from the Scriptures for so doing.

Well then, we see the former Opinion will by no means hold, neither in the
rigor of it, nor yet in the mitigation. We are therefore to beware of it, and
that so much the more heedfully, because of the evil consequents and effects
that issue from it; to wit, a world of superstitions, uncharitable censures,
bitter contentions, contempt of superiors, perplexities of conscience. First,
it fills men's heads with many superstitious conceits, making them to cast
impurity upon sundry things, which yet are lawful to as many as use them
lawfully. For the taking away of the indifferency of any thing that is
indifferent, is in truth superstition, whether either of the two ways it be
done; either by requiring it as necessary, or by forbidding it as unlawful. He
that condemns a thing as utterly unlawful, which yet indeed is indifferent,
and so lawful, is guilty of superstition, as well as he that enjoyneth a thing
as absolutely necessary, which yet indeed is but indifferent, and so arbitrary.
They of the Church of Rome, and some in our Church, as they go upon quite
contrary grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite contrary errors, and
both superstitious. They decline too much on the left hand, denying to holy
Scripture that perfection which of right it ought to have; of containing all
appertaining to that supernatural doctrine of faith and holiness, which God
has revealed to his Church for the attainment of everlasting salvation;
whereupon they would impose upon Christian people, and that with an opinion of
necessity, many things which the Scriptures require not; and that is a
superstition. These wry too much on the right hand, ascribing to the holy
Scripture such a kind of perfection as it cannot have; of being the sole
directour of all humane actions whatsoever: whereupon they forbid unto
Christian people, and that under the name of sin, sundry things which the holy
Scripture condemns not; and that is a superstition too.

From which superstition proceeds, in the second place, uncharitable
censuring; as evermore they that are the most superstitious, are the most
supercilious. No such severe censurers of our blessed Savior's person and
actions, as the superstitious Scribes and Phariseees were. In this Chapter, the
special fault, which the Apostle blames in the weak ones (who were somewhat
superstitiously affected) was their rash and uncharitable judging of their
brethren. And common and daily experience among our selves shows how freely
some men spend their censures upon so many of their brethren, as without
scruple do any of those things, which they upon false grounds have
superstitiously condemned as utterly unlawful.

And then thirdly, as unjust censures are commonly entertained with scorn and
contumely; they that so liberally condemn their brethren of profaneness, are
by them again as freely slouted for their preciseness: and so whiles both
parties please themselves in their own ways, they cease not mutually to provoke
and scandalize and exasperate one the other, pursuing their private spleens so
far, till they break out into open contentions and oppositions. Thus it stood
in the Roman Church, when this Epistle was written. They judged one another,
and despised one another, to the great disturbance of the Churches peace, which
gave occasion to our Apostles whole discourse in this Chapter. And how far the
like censurings and despisings have embittered the spirits, and whetted both
the tongues and pens of learned men one against another in our own Church; the
stirs that have been long since raised, and are still upheld by the factious
opposers against our Ecclesiastical constitutions, government, and ceremonies,
will not suffer us to be ignorant. Most of which stirs, I verily persuade my
self, had been long ere this either wholly buried in silence, or at leastwise
prettily well quieted, if the weakness and danger of the error whereof we now
speak, had been more timely discovered, and more fully and frequently made
known to the world than it has been.

Fourthly, Let that Doctrine be once admitted, and all humane authority will
soon be despised. The commands of Parents, Masters, and Princes, which many
times require both secrecy and expedition, shall be taken into slow
deliberation, and the equity of them sifted by those that are bound to obey,
though they know no cause why, so long as they know no cause to the contrary.
Delicata est obedientia, quae transit in causam deliberativam. It is a nice
obedience in St. Bernard's judgment, yea rather troublesome and odious, that is
overcurious in discussing the commands of superiors, boggling at every thing
that is enjoined, requiring a why for every wherefore, and unwilling to stir
until the lawfulness and expediency of the thing commanded shall be
demonstrated by some manifest reason or undoubted authority from the Scriptures.

Lastly, The admitting of this Doctrine would cast such a snare upon men of
weak judgments, but tender consciences, as they should never be able to unwind
themselves again. Men's daily occasions for themselves or friends, and the
necessities of common life, require the doing of a thousand things within the
compass of a few days, for which it would puzzle the best Textman that lives,
readily to bethink himself of a sentence in the Bible, clear enough to satisfy
a scrupulous conscience of the lawfulness and expediency of what he is about to
do; for which, by hearkening to the rules of reason and discretion, he might
receive easy and speedy resolution. In which cases if he should be bound to
suspend his resolution, and delay to do that which his own reason would tell
him were presently needful to be done, until he could happily call to mind some
precept or example of Scipture for his warrant, what stops would it make in the
course of his whole life? what languishings in the duties of his calling? how
would it fill him with doubts and irresolutions, lead him into a maze of
uncertainties, entangle him in a world of woeful perplexities, and (without the
great mercy of God, and better instruction) plunge him irrecoverably into the
gulf of despair? Since the chief end of the publication of the Gospel is to
comfort the hearts, and to revive and refresh the spirits of God's people, with
the glad tidings of liberty from the spirit of bondage and fear, and of
gracious acceptance with their God; to anoint them with the oil of gladness,
giving them beauty for ashes, and instead of sackcloth girding them with joy:
we may well suspect that Doctrine not to be Evangelical, which thus sets the
Consciences of men upon the rack, tortureth them with continual fears and
perplexities, and prepares them thereby unto hellish despair.

Quest. What are the dreadful consequences of scrupling some indifferent things?

Answ. Although difference of judgment should not alienate our affections one
from another, yet daily experience shows it does. By reason of that
self-love, and envy, and other corruptions that abound in us, it is rarely seen
that those men are of one heart, that are of two minds. St. Paul found it so
with the Romans in his time: whilst some condemned that as unlawful, which
others practiced as lawful; they judged one another, and despised one another,
perpetually. And I doubt not, but any of us, that is any-whit-like acquainted
with the wretched deceitfulness of man's heart, may easily conclude how hard a
thing it is (if at all possible) not to think somewhat hardly of those men,
that take the liberty to do such things as we judge unlawful. As for example;
If we shall judge all walking into the fields, discoursing occasionally on the
occurrences of the times, dressing of meat for dinner or supper, or even
moderate recreations on the Lord's day, to be grievous prophanations of the
Sabbath; how can we choose but judge those men that use them to be grievous
prophaners of God's Sabbath? And if such our judgment concerning these things
should after prove to be erroneous; then can it not be avoided, but that such
our judgment also concerning the persons must needs be uncharitable.

Secondly, This mis-judging of things fills the world with endless niceties
and disputes, to the great disturbance of the Churches peace, which to every
good man ought to be precious. The multiplying of Books and writings Pro and
Con, and pursuing of arguments with heat and opposition, does rather lengthen
than decide Controversies; and instead of destroying the old, begets new
ones: whiles they that are in the wrong out of obstinacy will not, and they
that stand for the truth out of Conscience dare not, may not yield; and so
still the war goes on.

And as to the public peace of the Church, so is there also, thirdly, by this
means great prejudice done to the peace and tranquillity of private men's
Consciences; when by the peremptory Doctrines of some strict and rigid masters
the Souls of many a well-meaning man are miserably disquieted with a thousand
unnecessary scruples, and driven sometimes into very woeful perplexities. Surely
it can be no light matter thus to lay heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders,
and to cast a snare upon their Consciences, by making the narrow way to Heaven
narrower than ever God meant it.

Fourthly, Hereby Christian Governors come to be robbed of a great part of
that honor that is due unto them from their people, both in their affections
and subjection. For when they shall see cause to exercise over us that power
that God has left them in indifferent things, by commanding such or such thing
to be done, as namely, wearing of a Surplice, kneeling at the Communion, and
the like: if now we in our own thoughts have already prejudged any of the
things so commanded to be unlawful, it cannot be.

Quest. If these things be so, how comes it to pass that so many godly men
should incline so much to this way?

Answ. But you will say, if these things were so, how should it then come to
pass that so many men pretending to godliness (and thousands of them doubtless
such as they pretend; for it were an uncharitable thing to charge them all with
hypocrisy) should so often and so grievously offend this way? To omit those
two more universal causes; Almighty God's permission first, whose good pleasure
it is for sundry wise and gracious ends, to exercise his Church, during her
warfare here, with heresies and scandals: And then the wiliness of Satan, who
cunningly observes whether way our hearts incline most, to looseness, or to
strictness, and then frames his temptations thereafter: So he can but put us
out of the way, it is no great matter to him on whether hand it be; he has his
end howsoever. Nor to insist upon sundry more particular causes; as namely, a
natural proneness in all men to superstition; in many an affectation of
singularity, to go beyond the ordinary sort of people in something or other;
the difficulty of shunning one without running into the contrary extreme; the
great force of education and custom; besides manifold abuses, offenses, and
provocations arising from the carriage of others, and the rest; I shall note
but these two only, as the two great fountains of Error (to which also most of
the other may be reduced) Ignorance and Partiality; from neither of which God's
dearest Servants and Children are in this life wholly exempted.

Ignorance first is a fruitful Mother of Errors; Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures, Matthew. 22. Yet not so much gross ignorance neither; I mean not
that. For your mere Ignaro's, what they err, they err for company; they judge
not at all, neither according to the appearance, nor yet righteous judgment:
They only run on with the herd, and follow as they are led, be it right or
wrong, and never trouble themselves farther. But by Ignorance I mean weakness
of judgment, which consists in a disproportion between the affections and the
understanding; when a man is very earnest, but withal very shallow; reads
much, and hears much, and thinks that he knows much, but has not the
judgment to sever truth from falsehood, nor to discern between a sound argument
and a captious fallacy. And so for want of ability to examine the soundness and
strength of those principles from whence he fetches his conclusions, he is
easily carried away, as our Apostle elsewhere speaks, with vain words and
empty arguments. As St. Augustine said of Donatus, Rations arripuit, he
catches hold of some reasons (as wranglers will catch at a small thing, rather
than yield from their opinions) quas considerantes, verisimiles esse potius
quam veras invenimus, which says he, we found to have more show of probability
at the first appearance, than substance of truth after they were well
considered of.

And I dare say, whosoever shall peruse with a judicious and unpartial eye most
of those Pamphlets, that in this daring Age have been thrust into the world
against the Ceremonies of the Church, against Episcopal Government (to pass by
things of lesser regard and usefulness, and more open to exception and abuse,
yet, so far as I can understand, unjustly condemned as things utterly unlawful;
such as are lusorious lots, dancing, Stage Plays, and some other things of like
nature) when he shall have drained out the bitter invectives, unmannerly jeers,
petulant girding at those that are in authority, impertinent digressions, but
above all those most bold and perverse wrestings of holy Scripture, wherewith
such Books are infinitely stuffed, he shall find that little poor remainder
that is left behind to contain nothing but vain words and empty arguments. For
when these great Undertakers have snatched up the Bucklers, as if they would
make it good against all comers, that such and such things are utterly
unlawful, and therefore ought in all reason and conscience to bring such proofs
as will come up to that conclusion, Quid dignum tanto? very seldom shall you
hear from them any other Arguments, than such as will conclude but an
inexpediency at the most. As, that they are apt to give scandal; that they
carry with them an appearance of evil; that they are often occasions of sin;
that they are not commanded in the Word, and such like. Which Objections, even
where they are just, are not of force (no not taken altogether, much less any
of them singly) to prove a thing to be utterly unlawful. And yet are they glad
many times, rather than sit out, to play very small Game, and to make use of
Arguments yet weaker than these, and such as will not reach so far as to prove
a bare inexpediency: As, that they were invented by Heathens; that they have
been abused in Popery, and other such like: which, to my understanding, is a
very strong presumption, that they have taken a very weak cause in hand, and
such as is wholly destitute of sound proof.

Quest. Whether what the King and Parliament have determined may be altered to
satisfy private men?

Answ. While things are in agitation, private men may, if any thing seem to
them inexpedient, modestly tender their thoughts, together with the reason
thereof, to the consideration of those that are in authority, to whose care and
wisdom it belongs, in prescribing any thing concerning indifferent things, to
proceed with all just advisedness and moderation, that so the Subject may be
encouraged to perform that obedience with cheerfulness, which of necessity he
must perform howsoever. It concerns Superiors therefore to look well to the
expediency and inexpediency of what they enjoin in indifferent things; wherein
if there be a fault, it must lie upon their account; the necessity of obedience
is to us a sufficient discharge in that behalf. Only it were good we did
remember, that they are to give up that account to God only, and not to us. But
after that things are once concluded and established by public Authority, Acts
passed, and Constitutions made concerning the same, and the will and pleasure
of the higher powers sufficiently made known thererein; then for private men to
put in their vie, and with unseasonable diligence to call in question the
decency or expediency of the things so established, yea with intolerable pride
to refuse obedience thereunto merely upon this pretension, that they are
undecent or inexpedient, is it self the most indecent and inexpedient thing
that can be imagined.

For that the fear of offending a private brother, is a thing not considerable
in comparison of the duty of obedience to a public Governor, might be shown
so apparently by sundry arguments, if we had time to enlarge and illustrate
them, as might sufficiently convince the judgment of any man not wilfully
obstinate in that point. I shall only crave leave briefly to touch at some of
them.

First then, when Governors shall have appointed what seemed to them
expedient, and private men shall refuse to observe the same, pretending it to
be inexpedient, who shall judge thereof? Either they themselves that take the
exceptions must be judges, which is both unreasonable and preposterous; or else
every man must be his own judge, which were to overthrow all Government, and to
bring in a confusion, every man to do what is good in his own eyes; or else the
known Governors must judge, and then you know what will follow, even to submit
and obey.

Secondly, To allow men, under the pretense of inexpediency, and because of
some offense that may be taken thereat, to disobey Laws and Constitutions made
by those that are in Authority, were the next way to cut the sinews of all
Authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into contempt. For what Law
ever was made, or can be made so just and so reasonable, but some man or other
either did, or might take offense thereat: And what man that is disposed to
disobey, but may pretend one inexpediency or other, wherewith to countenance
out such his disobedience?

Thirdly, It is agreed by consent of all that handle the matter of Scandal,
that we may not commit any sin whatsoever, be it never so small, for the
avoiding of any scandal, be it never so great: But to disobey lawful Authority
in lawful things, is a sin against the fifth Commandment. Therefore we may not
redeem a scandal by such our disobedience, nor refuse to do the thing commanded
by such Authority, whosoever should take offense thereat.

Fourthly, Though lawfulness and unlawfulness be not, yet expediency and
inexpediency are (as we heard) capable of the degrees of more and less; and
then in all reason, of two inexpedient things we are to do that which is less
inexpedient, for the avoiding of that which is more inexpedient. Say then there
be an inexpediency in doing the thing commanded by Authority, when a brother is
thereby offended; is there not a greater inexpediency in not doing it, when the
Magistrate is thereby disobeyed? Is it not more expedient and conducing to the
common good, that a public Magistrate should be obeyed in a just command, than
that a private person should be gratified in a causless scruple?

Fifthly, When by refusing obedience to the lawful commands of our Superiors,
we think to shun the offending of one or two weak brethren, we do in truth
incur thereby a far more grievous scandal, by giving offense to hundreds of
others, whose Consciences by our disobedience will be emboldned to that,
whereto corrupt nature is but too too prone, to affront the Magistrate, and
despise the Authority.

Lastly, Where we are not able to discharge both, debts of justice are to be
paid before debts of charity. Now the duty of obedience is debitum justitiae,
and a matter of right; my Superior may challenge it at my hands as his due,
and I do him wrong if I withhold it from him. But the care of not giving
offense is but debitum charitatis, and a matter but of courtesy. I am to
perform it to my brother in love, when I see cause, but he cannot challenge it
from me as his right; nor can justly say I do him wrong if I neglect it. It is
therefore no more lawful for me to disobey the lawful command of a Superior,
to prevent thereby the offense of one or a few brethren, than it is lawful for
me to do one man wrong, to do another man a courtesy withal; or than it is
lawful for me to rob the Exchequer to relieve an Hospital.

I see not yet how any of these six Reasons can be fairly avoided; and yet
(which would be considered) if but any one of them hold good, it is enough to
carry the cause; and therefore I hope there need be no more said in this
matter. To conclude then, for the point of practice (which is the main thing I
aimed at in the choice of this Text, and my whole Meditations thereon) we may
take our direction in these three Rules, easy to be understood and remembered,
and not hard to be observed in our practice, if we will but bring our good
wills thereunto.

First, If God command we must submit without any more ado, and not trouble our
selves about the expediency, or so much as about the unlawfulness: for both,
Abraham never disputed whether it were expedient for him, nor yet whether it
were lawful for him to sacrifice his Son or no, when once it appeared to him
that God would have it so.

Secondly, If our Superiors, endued with lawful Authority thereunto, command
us any thing, we may, and (where we have just cause of doubt) we ought to
enquire into the unlawfulness thereof; yet notwith such anxious curiosity, as
if we desired to find out some loop-hole whereby to evade, but with such modest
ingenuity, as may witness to God and the World the unfeigned sincerity of our
desires, both to fear God, and to honor those that he has set over us. And if
having used ordinary moral diligence, bona fide, to inform our selves the best
we can, there appear no unlawfulness in it, we are then also to submit and obey
without any more ado, never troubling our selves farther to enquire whether it
be expedient, yea or no. Let them that command us look to that; for it is they
must answer for it, and not we.

But then thirdly, where Authority has left us free, no command, either of
God, or of those that are set ever us under God, having prescribed any thing to
us in that behalf, there it is at our own liberty, and choice to do as we shall
think good. Yet are we not left so loose, as that we may do what we list, so as
the thing be but lawful (for that were licenciousness, and not liberty;) but we
must ever do that, which according to the exigence of present circumstances (so
far as all the wisdom and charity we have will serve us to judge) shall seem
to us most expedient and profitable to mutual edification. This is the way; God
give us all grace to walk in it: so shall we bring glory to him, and to our
selves comfort: so shall we further his work onward, and our own account at the
last.

Quest. Whether they that have taken the Covenant may Renounce it?

Answ. Thirdly, Beware of engaging thy self to sin. It is a fearful thing when
sin has got a tie upon a man. Then is one properly in the snare of the Devil,
when he has him as it were in a string, and may lead him captive to what
measure of presumption he will. And sundry ways may a man thus entangle
himself; by a Verbal, by a Real, by a sinful Engagement. He shall do best to
keep himself out of all these snares: but if once he be in, there is no way out
again but one, even this, To loose his pledge, to break in sunder the bonds
wherein he is tied, as Sampson did the green withs, and to cast a way those
cords from him.

A man has bound himself rashly by some promise, vow, or covenant, to do
something he may not do, or not to do something he ought to do, he is now
engaged in a sin; the Devil has got this tie upon him: And though his
Conscience tell him he cannot proceed without sin, yet because of his Vow, or
his Oath, he is wilful, and must on. It was Herod's Case for taking off the
Baptist's head; it was against his Conscience to do it, for he knew he had not
deserved it; yea, and it was against his mind too to do it; for the Text faith,
he was exceeding sorry that his Niece should put him upon it. But yet, says
the story withal, for his Oath sake, and because the great ones about him
should not say but the King would be as big as his word, he resolved it should
be done, and gave commandment accordingly to have it done. This I call a Verbal
Engagement.

Quest. Whether we English men may think our selves bound by the Solemn League
and Covenant?

Answ. Without betraying the Liberty, which by our Protestation we are bound,
and in the third Article of this Covenant must swear, with our lives and
fortunes to preserve. To which Liberty the imposition of a new Oath, other than
is established by Act of Parliament, is expressed in the Petition of Right, and
by the Lords and Commons in their Declarations acknowledged to be contrary.

3. Without acknowledging in the imposers a greater power than, for ought that
appears to us, has been in former times challenged; or can consist with our
former Protestation (if we rightly understand it) is sundry the most material
branches thereof.

Neither, secondly, are we satisfied, although the Covenant should not be
imposed on us at all, but only recommended to us, and then left to our choice.

1. How we should in wisdom and duty (being Subjects) of our own accord and
free will, enter into a Covenant, wherein he, whose Subjects we are, is in any
wise concerned, without his consent, either expressed or reasonably presumed.
It being in his power (as we conceive) by the equity of the Law, Numb. 30. to
annul and make void the same at his pleasure.

2. How we can (now that his Majesty has by his public Interdict sufficiently
made known his pleasure in that behalf) enter into a Covenant, the taking
whereof he has expressly forbidden, without forfeiting that Obedience, which
(as we are persuaded) by our natural Allegiance and former Oaths we owe unto
all such his Majesty's Commands, as are not in our apprehensions repugnant to
the will of God, or the positive Laws of this Kingdom.

Quest. What shall a man do, that scruples in Conscience what Authority enjoins
as unlawful.

Answ. But then thirdly, if the liberty of the agent be determined by the
command of some superior power to whom he owes obedience, so as he is not now
sui juris ad hoc, to do or not to do at his own choice, but to do what he is
commanded: this one circumstance quite alters the whole case, and now he is
bound in Conscience to do the thing commanded; his doubtfulness of mind,
whether that thing be lawful or no, notwithstanding. To do that whereof he
doubts, where he has free liberty to leave it undone, brings upon him (as
we have already shown) the guilt of wilful transgression; but not so, where he
is not left to his own liberty. And where lawful authority prescribes in
alterutram partem, there the liberty ad utramque partem contradictionis is
taken away, from so many as are under that Authority. If they that are over
them have determined it one way, it is not thenceforth any more at their
choice, whether they will take that way or the contrary: but they must go the
way that is appointed them, without gainsaying or grudging. And if in the deed
done at the command of one that is endued with lawful Authority there be a sin,
it must go on his score that requires it wrongfully, not on his that does but
his duty in obeying. A Prince commands his Subjects to serve in his Wars; it
may be the quarrel is unjust, it may be there may appear to the understanding
of the Subject great likely hoods of such injustice, yet may the Subject for
all that fight in that quarrel; yea, he is bound in Conscience so to do: nay,
he is deep in disloyalty and treason if he refuse the service, whatsoever
pretentions he may make of Conscience for such refusal. Neither need that fear
trouble him, left he should bring upon himself the guilt of innocent blood; for
the blood that is unrighteously shed in that quarrel, he must answer for that
set him on work, not he that spilt it. And truly it is a great wonder to me,
that any man endued with understanding, and that is able in any measure to
weigh the force of those precepts and reasons which bind inferiors to yield
obedience to their superiors, should be otherwise minded in cases of like
nature. Whatsoever is commanded us by those whom God has set over us, either
in Church, Commonwealth, or Family ( Quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo,
says St. Bernard) which is not evidently contrary to the Law and will of God,
ought to be of us received and obeyed no otherwise, than as if God himself had
commanded it, because God himself has commanded us to obey the higher powers,
and to submit our selves to their ordinances. Say it be not well done of them
to command it, Sed enim quid hoc refert tua? says he, What is that to thee?
Let them look to that whom it concerns: Toll quod tuum est, and vade. Do
thou what is thine own part faithfully, and never trouble thy self further.
Ipsum, quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum in his quae aperte non sunt contra
Deum audire debemus; Bernard still. God's Vicegerents must be heard and obeyed
in all things that are not manifestly contrary to the revealed will of God.

But the thing required is against my conscience, may some say, and I may not
go against my conscience for any man's pleasure. Judge I pray you what
perverseness is this, when the B. Apostle commands thee to obey for Conscience
sake, that thou should disobey, and that for Conscience sake too: He charge
thee upon thy Conscience to be subject, and thou pretendest thy Conscience to
free thee from subjection. This by the way; now to the point. Thou say it is
against thy Conscience; I say again, that (in the case whereof we now speak,
the case of doubtfulness) it is not against thy Conscience: For doubting
properly is motus indifferens in utramque partem contradictionis, when the mind
is held in suspense between two ways, uncertain whether of both to take to;
when the Scales hang even (as I said before) and in aequilibrio, without any
notable propension or inclination to the one side more than to the other. And
surely where things hang thus even, if the weight of Authority will not cast
the Scale either way, we may well suppose that either the Authority is made
very light, or else there is a great fault in the beam. Know (Brethren) the
gainsaying Conscience is one thing, and the doubting Conscience another. That
which is done repugnante conscientia, the Conscience of the doer flatly
gainsaying it, that is indeed against a man's Conscience, the Conscience having
already passed a definitive sentence the one way, and no respect or
circumstance whatsoever can free it from sin. But that which is done dubitante
conscientia, the Conscience of the doer only doubting of it, and no more; that
is in truth no more against a man's Conscience than with it (the Conscience as
yet not having passed a definitive sentence either way;) and such an action may
either be a sin, or no sin, according to those qualifications which it may
receive from other respects and circumstances. If the Conscience have already
passed a judgment upon a thing, and condemned it as simply unlawful; in that
case it is true, that a man ought not by any means to do that thing, no not at
the command of any Magistrate; no, not although his Conscience have pronounced
a wrong sentence, and erred in that judgment; for then he should do it
repugnante conscientia, he should go directly against his own Conscience, which
he ought not to do whatsoever come of it. In such a case certainiy he may not
obey the Magistrate; yet let him know thus much withal, that he sins too in
disobeying the Magistate; from which sin the following of the judgment of his
own Conscience cannot acquit him. And this is that fearful perplexity whereof I
spoke, whereunto many a man casts himself by his own error and obstinacy,
that he can neither go with his Conscience, nor against it, but he shall sin.
And who can help it, if a man will needs cherish an error, and persist in it?
But now if the Conscience be only doubtful, whether a thing be lawful or no,
but have not as yet passed a peremptory judgment against it (yea, although it
rather incline to think it unlawful) in that case if the Magistrate shall
command it to be done, the Subject with a good Conscience may do it; nay, he
cannot with a good Conscience refuse to do it, though it be dubitante
conscientia.

But you will yet say, that in doubtful cases the safer part is to be chosen.
So say I too; and am content that rule should decide this question; only let it
be rightly applied. Thou think it safer, where thou doubtest of the
unlawfulness, to forbear than to do: As for example, if thou doubtest whether
it be lawful to kneel at the Communion, it is safest in thy opinion therefore
for thee not to kneel. So should I think too, if thou were left merely to thine
own liberty. But thou do not consider how thou art caught in thine own net,
and how the edge of thine own weapon may be turned upon thee point blank, not
to be avoided, thus.

If Authority command thee to kneel, which whether it be lawful for thee to do,
or not, thou doubtest; it cannot choose but thou must needs doubt also, whether
thou may lawfully disobey, or not. Now then here apply thine own Rule, In
dubiis pars tutior, and see what will come of it. Judge, since thou can not
but doubt in both cases, whether it be not the safer of the two, to obey
doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly. Tene certum, demitte incertum, is St.
Gregory his rule, where there is a certainty, and an uncertainty, let the
uncertainty go, and hold to that which is certain. Now the general is certain,
that thou art to obey the Magistrate in all things not contrary to the will of
God; but the particular is uncertain, whether the thing now commanded thee by
the Magistrate be contrary to the will of God; (I say uncertain to thee,
because thou doubtest of it.) Deal safely therefore, and hold thee to that
which is certain, and obey.

But thou will yet allege, that the Apostle here condemns the doing of any
thing, not only with a gainsaying, but even with a doubting Conscience, because
doubting also is contrary to faith; and he that doubts is even for that
condemned, if he eat. O beware of misapplying Scripture! it is a thing easily
done, but not so easily answered. I know not any one Gap that has let in more,
and more dangerous Errors into the Church, than this, That men take the word
of the sacred Text, fitted to particular occasions, and to the condition of the
times wherein they were written, and then apply them to themselves, and others,
as they find them, without due respect had to the differences that may be
between those times and cases, and the present. Sundry things spoken of in
Scripture agreeably to that infancy of the Church, would sort very ill with the
Church in her fullness of strength and stature; and sundry directions very
expedient in times of persecution, and when Believers lived mingled with
Infidels, would be very unseasonably urged, where the Church is in a peaceable
and flourishing estate, enjoying the favor, and living under the protection of
gracious and religious Princes. Thus the Constitutions that the Apostles made
concerning Deacons and Widows in those primitive times, are with much
importunity, but very importunely withal, urged by the Disciplinarians: And
sundry other like things I might instance of this kind, worthy the discovery,
but that I fear to grow tedious. Briefly then, the Apostles whole Discourse in
this Chapter, and so wheresoever else he touches upon the point of Scandals,
is to be understood only in that case where men are left to their own liberty
in the use of indifferent things: The Romans, Corinthians, and others to whom
St. Paul wrote about these matters, being not limited any way in the exercise
of their liberty therein by any overruling Authority. But where the
Magistrates have interposed, and thought good upon mature advice to impose Laws
upon those that are under them, whereby their liberty is (not infringed, as
some unjustly complain, in the inward judgment, but only) limited in the
outward exercise of it; there the Apostolical directions will not hold in the
same absolute manner, as they were delivered to those whom they then concerned;
but only in the equity of them, so far forth as the cases are alike, and with
such meet qualifications and mitigations, as the difference of the cases
otherwise does require. So that a man ought not, out of private fancy, or
merely because he would not be observed for not doing as others do, or for any
the like weak respects, to do that thing, of the lawfulness whereof he is not
competently persuaded, where it is free for him to do otherwise; which was the
case of these weak ones among the Romans, for whose sakes principally the
Apostle gave these directions. But the Authority of the Magistrates intervening
so, alters the case, that such a forbearance as to them was necessary, is to as
many of us as are commanded to do this or that, altogether unlawful, in regard
they were free, and we are bound, for the Reasons already shown, which I now
rehearse not. But you will yet say (for in point of obedience men are very
loath to yield, so long as they can find any thing to plead) those that lay
these burdens upon us, at leastwise should do well to satisfy our doubts, and
to inform our Consciences concerning the lawfulness of what they enjoin, that
so we might render them obedience with better cheerfulness. How willing are we
sinful men to leave the blame of our miscarriages any where, rather than upon
our selves! But how is it not incongruous the while, that those men should
prescribe rules to their Governors, who can scarcely brook their Governors
should prescribe Laws to them? It were good we should first learn how to obey,
ere we take upon us to teach our betters how to govern. However, what
Governors are bound to do, or what is fit for them to do in the point of
information, that is not now the question. If they fail in any part of their
bounden duty, they shall be sure to reckon for it one day; but their Iailing
cannot, in the mean time, excuse thy disobedience. Although I think it would
prove a hard task for whosoever should undertake it, to show that Superiors
are always bound to inform the Consciences of their Inferiors concerning the
lawfulness of every thing they shall command. If sometimes they do it, where
they see it expedient or needful; sometimes again (and that perhaps oftener) it
may be thought more expedient for them, and more conducible for the public
peace and safety, only to make known to the people what their pleasures are,
reserving to themselves the Reasons thereof. I am sure, in the point of
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and Constitutions (in which case the aforesaid
Allegations are usually most stood upon) this has been abundantly done in our
Church, not only in the learned writings of sundry private men, but by the
public declaration also of Authority, as is to be seen at large in the Preface
commonly printed before the Book of Common Prayer, concerning that Argument,
enough to satisfy those that are peaceable, and not disposed to stretch their
wits to cavil at things established. And thus much of the second Question,
touching a doubting Conscience; whereon I have insisted the longer, because it
is a point both so proper to the Text, and whereat so many have stumbled.

There remains but one other Question, and that of far smaller difficulty;
What is to be done when the Conscience is scrupulous? I call that a scruple,
when a man is reasonably well persuaded of the lawfulness of a thing, yet has
withal some jealousies and fears, lest perhaps it should prove unlawful. Such
scruples are most incident to men of melancholy dispositions, or of timorous
Spirits, especially if they be tender conscienced withal; and they are much
increased by the false suggestions of Satan, by reading the Books, or hearing
the Sermons, or frequenting the company of men more strict, precise, and
austere in sundry points, than they need or ought to be; and by sundry other
means which I now mention not. Of which scruples it behooveth every man, first,
to be wary that he does not at all admit them, if he can choose: Or if he
cannot wholly avoid them, that, secondly, he endeavor, so far as may be, to
eject them speedily out of his thoughts, as Satan's snares, and things that may
breed him worfer inconveniences: Or, if he cannot be so rid of them, that
then, thirdly, he resolve to go on according to the more profitable persuasion
of his mind, and despise those scruples. And this he may do with a good
Conscience, not only in things commanded him by lawful Authority, but even in
things indifferent and arbitrary, and wherein he is left to his own liberty.

REASONS Of the present JUDGMENT OF THE University of OXFORD, Concerning The
Solemn League and Covenant. The Negative Oath. The Ordinances concerning
Discipline and Worship.

Approved by general consent in a full Convocation, June 1. 1647. And presented
to Consideration.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott. 1678.

A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, the
honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commmons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the King's Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms wherein every ones private Devotion is included; and
calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and
Practices of the Enemies of God against the true Religion, and how much their
rage, power, and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and
exercised; whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland,
the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public
Testimonies; We have now at last (after other means of Supplication,
Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves
and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the Example of God's People in
other Nations; after mature deliberation resolved and determined to enter into
a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one
of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I.
THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our Posterity after us may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III.
We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the King's Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV.
We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied in
former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted unto
us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments, we shall
each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they may
remain conjoined in a firm Peace and union to all Posterity; And that Justice
may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the
precedent Articles.

VI.
We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives; which are the causes of our sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant
we make in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to join in the same or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Negatie Oath.
I A. B. do swear from my heart, That I will not, directly nor indirectly,
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause,
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament, in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear, That my
coming and submitting my self under the Power and Protection of the Parliament,
is without any manner of Design whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings
of this present Parliament, and without the direction, privity, or advice of
the King, or any of his Council or Officers, other than what I have now made
known. So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

Reasons why the University of Oxford cannot submit to the Covenant, the
Negative Oath, the Ordinance concerning Discipline and Directory mentioned in
the late Ordinance of Parliament for the Visitation of that place.
WHereas by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for
the Visitation and Reformation of the University of Oxford lately published,
power is given to certain persons therein named as Visitors, to enquire
concerning those of the said University that neglect to take the Solemn League
and Covenant, and the Negative Oath being tendered unto them, and likewise
concerning those that oppose the execution of the Ordinances of Parliament
concerning the Discipline and Directory, or shall not promote or cause the same
to be put in execution, according to their several places and callings, We the
Masters, Scholars, and other Officers and Members of the said University, not
to judge the Consciences of others, but to clear our selves before God and the
world from all suspicion of Obstinacy, whilst we discharge our own, present to
consideration the true reasons of our present Judgment concerning the said
Covenant, Oath, and Ordinances; expecting so much Justice, and hoping for so
much Charity, as either not to be pressed to conform to what is required in any
the Premises, further than our present Judgments will warrant us; or not
condemned for the refusing so to do, without clear and real satisfaction given
to our just Scruples.

. I. Of the Preface to the Covenant.
THE Exceptions against the Introductory Preface to the Covenant, although we
insist not much upon, because it may be said to be no part of the Covenant; yet
among the things therein contained, the acknowledgment whereof is implicitly
required of every Covenanter, 1. We are not able to say, That the rage, power,
and presumption of the enemies of God (in the sense there intended) is at this
time increased. 2. Nor can truly affirm that we had used, or given consent to
any Supplication or Remonstrance to the purposes therein expresse^^ 3. Nor do
conceive the entering into such a mutual League and Covenant to be a lawful,
proper, and probable means to preserve our selves and our Religion from ruin
and destruction. 4. Nor can believe the same to be according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms, or the example of God's people in other Nations.
When we find not the least foot-step in our Histories of a sworn Covenant ever
entered into by the people of this Kingdom upon any occasion whatsoever; nor can
readily remember any commendable Example of the like done in any other Nation;
but are rather told by the defenders of this Covenant, that Such an Oath, as
for Matter, Persons, and other Circumstances, the like has not been in any Age
or Oath we read of in sacred or humane stories. M. Nigh, Covenant with
Narrative, page 12.
the World never saw the like before.


. II. Of the Covenant in gross.
FIrst, we are not satisfied how we

1. Such imposition (to our seeming) being repugnant to the nature of a
Covenant, which being a Contract, implies a Pactum est duorum pluriumvs in.
idem placitum consensus. L. 1. ff. de Pactis.
voluntary mutual consent of the Contractors; whereunto men are to be induced
by persuasions, not compelled by power. Insomuch that the very words of this
Covenant in the Preface, Conclusion, and whole Frame thereof run in such a form
throughout, as import a consent rather grounded upon prudential motives, than
extorted by Rigor. 2. Without betraying the Liberty, which by our protestation
we are bound, and in the third Article of this Covenant must swear, with our
lives and fortunes to preserve. To which Liberty the imposition of a new Oath,
other than is established by Act of Parliament, is expressed in the Whereas
many of them have had an Oath administered unto them not warrantable by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm; They do humbly pray that no man hereafter be
compelled to take such an Oath -- All which they most humbly pray -- as their
Rights and Liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm Petit. of
Right, 3. Carol.
Petition of Right, and by the Lords and Commons in their It is declared, 16
Jan. 1642. That the King cannot compel men to be sworn without an Act of
Parliament. Exact. Collect. page 859, 860.
Declarations acknowledged to be contrary. 3. Without acknowledging in the
Imposers a greater power than, for ought that appears to us, has been in
former time challenged; Or can consist with our former Protestation (if we
rightly understand it) in sundry the most material branches thereof.
Neither, secondly, are we satisfied, although the Covenant should not be
imposed upon us at all, but only recommended to us, and then left to our
choice; 1. How we should in wisdom and duty (being Subjects) of our own accord
and free will enter into a Covenant, wherein He, whose Subjects we are, is in
any wise concerned, without his consent, either expressed or reasonably
presumed. It being in his power (as we conceive) by the equity of the Law,
Numb. 30. to annul and make void the same at his pleasure. 2. How we can (now
that his Majesty has by His public Proclam. of 9. October. 19 Car.
Interdict sufficiently made known His pleasure in that behalf) enter into a
Covenant, the taking whereof he has expressly forbidden, without forfeiting
that Obedience, which (as we are persuaded) by our natural Allegiance and
former Oaths we owe unto all such His Majesty's Commands, as are not in our
apprehensions repugnant to the will of God, or the positive Laws of this
Kingdom.


. III. Of the first Article of the Covenant.
WHerein, first, we are not satisfied, how we can with judgment swear to
endeavor to preserve the Religion of another Kingdom; 1. Whereof, as it does
not concern us to have very much, so we profess to have very little
understanding. 2. Which (so far as the occurrents of these unhappy times have
brought it to our knowledge, and we are able to judge) is in three of the four
specified particulars, viz. Worship, Discipline and Government, much worse; and
in the fourth (that of Doctrine) not at all better than our own; which we are
in the next passage of the Article required to reform. 3. Wherein if hereafter
we shall find any thing (as upon farther understanding thereof it is not
impossible we may) that may seem to us savouring of Popery, Superstition,
Heresy, or Schism, or contrary to sound Doctrine, or the power of godliness;
we shall be bound by the next Article to endeavor the extirpation, after we
have bound our selves by this first Article to the preservation thereof. 4.
Wherein we already find some things (to our thinking) so far tending toward (
Viz.) In accounting Bishops Antichristian, and indifferent Ceremonies unlawful.
Superstition and ( Viz.) In making their Discipline and Government a mark of
the true Church, and the setting up thereof the erecting of the Throne of
Christ.
Schism, that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them to
reform the same, than that they should call upon us to preserve it.


Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; How we can swear to endeavor
the same (which without making a change therein cannot be done,) 1. Without
manifest scandal to the Papist and Separatist, 1. By yielding the Cause, which
our godly Bishops and Martyrs, and all our learned Divines ever since the
Reformation, have both by their writings and sufferings maintained; who have
justified, against them both, the Religion established in the Church of England
to be agreeable to the Word of God. 2. By justifying the Papists in the
reproaches and scorn by them cast upon our Religion, whose usual Objection it
has been and is, That we know not what our Religion is; that since we lest
them, we cannot tell where to stay; and that our Religion is a Let us not be
blamed if we call it Parliament Religion, Parliament Gospel, Parliament Faith,
Warding, confut. of Apology, Part 6. Chap. 2,
Parliamentary Religion. 3. By a tacit acknowledgment that there is something
both in the Doctrine and Worship, whereunto their conformity has been
required, not agreeable to the Word of God, and consequently justifying them
both, the one in his Recusancy, the other in his Separation. 4. By an implied
Confession, That the Laws formerly made against Papists in this Kingdom, and
all punishments by virtue thereof inflicted upon them, were unjust; in
punishing them for refusing to join with us in that form of Worship, which our
selves (as well as they) do not approve of.
2. Without manifest wrong unto our selves, our Consciences, Reputation and
Estates; in bearing false witness against our selves, and sundry other ways: by
swearing to endeavor to reform that, as corrupt and vicious, 1. Which we have
formerly by our Personal Subscriptions approved, as agreeable to God's Word;
and have not been since either condemned by our own hearts for so doing, or
convinced in our Judgments by any of our Brethren that therein we did amiss.
2. Which in our Consciences we are persuaded, not to be in any of the four
specified Particulars (as it stands by Law established) much less in the
whole four, against the Word of God. 3. Which we verily believe (and, as we
think, upon good grounds) to be in sundry respects much better, and more
agreeable to the Word of God, and the practice of the Catholic Church, than
that which we should by the former words of this Article swear to preserve. 4.
Whereunto the Stat. 13. Eliz. 12.
Laws yet in force require of all such Clerks as shall be admitted to any
Benefice, the signification of their hearty assent, to be attested openly in
the time of Divine Service before the whole Congregation there present, within
a limited time, and that un-under pain (upon default made) of the loss of every
such Benefice.
3. Without manifest danger of Perjury: This branch of the Article (to our best
understandings) seeming directly contrary, 1. To our former solemn
Protestation, which we have bound our selves, neither for hope, fear, or other
respect ever to relinquish. Wherein the Doctrine which we have vowed to
maintain, by the name of the true Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine
of the Church of England, we take to be the same which now we are required to
endeavor to reform and alter. 2. To the Oath of Supremacy, by us also taken,
according to the Laws of the Realm, and the Statutes of our University in that
behalf. Wherein having first testified and declared in our Consciences, That
the King's Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, we do after
swear to our power to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences, and Authorities granted or belonging to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. One of the which Privileges and Preheminences, by an express Statute so
annexed, and that even, interminis, in the self-same words in a manner with
those used in the Oath, is the whole power of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, for the correction and reformation of all manner of errors and
abuses in matters Ecclesiastical: as by the Such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities and Preheminences Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any, etc.
for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for
Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors,
Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, contempts and Enormities, shall for ever
by Authority of this present Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction,
etc. 1 Eliz. 1.
words of the said Statute more at large appears. The Oath affording the
Proposition, and the Statute the Assumption, we find no way how to avoid the
Conclusion.



IV. Of the second Article of the Covenant.
1. Endeavored to be extirpated; without any reason offered to our
Understandings, for which it should be thought necessary, or but so much as
expedient so to do. But also 2. Ranked with Popery, Superstion, Heresy,
Schism, and Profaneness; which we unfeignedly profess our selves to detest as
much as any others whatsoever. 3. And that with some intimation also, as if
that Government were some way or other so contrary to sound Doctrine, or the
power of godliness, that whosoever should not endeavor the extirpation thereof
must of necessity partake in other men's sins, which we cannot yet be persuaded
to believe. 4. And we desire it may be considered, in case a Covenant of like
form should be tendered to the Citizens of London, wherein they should be
required to swear, they would sincerely, really and constantly, without respect
of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Treason, the City Government (by a
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common Council, and other Officers depending
thereon) Murder, Adultery, Theft, Cosenage, and whatsoever shall be -- etc.
lest they should partake in other men's sins; whether such a tendry could be
looked upon by any Citizen that had the least spirit of freedom in him as an
act of Justice, Meekness, and Reason.


1. In respect of the thing it self. Concerning which Government we think we
have reason to believe, 1. That it is (if not Iure Divino in the strictest
sense, that is to say, expressly commanded by God in his Word, yet) of
Apostolical Institution; that is to say, was established in the Churches by the
Apostles, according to the mind, and after the Example of their Master Jesus
Christ, and that by virtue of their ordinary Power and Authority derived from
him, as deputed by him Governors of his Church. 2. Or at least, that Episcopal
Aristocracy has a fairer pretension, and may lay a juster title and claim to a
Divine Institution than any of the other Forms of Church Government can do, all
which yet do pretend thereunto, viz. that of the Papal Monarchy, that of the
Presbyterian Democracy, and that of the Independents by particular
Congregations, or gathered Churches.
2. But we are assured by the undoubted Testimony of ancient Records and later
Histories, that this Form of Government has been continued with such an
universal, uninterrupted, unquestioned succession in all the Churches of God,
and in all Kingdoms that have been called Christian throughout the whole world
for fifteen hundred years together; that there never was in all that time any
considerable opposition made there against. That of Aerius was the greatest,
wherein yet there was little of consideration, beside these two things: That it
grew at the first but out of discontent; and gained him at the last but the
reputation of an Heretic. From which antiquity and continuance we have just
cause to fear, that to endeavor the extirpation thereof, 1. Would give such
advantage to the Papists, who usually object against us, and our Religion, the
contempt of Antiquity, and the love of Novelty; that we should not be able to
wipe off the aspersion. 2. Would so diminish the just Authority due to the
consentient judgment and practice of the Universal Church (the best Interpreter
of Scripture in things not clearly expressed; for Lex currit cum praxi:) that
without it we should be at a loss in sundry points both of Faith and Manners,
at this day firmly believed and securely practiced by us; when by the
Socinians, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, we should be called upon for our
proofs: As namely, sundry Orthodoxal Explications concerning the Trinity and
Co-equality of the Persons in the Godhead, against the Arians and other
Heretics; the number, use and efficacy of Sacraments; the Baptizing of
Infants; National Churches; the observation of the Lord's Day; and even the
Canon of Scripture it self.



Thirdly, In respect of our selves; Justice, Ingenuity, and Humanity, to
require the extirpation of Episcopal Government (unless it had been first
clearly demonstrated to be unlawful) to be sincerely and really endeavored by
us, 1. Who have all of us, who have taken any Degree by subscribing the 39
Articles, testified our approbation of that Government: one of those Art. 36.
Articles affirming the very Book, containing the Form of their Consecration,
to contain in it nothing contrary to the Word of God. 2. Who have most of us (
viz. as many as have entered into the Ministry) received Orders from their
hands, whom we should very ill requite for laying their hands upon us, if we
should now lay to our hands to root them up, and cannot tell for what. 3. Who
have sundry of us, since the beginning of this Parliament, subscribed our Names
to Petitions exhibited, or intended to be exhibited, to that High Court, for
the continuance of that Government: which as we then did sincerely and really,
so we should with like sincerity and reality, still (not having met with any
thing since to show us our error) be ready to do the same again, if we had the
same hopes we then had the reception of such Petitions. 4. Who hold some of us
our livelihood, either in whole or part, by those Titles of Deans, Deans and
Chapters, etc. mentioned in the Articles; being Members of some Collegiate or
Cathedral Churches. And our memories will not readily serve us with any Example
in this kind since the world began; wherein any state or profession of men,
though convicted (as we are not) of a Crime that might deserve Deprivation,
were required to bind themselves by Oath, sincerely and really to endeavor the
rooting out of that (in it self not unlawful) together wherewith they must also
root out themselves, their Estates and Livelyhoods. 5. Especially it being
usual in most of the said Churches, that such persons as are admitted Members
thereof, have a personal Oath administered unto them, to maintain the Honor,
Immunities, Liberties, and Profits of the same; and whilst they live to seek
the good, and not to do any thing to the hurt, hindrance, or prejudice thereof;
or in other words to the like effect.


Fourthly, In respect of the Church of England; we are not satisfied how we can
swear to endeavor the extirpation of the established Government, no necessity
or just cause for so doing, either offering it self, or being offered to our
Understandings.

1. Since all Change of Government unavoidably brings with it, besides those
that are present and evident, sundry other inconveniences, which no wit of man
can possibly foresee to provide against, till late experience discover them: We
cannot be sure, that the evils which may ensue upon the Change of this
Government (which has been of so long continuance in this Kingdom, is so
deeply rooted in the Laws thereof, and has so near a conjunction with, and so
strong an influence upon the Civil Sat and Government, as that the Change
thereof must infer the necessity of a great alteration to be made in the other
also;) may not be greater than the supposed evils whatsoever they are, which by
this Change are sought to be remedied. For there are not yet any come to our
knowledge of that desperate nature, as not to be capable of other remedy, than
the utter extirpation of the whole Government it self. 2. Whereas the House of
Commons have -- give advantage to this Malignant party to traduce our
Proceedings. They infuse into the people that we mean to abolish all Church
Government -- -- Remonst. 15 Dec. 1641. Exact Collect. p. 19. The Lords and
Commons do delare, That they intend a due and necessary Reformation of the
Government and Liturgy of the Church, and to take away nothing in the one or in
the other, but what shall be evil, and justly offensive, or at least
unnecessary and barthensome: Declar. 9 Apr. 1642. Exact. Coll. p. 135.
remonstrated, That it was far from their purpose or desire to abolish the
Church Government, but rather that all the Members of the Church of England
should be regulated by such Rules of Order and Discipline as are established by
Parliament; and that it was Malignancy to infuse into the people that they had
any oother meaning: We are loath, by consenting to the second Article, to become
guilty of such Infusion, as may bring us within the compass and danger of the
fourth Article of this Covenant. 3. Since it has been declared by sundry
Statute of Carlisle 25 E. 1. recited 25 E. 3.
Acts of Parliament, That the holy Church of England was founded in the state
of Prelacy within the Realm of England; we dare not, by endeavoring the
extirpation of Prelacy, strike at the very foundation, and thereby (as much as
in us lies) cooperate toward the ruin of this famous Church, which in all
conscience and duty we are bound with our utmost lawful power to uphold.
Lastly, In respect of our Obligations to his Majesty by our Duty and

1. Having in the Oath of Supremacy acknowledged the King to be the only
Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical Causes, and over all Ecclesiastical
Persons; and having bound our selves both in that Oath, and by our
Protestation, To maintain the King's Honor, Estate, Jurisdictions, and all
manner of Rights: it is clear to our Understandings, that we cannot without
disloyalty and injury to him, and double Perjury to our selves, take upon us,
without his consent, to make any alteration in the Ecclesiastical Laws or
Government, much less to endeavor the extirpation thereof; unless the imposers
of this Covenant had a power and meaning (which they have openly They infuse
into the people, that we mean -- to leave every man to his own fancy --
absolving him of that Obedience which he owes under God unto his Majesty, whom
we know to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as with the
Temporal. Exact. Collect. ubi supra, page 19.
disclaimed) to absolve us of that Obedience, which under God we owe unto his
Majesty, whom they know to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law. 2. We
cannot sincerely and really endeavor the extirpation of this Government,
without a sincere desire and real endeavor, that his Majesty would grant his
Royal Assent to such extirpation. Which we are so far from desiring and
endeavoring, that we hold it our bounden duty by our daily prayers to beg at
the hands of Almighty God, that he would not for our sins suffer the King to do
an act so prejudicial to his Honor and Conscience, as to consent to the
rooting out of that estate, which by so many branches of his That he will
grant, keep, and confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchises, granted to the
Clergy by the glorious King S. Edward. And that he will grant and preserve unto
the Bishops, and to the Churches committed to their charge, all Canonical
Privileges and due Law and Justices; and that he will protect and defend them,
as every good King in his Kingdom ought to be Protector and Defender of the
Bishops and the Churches under their Government. Vide Exact. Col. Page 290, 291.
Coronation Oath he has in such a solemn manner sworn by the assistance of God
to his power to maintain and preserve. 3. By the Laws of this Land, See Stat.
25 H. 8.20. and 1 E. 6.2.
the Collation of Bishoprics and See Stat. 39 Eliz. 8.
Deanaries; the Stat. 14 E. 3.4. and 5. and 17 E. 3.14.
fruits and profits of their Lands and Revenues during their vacancies; the
Stat. 26 H. 8.3. and 1 Eliz. 4.
first fruits and yearly tenths out of all Ecclesiastical Promotions; and
sundry other Privileges, Profits, and Emoluments, arising out of the State
Ecclesiastical, are established in the Crown, and are a considerable part of
the Revenues thereof; which, by the extirpation of Prelacy, as it is in the
Article expounded, or by subsequent practice evidenced, will be fevered and cut
off from the Crown, to the great prejudice and damage thereof. Whereunto as we
ought not in common reason, and in order to our Allegiance as Subjects, yield
our consent; so having sworn expressly to maintain the King's Honor and
Estate, and to our power to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, etc. belonging
to his Highness, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm, we
cannot without manifest Perjury(as we conceive) consent thereunto. 4. The
Government of this Realm being confessedly an Empire or -- Supremam potestatem
and merum imperium apud nos habet Rex, Cambden. Whereas by sundry diverse old
authentic Histories and Chronicles it is manifestly declared and expressed,
that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the
world, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same. Stat. 24 H. 8.12. See also 1 Eliz. 3.
Monarchy, and that of a most excellent temper and constitution; we understand
not how it can become us to desire or endeavor the extirpation of that
Government in the Church, which we conceive to be incomparably of all other the
most agreeable, and no way prejudicial to the state of so well a constituted
Monarchy: Insomuch as King James would often say, what his long Experience had
taught him, No Bishop, no King. Which Aphorism, though we find in sundry
Pamphlets of late years to have been exploded with much confidence and scorn;
yet we must profess to have met with very little in the proceedings of the late
times, to weaken our belief of it. And we hope we shall be the less blamed for
our unwillingness to have any actual concurrence in the extirpating of
Episcopal Government; seeing of such extirpation there is no other use
imaginable, but either the alienation of their Revenues and Inheritances (which
how it can be severed from Sacrilege and Injustice, we leave others to find
out) or to make way for the introducing of some other form of Church
Government: which whatsoever it shall be, will (as we think) prove either
destructive of, and inconsistent with Monarchical Government, or at leastwise
more prejudicial to the peaceable, orderly, and effectual exercise thereof,
than a well-regulated Episcopacy can possibly be.
. V. Of the other parts of the Covenant.
HAving insisted the more upon the two first Articles, that concern Religion
and the Church, and wherein our selves have a more proper concernment; we shall
need to insist the less upon those that follow, contenting our selves with a
few (the most obvious) of those many great, and (as we conceive) just
exceptions that lie there against.

In the third Article, we are not In the preservation and defense of the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom. Forasmuch as 1. No such limitation of
our duty in that behalf is to be found, either in the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance (which no Papist would refuse to take with such a limitation) nor in
the Protestation, nor in the Word of God. 2. Our endeavor to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, is
required to be sworn of us in the same Article without the like or any other
limitation added thereunto. 3. Such limitation leaves the duty of the Subject
at so much looseness, and the safety of the King at so great uncertainty; that
whenever the people shall have a mind to withdraw their obedience, they
cannot want a pretense from the same for so doing. 4. After we should, by the
very last thing we did ( viz. swearing with such a limitation) have made our
selves guilty of an actual and real diminution (as we conceive) of his
Majesty's just power and greatness: the obtestation would seem very
unseasonable (at the least) with the same breath to call the world to bear
witness with our Consciences, that we had no thoughts or intentions to diminish
the same. 5. The swearing with such a limitation is a Testimony of the Subjects
Loyalty (to our seeming) of a very strange nature; which, the Principles of
their several Religions salved, the Conscience of a most resolute Papist or
Sectary may securely swallow, and the Conscience of a good Protestant cannot
but strain at.


In the fourth Article, 1. We desire it may be considered, Son, of accusing his
own Father, and pursuing him to destruction, in case he should be an
Incendiary, Malignant, or other evil Instrument, such as in the Article is
described. A course which we conceive to be contrary to Religion, Nature, and
Humanity. 2. Whether the swearing according to this Article, does not rather
open a ready way to Children that are sick of the Father, Husbands that are
weary of their Wives, etc. by appealing such as stand between them and their
desires, of Malignancy, the better to effectuate their unlawful intentions and
designs. 3. Our selves having solemnly protested to maintain the Liberty of the
Subject, and the House of Commons having publicly declared against the
exercise of an Arbitrary Power, with Order that their said Declaration should
be printed and published in all the Parish Churches and Chapels of the
Kingdom, there to stand and remain as a testimony of the clearness of their
intentions; whether the subjecting of our selves and brethren by Oath unto such
punishments, as shall be inflicted upon us (without Law of Merit) at the sole
pleasure of such uncertain Judges as shall be upon any particular occasion
deputed for that effect, of what mean quality or abilities soever they be, even
to the taking away of our lives, if they shall think it convenient so to do,
though the degree of our offenses shall not require or deserve the same; be not
the betraying of our Liberty in the lowest, and the setting up of an Arbitrary
Power in the highest degree that can be imagined.


1. That we do not see, nor therefore can acknowledge the happiness of such a
blessed Peace between the three Kingdoms (for we hope Ireland is not forgotten)
as in the Article is mentioned; so long as Ireland is at War within it self,
and both the other Kingdoms engaged in that War. 2. That since no peace can be
firm and well-grounded that is not bottomed upon Justice, the most proper and
adequate act whereof is, Ius suum cuique, to let every one have that which of
right belongs unto him; we cannot conceive how a firm and lasting Peace can
be established in these Kingdoms, unless the respective Authority, Power, and
Liberty of King, Parliament, and Subject, as well every one as other, be
preserved full and entire, according to the known Laws and continued
unquestioned customs of the several Kingdoms in former times, and before the
beginning of these sad distractions.


In the sixth Article we are altogether

1. The whole Article being grounded upon a supposition, which has not yet
been evidenced to us, viz. that this Cause, meaning thereby (or else we
understand it not) the joining in this Covenant of mutual defense for the
prosecution of the late War, was the Cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of
the Kingdoms; and that it so much concerned the glory of God, and the good of
the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King. 2. If all the Premises were so
clear, that we durst yield our free assent thereunto, yet were they not
sufficient to warrant to our Consciences what in this Article is required to be
sworn of us; unless we were as clearly satisfied concerning the lawfulness of
the means to be used for the supporting of such a Cause. For since evil may not
be done, that good may come thereof; we cannot yet be persuaded, That the Cause
of Religion, Liberty, and Peace, may be supported; or the Glory of God, the
Good of the Kingdoms, and the Honor of the King sought to be advanced, by such
means, as (to our best understandings) are both improper for those Ends, and
destitute of all warrant from the Laws, either of God, or of this Realm.
Lastly, in the Conclusion, our other Christian Churches might be encouraged by
our example to join in the like Association and Covenant, to free themselves
from the Antichristian yoke, etc. Wherein 1. To omit that we do not know any
Antichristian yoke under which we were held in these Kingdoms, and from which
we owe to this either War or Covenant our freedom; unless by the Antichristian
yoke be meant Episcopal Government, which we hope no man that pretends to
Truth and Charity will affirm. 2. We do not yet see in the fruits of this
Association or Covenant among our selves any thing so lovely, as to invite us
to desire (much less to pray) that other Christian Churches should follow our
example herein. 3. To pray to the purpose in the conclusion of the Covenant
expressed, seems to us all one in effect as to beseech Almighty God, the God
of Love and Peace, 1. To take all love and peace out of the hearts of
Christians, and to set the whole Christian world in a combustion. 2. To render
the Reformed Religion, and all Protestants odious to all the world. 3. To
provoke the Princes of Europe to use more severity toward those of the
Reformed Religion; if not (for their own security) to root them quite out of
their several Dominions. 4. The tyranny and yoke of Antichrist, if laid upon
the nooks of Subjects by their lawful Sovereigns, is to be thrown off by
Christian boldness in confessing the Truth, and patient suffering for it; not
by taking up Arms, or violent resisting of the Higher Powers.



. VI. Some considerations concerning the meaning of the Covenant.
OUR aforesaid Scruples are much strengthened by these ensuing Considerations.

First, That whereas no Oath, which is contradictory to it self, can be taken
without Perjury; because the one part of every contradiction must needs be
false: this Covenant either indeed contains, or at leastwise (which to the
point of Conscience is not much less effectual) seems to us to contain sundry
Contradictions; as namely, amongst others, these.

1. To preserve as it is, without change, and yet to reform and alter, and not
to preserve, one and the same Reformed Religion 2. Absolutely and without
exception to preserve; and yet upon supposition to extirpate the self-same
thing, viz the present Religion of the Church of Scotland. 3. To reform Church
Government established in England and Ireland, according to the Word of God;
and yet to extirpate that Government which we are persuaded to be according
thereunto, for the introducing of another whereof we are not so persuaded. 4.
To endeavor really the extirpation of Heresies, Schisms, and Profaneness; and
yet withal to extirpate that Government in the Church, the want of the due
exercise whereof we conceive to have been one chief cause of the growth of the
said evils; and do believe the restoring and continuance thereof would be the
most proper and effectual remedy. 5. To preserve with our estates and lives the
liberties of the Kingdom; that is (as in the Protestation is explained) of the
Subject; and yet contrary to these liberties, to submit to the imposition of
this Covenant, and of the Negative Oath, not yet established by Laws; and to
put our lives and estates under the arbitrary power of such as may take away
both from us when they please, not only without, but even against Law, if they
shall judge it convenient so to do.
Secondly, We find in the Covenant Common Enemies? and which be the best
Reformed Churches? mentioned in the first Article. Who (in the fourth Article)
are to be accounted Malignants? How far that phrase of hindering Reformation may
be extended? What is meant by the supreme Iudicatory of both the Kingdoms? and
sundry other.

Thirdly, By the use that has been made of this Covenant (sometimes to
purposes of dangerous consequence) we are brought into some fears and
jealousies, lest by taking the same we should cast our selves into more snares
than we are yet aware of. For in the first Article, 1. Whereas we are to
endeavor the Reformation of Religion in this Kingdom in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of
the best Reformed Churches: 1. The Reformation in Worship (whereby we could not
suppose any more was intended (according to their former The Lords and Commons
do declare, That they intend a due and necessary Reformation of the Liturgy of
the Church; and to take away nothing therein but what shall be evil and justly
often five, or at least unnecessary and burthensom. Dec. 9 Apr. 1642. Exact.
Col. p. 135.
Declaration) than a review of the Service Book, that the translations might be
in some places amended, some alterations made in the Offices and Rubricks; or
at most some of the Ceremonies laid aside for the reasons of expediency and
condescension) has produced an utter abolition of the whole form established;
without substituting any other certain form in the room thereof. 2. The
Reformation in point of Discipline and Government intended (so far as by the
overtures hitherto made we are able to judge) is such, as we conceive not to be
according to the Word of God, nor (for any thing we know) according to the
example of any Church that ever was in the World (best or worst) since the
Creation.
2. In the second Article, our grief and fears had been less, if we could have
observed the extirpation of Popery, Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, to have
been as really intended, and set on with as much speed and animosity, as the
extirpation of Prelacy, and that which some call Superstition. But when we see,
under the notions of rooting out Prelacy and Superstition, so much quickness
used to fetch in the Revenues of the Church, and the sacred Utensils (no
otherwise guilty of Superstition, for ought we know, than that they are worth
something;) and on the other side, so little yet done toward the extirpation of
Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness (as things of less temporal advantage;) We
cannot dissemble our suspicion, that the Designers of this Covenant might have
something else before their eyes, besides what in the beginning of the
Introduction is expressed; and that there is something meant in this Article
that looks so like Sacrilege, that we are afraid to venture thereon 3. In
the third Article, 1. Although we should not otherwise have apprehended any
matter of danger or moment in the ordering of the particulars in the Article
mentioned; yet since M. Challoner in his Speech, and others have made advantage
thereof to infer from that very order, that the defense of the King's Person
and Authority ought to be with subordination to the preservation of the Rights
and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdom, which are
From whence it is most evident, That the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments
and Liberties of the Kingdom are in the first place to be preserved. Answer to
Scottish Papers, 18 Nov. 1546, page.21.
in the first place, and before it to be endeavored; We hope we shall be
excused, if we dare not take the Covenant in this sense; especially,
considering that if the Argument be of any force, it will bind us at least as
strongly to endeavor the maintenance of the King's Person, Honor, and Estate
in the first place, and the rest but subordinately thereunto; because they are
so ordered in the Protestation: And then, that Protestation having the
advantage of preceding, it will bind us more strongly, as being the first
Obligation. 2. Whereas some have been the rather induced to take the Covenant
in this particular by being told, That that limitation, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms, was not to be
understood exclusively: yet when we find that the House of Commons in their
Answer to the Scottish Papers, do We observe you mention the defense of the King
twice from the Covenant, yet in both places leave out In the preservation and,
etc. p. 39 and 46. a main clause without which the other part ought never to be
mentioned. p. 56.
often press that limitation, as without which the endeavoring to preserve the
King's Majesty's Person and Authority ought not to be mentioned; it cannot but
deterr us from taking the Covenant in this particular so understood. 3.
Especially being told in a late Pamphlet, That the King not having preserved
the Liberties of the Kingdom, etc. as of duty he ought, is thereby become a
Tyrant, and so cease to be a King, and consequently that his Subjects cease
to be Subjects, and owe him no longer subjection. Which assertion, since we
heartily detest as false and scandalous in the supposition, and in the
inference seditious and divellish; we dare not by subscribing this Article,
seem to give the least countenance thereunto. 4. But it strikes us with
horror to think what use has been made of this fourth Article, concerning the
punishment of Malignants, etc. as by others otherways, so especial-by the
Corrector of a Speech without doors, written in the defense of M. Challoner's
Speech; who is so bold as to tell the Parliament, That they are bound by their
Covenant (for the bringing of evil Instruments to condign punishment) to
destroy the King and his Posterity; and that they cannot justify the taking
away of Strafford's and Canterbury's lives for Delinquency, whilst they suffer
the chief Delinquent to go unpunished.



. VII. Of the Salvo's.
THE Salvo's that we have usually met withal, for the avoiding of the aforesaid
Scruples, either concerning the whole Covenant, or some particulars therein of
special importance; we find upon examination to be no way satisfactory to our
Consciences.

The first is, that we may take the the Covenant in our own sense: but this (in
a matter of this nature, viz. an imposed promissory Oath, in the performance
whereof others also are presumed to be concerned) seems to be.

1. Contrary to the nature and which unless it be full of simplicity, cannot be
sworn in Truth and Righteousness, nor serve to the ending of Controversies and
Contradictions, which was the use for which it was instituted, Heb. 6. 2.
Contrary to the end of Speech; God having given us the use of Speech for this
end, that it might be the Interpreter of the mind; it behooves us as in all
other our dealings and contracts, so especially where there is the intervention
of an Oath, so to speak, as that they whom it concerns, may clearly
understand our meaning by our words. 3. Contrary to the end of the Covenant it
self: which being the confirmation of a firm union among the Covenanters, that
by taking thereof they might have mutual assurance of mutual assistance and
defense: If one may be allowed to take it in one sense, and another in a
contrary, the Covenanters shall have no more assurance of mutual assistance
each from other after the taking of the Covenant, than they had before. 4.
Contrary to the Solemn profession made by each Covenanter (in express terms in
the conclusion thereof) in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all
hearts, that he takes it with a true intention to perform the same, as he
shall answer it at the great day.
2. This will bring a scandal upon our Religion, 1. That we practice that our
selves, which we condemn in the Papist, viz. Swearing with Jesuitical
equivocations and mental reservations. 2. That we take the glorious and
dreadful Name of God in vain; and play fast and loose with Oaths: inasmuch as
what we swear to day in one sense, we may swear the direct contrary to morrow
in another. And 3. It will give strength to that charge which is laid to the
Presbyterian party in special, both Heretici nec Deo, nec hominibus servant
fidem -- Speciatim hoc addo, Calvinistas in hac re deteriores esse qua
Lutheranos. Number Calviniste nullem servant fidem: Iura perjura. -- Lutherani
moderationes sunt. Becan. 5. Manual. Controv. 14. n. 4. and 6.
by Jesuits and Invent Oaeths and Covenants for the Kingdom, dispense with them
when he pleases, swear and forsweae as the wind turns, like a godly
Presbyter. Arraign. of Persec. in Epist. Ded.
Sectaries; that there is no faith to be given to Protestants, whatever they
swear; because they may swear one thing in their words, and in their own sense
mean another.


Salvo's expressed, viz. So far as lawfully I may; So far as it is agreeable to
the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land; Saving all Oaths by me formerly
taken, etc. But 1. We believe this mocking of God would be so far from freeing
us from the guilt of Perjury, that thereby we should rather contract a new
guilt of most vile and abominable Hypocrisy. 2. It seems all one unto us
(the thing being otherwise supposed unlawful) as if we should swear to kill,
steal, commit adultery, or forswear our selves, so far as lawfully we may. 3.
If this would satisfy the Conscience, we might with a good Conscience not only
take the present Covenant, but even subscribe to the Council of Trent also;
yea, and to the Turkish Alcoran; and swear to maintain and defend either of
them, viz. so far as lawfully we may, or as they are agreeable to the Word of
God.


Thirdly, For the second Article sensu composito, so as if we do endeavor but
the taking away of Apparitors only, or of any other one kind of inferious
Officers belonging to the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, we shall have sufficiently
discharged our whole promise in that particular, without any prejudice done to
Episcopacy. But 1. Neither the Composers of the Covenant by their words, nor
the Imposers of it by their actions, have given us the least signification that
they meant no more. 2. Yea rather, if we may judge either by the cause or the
effects, we may well think there was a meaning to extirpate the whole
Government, and every part thereof, in the Article expressed. For 1. The
Covenant being (as we have no cause to doubt) framed at the instance of the
Scots, and for the easier procuring of their assistance in the late War, was
therefore in all reason so to be framed and understood as to give them
satisfaction, and (considering what themselves have By the Covenant both Houses
of Parliament, and many thousands of other his Majesty's Subjects of England
and Ireland, stand bound as well as we to hinder the setting up of the Church
Government by Bishops in the Kingdom of Scotland; And that we as well as they
stand bound to endeavor the extirpation thereof in England and Ireland. Scots
Declaration to the States of the United Provinces, 5 Aug 1645. recited in
Answer to the Scot's Papers, page.23.
declared against Episcopacy) we have little reason to believe the taking away
Apparitors, or any thing less than the rooting out of Episcopacy it self, would
have satisfied them. 2. The proceedings also since the entering of this Covenant
in endeavoring by Ordinance of Parliament to take away the Name, Power, and
Revenues of Bishops do sadly give us to understand what was their meaning
therein.



Fourthly, As to the Scruples that of answering, but little satisfaction in
either.

1. The former, by saying (which seems to us a piece of unreasonable and
strange Divinity) that Protection and Subjection standing in relation either to
other, the King being now disabled to give us protection, we are thereby freed
from our bond of Subjection. Whereas 1. The Subjects Obligation ( Ius
subjectionis) does not spring from, nor relate unto the actual exercise of
Kingly protection; but from and unto the Prince's obligation to protect ( Ius
protectionis). Which obligation lying upon him as a duty which he is bound in
Conscience to perform, when it is in his power so to do; the relative
Obligation thereunto lies upon us as a duty which we are bound in Conscience
to perform, when it is in our power so to do. His inability therefore to
perform his duty does not discharge us from the necessity of performing ours,
so long as we are able to do it. 2. If the King should not protect us, but
neglect his part, though having power and ability to perform it; his voluntary
neglect ought not to free us from the faithful performance of what is to be
done on our part. How much less then ought we to think our selves disobliged
from our subjection, when the Non-protection on his part is not from the want
of will, but of power?
2. The later (wherein yet some have triumphed) by saying that the Parliament
being the Supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom, the King, wheresoever in person,
is ever present there in his power, as in all other Courts of Justice: and that
therefore whatsoever is done by them, is not done without the King, but by him.
But craving pardon first, if in things without our proper sphere we hap to
speak unproperly or amiss; We must next crave leave to be still of the same
mind we were, till it shall be made evident to our understandings, that the
King is there in his power, as it is evident to our senses, that he is not
there in his Person: Which so far as our natural reason and small experience
will serve us to judge, all that has been said to that purpose can never do.
For, first, to the point of presence: 1. We have been brought up in a belief
that for the making of Laws the actual The old forms of Acts of Parliament were
The King wills, provideth, ordains, establishes, grants, etc. by the
assent of Parliament, etc. See Statutes till 1 H. 4. After that, The King, of
the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special instance and
request of the Commons of this Realm, has ordained, etc. See Statutes 1 H. 4.
till 1 H. 7. A form of such Petition of the Commons, see 1 R. 3. 6. Prayen the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, that where, etc. Please it
therefore your Highness, by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in this your present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, to ordain, etc.

No Bill is an Act of Parliament, Ordinance, or Edict of Law, although both the
Houses agree unanimously in it, till it has the Royal Assent. Ancient
Customs, page 54.

Assemblee de ceux troys Estats est appellee un Act de Parliament: car sans
touts troys n'est ascun Act de Parl. Finch Nomotech. sol. 21.

We admit that no Acts of Parliament are complete, or formally binding, without
the King's assent. H. P. Answer to David Ienkins, page 6.


Royal assent was simply necessary, and not only a virtual assent supposed to
be included in the Votes of the two Houses: otherwise, what use can be made of
his Negative voice? or what need to -- which if your Majesty shall be pleased
to adorn with your Majesty's Royal assent (without which it can neither be
complete and perfect, nor --) Stat. 1 Jac. 1.
desire his Royal assent to that which may be done as well without it? 2. The
Stat. 33 H. 3. 21.
Statute providing that the King's assent to any Bill signified under his Great
Seal shall be to all intents of Law as valid and effectual, as if he were
personally present, does clearly import that as to the effect of making a Law,
the Kings Power is not otherwise really present with the two Houses, than it
appears either in his Person or under his Seal: Any other real presence is to
us a riddle, not much unlike to that of Transubstantion: an imaginary thing,
rather devised to serve turns, than believed by those that are content to make
use of it. 3. Such presence of the King there, when it shall be made appear to
us either from the Writs, whereby the Members of both Houses are called
together, or by the standing Laws of the Land, or by the acknowledged judgment
and continued practice of former and later Ages, or by any express from the
King himself, clearly declaring his mind to that purpose, we shall then as
becomes us, acknowledge the same, and willingly submit thereunto.


And as for the Argument drawn from the Analogy of other Courts, wherein the
King's Power is always supposed to be virtually present, under submission we
conceive it is of no consequence.

1. The Arguments a minore and a majore are subject to many fallacies; and,
unless there be a parity of reason in every requisite respect between the
things compared, will not hold good: A petty Constable (they say) may do
something which a Justice of Peace cannot do: And the Steward of a petty Manor
has power to administer an Oath, which (as we are told) the House of Commons
it self has no power to do. 2. That the High Court of Parliament is the
Supreme Judicatory, we have been told it is by virtue of the King's right of
presiding there, he being Dominus Rex habet ordinariam jurisdictionem,
dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt. -- Ea quae
jurisdictionis sunt and paecis -- ad nullum pertinent nisi ad coronam and
dignitatem Regiam, nec a corona sebarari possunt. Bracton cited by Stamford,
lib. 2. cap. 2.
the Supreme Judge, and the Members of both Houses his Council: which being so,
the reason of difference is plain between that and other Judicatories in sundry
respects.
1. The Judges in other Courts are deputed by him, and do all in his Name, and
by his Authority; and therefore the presence of his power in those Courts of
Ministerial Jurisdiction is sufficient, his Personal presence not necessary,
neither has he any Personal vote therein at all. But in the high Court of
Parliament, where the King himself is the Supreme Judge, judging in his own
Name and by his own Authority, his Power cannot be presumed to be really
present without either the actual presence of his person, or some virtual
representation thereof signified under his Great Seal. 2. The Judges in
Inferior Courts, because they are to act all in his Name, and by his
Authority, do therefore take Oaths of fidelity for the right exercising of
Judicature in their several places; sitting there, not by any proper interest
of their own, but only in right of the King, whose Judges they are, and
therefore they are called the King's Judges and his Ministers. But in the high
Court of Parliament, the Lords and Commons sit there in Council with the King
as Supreme Judge for the good of the whole Realm; and therefore they are not
called the King's Judges, but the King's Council: and they have their several
proper rights and interests peculiar and distinct both between themselves, and
from that of the Kings; by reason whereof they become distinct For in our Laws,
the Clergy, Nobility, and Commonalty are the three Estates. -- we your said
most loving, faithful, and obedient Subjects (viz. the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons) representing your three Estates of your Realm of
England, 1 Eliz. 3. -- the State of the Clergy being one of the greatest States
of this Realm. 8 Eliz. 1.
Orders, or, as of late times they have been styled (in this sense we conceive)
See Finch supra ad lit. [d].
three distinct Estates. Each of which being supposed to be the best
Conservators of their own proper interest; if the power of any one Estate
should be presumed to be virtually present in the other two, that Estate must
needs be inevitably liable to suffer in the proper interests thereof: which
might quickly prove destructive to the whole Kingdom; the safety and prospetity
of the whole consisting in the conservation of the just rights and proper
interests of the main parts, viz. The King, Lords, and Commons inviolate and
entire. 3. The Judges of other Courts, forasmuch as their power is but
Ministerial and merely Judicial, are bounded by the present Laws, and limited
also by their own Acts; so as they may neither swerve from the Laws in giving
Judgment, nor reverse their own Judgments after they are given. But the high
Court of Parliament, having (by reason of the King's Supreme Power presiding
therein) a Power Legislative as well as Judicial, are not so limited by any
earthly Power, but that they may change and overruled the Laws and their own
Acts at their pleasure. The King's Personal assent therefore is not needful in
those other Courts, which are bounded by those Laws whereunto the King has
already given his personal assent; but unto any Act of Power beside, beyond,
above, or against the Laws already established, we have been informed, and it
seems to us very agreeable to reason, that the King's Personal Assent should be
absolutely necessary: Forasmuch as every such Act is the exercise of a
Legislative, rather than of a Judicial power; and no Act of Legislative power
in any Community (by consent of all Nations) can be valid, unless it be
confirmed by such person or persons as the Sovereignty of that Community
resideth in. Which Sovereignty, with us, so undoubtedly resideth in the person
of the King, that his ordinary style runs, -- Our The Crown of England has
been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately to God in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown. -- 16
R. 2. 5. Omnis sub so est, and ipsi sub nallo, nisi tantum sub Deo. Parem autem
non habet Rex in Regno suo, quia -- Item nec multo fortius superiorem aut
potentiorem habere dibet, quia sic esset inferior suis subjectis. Bracton.
conten. 1. Rubr. 36. -- Cui (...) legibus ipsis legum vim imponendi potestatem
Deus dedit. Finch Nomotech. in Epist. Dedic. to King James.
Sovereign Lord the King: And he is in the Oath of Supremacy expressly
acknowledged to be the only Supreme Governor within his Realms. And we leave
it to the wisdom of others to consider what misery and mischief might come to
the Kingdom, if the power of any of these three Estates should be swallowed up
by any one, or both the other, and if then under the name of a Judicial, there
should be yet really exercised a Legislative power. 4. Since all Judicial Power
is radically and originally in the King (who is for that cause styled by the
Laws Fons Iustitiae. Bracton. By War to intend the alteration of the Laws in
any part of them, is to levy war against the King, and consequently Treason by
the Statute of 25 E. 3. -- because they are the King's Laws. He is the Fountain
from whence in their several Channels they are derived to the Subject Master
Saint John's Speech concerning the Earl of Strafford page 12.
The Fountain of Justice) and not in any other Person or Persons, but by
derivation from him: it seems to us evident, that neither the Judges of
Inferior Courts of Ministerial Justice, nor the Lords and Commons assembled in
the High Court of Parliament, may of right exercise any other Power over the
Subjects of this Realm, than such as by their respective Patents and Writs
issued from the King, or by the known established Laws of the Land formerly
assented unto by the Kings of this Realm, does appear to have been from him
derived unto them. Which Laws, Patents, and Writs being the exact boundary of
their several Powers, it has not yet been made appear to our understandings,
either from the Laws of the Realm, or from the tenor of those Writs by which
the Parliament is called, that the two Houses of Parliament have any power
without the King to order, command, or transact; but with him -- Et ibidem
vobiscum colloquium habere, tractare super dictia negotiis tract. vestrumque
consilium impensur. Writ to the Lords.
to treat, consult, and advise concerning the great affairs of the Kingdom. In
which respect they have sundry times in their Declarations to his Majesty
called themselves by the Name of his Great Council. And those Laws and Writs
are (as we conceive) the proper Topic, from which the just power of the
Honorable Houses can be convincingly deduced; and not such frail Collections,
as the wits of men may raise from seeming Analogies and Proportions.
. VIII. Of the Negative Oath.
WE are not satisfied how we can submit to the taking of the Negative Oath, 1.
Without forseiture of that liberty which we have sworn, and are bound to
preserve. With which liberty we conceive it to be inconsistent, that any
Obligation should be laid upon the Subject by an Oath not established by Act of
Parliament. 2. Without abjuring our Every Subject by the duty of his Allegiance
is bounden to serve and assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord at all seasons
when need shall re quire. 11 H. 7. 18.
natural Allegiance, and violating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance by us
formerly taken. By all which being bound to our power to assist the King, we
are by this Negative Oath required to swear, from our heart, not to assist him.
3. Without diminution of his Majesty's just Power and Greatness, contrary to
the third Article of the Covenant; by acknowledging a Power in the two Houses
of Parliament, in opposition to the King's Power. Whereas we profess our selves
unable to understand, how there can be any lawful power exercised within this
Realm, which is not subordinate to the power of the King.


. IX. Of the Ordinances concerning the Discipline and Directory.
1. First, Concerning them altogether; we are not satisfied how we can submit
to such Ordinances of the two Houses of Parliament not having the Royal Assent,
1. As are contrary to the established Laws of this Realm, contained in such
Acts of Parliament as were made by the joint consent of King, Lords, and
Commons. 2. Nor so only, but also pretend by Repeal to abrogate such Act of
Acts. For, since Ejusdem est potestatis destruere, cujus est constituere, it
will not sink with us, that a letter power can have a just right to cancel and
annul the Act of a greater. 3. Especially the whole power of ordering all
matters Ecclesiastical, St. 1 El. 1.
being by the Laws in express words for ever annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm. And upon what head that Crown ought to stand, none can be ignorant.


As to the particular Ordinances, those that concern the Discipline 1. If under
that Title be comprehended the Government also; we cannot submit thereunto,
without consenting to the eradiction of a Government of reverend Antiquity in
the Church. Which (notwithstanding the several changes of Religion within this
Realm) has yet from time to time been continued and confirmed by the public
Laws and great Charters of the Kingdom: than which there cannot be a more ample
testimony that it was ever held agreeable to the Civil Government and the
Subjects Liberty: Which also the successive Kings of this Realm at their
several Coronations have solemnly sworn to preserve: And the continuance
whereof for sundry Reasons before (upon the second Article of the Covenant)
specified, we heartily wish and desire. 2. But if the word Discipline be taken
(as it is in the first Article of the Covenant) as contra-distinguished unto
the Government: there is something even in that also, wherein we are not fully
satisfied, viz. the leaving of so much power in so many Persons, and those,
many of them of mean quality, for the keeping back of thousands of well-meaning
Christians from the benefit and comfort of the blessed Sacrament: an Austerity,
for which there appears not to us any probable warrant from the Word of God;
but which seems rather repugnant, as to the general Principles of Christian
Prudence and Charity, so to the directions and practice of St. Paul in
particular; 1 Cor. 5.1, etc.
who in a Church abounding with sundry errors and corruptions both in Faith
and Manners (having first given order for the Excommunicating of one only
person, that by shameless continuance in a notorious sin had brought a foul
scandal upon the Gospel) sufficing himself then with a general proposal of the
great danger of unworthy communicating, remitteth every other particular person
to a Self-examination; 1 Cor. 11. 28, etc.
without any order either to Ministers or Lay Elders to exclude any from the
holy Communion upon their Examination.


Directory in particular; we cannot without regret of Conscience (during our
present Judgment, and the continuance of the present Laws) consent to the
taking away of the Book of Common Prayer.

1. Which by our Subscriptions most of us have approved; with a solemn promise
therewithal, in the Public Service to use the form prescribed therein, and no
other. 2. Which according to our said Subscription and Promise, and our bounden
duty according to the Statute in that case provided, 1 Eliz.
we have hitherto used in our Churches, Chapels, and other Oratories, to the
great benefit and comfort of our souls. 3. Which we verily believe not to
contain any thing which (with such favorable construction as of right ought to
be allowed to all manner of Writings) is not justly defensible; which has not
been by learned and godly men sufficiently maintained against such Exceptions
as have been heretofore taken thereat; and which we are confident (by the
Assistance of Almighty God) we shall be able to justify (as occasion shall be
offered) against all Papists, and other Oppugners or depravers thereof
whatsoever. 4. Which is established by an Act of Parliament made (in peaceable
times) by as good and full authority as any under Heaven can have over us.
which does so weigh with us, that as it freeth us from the necessity of giving
in any particular Exceptions against the Directory, or any thing therein
contained: so it lays an inevitable necessity upon us of continuing the form
of Prayer therein enjoined, and of not admitting any Directory or other Form to
the prejudice thereof, till the said Act shall by the like good and full
Authority be repealed.
In which Statute there is not only an express Command given to all Ministers
for the using of the same; but there are also sanctions of severe punishments
to be inflicted upon such of them as shall refuse so to do; or shall preach,
declare or speak any thing to the derogation or depraving of the Book of Common
Prayer, or of any thing therein contained, or of any part thereof; with
punishments also to be inflicted upon every other person whatsoever ( the Lords
of the Parliament not excepted) that shall in like manner declare or speak
against the said Book; or shall by deed or threatening compel, or otherwise
procure or maintain any Minister to say open Prayer, or to minister any
Sacrament in any other manner or form than is mentioned in the said Book; or
shall interrupt or hinder any Minister in the use of the said forms, as by the
words of the said Statute more at large may appear.

Which Statute also has had such universal powerful influence into the
succeeding times, that in all such Stat. 23. Eliz. 1. and 29 Eliz. 6. and 35
El. 1. and 2. and 3 Iac. 4. and 5.
Statutes as have been since made against Popish Recusants, the refusing to be
present at Common Prayer, or to receive the Sacrament according to the forms
and rites mentioned in that Book, is expressed as the most proper legal
character, whereby to distinguish a Popish Recusant from a true Protestant.
Insomuch that use has been made of that very Character in sundry Acts, since
the beginning of this present Parliament, for the taxing of double payments
upon Recusants.

THus have we clearly and freely represented our present Judgment concerning
the said Covenant, Negative Oath, and Ordinances, which upon better information
in any particular, we shall be ready to rectify. Only we desire it may be
considered, That if any one single scruple or reason in any the Premises
remain unsatisfied (though we should receive full satisfaction in all the rest)
the Conscience would also remain still unsatisfied. And in that case, it can
neither be reasonable for them that cannot satisfy us to press us, nor lawful
for us that cannot be satisfied to submit to the said Covenant, Oath, and
Ordinances.

QUINTIL. Quis damnaverit eum, qui duabus potentissimis rebus defenditur, jure
and mente?

ROMANS XIV. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that which he
allows.

A SERMON OF RICHARD HOOKER Author of those LEARNED BOOKS OF Ecclesiastical
Polity, Found in the Study of the late Learned Bishop Andrews.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriott. 1678.

A SERMON OF Richard Hooker, etc.
MATTHEW. VII. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever asks, etc.
AS all the Creatures of God, which attain their highest perfection by process
of time, are in their first beginning raw; so man in the end of his race the
perfectest, is at his entrance thereunto the weakest, and thereby longer
enforced to continue a subject for other men's compassions to work upon
voluntarily, without any other perswader, besides their own secret Inclination,
moving them to repay to the common Stock of Humanity such help, as they know
that themselves before must needs have borrowed; the state and condition of all
slesh being herein alike. It comes hereby to pass, that although there be in
us, when we enter into this present world, no conceit or apprehension of our
own misery, and for a long time after no ability, as much as to crave help or
succor at other men's hands; yet through his most good and gracious Providence,
which feeds the young, even of feathered Fowls and Ravens (whose natural
significations of their necessities are therefore termed in Scripture Prayers
and Invocations which God does hear) we, amongst them, whom he values at a far
higher rate than millions of brute Creatures, do find by perpetual experience,
daily occasions given unto every of us, religiously to acknowledge with the
Prophet David, Thou, O Lord, from our birth have been merciful unto us, we have
tasted thy goodness hanging even at our Mothers Breasts. That God, which during
Infancy preserves us without our knowledge, teaches us at years of discretion
how to use our own Abilities for procurement of our own good.

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. For whosoever does ask, shall receive; whosoever does seek,
shall find; the door unto every one which knocks shall be opened.

In which words we are first commanded to ask, seek, and knock: secondly,
promised grace answerable unto every of these endeavors; asking, we shall
have; seeking, we shall find; knocking, it shall be opened unto us: thirdly,
this grace is particularly warranted, because it is generally here averred,
That no man asking, seeking, and knocking shall fail of that whereunto his
serious desire tends.

1. Of asking or praying I shall not need to tell you, either at whose hands we
must seek our aid, or to put you in mind that our hearts are those golden
Censers from which the Fume of this Sacred Incense must ascend. For concerning
the one, you know who it is which has said, Call upon me; and of the other, we
may very well think, that if any where, surely first and most of all in our
Prayers, God does make his continual Claim, Fili, da mihi cor tuum, Son, let me
never fail in this duty to have thy heart.

Against invocation of any other than God alone, if all Arguments else should
fail, the number whereof is both great and forcible, yet this very bar and
single challenge might suffice; That whereas God has in Scripture delivered us
so many patterns for imitation when we pray, yea, framed ready to our hands in
a manner all, for suits and supplications, which our condition of life on earth
may at any time need, there is not one, no not one to be found directed unto
Angels, Saints, or any, saving God alone. So that, if in such cases as this we
hold it safest to be led by the best Examples that have gone before, when we
see what Noah, what Abraham, what Moses, what David, what Daniel and the rest
did; what form of Prayer Christ himself likewise taught his Church; and what
his blessed Apostles did practice, who can doubt but the way for us to pray so
as we may undoubtedly be accepted, is by conforming our Prayers to theirs,
whose Supplications we know were acceptable?

Whosoever comes unto God with a gift, must bring with him a cheerful heart,
because he loves hilarem datorem, a liberal and frank affection in giving.
Devotion and fervency adds unto prayers the same that alacrity does unto
gifts; it puts vigor and life in them.

Prayer proceeds from want, which being seriously laid to heart, makes
Suppliants always importunate; which importunity our Savior Christ did not
only tolerate in the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. but also invite and exhort
thereunto, as the Parable of the wicked Judge shows, Luke 13. Our fervency
shows us sincerely affected toward that we crave: but that which must make
us capable thereof, is an humble spirit; for God does load with his grace the
lowly, when the proud he sends empty away: and therefore to the end that all
generations of the world might know how much it stands them upon to beware of
all lofty and vain conceits when we offer up our Supplications before him, he
has in the Gospel both delivered this Caveat, and left it by a special chosen
parable exemplified. The Pharisee and Publican having presented themselves in
one and the same place, the Temple of God, for performance of one and the same
duty, the duty of Prayer, did notwithstanding in that respect only so far
differ the one from the other, that our Lords own verdict of them remains as
(you know) on record, They departed home, the sinful Publican, through humility
of prayer, just; the just Pharisee, through pride, sinful. So much better does
he accept of a contrite peccavi, than of an arrogant Deo gratias.

Asking is very easy, if that were all God did require: but because there were
means which his Providence has appointed for our attainment unto that which we
have from him, and those means now and then intricated, such as require
deliberation, study, and intention of wit; therefore he which imboldeneth to
ask, does after invocation exact inquisition; a work of difficulty. The baits
of sin every where open, ready always to offer themselves; whereas that which
is precious, being hid, is not had but by being sought. Praemia non ad magna
praevenitur nisi per magnos labores, Bernard: straitness and roughness are
qualities incident unto every good and perfect way. What booteth it to others
that we wish them well, and do nothing for them? As little our selves it must
needs avail, if we pray and seek not. To trust to labor without prayer, it
argues impiety and profaneness; it makes light of the Providence of God: and
although it be not the intent of a religious mind; yet it is the fault of those
men whose Religion wants light of mature Judgment to direct it, when we join
with our prayer slothfulness and neglect of convenient labor. He which has
said, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask -- has in like sort commanded also
to seek wisdom, to search for understanding as for treasure. To them which did
only crave a seat in the Kingdom of Christ, his answer, as you know, in the
Gospel was this, To sit at my right hand and left hand in the Seat of Glory is
not a matter of common gratuity, but of Divine assignment from God. He liked
better of him which enquired, Lord, what shall I do that I may be saved? and
therefore him he directs the right and ready way, Keep the Commandments.

I noted before unto you certain special qualities belonging unto you that ask:
In them that seek there are the like: which we may observe it is with many as
with them of whom the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.7. They are always learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Ex amore non quaerunt,
says Bernard; they seek because they are curious to know, and not as men
desirous to obey. It was distress and perplexity of mind which made them
inquisitive, of whom St. Luke in the Acts reports, that sought counsel and
advice with urgent solicitation: Men and Brethren, since God has blessed you
with the spirit of Understanding above others, hide not from miserable persons
that which may do them good; give your counsel to them that need and crave it
at your hands, unless we be utterly forlorn: show us, teach us, what we may do
and live. That which our Savior does say of Prayer in the open streets, of
causing Trumpets to be blown before us when we give our Alms, and of making our
Service of God a means to purchase the praise of men, must here be applied to
you, who never seek what they ought, but only when they may be sure to have
store of lookers on. On my bed, says the Canticles, there did I seek whom my
soul does love. When therefore thou resolvest they self to seek, go not out of
thy chamber into the streets, but shun that frequency which distracteth; single
thy self from thy self, if such sequestration may be attained. When though
seek, let the love of obedience, the sense and feeling of thy necessity, the
eye of singleness and sincere meaning guide thy footsteps, and thou can not
slide.

You see what it is to ask and seek; the next is Knock. There is always in
every good thing which we ask, and which we seek, some main wall, some barred
gate, some strong impediment or other objecting it self in the way between us
and home; for removal whereof, the help of stronger hands than our own is
necessary. As therefore asking has relation to the want of good things
desired, and seeking to the natural ordinary means of attainment thereunto; so
knocking is required in regard of hindrances, lets, or impediments, which are
doors shut up against us, till such time as it please the goodness of Almighty
God to set them open. In the mean while our duty here required is to knock.
Many are well contented to ask, and not unwilling to undertake some pains in
seeking; but when once they see impediments which flesh and blood does judge
invincible, their hearts are broken. Israel in Egypt subject to miseries of
intolerable servitude, craved with sighs and tears deliverance from that
estate, which then they were fully persuaded they could not possibly change,
but it must needs be for the better. Being set at liberty to seek the Land
which God has promised unto their Fathers, did not seem tedious or irksome
unto them: This labor and travel they undertook with great alacrity, never
troubled with any doubt, nor dismayed with any fear, till at the length they
came to knock at those brazen gates, the bars whereof, as they have no means,
so they had no hopes to break asunder. Mountains on this hand, and the roaring
Sea before their faces; then all the forces that Egypt could make, coming with
as much rage and fury as could possess the heart of a proud, potent, and cruel
Tyrant: In these straits, at this instant, Oh that we had been so happy as to
die where before we lived a life, though toylsom, yet free from such
extremities as now we are fallen into! Is this the milk and honey that has
been so spoken of? Is this the Paradise, in description whereof so much glosing
and deceiving eloquence has been spent? have we after four hundred and thirty
years left Egypt to come to this? While they are in the midst of their mutinous
cogitations, Moses with all instancy beats, and God with the hand of his
Omnipotency casts open the gates before them, maugre even their own both
infidelity and despair. It was not strange then, nor that they afterward stood
in like repining terms; for till they came to the very brink of the River
Jordan, the least cross accident, which lay at any time in their way, was
evermore unto them a cause of present recidivation and relapse. They having the
Land in their possession, being seated in the heart thereof, and all their
hardest encounters past, Joshua and the better sort of their Governors, who
saw the wonders which God had wrought for the good of that people, had no
sooner ended their days, but first one Tribe, than another, in the end all
delighted in ease; fearful to hazard themselves in following the conduct of
God, weary of passing so many strait and narrow gates, condescended to
ignominious conditions of peace, joined hands with Infidels, forsook him which
had been always the Rock of their Salvation, and so had none to open unto them,
although their occasions of knocking were great afterward, more and greater than
before. Concerning Issachar, the words of Jacob, the Father of all the
Patriarchs, were these; Issachar, though bonny and strong enough unto any
labor, does couch notwithstanding as an Ass under all burdens; He shall think
with himself that rest is good, and the Land pleasant, he shall in these
considerations rather endure the burden and yoke of tribute, than cast himself
into hazard of war, Genesis 49. We are for the most part all of Issachar's
disposition, we account ease cheap, howsoever we buy it. And although we can
happily frame our selves sometimes to ask, or endure for a while to seek; yet
loath we are to follow a course of life, which shall too often hem us about with
those perplexities, the dangers whereof are manifestly great.

But of the Duties here prescribed of asking, seeking, knocking, thus much may
suffice. The Promises follow which God has made.

2. Ask and receive, seek and find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
Promises are made of good things to come; and such, while they are in
expectation, have a kind of painfulness with them; but when the time of
performance and of present fruition comes, it brings joy.

Abraham did somewhat rejoice in that which he saw would come, although knowing
that many Ages and Generations must first pass: Their exultation far greater,
who beheld with their eyes, and embraced in their arms him which had been before
the hope of the whole world. We have found that Messiah, have seen the
salvation; Behold here the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.
These are speeches of men not comforted with the hope of that they desire, but
raped with admiration at the view of enjoyed bliss.

As often therefore as our case is the same with the Prophet David's; or that
experience of God's abundant mercy toward us does wrest from our mouths the
same acknowledgments which it did from his, I called on the Name of the Lord,
and he has rescued his servant: I was in misery and he saved me: Thou Lord
have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling: I have asked and received, sought and found, knocked and it has been
oopened unto me: Can there less be expected at our hands, than to take the Cup
of Salvation, and bless, magnify, and extol the mercies heaped upon the heads
of the sons of men? Ps. 116. Are we in the case of them, who as yet do any ask
and have not received? It is but attendance a small time, we shall rejoice
then; but how? we shall find, but where? it shall be opened, but with what
hand? To all which demands I must

Answer, Use the words of our Savior Christ, quid hoc ad te, what are these
things unto us? Is it for us to be made acquainted with the way he has to
bring his counsel and purposes about? God will not have great things brought to
pass, either altogether without means, or by those means altogether which are
to our seeming probable and likely. Not without means, lest under color of
repose in God we should nourish at any time in in our selves idleness: not by
the mere hability of means gathered together through our own providence, lest
prevailing by helps which the common course of nature yields, we should offer
the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving for whatsoever prey we take to the Nets which our
singers did weave; than which there cannot be to him more intolerable injury
offered Vere and absque dubio, says St. Bernard, hoc quisque est pessimus quo
optimus, si hoc ipsum quo est optimus ascribat sibi; the more blessed, the more
cursed, if we make his graces our own glory, without imputation of all to him;
whatsoever we have we steal, and the multiplication of Gods favors does but
aggravate the crime of our Sacrilege: He knowing how prone we are to
unthankfulness in this kind, tempereth accordingly the means, whereby it is his
pleasure to do us good. This is the reason, why God would neither have Gideon
to conquer without any Army, nor yet to be furnished with too great an host.
This is the cause why, as none of the promises of God do fail, so the most are
in such sort brought to pass, that, if we after consider the circuit, wherein
the steps of his Providence have gone, the due consideration thereof cannot
choose but draw from us the very self same words of astonishment, which the
blessed Apostle has; O the depth of the riches of the wisdom of God! How
unsearchable are his counsels, and his ways past finding out! Let it therefore
content us always to have his word for an absolute warrant; we shall receive
and find in the end; it shall at length be opened unto you: however, or by what
means, leave it to God.

3. Now our Lord groundeth every man's particular assurance touching this point
upon the general Rule and Axiom of his Providence, which has ordained these
effects to flow and issue out of these causes; gifts of suits, finding out of
seeking, help out of knocking; a principle so generally true, that on his part
it never fails.

For why? it is the glory of God to give; his very nature delights in it; his
mercies in the current, through which they would pass, may be dried up, but at
the head they never fail. Men are soon weary both of granting and of hearing
suits, because our own insufficiency makes us still afraid, lest by
benefiting of others we impoverish our selves. We read of large and great
proffers, which Princes in their fond and vainglorious moods have poured forth:
as that of Herod; and the like of Ahasuerus in the Book of Hester. Ask what
thou will, though it reach to the half of my Kingdom, I will give it thee:
which very words of profusion do argue, that the ocean of no estate in this
world does so flow, but it may be emptied. He that promises half of his
Kingdom, foreseeth how that being gone, the remainder is but a a moiety of that
which was. What we give we leave; but what God bestows benefiteth us, and
from him it takes nothing: wherefore in his propositions there are no such
fearful restraints; his terms are general in regard of making, Whatsoever ye
ask the Father in my Name; and general also in respect of persons, whosoever
asks, whosoever seeks. It is true, St. James says, Ye ask, and yet ye
receive not, because you ask amiss; ye crave to the end ye might have to spend
upon your own lusts. The rich man sought Heaven, but it was then, when he felt
Hell. The Virgins knocked in vain, because they overslipped their opportunity;
and when the time was to knock, they slept: But quaerite Dominum dum inveniri
potest, perform these duties in their due time and due sort. Let there, on our
part, be no stop, and the bounty of God we know is such, that he grants over
and above our desires. Saul sought an Ass, and found a Kingdom. Solomon named
wisdom, and God gave Solomon wealth also, by way of surpassing. Thou have
prevented thy servant with blessings, says the Prophet David. He asked life,
and thou gave him long life, even for ever and ever. God a giver; He gives
liberally, and upbraideth none in any wise: And therefore he better knows
than we the best times, and the best means, and the best things, wherein the
good of our Souls consists.

FINIS.

