THREE SERMONS Concerning the Sacred Trinity.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D. Professor of Geometry, in the University of Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, 1691.

TO THE READER.
THE first of the three Sermons here following, is Printed according as it was
Preached in Oxford, in the Year 1664. (accommodated to that time and place;)
but it was, for the Substance of it, Preached in London Twenty Years before
that time. Which I mention to show, that the Construction which I give of the
Words, is not a new forced Notion, just now taken up to serve a turn; or (as
somebody is pleased to call it) Equally New and Cautious: But, what I did, so
long ago, take to be a then received Truth. And, I since find, it is at least
as old as St. Austin's Epist. 174. The other Two are lately added, in pursuance
of some other Discourses lately made public, concerning the Sacred Trinity.
Wherein much of what was said before, scatteringly, (as those who wrote against
it gave occasion;) is now enlarged and put into a little better Order. If what
I have done may be serviceable to the Truth, and to the Church of God: I have
what I did desire, and shall not think the Labor ill bestowed.

A SERMON Preached to the UNIVERSITY of Oxford. December. 27. 1664.
JOH. xvij. 3. (...).

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.


I Need not apologize for the seasonableness of this Text; by telling you, that
the Subject Matter of it, suites well with the great Solemnity, which at this
time we celebrate; and the Penman, with that of the day: Because a Discourse
on such a Subject, can never be unseasonable to a Christian Auditory.
Especially to such as, whose profession being to seek after Knowledge, should
not decline that of God and Christ, the chief of all.

Nor will it be any Exception hereunto:

That it is no news, but well known already: Not only because That there be
many who pretend to know what they do not, or do in effect deny; and That there
be many things, which, though we know well, we have need enough to be minded
of: But even because I do not find that many persons are wont to be displeased
with being often minded of those things wherein they think that either their
Interest or Excellency lies; more than a good Wit when commended, or a fair
Lady with being told she is handsome; even though sometimes (as we are wont to
say) they know it but too well already. And therefore, since to know God and
Christ is both our Interest and our Commendation; it will not, I hope, seem
grievous to any to hear it discoursed of; to the end that those who know it not
may be incited to learn it, and those who know it, may take content in it.

And I shall as little apologize for a plain Discourse on this Subject: Since
it is both my Profession and Practice, to Demonstrate or make things as plain
as I can; not to perplex or make them intricate; which may amuse the Auditors,
or sometimes please or tickle them; but is not wont either to Teach, or
Persuade: like too much of Ornament, which does but disguise the native Beauty;
or too much Trimming, which hides the Cloth.

The words read, are our Savior's Words; addressed to his Father in the behalf
of his Disciples: And are a part of that Prayer with which he closes his large
Exhortation, or Farewel-Sermon to his Disciples, the night before he was to
suffer; of which we have a large rehearsal in the three foregoing Chapters, the
14 th, 15 th, and 16 th: which this 17 th. closes with a Prayer.

He begins his Prayer, with a Petition concerning Eternal Life, which he was to
bestow (according to the Power his Father had granted him) to as many as He had
given him; that is, to as many as should effectually believe in him. To which
Petition he subjoins this Exegetical Epiphonema, And this is life eternal, that
they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

We may consider the words either according to a Synthetic or an Analytic
method, as the Schools speak: The former of which they commonly follow in
Sciences Theoretical; the latter in Practical.

If considered Synthetically; they present us with, First, The Cause, or
Principle; The Knowledge of God and Christ: and, Secondly, The Effect, or
Consequent resulting from it; Eternal Life.

If Analytically; we have in them, First, A glorious End proposed; Eternal
Life: and, Secondly, The Means proportionate thereunto; The Knowledge of God
and Christ.

In the former way, the Result of them is to this purpose; That the excellent
Knowledge of God and Christ, is attended with this most glorious Consequent,
Eternal Life.

In the latter way, it amounts to thus much: That the way or means to Eternal
Life, is the Knowledge of God and Christ.

Nor is it much material, whether of the two ways we take them; Synthetically,
or Analytically: whether we take them as a Theorem; affirming this Effect, of
that Cause: or as a Problem; directing to these Means for such an End.

Yet I choose rather to take them in the latter consideration, (though not
exclusive of the former;) Because, this Epiphonema taking its rise from the
mention made of Eternal Life, in the former verse; (not from a former mention
of the Knowledge of God and Christ;) it seems to be rather intended as a
Direction how to attain Eternal Life; than, an account of the Effect of such a
Knowledge. But, in doing the one, it does the other also.

I shall begin, first, with that which lies first in the order of the word; The
End proposed; or the Effect, or Consequent of this Knowledge; the Happiness
which does attend it: which, for its Excellency, is called Life, and, for its
Duration, Eternal. This is life eternal.

The word Life I take to be here used in a figurative sense; and to import Good
or Happiness: like as, its contrary, Death, especially Death Eternal, to import
Misery.

There is indeed, at least, a threefold Life commonly mentioned; and, in
proportion thereunto, a threefold Death: Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal.

Life Natural, (which is indeed the proper acceptance of the word Life, or the
first signification of it,) is more easily apprehended, than expressed. It
imports that active state or condition which arises from the Union of the Soul
and Body, as well in Man, as in other Animals; (not to mention that of Plants:)
the destruction or want of which, upon the Soul's departure, we call Death.
It Is that, according to which, in common speech, a Man or Beast is said to be
alive or dead.

Now this Life, is, of all natural Goods, looked upon as the chiefest; and
consequently Death the greatest of natural Evils: Because Life is that
foundation or first good, which makes us capable of what else is so: and with
our Life, we lose all the rest. Hence that in Job 2.4. Skin for skin, and all
that a man has, will he give for his life. And that of Solomon; A living Dog
is better than a dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4. For, when Life is gone, there succeeds
an incapacity, not only of Doing, but also of Enjoying Good.

From this consideration it is, that the other significations of the word have
their Original. For Life being looked upon as the greatest natural Good, and
Death as the greatest natural Evil; The one (by a Synechdoche speciei) is
frequently used (both in sacred and profane Authors) to signify Good
indefinitely, especially the greatest Good; and the other, in like manner, to
signify Evil, especially the greatest Evil. The one is put for Happiness, and
the other for Misery.

And then, again, (by a Synechdoche generis) this general notion of Good or
Evil, Happiness or Misery, implied in the words Life and Death, becomes
applicable to this or that particular Good and Evil, as occasion serves.
Suppose the Spiritual Life of Grace, or Death in Sin: And the Eternal Life of
Glory in Heaven, or the Eternal Death of Torment in Hell. Thus, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I
have set before you (says Moses to Israel) life and death, blessing and
cursing: (where Life and Death, are made equivalent to Blessing and Cursing;)
therefore choose life (says he) that thou and thy seed may Live; that is, that
you may be Happy. So at ver. 15. of the same Chapter; I have set before you
(says he) life and good, death and evil. Where Life and Good are put
exegetical each of other, and so Death and Evil. And in the same sense it is
the Poet tells us, Non est Vivere, sed Valere, vita. Thus God to Adam in
Paradise (for it is no new Trope, nor of yesterday) In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall die the death; that is, thou shall become miserable: For we
know that Adam did not the same day die a natural Death; but some hundreds of
years after: but he did that day begin to be in a state of Misery, whereof his
natural Death was but a part. So, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death; where
the comprehension of all the Evils or Misery which sin deserves, or God
inflicteth for it, is called Death: like as on the contrary, all the Happiness,
which the Saints enjoy, is, on the same account, called Life; The gift of God
is eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So here: By Life we understand
Happiness; contrary to which is the Death of Misery: and then (by a Metalepsis,
or double Trope,) that Happiness in special, which the Saints enjoy in Glory
(though not exclusive of what they have before;) and that Misery which in Hell
attends the wicked.

It Is true indeed, that the condition of the Saints in Glory, after the
Resurrection, may, even in a proper sense, be called Life; because of that
Union, which shall then be, of Soul and Body; and the exercise of (at least the
most noble) faculties of Life. Yet do not I take that to be the true import of
the Word here. For though it be true, that the Saints in Glory, have not only
an Union of Soul and Body, but likewise a knowledge or sense of that estate
wherein they are, (which may import not only a Life, but even a Rational Life:)
yet as true it is, that the Damned in Hell have so too; (for their Souls and
Bodies shall not be less United; nor shall they be Insensible of their Woeful
condition:) yet is not that estate of theirs called a Life (though naturally it
be so, and it is their misery that it is so,) but Eternal Death; because a Life
of Woe and Misery; not of Bliss and Happiness: A Living Misery, being, in this
sense, the truest Death.

Secondly, As it is called Life for its Excellency, so, for its Duration, it is
called Eternal.

It is very usual in Scripture, in the use of Allegories, or Figurative
expressions, to add some kind of Epithet to distinguish the word so used from
the same in its native signification: And, when the word is used so as to
express figuratively somewhat more excellent than it self, the Epithet has
somewhat of additional exellency in it. Thus Christ is said to be the Spiritual
rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. the Living Bread, or Manna that came down from Heaven, Joh.
6.50. to distinguish the words, so metaphorically used, from the Rock and Manna
literally spoken of, in the story of their travails in the Wilderness. And the
Church of Christ, as Living stones, become a Spiritual house, and a Holy
priesthood, to offer up Spiritual sacrifices to God, 1 Pet. 2.5. Where the
Epithets serve both for distinction from the material Stones and Temple, the
Levitical Priesthood, and corporeal Sacrifices; and for the commendation or
pre-eminence of those before these. So the new heaven, and the new earth, and
the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.1, 2. Jerusalem that is above, Gal. 4.26. And Matthew.
26.29. I will drink no more (says Christ) of the fruit of the vine, till I
drink it New with you in my Father's kingdom: Not that Christ did intend anew
to drink of such wine in his Father's Kingdom; but of a New wine, another sort
of wine than that commonly so called; to wit, those spiritual Joys in his
Father's Kingdom, which should more refresh their Hearts and Souls, than this
wine did their Bodies. So; I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman,
Joh. 15.1. I am the good shepherd, Joh. 10.11. Not that Christ was more truly a
Vine, in propriety of speech, than that which we so call; or indeed a Shepherd,
who took the care of Sheep: But that there was in Christ somewhat of another
kind much more eminent, than that of the Vine, which did yet in some measure
resemble it; and, a much greater Care, but of another nature, of those he calls
his Flock, than a Shepherd has of his Sheep. So here; This is life eternal:
Not a natural Life, (such as is commonly meant by the word Life,) a life of the
Body, which after a short time is to be exchanged for Death; but a Life, a
Happiness, of another nature; a far more excellent Good than what we call Life,
which does but very imperfectly express it; An Eternal Life.

And this Eternity, as it serves, in general, to distinguish this word Life
from the ordinary acceptance; and does import, for the kind of it, somewhat
much more excellent: So it does particularly point out that Everlasting
Duration of this so great a Happiness. It Is that which, though indeed it have a
Beginning, shall never have an End. And upon this account it is, that it is so
often called Eternal Life, and Life Everlasting; that it were endless to
enumerate the places where it is so called. An eternal inheritance; Heb. 9.15.
2 Cor. 5.1. 1 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 12.28. 2 Cor. 4.17. 1 Cor. 15.53.
A house eternal in the heavens; An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
which fades not away; A kingdom which cannot be moved; An eternal weight of
glory; When our mortal shall have put on immortality.

And this consideration of Eternity, added to that of Life; this everlasting
Duration, to that unspeakable, unimaginable Happiness; renders this Eternal
Life, a perfect Felicity and every way complete. For that Perfection of Degree,
imported in the word Life, can admit of no addition, but that of Perfect
Con^in^ance, which the word Eternal assures us of. Like as, on the other hand,
that perfection of Misery, which attends the wicked, is capable of no greater
Aggravation, than that of Perpetuity: sealed up in that sad expression of a
Living Misery, Eternal Death. You have them both paralleled in Matthew. 25.46.
These shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

I have now done with the first part, the Happiness here proposed; Eternal Life.

Before I come to the s^^ond, The knowledge of God and Christ; it will (...)
requisite to consider, a little, the conne^^^^ of these together, in the word,
Is; This is (...) Eternal. Which is capable of a double ac^^ptation. For it may
be understood either as a Formal, or as a Causal predication. This is life
eternal; that is, Herein consists eternal life. Or else thus; This ^s life
eternal, that is, This is is the way or means, to attain eternal Life.

The former of these is very agreeable to the doctrine of the Schoolmen; who
generally place the Happiness of Heaven in the Beatifick Vision; in the seeing
or knowing of God. Grounded on such places as that of Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. We know but in
part, and we prophecy but in part; but when that which is perfect shall come,
then that which is in part shall be done away: We now see through a glass
darkely, but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know even
as also I am known. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory. 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, (or, when it shall appear)
we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. With others of the like
import. And certainly that Perfection of Knowledge, shall be at least a great
part of that Happiness, which we expect in Heaven; as from these and other the
like places is well collected. So that it is not improperly said, that Eternal
Life does, at least in part, consist in such a knowledge.

Nor is it any sufficient Objection hereunto, to say, That, it is not by
knowledge only, as an Act of the Understanding, that we enjoy God, wherein our
Happiness consists; but by an Act of the Will also, choosing and closing with,
and delighting in him.

For though this be true; yet neither is the Knowledge here spoken of, a bare
Speculative, or Notional Knowledge, wherein the Understanding is alone
concerned: But an Active, Operative Knowledge; such as brings the Will,
Affections, and all the Faculties into a proportionate Conformity thereunto.
And in such a Knowledge of God in the Understanding, attended with such a
Conformity in the Will and other Faculties, it is not to be denied that our
Happiness does consist; even that of Eternal Life.

Yet (without excluding this sense) I take the words here to be rather a Causal
Predication: assigning the way or Means whereby Eternal Life is attained. This
is life eternal, that is, this is the Way to attain Eternal Life; To know thee
the only true God, etc. The knowledge of God and Christ, being the direct way
to attain Eternal Life. Parallel to which, is that of our Savior, Joh. 12.50.
His commandment is life everlasting. And very frequent elsewhere are such
Metonymies of the Effect for the Cause. I am the resurrection, and the life,
says Christ, Joh. 11.25. that is, The Author of it. So Luke 12.15. Man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses; that is, it
does not depend upon it; it is not secured by it: or a Christ elsewhere, Matthew.
4.4. (out of Deuteronomy. 8.3.) Man lives not by bread alone, etc. And Moses,
speaking of their diligent observing the Commands of God, Deuteronomy. 32.47. This is
your life, (says he) and through this thing you shall prolong your days:
(where the latter Clause is enegetical of the former:) just in the same form
with the words here, This is life eternal; that is, hereby they shall attain
eternal Life.

This therefore being the most plain and simple Interpretation of the Words: We
are now to enquire particularly, what that is that Christ here says to be
Eternal Life, or rather the Way thereunto. That they may know thee the only
true God; and, whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

Which contains in brief the Doctrine of the Gospel, or Christian Religion:
Distinguished into two parts, The Knowledge of God, and The Knowledge of Jesus
Christ. Both which are necessary to bring us to Eternal Life.

I shall speak, first, to the former of these two; the Knowledge of God; that
is, of God the Creator and Lord of all; as contradistinguished to that of
Christ the Redeemer. (...), That they might know thee the only true God.

By Thee, or the Person here spoken to, we are to understand God, the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ; (For to him it is manifest, that Christ does here direct
his Prayer:) Yet not so much in his Personal as in his Essential consideration.
For it is not the Personality, but the Essence of the Father, that determines
him to be the only true God.

We have therefore, in the Object of this Knowledge, at least, these Three
Propositions:

I. That there is a God. II. That there is but One (True) God. III. That God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is this God.

I. The First of these strikes at Atheism, or those that deny a God. And that
we know thus much is necessary from that of Heb. 11.6. He that comes unto God,
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently
seek him. (...). He must believe, That there is a God. Nay, he must believe
also somewhat of What he is: Not fancy to himself somewhat under the name of
God, which indeed is not a God; or notions inconsistent with that of a Deity;
as those, Psalm. 50.21. Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self: or the like. For to believe such a false notion of God, is not to believe
a God, but to believe an Idol.

We are next to know, as that there is a God; so, That there is but One God. I
mean; But One True God. For there are indeed, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
8.4, 5, 6. Gods many, and Lords many; that is, there are that are called Gods,
(for so he explains himself) but to us there is but One God; We know, (says
he) that there is no other God but One. And this indeed depends upon the
former. For he that does, according to a true notion of God, know That there is
a God; must needs know also that there is but One. For the true notion of God,
including Infinite, Absolute, Perfect, etc. must needs also include Unity; for
it is inconsistent that there should be many such. So that, in a manner,
Polytheism includes Atheism. He that believes many Gods, does, in effect, not
believe any: that is, not any such Being as of which it is impossible there
should be more than One.

We are, Thirdly, to know, that This God, is that only True God. I say, This
God; whom we have variously designed in Scripture, by several Characters. The
God that made Heaven and Earth: The living God: The God of Israel: The God
whose name is Jehovah: And (as here, and elsewhere frequently in the New
Testament) the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. By which and other the like
Characters, he is distinguished from all false Gods, from all pretended
Deities. This God we are to know to be the only True God.

But, when I say, That the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is this only True
God; I add, That this appertains not so much to his Personality as to his
Essence. For though the three Persons in the Sacred Trinity, be distinguished
each from other by their Personalities, (the Father is not the Son, nor the Son
the Father, etc.) yet they all communicate in the common Essence; whereby the
Son as well as the Father, and the Holy Ghost as either, is this Only True
God. The Person of the Father is indeed True God, but not according to his
Personality, but according to his Essence. And the Person of the Son is God
also, and the True God; yet not another, but the same True God. And the Holy
Ghost likewise. According to that of Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are One: That
is, One mod, though not One Person. And 1 John 5.7. There are Three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are
One. Three, and yet One. Three Persons, yet but One God. They are all this One,
this Only True God; beside whom there is no God.

I know there are some who would be glad to take advantage of this place, to
the Derogation of the Divinity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost. As if it were
here affirmed, That the Father only were True God: and therefore, not the Son,
nor the Holy Ghost.

But the Cavil is obvious, and the Answer easy. It is not said that the Father
Only is True God; but that the Father is the only True God; he is that God
beside whom there is no other True God: which may well enough be said, though
the Son also (as indeed he is) be that same True God; and the Holy Ghost
likewise. Indeed should we say, That the Son were also True God, and another
God; the Father could not then be said to be the Only True God, since that
there would be another True God beside this. (And the like of the Holy Ghost.)
But to say that the Son is the Same True God, is well consistent with it. For
though another Person than the Father be True God, yet, because not Another
God, this One God remains still the Only True God. And the original words are
to this purpose very clear; (...). Where the Article (...) coming before (...),
(not after it) does determine it to be a restriction of the Praedicate, not of
the Subject. It Is not (...), but (...). Not Thee only to be the True God; but
(as we truly render it) Thee to be the only True God. That is; To know Thee to
be that God, beside which God there is no other True God; though another beside
Thee be likewise this only True God; viz. the same God with Thee, though not
the same Person. It excludes only a Plurality of Gods, not a Plurality of
Persons in the same Godhead. It Is true indeed, That this Divinity, is not, in
this place, so directly Affirmed, either of the Son, or the Holy Ghost: But,
neither is it Denied: And therefore it is to receive its decision from other
places where it is affirmed clearly.

And thus much concerning the first branch of this Knowledge, the Knowledge of
God. To know Thee, the only True God.

There is another piece of Knowledge necessary to the attainment of Eternal
Life; the Knowledge of Christ. For so it follows, And Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent.

It Is true, that had we continued in that Estate wherein Man was at first
Created, there had been no necessity of this second branch of Knowledge. For,
had there been no Sin, there had been no need of a Savior: and consequently,
not of this knowledge of Jesus Christ. A knowledge of God, the only True God,
with an Obedience conformable thereunto, had then been enough to make us Happy.
But Man, by his Fall, having contracted an Estate of Misery; there is now no
Restitution to our lost Happiness, but by a Redemption; and there is no
Redemption, but by Jesus Christ. For as there is but One God; so, but One
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Neither is
there any other name given to men, whereby we must be saved, but that of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth; whom they Crucified, and God raised from the dead: (Act.
4.10, 12.) There is no Salvation in any other. It is necessary therefore, to
the attainment of Eternal Life, that we know Him, in this Capacity.

What we are to know concerning him, though we cannot expect, in so few words,
to have clearly set down, without a Comment from other places to give light to
them: Yet at least three things seem in these words to be pointed at; His
Divinity, His Incarnation, and His Mediatory Office.

1. His Divinity; in that he is the Son of God. For he calls him Father, whom
he says we must know to be the only True God. Indeed, were he only the Son of
God in such a sense as Adam is so called, Luke 3.38. or the Angels thought to
be, Job 1.6. that is, by Creation; for as Saints are so called (Romans 8. and
elsewhere,) that is, by Adoption; it would not iner a Divinity. But to be (as
Christ is) the Son of God by Eternal Generation, argues a Communication in the
same Nature. As the Apostle infers, Heb. 1.5. For to which of the Angels said
he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? This only
begotten of the Father, must needs be also of the same nature with the Father;
and therefore, God, as he is.

And this Argument, (however now perhaps there are who endeavor to elude it)
the Jews, his Enemies, thought to be conclusive. For when they observed him to
call God his Father, or pretend himself to be the Son of God; especially, the
Christ the Son of God; they did not understand him to speak in such a sense as
when themselves were commonly wont so to speak (as Joh. 8.41. We are not born
of fornication; we have one Father, even God;) but in such a sense as they
judged Blasphemous, (and had been so indeed, had it not been true;) who
therefore sought the more to kill him, (Joh. 5.18.) because he said, That God
was his Father; making himself Equal with God. And the High Priest (Matthew.
26.65.) rent his Cloths, saying, He speaks Blasphemy, when our Savior
affirmed before him, That he was the Christ, the Son of God. 'Twas manifest
therefore, that he so spoke, and they so understood him, of such a Sonship as
argued a Divinity, a being equal with God.

2. His Humanity, or Incarnation, is pointed at, in these words, whom thou have
sent. For by the Fathers sending him, or his coming into the World, is clearly
meant his being Incarnate, or made Man. As Gal. 4.4. God sent his Son made of a
Woman. And Joh. 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us.

3. His Mediatory Office, is employed as well in the Title Christ, added to his
Name Jesus; as in that of his being sent by God. Jesus the Christ, or Jesus the
Messiah, whom thou have sent. For as his Name Jesus does design the Person; so
the Title Christ, that is Messiah, (that in Greek, answering to this in Hebrew,
and both signifying the Anointed) does import the Office, to which he was
designed, and for which he was sent. For God did not send him, to no purpose;
but sent him for this end, for this Work, 1 Timothy 2.5. Col. 10.20, 21. Romans
5.10, 11. and alibi.
To be the Mediator between God and Man; To reconcile us to the Father; To make
an Atonement or Propitiation for us. To take away the sins of the World; 1 John
2.2. Joh. 1.29. Heb. 9.12, 15.
To obtain Eternal Redemption; To procure an Everlasting Inheritance; a
purchased Possession; To make Intercession for us; To save to the uttermost
those that come unto God by him. Ephesians. 1.14. Heb. 7.25.
Or, as Joh. 3.16, 17. (where all the three Particulars are likewise intimated)
God therefore sent his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

And now, having gone through the whole Text, we might, if time would suffer,
look back upon it to take a new Survey thereof, and collect from thence some of
those particular deductions which might concern our practice. For certainly,
the Knowledge which Christ here declares necessary to Eternal Life, and the
means conducing thereunto, is not a bare Notional knowledge, or a pure
speculative Belief, (such as the Devils may have as well as we; Jam. 2 19.
) but an operative Knowledge, a practical Faith, a Faith fruitful in good
Works; without which those speculative notions will never bring us to Heaven.
And therefore, without engaging in the nice Disputes, of Justification by Faith
alone, or Works concurring thereunto; this is on all hands agreed without
dispute, That Faith without good Works will never justify us. Whatever their
influence be, in Justification; their Presence at least is necessary. Without
Doing, we cannot, in God's account, be reputed either to Believe or Know. Those
that obey him not, are reckoned, in God's account, amongst those that Know not
God: 2 These. 1.8.
at least amongst those who profess they know God, Tit. 1.16.
but do in their works deny him. Who shall be so far, by such a Knowledge, from
obtaining Eternal Life, that Christ shall come in flaming fire to take
vengeance on them, and to punish them with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

In particular: If we know God, to be the only True God; Then must we Love
him, Fear him, Worship him, and Obey him. Nor does the knowledge of Christ, as
Mediator, abate any thing of this Duty. For though he came to take away the
Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
by being made a Curse for us; yet not our Obligation thereunto. He came not to
destroy the Law, Matthew. 5.17.
or make it less obligatory to duty, but to fulfill it. I may add; That, those,
who will not acknowledge themselves under the Obligation of it, have reason to
fear, they be yet under the Curse of it.

Again, If we know Christ whom he has sent; It will be our duty then to
Believe in him; (For it is, Joh. 17.2.
to those only, that Christ does give eternal life.) And, so to Believe in
him, as to Obey him; 2 These. 1.8.
For, to those who obey not the Gospel of his Son, it is, that Christ shall
render vengeance in flaming fire.

Furthermore: If in this Christ we hope to have Eternal Life; how should this
excite our Rejoicing and Thankfulness for so great Salvation! Not by Rioting
and Drunkenness; by Revelling, and Debauchery; (which is the Abuse, not the
Celebration, of this Solemnity, in memory of Christ's Incarnation;) But by a
pious Remembrance and Commemoration of that Redemption obtained for us: such as
may be to the Honor, not the Reproach, of him that came to Redeem us from our
vain Conversation: That, 1 Pet. 1.18. Tit. 2.12, 13, 14.
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live Godly, Righteously, and
Soberly in this present World: Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself, a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory for evermore.

The End of the First Sermon.
A Second SERMON Concerning the TRINITY: TO THE UNIVERSITY of Oxford. April 26.
1691.
JOH. xvij. 3. (...).

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.


IT is now a great many years since, in this Place (if not to this Auditory) I
did discourse of these Words. I shall repeat very little of that Discourse: But
think fit to add somewhat to what was then said.

Our Savior, in the three Chapters next foregoing (the 14 th, 15 th, and 16
th. Chapters of S. John's Gospel) had made a large Discourse to his Disciples
(after his Institution of the Lord's Supper) the night before he was to Die;
which (in this 17 th. Chapter) he closes with a Prayer, to his Father, in
their behalf.

Wherein having made mention of Eternal Life (ver. 2.) which he was to give, to
as many as the Father had given him, (that is, to as many as should ^ffectually
Believe in him;) he subjoins this E^^phonema, And This is Life Eternal, That
they might know Thee, the only True God; and, whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

In which words, we have Two things proposed to us: The Christian's Happiness;
And, The M^ans w^ereby it is to be attained.

I. The C^ristian's Happiness, is called Life, as to its Exc^^^ency: and
Eternal, as to its Duration. Which is Begun here, in the Kingdom of Gra^^: and
is to be Perfected, and for ever Con^inued, in that of Glory.

II. The Means to attain it, is the Knowledge of God and Christ.

Where, by Knowledge, I do not understand a mere Notional or Speculative
Knowledge; (For such I presume the Devils may have in as large a proportion as
any of us, and yet never attain Eternal Life:) But an Active, Practical
Knowledge: Such a Knowledge as is attended with Faith and with Practice
suitable thereunto. As in that of Isa. 53.11. By his Knowledge, (that is, by
the Knowledge of Him) shall my righteous Servant justify many: That is, by
Faith in him, attended with a suitable Practice to it.

The Object of this Knowledge is declared to be twofold. 1. The Knowledge of
God; and 2. The Knowledge of Christ. To know Thee the only True God; that is
one part: And (whom thou have sent) Jesus Christ; that is the other.

And each of these contains several Particulars.

The former of them contains at least these Three. 1. That there is a God. 2.
That there is but One (True) God. 3. That the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
is this Only True God. He is that God, besides which God, there is no other
True God. And, though Jesus Christ be God also; yet not another God, but the
same True God. For He and the Father are One. Joh. 10.30.

In the latter of them (the Knowledge of Christ) are Three things also. 1. His
Divinity. 2. His Humanity. And 3. His Mediatory Office. Which are here briefly
insinuated; and are elsewhere more fully expressed.

1. His Divinity, in that he is the Son of the Father, who is the Only True
God: Not by Creation, as Adam and the Angels are called the Sons of God: nor by
Adoption, as are the Righteous, who truly believe in Christ: But by Generation,
as the Only Begotten of the Father, (Joh. 1.14.) and therefore of the same
Nature with the Father.

2. His Humanity; employed in these words, Whom Thou have sent. That is, So sent
as to be made of a Woman: so sent as to be made Flesh. Gal. 4.4. Joh. 1.14.

3. His Mediatory Office: employed in the Title Christ, added to the Name Jesus,
(And, whom Thou have sent, Jesus Christ.) He was so sent, as to be the Christ,
the Messiah. So sent, as that the World through him might be Saved: So, as that
whosoever Believes in him should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life. Joh.
3.16, 17.

Of all which Points I did then Discourse more largely; and therefore do now
but name them.

But I did then further observe, from the Order of the Words, (to obviate a
Cavil of the Socinians,) that the Word Only ((...)) is here Restrictive, not
of (the Subject) Thee; but of (the Predicate) the True God. Of which I intend
(with God's Assistance, and your Patience) to speak further at this time.

Objection I.
The first and great Objection of the Socinians, from this place, against the
Divinity of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Trinity, is this If the Father be
the only true God; then the Son, or Holy Ghost, is not God, or not the True
God; but the Father only.

To which I shall give Three things in Answer.

1. This Argument is a plain Fallacy; which they put upon us, by a willful
perverting the Order of the Words. For it is not said Thee Only to be the True
God, (as if not the Son also, or the Holy Ghost, were the True God, but the
Father only:) But, to Know Thee (not Thee only, or Only Thee,) to be the
Only true God. Nor is it so in our Englis^ Translation only; but in the
Original Greek: (...). It is not (...), but (...). Where the Article (...)
coming after (...), and before (...), does determine the Restrictive (...), not
to be applied to the Subject (...), but to the Predicate, (...). Just as, in
our English, the Article The, coming between Thee and Only, does confine the
word Only, not to Thee (that went before,) but to True God, which follows. To
know Thee (not only Thee,) the only true God. That is, to know Thee to be
that God, beside which God, there is no other true God. Which we readily
Acknowledge, and Profess.

And then the Socinians Argument will appear just in this Form: The God of
Abraham is the Only true God; And therefore not the God of Isaac, nor the God
of Jacob. Yes, say I; the God of Isaac is the same God with the God of Abraham;
And therefore the True God as he is. And the God of Jacob, likewise.

And this one Answer does fully satisfy the Objection, and there needs no more.
Yet I shall add Two other things (though they might here be spared) because
they may be of use elsewhere.

2. I say further: If it had been said (as it is not) Thee Only; yet even this
would not exclude any who is the same with Him. And therefore, not the Son, nor
the Holy Ghost; since they are One and the same God with Him. (I and the Father
are One, Joh. 10.30. These Three are One, 1 John 5.7.)

To which purpose, consider we what we have Jer. 16.14, 15. and again Jer.
23.7, 8. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that it shall no more be said,
The Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt; But, The Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel from the
land of the North, or out of the North Country. Now we are told by God himself,
Exodus 20.2, 3. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, -- Thou shall have no other God but ME. Shall we therefore argue thus;
The God who brought Israel out of Egypt, is the only true God; and we must
have no other God but HIM. Therefore, not him who brought Israel out of the
North-Country? Yes, say I, Him also. For the God who brought them out of the
North-Country, is the same God, with him who brought them out of Egypt, (not
another God, though designed by another Character,) and therefore, in having
Him, we have not another God. So here; To Know thee only (if it had been so
said, as it is not;) it had implied no more but thus, Not any who is not the
same God with Thee. To Know Thee Only (and not any other, who is not the same
God with Thee) to be the true God. Which therefore would not exclude the Son
nor Holy Ghost, who are the same God with the Father. But of this Answer, there
is no need in this place, because it is not said Thee Only, or only Thee.

3. I say further; If it had been said (as it is not) Thee Only, (as the
Socinians would have it to be understood;) I would then say, This were an
Essential Predication, rather than a Personal. That is, That the Predicate True
God, is affirmed of him in regard of his Essence, rather than of his
Personality. As belonging to the Essence, which is common to the Three Persons,
not as peculiar to the Person of the Father. Like as if it were said, David the
King of Israel, or David the Father of Solomon, is a Reasonable Creature, or
endued with Reason; this being endued with Reason, does not belong to him as
King of Israel, nor as Father of Solomon; but, as he is a Man (though
denominated by these Relations,) and is equivalent to this, The Man (who is
Father of Solomon, and King of Israel) is endued with Reason. So if it be said,
that David King of Israel, and He only, was Father of Solomon: it is not
intended, that he was so as King of Israel (much less, in that capacity Only,)
but rather, as the Man who begot him; though designed by that Character. So
here; God the Creator is the Only True God: and God the Redeemer likewise; (
Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the Lord of Hosts, I
am the First and I am the Last, and beside ME there is no God, Isa. 41.14. Isa.
44.6. applied to Christ, Rev. 1.8, 17. Rev. 22.13, 16.) Shall we therefore
argue, That God the Redeemer is the Only True God, and beside Him there is no
God, therefore not God the Creator? No, we must not so argue. For it is not as
Redeemer, or as Creator, that he is the Only True God, but as God. (It may be
praedicatio (...), but not (...).) For he was the Only True God from all
Eternity; but it was in Time that he made the World, and was the Redeemer of
Mankind.

And this both the Arian, and the Socinian, must needs acknowledge as to the
place before us. For when Christ says, To know Thee (Father) the Only True
God; it cannot (according to their Principles) be said of him as Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but as God. For if Christ be only a Titular God, or a
Creature-God, (as they would have it,) there was a time, or moment, when he was
not, ((...),) and therefore, when God was not his Father. But he was the Only
True God from all Eternity; and therefore must be here so called, not as Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, but as God. Not according to his Personality, but
according to his Essence; which, we say, is common to the Three Persons: Who
are the same God, though under different Denominations.

But these two latter Answers, (though they be True and Solid,) are not
necessary to this place; because it is not said Thee Only. Yet I here name
them, because they may be of use to answer some like Objection raised from some
other place.

The full import of the words, is this, That the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is that God, beside which God, there is no other True God. Or, There is
no other True God, beside that God, which is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this we do fully agree with, when we say, That the Son and the
Holy Ghost, are not another God, but the same True God with the Father.

Objection II.
It may perhaps be next Objected, That though this place do not Deny the Son
and Holy Ghost to be the True God, (meaning thereby, the same God with the
Father:) Yet neither does it Prove them so to be.

I answer. It Is true: This place alone, (without the concurrence of others)
does not Prove the Trinity. (And it is much if it should, where there are but
Two mentioned.) Nor is it brought by us to that purpose. We only Answer the
Objections brought against it by others, from this place: And leave the Proof
of it to be fetched from other places in concurrence with this.

I have observed elsewhere ( Let. 3.) that if we should read it thus, To know
Thee to be the Only True God; and him also whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ,
(as implying him also to be the same True God:) Or thus, To know Thee, and
(whom thou have sent) Jesus Christ, the Only True God: The words will well bear
it, without any force put upon them.

Nor is this only a new Notion of my own. For I (since) find, that S. Austin
had said the same long ago, in his Epist. 174. (speaking to Pascentius, an
Arian, concerning this place) De Patre tantummodo vos vultis intelligi, quod
ait, Ut cognoscant Te unum verum Deum, and, quem misisti Jesum Christum; Ubi
nos subaudimus, etiam Jesum Christum verum Deum: Ut haec sit sententia, Te,
and, quem misisti, Jesum Christum, cognoscant unum verum Deum. Ne illa
consequatur absurditas, ut, si propterea non est verus Deus Jesus Christus,
quia dictum est Patri, Te unum verum Deum: propterea non sit Dominus Pater,
quia dictum est de Christo, Unus Dominus. Where he takes the meaning to be
this, To know Thee, and, whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, the Only True God;
which he backs with this Argument; Because if we should here on this account
exclude the Son from being the True God; we might, for the same reason, exclude
the Father from being the Lord, because it is said (1 Cor. 8.6.) One Lord,
Jesus Christ.

Yet even this, though it might prove it, as to the Son, it would not hence
conclude it, as to the Holy Ghost. But the concurrence of other places, will
prove it more clearly as to both. I shall show it of each.

As to the Son, we have it clearly affirmed, by the same S. John, (who best
understood the import of his own words) that he is also the True God; (so that
it was not intended here to exclude him.) 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is
True, even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the True God* (And therefore not
only the Father.) And he had before told us (from Christ's own words) Joh.
10.30. I and my Father are One.

Nor is it here meant of one in Testimony, as the Socinians would have it
understood elsewhere, (there being in the Context here no mention of Testimony
at all:) But it must be meant of One God. And this is manifest from the
Inference which the Jews made from it. For they did thereupon take up stones to
stone him, as for (what they call) Blasphemy: Because thou (say they) being a
Man, make thy self God, ver. 31, 32, 33. For which Inference there had been
no Pretense, if by One, they had not understood One God.

And the High Priest in like manner, Matthew. 26.63, 64, 65. I adjure thee (says
he) by the Living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of
God; To which when Christ had answered, Thou have said, (dicis quod res est,)
He rent his clothes, saying, He has spoken Blasphemy, What further need have
we of witnesses? For to say that he was the Christ, the Son of God; or (as it
is in Mark 14.61.) The Christ, the Son of the Blessed; was understood by them
to be the same, as to call himself Go^. Which had been Blasphemy, had it not
been True.

And what is said of Christ, Joh. 10.30. I and the Father are One; is said of
all Three, by the same St. John, (^ Joh. 5.7) The Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; th^se Three are One.

Objection III.
It is Objected, that these words, last cited, are said to have been wanting in
some Translations, or some ancient Copies.

Answ. Be it so. And so are some whole Epistles wanting in some Translations.
And considerable parts of some other Chapters. But we are not therefore to cast
them away as not Genuine. The II d. and III d. Epistles of St. John, and that
of Jude, are said to have been wanting in the Syriack and Arabic Translations:
And the Story of the Woman taken in Adultery, Joh. 8. wanting in the Gothic
Gospels: And part of the last Chapter of St. Mark's Gospel, is said to be
wanting in some Books: And the Doxology in the close of the Lord's Prayer: And
the like in diverse others. But we must not thence conclude them not to be
Genuine, and put them out of our Bibles, because they have chanced to be
omitted in some Books.

And it is so far from being strange, that such Omissions should sometimes
happen; that it is very strange (if there were not a great Providence of God to
preserve the Scriptures pure and entire) that there should be no more such
mistakes than what are found. For (before the convenience of Printing was found
out) when Copies were to be singly transcribed one from another, and even those
but in a few hands: 'Twas very possible, (and hardly avoidable,) even for a
diligent Transcriber, sometime to skip a line. Especially, (which is the case
here) when some of the same words do again recur after a line or two; Men are
very subject, both in Writing and Printing, (as those well know who are versed
in either,) to leap from one word, to the same recurring soon after. Nor is
such Omission (when it happens) readily discerned, if (as here) the sense be
not manifestly disturbed by it.

Now when such variety of Copies happens (that words be found in some, which
are wanting in others,) this must either happen by a Casual mis-take, (without
any design of Fraud:) or by a willful Falsification; as to serve a particular
turn; (which I take to be the case of the Papists, Indices Expurgatorii.)

And, as to the words in question; If the difference of Copies happened at
first by a Casual mistake, (as I am apt to think,) it is very easy for a
Transcriber (unawares) to leave out a Line which was in his Copy (especially
where such omission does not manifestly disturb the sense;) but not to put in a
line which was not there. And, in such case, the Fuller Copy is likelyest to be
True, and the Omission to be a Fault. Which happening (as it seems it did) some
hundreds of years ago, in some one Copy; it might easily pass (unobserved) into
many others transcribed thence (and so to others derived from those
Transcripts.) But an Insertion (of what was not in their Copy) must needs be
willful, and not casual.

On the other side; If this variety of Copies were at first from a willful
Falsification; It is much more likely to be a willful Omission of the Arians,
in some of their Copies, (which might be done silently, and unobserved;) than
by a willful Insertion of the Orthodox.

For the Insertion of such a clause, if wholly New, and which had never before
been Heard of; would have been presently detected by the Arians, as soon as
ever it should be urged against them.

Nor was any advantage to be made of it by the Orthodox, since the Divinity of
Christ (which was the Point then in question) might be as strongly urged from
that in St. John's Gospel, I and the Father are One, as from this in his
Epistle, These Three are One. And therefore it is not likely that the Orthodox
should wilfully make any such Falsification, from whence they could promise
themselves no advantage. Nor do I find, it was ever charged upon them by the
ancient Arians in those days: though Athanasius and others urged it against
them. And in very ancient Copies, in which it had been left out, it is found
supplied in the Margin, as having been faultily omitted.

And it is the more likely to be Genuine, because in this clause ( The Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost) the second Person is called sunpliciter, (...),
the Word; which is St. John's Language, both here, and in his Gospel, Joh. 1.
And is (I think) peculiar to him; and not so used by any other of the Holy
Writers of the New Testament.

I do not deny but that this second Person may be called the Word of God, in
Heb. 11.3. By Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of
God. And 2 Pet. 3.5, 7. By the Word of God were the Heavens of old, and the
Earth, etc. and by the same Word they are kept in store. As he is by the same
St. John, Rev. 19.13. His name is called, the Word of God. But to call him the
Word absolutely (without other addition) I think is peculiar to St. John. And
therefore much more likely in this place, to have proceeded from the same Pen,
and not to have been inserted by an Interpolater some hundreds of years after.
And that clause These Three are One, in the Epistle, agreeing so well with I
and the Father are one in the Gospel, is a further confirmation of their being
both from the same Pen.

Add to this, That the Antithesis which we find in the 7 th and 8 th Verses, is
so very Natural; that it is a great Presumption to be Genuine. There are Three
that bear record in Heaven, The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
Three are One: And there are Three that bear witness in Earth, The Spirit, and
the Water, and the Blood, and these Three agree in One. Which as it stands, is
very Natural; but the latter clause would seem lame without the former: and the
words in Earth wholly redundant in the latter, if not by Antithesis to answer
to the words in Heaven, in the former Verse.

And that it was anciently so read, appears from St. Cyprian, by whom it is
twice cited (in his Book De Unitate Ecclesiae, and in his Epistle ad Jubaianum)
before the Arian Controversy was on foot.

In the former place, (arguing for the Church's Unity, not to be broken by
Schisms) he speaks thus. Dicit Dominus, Ego and Pater unum sumus. Et iterum de
Patre and Filio and Spiritu Sancto, scriptum est, Et hi tres unum sunt. Et
quisquam credit hanc Unitatem de divina firmitate venientem, sacramentis
coelestibus cohaerentem, scindi in Ecclesia posse? That is, Our Lord says, I
and the Father are One: And again, of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, It is
Written, These Three are One. And who can believe, that this Unity of the
Church, proceeding from this Firm Union in God, and united by the Heavenly
Sacraments, can be separated in the Church? Where he argues for the Unity of
the Church (not to be divided by Schism) by two Arguments from this place. One
from the firm Unity of God; noted in ver. 7. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are One; from whom this Church proceeds, ( de divina firmitate venientem.) The
other, from their being United by the same Sacraments (sacramentis coelestibus
cohaerentem) which relates to ver. 8. The Spirit, the Water, and the Blood
agree in One. Which double Argument, from the two Verses, show that, then, they
were both read.

And, as to the former of them (which is that in question) He cites it again,
in his Epistola ad Jubaianum; where, disputing against Bapt^sm by Heretics, he
thus argues; Si baptizari quis apud Haereticos potuit; utique and remissam
peccatorum consequi potuit. Si peccatorum remissam consecutus est; and
sanctifica^us est, and templum Dei factus est. Quaero, Cujus Dei? Si Creatoris;
non potuit, qui in eum non credidit. Si Christi; nec hujus potuit fieri
templum, qui negat Deum Christum. Si Spiritus Sancti; [cum tres Unum sint,]
quomodo Spiritus Sanctus placatus esse ei potest, qui aut Patris aut Fi^ii
inimicus est? That is; If by Heretics one could be baptized; then he might
obtain remission of sins: If he obtain remission of sins, then is he
sanctified, and become the Temple of God. I ask then, of What God? Of the
Creator? that he cannot be, who did not in Him believe. Of Christ? Neither can
he be His Temple, who denies Christ to be God. Of the Holy Ghost? No. For,
seeing these Three are One, How can the Holy Ghost be at Peace with him who is
at Enmity with either the Father or the Son?

It Is manifest therefore that, These Three are One, was thus read in Cyprian's
time; as being by him twice cited, before the Arian Controversy was on foot.

And (before him) it is cited by Tertullian, in his Book adversus Praxeam, cap.
25. Connexus Patris in Filio, and Filii in Paracleto, tres efficit cohaerentes,
alterum ex altero: qui Tres Unum sunt, ( non Unus:) quomodo dictum est, Ego and
Pater Unum sumus; ad Substantiae Unitatem, non ad Numeri Singularitatem. Where
he does not only cite the place, but does likewise Parallel and Compare, These
Three are One, (in this place) with I and the Father are One, (in the other
place) as being of a like import. That is, The Connection of the Father with the
Son, and of the Son with the Paraclete or Holy Ghost, makes these coherent one
with the other: Which Three are ONE, (Unum not Unus, One Thing, not One
Person;) like as it is said, I and the Father are One, (one Thing) as to the
Unity of Substance, though not as to Singularity of Number. They are One Being,
One Substance, though otherwise they may be Three.

It Is therefore no New Interpolation; but was anciently so read by Cyprian and
Tertullian (the two most ancient of the Latin Fathers) long before the Arian
Controversy was on foot. And has been urged by others afterward, against the
Arians.

Nor is there any prejudice (that I know of) against its being so read as now
we read it, save that some of the Fathers (it is said) have omitted to Urge it
against the Arians, when there has been occasion of so doing.

But this (beside that it is only a Negative Argument, and I know not how well
grounded) might very well happen, if it chanced to be wanting in that
particular Copy which such Father used. (For we are not to suppose they had
then such plenty of Bibles as are now in our hands; but some one Manuscript
Copy was to serve many.) And because that in St. John's Gospel, I and the
Father are One, did fit their purpose as well, or rather better, than this in
his Epistle, These Three are One. For the Controversy, then on foot, was not
so much that of the Trinity, as that of the Divinity of Christ.

To return, therefore, to the place which is before us; From what has been
said, it is manifest enough, that St. John, in calling the Father, the Only
True God, did not intend to exclude the Son, from being the same True God; whom
himself does elsewhere call the True God also, 1 John 5.20.

No more (I say) than what is said, by name, of God the Redeemer (Isa. 44.6,
8.) is to be thought exclusive of God the Creator, or God the Father; Thus
says the Lord, the REDEEMER, the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the
last, and beside ME there is no God. Which is applied to Christ in particular,
Rev. 22.1^, 16. But is not exclusive of the Father; because God the Creator (or
God the Father) is the same God with God the Redeemer, and therefore not
another God beside him. And therefore both of them (or rather, the same God
under both Considerations) indifferently called (especially in the Old
Testament) God indefinitely, the Lord of Hosts, the Holy One of Israel.

Nor is that which is said of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, who Only has Immortality, intended to exclude the Father; as if the
Father were not also Immortal, or were not (what is there said of Christ) the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords. But
only, that our Lord Jesus Christ, is that God, which (God) is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and who only has
Immortality.

And (as was before noted by S. Austin.) The Father is not excluded from being
Lord, notwithstanding that of 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but One God, the
Father; and One Lord Jesus Christ: or that of Ephesians. 4.5, 6. One Lord, one Faith,
One Baptism, one God and Father of all. For the Father, and the Son, are the
same God, the same Lord. The same of whom it is said, Isa. 45.5. I am the Lord
and there is none else, there is no God beside me. And again, ver. 6. I am the
Lord and there is none else. Where note, that the Word Father, in that phrase,
God and Father of All, is different from the sense of it, in the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: that relating to the common Nature; this to the Person.

And as in these places, what is sa^d of the Son, (that he only has
Immortality, that he is the only Potentate, that he is the One Lord, that
beside him, the Redeemer, there is no God,) are not to be understood exclusive
of the Father; so what is here said of the Father, (that he is the Only True
God) is not to be understood exclusive of the Son; who is not another, but the
same True God.

I thought here to have inserted (as in a proper place) a Discourse of some
other Points relating to the Trinity; which I find it necessary here to omit
(or to defer it to some other occasion) that I be not prevented by the time in
what I have to say further.

That there is a God the Creator, a God the Redeemer, and a God the Sanctifier;
and that these are the same God; I think cannot reasonably be Denied. I shall
show it of each.

As to God the Creator, we are told, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God Created the
Heaven and the Earth. (And, to the same purpose, in many other places.) And, I
think, there is none doubts, but that this Creator, is the True God, the
Supreme God. And in Jer. 10.11. God does by this Character distinguish himself
from all other (pretended) Gods, The Gods that have not made the Heavens and
the Earth, they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens.

As to God the Redeemer; I know that my Redeemer lives, says Job, Chapter 19.25.
By which Redeemer doubtless he meant the Living God, a God who did then Live; a
God who was, then, in Being, and not (as the Socinians would have us think) who
was not to Be, till Two Thousand years after. And Isa. 44.6. Thus says the
Lord the Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, I am the first and I am the last, and
beside Me there is no God. Which Redeeme^, must needs be the same God, with God
the Creator, the Lord of Hosts.

As to God the Sanctifier; Purge me with hyssop (says David) and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow: Create in me a clean heart, O
God; and renew a right spirit within me, (Psalm. 51.7, 10.) Which certainly are
works of Sanctification; and the God, to whom David prayed, is doubtless the
Living God, a God then in Being. And when God promises ^o Israel, I will give
them a hear^ to k^ow me; and they shall return unto me with their whole heart,
Jer. 24.7. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for
ever; I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me,
Jer. 32.39, 40. I will give them one heart, and put a new spirit within them; I
will take away the heart of stone and give them a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and 36.26. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, Jer. 31.33. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live, Deuteronomy. 30.6. All these are sanctifying works; and
that God who does them, is God the Sanctifier And it is the same God, who does
thus Sanctify, that is the Creator and the Redeemer.

Now this God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, I take to
be the same with what we otherwise call, God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost. And our Church does so expound it in her Catechism; First, I
learn to believe in God the Father, who has Made me and all the World:
Secondly, In God the Son, who has Redeemed me and all Mankind: Thirdly, In God
the Holy Ghost, who Sanctifies me and all the Elect people of God. And it is
no more absurd or inconsistent, to say, that God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, are the same God; than to say, that God the Creator, God
the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, are the same God.

As they stand related to us, they are called God the Creator, God the
Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier. As to the different Economy, amongst
themselves, one is called the Father, who is said to Beget; another the Son,
who is said to be Begotten; a third, the Holy Ghost, who is said to Proceed or
Come forth; But are all the same God.

Objection IV.
But then here I meet with another Objection, on which the Socinians lay great
weight. If God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, or God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be the same God, they cannot
then be Three Persons: And if they be Three Persons, they must be Three Gods.
For like as Three Persons, amongst Men, does signify Three Men; so Three
Persons, who are God, must be Three Gods. Contrary to the First Commandment,
which allows us to have but One God.

To which I answer; First, This is only to cavil at a Word, when they have
nothing of moment against the Thing. So that if in^^ead of saying ^hese Three
Persons are One God, we say, These Three are One God, or give them another Name
instead of Persons, or say these Three Somewhats, without giving them a Name,
this Objection is at an end.

2. I say further; It Is very true, that, in our English Tongue, by another
Person, we sometimes understand another Man, (because that other Person is,
very often, another Man also.) But it is not always so; nor is that the proper
Signification of the Word; but an Abusive sense put upon it.

And the reason of using the word Person in this abusive or improper sense; is,
for want of an English word to answer the Latin word Homo, or the Greek (...),
which might indifferently relate to both Sexes.

For the word Man does properly relate to the Male, and Woman to the Female.
And if the word Man be sometimes so used as to imply the Woman also; it is (by
a Synecdoche) putting the Name of One Sex, to signify Both. And it is for want
of such a Word (which might indifferently relate to both Sexes) that we
sometime make use of Person in a borrowed sense, rather than to use a
Circumlocution of Man and Woman, by naming both Sexes.

And if we should use such Circumlocution of Man and Woman; yet even this would
not reach the whole Species. For we do not use to call them Man and Woman, till
they be of a considerable Age; before which time they are called Children; and
therefore to comprehend the whole Species, we say, Man, Woman, and Child.

We do indeed, sometimes, to that purpose, make use of the word Mankind,
(adding the word kind to that of Man, to Ampliate the Signification of it.) But
this relates only to Genus Humanum in a Collective sense; not to Homines taken
Distributively. For we do not say a Mankind, two Mankinds, etc, as we say Homo,
Homines.

We are fain, therefore, for want of a proper English word, to make use of
Person in a borrowed sense to answer the Latin Homo.

But the Ancient Fathers, who first applied the word Persona to the Sacred
Trinity, did not speak English. And therefore we cannot, from the present use
of the word Person in our Language, conclude in what sense they used the word
Persona.

3. Again; the Schoolmen in later Ages, have yet put another sense on the word
Persona, peculiar to themselves; extending it indifferently to Men and Angels;
(for want of a proper word of that Extent;) so as to signify (with them) what
they call Suppositum Rationale, or what we call a Reasonable Creature. (And, in
imitation of them, some others have since so used it.) But this is a New sense,
of later Ages, since the time of those Fathers, (nor do the Schoolmen, in this
sense, without a Metaphor, apply it to the Sacred Trinity.) We cannot therefore
conclude from hence, What was the Fathers sense of it.

4. To find out therefore the true sense of the word Person as applied to the
Trinity; we are not so much to consider, what nowadays the word does sometime
signify with us in English; nor what sense the Schoolmen have put upon it
since the time of those Fathers: As, what was the true sense of the word
Persona, at or before their times, in approved Latin Authors. Which is quite
another thing from either of these senses.

For what in English we sometimes mean by Three Persons (taken indifferently
for Men, Women, and Children,) the Latins would not have called tres Personas,
but tres Homines: Though, if considered in such Relations, as Father, Mother,
and Child, they might so be called tres Personae.

Nor do I find that in approved Latin Authors, the word Persona was wont to be
attributed by them (as by the Schoolmen it has since been) to Angels; nor to
their Genii, or Heathen Gods.

But, 5. It did signify the State, Quality, or Condition of a Man, as he
stands Related to other Men. (And so I find the Latin word Persona Englished in
our Dictionaries.) Suppose, as a King, a Subject, a Father, a Son, a Neighbor,
a Public or Private Person, a Person of Honor, and the like. And so, as the
Condition varied, the Person varied also, though the same Man remained. As if
an ordinary Person, be first made a Knight, and then a Lord; the Person or
Condition is varied, but he is still the same Man that he was before. And he
that is this Year, a Lord Mayor, may be, next Year, but an Alderman, or not so
much.

Hence are those Latin Phrases, frequent in approved Authors; Personam
imponere (to put a Man into an Office, or confer a Dignity upon him;) Induere
personam (to take upon him the Office;) Sustinere personam (to Bear an Office,
or Execute an Office;) Deponere personam (to Resign the Office, or lay it
down;) so, Agere personam (to Act a Person,) and many the like.

So that there is nothing of Contradiction, nothing of Inconsistence, nothing
Absurd or Strange in it, for the same Man to sustain diverse Persons, (either
successively, or at the same Time;) or diverse Persons to meet in the same Man;
according to the true and proper Notion of the word Person. A Man may, at the
same time, sustain the Person of a King, and of a Father, if invested with
Regal and Paternal Authority; (and these Authorities may be Subordinate one to
another;) and he may accordingly Act sometime as a King, and sometime as a
Father. Thus Tully, (who well understood the Propriety of Latin words) Sustineo
Unus tres Personas; meam, Adversarii, Judicis, (I being One and the same Man,
sustain Three Persons; That of my Own, that of my Adversary, and that of the
Judge.) And David was, at the same time, Son of Jesse, Father of Solomon, and
King of Israel.

And this takes away the very Foundation of their Objection; Which proceeds
upon this Mistake, as if Three Persons (in a proper sense) must needs imply
Three Men.

6. Now if Three Persons (in the proper sense of the word Person) may be One
Man; what hinders but that Three Divine Persons (in a sense Metaphorical) may
be One God? What hinders but that the same God, considered as the Maker and
Sovereign of all the World, may be God the Creator, or God the Father; and the
same God considered, as to his special Care of Mankind, as the Ruthour of our
Redemption, be God the Redeemer, or God the Son; and the same God, as working
effectually on the Hearts of his Elect, be God the Sanctifier, or God the
Holy Ghost?

And what hinders but that the same God, distinguished according to these three
Considerations, may fitly be said to be Three Persons? Or (if the word Person
do not please) Three Somewhats that are but One God?

And this seems to me a Full and Clear Solution of that Objection, which they
would have to be thought Insuperable.

Objection V.
It may perhaps be Objected further, Why must we needs make use of the word
Person; and call them Three Persons, if Three Somewhats will serve as well?

I answer, First, We have no such need of the word Person, but that we can
spare it. Hypostasis will serve our turn as well. And if they think the Latin
word Persona, be not a good Translation of the Greek Hypostasis; Let them
retain the Greek word. (We mean the same by both.) And then perhaps they will
find themselves at a loss, to fasten some of their Objections upon the word
Hypostasis, which they would fasten upon Persona.

2. But, Secondly, If the Thing be thus far agreed, That these Three Somewhats
(thus considered) may be One God: I see not why they should contend with us
about the Name Person. For this is only to quarrel about a Word, or Name, when
the Notion is agreed.

3. If it were admitted (which I see no reason for) that the word Person does
not fitly express that Notion which it is intended to design; the most that can
be inferred from it, is but, That we have not given it so fit a Name: And, to
cavil at that, when the Notion intended by it is understood; were just as if
one should argue, There never was such a Man, as whom they called Pope Pius;
because the Man, who was so called, was not a Pious Man.

4. But I see not why the word Person should not be thought a very fit word for
this purpose.

For Two of these Three are represented to us in Scripture under the Names of
Father and Son; and this Son as Begotten of the Father; (and therefore these
Names are not to be quarrelled with:) But all this in a Metaphorical sense;
(For no Man can suppose, that this Father does so Beget this Son, as these
words do properly signify amongst Men).

Now the Relations of Father and Son, in a proper sense, are such as are
properly denoted by the word Persona, in its proper Acceptance.

And consequently the Father and Son, in a Metaphorical sense, may (by a
Continuation of the same Metaphor) be fitly called Persons, in that
Metaphorical sense. And in what sense they be Father and Son, in a like sense
they be Persons, according to the Propriety of the Latin word Persona. For such
Relatives the Latins called Personas.

And if the Father and Son may fitly be so called; no doubt but the Holy Ghost
may be so called also, as One Proceeding or Coming forth ((...)) from them. As
in Joh. 14.26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in My name, he will teach you all things. And Joh. 15.26. The Comforter,
whom I will send you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which
proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of Me. Where it is manifest,
that, in what sense the Father and Son are to be reputed Persons; the Comforter
or Holy Ghost, is, in the same sense, so to be reputed.

So that (I think) I have clearly Vindicated, not only the Notion, That these
Three Somewhats may be One God; But the Name also, That these Somewhats, may
fitly be called Persons.

Objection VI.
I shall name but one Objection more, which when I have satisfied, I shall
conclude for this time.

That 6 th. Objection (and it is but a weak one) is this. The Trinitarians do
not all agree, but differ among themselves, in expressing their Notions in this
Matter.

Very well. And do not the Antitrinitarians differ much more? Does not the
Arian and the Socinian differ as much from one another, as either of them do
from us; (and declare that they so do?) And do not the Arians among themselves,
and the Socinians amongst themselves, differ more than do the Trinitarians?
Certainly they do.

It must be confessed, that different Men, as well in the same as in different
Ages, have very differently expressed themselves, according to their different
Sentiments of Personality; and of the particular Distinctions of the three
Persons among themselves.

But so it is in all the most obvious things in the world. As, in Time, Place,
Space, Motion, and the like. We are all apt to think, that we all know well
enough, what we mean by those Words, till we be asked. But if we be put to it,
to express our selves concerning any of them, What it is, whether a Thing, or
Nothing, or not a Thing, or somewhat of a Thing, and what that somewhat is; it
would be long enough before we should all agree to express our selves just in
the same manner; and, so clearly, as that no man who has a mind to cavil,
could find occasion so to do. I might say the like of Heat and Cold; of Light,
Sight, and Color; of Smells, and T^sts, and the different Sorts of them.

Can we never be s^id to agree in this, That the Fire does Burn and Consume the
Woo^; till we be all agreed what is the Figure of those Fiery Atoms (and what
their Motion, and from what Impulse) which enter the Pores of ^he Wood, and
separate its parts, and convert some of them to Smoke, some to Flame, and ^^me
to Ashes; and which to which; and in what manner all this is done?

What a folly then is it to require that, in the things of God, we should all
so agree as to express our thoughts just in the same manner; as is not possible
to do in the most obvious things we meet with?

And, in such a case as wherein to express our Notions, we have no Words but
Figurative, it is not to be thought strange, that one man should make use of
one Metaphor, and another of another, according as their several Fancies serve.

But thus far, I think, the Orthodox are all agreed; That between these Three,
which the Scripture calls The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, there is a D^stinction, greater than that of
(what we call) the Divine Attributes; but not so as to be Three Gods. And this
Distinction, they have thought fit to denote by the Word Hypostasis, or Person.

They are also all agreed; that one of these Persons (namely the Son or the
Word) was Incarnate, or Made Flesh, and did take to himself our Humane Nature.

But as to the particular Modes, or Manner How; either how these two Natures
are United, or how these three Persons are Distinguished each from other: we
may be content to be Ignorant, farther than God has been pleased to Reveal to
us.

We know that our Immortal Soul is joined with an Humane Body, so as to make
One Man (without ceasing, that to be a Spirit, and this to be a Body:) But it is
hard for us to say How. And accordingly we say, that the Man Christ Jesus,
(without ceasing to be Man,) and God manifested in the Flesh, (without ceasing
to be God,) are One Christ: But what kind of Union this is, which we call
Hypostatical, we do not thoroughly understand. We know also that the Father is
said to Beget, the Son to be Begotten, the Holy Ghost to Proceed: But neither
do we fully understand the import of these Words; nor is it needful that we
should. But, so far as was said before, we do all agree; and we may safely rest
there.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; three Persons, but
One God; be Honor, and Glory, and Praise, now and for ever. The End of the
Second Sermon.
A Third SERMON Concerning the TRINITY.
JOH. xvij. 3. (...).

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.


I Have, in a former Discourse from this Verse, entered upon the Doctrine of
the Trinity; not so much, as being contained in it, as occasioned by it.

I have showed that the word Only is here restrictive, not of the Subject
Thee, but of the Predicate True God. Affirming the Father to be the Only True
God, though not the Father Only. Nor is it exclusive of the Son, who is also
the same True God; and is so expressly called, by this same Writer, 1 John 5.20.
where (speaking of Jesus Christ) he says, This is the True God, and Eternal
Life; as if it were spoken with a direct aspect to the words before us.

Now that Christ is often called God, neither the Arians nor the Socinians do
deny. And it is so frequent, and so evident, as not to be denied. Not only in
the place last cited, but in many others. Thy throne, O God endures for ever,
Heb. 1.8. The Word was with God, and the Word was God. Joh. 1.1. My Lord and my
God. Joh. 20.28. The Being over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. (Or, the
Supreme Being, the ever blessed God. Romans 9.5.) And elsewhere.

Objection VII.
But to this they Object, That though he be sometime called God; yet by God is
not there meant the Supreme God: But either a mere Titular God, as the
Socinians will have it; (as one of the (...), 1 Cor. 8.5. one who is called
God, but indeed is not, but a mere Man however highly dignified.) Or (as the
Arians will have it) that he is God indeed, but not the Supreme God, not the
same God with the Father, but an Inferior God, ( Deus factus) a made-God, a
Creature-God; who was indeed before the World, but not from Eternity, (...),
there was (a Time, a Moment, a Quando) when he was not, when he had not a Being.

In Answer to both which; I shall endeavor to show, (by the most signal
Characters, whereby the Supreme God, the Only true God, is set forth to us in
Scripture; and by which he is therein Distinguished from all false Gods, or
other pretended Gods;) that Christ is the True God, the Supreme God, the same
God with the Father, and not another God.

CHARACTER I.
The first Character, which we meet with, of this God, is that of Genesis 1.1. In
the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. Which I think no man doubts
but to be meant of the True God, the Supreme God. And by virtue of this, he
claims the Sovereignty thereof; The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness
thereof, Psalm. 24.1. Jehovah, the Lord of all the Earth, Josh. 3.11, 13. The
God of the Heaven, and the God of the Earth, Genesis 24.3. The Heaven is my
Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, Isa. 66.1. Behold the Heaven, and the
Heaven of Heavens, is the Lord's, the Earth also, and all that is therein,
Deuteronomy. 10.14.

The same Character is applied to God very often, Isa. 42.5, 8. Thus says God
the Lord (Jehovah) he that created the Heavens and stretched them out; he that
spread forth the Earth and that which comes out of it; he that gives breath
unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. I am the Lord
(Jehovah) that is my name, and my Glory will I not give unto another. And Isa.
48.13. Mine hand has laid the foundation of the Earth, and my right hand has
spanned (or spread out) the Heavens. So Psalm. 8.3. When I consider the Heavens,
the work of Thy fingers; the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained. Psalm.
146.6. Which made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is. And many
other places, not only in the Old Testament; but in the New Testament likewise;
as Acts 14.15. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the Living God, who
made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and all things that are therein. And Acts
17.24. God that made the World, and all things therein. So Revel. 4.11. Thou
have created all things. Chap. 14.7. Him that made Heaven and Earth, and the
Sea, and the Fountains of Water.

And it is the distinctive Character, whereby he does distinguish himself from
all other pretended Gods, Jer. 10. Where he who at ver. 10. is called The Lord,
the true God, the living God, an everlasting King, at who is wrath the Earth
shall tremble, and the Nations shall not abide his indignation; does at ver.
11. give this defiance to all other Gods, Thus shall ye say to them; The Gods
which have not made the Heavens and the Earth, they shall perish from the
Earth, and from under these Heavens.

Now this Character we find ascribed to Christ. Not only, where it is spoken as
of God indefinitely, but to be understood of Christ; (as are some of the places
already mentioned:) But even where it is particularly applied to him.

I shall begin with that of Joh. 1.1, 2. where we have a large Discourse of
him, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. Where, by the Word is meant Christ, as is evident from the further
descriptions of him in the following verses; It Is he of whom John the Baptist
came to bear witness, ver. 7, 8. He who came into the World, but the World knew
him not. ver. 10. Who came to his own, but his own received him not; but to as
many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God. ver. 11.12. Who
was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory; the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father. ver. 14. He of whom John bare witness and
cried, saying, This is he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is preferred
before (...) ^or he was before me; (not as to his Humane Nature; for so, John
the Baptist was older than he, by six months, Luke 1.26.) and of his fullness
(says St. John) we have all received grace for grace; For the Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, ver. 15, 16, 17. 'Twas Jesus
Christ therefore that is here called the Word.

Now of this same Word, it is said, The same was in the beginning with God; All
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made which was made,
ver. 2, 3. He was in the World, and the World was made by him, ver. 10.
Consonant to that of Heb. 11.3. The Worlds we refrmed by the Word of God: and 2
Pet. 3.5. By the Word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing in
the Water and out of the Water. And by the same Word, the heavens and earth are
kept in store, or preserved, ver. 7.

And to the same purpose, Col. 1.16, 17. By him were all things created, that
are in heaven, and that are in earth. And he is before all things, and by him
all things consist. And Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the Worlds.

In Psalm. 102. we have a long Prayer (to the Supreme God doubtless) which bears
this title, A Prayer of the Afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out
his complaint before the Lord, (the Lord Jehovah.) It begins thus, Hear my
Prayer, O Lord, (Jehovah) and let my cry come unto thee. And at the same rate
he proceeds, addressing himself to the same God all along. And at ver. 24, 25,
26, 27. he speaks thus, O my God, thy years are throughout all Generations;
Thou of old have laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the
work of thy hands; (who is the same God therefore of whom Moses had before
said, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, Genesis 1.1.) They
shall perish (as the Psalmist proceeds) but thou shall endure: Yea all of them
shall wax old as a Garment, as a vesture shall thou change them and they shall
be changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. And
doubtless the Psalmist, when he made this long Prayer, thought not of
addressing himself to any other than the Supreme God. (Not to a God who had
not, then, a Being, nor was to have till a Thousand Years after, as the
Socinians would have us think of Christ.) He prays to God as his Redeemer; that
is, to Christ.

And that Christ is that God to whom he did thus address, we are expressly told,
Heb. 1.8, 10, 11, 12. But unto the Son he says, -- Thou, Lord, in the
beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Works
of thine hands; They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall wax
old as does a Garment, and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall
be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. All which is
plainly cited from that Psalm. Christ therefore is that God to whom that Prayer
was made; the same Supreme God, who created the Heaven and the Earth: even
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to day and for ever, Heb. 13.8.

And it is very frequent in Scripture, that what in one place is spoken of God
Indefinitly (without specification of this or that Person) is elsewhere applied
to one or other of the Persons in particular, as that of the Creation is here
to Christ, the Redeemer; as being the same God who is the Creator also. And
that of Redemption, to God the Creator (who is the Redeemer also) Isai. 43.1.
Thus says the LORD (Jehovah) that Created thee, -- Fear not, for I have
Redeemed thee. So that God the Creator, and God the Redeemer, are the same God.

CHARACTER II.
The next Character I shall insist upon, is that whereby God denotes himself to
Moses, Exodus 3.13, 14, 15. I Am that I AM; and I AM has sent me unto you. When
God was sending Moses to the Children of Israel, in order to their deliverance
out of Egypt, Moses puts this Question, When I come to the Children of Israel,
and shall say them, The God of your Fathers has sent me unto you; and they
shall say, What is his Name? What shall I say to them? It Is certainly,
therefore the True God, that is here spoken of: Let us see what is the
Character that this God gives of himself. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I
AM: And he said, Thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel, I AM has sent
me unto you. This therefore is a proper Character of the True God. I am that I
am, (Ehjeh asher Ehjeh,) or I am, who AM; or I am, He who AM, so the vulgar
Latin; (Ego sum QVI SVM;) and (QUI EST) He that IS, has sent me: As if, what
God says of himself (in the first Person) I that AM, were proper for Moses to
say of him (in the third person) He that IS. And so the Septuagint, (...), I
am, He that AM, or He that IS; and (...) (He that IS) has sent me. Where
simply TO BE, is made a Distinctive Character of God, as he whose Essence is To
be; and it is Impossible for him Not to Be. Who IS of Himself (or rather
Himself IS) without deriving ought from any other; and from whom all other
Beings, have their Being. Who gives to all, life and breath and all things; In
whom we live and move and have our Being, Act. 17.27, 28. Who has first given
to him? that is, None has: He receives nothing (aliunde) from ought else; but
of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.35, 36. who is
therefore called (...).

The same notion the Heathens also had of the Supreme God. Hence Aristotle
calls him (...), the Being of Beings; and Plato (...), the self Being; who
himself IS, and gives Being to all else.

And (being thus self-existent) he must be also a Necessary Being (Ens
Necessarium) and Eternal, (for if ever he had not been, it were impossible he
should ever Be; for how could Nothing make it self to be:) and likewise
Infinite (as the Source of all Being.) All which the Heathen acknowledged (as
consonant to Natural Light) as well as We.

Now this same Character I Am, or (...) (which is the word whereby the Greek
Septuagint does here render the Hebrew word Ehjeh, which we translate I AM)
that is I who AM, or He who IS, we find signally applied to Christ, Romans 9.5.
He that IS. For what there we render, Who IS, in the Greek is not (...), but
(...), He that IS, or the Being: With this addition, over all; (the Being, over
all, or the Supreme Being:) with this further Character, God Blessed for ever;
(or the ever blessed God.) Amen.

Where it is not amiss to note, that the Blessed ((...)) was an usual Title
whereby they were wont to design the True God. And accordingly, that question
which Caiaphas the High Priest, puts to our Savior, Mat. 26.63. I adjure thee
by the Living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ, the Son of
God; is in Mark 19.53. Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed, (...).
Where no man doubts but that by (...), is meant, the Supreme God. And when
Christ is here called, (...), (the Supreme Being, the ever-Blessed God;) with
the Solemn note of Asseveration, Amen: It is certainly too August a Title for
any less than the Supreme God, the Only God.

The same Character we have of him again, Rev. 1.8. where we have not only the
Title (...), importing his Being, but the additional intimation of his
Eternity, through all the variety of continued Duration, past, present, and to
come.

Where we are to observe, that at ver. 4. we have this Character of God
^ndefinitely, without restriction to this or that Person in the Deity, (as
appears by its being contradistinct to Christ personally considered, ver. 5.)
Grace be unto you and peace, ((...)) from him which Is, and which Was, and
which is to come, -- and from Jesus Christ, etc.

Where it is manifest from the unusual construction, (...) etc. that the Title
(...), (who is and was, and shall be) is taken, (...), as the Grammarians
speak, (as one undeclined-Substantive joined with the Article (...)) as being
(all together) one joint title of God, Indefinitely taken, (because of that
contradistinction which follows; And from Jesus Christ;) and with particular
respect (as the Margin of our Bible directs) to that of Exodus 3.14. (...), I am
(...), or He who AM; and can relate to none but the Supreme God.

Now what is thus said of this God indefinitely, at ver. 4. is again repeated
of Christ in particular at ver. 8. (with a further addition of Omnipotence,) I
am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending (the First and the Last) says
the Lord, which Is, and which Was, and which is to Come; the Almighty. So that
he is here designed, not only by his Absolute Being; but by his Eternity also,
through all variety of continued duration, (past, present, and future;) who Is,
and Was, and shall Be; who was the First (before whom nothing was) and the Last
(after whom nothing shall be;) and, by his Omnipotence, the Almighty.

The same title of Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, is given him in
diverse other places; as at ver. 11, and 17. of the same Chapter, I am Alpha and
Omega, the First and the Last; I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore, Amen. And Rev. 2.8. The first and the last, which was
dead and is alive. And again, Rev. 21.6. and Rev. 22.13. All relating to Isai.
41.4. Isai. 44.6. Isai. 48.12. where the like had before been said, as a
Character (no doubt) of the True God. And Isai. 43.10. Before me there was no
God formed, neither shall there be after me.

And what can this be other than the Infinite, the Eternal, the Almighty God.
The same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, as he is called, Heb. 13.8. The
Blessed, and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only
has Immortality, etc. as he is described, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16. And again, The
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14, and Rev. 19.16. The Great God,
and our Savior, Tit. 2.13. Where, our Savior, is so contra-distinguished, not
as another from the Great God, but as another Title of that same Person: He
that is our God and Savior, or God our Savior, as it is Tit. 3.4. (like as
God and the Father, Ephesians. 5.2. and again, Col. 3.17. Giving thanks to God, and
the Father.) For it is manifest that here ( Tit. 2.13.) it is spoken of Christ's
coming to judgment; which is here called, the Glorious appearance of the Great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; that is, the glorious appearance of Jesus
Christ, who is the Great God and our Savior; The title that Jeremy gives to
God, Jer. 32.18. The great and mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his name.
Christ therefore, our Savior, is (...), the Great God.

And the Doxology there added, Rev. 1.6. To him be glory and dominion for ever
and ever, Amen; is equivalent to that of (...), Romans 9.5. God blessed for ever.
And the like, 1 Timothy 6.16. To whom be Honor and Power everlasting, Amen. And
much more, that of Rev. 5.12, 13, 14. Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing: (As High a Doxology as that in the close of the Lords-prayer;) To
which we have the Acclamation of every Creature (which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are
therein,) saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And the four Beasts said,
Amen; And the four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives
for ever and ever. Too great things to be said of a mere Creature, or a Titular
God; but very agreeable to Christ, being (as he is) the same God with the
Father, the only True God.

I might here add a like Remark, on that of Isai. 48.12. Hearken O Israel, I am
HE; I am the First, I am also the Last. And in like manner, Isai. 41.4. Isai.
43.10, 13, 25. Deuteronomy. 32.39. I, even I, am HE (Hu) and there is no other God
with me, or beside me. (And to the same purpose elsewhere.) Any Hu; I am HE; so
we render it.

I am HE; What HE? It Is (...). It Is the HE Absolutely taken, and Emphatically
applied to God. Which I take to be of like import with, (...), I AM; I that Am,
or That which IS. For I take the Hebrew Pronouns Hu and Hi, (which we commonly
render by He, She, or It, according as the Gender varies) to be Derivatives
from the Verb Havah or Hajah which signifies To Be. Not that I take Hu to be a
proper Name of God (as are Jah and Jehovah, from the same Verbs,) But an
Appellative w^rd, common to the Creatures also; but here Emphatically appl^ed
to God, (as are the words (...) and (...). which are common to the Creatures
al^o; for ^hey also are, in their kind, (...).) And the Latin P^onouns is, id,
(that is, he or it) when Relatively taken, are to be expounded of their
Antecedent to which t^^y Relate: But when put A^solutely without an Antecedent;
they are of alike import with (...) Quid taken Substantively: ((...), or (...))
according ^o which we use to say (even in our Metaphys^cks) Ens and Aliquid
con^ertunt^r, ( He or It, so taken ar^ of the same import, with a Being, or
What Is.) And the Learned Gat^ker (than whom I do not know that we have a
better Critic; more Judicious or more Acute;) though (in his Book De ^tylo
Novi Instrumenti, contra Pfochenium,) he do not take Hu to be a Proper Name of
God (but communicable to Creatures, however here Emphatic^ll^ applied to him:)
Yet does allow, that in these places, and in many others (o^ which he gives
diverse instances) it is used for the Ve^b Substantive (Sum, or Est.) Which is
the same wi^^ that I say, that it Imports a Being, or to Be, (and therefore,
when signally applied to G^d, ^is Absolute, Infinite, Independent* Self-Being.)
And so, it seems, the Septuagi^ts did (...) und^rstand it, who render Any Hu,
by (...), I AM; (and the Vu^gar Latin b^ (...) Sum;) and in the New T^stam^^t
(which commonly ^ollows the Phrase o^ the ^ept^^gints) Christ says it of
himself, Before Abraham Was (not I Was, but) I Am, ((...)) importing ^hereby
his Permanent and Ins^ccessive Being: co-exis^ent to all the (...) (Successive)
Duration; Past, Present, and Future: the same Yes^erday, and To-da^* and for
ever. The difference between is or id Relatively taken (r^lating to what we
call (...) Antecedent,) and the same taken Absolutely (without such reference
to other (...) it self;) is much the same as between (what the Logi^ians call)
Est secundi ^djecti (which is but a Copula to join the Predicate with the
^ubject.) and Est ^^rr^ adjecti; where it self is (or does include) the
Predicate. As when S^crat^^ Est, (...) r^solved by Socrates Est Ens, or Est
Existens; The word Est, so taken, including (...) the Copula and the Predicate:
Like as id or quid Substantively taken, is not Relative, (...) Absolute, and
the same with Ens.
The Greek Septuagint (in the places cited) renders Any Hu by (...): And the
vulgar Latin (indifferently) by Ego Sum, Ego Ipse, Ego Sum Ipse, Ego Ipse Sum:
That is, I am He, or I AM. And Christ, of himself, Joh. 8.58. (...), Before
Abraham was, I AM. And I the rather take it so to signify (in the places cited)
because I there find it attended (exegetically) with an Intimation of his
Eternity; He Is, He is the First and he is the Last; Before him none Was, and
after him none shall Be: He Is, and ever Was, and ever shall Be.

CHARACTER III.
The next Character that I shall insist upon, is that of the two Proper Names
of God, Jah and Jehovah; which I take to be Proper to God, and Incommunicable
to any other. I put them both together, because they be both of the same
import; and indeed, of the same with Ehjeh, (I AM) beforementioned. The chief
difference is, that Ehjeh (I AM) retains the form of the Verb; but Jah and
Jehovah are Nouns verbal, from Hajah or Havah which signify to Be: All
denoting Gods absolute Being: And All peculiar to the Supreme God, and no where
applied in Scripture (that I know of) to any other. I know the Socinians would
persuade us that Jehovah is sometime given to an Angel, which we do not deny;
but we say that Angel is not a Created Angel, but the Angel of the Covenant,
who is God himself.

The name Jah comes often in the Old Testament, but not so often as Jehovah.
Particularly in Psalm. 68.5. Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name, extol him
that rides upon the heavens by his Name JAH. So we find it in our Bibles, and
it agrees with the Original. But in our Psalters, (by a continued mistake,)
instead of Jah or Ya, is printed Yea. In one Great Bible of this Tr^nslation,
(amongst Mr. Selden's Books in the Bodleyan Library) appointed to be read in
^^urches (as we are told in the Title page) printed (if I do not mis-remember
the date) abo^^ the Reign of King Edw^rd the Sixth, or the end of King Henry
the Eig^th, I find the Name JA. But in all other (whether Psalters or Bibles,
Old or New) of that Translation (that I have consulted) it is Yea. Of which (I
suppose) the occasion at first was this: The Hebrew Letter, by different
persons, is differently called Jod and Yod; and accordingly that Name to be
written in English Ja or Ya. Which being (it seems) in some Books written or
printed Ya; some after-Printer thinking it to be mis-printed for yea, did so
(as he thought) Correct it; and the Error has thence been propagated
eversince. Yet this having (it seems) been discovered by somebody, some while
since; I find in diverse late Editions of the Psalter, or Psalms in our Book of
Common Prayer, (which follows that Translation) it is thus printed praise him
in his name, yea, and rej^yce before him, (with a Comma before and after yea,)
leaving it indifferent, whether to refer Yea (or Ya) to the former Clause, as
the Name of God; or, to the latter Clause as the Affirmative particle yea. But
in the Original Hebrew, and in all other Translations (that I have observed) in
any Language, I find the name Jah, or somewhat equivalent thereunto; as
doubtless it ought to be.
.

But this name is no where (I think) retained in the Greek Septuagint, (the
Septuagint renders it by (...):) Nor in the New Testament (which frequently
follows the Septuagints form of Speech,) unless in the Solemn Form of praise
Hallelu-Jah (which the Greek puts into one word Alleluia) that is, Praise Jah,
or (as it is usually rendered) Praise ye the Lord. Which is jointly applied to
him that sits upon the Throne and to the Lamb, Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6. whom I take
to be there meant by the Lord our God, ver. 1. and the Lord God Omnipotent,
ver. 6. and the Great God, ver. 17. For the Supper of the Great God, ver. 17.
is the same with the Supper of the Lamb, ver. 7, 9.

The name Jehovah is, in the Old Testament, much more frequent; especially in
the Original Hebrew. But in our Translation is frequently rendered by the LORD;
as in all those places (if the Printers have been careful) where LORD is
printed in Capital Letters.

The name Jehovah, is at Exodus 3.14, ^5. made equivalent to Ehjeh, I AM. For
what is said at ver. 14. Thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM
has sent me unto you; is thus repeated at ver. 15. Thus shall thou say unto
the Children of Israel, JEHOVAH (the God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob) has sent me unto you: with this
Addition, This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all
generations. And Psalm. 81.18. That men may know, that thou, whose Name alone is
JEHOVAH, art the most High over all the earth.

In which place, the restrictive word Alone, cannot be understood to affect the
word Name, as if it were thus to be construed, ( cujus nomen est Jehovah
solum,) Whose name is Only Jehovah; (For God we know had other Names, whereby
he is often called:) But to the word Whose, (cujus solius nomen est Jehovah,)
To whom Alone (or to whom Only) the name Jehovah does belong. So Isai. 45.5. I
am JEHOVAH and none else; there is no God beside me. And Deuteronomy. 5.35, 39.
JEHOVAH he is God, and there is none else beside him: JEHOVAH he is God in
heaven above, and upon earth beneath, there is none else. And Isai. 42.8. I am
JEHOVAH that is my name; and my Glory will I not give unto another. And Deuteronomy.
6.4. Hear, O Israel, the LORD thy God is one LORD; or, JEHOVAH thy God is one
JEHOVAH; there is no other Jehovah but he. And Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may
fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD, or JEHOVAH thy God. And
to the same purpose, Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 12.2. and in many other places.

I will not despute, whether this name JEHOVAH, were never made known, till God
did thus declare it to Moses, at Exodus 3.15. It might seem so to be by that of
Exodus 6.3. I appeared unto Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of
God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. It Is true, that
God is often so called in the Book of Genesis: But that Book was written by
Moses, after the time that Moses speaks of, in Exodus. And Moses might so call
him, by a name known at the time when he wrote, though it had not been known at
the time whereof he wrote. As when Abraham is said to go forth from Vr of the
Chaldees, or of Chasdim, Genesis 11.31. though Chesed the Son of Nahor (from whom,
in likelihood, the Chaldees were called Chasdim) was not born till afterward,
as appears Genesis 22.22. So Exodus 12.40. where the Children of Israel are said to
have sojourned four hundred and thirty years; it must be reckoned backward as
far as Abraham's coming forth from Vr of the Chaldees, at which time they could
not be called, the Children of Israel, (for Israel was not then born,) but it
was that people, who were afterward called the Children of Israel. And many
such Prolepses, or anticipations of Names, there are in all Historians.

But, whether it be upon this account, or some other, that he is said, by his
Name JEHOVAH not to have been known to them, is not material to our present
business. It Is enough, that Jehovah is now known to be the signal Name of the
True God; and (I think) no where given to any other.

Now that our Savior Christ is called Jehovah, is not to be denied. And it is
for this reason, that the Socinians would have us think that this Name is not
peculiar to God. In Jer. 23.5, 6. he is called Jehovah Tzidkenu, the LORD our
Righteousness. Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a Righteous Branch; and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice on the Earth; In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell in safety: (which is agreed, by Jews and Christians, to be
understood of the Messiah.) And this is the name whereby he shall be called
(JEHOVAH Tzidkenu) the LORD our Righteousn^^s, (JEHOVAH our Righteousness.) And
to the same purpose, Jer. 33.15, 16.

In Psalm. 102. which is called, A prayer of the afflicted, when he pours out
his complaint before the LORD (Jehovah.) It begins thus, Hear my prayer O LORD
(Jehovah) and let my cry come unto thee. And he to whom this prayer is made, is
eight or nine times called the LORD (Jehovah.) Now he to whom this prayer is
made (we are told, Hebr. 1.8, 10, 11, 12.) is our Lord Christ; Unto the Son he
says, -- Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of thy hands; They shall perish, but thou
remainest; They all shall wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall thou
fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years
shall not fail. All which is cited out of that Prayer, made to the Lord Jehovah.

So I the LORD (Jehovah) the first and the last, Isai. 41.4. Thus says the
LORD (Jehovah) before me there was no God, neither shall there be after me,
Isai. 43.10. Thus says the LORD (Jehovah,) the King of Israel, and his
Redeemer, (Jehovah) the LORD of Hosts, I am the first and I am the last; and
beside Me there is no God, Isai. 44.6. which are the Characters applied to
Christ, Rev. 1.8, 9. and 2.8. and 21.6. and 22.13. as was showed before.

It Is true, that in the Greek Septuagint of the Old Testament, the name Jehovah
is no where retained; but (...) (I think) every where put for it. Whether
because of a Jewish Superstition, no where to pronounce that Name; or because
it could not conveniently be expressed in Greek Letters; I will not determine.
And for that reason (because the Septuagints did not use it) it is not used in
the New Testament (which does mostly comply with the Language of the
Septuagints; as being the Greek Translation then in use.) And therefore we are
not to look for the Name Jehovah there applied to Christ. But diverse places are
in the New Testament applied to Christ, wherein the name Jehovah was used in
the Old Testament. And the name (...) ( the Lord) by which both the Septuagints
and the New Testament do constantly render the Hebrew Name Jehovah, is so
frequently applied to Christ in the New Testament, as that (throughout the New
Testament) it is almost his constant Character, the Lord, the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. One Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Glory, Jam. 2.1. My Lord and my God, Joh. 20.28. No man can say that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. And elsewhere so often, that
none can be ignorant of it.

CHARACTER IV.
The last Character (which I shall insist upon) of the True God, the Only God;
is that of the Lord God of Israel; Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Deuteronomy. 6.4. And
the Lord thy God, is almost the constant Language of Moses to the Children of
Israel: And it is the Character which God directs him to use; Thus shall thou
say unto the Children of Israel, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me; this is my name
for ever, and this is my memorial unto all Generations, Exodus 3.15. and the
Lord God of the Hebrews, ver. 18. And elsewhere very often throughout the
Bible. And doubtless, he that was the Lord God of Israel, is the true God, the
only God.

It Is He who tells us, I am the Lord thy God -- Thou shall have no other God
but Me, Exodus 20.3. And, Besides Me, there is no other God, Isai. 44.6. and so
often elsewhere, that it is needless to name the places.

And this Character, as well as the rest, is expressly given to Christ also,
Luke 1.16, 17. where we are expressly told of John the Baptist, that many of the
Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord Their God (to the Lord God of
Israel:) for he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias. Now we
all know, whose forerunner John Baptist was; and before whom he was to go, in
the Power and Spirit of Elias. And he before whom he was thus to go, is the
Lord God of Israel; and therefore not only a Titular God, or a Creature God,
but the True God, the Supreme God, the same God with that God who is the Lord
God of Israel; whom no man doubts to be the True God, the Supreme God, the Only
God.

I might add many other Characters given to Christ, proving him to be the True
God; as that Rev. 2.13. I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts, and I
will give unto every one according to his Works, (and to the same purpose, Rev.
22.12. and elsewhere:) which God (the True God) claims as his peculiar
Prerogative, Jer. 17.9, 10. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, Who can know it? I the LORD search the Heart, I try the
Reins; to give to every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit
of his doings. And to the same purpose, Jer. 11.20. Jer. 20.12. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
Psalm. 7.9. Psalm. 139.1. and in many other places. And that likewise of Isai
9.6. His Name shall be called Wonderful Councellor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, etc. with many other Characters of
like nature, which can never agree to any but the True God.

But it is not my business, in this short Discourse, to say All that might be
said; but what may be sufficient.

He therefore that is (as has been showed) God, the True God; the Mighty God;
the Everlasting Father; the Eternal God; the First and the Last, (before whom
nothing was, and after whom nothing shall be) that Was, and Is, and shall Be;
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; the Almighty; by whom the World
was made; by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made that
was made; who laid the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work
of his hands; who, when the Heavens and the Earth shall fail, his years endure
for ever; who searches the heart and the reins, to give to every one according
to his works; who is Jehovah; the Lord God of Israel; the Supreme being; which
is over all, God blessed for ever; who is the Blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who only has immortality, to whom be Honor
and Power Everlasting, Amen. That God (I say) of whom all these great things
are said, is (certainly) not a mere Titular God, (who is called God but is
not,) a Creature God, or only a dignified Man. For, if these be not Characters
of the True God, by what Characters shall the True God be described?

I know, the Socinians have employed their Wits to find out some tricks to
evade or elude some of these plain places, which I shall not trouble my self,
or you to repeat; or to give an answer to them. For they are so weak, and so
forced, that the plain words of Scripture, read together with the forced senses
they would put upon them, are answer enough; nor do they need or deserve any
further answer.

OBJECTION VIII.
The last Objection which I shall now take notice of, is this; That the
Doctrine of the Trinity was not known to the Jewish Church before Christ.

To which I answer, 1. If it were not made known to them, it was not necessary
for them to know. For matters of pure Revelation, are not necessary to be
known, before they are revealed, (nor farther than they are revealed:) But may
be so to us, to whom they are Revealed.

The whole Doctrine of our Redemption by Christ, was (doubtless) unknown to
Adam before his Fall; And, had he not fallen, it would have been no fault in
him not to have known it at all.

And when (after his fall) it was first made known to him, (in that first
promise, that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.)
it was yet so dark, that he could know very little (as to the particulars of
it) of what is now known to us. And as God by parcels ((...)) at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, declared more of it to Abraham, to David, and the
Prophets, so were they obliged to know and believe more of it: and when in the
last days he had declared the whole of it by his Son; Heb. 1.1, 2. it is now
necessary for us to believe much more; of which they might be safely ignorant.
And, of the Trinity likewise, if it were not then revealed.

2. But Secondly, There were many things, which though not fully revealed, so
as to be clearly understood by All; were yet so insinuated, as to be in good
measure understood by some; and would more be so, when the Veil should be taken
off from Moses's face, 2 Cor. 3.13, 15, 16.

Thus the Death and Resurrection of Christ, were not understood, even by his
own Disciples, till after his Resurrection. Yet we must not say that these
things were not before intimated in the Scriptures (though covertly;) for when
their understandings were opened, to understand the Scriptures, and what had
been written of him in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms; they then perceived that it was so written, and that it behooved Christ
to Suffer and to Rise from the dead the Third day. Yet this was therein so
covertly contained, that they seem no more to have understood it, than that of
the Trinity.

And St. Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews, declares a great deal to have been
covered under the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies; which, certainly, most of the
Jewish Church did not understand; though, in good measure, it might be
understood by some.

I might say the like of the Resurrection; which was but darkly discovered till
Immortality was brought to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. We must not
yet say, it was wholly unknown to the Jewish Church, (of whom many, no doubt,
did believe it:) Yet neither can we say, it was generally received; For we know
the Pharisees and the Sadduces were divided upon that point, Act. 23.6, 7, 8.
And so little is said of it in the Old Testament, that those who had a mind to
be captious, might have found much more specious pretense of cavilling against
it then, than our Adversaries now have against the Doctrine of the Trinity.

3. I say Thirdly, as of the Resurrection, there were then diverse intimations,
which are now better understood (in a clearer light) than at that time they
were: So I think there were also of the Doctrine of the Trinity. I shall
instance in some of them.

1. That there was, in the Unity of the Godhead, a Plurality of Somewhat
(which now we call Persons) seems fairly to be insinuated, even in that of
Elohim-bara, Genesis 1.1. (In the beginning God created,) where Elohim (God) a
Nominative Case Plural, is joined with Bara, a Verb Singular; (which is as if
we should say in English, We Am, or They Does; which would to us sound odly, if
somewhat of Mystery be not intended in it.) Nor is it here only, but very
frequently, that God is called Elohim in the Plural Number, (and much oftener
than in the Singular Number Eloah,) as if, though Jehovah be but One, yet
Elohim may be Three: Not Three Gods, but Three Somewhats in that One God. (For
though it be Elohim, yet it is Bara: It is So Three, as yet to be One.) Nor is
it Elohajim (in the Dual Number) as spoken of Two, or a Couple; but Elohim (in
the Plural Number) as of more than Two.

This may perhaps be called a Criticism, (and it is so.) But I am loath to say,
it is purely Casual, and not designed. For many times little Circumstances, and
unheeded Expressions (as at first they may seem to be,) may (by the Divine
Wisdom) be fore-designed to some considerable purpose. As, that of, Not a bone
of it shall be broken, Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12. Psalm. 34.20. And that of, they
pierced my hands and my feet, Psalm. 22.16. And, they shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, Zach. 12.10. And that, they part my garment among them, and
on my vesture they cast lots, Psalm. 22.18. And, they gave me gall for my meat,
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69.21. Which are most of
them, but Poetical Expressions; and seemingly casual, and undesigned, as to
their Literal Sense; but were providentially ordered, as being literally to be
fulfilled; as we find in Joh. 19.23, 24, 28, 29, 36, 37. and in the places
parallel of the other Gospels.

I might instance in a great many such, which at first might seem Casual, but
were Providentially designed. I shall content my self at present with one more;
which is that of St. Paul, (which perhaps may be thought to look as like a
Criticism as what I mention) Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the
promises made. He says not, And to Seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to
thy Seed which is Christ. Now the promises made to Abraham, to which he refers,
are those Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. (which, I think, is the only place, where, in
promises made to Abraham, such mention is made of his Seed.) By my self have I
sworn, says the Lord; For because, thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son; That in blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thy Seed, as the stars of the heaven, and as the
sand which is upon the sea-shoar, and thy Seed shall possess the gate of his
enemies; and in thy Seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because
thou have obeyed my voice.

By Abraham's Seed, here, is manifestly meant his Children whom God promises
to multiply. And it might seem to be very indifferent whether to say, thy Seed,
or thy Children. But St. Paul was so nice a Critic, as to take advantage of
his saying Seed (in the Singular Number) and not Seeds or Children (in the
Plural) as thereby signally denoting (as principally intended) that One Seed,
which is Christ. Yet are not the rest of the Seed to be quite excluded (even in
that last Clause of it, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed,) as appears by Act. 3.25. And ye (men of Israel, ver. 12.) are the
Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers,
saying unto Abraham, And in thy Seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed. Whence it is evident, that seemingly unheeded Criticisms are sometimes
Providentially designed. And such I take this of Bara Elohim, to be. And it is
taken notice of to this purpose, both by Jewish and Christian writers.

The like Plurality seems plainly intimated in the same Chapter, Genesis 1.26. Let
US make man in OUR image and after OUR likeness. Yet even this Plurality is no
other than what in another consideration, is an Unity; for so it follows, ver.
27. So God created man in HIS own image. These Plural Somewhats, therefore, are
but One God.

And it is but a childish excuse to say, It is the Style of Princes to speak in
the Plural, We and Us instead of I and Me. It Is indeed a piece of Courtship at
this day, (and perhaps has been for some Ages:) But how long has it been so?
It Is not so old as Moses; much less so old as the Creation. King Pharaoh, and
Senacharib, and Ahasuerus, were wont to say I, Me, Mine, (not We, Us, Ours.)
And Nebuchadnezzar, even in the Height of his Pride, Dan. 4.30. Is not this
great Babylon that I have built, by the might of MY Power, and for the honor
of MY Majesty. Here Is nothing of We and Our. This was not Stilus Regius in
those days. And if we should here expound it by such an equivalence; And God
said, Let Me make man in My image; it would scarce sound like good Sense. (For
it is not usual to speak Imperatively in the First person Singular.) It seems
therefore to imply a Plurality, though not a Plurality of Gods.

The like we have Genesis 3.22. Behold, the man is become like One of Us. Is this
also Stilo Regio, instead of, The man is become like one of Me?

So, Genesis 11.6, 7. And the LORD (Jehovah) said, Let US go down, and confound
their Language.

2. And as these places intimate a Plurality, so I know not but that of Genesis
18. may intimate this Plurality, to be a Trinity. That the appearance there of
three Men to Abraham, was a Divine Apparition (though Abraham did not at first
apprehend it so to be) is evident. For it is expressly said by Moses, ver 1. The
LORD (Jehovah) appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre; and he lift up his
eyes, and lo Three Men stood by him. So that this appearance of Three Men, was
an appearance of the Lord Jehovah. And though we do not find that Abraham does
any where use the word Jehovah in that discourse, (but Adonai all along:) Yet
Moses the Relater (where himself speaks) says every where Jehovah; though when
he recites Abraham's words, it is Adonai: But even Adonai is a word Plural (as
well as Elohim) that is, my Lords, (the Singular is Adoni, my Lord; but seldom
said of God.)

Whether it were, that the name JEHOVAH were not then known to Abraham
(according to that of Exodus 6.3.) or that Abraham was not at first aware who it
was with whom he was then discoursing; or for what other reason he did avoid
using the name Jehovah; I shall not trouble my self curiously to enquire: But
sure we are that Moses tells us, This Apparition of Three Men (as at first they
seemed to be) was an Apparition of the Lord Jehovah.

We need not doubt therefore, but that God appeared there, in this Apparition
of Three Men; which is therefore a fair intimation of a Trinity of Persons.

It might perhaps be cavill'd at, if this were all: And so might that of
Jonah's being three days and three nights in the Whale's belly, when brought as
an Argument to prove our Savior ought so long to lie in the Grave. But St.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures; and that he rose again the Third day, according to the Scriptures.
(And Christ in like manner, Luke 24.46.) Yet I know not any thing more clear to
that purpose in the Scriptures (of the Old Testament) than either this of
Jonah's being so long in the Whale's belly (to which Christ himself alludes,
Mat. 12.40.) or that of Hos. 6.2. After two days he will revive us, and the
third day he will raise us up. Which seems not to be more express (for the
Resurrection of Christ on the Third day) than this of Jonah. But such covert
Intimations there are in the Old Testament; of things afterward more clearly
discovered in the New.

Nor was this unknown to the ancient Jewish Doctors, as appears by what
Ainsworth (in his Notes on Genesis 1.) cites from thence, (out of R. Simeon, Ben
Jochai in Zoar;) Come see the Mystery of the word Elohim: there are three
Degrees, and every Degree by it self Distinct; and yet notwithstanding they are
all one, and joined together in One, and are not divided one from another,
(only, there he calls Degrees what we now call Persons.) So that it was not
unknown to the Jews of old, whatever the present Jews think of it.

3. What these Three are, (the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,) seems to be
likewise intimated in the Story of the Creation, Genesis 1. where they seem to be
distinctly named.

In the beginning (Elohim) God created the Heaven and the Earth, ver. 1. where
no man doubts but God the Father is implied, though perhaps not He only.

And ver. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. Where
Ainsworth tells us from the ancient Rabbines whom he cites, they call him, The
Spirit of Mercies from before the Lord: The Spirit of Wisdom, called, the
Spirit of the Living God: And, The Spirit of the Messiah. Of the same Spirit,
we have elsewhere mention; My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, Genesis
6.3. Take not thine Holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, Isai. 61.1. They vexed his Holy Spirit, Isai. 63.10. and elsewhere.
And if it be said, that by the Spirit of God, is meant God himself: we say so
too, for we do acknowledge, that the Holy Ghost, is God himself.

And, of the Word, there is a like intimation, ver. 3. God Said (or spoke the
Word) Let there be Light, and there was Light. And in like manner, ver. 6, 9,
11.14, 20. God Said, Let there be a Firmament, etc. So Psalm. 33.6, 7. By the
Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, etc. He Spoke and it was done, He
Commanded and it stood fast. And Psalm. 148.5. He Spoke the Word and they were
made, He commanded and they were created. Consonant to that of Heb. 11.3. By
faith we understand that the Worlds were made by the Word of God. And 1 Pet.
3.5, 7. By the Word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth, etc. And by
the same Word they are kept in store, or preserved. In which places, by the
Word, so often mentioned, and with such Emphasis put upon it; seems to be
meant, that Word mentioned, Joh. 1.1, 3, 10. In the beginning was the Word,
((...),) All things were made by Him: The World was made by Him; just as in
Heb. 11.3. the Worlds were made by the Word of God.

Nor was this notion of the Word (Personally taken) unknown to the Jewish
Doctors. For what we have Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, (Dixit
Jehova Domino meo) the Chaldee Paraphrase, renders by Dixit Jehova, (Bemeimreh)
in Verbo suo meaning, by His Word, the Messiah; and of whom our Savior himself
expounds it, Mat. 22.44. And it is frequent, in that Paraphrase, by the Word to
design the Messiah; So in Isa. 41.10. Fear not, I am with thee; and ver. 13.
Fear not, I will help thee; and ver. 14. Fear not, I will help thee, says the
Lord and thy Redeemer; and ver. 16. The Wind (or Spirit, Ruach) shall carry
them away, and the Whirlwind shall scatter them: Is in the Chaldee Paraphrase
(rendered into Latin) Ne timeas, quia in adjutorium tuum erit Verbum meum. Ne
timeas, quia Verbum meum erit in adjutorium tuum. Ne t^meatis, -- Verbum meum
est in auxilium vestrum, dicit dominus and Redemptor vester. Ventus (seu
Spiritus) abripiet eos, and Verbum ejus disperget eos, quasi Turbo stipulas.
(Where we have God, his Word, and Spirit.) So in Isai. 48.11. For my own sake,
for my own sake will I do it: and ver. 12. Hea^ken unto Me: and ver. 13. My
hand has laid the foundation of the Earth, and my right hand has spanned the
heavens: and ver. 15. I, even I have spoken, I have called him: and ver. 16.
Come ye near unto me, hear ye this: Are in the Chaldee Paraphrase, Propter
Nomen meum, propter Verbum meum faci^m. Obedite Verbo meo. In Verbo meo fundavi
terram, and in Potentia mea appendi coelos. (Where again we have God, his Word,
and Power, or Spirit.) In Verbo meo pepigi pactum cum Abraham patre vestro, and
vocavi eum. Accedite ad Verbum meum, audite haec. And, at the like rate, in
many other places.
as S. Joh. does, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word.

And I put the more weight upon this, because (as here, Genesis 1.2, 3. so) we
have in several other places, the Word and Spirit mentioned as concerned in the
Creation, Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the LORD (Jehovah) were the Heavens made,
and all the Hosts of them by the (Spirit, or) breath of his mouth, (Berwach.)
Where we have Jehovah, his Word, and Spirit. Job 26.12, 13. He divides the Sea
by his Power, and by his (Wisdom, or) Understanding he smites through the
proud; By his Spirit he garnisheth the Heavens, his Hand has formed the
crooked Serpent. Where we have the Power of God, the Wisdom of God, and the
Spirit of God. And Job 33.4. ^he Spirit of God has made me, and the Breath of
the Lord has given me Life. So, Psalm. 104.24, 30. O LORD (Jehovah) how
wonderful are thy Works, in Wisdom thou have made them all. Thou sendest forth
thy Spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the face of the Earth.

And it is not amiss here to take notice, that as (...) signifies as well ratio
as oration; so Christ ((...)) is called the Word of God, and the Wisdom of God.
And as in Joh. 1.1, 3, 10. it is said of the Word, that in the beginning was
the Word, all things were made by Him, and the World was made by him: And Heb.
11.3. The Worlds were framed by the Word of God. So the same is said of Wisdom,
Prove. 3.19. The LORD by Wisdom has formed the Earth, by Understanding has he
established the Heavens. And Prove. 8.22. etc. The LORD possessed me (Wisdom) in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old; I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, ere ever the Earth was; -- When he prepared
the Heavens I was there, -- When he established the Clouds above, -- When he
strengthened the Fountains of the deep, -- When he appointed the Foundations of
the Earth, then was I by him, etc.

And accordingly the Holy Ghost is called the Power of God, Luke 1.35. The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over-shadow
thee. And 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation* which doubtless is not without the operation of the Holy Ghost,
working and preserving faith in us.

Suitably hereunto, God's Power and Wisdom are often conjoined. He is Wise in
Heart, and Mighty in Strength, Job 9.4, etc. He is excellent in Power, and in
Judgment, Job 37.13.

But, (without laying too great a stress on every particular,) there seems a
foundation clear enough to consider the Word of God, and the Spirit of God, as
clearly distinguishable, even in the great Work of Creation; and that the holy
Writers, even in the Old Testament, have considered them as distinct; and that
even the Jewish Writers have owned them as such.

I know very well that those who have a mind to be captious, may cavil at these
places, as the Sadduces of old did at those passages in the Old Testament
tending to prove a Resurrection.

And not those only, but even some of our own; who would have us think, that
the Fathers before Christ had only Promises of Temporal blessings (not of
Heavenly and Eternal:) Though St. Paul tells us, (when, of the hope and
resurrection of the dead he was called in question;) that he did so worship the
God of his Fathers, believing all things which were written in the Law and the
Prophets, and had hope toward God (which they also allowed) that there should
be a Resurrection of the dead both of the Just and Unjust; and that it was a
promise made of God to their Fathers, to which their twelve Tribes instantly
serving God day and night, hoped to come; which were no other things than what
Moses and the Prophets had said should come to pass; and which to King Agrippa
(who if not a Jew, was at least well acquainted with their Doctrines) should
not seem strange, Act. 23.6. Act. 24.14, 15. Act. 26.2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 22. And
Heb. 11.13. that all these died in faith, not having received the promises;
(that is, they died in the belief of better things than what they had yet
received:) But saw them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced
them, and confessed, they were but strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth. And our
Savior proves it out of the Old Testament, (Mat. 22.32.) by such an Argument,
as if one of us should have urged, it would perhaps have been ridiculed: I am
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; Now God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living. And the Apostle pursues the same Argument,
Heb. 11.9, 10, 14, 15, 16. They sojourned in the Land of promise, as in a
strange Land, dwelling in Tabernacles (movable from place to place) for they
looked for a City which has foundations (a fixed City, not flitting as were
those Tabernacles,) whose builder and maker of God: Declaring plainly that they
did seek a Country: Not such as that from whence they came; but a better
Country, that is, a Heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their
God; for he has prepared for them a City; where he directly argues, that God's
Promise, to be their God, was a Promise of Heaven.

And no doubt but the Prophets, and Men of God, had taught them all along, to
put a Spiritual Sense, upon those (seemingly) Temporal Promises, (though the
Sadduces would not believe it, but cavilled at it;) in so much that not only
the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law; but even the Women embraced it (even
before Christ's Resurrection;) I know says Martha (of her dead Brother
Lazarus) that he shall Rise again in the Resurrection, at the last day, Joh.
11.24. And, of such Spiritual Senses, we have copious Instances, in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, and elsewhere frequently.

And as they did without any reluctances, readily embrace the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, when more clearly declared by the Apostles, (as a thing not
wholly new to them;) so neither do we find in them any Reluctance to that of
the Trinity (for which, in likelihood, they had in like manner been before
prepared:) but readily closed with the Form of Baptism, in the Name (not Names)
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. And that
Solemn Benediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. Where
we have all the Three Persons reckoned together; as they are also in that
celebrated place, 1 John 5.7. The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; these
Three are One. And as they had been before by Christ himself, Joh. 14.26. The
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in My Name, He
shall teach you all things. And Joh. 15.26. The Comforter whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which Proceeds from the
Father, He shall testify of Me. And (to name no more places) Mat. 3.16, 17.
Jesus, when he was baptized, went straitway out of the Water: And lo, the
heav^ns were opened unto him, and he (John the Baptist) saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon Him: And lo, a voice from heaven
saying, This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

4. There is yet another Consideration which does confirm this opinion, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity was not unknown to the Jewish Church before Christ:
From the footsteps thereof yet extant in Heathen Writers.

It Is well known (to those conversant in such Studies) that much of the Heathen
Learning (their Philosophy, Theology, and Mythology) was borrowed from the
Jews; though much Disguised, and sometimes Ridiculed by them. Which things
though they be Fabulous, as disguised in a Romantic dress: yet they are good
Evidence that there was a Truth in History, which gave occasion to those Fables.

None doubts but Ovid's Fable of the Chaos (of which all things were made) took
its rise from Moses's History of the Creation: And Deucalion's Flood, from that
of Noah: and the Titan's fighting against the Gods, from the Builders of
Babel's Tower: And that of Two-faced Janus, from Noah's looking backward and
forward to the World before and since the Flood. And many the like, of which we
may see in Natalis Comes, in Bochartus, and others: And of which we have a
large Collection in Theophilus Gale's Court of the Gentiles. And in Dr.
Duport's Gnomologia Homerica; wherein is a Collection of Homer's Sayings, which
look like Allusions to like Passages in Sacred Scripture; and seem to be
borrowed (most of them) from those Books of it, which were written before
Homer's time; who yet is one of the most Ancient and most Famed of Heathen
Writers.

Plato has borrowed so much of his Philosophy, History, and Theology, from the
Jewish learning, as that he has obtained the Title of ((...)) Moses disguised
in a Greek dress. And, may seem, because the name of Jews was odious, to cite
them rather by the names of certain Barbarians, Syrians, Phoenicians, Egyptians
etc. From that Title of God in Exodus, I AM, (...), (or from the Equivalent
names of Jah and Jehovah) he borrows his ((...),) the Being, (or that which
Is,) the very Being, the true Being; which are the Titles he gives to the
Supreme God. For his Immortality of the Soul, he reckons the best Argument to
be ((...).) a Divine Revelation, which he had by Tradition from certain
Ancients, who lived (as he speaks) nearer to the Gods, (as if he had borrowed
even this Phrase from Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation is so great, who has God so Nigh
unto them?) And much more, as has been noted by others.

And I am so far from thinking (as the Socinians would have us) that St. John
did but Platonize, and borrowed his (...) from Plato's Trinity; that I rather
think, that Plato borrowed his Trinity (as he did many other things) from the
Jewish Doctrine, though by him disguised: And take it for a good Evidence, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity, was then not unknown to them.

Aristotle, in the last Chapter of his Book, De Mundo; which is de Dei
Nominibus: He tells us that God, though he be but One, has many Names: And
amongst those many, he reckons that of the Tres Parcae ((...)) or as we call
them, the Three Destinies (Atropas, Clotho, and Lachesis; whom he does
accommodate to the three diversities of Time; past, present, and future,) to be
One of these Names. Which, though numbered as Three, are but this One God.
(...). (And cites Plato to the same purpose) (...). So that it seems both Plato
and Aristotle were of opinion, that Three Somewhats may be One God. And this,
in likelihood, they derived from the Jewish Learning.

I might say the like of their three Judges in another World, Minos,
Radamanthus and Aeacus. which thing though it be Fabulous, yet it implies thus
much, That they had then a Notion, not only of the Soul's Immortality, but also
of a Trinity of Persons in another World, who should take Account of men's
Actions in this World. And both these Notions they had, no doubt, from the
Jewish Learning; from whence their most sublime Notions were derived.

To these I might add that of their three-shap'd Chimaera; which their Poets
feign to have been. (...), as is to be seen in Homer one of their most Ancient
Poets. And that of Cerberus, their three-headed Porter of the other World.

Which Poetical Fictions, though invented perhaps to ridicule the Trinity; do
yet at last argue that they had then some notices of a Trinity, (of Three
Somewhats which were yet but One.) For, if they had no notice of it, they could
not have ridiculed it.

Our Adversaries, perhaps, may please themselves with the Fansy, that Chimaera
and Cerberus are brought in to prove the Trinity.

But they mistake the point: We are not now Proving the Trinity, (which is
already settled on a firmer Foundation;) but inquiring, whether this Doctrine
were then known. And as we think it a good argument to prove the Christian
Religion, to have been known in Lucian's time, (and known to him,) because
Lucian does Scoff at it; which he could not have done, if he had known nothing
of it: So is it a good Argument to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity to have
been then known, when it was ridiculed.

And it proves also, that there might be then profane Wits to ridicule it, as
there are now to Blaspheme the Trinity, as a three-headed Monster; and, that
this (...) Wit of theirs, is not their own, but stolen from wittier Heathens.

But, whether it were, or were not, known to the Jewish Church before Christ,
(of which there be great Presumptions that it was so known, as well as that of
the Resurrection:) it is enough to us, that we are taught it now. And, if any
will yet be so obstinate as not to believe, either the Resurrection, or the
Trinity; upon pretense that neither of them was known to the Jewish Church, (or
at least, not so clearly, but that they may be able to cavil at places from the
Old Testament alleged to prove either;) we must leave them to the Wisdom and
Judgment of God, till he shall think fit to instruct them better.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; Three Persons, but
One Eternal and Ever blessed God; be Praise, Honor and Glory, Now and for
Evermore, Amen. FINIS.
Advertisement.
BY reason of the Authors absence from the Press at so great a distance, some
mistakes have happened, both in the Letters and Sermons; and some things
omitted, which should have been inserted in their proper places, but that they
came so late to the Printers hands, that it could not well be done without
d^scomposing his Affairs. Of both which it is thought fit thus to direct.

ERRATA.
LEt. I. p. 12. l. 6. for Divisions read Dimensions. p. 13. l 6. dele Three. p
18. l. 7. for Meaning read Memory.

Let. II. p. ^. l. 21. for that read shall.

Let. III. p. 30. l. 11. as a separate Existence. p 32 l. 7. as to be. p. 37.
l. ult. for Those read These. p. 41. l. 18 known p. 57. l. 7. for sure read
save.

Let. IV. p. 7. l. 20. for toil read talk. p. 11. l. 2. as well as.

Let. V. p. 6. l. 22. dele of. p. 7. l. 19. for any read my. p. 11. l. 10. read
1 John 5.20. p. 12. l. 18. for Israel read Jacob. p. 18. l. 13. does not well
p. 21. l. 14. said so much.

Let. VI. p. 4. l. 1. for Nor read Now. p. 9. l. 28. for then read t^ere. p.
10. l. 28. for London read Leyden. p. 11. l. 19. at least. p. 13. l. 30. for
This read Thus. p. 14. l. 33. for as read in l. 34. thee only, the. p. 17. l.
6. for Railing read Ranting. p. 18. l. 2. was not then. l. 13. beside that in.

Let. VII. p. 6. l 28. Possibility. p. 7. l. 27. for fourt^ read fault. p. 10.
l. pen. All-comprehensive. p. 12. l. 20. Father. p. 13. l. 5. afte^ Notion^,
add further than they are revealed. l. pen. Words. p. 14. l. 13. Hands. p. 17.
l. 13. to Answer. l. 23. for one read me.

Sermon. p. 15. l. 14. exegerical. p. 19 l. 7. God. p. 22. l. 19. for for read
or. l. 21. for er read fer. P. 61. l. 9. read Author. P. 73. l. 3. read were
framed.

ADDITIONS.
LET. I. p. 2. l. 1. after united, add or intimately One. p. 12. l. 21. after
Cube, add, ( there being no limits in nature, greater than which a Cube cannot
be).

Let. III. p. 16. l. 18. Add this Marginal Note, The Saxon word Hell or Hell,
(whence comes the English word Hell,) does not properly or necessarily import
the place of the Damned; But may be indifferently taken for Hell, hole, or
hollow place: Which are all words of the same original. Helan (to hide, or
cover,) Hole (cavitas,) Hol (cavus) hollow. And when it is used in a restrained
sense; it is Metonymical, or Synecdochical; as when Hole or Pit, is put for the
Grave, and the like. p. 19. l. 2. Add, So that I take the plain sense of the
words to be this: He was (for some time) in that Hell, or Hades (what ever by
that word be meant); wherein (it is expressly said) he was not left; but was
Raised from it. p. 44. l. 16. Add, Beside this Letter of thanks from his
Partner in the Disputation; there was another from Sandius himself, (not
Printed, but in Manuscript,) acknowledging a like conviction. Of which
Wittichius recites an Extract, in his Causa Spiritus Sancti Victrix
demonstrata, a Christophoro Wittichio. Lugduni Batavorum, apud Cornelium
Boutestein, 1682.

Let. IV. p. 36. l. 26. after Athanasius, Add, ('It Is the same thing with me,
whether it were written by Him or some Other, as long as I find it agreeable to
Scripture. At the end of the same line, Add (Wherein yet I would not be thought
to encourage dangerous Errors: For the Errors are equally Dangerous, and
equally Fundamental; whether I do, or do not Anathematize them.) p. 38. at the
End; Add Jan. 13. 1690/1. Yours, John Wallis.

Let. VI. p. 9. l. 25. Add this Marginal Note. Socinus 's Words are these:
Velim autem scias, me duplici de causa (praeter eam quam ipse commemoras) ab
ista quaestione, De Animae Immortalitate, abstinuisse. Nam and mihi res erat
cum homine qui me calumniandi, inque omnium invidiam vocandi, omnem occasionem
quaerebat. Necdum mihi, quid de quaestione ista statuendum sit, plane
exploratum erat; quemadmodum nec hodie quidem est. Tantum id mihi videtur
statui posse; Post hanc vitam, animam seu animum hominis non ita per se
subsistere ut praemia utla poenasve sentiat, vel etiam ista sentiendi sit
capax. Quae mea Firma Opinio facile potest ex Disputatione ista colligi: Cum ex
multis quae identidem a me ibi dicuntur; Tum ex ea ipsa, de qua praecipue
agitur, sententia mea. Nam quamvis, cum ipso Puccio disputans, (qui, ut
immortalitatem primi hominis ante peccatum probaret, animi ipsius
Immortalitatem mihi objiciebat,) ostendi, non propterea dici posse hominem
immortalem quia anima ipsius non moriatur: Tamen satis apparet me sentire, non
ita vivere, post hominis ipsius mortem, animam ejus, ut per se praemiorum
poenarumve capax existat: Cum in ipso primo homine, totius Immortalitatis
rationem uni gratiae Divinae trib^o; nec in ipsa Creatione quidquam Immortalis
Vitae agnosco. Socini Epist. 5. ad Volkelium; die 16. Novembris, Anno, 1596.

Let. VI. p. 12. l. 3. Add this Marginal Note: Sandiru 's Words are these
(cited by Wittichius in his Causa Spiritus Sancti Victrix, page 4.) Jam finitis
illis quae ad Librum tuum regerenda duxi (praeter ea quae satis a Socio meo
responsum puto,) Oro te ne graveris ulterius hoc argumentum prosequi; quo
tandem Veritas, si fieri possit, patefiat; and velut scintilla ex silice ad
Chalybem alliso prosiliat. Nam ingenue fateor, mihi conjecturam mean long
verisimiliorem visam, antequam Librum tuum, quo me docere aggressus es,
legissem. Non parum and contulit ad eam debilitandam, consideratio mea, Joh.
1.32, 33. and Mat. 4.^1. Nam postquam in Baptismo Spiritus Sanctus super
Christum descendit, and super eum mansit, eumque in desertum duxit, nec ab eo
recessit; (cum non verisimile sit Christum tentationem Satanae sine Spiritus
Sancti auxilio superasse;) finita demum tentatione dicuntur Angeli accessisse
and ministrasse ei. Quod si itaque conjectura mea consistere non possit, ut vix
possit, perpendendum erit, an non Spiritus Sanctus possint esse septem Spiritus
Principales; vel, multitudo Spirituum long subtiliorum caeteris Angelorum
ordinibus, fortean natura ipsa: Et an per hanc hypothesin salvari possint omnes
difficultates contra conjecturam meam hactenus product^. Novi quendam qui
sentit, Spiritum Sanctum quidem esse unam Personam, camque creatam, sed totum
Vniversum Essentia sua pervadentem. Valde autem dubito an haec sententia
subsistere queat. Illa de una Persona Spiritus Sancti comprehensis sub eo
Angelis tanquam ejus ministris and satellitibus; mihi non admodum arridet. Si
autem horum nihil verum comperiatur; tum demum mihi verisimillimum videbitur,
Spiritum Sanctum cum Deo Patre ejusque Verbo, unum Deum, unam Substantiam, unum
Individuum esse.


