WALWYNS JUST DEFENSE AGAINST THE ASPERTIONS CAST UPON HIM, IN A late
un-christian Pamphlet entitled, WALWYNS WILES.

By William Walwyn, Merchant.

Proverbs 12. ver. 6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood,
but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for W. Larnar, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Blackmore, near Bishops-gate.

M. DC. XLIX.

Walwyns just defense against the Aspersions cast upon him, etc.
I should be glad for the good of humane society, that those seven men whose
names are subscribed to the Epistle of that Book, would set down a certain
rule, or declare what rule theirs is, whereby in civil Communication, a man may
know, when those he keeps company withal are real; and when deceivers, when
they mean as they seem, and when they carry two faces under one hood, which
amongst honest men is called double-dealing; and this not so much in respect of
themselves, for I have not had much familiarity with any of these seven; but in
respect of those from whom they seem to have had their false informations
concerning me; there being not one of them that ever reproved me to my face for
any thing I ever said or did, or that ever applied themselves to me with
Friends in a Christian way, to show we wherein I walked erroniously or
scandalously: but all they have done or spoken to my disparagement, has been
behind my back; whilst, wheresoever they met me, they nevertheless saluted me
as a Friend: How this kind of behavior can be justified, I profess I
understand not.

And upon what grounds these seven men subscribe this Epistle, I do not
apprehend; for, as for Mr Kiffin, I never had an unfriendly word or countenance
from him; nor from Mr Rosier, but kind respects wherever I met them: for Mr
Foster, and Mr Burnet, I know them not by name, not cannot guess who they are:
Mr Lordall, and Mr Price, have been somewhat shy a good while, about our
different judgment for seasons of petitioning; but especially, since at
Kingston, before his Excellency, I gave my reasons against the raising of a new
Regiment for the Tower of London; proposing the place to be guarded with
Citizens, as a means to preserve trade, and the affection of the City to the
Army; which I still judge was honest and good council: but their Friends
pursued the contrary, and prevailed; and ever since, these have cast an ill eye
upon me, and as I have heard, have reproacht me much behind my back.

And for Mr Arnald, just before the New Model, he groundlesly reported to the
Lieutenant General Cromwell, that I held correspondence with Oxford, though at
the same time I held daily meetings, and intimate Discourse with Mr John
Goodwin, Mr Henry Burton, Mr Peter's, Mr Hilsly, Mr Lilburn, and others, and
continued so after with the best respect; but I could never get so much
satisfaction among them for so gross an injury, as to know his Author, I only
was answered, that I saw none of them had an ill thought of me: but since he
understood I knew of this his injury to me* he has ever hated me, and sought
to do me mischief; giving out confidently, that I am a Jesuit; and he now
fixes his name, I fear, malliciously, to things I am sure it is impossible for
him to know or for any man in the world: for what is false has no essence or
reallity; but it is suitable to his practice toward me, and so I wonder not to
find his name there: though at others, I cannot sufficiently wonder:

In the year 1646. whilst the army was victorious abroad, through the union and
concurrence of conscientious people, of all judgments, and opinions in
religion; there brake forth here about London a spirit of persecution; whereby
private meetings were molested, and diverse pastors of congregations imprisoned,
and all threatened; Mr. Edwards, and others, fell foul upon them, with his
Gangreen after Gangreen, slander upon slander, to make them odious, and so to
fit them for destruction, whether by pretense of law, or open violence he
seemed not to regard; and amongst the rest, abused me, which drew from me a
whisper in his ear, and some other discourses, tending so my own vindication,
and the defense of all conscientious people: and for which had then much
respect from these very men, that now asperse me themselves, with the very
same, and some other like aspertions, as he then did.

Persecution increased in all quarters of the land, sad stories coming daily
from all parts, which at length were by diverse of the Churches, my self, and
other friends, drawn into a large petition; which I profess was so lamentable,
considering the time, that I could hardly read it without tears: and though
most of those that are called Anabaptists and Brownists congregations, were for
the presenting of it; yet Master Goodwins people, and some other of the
Independent Churches being against the season, it was never delivered.

But troubles still increasing, another petition, not so large, was prepared,
and at length agreed to by all sorts of conscientious people, that were
opposite to persecution: and all this while I was acceptable among them; only
some grudgings I perceived in Master John Price, which I imputed to some
weakness, it clyning to emulation: and all the strise about this petition also,
was the season: multitudes with me being for the presenting, and the
Independents against it: in conclusion, a final meeting there was, where
before I came was dispersed the most shameful aspertion of me, that ever was
uttered of man: and which did render me so obnoxious to that meeting, that all
I spoke was construed to the worst; and caused so great a clamor and
discontent, that he who had the petition and hands in keeping, rent it
in^^eeces; and so the meeting ended.

Toward the conclusion whereof, Major Robert Cobet pulls me by the arm to
speak with me, so I took Master Davis, and Master Antrobus and others with me;
and master Cobet told me before them, that one master Husbands a linen draper
in Corn hill, being at Lieutenant Generals house, there openly avouched that I
was an Athiest and denier of Scriptures, a loose and vicious man, and that
^busing my self with a lewd woman, she putting me in mind of that place of
Scripture, that whoremongers and adulterers God would judge, that I should make
answer, what do ye tell me of that Idle book?

Telling me withal, that this report was gone all about the town, and was the
cause I was so ill resented by the present meeting; I confess, I was amazed to
hear this, but whilst he was telling me this foul story, he espies master
Hu^bands, and calls him to us; telling him he was declaring to master Walwyn
here, pointing to me, what he heard him declare at the Lieutenant Generals,
says master Husbands, I wish you had not spoken of it, for I find it is a
mistake, the thing is not true of master Walwyn, it is another; so he suffered
himself to be thoroughly reproved by those present, and he seemed then to be
sorry for it; but aspersions fly faster, then any man can fetch them back, and
so did this, to my extreme desparagement: and it served their turn at that
meeting to blast all the reason I spoke, and to destroy that petition:

And those who had made use of this reproach, and so made themselves guilty, as
the manner of men is, resolved to disparage me to purpose, and thereupon some
leading people of master John Goodwins, set themselves down as a Committee,
calling before them, all they could find had ever conversed with me, to inform
whatsoever I had said, that might tend to my disparagement: this is some three
years since: and so by way of articles, most of the aspersions now in this
book, were then collected, which I had continual notice of as they came in,
and who did inform: and who would not, but declared confidently they were
persuaded from long and much familiarity, that I was really honest and
conscientious; amongst which Mr. Henry Brandriff, Captain Chaplain, Mr. Weeks
and others;

Nevertheless the violent party, as Mr. John Price, and others, would go on
with their articles: me thoughts it was a strange work, for a people who called
themselves the people of God: but so they did; and at length had possessed
diverse, who formerly had well respected me, that I was a dangerous man and not
fit for society; whereupon it was desired by my friends, and agreed unto by
theirs, that a meeting should be on both parties; and their articles should be
heard, and I have freedom to make my defense, and the place appointed was the
Dolphin in Cornhill, where I and my friends kept our time and continued there,
but on their parts none came.

And Mr. Brandriff, my then intimate friend, persuaded me it was not fit,
things should come to such a height, that it would make but rejoicing for our
enemies; that he was confident, there was no real enmity, but only causles
doubts and jealousies, and that if I would but vindicate my judgment
concerning the Scriptures, and my owning of them, I should find they had
nothing to object against me, and that they and I should be as good and as
loving friends as ever.

Whereunto I was very inclinable, as having never born any man a grudge for any
injury ever done me, esteeming the doer by wounding his own conscience; to be
punished sufficiently; nor do I relate these things in way of revenge, but only
as to do my self right, and to free my wife and children from the reproach of
having so unworthy a husband and Father; and the cause I honor, from having so
vile a servant as these would make me, I told him my whisper to Mr. Edwards and
my other writings did sufficiently testify I owned the Scriptures, and he
confessed it, but yet wished me to do something particularly, to that end:

About this time upon occasion of Mr. Edwards, writings (I take it) came forth
Mr. John Goodwins Haggi^-Mastix, wherein to the apprehension of some eminent
men: he in effect denied the scriptures to be the word of God, and much
discourse, and great complaint there was about it, in so much as Colonel
Leighs Committee had it brought before them, where it was my lot to be, when
the passage concerning the Scriptures was read openly by one, thatamongst
others, informed against it: and where it was called a most impious,
blasphemous Book, and ordered to be seized, all of them immediately;

That Committee was of a most persecuting disposition, and dealt most forwardly
with diverse conscientious people; with whom, and in whose behalf; I continually
appeared, as for Mr. Kiffin, Mr. Patience, and many others, I cannot now
remember: and Henry, Mr. Overtons man the bookseller, that, as I am told,
prints this unchristian book, called, Walwyns Wiles, might remember who it was
that gave timely notice of the order for seizing his Master's Books (for he
pri^ted Hagio Mastix) and in thanfulnesse for the courtesy done to his dead
Master, might have forborne to have done me such a discourtesie: but it has
been my usual payment for all my services to that sort of men.

Diverse did observe a strange providence, that those who had so scandalized me
for a denier of Scriptures, should from a pen, wherein they were all concerned,
receive occasion of so great suspicion, and be put themselves upon a work of
vindication on his behalf: And though they called it, a Candle to light the Sun
(as esteeming it altogether superfluous) yet many still say, it needs to be
more cleared.

And hence some of my Friends persuaded me I needed not to publish my
Vindication concerning the Scriptures, for satisfaction of those, who had
enough to do for their own Vindication: yet because I was willing to stand
clear in the sight of all men, I published my Still and foft voice, against
which I never yet heard any objection: And one of Mr Goodwin's People, namely,
Mr Davenish, meeting me a few days after in the Court of Requests, saluted me
kindly, and gave me thanks for publishing that Book; I told him, I was glad
understanding men approved it, and did hope it would be profitable to the
public: he replied, it would be so, and that he should make it his rule.

And so a good while after this, I had much respect from many o^ them, and not
an ill look from any: but though Mr Leigh's Committee extremely perplexed
honest people about their private meetings and doctrines, yet did this sort of
men that traduce me appear very slenderly in comparison of others, that were
thought to be less concerned.

In conclusion, that Committee and their Favorers in both Houses grew to so
great a height, that the Generality of Congregations, and others, resolved to
bear testimony openly against the same, as being contrary to the many
Declarations of Parliament, and as doing the very same things they had
condemned in the high Commission: and thereupon drew up a Petition, wherein
they did parallel all the former practices complained of in the Star Chamber
and high Commission, with the present proceedings; which Petition was drawn and
debated by many persons chosen purposely thereunto, and indeed was the most
serious of any that was presented (which the Author of this Pamphlet, I
perceive, terms sharp^esse and provoking) and imputes it unto me.

This Petition was taken before it was handed, and questioned as a scandalous
and seditious paper, and committed to Mr Leigh's Committee to enquire after the
Authors and Promoters; and Mr Lamb, at whose meeting place it was taken,
ordered to appear there: this occasioned a very great appearance in the owning
of it, by abundance of conscientious honest people, and that occasioned some
discontent in the Committee, which begot the commitment of Major Tulidah, and
Mr Tue; and that occasioned another Petition to the House, and that another,
un^ill the last and the first large one were ordered to be burnt by the common
Hangma^; in all which time of motion and trouble, most of the uppermost
Independents stood a loof, and looked on: whilst Mr Stasmore, Mr Highland, Mr
Davis, Mr Cooper, Mr Thomas Lamb of the Spittle, and very many more, for many
weeks continually plied the House.

The Petition is yet to be seen, and is fraught with abundance of good things,
such as I really desired the House would have granted; and I think it had been
happy for them that burnt it, rather to have granted it, and most happy for the
Commonwealth; So that it is an extreme mistake to imagine, that I, or any that
I ever knew, petitioned for such things as we did hope the Parliament would not
grant: Indeed, we had cause to doubt they would not, but we conceived they
ought, the things being evidently just; and we conceived if they would not,
'twas more then we knew before we asked; and we knew it was our duty to ask,
and that upon such evidence of reason and equity which that Petition holds
forth, as should leave a testimony to the world, that we understood our rights,
and did in an humble petitioning way demand them.

But this bustling unkind dealing with Petitioners for many weeks together, and
the burning of a Petition so just and necessary, so opened the eyes of the
people in all places, that it was both grieved and wondered at; all men
evidently seeing, that we were likely, though the Common Enemy was vanquished,
to be liable to the same, or worse bondage, notwithstanding all the blood and
misery it had cost to be delivered there from.

And when this was discerned, then some of my now Adversaries began to approve
of our motions, and they and I began to come a little nearer together, and had
joint meetings and debates; and Mr John Price may, and cannot but remember an
evenings journey he and I made into Drury Lane to the Lieutenant General, and
what satisfaction we received; what abundance of friendly discourse we had all
the way going and coming, and parted in a most kind and cordial manner;
rejoicing on my part, as having no grain of rancour remaining in me, and
thought it had been so on his; if it were not, God forgive him.

But the effect was, we all, both his Friends and mine, joined in a Petition,
the last and most sharp of any, as is yet to be seen; wherein he knows was not
only his and mine advice, but many others: so that to say, I delight or design
provocations to Authority, is a gross abuse; if there were any, it is, he
knows, to be shared amongst he knows whom, as well as us.

And, as unadvised, it is to lay to my charge the opposing of all Authority
that ever was: for let them tell me what Authority they opposed not; the Kings
and Bishops they cannot deny; and the Parliament and Presbyterian, I think,
they will confess; and truly I never opposed since, except to insist for such
just things as were promised, when the Army first disputed, be called an
opposition: and such as are not only fixed in my mind, but in the minds of
thousands more that then owned the proceedings of the Army, and ventered their
lives for them, when these that now revile me, stood aloof, seeing it neither
just nor seasonable.

And truly, that they have sat themselves down on this side Jordan, the reason
is somewhat too evident, for men that would not be thought men of this world;
it is but a promised land, a promised good that I and my Friends seek, it is
neither offices, honors nor preferments, it is only promised Freedom, and
exemption from burdens for the whole Nation, not only for our selves; we wish
them peace, we repine not at any man's honor, preferment or advantage; give us
but Common Right, some foundations, some boundaries, some certainty of Law, and
a good Government; that now, when there is so high discourse of Freedom, we may
be delivered from will, power, and mere arbitrary discretion, and we shall be
satisfied: if to insist for this, be to oppose Authority, what a case are we
in? Certainly were these men in our case, or were they sensible of the price it
has cost this Nation to purchase Freedom, they would think it deserved more
then the mere name thereof.

And how I can be charged to make it my work to divide the Army, I cannot see;
I only pursue the establishment of Freedom, and redress of Grievances, I have
ever pursued, and which are not yet obtained; so also have done many in the
Army. It is in the Army, as it is between these men's Friends and mine; some
content themselves with present enjoyments, others with the Commonwealth at
more certainty in the foundations of Freedom; and for my part, I ever most
earnestly desired their union, so it were in good, and for that Freedom and
good to the Nation, for which, I believe, most of them have fought; and if they
divide for want of it, they divide them that keep them from it, and not I, that
wish with all my heart that cause of division were not.

The Lieutenant General well knows (for I visited him often in Drury Lane
about that time that Mr Price was there with me) how much I desired the union
of the Army; and though it then divided, it was not esteemed a fault in those
that separated themselves for good, but blame worthy in those that would not
unite, except for evil: So that to unite, or divide, is not the thing; but
whether in good, or evil, is the main of all; and by which, my Adversaries and
I shall one day be judged, though now they have taken the Chair, and most
uncharitably judge me of evil in every thing wherein I move, or but open my
mouth.

And the Lieutenant General also knows, upon what grounds I then persuaded him
to divide from that Body, to which he was united; that if ^e did not, it would
be his ruin, and the ruin of the General, and of all those Wo^thyes that had
preserved us; that if he did do it in time, he should not only preserve himself
and them, and all conscientious people, but he should do it without spilling
one drop of blood; professing, that if it were not evident to me that it would
be so, I would not persuade him; and that I would undertake to demonstrate to
him that it would be so; and so, through God's goodness, and the zeal and
affections of these men's now despised Friends, it came to pass: so far was I
ever from: ^vising unto blood: whereas these men would suppose me to be
delighted with nothing more then slaughter and confusion.

Well, I had no show of enmity from them all the time the Army disputed with
the Parliament, but they would, diverse of them, come home to my house day by
day, and sit and discourse friendly, and cheerfully, and seriously, of the
present affairs, and refresh themselves in my Garden with that simple
entertainment I use unto my Friends; and when they had done, I would bring them
on their way, and they as kindly bring me back; and so joy'd was I really with
this (as I thought) renewed affection, that I would often say within my self,
and to some others, I now see, The falling out of Lovers is the renewing of
Love.

Nay, so great a testimony I then had, from my continued Fr end Mr Brandriffe,
that greater could not be; for it was his lot to discourse with one Major West,
a Gentleman, I take it, of Cambridge-shire, who was to have gone for Ireland:
this Gentleman told him diverse secret things, that rightly ordered, were very
useful at that time: Mr Brandriffe thinks me the fittest man to be acquainted
therewith, tells me of it, and brings him to my house, to whom I was not
altogether a S^ranger; so he opens his breast to me in such things, that as the
times were, if I had been base, or falsehearted, might have cost him his life;
I say, as the times were: but I proved as Mr Brandriffe had reported me to him,
and kept his council.

Well, very good Friends we were all; and I was by very eminent persons of the
Army, sent for to Reading, to be advised withal touching the good of the
people, a study my Conscience had much addicted me to; and after this, no jarr
appeared amongst us till the Army had past through the City, nor until the
business of the Tower aforementioned besell: But then, instead of Arguments
against mine, and my Friends Reason, aspersions were produced; and then afresh,
we were Atheists, Non-Scripturists, Jesuits, and any thing to render us
odious. This, whilst I remained there, begot a great falling out amongst our
Friends and theirs in London; which upon my coming (looking upon it as a thing
of very ill consequence) I prevailed for a reconcilement: so far have I ever
been from dividing, that I believe all those with whom I have most converst,
judge no man more deserves the name of a Reconciler.

But about this time I met with that Gentleman, Major West, in the street, and
he looks upon me somewhat ghastly, saying, what are you here? yes, said I, why
not? why, says he, being at my Lord Mayors, you were there said to be the most
dangerous, ill-conditioned man alive; that you seek to have the City destroyed;
that you would have no Government, and all things common, and drive on
dangerous designs: says I, who is it that avouches this? why, says he, Henry
Brandriffe, who says, he knows it to be true, and that he has kept you
company these seven years, of purpose to discover you: I profess, I was so
astonished to hear this from Mr Brandriffe, that I had no thought (nor did not
then call to mind) how upon intimate entire friendship, he had brought this Mr
West to unbosome himself unto me, in a matter of so great concernment; so I
past it over, and parted with him.

But in a little ruminating of the strangeness and horriblenesse of this
dealing, the business of Major Wests coming to me with Mr Brandriffe, withal
circumstances came fresh into my mind; and about a week after, I met with Major
West in Bishops-gate-street, and after a salute, asked him, if he had seen Mr
Brandriffe: he told me, he had, and that he was of the same mind, and would
justify it, for he had kept me company seven years to discover me: upon this I
asked him, whether he did not remember, that Mr Brandriffe (upon pre-discourse)
did bring him to my house to discover such and such things to me, as the
fittest Friend he had? he answered me, yes: and were they not such things, said
I, that if I had been base and deceitful, might have been much to your
prejudice, as the times then were? yes, says he: said I, did he then know me
to be base, and to carry on dangerous designs, and had kept me company seven
years to discover me, and would he bring you to discover such things, and to un
bosom your self to me? said I, whether was he most false to you, or to me? he
makes a stand a little while; truly, says he, he must be very false and
unworthy to one of us: So I wished him to consider, what strange kind of men
these were, and how a man might come to know when they meant good faith in
their discourse and society amongst men.

This Discourse I have set down thus punctually, because a person of so good
credit as this Major West is, is ready, as he told me lately, to avouch this
that Mr Brandriffe said of me; and because it is their usual way to beget
credit in the foulest aspersions they cast upon me, by saying, this is certain,
I kept him company so long of purpose to discover him, and will rather injure
their own conscience then want of belief; for I am confident Mr Brandriffe in
all his society with me, had not an ill thought of me; if he did keep me
company so long for ill and unworthy ends, to entrap and make the worst of
every thing I said (which I cannot believe) he was the more unworthy; and
cannot but lament his condition, or any man's else that uses it: I bless God,
I never was a minute in his company, but upon terms of true hearty love and
friendship; nor ever circumvented him, or any man else; nor have used to carry
tales, or to make the worst of men^ discourses, but have set my house and heart
open at all times to honest men, where they have had a most sincere and hearty
welcome; and if any have turned my freedom and kindness to my prejudice, God
forgive them.

Yea, so far has it been from being my principle, or practice as the
uncharitable Subscribers of the Epistle Dedicatory to this-vain Book, infer) to
say or do any thing against him whom I thought engaged to destroy me; that both
to those of the Kings Party, with whom I had some acquaintance, and those my
old and many Friends of the Presbyterian judgment, in all times; I ever spoke
and advised them what I thought in my conscience was for their good; persuading
with all men to place their happiness so, as it might be consistent with the
freedom, peace and prosperity of the Commonwealth; and, I believe, many will
acknowledge they have found my council good, and wish they had taken it; some
having since confessed, I have told them truth, when they did not believe it; nor
can any of them ^ustly say, and I believe will not say, that ever I abated one
syllable of my principle of Common Freedom, nor ever discovered a thought to
the prejudice of the Parliament or Commonwealth.

But would these men turn their sight inward, and look into their own hearts,
there they would find such a latitude of dissimulation, as is hardly to be
found in any sort of men pretending to Religion; as may not only appear by
these men's fair carriages outwardly always to me, and Mr Brandriffe's strange
discovery of himself, but in others also of the same people, as Mr Richard
Price the Scrivener, the Author of one of the most notorious false scandals
contained in the Book.

My first acquaintance with this Mr Richard Price, was by occa^ion of our
Parish business, in his trade, and that about our Ward; and after that, about
a Remonstrance presented to the Common Council, in all which I found him
ingenuous, and so grew to intimacy with him: this was when Alderman Pennington
was Lord Mayor, and before Mr John Goodwin had gathered his Church, or at
least, before this Mr Price was a Member of it; and I took so much content in
his company, that I brought such as I loved most entirely, acquainted with him.

I, through God's goodness, had long before been established in that part of
doctrine (called then, Antinomian) of free justification by Christ alone; and
so my heart was at much more ease and freedom, then others, who were entangled
with those yokes of bondage, unto which Sermons and Doctrines mixed of Law and
Gospel, do subject distressed consciences: upon which point, I was frequent in
discourse with him, and he would frequently come home to my house, and took
much delight in that company he found there; insomuch, as we fell to practice
arms in my-Garden: and whither he brought his Friends; and Lords days, and
Fast days he spen^ usually with us: As for Fasts then, some circumstances of
the times and proceedings considered, neither he nor we were satisfied therein,
nor hardly any of those that we called Sectaries (or Antinomians, which was
then the beam in the e^e) about the Town.

It sell out upon a Fast day in the morning, my Friend and I thought fit to
give, him a visit, to manifest our joy in his society: so coming to his house,
he seemed to be ^^eding glad, and hastened abroad with us, and we went at last
to Basing-shaw Church (...) ^eing where my Lord Mayor was to be, as expecting
to hear some excellent man there; being there some time, we found the matter so
lamentable, as we were all three weary of it: For the truth is, whosoever is
clearly possessed with this one Doctrine of Free Justification, has such a
touchstone as presently discovers the least contradiction either in Prayers, or
Sermons, and what is gold, silver, dross, hay or stubble: so we all at once
together went away, but so, as we could give no offense to the congregation,
being not in the body of the Church; (so that the relaters, in saying we had
been from Church to Church) Mr. Cranfords being all we were at before, though
he know, it has not been more usual with-any then with themselves, passing to
and fro from place to place on the Lords, and Fasts days, 4 and 6 of a company
spying, watching, and censuring of doctrines (as he that wrote the Book called
the Pullpit incendiary, me thinks should be ashamed to seem ignorant of.

Being come out of the Church, we past the way homewards; much lamenting the
condition of a people under such teachers, being taught scarce any thing to
make them either knowing Christians, or good and useful men; imputing much of
the misery of the times to the ignorance or preversnesse of preachers; the
greatest part of their time being spent to uphold their interest against
Antinomians, Anabaptists, and others, that fell off from their congregations,
seldom upon any necessary or useful doctrine, or if they did, before they had
done with it, they contradicted themselves much or little, sufficient to spoil
all they had done.

So in short time, we came to my house, where we went on discoursing, from one
thing to another, and amongst other things, of the wisdom of the heathen, how
wise and able they were in those things, unto which their knowledge did extend;
and what pains they took to make men wise, virtuous, and good commonwealths
men; how pertinent they were in the things they undertook, to the sahme of such
Christians, as took upon them to be teachers of others, when they were to seek
in the main principle of their science, with which kind of discourse, he was
very much affected, though it did not appear he had been accustomed to the
reading of humane authors; which for twenty years before I had been, but I used
them always in their due place; being very studious all that time in the
Scriptures, and other divine authors, as some of Mr. Perkins works, Mr.
Downhams divinity, I had, as it were, without book, also Doctor Halls
meditations, and vows, and his heaven upon earth, and those pieces annexed to
Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical policy; hearing, and reading continually; using
Seneca, Plutarchs Lives, and Charon of humane wisdom, as things of recreation,
wherein I was both pleased, and profited; and truly, I do not see I have cause
to repent me of taking liberty in this kind, having never in my life, I bless
God; made an ill use thereof, amongst which Lucian for his good ends, in
disovering the vanity of things in worldly esteem, I like very well, whereof I
can read only such as are translated into English; such a wise Jesuit I am,
that withal my skill, I cannot construe three lines of any Latin author, nor
do understand any, except such common proverbs, as are more familiar in Latin
then in English, which sometimes I use not to dignifie my self, but because of
the pertinency of them in some occasions.

For as this author would infer of me, I do not think any man much the wiser
for having many languages, or for having more then one; and though I wish I had
the Latin, yet I think it not worth that pains, and time, as is commonly spent
in learning; and do believe, I had been furnished with it, (for my parents, I
thank them, were not wanting) but for the tediousness, and impertinency of my
teachers; which since I understand, I often blame in them, which is all I have
to say against Latin, or any kind of learning; except that part of it, which
puffs up, and makes men scornful pedants, despisers of unlearned and
illitterate men, a humor, if I mistake not puffs my present Antagonist:

I see wise, and inconsiderate men too, skillfull in languages, and in arts,
and science; I have not much to do with them; my care is rightly to understand
my self in my native language, being troubled with no other; and of all I
chiefly thank these that employ there charity in translation of well meaning
authors, which I hope I may read without asking leave of these that through
scupulosity dare not.

Moses was skillful in all the learning of the Egyptians, which the Scriptures
testify without reproof, and S. Paul certainly read the poets, and was not
abasht to recite one of them; and I am certain most of the university men in
England, and most of the liberaries are not without all Lucians works, some
whereof, as I am informed, are much more offencive to Christianity then these
in English.

And why then I might not without blemish read one of his dialogues to this,
Mr. Richard Price, I cannot yet perceive? as I take it we read that which is
called his tyrant; a discourse, though possibly not in all things justifiable,
yet such as he might have made a better use of, being so pointed against
ambition, pride and coveteousnesse as he might have been the better for it
whilst he lived: as for me I count him a very weak man, that takes harm by
reading it or any such like things.

The truth is, for many years my books, and teachers were masters in a great
measure of me; I durst scarce undertake to judge of the things I either Read,
or heard: but having digested that unum necessarium, that pearl in the field,
free justification by Christ alone; I became master of what I heard, or read,
in divin^ty: and this doctrine working by love; I became also, much more master
of my affections, and of what ever I read in humane authors, which I speak nor
as Glorying in my self, but in the author of that blessed principle; which I
did long before, and then (and do still) prize at so inestimable a value; that
I was far from any such thought of impious blasphemy, as to say, here is more
wit in this (meaning Lucian) then in all the bi^le: all our discourse was
before my wise and children, and my friend, and a maid servant that had dwelt
with us then three years, and since has made them up nine years; I dare
appeal to them all if ever they heard me value, any, or all the Books, or
Sermons either, in the world Comparable to the Bible; so as, but that I have
since had some experience of the easiness of Mr. Price his conscience? I
should even expire with wonder, at his impudence, and at his uncharitableness,
that he and his friends, people of a Church, that call themselves Saints, and a
people of God, should harbor this wretched slander six years amongst them,
and be bringing it forth this time, and that time, but find no time, their
season, but when I was violently taken out of my bed, and house, and made a
prisoner: if this be their way of visiting of prisoners, would not it make men
think they had forgot the Scriptures; nay, might they not go to the heathens to
learn some Charity.

Where is Charity? Where is love? that true Christian love, which covers a
multitude of sins; but that there should be malice, inventive, inveterate
malice, in place thereof: certainly were your Church truly a Church of Christ's
making, it would deserve a heavy Censure.

Our Savior sends the sluggard to the Ant: the over careful and distrustful
to the lilies of the field, and may not I send these to heathens, to get some
charity?

Mr. Price, I blush not to say, I have been long accustomed to read Montaigns
Essaies, an author perhaps you will startle at; nor do I approve of him ^n all
things, but i will read you a piece or two, that will be worth your study; though
he be an author scarce so modest as our Lucian.

Speaking in his 12 chap. page 244. of Christian religion, he says thus,

If this ray of Divinity, did in any sort touch us, it would every where
appear: not only our words, but our actions, would bear some show, and lust^e
of it. Whatsoever should proceed from us, might be seen enlightened, with this
noble and matchless brightness. We should blush for shame that in humane
sects, here was never any so factious, what difficulty or strangeness soever
his Doctrine maintained; but would in some sort conform his behavior, and
square his life unto it; whereas so divine and heavenly an institution, never
marks Christians but by the tongue: And will you see whether it be so? Compare
but our manners unto a Turk, or a Pagan, and we must needs yield unto them:
whereas in respect of our religious superiority, we ought by much, yea, by an
incomparable distance outshine them in excellency, And well might a man say.
Are they so just, so charitable, and so good, then must they be Christians. All
other outward shows, and exterior appearances, are common to all Religions, as
hope, affiance, events, ceremonies, penitence, and Martyrdom; the peculiar badg
of our truth should be, virtue, as it is the heavenlyest, and most difficult
mark, and worthyest production of verity it self: And in his twentieth Chapter,
page: 102. he says, speaking of the Cannibals, the very words that import
lying, falsehood, treason, dissimulation, covetousness, envy, detraction, and
pardon, were never heard of amongst them.

These, and the like flowers, I think it lawful to gather out of his
Wilderness, and to give them room in my Garden; yet this worthy Montaign was
but a Romish Catholic: yet to observe with what contentment and full swollen
joy he recites these cogitations, is wonderful to consideration: And what now
shall I say? Go to this honest Papist, or to these innocent Cannibals, ye
Independent Churches, to learn civility, humanity, simplicity of heart; yea,
charity and Christianity.

This has been an old long rooted slander, and has therefore cost me thus much
labor to stock it up: As for my breach of the Fast, one would think Mr John
Goodwin's playing at Bowls upon a Fast day in the afternoon, a while after
this, and which he did not seem to judge a fault, but as it was an offense
against the reputation of his faculty, might have stopped these men's mo^ths in
that particular: Nor would I ever have revived the memory of it, but their
triumphing thus in slanders against me, deserves their abasement and
humiliation.

Of whom this Mr Richard Price receives instruction, I know not; but this is he
that with knowledge, if not direction of their Church, undertook to betray the
KING into the hands of the Governor of Alisbury, under pretense of giving up
Alisbury unto him, in lieu of Liberty of Conscience (that was the gold upon the
bait) and did go, and spoke with him; and how many untruths in such a case he
forc^^ to utter with confidence, may easily be judged; and where he had a rule
for this being a Christian, for my part I am to seek; the Apostle thought
himself injured, that it was reported, he maintained that evil might be done,
that good might come thereof.

And since treachery seems so slight a matter, with these Churchmen, I shall
make bold to send them again to this Lord Mantaign, in his third Book, and
first Chapter, page: 443. he says thus;

To whom should not treachery be detestable, when Tiberius refused it on such
great interest? One sent him word out of Germany, that if he thought good,
Arminius should be made away by poison; he was the mightyest enemy the Romans
had, who had so vilely used them under Varus, and who only impeached the
increase of his Dominion in that Country; his answer was, That the People of
Rome were accustomed to be revenged on their enemies by open courses, with
weapons in hand, not by subtilties, nor in hugger-mugger: thus left he the
profitable for the honest, in 447. As for my part (says Montaign) both my word
and my faith are as the rest, pieces of this common body, their best effect is
the public service; that is ever pre-supposed with me: But as if one should
command me to take charge of the Rols or Records of the Palace, I would
answer, I have no skill in them, or to be a Leader of Pioners; I would say, I
am called to a worthier office: Even so, who would go about to employ me not to
murder, or poison? but to lie, betray, or forswear my self, I would tell him,
if I have robbed or stolen any thing from any man, send me rather to the Galleys;
for a Gentleman may lawfully speak, as did the Lacedaemonians, defeated by
A^ripater, upon the points of their Agreement; You may impose as heavy
burdens, and harmfull taxes upon us, as you please; but you lose your time to
command us any shameful or dishonest thing. Every man should give himself the
oath which the Egypt an Kings solemnly and usually presented to their Judges,
Not to swerve from their Consciences, what command soever they should receive
from themselves to the contrary.. In 448. he says thus, What is less possible
for him to do, then what he cannot effect without charge unto his faith.

It will, I know, be wondered at, that I thus enlarge my self; but these things
are so rich and excellent, that I cannot but insist upon them, and a^^ in some
hope to convert my Adversaries, which has ever been my aim, equal to my own
vindication; for I recite these passages, because I am in love with them,
wishing them also of the same mind, for I wish them no worse then I wish to my
self: or if I fail of thi^, yet I am desirous and hopeful to better other men
by the things I write.

These are the plainnesses wherein I have ever delighted; so far; ^m I from
that politic, crafty, subtle and hidden reservednesse, which this Author
would persuade the world I abound withal; exercising his wit so exquisitly in
decyphering me out to be a man of so large capacity and ability, as for my part
I do not believe there is any man in the world so; much less my self, who
setting aside a little consideration and experience, united to an upright
conscience, have nothing to please my self withal: Nor do I much desire those
extraordinary parts, which are seldom employed to their right end, being
commonly tempted, to serve some Politicians ends, as may be seen rather in the
abilities and application of them, in this Author; for he has drawn such a
picture of man's ability, as shows only his own parts in so doing; and applies
them to me, that have no part of them, of purpose to make me (...) lifts me up
to the top of the pinnacle, that he may cast me down to my greater (...).

Truly, I never thought a good cause ever needed such workings is he exalts
himself (not me) withal: and I dare appeal to those many my Friends, that I
daily and hourly converst withal for some years now in public businesses,
whether ever they saw more plainness and open-heartednesse in man: Indeed, ^f I
suspected any man inclinable to ensnare me, as these men's practices, made me of
late somewhat wary; I had reason to be careful. And whereas he taxes me of
^eightening men's discontents, I believe till now, they are pleased (not without
particular morsels) none were more apt thereto then themselves: but the world
is well am^nded with them, and every other man's mouth must be stopped on pain of
Treason.

I am not more pleased with the former sayings of Montaign, then with what he
says in page: 449.

I have the^rfore placed Epaminondas in the first rank of virtuous men, and now
recant it not: unto what a high pitch raised he the consideration of his
particular duty? Who never ^^ew man he had vanquished; Who for their valuable
good of restoring his Country her liberty, made it a matter of Conscience to
take away any man's life, without a due and formal course of Law; and who
^udged him a bad man (how good a Citizen soever) that amongst his enemies, and
in the sury of a battle, spared not his friend, or his hon, so here a mind of
a rich composition.

And truly, I boast not, but these things have long since made so deep
impression in me, that I have been extremely mistaken by those, that gave our,
there was a plot amongst us to murder the King, when he was at Hampton Court,
and as much these that now start, that other as base, of an intention to
murder the Lieutenant General, they are ways neither justifiable nor
profitable; for where should such courses end, or what could more disparage
that side that began it; I wish you would be but as careful to preserve
entirely, the due and formal course of Law to every man, without exception,
friend, or foe, as we have been: and though at present you may please, your
selves with the sufferings of your adversaries (as you fancy them) yet you do
therein, but tread down your own hedges, and pluck up that Bank, that lets in
the sea of will, and power, over whelming your own liberties.

But before I part with this Mr. Richard Price; I have another thing to lay to
his charge, and that is; That he should say, I had a hand in that plot where
Read, and Sir Basil-brook were in question: in so much as my friends came
running to me with tears in their eyes, and all from his unadvised speeches:
was this like a friend, with whom you had eaten, and drunk, and discoursed
familiarly, and from whom you had taken some small tokens of sincere
affection; as the books entitled Luthers Christian liberty, The benefits of
Christ's death, Freemans meditations, and is I remember; Christ's Council to
Loadicea, and since I was so far from retorting this injury upon you, as that
after it, I chose rather to convince you by love, and as a testimony of my good
respects to you, sent you the Hystory of Thucidides, vvherevvith I was much
delighted, truly I vvonder nothing could keep you from bearing me rancour thus
long, and to vvatch this time of any, to slay me with your unjust report.

And truly, upon occasion lately, making my moan of this kind of usage to one
of their own people, that had received, extreme prejudce against me upon
these, and the like false reports, which upon some discourse with a friend of
mine first, and afterward with my friend, and I together, he did profess
much greef, for my hard usage; and told me that he did impute most of all this
to pride, and emulation, from this Mr. Price, and in that my pen in Petitions
(which otherwise was his work and trade) was many times accepted, if it be
so it is a sad story indeed, his own conscience only knovvs whether it be so
or not.

Yet I cannot but fear most of all the injuryes of this nature I have received,
have proceeded from this ground, for otherwise I am certain, I have given no
occasion to that Congregation, whereas most of my reproaches come from them.
And since I am thus fallen upon Mr. Richard Price, there is yet another of that
name of this congregation, and is this Mr. Richard Price his uncle, and Mr.
Hilleslyes son in law: from this Mr. Price I heard the first aspersion, that
ever I heard of my self, and it was thus,

Standing in Cornhill, at a Booksellers shop, a man comes and looks me very
earnestly in my face, I took little regard to it and went away, I was no sooner
gone, but says he to the Book seller, you are acquainted withal the sparcks
in the town; sparcks says he, the man seems to be a rational man: I But
replied the party, I am told he is a notorious drunkard, and a whore master,
and that he painted his face, but I see that's false: whereupon the Bookseller
having some knowledge of me, became troubled on my behalf; and fell to be very
serious with him, to know his author, and he honestly tells him, naming this
Mr. Price a mercer; and the Bookseller soon after tells me the whole story, and
the authors name, saying, he had been abused himself with base reports; and a
man might be undone by them, and never know it, till it was too late, and
therefore had resolved to hear no evil of any man, but if he could he would
learn the au^hor, and tell the party concerned of it: this Book seller is Mr.
Peter Cole at the sign of the Printing press, and I esteem my self obliedged
to him, ever since for his plain dealing:

So away went I to this Mr. Price, for I was somewhat troubled having never
heard, evil of my self till then: and I found him at Mr. Hilslies, and (...) a
friendly manner made him acquainted, with my business; he did not deny but he
had spoken as much; and that walking in Westminister hall, he was called from
me, and bid beware of me for I was supposed to be a Papist, and a dangerous
man: but he had not spoken any evil of me, as believing any of it to be true?
so I told him he and I had come acquainted upon a very honest business; about
the remonstrance presented to the Common Counsel, and therefore why he should
suffer such words to pass from him concerning me; I did wonder at it; I told
him how with very little enquiry he might soon have been satisfied, that I was
no such man; asked him if he knew any at Garlick-hill, where I had lived fifteen
years together, in good and honest repute; and where he ought to have informed
himself; and not so unadvisedly to disparage me: he seemed to be sorry for it:
so I only desired him to let me know his author, he told me I must excuse him;
he might not do it: nor could I ever get him to tell me: so being familiar with
my then friend Mr. Brandiff, I asked, whether they had not some rule, or method
in their Church, to give a man some satisfaction, that had received palpable
injury by a meraber; come said he I know where abouts you mean; trouble not
your self, no body believes it: and this was all I could get in this case:
wherein I yet stand injured, and since they are so desirous, more then truth
should be believed of me: I think it fit this which is certainly true, should
be known of their dealing with me.

Nor can any ingenious people now blame me, for being thus open, and
particular, since this sort of independents have made thus bold with my good
name so long a time; and since it is evident that manifestation dated the 14 of
April 1649. Published by my self, and my other three fellow sufferers; that I
was willing to have vindicated my self, from those common reproaches, they had
aspert me withal without naming, or reflecting upon any person, or any sort of
men whatsoever, so careful have I ever been, as much as in me is to have peace
withal men; bearing, and forbearing to my own loss, rather then I would
return evi^ for evil.

But their mallic^ breaking thus foully out upon me, in this vile book; I should
be unjust to my self, if I should not do my best endeavor to manifest so
detestable falsenesse, uttered to so bad an end, in so unseemly a time (the
time of my affliction) which I shall do with as much truth, as I can remember,
profe^sing withal from my very heart, and conscience, that I take no more
pleasure in doing of it, then I should do in gathering up, and throwing away
Snakes, and V^rmin scattered in my Garden; and do wish withal my soul they had
not necessitated me, nor my other fellow prisoners, to have exceeded our joint
Manifestation; but that we might all have been good friends thereupon.

In which Manifestation, is to be seen all our very hearts, and wherein all our
four heads, and hands were nigh equally employed, though this c^pritious author
(Mr. John Price, its said) be pleased to suppose me to be all (...) all
therein; yet I must, and truly profess the contrary: and must be bold to ^ell
them, where my friend Lieutement Colonel John Lillburn, appears otherwise in
any of his writings; I do not impute it to passion, as his adversaries
politiquely are accustomed; to take weak people off from the consideration of
what he says: but unto his zeal against that injustice, cruelty, hypocrisy,
arrogance, and flattery, which he has found amongst a sort of men, from whom
of any men in the world, he expected the contrary virtues; being otherwise to
my knowledge, and upon experience, a very lamb in conversation; and whom
goodness, and love, and piety, justice, and compassion, shall as soon melt,
and that into tears (I hope he will pardon my blabbing) as any man in the
world: but he hates all kind of baseness, with a perfect hatred: especially
that of ingratitude, which he has found, I have heard him say, so exceeding
all measure, in some of the subscribers of this pamphlet, that it loathes him
to think of it.

And as for my friend, Mr. Prince, whom this self-conceited author, would make
so weak in judgment, as to have no ability toward such a work; it is his
unhappiness to be so exceedingly mistaken; yet I must tell him, he has given
him so true a character, for honesty, and sincerity of heart, toward the
public, which in my esteem, does more commend him; then if he had attributed
to him, all those parts and abilities, he falsely, and for an ill end, does unto
me: lifting me up to heaven, that he might cast me down to hell: making me an
Angel, that he might make me a Devil: which parts are more abounding in
himself, as is to be seen in this his unhappy Book, and for which he will one
day sigh and groan, except he make a better use of them.

But Mr. John Price, Mr. Prince has not a congregation to cry up his parts;
amongst whom there is such a humor of flattery, as is not to be found the like
again amongst any sort of men; Oh such a Sermon, such a discourse, such
arguments, as never was heard of; when often times it is mere lamp-work, and ink
horn terms; such as the three first years in the University; or the first year
of a sound consideration, with a sincere conscience, would be ashamed of,

But were Mr. Prince of one of your congregation, and had but run with the
stream, and turned with the times, as most of you have done; could he but have
changed his principles with his condition; would he (as he was tempted by some
of you) have belyed his friends, and betrayed his cause, Oh what a man of parts
Mr. Prince had been; what could Mr. Prince have wanted, that those men had to
give: but to their shame, let them know, Mr. Prince values the integrity of his
conscience above his life, or any thing in this world; and for which he
deserves the love of all sound hearted men.

But Mr. John Price, you that make it so strange a thing for any man, to own in
the substance, what another has penned; there is a book with Mr. John Prices
name at it, of no long date; and the subject of it is about the King-ship of
the People: to me it seems, not to be the style of Mr. John Price: I am against
examining you, upon questions against your self; but there are (Knaves and
Fools in Folio, a book so called) that seems to claim kindred of Mr. John Price
in that piece; and if you be but a Godfather; (and it be now against your
judgment to be such) yet since the child bears your name, and it is a pretty
handsome one, be not ashamed still to own it; but if you be, the child shall
not want, I Will undertake to find the right Father: so much for Mr. Prince.

And for the complexion of my Friend Mr Overtons pen, truly it commonly carries
so much truth and reason in it, though sometimes in a Comic, and otherwhiles
in a Satyrick style, that I do not wonder you shun its acquaintance; and you
did wisely by this touch and glance, think to pass him by without provoking of
him: But look to your selves, and say, I gave you lawful warning; for he, I
assure ye, knows when, and when not, to answer such as you according to your
folly: And truly, but that it is against the nature of impudence to blush, the
complexion of the pen engaged in this your unseemly discourse, might well turn
Cowler, in correction of his: but he is old enough, let him answer for himself.

But why come their lines from them, as through a Prison^gra^e, Mr Price? Are
Prisons, in your Divinity, such ominous things? The Primitive Christians, and
the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, did not esteem them so. But it seems your
Congregation is of a near relation to those that hold prosperity a mark of the
true Church; and it will be good for those amongst you, that are yet sincere in
their Consciences, in time to consider it, and to enquire amongst all those
Churches the Apostles wrote to, where they find a Warrant for such slanderous
and backbiting practices as you are accustomed unto, licking up the very foam
and dregs of Mr Edwards his Gangrena; yea, your own vomit and poison which then
you cast out upon him.

But, I confess, you have notable ways to escape imprisonments; you can be
for a Kingly Government, and publish to all the world, that Kings are, as the
Consecrated Corn, not to be reapt by any humane fickle; and when occasion
serves, you can change your copy, and say, you are not bound to declare why
your judgment altered: But pray, Mr Goodwin, are you not bound to undeceive
those whom by your error you deceived, as soon as you saw your error?
Sometime your strength is not in an arm of flesh, nor in the power of the
Sword, but you no sooner get, as you think, the least hold of it, but the power
of the Sword is then the power of God, and then the Saints (meaning no body but
your selves) must judge and rule the earth. Indeed Friends, you manifest to all
the world, that your ways are the ways rather to good Offices and Benefices
too (for else, why are ye now so high for tyths, that some years since were so
much against them?) and le^ to honors, and preferments, and greetings in the
market places, rather then to prisons.

Yet are ye furnished with ways enough to send other men thither; you have one
way, is called, Ah Lord! we thank thee we are not as other men: A way to make
them first odious, by vindicating your selves in those things whereof ^o man
suspected you, that others might be thought guilty; as you endeavored by your
Declaration, wherein you vindicated your selves from being against Magistracy,
or liberty of Conscience, nor for Poligamy, or Community; and this in a time
when you had freshly and falsely asperst us, to be opposite to you in all
these, purposely to get your Guard into the Tower: and for your abatement, it
will not be amiss to let you know how a weak woman answered your strength
spent in this elaborate Declaration, at first and in the reading of it; but it
was my Wife, and she having been (as you will have it) a Jesuit's wi^e this two
and twenty years, may have more wit then ordinary.

Says she, They against Magistracy? Who can suspect them, that hunt and seek
for Offices as they do (now I am sure the City and Custom House will cry,
probatum est) and where you argued your selves to be for liberty of Conscience,
a^es she, Who have more need? I am sure none use so great a liberty, to raise
such vile and false reports as they do (for she hears all you say of me, and
about that time, that some of your tribe should report I used her very hardly,
and used to beat her; whereas we both know and believe in our consciences,
never two in the world lived more comfortably together then we have done, nor
have more delighted in one another.) And where you declared, you did not hold
it lawful to have more Wives then one, says she, They that keep their Wives
a^ such a rate as they do, had not need to have more then one apeice, they will
find one enough: And where you declared, that you were not for to have all
things common, says she, No, I warrant you they know well enough how to hold
their own: are not some of them Usurers? And you know it to be true: but if you
deny it, we will find you for this also a probatum; and thus was your mighty
Sisera struck through the temples by the hand of a silly Woman: The truth is,
ye overween your selves exceedingly, because ye are a little skillful in
talking and writing: But why went ye not on boasting? ye were no hypocrites, no
slanderers, no backbiters, no envious, malicious persons, no spies or
intelligencers, no covetous or ambitious persons, no hard-hearted or cruel
persons: truly you took the better way to vindicate your selves of those things
only, that no men accused you of.

Another way ye have to get men into prison, by suggesting fears and jealousies
of them into the minds of such as are in power and authority; playing the
pick-thanks by such unworthy and uncharitable courses; buzzing continually in
their ears, that we drive on dangerous designs; that we are Atheists, Jesuits,
and the like, which has been your common practice: insomuch, as being with
Colonel Martin, and another Gentleman, about a month before I was made a
Prisoner, at Lieutenant General Cromwels; and amongst other discourse,
wondering why he should suffer me continually at his table to be reproacht, as
if I were a Jesuit, and a man of dangerous principles; whereas none in the
world could have more testimony of any man to the contrary, then he had of me;
and why he did not vindicate me, when he heard me so abused: he told me, that
he could not believe those scandals, that he had professed often and again he
could not; but they were brought continually to them by Citizens, that were
esteemed honest godly men: And truly I do believe in my Conscience, we never
had been thus dealt withal as we are, but by your reports; and that we are
prisoners more by your occasion then any other.

And what a way did Mr Kiffin, and his Associates, find out as soon as we were
in, to rivet us in, with a Petition somewhat like your forementioned
Declaration? The scope thereof being truly Pharisaicall: Another, Lord, we
thank thee, we are not as other men, etc. Nor as these Publicans-No Anabaptists
of Munster (defiling their own nest) as supposing that lying story of that
injured people true) and praying the Parliament to be careful to suppress all
profaneness and licenciousnesse: as if we had been such a people: But so
justly did this mischief (intended on us) turn on their own heads, that most of
their own people abhorred the practice, as Un-Christian; and Mr Thomas Lamb of
the Spittle, offered to prove the promoters of it guilty of injustice,
arrogance, flattery and cruelty, and to give them a meeting to that purpose;
but sure they were ashamed, and durst not, for none of them would undertake him.

Besides these ways of holding Prisoners fast, my back-friend, Mr Arnald, has
a way of going from house to house, to discover matter (there ^^ing none at all
in these very men's opinions of me) For they all conclude, England's New Chains,
to be none of my indicting: I wonder why then they did not petition, or move
for my enlargement. No, besides that I am not of their Church; 'twas good
holding a man so hardly to be caught, that needed horse and foot to catch and
fetch him out of his bed: And therefore this Mr Arnald also sends Spies to
ensnare and entrap us in our discourse: and for encouragement to those he
sends, that they may not scruple, but think they do God good service therein;
he prosesses continually, I am a Jesuit: And now, I believe, finding his error
(for it is very easily found) he dreads my releasment, as believing I may have
remedy at Law for so destructive a slander: and therefore has thought even to
overwhelm me with this flood of aspersions, that I should not possibly escape
drowning. But the man's mistaken, and so are his Abettors and Associates; it is
but a Vision, a false fantastic apparation; they are all Nothings, mere
falsnesses, Serpents of Magicians making, the mere works of a malicious
imagination, that by cross working, forcing and wresting of words and
sentences, and by sames and opinions, has made a kind of crawling thing, that
might possibly serve to fright Children, or to please a Church that would go a
wool-gathering for a miracle, to confirm its reallity: But truth, which is
Moses his Serpent, you shall see will eat them up, and devour them all: Many of
them, if you well consider what you have here and elsewhere read, being consumed
already.

That which remains in general, is, that I aim at the destroying of Religion,
and at the subversion of all Government: But why should I do either Where Is the
advantage? I have always professed the contrary, and ever practiced the
contrary; as those that read my Whisper to Mr Edwards, and my still and soft
voice, forementioned, will easily believe. And I beg and entreat both young
and old to read them, before they give sentence in their own hearts of me,
that I should be so irreligious, as to utter such profane language concerning
the Book of Psalms, or Proverbs, or that horrid expression of the Book of
Canticles, as that it was nothing else but one of Salomons Epiphonemacs: a word
that I never spoke, nor yet know well how to pronounce, nor ever did apply the
meaning of it to so vile an end (speak the rest, whosoever will for me) and if the
Author had had any modesty or Religion in him, however it had come into his
thought, he would have silenced it, rather then such blasphemy should be seen
in print; I abhor the words should be in any of my paper; having never entered
my thought, or past my lips.

As true, likewise, are all the other unworthy passages in the 9 and 10 pages
of that shameless book; they have been all malicious snatchings and gatherings
from some officious tongues, at third, fourth or tenth hand; there being
nothing but mistakes and mis-applications in all of them, contrary to my
judgment, or any thing ever intended by me, in my discourse of any of those
subjects: And to show some palpable token, that they are mere malicious
smatterings, I appeal to all that know me, whether ever I were heard to commend
Plutarch's Morals to any man's reading; it being a Book, that although I have
had above these twenty years, yet I am certain, I never read forty hours
therein; though I somewhat blame my self for my neglect, it being so generally
commended by wise and judicious men: yet I could never persuade my self to take
the pains in reading of it, it being somewhat too ^edious for my expectation.
And as for Cicero's Orations, I never had it; have only seen it; and (though
very unadvisedly, as I was lately told by one whose judgment I love) am
somewhat prejudiced against his writings, as esteem^ng him a verbal and
vainglorious Writer.

I have, indeed, bemoaned the breeding of the Youth of this Nation, as being
bred so, as to be artificial and crafty, rather then truly wise and honest; to
be Sophisters, and Pedantick Disputers, and Wranglers about words, then of
solid judgment: but as for feats of activity, it is a light expression, to be
applied rather ^o tumblers, and the like, then to be a part of Childrens
breeding; and for Geometry, there may be much in it, and of use: but I have not
so much skill in it, as that (...) could make it matter for my commendation. So
that these Intelligencers being engaged in evil designs, and knowing themselves
guilty, are confused in their thoughts, their consciences ever flying in their
faces; and so they hear otherwise then is uttered, and report different from
what they hear, and so prove by a just providence destructive to those that
employ them; and it were pity an ill end should be better served.

In the 11 page, because he would not want matter to disparage, he pulls in I
know not who, that, forsooth, must be of my acquaintance, and speaking absurd
profane language, concerning things heavenly, and of God; that I profess I do
not think any man in the world would utter, nor think them fit to be repeated,
much less printed, to save a life: whereas this unhappy Author puts them in a
particular character, lest they should pass un-observed; and that not to save,
but to destroy me and mine: Who this should be, I cannot guess; but it seems,
it is a man of parts, possibly, for to have made him an intelligencer: if so
you have given him your reward, slander him, and let him go; and it is well he
scapes so, as the world goes.

For there are uses for Spies and Intelligencers, that few men dream of; and Mr
John Price, and Mr Goodwin, and Mr Lavander, knows of the making of them, their
instructions and oaths of employment and secrecy; an office and institution we
never read of in all the New Testament: but what wonder if their practice be
point-Blanck against the Scriptures, whose structure is not built upon (but
borrowed, or rather forced upon) that golden foundation?

As for the next passage in the 11 page, that I should affirm the Scriptures to
be, and not to be the Word of God; it is such a double way of expression, as I
dislike in all men, and avoid it in all my writings or discourse: but-for this,
or any thing relating to the Scriptures, I refer the honest-hearted Reader to
my still and soft voice.

And that I should persuade that Gentlewoman next mentioned, to ruin her self,
is as false as ever was spoken, as her Husband, her Sisters, her Friend that
was continually with her, her Servants and Children, I am confident are all
ready to testify, and some of them I am certain will witness, that I used my
utmost skill to dissuade her, and did manifest as much grief for her, as I
never did more for any, except a Child I had, to whom she was Godmother, for
she was my true Friend, and her Husband has for these twelve years (as I have
cause to believe) held me as dear to him as any Friend, and so has continued
to the time I came into prison; and her sister that has been in the most
extreme affliction for her, has yet showed so much respect to me (with the
Gentlewoman that was always with my distressed Friend) as to give me a visit
in this my imprisonment, and so also has two of her Sons: these are truths,
and will be believed by all that truly knew both her and me; though Mr Goodwins
whole Church should swear the contrary; and from whom she deserved a better
regard. I am sorry their hate to me should awake the remembrance of that sad
disaster from sleep, where it ought to have rested; she being very religious
after the way of Mr Simpson of Allhallowes Thames Street, and no admirer of Mr
John Goodwin: Insomuch as it was said to her, in her greatest extremity of pain
in her head (the greatest, in my apprehension, and most continued, that ever
was felt) you have a wise Religion, that cannot bear with a pain in your head:
his profession that said it, required another remedy; but as he exceeded in his
tongue, he was as short in his brain and hand: Not only she, but her Husband to
this hour, being much distressed through such comforters: and it were well some
skillful man would administer some matter to cure the man of his vainglory,
and flashing self conceitednesse, with which he abounds to the destruction of
some native goodness, and acquired parts; which would otherwise commend him: I
could not be more particular in this story, lest I should grieve my friends,
who I know cannot but desire this were buried in oblivion.

As false also is that other passage, concerning King James, and King David: it
having never been my manner, to use such opprobious language toward any men;
much less toward persons of such Eminency, but Generally reproove it.

I have from a serious consideration of David's offenses, and Gods passing them
by, and not rejecting of him for them; observed a different way from God, in
those of our times, that call themselves Saints, and would be esteemed his
nearest servants; for if any man be overtaken in a fault; they are so far from
restoring such a one by the spirit of meekness: or, reproving him privately, or
by love, as Gods way is; passing by multitudes of sins, and sailings; that they
make it their meat and drink, yea, they hunger, and thirst after evil reports;
yea, send out into the highways, and hedges, and as it were compel men to
come in to witness, and article, against men too, that have hazarded their
lives for their good: and with whom they have frequently, familiarly, and
intimately conversed; never reproveing them in their lives to their faces: and
keep things in boxes, three, four, six, years together, watching a season to
divulge them to their ruin: as now in mine, and my friends cases.

They that are now advocates for David, if David lived in our days, and had
not favored Mr. Goodwins Church Way, and had been guilty of the matter with
Bathsheba, and Vriah, where should David have found a place to have hid
himself, who amongst them; (according to their present rule with us) wou^d have
pleaded for him? nay, had not David's wiles (pardon the expression) been
published in words at length, and not in figures: yet possibly (nay probably)
David's being King had altered the case with these men; especially, if he were
supreme in power: for they are ever careful to row with, or not long against
the tide: but what (think you) would they not give that they had such matter
against me, that make so much to gather up false reports against me; what
society should I keep; who would own me, no marvail? now I see, that David
being put to his choice; chose rather to fall into the hands of God, then into
the hands of men: for with him there is mercy, his mercies are over all his
works; he delights in showing mercy, he considers that we are but dust: and
puts away our sins out of his remembrance; as far as the East is from the
West: whereas the mercies of men are cruelties: although I cannot so
experimentally say it, of any other sort of men, as of these; for I have found
the contrary from so many other sorts of people, upon diverse of my particular
occasions, that I have wondered to consider the difference.

For the next slander: that I should speak so slightly, of the sin against the
holy Ghost; this I heard they have asperst me with all above these three years:
and I have considered it seriously, and can profess, with a sincere
conscience, that I do not know that I ever uttered a syllable toward it: sure
I am it never entered into my heart: nor could I, till now I see it in their
book, learn, to what woman they charged me to have spoken it: but yet because I
ghessed, they might mean the gentlewoman forementioned, she being well known
to them: I have told her of the aspertion; and desired seriously if she could
to call to mind, whither ever any such unadvised speech had past from me to
her; as I might meet her, and in a friendly manner chide her for not visiting
my wife: and she has very often solemnly protested, she could not for her life
remember, that I did ever speak any thing toward it: and truly, if I had
known any such thing by my self, though it had been never so unserious, I
should have taken the shame of it to my self; and have manifested my sorrow for
it, as not in the least justifying a carelesnes in things of so high a nature:
and do fear, they come near to scoffing, that dare thus liberally publish in
print, expressions so unsuitable to so divine a subject, for they may remain
upon a readers mind, to prejuduce, longer then he would have them.

And concerning the next slander; I might blame her for her sadness, and fear,
which sometimes she would express, as being contrary to the principle, of that
love of God, she would constantly profess, to have assurance of: urging
frequently that place, which says, we have not received the spirit of bondage
to fear any more; but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father; and
have boldness to the throne of Grace, and the like; but that I ever
discouraged her in the hearing of Mr. Simpson; or in the ways of religion, I
utterly deny,

And being thus, as thus in truth it is, and no otherwise in all the
perticulars forementioned; let all impartial, and judicious people judge,
whether it had not been more for the honor of God, the Scriptures and
Religion; that this author; his associats subscribers, his abetters, and
confederates; to have received in good part our clear manifestation; wherein we
justly vindicated our selves in general, from those aspersions that causlesly
were cast upon us; without naming any person, or persons, as authors thereof;
or reflecting, with the least rancour upon any conditon of men; as being
willing, if possible, to have buried for ever, all former unkindnesses, and
evil offices done to any of us in this kind: and as far as in us was to have
renewed our former friendship with those, in whom we had formerly delighted, or
at least to have expelled that enmity, which we knew was exceedingly
prejudicial to the Commonwealth: I say, had it not been much more
Christian-like; then to have set their brains, and credits thus upon the
tenters (stretching them past the staple that they will never in again) and to
put upon record, so many unseemly expressions, as if they gladly took accasion
through my sides, and friends, to give Religion, the scriptures; yea, God
himself were it possible a deadly wound: for such I fear will be the effect;
whither throw their malice, or indiscretion, or both, I leave to judgment: and
for what cause, at best; but only to render me and my friends odious, to
discredit us in the things we undertook for the public.

And then to cry out of violence in some men's writings, and yet to abound, as
here they do, with such new invented invectives, and provoking language, as is
hardly to be paralleled: Cheef secretaries of the Prince of slander: this
English man-hunter, this wretch: this, wretched man Walwyn: this worthy
Champion: the venison, which his soul does so sorely long for: as the serpent,
that deceived our first Parents: this factor for the Region of Darkness, these
Jesuiticall-whifflers: this artificall impostor, in his Satan-like work: Good
God, where is the cause, what has moved them to this high flown malice, these
bumbaste poetic raptures, fit rather for stagers; then Preachers, for
swagg^rers, then Saints, (oh, but it must not be so taken; it must be esteemed
their zeal, their Jehu-like affection to God, and his truth; yea, come see our
zeal (say they in effect) which we have for God: why, be it so, (...) Jehu, yet
what is the cause?

The cause; why, heers Walwyn with his Wiles will overturn, destroy, and
overthrow all Religion; and the Scriptures themselves? sure its not possible?
no, have you ever heard such things uttered by man, as is recited in Walwyns
Wiles? no, but he denies them to be true; gives reasons here; and refers to his
Whisper: and other writings: and particularly to his still, and soft voice: and
those are extant, and to be seen; and surely if he intend to destroy Religion,
to publish such things as these is not the way; besides, uttered by one, that
you your selves say is wary, and sober, and discreet. But I pray, friends what
a religion is yours, that fears the breath of one man should overthrow it?
what? is it built upon the sand? if so, you may doubt indeed; but if upon a
rock? let the winds blow, and the waves too-beat; what need you fear? sure your
faith is built but upon Reason; look to it; some say it is your tenent; if so,
you had need indeed to be stir your selves, for you find he is a rational
man, and that's a showed thing; against Diana of the Ephesians, though all Asia,
and the world worship her: if your Churches have but an imaginary foundation
then indeed you had need betake your selves to Demetrius his Arguments; and to
tell all men? these Walwynites every where, turn the world upside down;
breathing strange, and unwelcome doctrines, such as your Churches and people
cannot bear.

And so it seems, indeed they do, as these authors Complain in the latter part
of their 13 page where they say, I am ever harping upon the hard-heartednes and
uncharitablenes of professors; and those that are religious men, how grinding
they are in bargines: how pennurious: base, and back ward in works of charity,
and mercy, how undermining, and overreaching they are in buying, in selling;
how having and craving in the things of this life; how hardly any work of
mercy, and charity comes from them; how they let their brethren starve, and die,
and perish, rather then help them; and how bountiful, free, and liberal the
very heathens have been and how beneficial even Popists, and many that do not
so much, as pretend to religion, are to the poor; and herein (he confesses) I
speak too true: yet immediately calls me devil for my labor they pay their
Pastors better, I believe, for worse doctrine)

But why devil? Why, say they, for speaking truth to wound, and destroy it; but
say I, who art thou, o man, that judge another man's Conscience, forbear the
chair a while, and it may be the chair of the scornful: for God and my own
conscience knows, I never yet in my life spoke, or uttered one of these truths
but to the end the Scriptures warrant.

But they go further, and say, by doing thus, I cunningly insinua^e into the
discreet, and beget a disparagement of that that is called Religion amongst
them. page the 14.

This is very observable: for by this expression, all men shall easily
understand the ground of their quarrel against me: if they can but find out,
what it is that is called Religion amongst them: do not these men call such a
thing Religion; as the Pharisees did; I Will deal so kindly with them, yet; as to
leave the comparing the one with the other to themselves: only, 'twas much in
words, and to be seen of men: both which our Savior reproves: and both by
example, and precept invites to practice; possitively concluding, that not he
that says Lord, Lord; shall enter into the kingdom, but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven: requires, That our light so shine forth
before men, that they, seeing our good works, may glorify our heavenly father
and at the last day, he will say unto those on his right hand, Come ye blessed
of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you; for when I was an hungry,
ye fed me, naked, ye clothed me; sick and in prison, and ye visited me; in as
much as ye have done it unto these, ye have done it unto me: when to others,
(that yet have to say, Lord we have prophesied, and done many great things in
thy name) he will say; Away from me ye workers of iniquity, I know ye not, for
when I was hungry, ye sed me not: naked, ye clothed me not; sick and in prison,
and ye visited me not; inasmuch as ye did it not unto these, ye did it not unto
me.

And if now to invite to these, and to reprove the want thereof, be, to be a
Devil, truly I Will bear it, and rejoice that I am accounted worthy to suffer
reproach for this cause of Christ: I am sure the Apostle Paul (that abounded
with real, not pretended gifts, or acquisitions rather) boasted not of them;
but proclaims to all the world, that though he spoke with the tongues of men
and Angels, and have no Charity, that he was but as sounding brass, or a
tinkling Cymball; and Saint James, his pure and undefiled Religion, is, to
visit the fatherless, and the widows in their distress, and to keep our
selves unspotted of the world; and says plainly, that he who has this worlds
goods, and sees his brother lack, and shuts up his bowels of compassion,
how dwells the love of God in him? And truly, if I must be a Devil for
insisting upon these most needful doctrines, I had rather be these men's Devil
then their Saint: And if the use and application of these, and the like, will
overthrow that which they call Religion amongst them; certainly it is not pure
and undefiled, and hardly of Gods making: I might enlarge my self upon this
theme, but the little Book, called, The vanity of the present Churches, has
prevented me, unto which I refer the ingenious Reader, for satisfaction of what
they call Religion among them.

And thus I think to all unbiassed men, I have acquitted my self from going
about to destroy Religion; I mean, true, not false Religion, or superstition,
too commonly dignified with the title of Religion.

And as for my designing, as the desire of my soul, the trouble, misery and
ruin of this Commonwealth, it is so absurd a suggestion, that it seems not
worth my answer; the utmost of my desire concerning this Commonwealth, being
held forth and contained in the Agreement of the People, dated the first of
May, 1649. And as a testimony of our acquiescence therein, is subscribed by
Lieut: Col: John Lilburn, Mr Richard Overton, Mr Thomas Prince, and my self: so
that all my designs are therein centered; and if that imports the trouble,
misery and ruin of this Commonwealth, I am extremely mistaken, and shall not
refuse to acknowledge my error when I see it: but till then, and whilst I
conceive it to tend to the good of all men, I cannot but wish it might be
established with contentment and security of all sorts of people: I know not
the man in the world, whose finger I desire should ak^ longer then he pinches
another; nor that any man should be reduced to any extremity, by any alteration
it might bring with it: but that authority would provide rather a change of
interests, and remove men from that which is not, to that which is consistent
with the peace, freedom and prosperity of the Nation; it having been all along
a sad thing to me, to see men of parts, and breeding, and eminency, upon
reformation of interests, or their reducements, to be left to the wide world,
without any care or regard of a livelihood for themselves, their Wives and
Children, in some measure answerable to their former condition: such
extremities commonly begetting greater, and more mischievous to the
Commonwealth; and it should, in my poor opinion, be the care of the supreme
Authority; no desire being more forcible in man, then to live answerable to his
breeding, or to what he has been long accustomed; every one finding it an
easy thing to learn how to abound, but to abate, most difficult: and, I fear,
our late and present times suffer much under these two extremes.

He upbraids me, that I find fault, that riches, and estates, and the things of
this world, should prefer men to offices, and places of trust: but say that
virtue, though in poor men, should be more regarded, as in Butchers, or
Cobblers: And truly I know some Butchers, though not many, as fit as some in
your Congregations; and I think you do not exclude for that trade: And as for
Cobblers, there are trades more in credit, hardly so useful, and Mr Price knows
it well; and were he as busy in self examination, as he is in reproaching
others, he would have little time to trouble himself about others motes: he who
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet despised not to be
esteemed the Son of a Carpenter, and chose simple herdsmen for his Prophets,
and poor fishermen for his Apostles, did certainly judge otherwise then these
Churchmen judge. Besides, there was a time, when Samuel How, a Cobbler by trade,
and a contented man in that calling, was not ashamed to preach before your most
learned Pastor, and printed his Sermon afterward; and your Pastor has changed
his mind since, and is come somewhat near to his judgment; and had done then,
as is said, and can be proved, could any have showed him a livelihood with
credit, upon the exchange.

But by the way, I am not so strong as to talk usually after this rule. I know
the generality of our times cannot bear it; I indulge exceedingly toward the
weakness of men for peace sake: who ever heard me speak either in behalf of
Butchers or Cobblers, as to places of government? I profess, I know not where,
nor when; though for their callings, I make no difference between them and my
self; for the callings are honest, and mine can but be so.

And as for Riches, Saint James, whom I am exceeding in love with had no great
good opinion thereof: he demands positively, Do not rich men oppress you, and
lead you before the Magistrates? (the Magistrates, possibly, were no rich men)
Nay, is there not such an expression again in Scripture, as, Go too, weep and
^owl, ye rich men, etc? But I shall be told anon, I have too much straw for
this brick; truly, I wish I had none at all, and that you and your Associates
had been more advised, then to have necessitated me thus to discover your
weakness; but I comfort my self, that I shall turn it to your good. I hope you
will say no more, that by these truths I shall destroy that which is called
Religion amongst you, for this is a part of pure and undefiled Religion: And if
you make one more change, and sell all that ever you have, all your
uncertainties, vanities, and superfluities, for these reallities, it will prove
the best bargain that ever you made; and, I believe, we should be Friends upon
it; this difference being the only quarrel: And that Riches may no longer be a
stumbling block in your way, read, at your leisure, Montaign's 52 Chapter, of
the Parcimony of our Forefathers.

And where you charge me, that I find fault that some abound, whilst others
want bread; truly, I think it a sad thing, in so fruitful a land, as, through
Gods blessing, this is; and I do think it one main end of Government, to
provide, that those who refuse not labor, should eat comfortably: and if you
think otherwise, I think it your error, and your unhappiness: But for my
turning the world upside down, I leave it to you, it is not a work I ever
intended, as all my actions, and the Agreement of the People, do sufficiently
evince, and does indeed so fully answer all your remaining rambling scandals,
that I shall pray the courteo^s Reader hereof to read it, and apply it, and
then shall not doubt my full and clear vindication: so far as that is, am I for
plucking up of all the pales and hedges in the Nation; so far, for all things
common.

So far from wishing printing had never been known, that I have always said,
that printing (if any thing in this age) would preserve us from slavery; and
you that know how much I have been against the stopping of the press, methinks
should blush to talk thus.

As for Mr Pym, and Mr Hampden, it is well known, I honored them much, for what
I saw was good in them, and never reproached them in my life; but was not
satisfied, when they would make a war, that they would make it in the name of
the King and Parliament; I could not understand it to be plain dealing, nor
thousands more besides me.

As for any invectives against the Lieutenant General Cromwell, Commissary
General Ireton, or Colonel Harrison, I shall refer this to be satisfied by
one Mr David Brown, the Scotch Writing-Master, a man of integrity, and of a
sincere Congregation, what I have done to the contrary: but I allow him not to
be over-particular, in naming what particularly, that being inconvenient: And
if Colonel Harrison would but remember my attendance on him at Colonel
Fleetwoods, and but reflect upon a paper I then delivered him, methinks my
integrity to my Country, and affection to all such as desire the liberty
thereof, could not be questioned; and, I confess, I have wondered, he of any
man in power, has not appeared more to my vindication: indeed, I have no
fawning flattering ways to work upon men, nor have used any toward them, I
have been real and plain-hearted toward them; and though you may have courted
them more plausibly into an opinion of your way in the affairs of the
Commonwealth; yet is it conscience and time that proves all things, and I refer
my self to both; and if you prove not to them (and the rest in power, that give
ear to you) like Rhehoboam's young Counselors, I shall be glad of it; I am
sure you came in late to the work, and (to my apprehension) labor to build hay
and stubble, if not worse, upon a golden foundation, laid by others for the
Freedom of the Commonwealth.

But I must beware, for, as I hear, you much rejoice in a new Act concerning
Treason; so copious, that I may be in the verge of it, before I am aware; it
makes me almost not sorry that I am kept close Prisoner, but that it is no good
sign of Englands liberty which I have earnestly labored for: but truly I may
rejoice that I am kept from you, and you from me; for certainly, should we
pass but one hours discourse together (in the mind you are in) and as the case
and law now is, I should not escape an information.

And truly, that ye are so well pleased with this act proceeds, for that it
serves your present turn, rather then any reason or consideration in you; for
how soon the edge of it may be turned against your selves, you know not; and
some who consider not how much ye have labored for it, wonder ye do not
petition against it: for whilst a Parliament sits, it is lawful to petition
against things, though established by Law; and it is somewhat rare in the
practice of Parliaments, for a law to take place, and be of force so soon as it
is made, having commonly had a good distance of time, that men might digest,
and consider and understand it, before the commencement or beginning of the
power thereof; and that, at soonest, not before the end of the Parliament that
made it: And there seems to be this reason for it, that the Parliament men that
made it should be as soon, and as clearly subject thereunto, as any other
persons whatsoever; otherwise they might make such, as might ensnare the
people, and yet keep themselves out of danger.

And certainly, if this caution be necessary in any case, it must be where men's
lives are concerned, as in Treason and Felony; wherein our fore fathers were
ever very careful; as Sir Edward Cook does sufficiently witness, some
particulars whereof concerning Treason, are worth yours, and every man's
knowledge.

Briefly thus: he says, The Parliament holden the 25th of Ed. (...) was called
benedictum Parliamentum; because of its particular expressing what was Treason:
and that except Magna Charta, no other Act of Parliament has had more Honor
given to it, as appears by the Statute of the 1 of Hen. 4. chap. 10.
reciciting, That whereat a Parliament, holden the 21 of Rich. 2. Diverse pains
of Treason were ordained by Statute, insomuch as there was no man did know how
to behave himsefe; to do, speak, or say, for doubt of such pains: It is
enacted, etc. That in no time to come, any Treason be judged otherwise, then it
was ordained by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. the like honor is given to it, by the
Statute 1 Ed. 6. chap. 12. and by the Statute of the first of Mary, chap. 1.
Sess. 1. -- different times, but all agreeing in the magnifying, and extolling
that blessed Act of 25 Ed. 3.

And speaking of the care of our Ancestors, in avoiding nice and extreme Laws
concerning Treason: he says, And all this was done in several Ages, that the
fair Lillies and Roses of the Crown (which now may be interpreted) the
Government of England, might flourish, and not be stained with severe and
sanguinary (bloody) Statutes.

He says further, That the Statute for Treason, is to be taken strictly; and
the proofs to be direct and manifest; not upon conjecturall presumptions, or
inferences, or strains of Wit: but upon good and sufficient proof, That none
are to be proceeded against, but according to due course, and proceeding of
Law, to be judged by men of our own condition; and not by absolute power, or
other means, as in former times had been used; and affirms it to be a
received maxim, that bare words without an overt Act, could not make a Traitor.

But if you can rejoice that these strong holds, and safegards of our lives,
shall now in the first year of Englands Liberty, with the Petition of Right, be
accounted of no value; but that we must be so exposed to danger, that no man
shall know how to behave himself, to do, speak, or say, for fear of the
pains of Treason: I believe your rejoicing is but matter of grief to us, and
the rest of the plainhearted people in England: it being not who does it, but
what is done, that most concerns all men: you use to talk of something still,
in the bottom of what I, and my friends proposed; but when shall we see what
lies at the bottom of your hearts, if such as those rejoycings are aflote
already?

You think it strange, that we should object against Martial Law, in times of
Peace, for Soldiers or others; and yet if you read the Petition of Right, you
cannot but confess it to be expressly therein provided against; you deny us all
Legal proceedings, and yet think the proceedings of the Swisse a horrible
thing; a story kept in Lavander about seven years, and next to one that now is
not, is due to him that kept it in sweetning so long, for so unsavory a
season, and whose profession is nearer cutting of throats, then mine is; and as
I remember, was very merry at the thought of it.

I am of opinion, there is much, if not more need of another kind of Law; and I
could wish some good people would consider of it, but I have no hope of your
Congregation: It is a Law against Lying; you know what a sad condition the
Scripture holds sorth to him that loves, or makes a lie: what think you of
it? will our trades bear it? there needs no sanguinary punishment be annexed,
but some easy punishment: besides, if you hear one that is not of your own
Congregation asperst, and run presently and tell it to others, before you are
certain of the truth your self, this need not pass for a lie, if you can but
remember your author; though he had it only from the father of lies: being sure
also, that you may confidently avouch, that you had it from a very precious
Godly man; so are all your Churchmen: or if you do but think ye remember a
thing right, and witness it; this also had not need to be taken for a lie
neither: and some such other indulgences, as the time, and your occasions
require; there are some say, pia mendacia, those that are Learned amongst you,
will expound the meaning; there may be a remission also for those, but
certainly, yet a Law (though with allowance of a large latitude) were
absolutely necessary for these times, and it would honor you exceedingly to
seek for it; you may have also allowance, for all false slanderous invectives,
if once you have gotten them Licensed, and Printed, such as are in Walwyns
Wiles; all such shall not be doubted for lies: but a Law would be wondrous
necessary, though it were never kept, you can bear with that, though we, as you
say, cannot, but are clamouring always about the Selfe-denying Ordinance:
well, pray get a Law, and draw it up as large as will serve your seared
Consciences, that durst subscribe such abominable ones, as that book
contains; it being a thousand pities, that you, who have ever been so forward
for the good of the Commonwealth, should stay till some that are not of
Churches, or some obscure inferior Churches should move for it; nay, and may
occasion a greater strictness, then will serve your turn.

Many considerations will be necessary in the making of it; for as you know in
wrestling, three foiles, are valued a fall: so it must be expressed, how many
mental reservations shall make a lie; how many feignings, how many times
appearing as a spy; whether a spy under an oath can lie, so long as he
intends the service of his principals: how many times a man may walk and
discourse familiarly in dissimulation, before it amount to a lie; how many lies
a years hypocrisy amount to: that so, such as Mr Richard Price, Mr Brandriff
and the like, may be reckoned withal: and then to proportion punishments to
offenses; you have time and leisure, and I perceive, meet together for worse
purposes, so I leave it to you.

Only thus much for encouragement; Almanzar the first (or third) of the
Sarazens Emperors, made use of such a Law, by which (above any other means) a
mighty people were kept in great quietness and prosperity, as you may read in
a little Book, called the Life of Mahomet; and are we not in a low form for
Christians, when we are not so wise as such Schoolmasters? O miserable
Reformation!

But I must take heed what I say, for it seems the Petition of the 11 of
September, is afresh come into their minds, and all the circumstances therein
reckoned up, as matter of provocation to all interests, and of devision to the
honest party; for of all Petitions, after that which was burnt, this contained
most particulars; and then, and long after, was that wherein the well-affected
from all parts, and Countries, did agree and center; so that it proved a
Petition of the greatest power of uniting, as ever was: and was by the heads,
and chosen men of these men's friends agreed unto, to be the substance of an
Agreement of the People; as Lieut: Colonel John Lilburne, Mr Doctor Parker,
and others can testify: and yet now by this author, must be raised against me,
as if but for me, that Petition, had never been seen; and as if his judgment
were to be valued to the blasting of that which received the approbation of
many thousands of the most cor^^all friends the Parliament, and Army had
throughout England: I wonder of what honest party, this author reckons himself
to be; if this Petition were so unworthy an exasperating Petition, who did it
exasperate? if this Petition did demonstrate my design of mischief to the
honest party; I say (as he says) let any man's reason judge impartially and
determine; certainly these people have resolved themselves to be, and have
contracted some corrupt interest, that the matters of that Petition now so much
troubles them: but why this must fall upon my account, more then upon any
others, that I do not see; only he has undertaken to try what work his wit can
make of any thing; and out of the strength of his brain, presumes he can turn
my promotion of the best things to my disadvantage, although (but that I will
not favor his expectation with a blab) I could tell him how little I had to do
in that Petition; but why should I take care to set that man right, that cares
not which way he goes, to do mischief, and will not be dissuaded? and whose
ends are so unworthy, as to affright all men from Petitioning, without his, and
his associates allowance?

I know not whether any body sets him to this unhappy work, or whether he
officiously undertakes it of himself, but truly to me he seems to be but an
impertinent workman to his pretended ends; for as in the former part, (...) man
(to my apprehension) ever more wounded Religion, and the honor of God and his
Word, then he has done, upon pretense of wounding me: so in this other part,
which he pretends for the honor of the present Parliament; what man in the
world would have made such a repetition of things? trumpeting out himself
really such things, as I am confident, he never heard from me, nor any body
else: it has not been my use to stir much in what is past; but my way has
been to propose a passing by of what is gone, and laying a good foundation for
the time to come; that there might be no need of such complaints, as he there
more Rhetorically, then truly, reckons up as uttered against me.

As how basely things go; what Oppressions, Taxations, and vexations, the poor
people endure, how this poor betrayed Nation is bought and sold; how the
cutting off some Tyrants, do always make way for more, and worse to succeed
them; how nothing is done for the Commonwealth; how basely the treasure of the
Commonwealth is embezell'd; how Parliament Men Vote money out of the purses of
the poor ridden people, into their own; how they share the riches of the
Nation among themselves; how to day, they Vote this Parliament Man into a great
Office, and to morrow, another; and now they do nothing for the Commonwealth,
but Vote one another into places of power and profit; how that, though to
abuse, and cast a mist before the eyes of the people; they made a Self denying
Ordinance, yet suffer no man to put it in execution; how they promote their
Kindred and Allies, into great places every where; if any use be for men in the
Custom house, in Excise office, or in any other places of profit, this, and
that Parliament-man's friends, or brothers, or sons, or nephews must be the
men; nay, Parliament Men and their allies, have place upon place, and office
upon office; as if they had several bodies, to be employed at one and the same
time: What Is become of the infinite sum^^es, the unconceiveable Treasure of the
Nation; the late King's Customs, Ship money, Coat and Conduct money,
Monopolies, etc. were nothing to the Customs, Excise, Taxations, Free quarter,
Sequestrations, Papists moneys, Bishops Lands, Revenues of the Crown; besides
all the Plate and moneys, lent freely by the people, and yet nothing done: nay,
how many for their zeal and good will to the State, have lent freely and
bountifully, thereby beggering and undoing themselves, and now cannot receive
one penny to buy them bread, but may lie begging, petitioning, and starving at
their doors, and cannot be heard; nay, it may be, have nothing but course, hard
and cruel language from them; how one Faction tears the Commonwealth, and share
it among them one while, and another another while, neither of them regarding
the ease or grievances of the poor people all this while: And what have they
done since this purge, and that purge? they have voted the continuance of
tithes, the laying of more taxes and rates, they imprison honest men, etc.

These he implies, are my ordinary discourses, to the disparagement of the
Parliament, and that too since the King's Death; for my part, I must deny it;
and that if I should have in any place, or at any time, spoken, or directed
others to speak all what he there recites, I had spoken what I do not know to
be true; for I have never made it my work to take a Catalogue of the failings
of Authority, but have frequently proposed a general remission and security to
all men, for what has been past (as I said before) without which I never
expected peace, or an end of wars and miseries: And this my back friend, Mr
Arnald, may averr on my behalf; to whom I once gave a paper (upon his sight and
desire) to that end: so far have I been from blowing such coals as these, that
if any ever cast water or milk upon this wildfire, I have done my endeavor
therein.

But I must not be what indeed I am, but what this and these men are pleased to
give me out; unto whose secret suggestions, and false aspersions continually
whispered by them at Parliament, and Derby-house, I impute all the hard measure
I have found (and which, I fear, will be the undoing of me, my Wife, and
Children) there being none of the Gentlemen of either place, I am certain, have
any thing against me, but what these men bring; and some of them, I am
confident, have that experience of my integrity and ingenuity in all I have
done in relation to the public, that they would do as much for my deliverance
out of this affliction, as for any man's in the world.

And truly, whether he wounds me or the Parliament more, in making such a
Rhetorical recital of so many particulars, as, whether true or false, will be
apt enough to be believed in these sad, complaining and distracted times; let
any man that has reason, judge.

So that if he meant not to wrong the Parliament, but me, he has over-done his
work, which generally befalls such as take not their Consciences along with them
in what they undertake; they over-do, do, and undo, ordinarily; as you may
observe by his so many firsts, seconds, thirds, his doubling and trebling of
them, and his running over one and the same thing again and again, as if he
labored with the disease of multiplication.

But truly, when I consider with what a continued, but secret malice, they have
pursued me; and that all their pretended reconcilements and friendships, have
been but counterfeit, I can impute the same to nothing more then emulation: for
before this Parliament, I was accustomed to discourse much with Mr Goodwins
hearers, upon what they and I had heard him preach; and my character of him
usually was, that he spent much time (in my apprehension) to make plain things
difficult to be understood, and then labored again to make them plain and
easy to be understood; but he had so perplexed them, as that he could not:
this I know did sorely trouble them, though when they fell to congregate in a
Church Way, they gave me good respect, as needing the help of every one, whose
conscience (as mine did) led them out to stand and plead for liberty of
Conscience.

I believe they were also not a little troubled, that I closed not with them,
or some others, in their Church Way; for so I once perceived by one Mr Lamb, a
Linen Draper in Cornhill; to whom I having sold a good parcel of linnens, and
taking it very kindly that he would deal with me, I would needs give him and
some Friends with him, a cup of beer and sugar one morning, and we were all
free and cheerful: but Mr Lamb and I out-staid the rest, falling very largely
into discourse, he putt^ng all the questions and doubts he had concerning my
opinions; which I answered one by one, upon condition that he would give
himself and me time, then, and hear me out all I had to say, because (as I then
told him) I never had received prejudice from any discourse that ever passed
from me with ingenious men, but where they carried away things peece-meal, and
by halfs: So in a most friendly manner he heard me, and, in conclusion,
approved exceedingly of all I had said, even with abundance of content and
rejoicing: but when we had done, he fetches a deep sigh, saying, O, Mr Walwyn,
tha^ you had a good opinion of Churches.

To which I answered, that I had no evil opinion of them; that rather I did
rejoice to see with what amity and friendship they enjoyed each others society
in a comfortable way, assisting and supporting one another; that I was glad
they so contentedly enjoyed the exercise of their consciences in a way that was
agreeable to their judgments; that I had made it my work, as far as I was able,
to preserve unto them, and all others, the enjoyment of that just liberty; it
being a principle in me, that every man ought to be protected in the use of
that wherein he does not actually hurt another; and that were I satisfied in
some particulars, I could not but join my self to some such society; that I
thought, as I was, I wanted much of that intimacy with good people which they
had, but yet must not purchase it upon a doubtful conscience, or against my
judgment; that I wished them all happiness in their way, and was not willing
to disturb any, and hoped they would not disturb me; hoping, that they would
have as good an opinion of me, as I had of them though I did not join in a
Church Way: and with this he then seemed to be very well satisfied.

And so we held very fair and serious respects a good while, I giving him some
visits at his house, where he would read to me with much admiration, some of
Mr Goodwin's Books; the weakness whereof I made somewhat bol^ withal (as
being never used to flattery, or to balk my judgment) which proved a^, noli me
tangere: for Mr Goodwin is the apple of their eye, and in a short time, not
only his familiarity ceased, but I was even slandered to death from this man's
mouth; no place wherever he came, but his aspersions flew abroad; as if to
blast my reputation, had been given him in commission from the whole
Congregation: this was the fruit of my intimacy with him.

Nor can I imagine any other reason why Mr Brandriff should deal so unworthily
with himself and me; for when we have been together, he has discoursed to me
much concerning his Wife, his Father, his Children, what he had done for his
Kindred, how ungrateful they were, the manner of his trade; how, and by what
means he got good store of moneys, in the midst of the wars, by rising early in
mornings, and searching in Inns, what goods were brought to Town (indeed most
commendably and industriously) how he many times ventered to buy goods he had
little skill in, nor knew not when he had bought them, where he was like to
vent them; yet how well he sped, with abundance of things, I will not repeat,
these being sufficient to show the man, was not certainly feigned toward me so
long a time as afterward he pretended; only when we have been hearing Mr
Goodwin together, and come from him discoursing, I have showed suddenly some
mistakes, and weakuesses, and drinesses in things which Mr Goodwin had much
labored to make good, but would not endure my touchstone; and Mr Brandriff
has been ^orc'd to confess as much; sadly smiling and saying, well, what
shall we say? where can we hear better? To which I would answer, that is not the
thing, you see what this is.

Indeed, but for this, which can be nothing but emulation, I know not any cause
I have given them thus to persecute me; they have thanked me for Books I have
written, as my Whisper, and others forenamed; and for, a Book, entitled, A
help to the understanding of Mr Pryn, which they would no nay, but it should be
mine, though my name was not to it; so good an opinion they had of my
integrity: Nay, their Church disbursed fifty shillings toward the printing of
ten thousand of that little Book, called, The word in season (they then judged
the dispersing of Books no sin) which Mr Batcheler can tell who was Author of,
and they know well enough; so far were they from believing what now they
subscribe to; that in all times I ever opposed the present Government; but it
will be found only, that I never flattered them by such undue expressions, as,
by the womb that bare you, and the paps that gave you suck, and the like, more
suitable to the liberty of Sycophants, then Christians: Nor did I ever oppose
any just authority otherwise then as I have opposed men: not to destroy them,
but their destructive errors and mis-applications of their power.

Well, ye are the most strange conditioned people that ever I met withal, the
most inconsistent; walking, not by any principles, but merely by occasion, and
as the wind turns; and I am heartily glad I have so nigh done with you, for I
never shall be induced to bestow the like pains about you again: only I have
this farther to acquaint the ingenious withal concerning you, viz: that you
bear your selves very high and confidently upon your ability of proving
whatsoever you allege by way of aspersion against any man: And indeed herein,
I can resemble you to none so properly, as to a people are called, Gypsyes (I
must entreat pardon, if there seem any lightness or despising in this simile)
for if I could have found one more handsome so proper, I would not have stained
my paper with this: but just so have I found them confederated together; if one
but averr a thing, presently there are a cloud of witnesses; and not in a
slighting way, but such as will take their oaths of it, Upon which account,
upon the Exchange, all their affirmatives concerning others, and there
negatives concerning themselves, are carried on; bearing down, by this one
trick, all their opposers.

And so they dealt in a most filthy scandal concerning an honest man I know
abhorred such baseness; and which was carried all over the Town by this kind
of Congregationall men: I reproving of it, and saying, the parry would not to
put it up, but would seek for remedy at Law; one of them rounds me in the
(...), If you are his Friend, advise him to be quiet; for I am told by as godly
men as at the England, the thing will be witnessed upon sufficient men's oaths:
whereas, I (...) the thing was of so abominable a nature, as I do not believe
ever was, or (...) be proved by witnesses, all circumstances of day, and light,
and open street ^^dered: And truly they are as cunning at dispersing, as they
are confident in ^^ing, that the resemblance may well hold; for generally all
their aspersions, though they are so vile, as, if believed, shall undo a man
and his family, in respect of the loathings they will beget in all that know
him: yet you shall ever have the^ such as by law you shall hardly ever take
hold of them: so that they exceedingly presume, never giving over railing and
writing, that there is no possibility of silencing them: shame they care not
for, and no prejudice can come unto them; for touch one, and touch all; all
have one purse for a common end, offensive and defensive; and if they should by
these courses grow so odious, as that no body else would trust them; their
Consederacy is so large, that by buying, and selling, and purchasing, and
lending, they are able to enrich one another, so as they grow to a mighty
interest, as distinct almost as the Jews in Amsterdam; and much to the same
ends of gain, but have greater aims of power and dominion.

And I beseech God to deliver me out of their unmercifull hands, before they
yet grow greater; for I look upon my self as their Prisoner, aspersed and
imprisoned, and even ruined by their ungrateful, Un-Christian suggestions and
machinations.

Mr K^ffin, I hear, since he has subscribed, Walwyns Wyles, desires I would
give him a meeting, with others he will bring with him; and if proof be not
then made of the truth of those things therein alleged against me,
effectually and sufficiently, he will then himself write against the Book: what
an offer is here? he has set his name already to the Book, as a witness, and
published the Book (before ever he, or any man else ever spoke to me of it) to
my disparagement, and undoing (were men as ready in believing, as they are in
scandalizing) and now he offers a meeting to have those falsehoods proved.

Is this like the Pastor of a Congregation of Christians? Good God! what are
be^aln to Congregations, that they can bear with such Pastors! Truly, Mr
Kiffin, although your people will not deal with you as you deserve, I shall be
bold to persuade you to leave them; and take such with you as are of your own
mind, and color your faces of a tauny color, and pursue the profession, you
have begun the practice already; and cease to (cannot, shall I say, I even
tremble to think it is no better) to deceive, I will say, any longer, in the
name of the Lord; for God is a jealous God, and will one day recompense it.

A man that looks upon these seeming Saints, no mervail if they take them for
such indeed, they are so solemn in their countenances, so frequent and so
formal in their devotions, so sad at others cheerfulness, so watchful over
others tr^pping, so censorious over others failings, having a kind of
disdainfulnesse at others, bespeaking them in effect to stand farther off, I am
holyer then thou; it being a great scruple amongst many of them, the
lawfulness of playing at Cards, or the like recreation, as being a vain
expense of time.

Whereas all this is mere outside, and but the washing of the outside of the
pot, a but appearing holy before men, to gain the repute of Godliness; shut
but the doors, and let them but be sure of their company, and they are as other
men for sports, and jigs, and jeers, and idle jests and tales, and laugh and
love it, and even lie down again; for if they would do thus before me, and some
other of my Friends, what will they do when they are alone one amongst another?
Colonel Tichburn himself, at Mr Hunts house at Whitehall, telling so nasty a
tale of a Scotch-man that would reach a Lord to give himself a vomit, crooking
his fingers, and thrusting them as into one place, and then into his mouth, and
down again, and up again, acting of it with so much art, and delight, and
laughter, as that other solemn man, Mr Daniel Tailor, and Mr Richard Price,
were ready to burst themselves with laughter; Mr Tailor calling out for more
jests and sports, being* as he said, extremely troubled with melancholy; I
would he were troubled with no worse.

For it was but a slippery trick of him, to allow of all I said against Excise,
as an extreme burden to Trades; and saying he felt it himself, and was at
that time in question at the Office, and wishing it down with all his heart;
when at the very same time, or just upon it, he writes a Letter to the
Commissioners of the Excise, advising them not to be so severe in dealing with
him, for the times were like to be such, as they might need the least of their
friends; whereas in an eminent place, he had appeared in no mean manner, in
defense of the Excise, or to this effect; yet these, forsooth, must pass for
the only holy, unspotted men of the times; so as a man that has but a
cheerful countenance is scarce fit for their company, and he that should be
said in their company to carry two faces under one hood; O what a wretch were
he! but these it seems may do any thing; and as the proverb has it, better
steal a horse, then others look over the hedge; but you must note, Captain
Lacy, and Mr Lamb, fellow members with Mr Tailor of Mr John Goodwins
Congregation, have some hundreds of pounds in the Excise, which yields them
good interest (what ere it does the Commonwealth) and how many Congregationall
men's cases it may be, they knew better then I; and so Mr Daniel Tailor, had
more reason for what he did, then he would tell every body of: these relations
are the tenter-hooks, upon which all oppressions hang, and cannot get off; if
they but concern one of a Congregationall way, you draw Dunne out of the mire,
and none of that way will help, but hinder you.

And for Col: Tychburn's jest as they called it, and their other gibbish
prattling, how long one had been from his Wife, and how long another; which was
to me no better then catterwawling; I was wondered at I was no merrier, being
somewhat dumpish by thinking, why those men separated themselves from other
men; and sadly considering, what a stroke this light easy people were like to
have; through their seeming Godliness, in the greatest affairs of the
Commonwealth, as soon after was, and has been seen.

But its well known, I, and all that were with me, were so far from telling
these things any where to their disparagement, or so much as speaking of it,
that we agreed it should not be known, lest we should break those rules of
society, which require honest men, not to talk to any man's discredit, whatever
befell in company, where no evil to any man was intended; and truly, but that
now these men seem to stretch themselves and to walk on tiptoe, not only upon
my ruins, but without all tenderness of compassion, toward my dear Wife and
Children; yea, and insult over our more dear Cause, and our Countries
Liberties, bearing down all upon an opinion of their godliness, and our
licentiousness, which we more abhor then themselves; these stories had been
buried in the grave of silence, but as they have borne themselves, not
regarding our manifestation, but despising and jeering of it; and by their most
uncharitable Book, raising up a whole legion of scandals and slanders against
me; a necessity was upon me, to show these men as they are not as they labor
by hypocrisy to appear unto the world.

I have only one request to this sort of men, and I have done with them; and
that is, That they would agree among themselves, to wear some very visible and
remarkable thing, either upon their breasts, or in their ha^ts, in that company
where they resolve to be sincere; and to make no persidious use of that
meeting, or conversation, whilst they wear it, and to keep it in their
pockets, or concealed, when they intend to deceive; and it will be necessary in
your next Book, to publish what this note shall be, that all men may expect it,
and accordingly keep you company or not, and know how to behave themselves in
their conversing with you; in the observation whereof also, you must advise all
those that have been used to deceive; especially those that have professed to
have kept me company, purpo^^ to turn all I did to my prejudice; that they be
very exact and ^^acere in the observation thereof, for otherwise it will come
to nothing; and no body will know where to have you, or how to confer with you.

It has been others cases, who have used over much dissimulation, as Lewis the
11th of France, who in his transactions with Charles Duke of Burgundy,
concluding Peace, Truce, and Articles upon Oaths; and nothing provin^ of force
to hold him; neither oaths, nor sacraments, nor execrations, nor covenants,
nor any such bonds as should hold inviolable all contracts amongst men; in
conclusion, he discovers the image of St. Claud, which he continually wore in
his heart; and after he had offered any other obligation, in a thing he was
suspected not to intend, or keep; he urging him to swear by that St. Claud, he
refused; as not daring to break faith upon that oath; this was something yet;
and truly, when you shall consider to what a pass you have brought your selves,
you cannot but conclude upon some such course.

And having thus turned your insides outward, though with unpleasing pains to
himself, and much trouble to the ingenious Reader (for I was hopeful I had
done for ever with this kind of work, when our manifestation and Agreement of
the People was once abroad) you may without spectacles, read in your own
hearts, written in Capital letters, what you through a great mistake intended
to me, and my friends, in the first entrance of your Book: namely, That the
greatest hypocrisy, is often palliated with the most specious pretenses of the
plainest sincerity; and the chiefest use that some men make of Religion, and
the language thereof, is (after the similitude of Satan with our first parents)
to mu^^ the understandings of over credulous and flexible men, and then to
cheat them, under a gilded bait of their seeming good, unto such actions, that
are most conducible to their certain misery: If this be not true of you, and
due to you it has no true owners in the world.

And so I have done with you all, and all your Wiles; and henceforth, he that
is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is ignorant, let him be
ignorant still; he that is so ^ouly partial in his Conscience, as after this
my Just Defense, to believe your slanders of me, let him remain so still; and
he that through a perverse ignorance, shall henceforth doubt my integrity, let
him remain ignorant still: I would gladly be free from this Restraint, because
I fear it will prove prejudicial to many more besides my self, if not
already; and I trust, God will open some just way; however, I have peace
within, because in all that has befallen me; my will is not to harm any man,
nor to dishonor God; affliction being still to me, a better choice then sin.

William Walwyn.

FINIS.

