THE PRESENT STATE OF EGYPT; Or, A new RELATION OF A LATE VOYAGE INTO THAT
KINGDOM. Performed in the Years 1672. and 1673. By F. VANSLEB, R. D.

Wherein you have an exact and true Account of many Rare and Wonderful
Particulars of that Ancient Kingdom.

Englished by M. D. B. D.

LONDON; Printed by R. E. for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet Street, near
Temple Bar. 1678.

TO THE READER.
Ingenuous Reader,
TO thee alone I recommend the perusal of this Journal, which not only my self,
but some other judicious Persons have thought worthy to appear in our Tongue,
and amongst the Curioso's of our Nation. The Author is well known to be a Man
of Integrity, and one that scorns to impose upon the World an untruth; of
which, in this occasion, nothing can tempt him to be guilty. If therefore some
Particulars look with a strange and unprobable Countenance, be not so
unsociable in thy persuasion, as to reject whatsoever thou have no
demonstration to prove. A ridiculous Humor, and a pernicious Rule, which tends
to deprive us of the benefit of many Knowledges, both in Divine and Humane
Matters. It is unlikely that such a Person of discretion and interest in the
World, as he is known to be, should so much forget his reason, as to subscribe
his Name to such falsehoods, as may be easily discovered at Rome, in the place
of his ordinary abode. I confess some Observations are trivial and ordinary,
but others will prove satisfactory to such worthy Souls as desire to know the
passages of the World, and Foreign Nations. This Country of Egypt has
heretofore been the richest Magazin of Learning, as well as of Provisions: It
has flourished in all Manual Arts, and the rarest Sciences. No doubt but that
there are yet to be seen some Monuments of the Primitive Grandeur and Learning
of the ancient Inhabitants: As therefore Vanslebius has judged them worthy to
be visited in his Travels, and afterward of this account which he gives in
Print, I think them not unworthy of thy knowledge; which thou may perhaps
improve in the interpretation of some obscure passages of holy Writ, and for
other purposes according to thy Profession.

Vale, M. D.

THE PRESENT STATE OF EGYPT: OR, A New Relation, or Journal, of the Travels of
Father Vansleb through Egypt.
IN the Year 1671. about the 8th of May, I was at Marseilles, with an intention
to sail again into Egypt: for that purpose I found an opportunity, the Ship the
Three Kings, Commanded by an Aged Captain named Artaut, was ready to depart for
Alexandretta. I went aboard, and set sail from the Port the 20th of the same
Month, strait toward Malta, where we remained five days, and after directed
our Course to Lernica, in the Island of Cyprus, where the French Merchants make
their abode; on the Seaside, looking toward the South, we arrived the 17th of
June.

As soon as I set foot ashore, I fell desperately sick of an ordinary Disease
to all Strangers, proceeding from the Infection of the Air, that is an Enemy to
them: But my Distemper could not hinder me from going to Nicosia, the chief
City of the Island. When I felt my Malady increasing every day, and the rather
through the dangerous Infection of the Plague which was then in the Island, I
resolved to be carried to Tripoli in Syria, the nearest and most convenient
Port where the French Nation has a Consul: Whilst I was at Nicosia, Captain
Artaut was departed with his Ship for Alexandretta, and the 26th of June I went
aboard another Ship in the Haven of Lernica, and the next day with a favorable
Wind we landed at Tripoli.

Though I had forsaken the infectious Island, the disease of my body forsook me
not, but grew to that pass, that I prepared my self, as Christianity injoyns
us, to leave the World: Nevertheless, at the end of 35 days, my distemper being
weary to torment me, suffered me to recover a little strength; and though I was
but weak, I went aboard a Ship bound for Alepo the first of September. arrived
the 13th, and abode there four Months.

About the last of December. I went to Damascus, where I remained a Month, and
from thence to Seyda, where I was also two Months.

My purpose is not to give any account of the Curiosities of Lernica, of
Nicosia, of Tripoli, of Alepo, of Damascus, and of Seyda. These Towns are
sufficiently known to all the World, by the many Relations already published of
the Levant Countries: Besides the shortness of the time of my abode there,
together with the inconveniency of a Quartan Fever which kept me company
sixteen Months, suffered me not to inquire into any such matters. I shall
therefore in this Treatise give an account only of what Curiosities I have seen
in Egypt, where during the space of twenty Months I have had the leisure and
opportunities to take a view of the most remarkable things, with the greatest
exactness and care imaginable, which has never been done of this famous and
beautiful Country till now.

The 19th day of February, 1672. I took Ship at Seyda, a Town of Phoenicia, to
sail for Damietta in Egypt; but a contrary Wind rose, and brought us back to
Seyda again, where we remained till the 16th of March. I went then aboard, and
met with a favorable Gale, that drove us very happily to Bogas, which lies at
the Mouth of the River Nilus.

I think it convenient, before we proceed, to give a general account and
description of Egypt, that the things that I shall hereafter mention may better
be understood.

A General Description of Egypt.
CHam, one of the three Sons of Noah, had four Children Males, Cus, Misraim,
named by the Arabs Beidar, Fut, and Canaan. Cus was the Father of the Abyssins,
Misraim of the Copties and Nubians, Fut of the Africans, and Canaan of the
Syrians, and their Neighbors.

Misraim after the Deluge, as Macrisi an Arabian Historian says, pitched upon
Egypt, made there his abode, and left it and the Country, as far as the
farthest part of Africa, to his Posterity. He had likewise four Sons, Ischemun,
Atrib, Sa, and Coptus, unto whom he divided the Land of Egypt in four equal
parts; Coptus had all that tract of Land, from Isvan to the City of Coptus; to
Ischemun he allotted the Country from that City to Menuf; to Atrib he gave the
Heart and middle of Egypt, now called Delta; and to Sa he appointed all the
Continent, from the Province of Beheire as far as Barbary. They all builded
Cities in their several Dominions, calling them by their own Names. We shall
mention them in the sequel of this Discourse.

After the decease of their Father, the four Brothers were at variance about
the Sovereignty, neither of them could endure a Partner. At last they resolved
to end their Controversies by a Battle, which was to give the chief Command to
the Victor.

Coptus the youngest overcame all the rest of his Brethren, and was
acknowledged by them as their Chief Lord. He chose the City of Menuf, or
Memphis, where his Father lived, as his Royal Seat. From this King Coptus all
the Race of the Egyptians are now called Copties. Likewise from this first
King, the Greeks have given the name of (...) to the Land of Egypt, by changing
the K into G; which is the custom not only of this Language, but also of the
Arabian, as may appear by the words Nekkade, and Dunkala, written in Arabian
with a K, and nevertheless they are pronounced in discourse Neggade, and
Dungala, as if they were written with a G. They are the names of two Towns; the
one in the Upper Egypt, and the other in Nubia.

The Moors and Copties, Natural Inhabitants of the Country, call it Massr, from
Misraim the Son of Cham, and the Grandchild of Noah, who first laid the
Foundations of it after the Deluge. And from the same Misraim, the Turks have
named it Missir, and the Jews Eretz Misraim, the Country of Misraim.

Egypt is situate in Africa, according to the common and ordinary Opinion;
nevertheless, some of the Ancient Geographers have placed it part in Africa,
and part in Asia, making the River Nilus as the Bounds between these two great
parts of the World.

Egypt is bounded on the South with Nubia, and the last City of Egypt is Isvan,
called by the Europeans Siene, which is commanded by the Bay of Girge; on the
West it has the Provinces of Vah, and Barca; and on the East are the Deserts
that divide it from Palestina; and on the North is part of the Mediterranean
Sea.

It stretches it self in length from the City of Isvan to the Mouth of the
River Nilus; at Rosetta, in a straight line, that is from South to North about
five hundred and threescore miles: it is not possible to declare it precisely,
because they are not wont to measure the Country by Miles, or by Leagues, but
by the Camels Journeys only. I say here nothing, but according to the Relation
of the Authors that have examined it.

It is divided, according to the accounts of the Divan, or Treasury, into three
parts: 1. Into Said, or the Upper Egypt, which begins at Sint, and extends as
far as Isvan. 2. Into Vostani, or the middle Egypt, in respect of the Said and
Cairo: And 3. Into Bahri, or Inferior Egypt. The middle begins at Gize, a
Village over against Boulac, and reaches as far as Momfallon* and the lower
commenceth at Cairo, and includes Alexandria, and Damietta.

The Upper Egypt, or that part of it which is habitable and useful, is very
narrow. In the widest part, a Horse in four hours may pass over it; in some
places it is not above three hours riding: and the Country in both sides is
wild, sandy, and hilly.

I cannot give an exact account of its wideness in the middle, but yet I am
persuaded it is not much larger nor wider than the higher part; for being
situated between both, Egypt begins to grow wider about Cairo; it must needs
follow, that the middle is not much wider than the upper part, unless it be
about the Cascieflik of Fium, where Egypt in the middle begins to be wider; but
yet I cannot give any exact account of it.

The Inferior part is wider: The Inhabitants reckon about 70 miles from
Damietta to Alexandria, the most Western-Town upon the Seacoast.

A Learned Person of this Age, in a discourse concerning the causes of the
Inundation of Nilus, has very well proved against the Ancient Philosophers,
that the lower Egypt has always been, and is not a new gift of Nilus. He
grounds his Opinion first upon Homerus, who mentions the old City of Canopus,
which was at one of the chief entrances into Nilus from the Sea. Secondly, upon
the testimony of Moses and David, Ps. 77. who have mentioned the City of Tanis,
where was Pharaoh's Court, and where God performed great Wonders.

Egypt was always governed by Kings, but the Royal Seats have not always
continued the same, for the Conquerours have altered them according to their
pleasure.

The first Royal City, as Macrisi says, was Amsus; but the Waters of the
Deluge having ruined it, the Posterity of Noah built Menuf, or Memphis, which
was the Seat of the Ancient Kings of the Race of Coptus, till Nabuchodonozor
had sacked it. When Alexander the Great had built Alexandria, he made it the
Principal City, where all the succeeding Kings of the Greeks made their
Residence for nine hundred years, till the Arabians had taken Egypt, and made
Fostat Metropolis. But when Giauher, the General of Meez le Din-alla had built
Cairo, about the year of the Hegeira 362. he called it Dar il Memleke, that is
the Royal Seat, which it has been ever since.

Egypt has been governed by three several sorts of Mahumetan Princes, since
the Arabians took it from the Greeks.

The first were named Omara Massr, or Lords of Egypt, without any other Title.
They were all Arabians, and Successors of Amru ibn il Ass, who was the first
Conqueror, and after to Abu il Fevares, the last of that Race. We reckon one
hundred and twelve Princes of Egypt, during the space of 337 Years, seven
Months, and twenty Days. Their Conquest happened about twenty years after the
Hegeira, and ended in the year 358. They all dwelt at Fostat Masser, or
thereabouts.

The second Race of the Arabians were called Caliphs. They began to take that
Title, when General Abuhassein Giauher had built Cairo by the Order of Meez le
Din-alba, who was then Prince of Barbary, and Conquered Egypt, and took it from
the Arabians. Egypt was afterward governed by its Caliphs about 108 Years, 4
Months, and 22 Days; that is, to the death of Adet le Din-alla, who was the
last and Eleventh Caliph.

The third sort, named Sultans or Soldans, succeeded immediately after; of them
there have been of four Nations.

The first, who was the Posterity of a certain Eijub, were called Sultans
Curdes.

The second came from beyond the Seas, and were named Mamaluk Turks, because
they had been before Slaves, and sold by the Merchants of Constantinople to the
Kings of Egypt, who caused them to be brought up and instructed in all Martial
Discipline. When the King was dead, one of these Slaves was chosen to succeed
in the Throne.

The third sort were styled Mamaluks Circassians, because they came originally
from Circassia, and were brought thither by the Merchants as the former, and
sold also as Slaves to the Kings of Egypt, who caused them to be also trained
up as the former, unto whom they succeeded in the Regal Dignity and Command.

The fourth sort, who are now in possession, are the Sultans of the Race of
Ottoman, who overcame the Circassian Sultans in the year 922. of the Hegeira;
for Sultan Selim Conquered this Kingdom in the year 1517.

Egypt is inhabited at present by Copties, Moors, Arabians, Turks, Greeks,
Jews, and Franks, and other strange Nations; but as they are not numerous, they
deserve not to be mentioned.

The Copties or Copts are the Natural Inhabitants of the Country, thus called,
as we have already said, of Coptus the Son of Misraim, who was King of Egypt
after his Father.

The Moors, who are named by the Arabians Aulad il Arab, or Children of the
Arabians, are likewise as well as the Copties descended from the same Father,
but they are become Mahumetans, and it may be since they have Conquered Egypt,
there are some amongst them yet that are come from the Arabians.

The Arabians are a people of Arabia, and though they live in Egypt, they have
no communication with the Moors, who are originally of the Country. They are of
many differing Generations, governed by their several Chieftains, whom I shall
mention in the sequel of this discourse.

The Turks have established themselves there since Sultan Selimus conquered
Egypt. These govern the Country, defend it, and act in all Offices of State.

The Greeks that live there now, and that make yet profession of the Christian
Religion, have been invited thither by the great Trade of Egypt; for there is
no sign of the Ancient Greeks, who established themselves there when Alexander
the Great conquered Egypt; if there be any, they are mingled with the Copties,
and are called by their names.

And because the Greekish Emperors that followed the Council of Chalcedonia
were glad to encourage a Party in Egypt against the Copties, sworn Enemies of
that Council, they protected there the Greeks that went thither from Greece,
that submitted to that Council, and gave them means to establish themselves in
this Kingdom; since that time the Greekish Religion has been there professed.

The Jews have always lived there; at present they are very numerous, and are
in great repute, chiefly at Cairo, and in the Maritime Towns: but unless it be
in such places there are none to be found, for if their occasions call them
into the Country, they usually disguise and hide themselves; for when the
Country People find them out, they abuse and affront them strangely.

The Copties at present in Egypt are not numerous, in comparison of what they
have been heretofore; for in the days of Amru ibn il Ass, who took this Country
from the Greeks, there was of this Nation six hundred thousand that paid him
Tribute: but now, according to the relation of their own Patriarch, there is
scarce ten or fifteen thousand. One of the Causes of this decrease, was their
constancy in the Christian Religion, in the time of the Romans; their
Governors were so furious against them for that reason, that they have put to
death millions at a time: for the Histories tell us of the Governor under
Dioclesian the Emperor, who massacred in one night, at Christmas, fourscore
thousand; who are buried upon Mount Achmim in the Upper Egypt. And at another
time near Isna, either the same Governor, or another, put to death so many
that they were not to be numbered, for they covered fourscore Fiddans, or
Furlongs, with their dead martyred bodies: The Fiddan in Egypt contains 400
Cassabs or Yards, every Yard is 6 Cubits.

Another Cause of their decrease in the days of the Christian Emperors, was
their obstinacy in maintaining the Error of Dioscorus, one of their
Patriarchs, concerning one Nature, one Will, and Person in Jesus Christ, which
caused them to suffer almost the same destructions as they had done formerly
under the Heathen Emperors for the Christian Faith: For when the Greek
Emperors offered to force them to leave the Error of Dioscorus, and to
embrace the Faith established in the Council of Chalcedone, and when they found
them disobedient and inflexible; they made use of the Sword to compass their
design. Amongst the rest the Emperor Justinian, as Macriz says in his History
of the Patriarchs, caused two hundred thousand Copties to be killed at
Alexandria for that very purpose. I shall not mention the Cruelties of the
other Emperors his Successors exercised upon them. So that such as survived
after such like Massacres, when they saw the danger that attended the
profession of this Opinion, and of appearing in the Cities, they retreated into
the wilderness, or withdrew themselves into the Monasteries, in despair, to
lead a Monastical life, without marriage, or thinking to propagate their Nation.

After this, the Mohammedan Kings and Princes, that have governed Egypt since
the Christian Emperors, when they found them rebellious against their
Government, have not spared them. They have killed the Chief, sold for Slaves
the Wives and Children of others, so that the weaker sort have been forced to
turn Mahometans. By this means, after so many evils, this Nation is reduced to
a very small number.

They were anciently Heathens, every City had a God to adore.

Abusir, or the old Busiris, worshipped a Calf. Alexandria, the ancient
Racotis, adored Serapis of Stone. Achmim, which is the old Panos, acknowledged
Apollo. Bana worshipped a Dog. Bassa, or the old Bubastis, had for God a Lion
of Stone. Eida adored Serapis. Ischemunein, which is the ancient Hermopolis,
worshipped a Man of Stone. Isvan, called by the Copties Sevan, reverenced the
Tree Lebaca. Cous worshipped the Moon and Stars. Mindadi the Fig Tree of
Pharaoh. Memphis a Calf. Atrib, or the old Atribis, adored a Calf of Stone.
Semennut, which is the ancient Sebennis, worshipped a Calf of Brass. Sa a Hog
of Stone. Tuba had a respect for the Water and all that is therein. I have
taken all these particulars out of an old Manuscript in Arabic, that I have
seen in the Monastry of S. Anthony.

But since the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, they have been some of the
first that have embraced the Christian Religion, at the preaching of the
Apostle S. Mark. They have continued in the right Faith, till Dioscorus their
Patriarch fell into this Heresy, That in Jesus Christ there was but one
Nature, one Substance, one Will, and one Operation. This Error with its Author
was condemned in the Council of Chalcedone, and such as receive it are counted
as Heretics by the Church of Rome; therefore they have been persecuted by the
Christian Emperors in times past.

But because I treat more amply of their Belief and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies
in another Book named the Church of Alexandria, which I composed for that
purpose when I was at Cairo, therefore I will say no more at present.

The Egyptians have often changed their Language. The first and ancient
Language of the Country was that of the Copties, which was used all the time
that their Kings reigned in Egypt. But when Alexander the Great had subdued
that Country, they were forced to learn the Speech of their Conqueror, which
was the Greek, since commonly spoken in Egypt above nine hundred years, till
the Arabians had driven away the Greeks. They brought in the Arabian Tongue,
which is now commonly used.

Of Saida, or the Upper Egypt.
SAid in Arabic signifies a Place or a Country, higher and above another:
Therefore because the Upper Egypt is higher and above the Lower, it bears this
Name. The Arabians call it yet Vogh il ard, or the Face of the Country, being
situate on the South of Cairo. The Hogia's or Priests of Mahomet turn that way
their Faces, when they begin to call the Congregation to Prayers, because Mecha
is toward the South, in respect of all the Territories of the Ottoman Empire.

Giafer ibn Daleb, an Arabian Historian, says, that it is twelve days journey
long, as they march with Camels in Egypt; but it is not above four Hours
traveling from side to side in the Country that is inhabited: for if we should
comprehend in the breadth the Mountains of Sand on the East and West, it is a
great deal broader than we have said.

The City of Isvan is the farthest Confine toward the South, which is in the
Cascieflick of Ibrim. On the East it stretches forth as far as the Red Sea,
and on the West as far as the Province of Vah.

The Chief City heretofore was Hu, whereof I shall speak hereafter more at
large; but now the Capital City is Girge, where lives the Sangiac-Bey that
governs it.

Anciently certain Princes ruled here in the time of the Arabians, called in
their Language Omara Said. They dwelt then at Hu, which is, the old Diospolis,
surnamed the Upper, distant from Girge about a days journey, and on the same
side of the River Nilus as we go up: But when Girge was enlarged by time, and
Hu fell to decay, the Princes of Said settled their abode at Girge, which has
been always the Chief City since that time till now.

About fifty years ago the Turks drove away from thence those Arabian Princes,
and in their stead they put the Sangiac-Beys, who are Natural Turks; the first
was named Soliman-Gianballat.

This puts me in mind of a mistake of James Albertus in his discourse of Egypt;
he says, that Said was about 60 years ago a Kingdom of it self, to which the
Grand Seignior did usually assign a Pacha. This Error has no ground: First,
because in all the Histories, ancient and new, of the Arabians, the Province of
Said is never named Memleke a Kingdom, nor Pachalick the Government of a Pacha,
but only Arde Said, i. e. the Country of Said; and its Rulers, were not named
Kings, or Pachas, but only Omara Said, or Princes of Said. Secondly, because
all the Governors of the Turkish Race, who have governed it since the driving
out of the Arabian Princes, are never called in the Registers of the Divan, nor
of the common people, otherwise than Sangiac-Beys, two only excepted, who were
named Pachas, because they had been Pachas before they were the Governors of
this Province; and though they did bear this Title, they were always subject to
the Pachas of Grand Cairo.

It is certain, the Province of Said is very large; and if it were all
inhabited, and all manured, as is the lower Egypt, its Bey might contend with
the Pacha of Cairo for pre-eminence. They have often endeavored to free
themselves from his Command, but because the inhabited Country is very narrow,
and the Villages and Towns ruinated, they could never succeed in their design.

Nevertheless, the Government is much like that of the Pachas of Cairo, for he
has the same Officers to attend him, a Chiaoux-Bachi, or a Captain of the
Chiaoux, an Interpreter, an Aga of the Janissaries, and other Aga's of the
Military Orders, named in their Language Boulouks, who are taken out of the
Soldiery of Cairo, and are paid out of the Reversions of the Divan. He has
likewise his Divan Catebi, or Chancellor; and in truth, he has all the
Privileges of a Pacha, but he has not the Title, nor the Quality, nor ever
had.

This Bey gives to the Pacha of Cairo, as James Albertus says, forty Purses
every year; besides, he sends him fifty Horses, fifty Mules, and one hundred
Camels. He gives also ten Purses to his Kehaja, and his Aga: And for the Tax of
his Country, he pays to the Divan of Cairo one hundred and fifty Ardebs of
Wheat; and when he gives other Grain, he delivers one Ardeb and a half, instead
of one Ardeb of Wheat; and besides, he sends four hundred and fourscore Purses,
each Purse containing five hundred Crowns: And when he is in the last year of
his Government, he is bound to cause all the Lands of his Government to be sown
which the River has watered, and for his Expenses the Divan gives him an
Allowance.

Of the Casciefs of Egypt.
IN regard the word Cascief is often repeated in this Treatise, I have thought
it needful, before I proceed any farther in the general description of Egypt,
to mention its Origin, and the number and employment of the Casciefs: By this
means we shall see that all Egypt is divided into little Provinces, or
Governments.

The word Cascief proceeds from the Arabik Jickscif, which signifies to
discover a thing; because their Ancient Office was to visit their Province and
Jurisdiction, to find out the Arabians, and Thieves, and Persons of an ill
life, and to punish them: But now their Power and Riches increasing, they have
rented the Incomes of their Provinces without altering their Names; so that at
this time they are the Petty-Governours of Egypt, and are in number six and
thirty.

In the upper Egypt are twenty four, namely of Sint, where the upper Egypt
begins, of Abutig, of Temeh, of Tahta, of Gezire, of Sobaitg, of Minscie, of
Tuh il essirat, of Girge, where the Vali is the Cascief: All these are on the
West Side of Nilus, before you come to Girge.

These following are likewise on the West Side of Nilus; but beyond Girge,
namely, the Casciefs of Berdis, of Fersciut, of Hu, of Bahgiura, of Jarbuksas,
of Arment, and of Isne.

These following reside on the East-part of Nilus; namely, the Casciefs of
Scierkabuet, of Achmin, of Scierkmerg, of Limbir ve il cheijam, of Scierkfau,
of Cous, of Kenne, of Luxorein, and of Ibrim.

Six dwell in the middle Egypt; namely, at Momfallot, where the Cascief
Commands the other of Vah; there is the Cascief of Ischmunein that dwells at
Minie, the Casciefs of Behnese, of Fium, of Gize: All these are at the
West Side of Nilus; and on the East there is only the Cascief of Atfieh, in the
middle of Egypt.

There are also six in the lower Egypt; namely, of Menuf, of Garbie, which two
Provinces are in the Isle of Delta. The Cascief of Beheire resides in the
West Side of Nilus, as we go to Gize, over against Cairo. This Province reaches
as far as Alexandria, and includes the little Cascief of Tarane that depends
upon it. There is likewise the Cascief of Kel, Jub, in the same side as Cairo,
and the Cascief of Mansoura on the same hand, near the Province of Keliub, and
the Cascief of Bilbeis, which is on the side of Crand Cairo.

All the Casciefs of the inferior Egypt, and some also of the middle, never
abide in the Towns of their Jurisdictions, for the most part, but only eight or
nine Months, from January till August. When Nilus begins to overflow the Banks,
then they retreat to Cairo, where they dwell till the Waters are gone, and that
the Bersim, or Sinfoin, is grown high enough to feed their Horses.

When the Governors are gone out of their Towns, there is no assurance for a
Traveller, for the Arabians and Thieves having no body to fear in the quarter,
they watch for their prey in the passages and highways; so it is not safe to
travel by Land, till they be returned to their Jurisdictions again, which
commonly happens at the Feast of the Epiphany of the Copties.

They observe this order in going from Cairo; the Cascief of Garbie departs the
next day after the Epiphany, of Menuf, the day following; the third day the
Cascief of Beheire, the fourth of Mansoura, the fifth of Atfieh, the sixth of
Keliub, the seventh goes away Lord of Gize. They all come back again to Cairo,
in the Month of August, in the same order.

This is the Tax that was commonly paid in the year 1634. as James Albertus
says; I know not whether there is any alteration.

The Cascief of Beheire pays to the Pacha 30 Purses, to his Kehaja and Agas six
Purses, and to the Divan or Treasury of the Grand Seignior, yearly in four
portions, four hundred and fourscore Purses. He has at his Command two hundred
men, half Spahis, and half Metferracas; and besides these, he hires many more
to give a check to the Arabians. He is bound to make the water of the River to
run into Alexandria, through the Calitz or Conduit of Cleopatra, which conveys
the water from a Village called Latf; he is bound also to entertain Soldiers
all along the Channel, to see that the water be not cut off: he is also bound
to cause it to be cleansed at his own charges. In his Province are one hundred
threescore and ten Towns and Villages.

The Cascief of Menuf pays to the Pacha five and twenty Purses, to his Kehaja
and Agas four, and to the Divan two hundred fourscore and sixteen; and the
Divan of Cairo is obliged to entertain one hundred Spahis to keep his Country.

The Cascief of Garbia pays to the Pacha, as I understood when I was at Cairo,
one and thirty Purses; two to his Kehaja, to the Emir Achour, a great Officer,
eighteen thousand Medins; and in all, one hundred and twenty Purses. The Divan
of Cairo allows him one hundred and fifty Soldiers; he lives at Mohelle
Kebire, or the Great Mohelle, the Chief Town of the Province.

The Cascief of Mansoura, as James Albertus says, gives to the Pacha five and
twenty Purses, four to his Kehaja and Agas, and to the Divan two hundred
fourscore and sixteen. The Divan entertains a hundred Soldiers in his
Province, and keeps as many more.

The Cascief of Keliub, which was the old Calliope, situated on the East Side
of the River Nilus, as Cairo, pays to the Pacha five and twenty Purses, four to
his Kehaja and Agas, and to the Divan two hundred fourscore and sixteen. The
Divan keeps for him, as for the former, a hundred Soldiers.

When the Cascief receives the Coftan, or his Commission from the Pacha, he
spends about five hundred Crowns. All such persons as have been Chiaoux and
Metferracas may pretend to this Office: These Metferracas, amongst the Turks,
are a Noble kind of Horsemen.

Of the Seasons of Egypt.
THough the Copties are much despised by all the Mahumetans, they are esteemed
because of the computation of the time; for the Mahumetans in all their
actions, either private or public, never make use of their own computation,
but of that of the Copties, as the justest and the best for their business: For
example, they say not, that the Rains fall such and such a day of their Month,
but such a day of the Month of the Copties. They reckon Easter, called Camsins,
not after their Beiram, but according to the Easter of the Copties: So that
they govern all their actions, and all their public affairs, not according to
their own, but according to the Copties Calendar.

The Copties divide thus the Seasons of the Year: They reckon the Autumns,
called by the Arabians il Charif, from the 15th day of the Month Tot, or
September, till the 15th of Kijahak, or December.

Winter, named by them il Scitte, begins on the 15th day of December, and ends
on the 15th day of Baramhat, or March.

The Spring, called by them il Auvel rebie, begins on the 15th day of March,
and ends the 15th day of Baoni, or June.

The Summer on the 15th day of June, and ends the 15th day of the Month Tot, or
September: they reckon for every Season just three Months.

They begin the year the 8th day of September, according to the Gregorian
style, or on the 28th of August, according to the Calendar of the Greeks. They
reckon this present year 1672. to be the 1398. year since the Viceroy of
Dioclesian massacred so many Martyrs, at which time they begin their
computation.

These are the names of their Months, and the days in which they begin.

Tot, or September, begins the 8th day of ours. Babe, or October, begins the --
of ours. Hatur, or November, begins the -- of ours. Kijahak, or December,
begins the 7th of ours. Tube, or January, begins the 6th of ours. Amscir, or
February, begins the 4th of ours. Baramhat, or March, begins the 7th of ours.
Bermude, or April, begins the 6th of ours. Besciens, or May, begins the 6th of
ours. Baoni, or June, begins the 5th of ours. Abib, or July, begins the 5th of
ours. Messr, or August, begins the first day of ours.
Every Month has 30 days, which make up 360. and because there wants yet five
to complete the year, they add the five at the end of all, and call them
Epagomene, which signifies added, to make up the full year.

The most temperate Season has something of the Spring and the Autumn; which
two Seasons cannot well be distinguished in Egypt. Now the mild Weather begins
in the Month of September, then the people begin to breath the fresh air; but
as about this time the Fields are all drowned in water, and that there is no
walking up and down by Land, the abode is not then so pleasant till the middle
of November: Then the Country is dry, the Ways are free, the Waters are run
into their usual Currents, the Birds are to be taken by the Fowler, the Air is
pleasant, the heat of the Sun is supportable, the Fields grow green, and the
sweet and fresh Gales blow every where. In short, the Season is then very
pleasant, and continues so till the middle of April.

The cold season, which is answerable to our Winter, begins about the middle of
December: It is a delightful time, unless in the seven days which the Arabians
call Berd il agiuz, or the cold of the old Hag; they begin about the 7th of
February, and continue till the 14th; the Mornings are then very cold, the Sky
is cloudy, the Rains fall, and the Winds are commonly very boisterous.

Though the Winter is there very mild, persons of Estate wear Furred Gowns,
from the Month of November, till the Month of March, not because of any great
cold, for there is scarce any, but because then the Weather is variable, and
they fear to be incommoded with the distempers which this changeable weather
produces.

The Summer is the worst and most troublesome season, because of the excessive
heats of the hot Winds, and the dangerous diseases that are rife, chiefly at
that time, which the Egyptians call Camsins, which we name Easter. This
dangerous season begins about the Easter-Monday of the Copties, and ends at
their Whitson-Monday. About this time the Winds, called by the Arabians
Merissi, are boisterous; they are so hot and troublesome, that they are ready
to stifle the breath, and they raise in the Air so much Straw and Sand, that
the Sky is darkened. This Sand is so subtle, that it penetrates through every
little chink and hole.

About this time Malignant Fevers commonly reign, Dysenteries, and many other
Diseases; the least is incurable, if the necessary Remedies be not applied in
time: And when these winds blow, the bodies that are not distempered, are cast
down, and not well.

These Southerly winds blow not every day in this season, nor every year in the
same manner and fury; for in the year 1672. they blew but twelve times, and the
next year but twice, and that very moderately; other fresher and wholesomer
winds blew the rest of the time. It is not possible to express the joy of the
people, when these Southerly winds favor them, and are mild.

The ordinary time of Rains and Winds, which might be compared with our Autumn,
begins in the Month of December, and continues till January, and February;
though at Rosetta, and Alexandria, the Rains fall at other times, because of
the Seas that are so near. At the Eve of the Pentecost, in the year 1672. the
weather was full of Rain at Rosetta, and the next day followed a very thick
Mist. On the 24th day of November, in the same year, the Rains fell very
moderately at Cairo; the Sky was obscure, and full of wind; and on the tenth,
eleventh, fourteenth and fifteenth in the same Month, very furious Rains fell.
By this you may see, that it is a great error to say, that it never Rains in
Egypt.

I have often seen in my Travels, that the weather has been so misty and
moist, that my Beard and Clothes have been so wet, that a shower of Rain could
not have wetted them more; and that which is wonderful is, that this happened
in a season that none ever expected it. During several mornings in the Month of
April, in the year 1672. in my traveling from Damietta to Cairo, the same
thing happened to me in the Month of June at Rosetta; and in the Month of
September at Benesuef; and in October, in my return from the Monastery of S.
Anthony.

These wet Mists are more frequent about Cairo, than in other places. They
begin usually about the Month of November, before the rising of the Sun, and
continue all the Winter. Some happen in other seasons of the year, and many
times in Summer, as I have taken notice in the year 1672. in the beginning of
August, in my return back from Fium to Mocanan, a Village about four hours
traveling from Cairo, I saw upon the Town so thick a Mist, that I could not
discover it, nor the Pyramids that are near, though the Air was clear where I
stood.

In all the seasons of the year, when the nights are serene, there is so much
Dew that falls, that it may very well be taken for a little shower; but when
the Sky is cloudy, there falls no Dew. Were it not for these Dews, there would
be no Grass nor Corn, the Trees would bear no Fruit, the wild Beasts in the
Deserts could not live where there are no Fountains nor Rivers, and where the
Rains fall but seldom. Thunders are not often heard; in all the time that I was
in Egypt, I heard this noise but twice, on the first day of January, and on the
fourth of May, 1673.

I have already spoken of the two chief Winds that blow in Egypt, Merissi and
Maltem. I must further take notice, that not only the Southern Winds are named
Merissi, but also the Eastern. They blow commonly twice every year; at Easter,
called (as I have already said) Camsin; and from the Month of November, till
the middle of February. They are helpful to those that travel down the River
Nilus, and to the Ships that sail from the Indies and Arabia through the
Red Sea to Sues: But they are contrary to those that go up the River: From
hence it sometimes happens, that Travelers are 30 days going up from Cairo to
Girge, which Voyage is easily performed in 8 or 10 days when the other winds
blow.

The Winds called Maltem or Teijab are Westerly Winds: They begin about twelve
days before the Rain falls, and last till the Month of November; during that
time scarce any other Wind blows. The Winds called Merissi are hot, they spoil
the Corn, and are hurtful to every thing; but these nourish and refresh, not
only the Corn, but are comfortable to Man and Beast, for they are cooling, and
give strength.

They stop the Mouth of the River, and cause the Waves to send back the water
of Nilus, which makes it to stop and swell over the Banks to water the Earth,
and fill all the Channels with water. In their seasons they begin to blow about
Noon, and continue till midnight; but between midnight, and the Noon of the
next day, they seldom blow, or very faintly.

The Description of the Egyptians.
THe Egyptians generally are of an Olive-colour, and the farther their Country
is distant from Cairo toward the South, their skin is the more tawny; such as
live next to Nubia are all blackish, as the Nubians.

Their ordinary Vices are Idleness and Cowardice, which is so natural to them,
that they are all touched with them, whether they be Mores or Copties: Their
ordinary employment every day is to smoke Tobacco, and drink Coffee, to sleep,
or lie in a place idle, or sit talking together. They are very ignorant in all
manner of Sciences and Knowledges; they are very proud and vainglorious; and
though they all know that they have lost their Nobility, their Country, all
knowledge and exercise of Arms, their Language, their chief Books, and public
Histories, and that instead of a famous and valiant Nation that they were
heretofore, they are become mere Slaves, an odious and a contemptible people;
nevertheless they are so proud, as to think that they have need of nothing.
They are displeased when we Francs advise them to send their Children into our
Country to learn the Arts and Sciences, and to understand how we live and
behave our selves.

The common people are Thieves, Liars, treacherous, and so greedy of gain, that
for the love of a Meidin they would kill their own Fathers. They are very
negligent of their business, and changeable, troublesome in discourse, so
unconstant in their promises, that there is no heed to be taken of their words,
nor of their Oaths. In a word, they are very proper to be employed in all evil
actions; my Conversation with men of that Nation of all sorts, has caused me
to discover them to the bottom.

The Women of the Country are usually of a low stature, of a brown Complexion,
all their Beauty consists in a lively eye; their discourses are troublesome,
and their clothing is not handsome. The Wives of the better sort, brought from
other parts of Turkey, are better bred, and more pleasing in all respects.

Of the River Nilus.
THe discovery of the Springs of Nilus, which has caused so many Disputes
amongst the Ancient Philosophers, and for which some great Persons were at vast
expenses without any success, seems to have been left to the Portugueses, who
have found them out in our Age.

Father Tells, a Jesuit, says in his History of Ethiopia, printed at Lisbon,
That in the Kingdom of Gojam, which is about 12 Degrees from the Equinoctial
toward the West, and in the Province of Sacahala, inhabited by the Agaus in a
Field of no great extent, encompassed about with many high Mountains, there is
a little Lake over which one may cast a stone, full of Bushes and low Trees,
whereof the Roots are so thick and entangled, that in Summer one may walk upon
them. In the middle of this Lake are two great and deep Fountains very near
together; from hence issues out a clear water that runs under these Bushes and
low Trees in two several Channels: toward the East, and about the distance of
a Musket Shot, they turn to the North; about half a mile from thence there
appears a great deal of water, and a considerable River, into which runs many
other streams; and about 15 miles from thence, it receives another bigger
water, called Gema, which loses then its name: a little farther, turning
toward the East, it receives also two other considerable streams, called Kelti
and Branti; near this place is the first fall of the River: Not much farther,
in running toward the East, it enters into the Lake of the Abyssins, named
Bahr Dembea, or the Sea of Dembea: when it is past through, without mingling
its waters with the waters of the Lake, it receives many other Rivers very
great; and namely, the River Tekeze near Egypt.

As soon as Nilus is out of the Lake Dembea, it turns to the South-East,
leaving at the left hand the Kingdoms of Beg-amidr, of Amhara, of Voleca;
afterward running to the South, it has upon the South-East the Kingdom of
Sauva; afterward turning again to the East-North-East, it has on the South-
side Ganz, Gafata, and Bizamo, and passes through the Countries of Gonga and
Gafre, and a little farther by Fascalo, then it enters into the Country of
Funch, or Nubia, and from thence runs into Egypt, as Father Tells affirms.

We must consider besides, that when Nilus is fallen down the last Cataract
near Isvan, it runs from the South to the North very slowly, and divides it
self below Boulac into two great Branches, the one meets the Sea at Rosetta,
and the other at Damietta. This latter divides it self into another Current at
Sciobret il yemen, a Village situate on the West Side of Nilus, about halfway
between Cairo and Damietta, which runs into the Sea at Brullos.

Besides these three branches, there is a fourth which is artificial, and full
of water; but about thirty days of the year, it begins at a Village called
Latf, on the West Side of Nilus, in going to Rosetta, about thirty miles from
Alexandria, where the waters of this Current run into the Sea; therefore the
Egyptians reckon it amongst the true Mouths of the River Nilus.

I know not whether besides these four there be any other, as Herodotus and
Strabo affirm, for they reckon about seven. But Egypt is much altered; so that
there is no appearance nor remembrance of the seven Cities where they were, as
they say.

When I was at Rosetta, I inquired from the Inhabitants concerning this
particular, but they could not give me any account, but only of these four.
Some told me, that besides the great Current at Damietta, there was another
artificial Channel at Gaza, where the waters did run into the Sea, but I cannot
believe it: but if this were true, Gaza is not in Egypt; therefore it cannot be
one of the seven Mouths of the River Nilus spoken of by the Ancient
Geographers. I could wish that some other curious Traveller would enquire them
out, and tell us the truth.

This is remarkable of Nilus: 1. That it begins to increase and decrease on a
certain day precisely. 2. That when it first increases it grows green. 3. That
afterward it appears red; and 4. That it changes its Channel sometimes.

The day in which it begins to increase is yearly the 12th of June of the
Copties, or the 17th day of our June, on which day they observe the Feast of S.
Michael the Archangel, on which day the drops fall. Now these drops are
nothing else, according to the judgment of the Inhabitants, but the Mercies and
Blessings of God: They believe on that day God sends the Archangel S. Michael
to cause the River to be fruitful. This is the common Opinion of the people:
But the Learned say, that these drops is a kind of a Dew which falls toward
the last quarter of the night, near the morning; and which causes the River to
be fruitful, purifies the Air from all the infection of Cumsin, and gives
strength and virtue to all things upon which it falls.

These drops are doubtless the only cause of the fruitfulness of Nilus: this is
easily seen; for as soon as this Dew is fallen, the water begins to be corrupt,
and to be of a greenish color; this color increases more and more, till the
River appears as a Lake covered all over with Moss.

This color is to be seen not only in its great Channel, but also in all the
Ponds and Branches that come from thence, only the Cisterns keep the water pure.

Some years this green color continues about 20 days, and sometimes more, but
never above 40. The Egyptians call this time, when the River is green, il chad
raviat, for they suffer much, because the water is corrupt, without taste, and
unwholesome, and that good water is very rare.

These drops or Dew purifies the Air, for as soon as it falls, the Plague
cease to be mortal, none dies of it; the Air is wholesome, all Distempers
cease, and if any person grows sick, he never dies.

This Dew gives life to every thing; and when it falls upon the Wheat, it
causes it to continue many years without corruption, or worms, and is far more
nourishing than that Corn upon which it never falls; For this cause they never
house the Corn of the Grand Seignior in the Barns, till this Dew is fallen upon
it, that it might keep the longer without worms.

The increase of the River proceeds from several causes; the first and the
chief is, the fermentation caused in it by this Dew, which falls at the time
mentioned before.

The continual Rains of Ethiopia, that come in July, August, and September,
which is the Winterquarter of that Country, and the great Torrents of water
that run down from the Mountains into the Rivers that flow into Nilus, may be
looked upon as another cause of this increase, for I cannot conceive that the
fermentation can continue 100 days, and cause it alone to increase so much as
it is wont.

The third cause, in my judgment, are the Westerly winds, called Maestrals, and
by the Egyptians Maltem, which begin to blow, as I have said, about 12 days
before the Dew falls; namely, the fifth day of June, and continue afterward
about four Months without alteration. They blow strait into the River Nilus,
and hinder the fresh water from coming out, so that it returns back, and
causes the River to swell.

These same Winds have caused several Travelers, and namely Monsieur Burattini
to affirm, that the River observes not a precise day to increase, but that it
happens some years sooner, others later; because before the 17th day of June,
the water did seem to swell; but this is no real increase, the winds Maestrals
are the causes of this appearance.

The Ancient Egyptians ascribed the cause of the swelling of Nilus to a
superstitious custom. They bought a young Damosel, adorned her with rich
attire, and afterward cast her as a Sacrifice into the River, on the 12th day
of their Baony, or June: But when Amru-ibn il ass had conquered Egypt, and
taken it from the Greeks, he abolished this damnable Custom; which was observed
in that time, as Gaznevi a famous Arabian Historian says. Amru commanded the
Egyptians to forbear and leave that act of cruelty; in that year it happened
that the River did not increase, which caused the people to suspect and fear a
great Famine, insomuch that they resolved to depart out of the Kingdom. This
caused Amru ibn il ass to write to Amru ibn il Chottab, a Califf of Mahomet, to
desire his advice. This Califf sent him a Letter written with his own hand for
the River Nilus, commanding him to read it, and to cast it into the water;
which as soon as Amru had performed, the waters rose 16 Cubits in one night,
the 14th of September, which is commonly the last day of its increase. This was
sufficient to water the Country, and satisfy the people.

Some of the Country that are ignorant of the true causes of this increase,
imagine that it proceeds from a large Pond in Ethiopia, in the River it self,
which the Abyssins begin to open about the 12th of June, and by degrees let out
the water more and more, till the 14th of September, at which time they begin
to shut it again; but this is a foolish fancy of the Copties.

As soon as the green color is gone, the River Nilus begins to become red, and
very muddy; it is then no doubt but the fermentation is passed, and that the
waters of Ethiopia are arrived in Egypt, which are of that color, because of
the red Earth which the furious torrents from the Mountains carry into the
River; for it is not possible that the Land of Egypt, which is very black,
should give it that color. In the year 1673. in the beginning of July, the
water began to be red, which continued till the end of December, the time that
the River returns to its ordinary bigness.

They have an art to make this muddy water as clear as Crystal. As soon as the
Waterbearers have filled their Vessels, they rub them in the inside with a
Paste made with pounded Almonds, which causes the water to become in a short
time very clear.

In the places where this Paste is not to be found, they use for that purpose
the Kernels of Apricocks, pounded in the same manner. I was told, that the
Flower of little Beans could perform the same effect. The Egyptians believe,
that the River Nilus decreaseth also at a certain day; namely, the 17th of
their September, and the 24th of ours, the day which they observe in
remembrance of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. They are so fully persuaded of
it, that if any should deny it, he would be looked upon as ridiculous.

The occasion of this belief, as I conceive, is,

First, Because the next day after this Festival, all the Banks and Stoppages
of the River, on this side the Cairo, which were before kept shut, and guarded
by armed men, that such as need the water for their grounds might not open
them, are cut and removed, and the water let into the Country. By this means
the River spreads abroad more than before, and its water returns not back,
which makes them say, that it rises and swells no more.

Secondly, Because the day after the Holy Cross, they do not take notice of its
increase at the Pillar of Mikias, nor publish it about the Town, as before;
they believe therefore that this is done, because the River never increases
after.

Thirdly, Because when the seasons of the year in Egypt are regular, the winds
Maestrals that help to make the River swell, cease after the 17th of September,
and the Southerly winds rise, driving the waters out of the Fields.

Though these reasons appear strong enough, to prove the Opinion of the
Copties, one cannot without offending them say, that the River may yet increase
after that day, because the winds Maestrals, and the rains of Ethiopia, may
some years continue a longer time than ordinary, and so the River may increase
a little, not to be perceived: for these winds have blown till the Month of
November. In the year 1672. at the Calliz of Cairo it was visible, that the
water was risen three fingers higher than the day before, in the night of the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross. It may be said, that this increase was not real,
but only caused by some stoppage at the passage of the River, or at one of the
Bridges of the Channel out of the City: For my part, let every one believe what
seems most likely.

From hence we may see how much some Travelers have been mistaken, when they
have endeavored to persuade us, that the River Nilus never increases above 40
days: For if you reckon the beginning of its increase, from the 17th of June
till the 14th of September. the day of its decrease, you shall find that it
increases during 100 days at least.

There cannot be a greater Testimony of this, than the Custom of the Copties,
who in their Rubric have a form of prayer for the increase of the River, which
they say from the 12th day of Baoni, or June, till the 8th of Babe, or October,
which is in all 120 days. In which prayer they desire, that God would cause the
River to rise to its necessary height, to water sufficiently the Country, as
Abulbaracat, a famous Author amongst the Copties, says in his work called
Mosbah iddolme, which I have brought from Egypt.

The Copties altogether ignorant, ascribe this ordinary decrease to a Miracle.
They observe the Festival of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, at which time
they bless a Cross at the Celebration of the Mass, which they cast into Nilus,
and imagine that this Cross stops the increase of the River.

Their Patriarch was wont to perform this Ceremony with great pomp and state;
but because the Mahumetans suffer them not to go in Procession about the Cities
publicly, their Priests observe this Custom every one in his own Village.

The waters of this River have several Operations. 1. They cause a Looseness to
the newcomers, if they drink of them at their first arrival, which continues
about eight days. 2. They cause an itch in the skin, which troubles such as
drink of them when the River increases. This itch is very small, and appears
first about the Arms, next upon the Stomach, and spreads all about the Body,
which causes a grievous pain. This Itch comes not only upon such as drink of
the River, but such as drink of the waters of the Cisterns filled with the
River water. It lasts about six Weeks. 3. About the Month of June, July,
August, and September, it turns into a swet, but is not so in any other time of
the year. 4. When this water covers the Earth, it fats the Land with the slime
that it leaves behind. Monsieur Th. is mistaken in his Travels into the Levant,
when he says, that this slime makes the ground so fat, that if they did not
mingle Sand with it, the ground would rot, and choke what is put into it; and
that in Egypt they take as much pains to carry Sand into the ground, as we do
to carry dung. This is not generally so; for they never use Sand, but for
Melons, Cucumbers, and such like Fruits, which grow only in sandy ground; they
never use Sand for other Fruits and Grains.

When the River runs over, it makes a great destruction; it carries away not
only great pieces of the Bank, but destroys sometimes Towns and Villages near
to it. This may easily be perceived by the ruins of the Houses, and the old
Walls, seen all along the sides of the River.

Sometimes it alters its Channel. I have read in the Mekkin, an Arabian
Historian, that about the time that the Arabians conquered Egypt, the water was
so high, as to touch the Walls of the Cassr Isscemma, a part of the old Cairo;
and that it ran near the Church of Mary Moncure, which is in that of the
Patriarchs, in the Street called in that time Haret il bahr, The Street of the
River; whereas now it is above a mile off from this place.

One day as I was walking out of the old Cairo in the Fields, near the Church
of S. Michael, the Copties showed me a Garden near adjoining, which was about
10 years ago upon the Banks of the River, but at present it is above a Musket
shot off, because the River has taken as much ground on the other side, as it
has lest on this.

Now let us see whether the Kings of Ethiopia are able to divert the course of
the River, and cause all the Inhabitants to perish with hunger, as some
imagine. I am of this Opinion, though the Father Tells supposes and alleges
many difficulties in his History of Ethiopia. These are the Reasons that oblige
me to believe it possible.

1. A Letter of David, King of Ethiopia, surnamed Constantine, written to Abu
seid Barcuk, King of Egypt, in the year of the Martyrs, 1193. I have a Copy of
it written in Arabic, in which he threatens him in two distinct places of his
Letter, to turn aside the River Nilus, and hinder it from entering into Egypt,
to cause all the Inhabitants to perish with hunger, if he continues to vex the
Copties, whom he names his Brethren. He says, that he has received from God
this privilege, which he had not discovered to any of his Predecessors.

2. Because the Kings of Ethiopia have hindered the Current of Nilus, and turned
it out of Egypt, in the days of Mostansir, one of the Califfes of Egypt; which
obliged him to send the Patriarch of the Copties with rich Presents to the King
of Ethiopia, to entreat him to take away the Bank which he had raised to turn
aside the River. The King of Ethiopia having granted him this request for the
Patriarchs sake, the River increased in one night three Cubits, which was
sufficient to water the Fields with that water that was there before; as we may
see in the History of the Musulmans of George le Mekkin.

The first thing that Strangers may take notice of in sailing upon the River,
is the great number of Islands, whereof some be very great, 20 miles in
compass: They proceed first from the shipwreck of Vessels that have stuck in
the mud. This happens frequently through the unskilfulness of the Mariners, and
the mud of the River, the slowness of the Current, the dirt and mire gathers
immediately about any thing that stops there; by this means these places
increase into Islands. Almost every day new Islands are discoverable: And
because the State of Egypt never changed since the Conquest of Sultan Selim,
and that these Islands have been made since, they are not recorded in the Rolls
of the Divan of that time. From hence it is that they pay nothing to the Grand
Seignior, but belong to the Pacha, who lets them out to the Casciefs of the
Province, where these Islands are situated, or to whom he pleases.

Several Pillars have been erected in diverse times to measure the rising of the
River.

The first was at Menuf, or Memphis, built by Joseph Jacobson. When this fell
to ruin, a rich Lady of the Copties, named Deluca, erected two others; one at
Insine, or Thebe, and the other at Achmin. When this last decayed, the Greeks
built one at Cassr Isscemma, whereof the Ruins are yet to be seen, as some say.

Ater that Amru ibn il Ass had conquered Egypt, he caused one to be built at
Insine for the same purpose. This remained entire till the days of Abd il aziz
ibn Mervan, a Califf of Egypt, who caused one to be built at Helvan, a place
where he delighted to dwell.

The last of these Pillars stands in the Roude, an Island, where it remains to
this very day. It was erected by the Command of Azamed ibn zid, il Nettuchi, as
we may see in the Macrizi, in the Serrur, and other Arabian Histories.

Of the Pillar of Mikias, and in what manner they take notice of the Rivers
increase.
THE Name of Mikias, in its right signification, is nothing but a place where
something is to be measured: But when at Cairo Mikias is named, they understand
only the Pillar which is in the Palace of the Roude, an Island, which serves to
observe the increase of Nilus. This Island is named Roude, or Garden, because
it is a delightful place, and full of many pleasant Gardens. It stands over
against Grand Carro, from whence it is distant about a Musket Shot. This Pillar
is in the Palace of the Isle Roude; and to come to it, one must pass by a great
and a beautiful Mosquee: Therefore it is a difficult matter for a Christian to
see it, because the Mahumetans do not suffer them to enter into their Mosquees,
chiefly in Egypt, for they believe that they would by their entrance defile and
profane them. For this cause I could not have the liberty to see it; therefore
I cannot give any other description than that of Amer ibn il verdi, and of
Macrizi, famous Historians of the Arabians.

It is, as they say, of white Marble, of an Octogone figure, standing in a Pond
of water, into which the water of Nilus enters in by a large Channel. It is
divided upon the eight Angles into two and twenty Cubits, from the top to the
bottom: The first is divided into 24 equal parts, called Fingers; the second is
not divided; the third is divided as the first; thus alternatively, till the
eleventh Cubit. The first Cubit of the second side is not divided, the second
is divided into four and twenty thumbs, the third is not, thus, till the
eleventh, which with the others, to the bottom, are divided into eighteen
fingers or thumbs. All the other sides are divided in the same manner; so that
all the Cubits which are divided in a side, answer to the Cubits which are not
divided in the other side. The increase of the River is discerned from the top
to the bottom. The Copties say that John Mekaukes, a famous Man of their
Nation, and a Governor of Egypt, for the Emperor Heraclius, laid the
Foundations of this Palace, and of the Church which is near a Mosquee.

When Christianity flourished in Egypt, it belonged to one of their Priests to
examine the increase of the River; which action was performed three hours after
midnight, and after Mass. This is very likely. The last Priest of the Copties
that measured it, was named Raddat, who continued in that Office by making
himself a Mahumetan, that none but his Posterity might have this Office. Ibn
Raddat, who now executes this Function, is descended from him, and is a Caddi
by Profession.

Though the Mahumetans are Enemies of the Copties, they observe some Customs
now which were then kept, when their Priests did measure the River; for they do
this about Even-song, that is, about three hours in the afternoon. They that
must examine the increase of the River, must be Cadis, or Judges, an
Ecclesiastical Function amongst the Mahumetans. They do it after they have
first purified themselves, and said their prayers of the Even, as the Copties
after Mass.

When Ibn Raddat has taken notice of the number of the Fingers that signify
the increase of the River, he takes three times the water in the hollow of his
hand, and flings it as often into the air: He repeats afterward the Chapter of
Fatha, and departs with the news of the rising of the water to the Pacha.

On the 29th of June, the Festival of the Apostles of S. Peter and S. Paul,
they begin to publish abroad this increase through the City of Cairo; the
manner of this publication is sufficiently described by Monsieur Thevenot. This
day is the 26th of Baoni, or the June of the Copties, which is the Festival of
the Angel Gabriel. They call this day in their Language, Besciaret innil be
Massr; or, The day of the publication of the River Nilus at Cairo.

They that are employed in this business, observe a particular Custom: They
never declare exactly the number of the fingers of the increase, but always
keep back some, till the time comes that the Calitz is to be cut. For example,
if Nilus be increased ten fingers the first day, they will declare but seven or
eight the next day, and will conceal three or four: if in another day it
increases twelve fingers, they will discover but eight or nine, and keep back
three or four. Thus they continue 20 days, till the time comes that the Bank is
to be cut that hinders the River from running into the Channel of Cairo; then
they reveal some of those fingers which they concealed. All which they
constantly perform, until the day comes that they cry out Ouf Alla, that the
River is come to its perfect increase to water all the Fields of Egypt. They
observe this method, as they say, to cause more rejoicing in the people, by
discovering a great many fingers at once, at the time when the Bank is cut.
This makes them expect a year of Plenty.

Of the Well of Argenus.
I Have taken notice of one particular thing concerning Nilus, worthy of the
knowledge of our Learned Wits, which never any Traveller of Europe has yet
given any account of. At Argenus, or Gernus, as some call it corruptly, a
Village near Behnese, a Town situate in the middle of Egypt, there is a
Monastery of Copties, with a Church dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, where
there is a Well whereof the waters increase and swell every year, that same
night in which the Dew falls, in such a manner, that from thence it is easy to
gather how many Cubits the River will rise that year above sixteen. To know
this, they observe this Custom.

The Evening before the Dew falls, the Cadi, together with the Elder of this
Town, goes to the Church with a little Cord of Cotton, having eight knots
distant from one another about a thumb; at the end there is a piece of Lead,
which they let down into the Well in the presence of a crowd of people. As soon
as the Lead touches the top of the water, they tie the string, and stop the
Well, sealing it with their Seal: Afterward they go to the Church, and
continue there till the morning, at which time they examine how much the water
is risen that night, for at break of day they take away the Seal, they open the
Well, and draw up the Cord. Now by the rising of the water in the Well, and the
number of the knots that are wet, they can Prognosticate how many Cubits the
River will rise that year above sixteen. They reckon a Cubit for every knot
that is wet: For example, if there be four knots wet, they understand that the
River will rise four Cubits that year, that is in all twenty; so they judge of
the rest.

Nevertheless, I know not whether this be true, or whether it be but a Cheat,
as the late holy Greek at Jerusalem of Easter-Eve, as the appearing of the
Saints at Gemiane. I could not go upon the place to observe this passage; yet I
can say, that all the Historians of Arabia speak of it as most true; as we may
see in George le Mekkin, which is in the Kings Library.

Of the Fishes of the River Nilus.
THe chief Fishes found in this River, which I am acquainted with, here follow.

The Fish called Variole is the best; some are taken weighing three hundred
pounds: next is the Buni, and the Houd; the latter is without Scales, the Flesh
is of no good taste, because it is greasy and soft.

Here are also other Fishes, called Keschue, Abeide, Mischt, Taaban-me, or
Eels, Lebis, Schilan, the Crocodile, Kersche, Tirse, Buri, or Mullet, which
they pickle, Kelbe me, or the Sea-dog. The Bulti next to the Variole is the
best Fish of Nilus, it has Scales. There is also the Feres-me, or the
Seahorse, the Sebuga, the Focaca, or the Orbis marinus, which turns himself
round when he sports in the water. There is also the Read, or the Cramp-fish.
All these Fish are not so pleasing to the taste as the Variole, or the Bulti,
because the flesh is soft, which proceeds from the mud of the River.

Of the Crocodile.
THE Crocodile, in Arabic called Timsah, is the most remarkable and most
curious Animal belonging to the River Nilus. I have therefore thought that it
deserved a particular Description amongst the Fishes of this Current. That it
might be the more punctual and exact, I shall first repeat what Pliny says,
and afterward add what I have taken notice of. This Learned Naturalist tells
us that The Crocodile is an Animal with four Legs that makes a grievous
destruction both in the Water, and out upon the Land. Of all the Creatures that
live upon the Earth, this alone is without a Tongue, and this alone moves the
upper-jaw in eating. It has two ranks of great Teeth, and commonly it is
longer than 18 Cubits. It produces Eggs about the bigness of a Goose-Egg, that
it sits upon them out of the Water, and lays them at the place unto which the
Water is to rise that Year, when it is at its highest; as if it had a knowledge
of this beforehand. It is the only Creature that rises from such a small
beginning, to such a prodigious bigness. It is Armed with Claws to defend it
self. Its Skin on the Back is so extraordinary hard that no Weapon, never so
sharp, is able to enter it. In the Daytime it lies upon the Ground, and spends
the Nights in the Waters. When its Belly is very full, it sleeps upon the Bank
with its Mouth open; then there comes a little Bird, named Trochilos, To eat
the remains of the devoured Prey which sticks between the Teeth: with this Food
it nourishes it self, and by the picking of the Teeth it gives the Crocodile a
pleasure, which causes him to fall asleep in this posture. At that time the
Ichneumon takes notice of the Crocodile at a distance, and when it sees its
time it enters into the others Mouth, slides down the Throat into the Belly,
and gnaws the Entrails; with this the Crocodile dies. In the River Nilus are
also, as he says, Dolphins which have a very sharp Back, with which they kill
the Crodiles that pursue them continually. For that purpose these Dolphins seem
to be afraid of the ravenous Beast, which causes them to hide themselves in
the Waters under the Crocodiles; then, with their sharp backs, they rip open
the others belly. This Creature, says he, is very bold and daring to them that
run from it, but timorous and fearful if it be pursued. It is very weak-sighted
in the Water, but out of the Water it is quick. In the Winter it spends four
Months in some Cave, without eating. It lives long, and grows continually till
it dies.

This is the account that Pliny gives of the Crocodile. We will a little
examine what he says, and to that we shall add our own observations.

It is true that the Crocodile is a very dreadful Creature in Egypt, because of
the great destructions that it makes in the Water, and out; for it devours not
only all the Fish that it can catch in the River, but also the Camels, the
Horses, the Sheep, the wild Beeves, the Dogs, and little Children. In short,
all that it can catch upon the Land, it draws into the River, and eats it.

Concerning its length, which Pliny says is commonly above 18 Cubits, I must
needs confess that I know not how many Inches are his Cubits; for, many Hunters
of Crocodiles have assured me that it grows never above a Cubit in length in a
Year; and when it comes to twelve years old it grows no more: so that,
according to this account, the longest Crocodile is not above 12 Cubits in
length. If this be true, the Arabian Author, whom Ibn Beitar mentions in his
Book of Animals and Plants, is mistaken, when he says, that there are some
Crocodiles that have their Tails 6 Cubits long, their Head two, and the rest of
their Body 8.

The Eggs that he lays, which are sometimes in Number 30, never 100, as a
certain Traveller affirms, are as big as the Eggs of Austriches; three-times
bigger than Geese-Eggs. As soon as they are out of its Body, it carries them
into some Island of Nilus, and puts them into a hole made with its fore-feet,
it covers them with Sand, and smooths the place where they lie that no Person
might discover them. In this condition it leaves them, till by a natural
Instinct it knows that the young are formed. It goes then and opens the hole
and breaks the shell with its Musle for the young to creep out. As soon as they
are in the Air, they run strait to the River. And because some of these Eggs
are rotten, it is from this corruption that a certain Lizard, nameed by the
Arabs, Varal, is engendered. We shall speak of this Serpent in the sequel of our
Discourse.

That which Pliny says of the Trochilos requires a further inquiry; for one
might ask an hundred years in Egypt, what this Bird is, and yet none is able to
give an account. Beitar says this of it, when the Crocodile is full with the
devoured Prey, he goes out of the Water to sleep in the Sun; and because its
Teeth are full of slime and filth, in which the Worms are engendered; a certain
Bird, as little as a Teitavi, enters between his Jaws, eats up the slime, and
the Worms, if there be any; and when the Crocodile feels that all is clean, he
shuts his Mouth to eat the Bird also. But Nature has provided an expedient to
secure it; there are two sharp pricks on the top of the Birds Head, which when
the Crocodile feels, he opens his Jaws again for the Bird to escape out.

I inquired from several Moors, whether they knew any Bird that had any pricks
on the Head? They answered, they knew none. They told me, that there is in
Egypt the Saksak, a Bird that keeps the Crocodile always company, which I have
seen very often, and which lives upon the filth that sticks about, and between,
the Crocodile's Teeth. Whether therefore the Saksak of the Moors, and the Bird
mentioned by Beitar, be the Trochilos of Pliny, I leave to the Reader to judge.

Concernining the Ichneumon, named by the Arabians, Nims, by the Italians,
Sorca di faraone, and by the Frenchmen, Rat d' Egypt. It is very true that it
creeps into the Mouth of the Crocodile, enters into its Belly, which it gnaws
to the very Entrails; the like happens to the Camels, and wild Beeves, and
other Animals, when they sleep in the Fields.

That which Pliny speaks concerning the Dolphins is not likely, for there be
none in the River. But it may be it is the Tirse, which is the only Fish that
assaults the Crocodile. This Tirse is as round as a Buckler which eats the
young Crocodiles when it can meet them.

That the Crocodiles can live a long while without eating, as Pliny says, is a
truth which I have seen by experience by two that I have kept alive a long
while. I had one in my Closet about a Foot long, and another six in my Cellar.
I caused the latter to be tied with a great Cord about the Jaws, that it might
not offend such as came to see it. They lived both about a Month without
eating. The Moors told me that they could subsist forty days without any
nourishment.

They have, in all, threescore and twelve great Teeth, very sharp; six and
thirty in the upper-jaw, and as many in the lower: So that Ibn Beitar is
mistaken, when he says in his History of Animals, which I have sent to the
King's Library, that they have threescore in the upper-jaw, and forty in the
lower; and that between every two sharp and great Teeth, there is one square
and little one; for I have seen many alive and dead, but have never found this
difference in the Teeth, but rather I have always found them to be sharp and
uniform.

Its four Paws are furnished with great Hooks, or Claws, very sharp; the two
Fore-feet having five distinct, separated the one from the other; the two
hinder but four, which are all joined together by a very thin skin, as are the
Feet of all Sea-fowl, as Geese and Ducks.

The Arabian Authors say, That it casts out its Excrements by the Throat,
because it has no hole under the Tail, and its Stones have the smell of Musk;
but as I have had no experience neither of one nor the other, I refer my self to
their Relation.

Because the Crocodile cannot well turn it self upon the Belly when it lies
upon the Back, and that it is needful that the Female be in that posture when
the Male covers her. The Male takes care when he has laid her upon her Back
and performed his duty, to turn her again upon her Belly, for fear of the
Hunters.

I have also taken notice, that from the City Cairo, toward the upper Egypt,
there are many Crocodiles to be found, where they do much mischief; but from
thence toward the lower Egypt are very few, and they say, that they be not
dangerous.

The Moors give two Reasons of this; they say, That one of their Saints, named
Sidi Ibrahim il Zuphi, or The Lord Abraham of Zug, has conjured them to hinder
them from passing beyond the City Cairo, and bound them to hurt no body. The
other Reason is, as they say, because under the Pillar or Mikias there is a
Talisman that kills them as soon as they draw near.

But it is most certain that there are some on this side the Cairo to be seen,
though not so frequently as on the other. This proceeds, as they say, from the
Talisman that is turned up-side down in this Pillar, and therefore loses its
greatest virtue; therefore they can pass beyond it, swimming upon their Backs.

An exact Account of all the Pacha's that have Governed Egypt since Sultan
Selim, who took it from the Mammeluc Circassians, till the year 1673.
I Think that this general Description of Egypt would be imperfect, did I not
add a List of all the Pacha's, or Turkish Rulers, that have Governed Egypt till
this present time, since Sultan Selim gained it with his Sword from the
Circassians. I have taken it from an Arabian Historian of good credit, named il
Serrur; I have brought his Book from Egypt.

The first Pacha that Sultan Selim made himself, before his departure out of
Egypt, was named Cheirbek: He Governed five Years, two Months, and one and
twenty Days.

The second was Mustapha, who entered into his Office in the Year of the
Hegeira, 928, and continued in it nine Months, and fifteen Days.

The third was Ahmed, who Governed Egypt about one Year.

The fourth was Cassem, who was made Pacha in the Year 931, and cashiered in
the following Year. He Ruled three Months, and four and twenty days only.

The fifth was Ibrahim, who entered into the Government in the Year 932, and
continued in it two Months, and twenty four Days.

The sixth was Soliman, who was made Pacha in the Year 932, and removed in the
Year 941. He Commanded nine Years, eleven Months, and seven Days.

The seventh was Cosrof, who began to Command, as Pacha, in the Year 941, and
Ruled one Year, ten Months, and seven Days.

The eighth was Soliman, who was made Pacha the second time, after his return
from Arabia, in the Year 943, He Governed afterward one Year, five Months, and
one and twenty Days.

The ninth was Davud, who was made Pacha in the Year 945, and cashiered in the
Year 946. He Ruled eleven Years, ten Months, and seven and twenty Days.

The tenth was Ali, who was made Pacha in the Year 956, and discharged in the
Year 961. He Ruled four Years, five Months, and twenty Days.

The eleventh was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the Year 961, and cashiered
in the Year 963.

The twelfth was Iscander, who was made Pacha in the Year 963. He Ruled three
Years, three Months, and ten Days.

The thirteenth was Ali, who was made Pacha in the Year 966, and cashiered in
the Year 967. He Governed one Year, four Months, and seven Days.

The fourteenth was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the Year 967, and
discharged in the Year 971. He Governed three Years, three Months, and four and
twenty Days.

The fifteenth was Ali il Sophi, who was made Pacha in the Year 971, and
Governed two Years, and three Months.

The sixteenth was Mahmud, who was made Pacha in the Year 973. He Governed one
Year, seven Months, and four and twenty Days.

The seventeenth was Sinan, who was made Pacha in the Year 975, and cashiered
in the Year following. He Ruled nine Months, and a little more. He Conquered
the Country of Yemen.

The eighteenth was Cirkes Alexander, who was made Pacha in the Year 976, and
Ruled two years, six Months, and seven days.

The nineteenth was Sinan, who was made Pacha the second time, after his return
from the Country of Yemen, in the Year 979, and discharged in the Year 980. He
Governed one Year, and ten Months.

The twentieth was Hussein, who was made Pacha in the Year 981. He Governed one
Year, and three Months.

The one and twentieth was Messieh, or Messie, who was made Pacha in the year
982. and cashiered in the year 988. He Governed five years, seven months, and
fifteen days.

The two and twentieth was Hussein, who was made Pacha in the year 988, and
discharged in the year 991. He Ruled two years, ten months, and one day.

The three and twentieth was Ibrahim, who was made Pacha in the year 991, and
discharged in the year following. He Ruled one year, and five months.

The four and twentieth was Sinan, who was made Pacha in the year 992, and
Governed one year, sev^n months, and twenty days.

The five and twentieth was Aviz, who was made Pacha in the year 994, and died
suddenly in the year 999. He Ruled five years, five months, and ten days.

The six and twentieth was Ahmed, who was made Pacha in the year 999, and
cashiered in the year 1003. He Ruled four years, and three days.

The seven and twentieth was Curd, who was made Pacha in the year 1003, and
discharged in the following year. He Governed one year, and eight days.

The eight and twentieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1004, and
cashiered in the year 1006. He Governed two years, one month, and twenty days.

The nine and twentieth was Chidr, who was made Pacha in the year 1006. He
Governed three years, and twelve days.

The thirtieth was Ali il Selehtar, or Ali the Sword Bearer of the Grand
Seignior, who was made Pacha in the year 1010, and cashiered in the year 1012.
He Ruled two years, and two months.

The one and thirtieth was Ibrahim, who was made Pacha in the year 1012, and
murdered the next year at Cairo. He Governed four months, and seven days only.

The two and thirtieth was Mohammed il Gurgi; he was made Pacha in the year
1013, and cashiered in the year following. He Ruled seven months, and twelve
days only.

The three and thirtieth was Hussein, who being Pacha of the Country of Yemen,
was taken from thence and made Pacha of Cairo in the year 1014, and put out in
the year 1016. He Ruled one year, and eleven days.

The four and thirtieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1016, and
cashiered in the year 1020. He Ruled four years, four Months, and twelve days.

The five and thirtieth was Mohammed il Sophi, who was made Pacha in the year
1020, and discharged in the year 1024. He Governed four years and six days.

The six and thirtieth was Ahmed, who had been Testerdar, or Treasurer, of
Egypt; he was made Pacha in the year 1024, and discharged in the year 1027. He
Governed two years, ten months, and twelve days.

The seven and thirtieth was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the year 1027, and
cashiered in the same year. He Governed eight months, and nine days only.

The eight and thirtieth was Giafer, who was made Pacha in the year 1028, and
cashiered in the same year. He Ruled five months, and fourteen days only.

The nine and thirtieth was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the year 1028, and
cashiered the next year. He Ruled eleven months, and twenty days.

The fortieth was Hussein, who was made Pacha in the year 1029, and discharged
in the year 1031. He Ruled one year six months, and two and twenty days.

The one and fortieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1031, and
cashierd the same year. He Governed only a month and a half.

The two and fortieth was Ibrahim, who was made Pacha in the year 1031, and put
out of his Office in the year 1032. He Ruled only one year.

The three and fortieth ^as Mustapha, who was made Pacha the year 1032, and
cashiered in the same year. N. B. The Manuscript is here ambiguous.

The four and fortieth was Beiram, who was made Pacha in the year 1035, and
discharged in the year 1038. He Ruled two years, four months, and twenty days.

The five and fortieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1038, and
cashiered in the year 1040. He Ruled two years, and one day.

The six and fortieth was Muse, or Moyse, who was made Pacha in the year 1040,
and cashiered the same year, by the Soldiery of Cairo, when he had Governed
the Country six months, and eight days only.

The seven and fortieth was Chalil, who was made Pacha in the year 1041, and
discharged the next year. He Ruled one year, six months, and two days.

The eight and fortieth was Ahmed, who being Emir Achour, or Great Master of
the Grand Seignior's House, was made Pacha in the year 1042, and cashiered in
the year 1045. He Ruled three years, six months, and three days.

The nine and fortieth was Hussein, who was made Pacha in the year 1045, and
cashiered in the year 1047. He Ruled one year, and eleven months.

The fiftieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1047, and discharged
in the year 1050. He Ruled two years, nine months, and four days.

The one and fiftieth was Mustapha, who had been chief Gardener of the Grand
Seignior, he was made Pacha in the year 1050, and cashiered in the year 1052.
He Governed almost two years.

The two and fiftieth was Maksud, who was made Pacha in the year 1052, and put
out the next year. He Ruled one year, six months, and eight days.

The three and fiftieth was Eiiub, who was made Pacha in the year 1054, and
cashiered in the year 1056.

The four and fiftieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1056, and
discharged in the year 1058. He Governed two years, five months, and seven and
twenty days.

The five and fiftieth was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the year 1057. In
the same year the former Mohammed was restored.

The six and fiftieth was Ahmed, who was made Pacha in the year 1059, and
cashiered in the year 1061. He Governed full two years.

The seven and fiftieth was Abd il rahman, who was made Pacha in the year 1061,
and cashiered the next year.

The eight and fiftieth was Mohammed, who was made Pacha in the year 1062. He
Governed Egypt three years, and nine months.

This is die last Pacha mentioned in the Serrur. These that follow, I have
taken them out of the Memoires of a learned Person of Cairo.

The nine and fiftieth was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the year 1066. He
Ruled one year, and six months.

The sixtieth was Gazi, who was made Pacha in the year 1067. He Governed three
years.

The sixty first was Mustapha, who was made Pacha in the year 1070. He Ruled
one year.

The sixty second was Ibrahim, who was made Pacha in the year 1071, and
continued in his Office three years.

The sixty third was Omar, who was made Pacha in the year 1074. He Governed
Egypt two years.

In the time of this Pacha I was in Egypt in my first Voyage to Cairo, in the
year 1664.

The sixty fourth was Ibrahim, who was made Pacha in the year 1077. He Ruled
one year, and four months.

The sixty fifth was Ali, who died at Cairo in the year 1079, after that he had
Governed, as Pacha, one year.

The sixty sixth was Ibrahim, who arrived at Cairo in the year 1081, and was
cashiered in the year of our Lord 1673, when I was in Egypt the second time. If
any will see a large Account of their Actions, let them read the Arabian
Historian, named before, which is very exact.

Of the Sangiac-Beys of Egypt.
IN Egypt, as well as in other Countries subject to the Grand Seignior, there
are several Sangiac-Beys, who be Governors of great Provinces.

They are so called in the Turkish Tongue from two words, Sangiac, which
signifies an Ensign, and Bey, a Prince; because when the Grand Vizier, or the
Pacha, makes them, he delivers into their hands an Ensign, as a mark of their
Dignity.

They that may pretend to this Dignity are the Agas of the Boulouks, the
Chieftains of the seven Orders of the Militia of Cairo, and the Metferracas.

The greatest part of these Lords are Meltesimins, or Farmers of the Provinces
that they hold from the Divan, at the rates mentioned in the Rolls: heretofore
some Beys have Farmed fourscore Villages, or Towns. They Let these Villages to
under Farmers, and the usual Rent of every Town, is known to every one, chiefly
to the Mebascicrins, or Scrivners of the Copties.

About twenty years ago this honor was purchased with the expense of twenty
Purses, or thirty: This was called Chidmet il Sangiakie. And as soon as any
Person was made Bey, the Divan did allow him half a Purse every Month, as his
Sallary; and when he traveled to any Place, for the service of the Grand
Seignior, at his return to Cairo the Divan did give him half a Purse more for
his Reward. In that time these Beys wore in great Credit, and Power; for when
they declared their opinion in the Divan, the Pacha's were afraid to contradict
them. They did sometimes depose them, when they did not amend their manners
after a reproof. They were wont to be six and thirty in Number.

But now they are a great deal less, and are reduced to that condition, that
they are not much esteemed. This Honor now costs them fifteen Purses, and
their Allowance given to them by the Divan is one thousand Aspers every day. So
Aspers is 4 s. 6 d.

Their Office is, to Conduct the Hazna, or Treasure, of the Grand Seignior to
Constantinople, or to Command the Caravan that travels toward Mecha; and to go
to War, when required. Four of them are to watch always round about Cairo, with
a Company of Janissaries. The first keeps Guard at Adelia, where the way leads
to Sues; the second at Caraffa; another at the second Bridge of the Calitz,
near its Mouth; another watches at the old Cairo, to prevent Tumults and
Murders.

In the Year 1672, when I was at Cairo, there were sixteen Beys, here be their
Names.

Sulfucar was Bey of Girge, but he was cashiered in the Month of September in
this Year. Jezbee was made Bey of Carge in his stead. Mohammed Abu Sciavareb,
or Mahomet with the great Whiskers. Mohammed Abu-Gura. Gazem, Bey of Sues.
Juseph of Constantinople, who was Emir-hag, or Commander of the Caravan to
Mecha. Juseph of Cairo. Delaver, who carried the Grand Seignior's Treasure to
Constantinople. Mohammed il ghindi, who had Rented Bebe. Ali. Omar, Hussein of
Constantinople. Canzo, who was Serdar, or Colonel. Torna Mustapha, the Cascief
of Dekahlie. Eivaz, who had been Treasurer of Egypt. Abdolla, who was Treasurer
this Year 1672, of all Egypt.

Of the Trees, Plants, and Birds of Egypt.
I Shall now speak something of the rarest Trees, Plants, and Birds of Egypt,
which are come to my knowledge; for this belongs to the General Description of
this Country: I shall afterward return to my Journal.

Of the Trees.
IN Egypt are to be found several Trees very rare, which are not in Europe.
Lebaca is one which, as the Copties Stories relate, worshipped our Savior
Christ when he came first to Ischemunein, a City situate in the middle Egypt
near Melave, toward the North. This Tree is now very rare; for I have not seen
any in all my Travels.

The Hilelgie is a great Tree full of prickles. I have seen one in the
Monastery of Abuhennis, situate in the middle Egypt, almost over against
Melave. I was told that it bears a Fruit like to yellow Dasies. The Sycamore,
named by the Arabians, Gomeize, is one of the ordinary sort of Trees; as also
the Fig Tree, which is of four sorts, 1. The common Fig Tree; 2. The Fig Tree
of Fium; 3. Of Europe; 4. Avodlis. The Palm Tree, in Arab. Temer, is one of the
most vulgar Trees; it bears above fifty differing sorts of Fruits. There is
also the Nebeca, a kind of Gum-tree. Zante, which is called Acacia. The
Mastick, I have seen too in the Monastery of St. Anthony. Carobis, Atles, and
Tamrhennes. There is also a Tree called Seiials, a wild kind of Acacia. The
Cinamon-tree, named in Arab. Cheiiar Scembar. The Pomgranate, Orange-tree, the
Lemon-tree, the Cedar, the Quince-tree, the Sefsafs, a kind of Withy, the
Apricock tree, the Almond-tree, the Cypress-tree. The Tree called Mocheits, or
Sebeste; the Fruit whereof is good for Food, and to make Glue. The Tree called
Alats, the Myrhe, the Fig Tree of Adam, named in Arab. Mouz. The Kebbads, a
Tree that bears Oranges of a strange bigness. The Keffe Mariam, or the holy
Virgin's Hand.

The Doum, or the Gum-tree, is a rare Tree in Egypt; I have never seen but
three in all my Travels: one in the Monstery of St. Athanase, distant from Siut
about three hours traveling, toward the South. In this Tree are two things
remarkable: 1. That its Leaves burst forth only at the end of its Branches, and
in the thick Bunches. 2. That they are so equal, and even at the end of the
Branches, that to look upon them one would think that some have cut, and even'd
them with Scissers. The Leaves are very thin and long, and are like the Leaves
of the Palm Tree. The Body of this Tree has many Branches of a considerable
bigness, from them proceed others of a lesser size; every one is forked, and
the end of these Leaves appear in Bunches, as we have said.

Of the Plants.
AMongst all the Curious Plants of Egypt, I have taken notice of these
following.

Belsen is a Plant, or Herb, that bears a Medicinal Grain, good to heal Wounds.
Sabbara; the Leaves whereof are very thick, and full of sap; there are two
sorts, the Male, and the Female. Vudne is like Purslan, but its Leaves are very
great, and its taste is fourish, and it is eaten raw. Sedab, is Rue; Filfil,
Garden-Pepper. Gesalaht is a Plant that grows as big as a Tree. Verdhomar is
our Rosa asini. Morian is called in Latin, Halicacabus. Kilu, otherwise named
Alcali. Rabl is an Herb of a fragrant smell, full of Oil; growing upon Hills.
Barnub is a Plant that contains a Powder that Dyers use; I shall speak of it in
the sequel of this Journal. Here be also Jessemins, both single and double.
Katife, or the Virgins-Bower, whereof there are two sorts; the single, and the
other named in Arab. Katife Kodsi, or the Virgins Bower of Jerusalem. Rihan is
our Origanum. There are several sorts; 1. Of Kodsi, or Jerusalem: 2. Sciami of
Damascus: 3. Hindi of the Indies: 4. Miski, of the smell of Musk: 5.
Ascickrihan, or the lovely Origanum. Leblab is another Plant, called by the
Italians, Convolvolo; by the French, Liseron, and by the English: Bengiar, are
our Beets. Mentur, otherwise named Chobeize, are our Mallows. Here are also
Gilly-flowers, Lillies, and Roses of all colors, and in abundance. Merdekusch
is our Marjoram. Merscienne -- Lisan-hammel is our Plantain. Lisant Tor is our
Bugloss. Neane, Mint: Bamie, and Meluchie are ordinary Pot Herbs in Egypt.
Amberboy, is Amber. Seseban is a tall Plant, sown about the Sugar-Fields; it
serves instead of a Fence. Sciebeh, is Rue of Rome. Cheschach is the Pavots.
Hendal, or Colocinthis; Helbe, named by the French, Fenugrec by the English.
They have a Proverb in Egypt, that says, Blessed are the Feet that walk upon
that Ground where the Helbe is sown. They eat it raw, and sodden. Carrots,
called in Arab. Gissr, are no bigger than Radishes. Succory, called in Arab.
Hindibe. Lettuce, called Chas Melieh. Pease. Tormus, are Lupins. Bersim, or
Sinfoin. Il Nile, is Indigo. Scich, is Absynthium Ponticum. Gabbar was an Herb
that I found in abundance upon the Mountains, near the Monastery of Abuhennis.
Homos gebeli, are the wild Pease of the Mountains; for they are like Pease.
Roiet gassal, or Harts-Foot: so called, because it is like the Foot of this
Animal, and both are oily. Selguem, called by the Germans, Rubsamen: Zabuz,
Oats, Saffron, Simsim, or the Sesame, Heb-il-sode, called Jugeolin. Tobacco,
Rice, Sugar, Linni; Coulangian, called in Latin, Gulange; and in French,
Galangu.

Of Birds.
THE rarest Birds that I have seen in Egypt, are these; Sciamta is the biggest,
next to the Austrich. It is so strong, that some say, it can carry up a Man
into the Air. Next to these are the Eagles, the Vultures, named in Arab. Akab,
which are very big. Gaddafs, Havams, Baz, Heddahs, Sakers, Sciahins, Bascieks,
Rachms; all these are several sorts of Vultures, Faulcons, and Hawks. There be
also Mezaz, and Begas, otherwise called Gemel il Bahr, or the River-Camel; or
the Pelican. The Saksaks have a Bone strong and sharp, at the joint of each
Wing. The Guinney-Hens, Cranes, Wild-Geese, and many other Birds; which are
ordinary amongst us.

There are also many Austriches, and chiefly in Deserts, that lead to the
Monastery of St. Anthony, I have seen there Herds together.

I have read in an Arabian Manuscript, called Giauharet innefisse, a remarkable
thing concerning the Austrich, which I cannot pass over without publishing.

When it intends to Hatch its Eggs, it sits not upon them, as other Birds; but
the Male and the Female Hatches them with their Eye only; and when either of
them has need to seek for Food, he gives notice to the other by crying; and
the other continues to look upon the Eggs, till it be returned: likewise when
the other has the same desire to seek about for Food, he gives the same
notice, with the same shriek, that its Companion might remain still to look
upon the Eggs, till they be all Hatched: For if they did but look off a moment,
the Eggs would spoil and rot.

The Church of the Copies has learned an excellent Custom from the Practice
of this Bird: They hang up a lighted Lamp, between two Eggs of an Austrich, over
against the Priests that officiate, to advise them to be attentive about their
Devotions; that their Prayers might be more efficacious, and might not lose
their strength, for want of attention.

It is now time to bring back my Reader to my Journal, to Damietta, where I
left him; that I might give him first a General Description of Egypt.

The Continuation of the Journal.
I Set Foot in Diametta the 18th day of Feb. 1672. where I abode till the 8th
day of the next Month: Sometimes lodging in the City, sometimes in the Barque
that had brought me, because it was laden with Wine for the Consul, and French
Merchants of Cairo: And the Aga of the City would not suffer the Wine to be
carried ashore, nor into the Haven, until the Pacha had sent him an express
Order to that purpose. He dealt in this manner, because the Grand Seignior had
sent very strict, and severe orders, to forbid the Importation of Wines in all
his Dominions. And Because I was in the company of a Servant of the French
Consul, whom I could not leave with Civility, because he could not understand
the Arabian Tongue; I was therefore engaged to be his Interpreter, by the
Obligations that he had laid upon me in my Voyage: For his, and his Masters
sake, I abode with him till the orders were come, and a Janissary to Guard the
Wine to Cairo. They loaded therewith two great Barques, and we departed
immediately for Damietta, on Saturday, the 8th of April; and were at Boulac, a
Suburb of Cairo, the Eve of Wednesday before Easter.

Here follows the most remarkable Passages, and the Description of the Towns,
and Places, which are from the Mouth of the River at Damietta, as far as Grand
Cairo, as they lie in order.

As soon as we enter into the River, from the Sea, we find on the East Side, at
the Mouth, an old Castle ruinated, but small; which, as the Francs say, was
built by S. Lewis, the French King, when he had Damietta. It is square, and
divided into four round Turrets, upon which some Artillery have been planted to
command the Passage, and where a few Moors are upon the Guard.

A little further into the River stands a poor Village, named Bogas, or Mouth
of the River; because it is there situated. The Arabian word Bogas signifying
so much.

In this Village dwell the Owners of the Germes (being Long-Boats made to
un-load Ships and draw them out of the Sands) that guide and tow along the
Ships that sail in or out of the River; and discover to them the Banks of Sand,
which are very ordinary in this Road.

In this Village is to be seen the Foundation of another square Fort, the Walls
whereof are not yet finished, and never likely to be. There are also here two
Calitz, or Artificial Channels, full of the River-water all the year; made on
purpose to water the Fields.

About an hundred Paces from this Village, on the other side, is another Castle
to command the Mouth; so that the two Castles that are there planted for this
purpose, are not over against one another.

A Description of the City of Damietta.
DAmietta, called by the Arabians, Damiat, a famous City of Egypt, is situate
upon the East Side of Nilus, about eight Miles from the Mouth. Next to Cairo it
is the greatest, most beautiful, the richest, the most populous, and the
fullest of Merchants of all Egypt; for the convenience of Trade draws thither a
great number of People form all parts of Turkey.

It is built upon the River Nilus, in the form of an half Moon. The Waves of
this River that wash the Foundations of their Houses on that side, and the
great number of beautiful Mosques, together with the Fleet of Ships and Barques
that ride in the Haven, yield a most delightful Prospect.

There are no Walls, nor Fortifications, only a round, and very high Tower,
that stands at the end of the Town toward the Sea; where there is neither
Watch nor Ward, nor Guns.

In this City there is great Trading in Linen, Rice, Coffee, and Stuffs. I was
told, that every year, about five hundred Ships go out of this Haven, small and
great, loaded with Rice for Turkey.

Here are made many beautiful sorts of Linen of all kinds and colors, which
are Transported to Foreign Countries. Here is also a great deal of Fish salted.
The Mullet that are here pickled are highly esteemed all over the Levant.

The Town is Governd by an Aga, sent thither from the Pacha, and therefore
named by the Turks, Pachagasi, or the Aga of the Pacha. Besides his other
Incomes, he takes from every Tavern of Aquavitae ten Pora's, in the City are a
great many such Taverns. From every Carache (it being a little Ship) he
receives five Pora's; and from greater Ships six and thirty, and forty, when
they go out of the Port: Besides many Casualties which amount to a great deal,
through his extortion, as the manner of the Turks is: for, out of our Ship he
took six Barrels of Cyprus-wine, containing each six Metres, and every Meter
holding twenty Pots, though this was not his due. I had some difficulty to save
from his greedy hands a Box of excellent Wine of the Country of Kesrovan.

The Soldiery, and chiefly the Janissaries, are very insolent. There be but
two hundred, and about twenty Spahins.

Of the Christians, the Grecks are the most numerous. They be about two hundred
Families, and have a considerable Church.

Of the Copties there be about eight Families. The Turks, about a year since,
took Possession of their Church, because they had not paid them a certain Tax
that they had laid upon them.

There are no Francs that dwell there in the City for want of Trade; because
this Haven is at a little distance from all the Christian Countries, and
because they are settled at Rosetta, which lies more convenient for them, and
nearer. There is only a Chamber which the Franciscans of the holy Land have
hired in the Apartment of the Greek Patriarch, which is a little House, very
filthy, yet they Lodge there when they pass to and fro from Jerusalem to Cairo.
The greatest Traffic in this City, by Sea, is of Wood and Timber which is
Imported as well for Fuel as for the building of Houses and Ships; for Wood is
very scarce in Egypt, chiefly in the Inferior.

During my abode in this City I met with an old Ship-Captain, by Religion a
Maronite, who told me, that between this City and the Town of Bogas, the River
Nilus grew shallower every year; and that he had taken notice, that about
fifteen years ago it was fifteen Cubits deep; but now scarce fifteen Foot. This
proceeds from the Earth, which the Water loosens from its sides and washes into
the middle; about the Mouth of the River there the Earth stops. He gathered
from thence, that it was to be feared, that in this River great Ships would not
be able, one day, to pass from the Mouth to Damietta.

The Town of Mansoura, i. e. Victorious, the abode of the Cascief of Dekahlie,
is a great and beautiful Town, situate upon the East Side of Nilus. Its Houses
are not builded as those of Damietta, upon the Water, but there is a large
Street between them for to walk; but because we Landed not then in that place,
I had not the opportunity to view it, nor to give an exact Description of it.

I shall only say this of it, That in this Town the French King, S. Lewis, was
taken Prisoner by Sultan Saleh, negm iddin, eiiub ibn il Kamel. All the
particulars of the end, and carrying on of this War, are to be seen in the
Macrizi, and in Ibn Zulak. I could wish these Histories of the Arabians were
Translated into any known Languages, for here are several remarkable
Circumstances mentioned in them, with which we are not acquainted. Here are
likewise many Verses full of Wit, but Satirical, made then by the Moors, upon
the taking of S. Lewis, and the conclusion of this War, so happy for their
Nation.

Between Damietta and Grand Cairo, are to be seen, upon the River side, a
prodigious number of Pigeon-houses, which is here remarkable, because there are
not found so many in any other part of Egypt, nor builded in the same manner.

These Pigeon-houses begin at Mitbedri, a Village near Mansoura, on the same
side, in sailing toward Cairo. In one days Journey and a half I saw so many,
that I wondered at it; for there is scarce a House in all the Villages but there
is one, or more Pigeon-houses. At the Foundation the Walls are of Earth only,
and round on the top, very spacious within, full of Earthen Pots for the
Pigeons Nests; and without are many Poles for them to pitch on, and rest
themselves. It is easy to judge whether the sight, and Prospect of so many
Pigeon-houses be not very delightful.

The Moors that were in our Boat told us, that in these Villages fifteen
Pigeons were commonly sold for one Para; forty Para's make 4 s. 6 d. So that I
reckon, that about two hundred and forty Couples were sold for that Money.

Semennut is a great Town, situate on the West Side of Nilus, in the
Cascieftik of Garbie, not far from Mohelle Kabire, or the great Mohelle. It is
built in a Triangular Form; the lower part stretches it self along the River.
The Barques that sail toward Cairo are bound to stop here, and pay Custom:
The Custom House is built upon a Ship, in the River, at which the Vessels
never stop above an hour.

In the middle Way, between Diametta and Cairo, is Mitgamr, a very beautiful
and large Town, situate upon the East Side of Nilus. We landed, and I found
there many fair Houses, and a spacious Bazar, or Marketplace, where all manner
of Provisions were to be sold. Here are also a great many Christians of the
Copties.

Over against Mitgamr, that is on the West Side Nilus, is Sitfe, a beautiful
and big Town, belonging to to the Cascieftik of Mohelle Kebire; where we beheld
a pursuit of some Peasants, whom the Cascief of that Province chased. They were
come to demand a certain Tribute, which he was wont to pay them: and upon his
denial of it they rose up in Arms against him: But as soon as he had sent out
the Spahins against them, they ran all away. These poor Caitiffs being on Foot,
and finding themselves followed by Horsemen; that they might not fall into
their hands, they cast themselves, in haste, into the River to swim over; six
were unhappily drowned before our Eyes.

In the upper Egypt is a Village, named also Sitfe; which I shall mention in
another place.

The 12th of April, about two a-Clock in the Afternoon, we left one of the
Branches of Nilus that leaves the main River and runs to Damietta, and entered
into the Bogas, or Channel of Boulac. The clear Weather gave me the liberty to
take notice of the separation of the two Branches of the River: I found that
the Branch that goes to Rosetta stretches it self to the North-East, and that
of Diametta to the North. In respect of this last, Cairo stands to the
South-East, and its Castle to the South.

At this Bogas the two great Pyramides of Egypt are first discovered: They
appear here to be equal, though one is far higher than the other.

From this separation, or division of Nilus, as far as Boulac, there is but an
hour and a halfs traveling, though Monsieur Thevenot tells us of six Leagues.

We landed at Boulac, the Wednesday before Easter, at Night. I staid there till
the next Morning, and entered into Cairo about Noon. At my entrance I paid a
Crown, at the Custom House of Boulac, which is an ordinary Tribute demanded of
all Francs many years ago.

A Description of the City of Cairo.
MY design at first, was to publish a large Description of all the Rarities of
this great and famous City, before I proceed on in my Journal: But since I have
considered that great Volumes are wont to nauseate, rather than to delight the
Reader, chiefly in these days that Men are pleased with the reading of short
and small Volumes: I have therefore taken notice of those things only which
other Travelers have omitted, and could never know perfectly for want of an
insight into the Arabian Tongue. He that will know more, may peruse the second
Part of the Chottats of Macrizi.

The City of Cairo borrows the Name from the Planet Mars, called by the
Arabians, Kaher; which Name was given to it, as says the Serrur, an Arabian
Historian, because the Foundation of its Walls were laid when this Planet was
in its ascent; which happened unhappily in this manner.

Giauher, the General of Meez le din alla, one of the Cailiffs of Egypt, having
resolved to build a new City for the abode of his Lord, in the Year 362 of the
Hegira; he gave orders to the Astronomers, to observe the time of the rising of
a good Star, when the Foundation might be laid; that the City might be the more
happy, and of a longer continuance.

The Astronomers accordingly encompassed about with Ropes, all that space of
Ground that was to be shut into the Walls; tying to the Ropes a great many
little Bells, to give notice to the Builders when they were to cast the
Foundation: The signal was, the sounding of the Bells; which was to be given
when they saw the rising of a good Star.

By chance it happened, that a Crow pitched upon the Ropes that was stretched
along, when Mars was in its rising; and with the motion of the Ropes caused the
Bells to sound: As soon as the Masons heard the signal given, they cast all,
with one consent, the Foundation: which when the Astronomers had understood,
they declared by unlucky rising of Mars, that governed at that Instant, that
the City should be one day taken by a Conqueror that should come out of
Romania, where Mars governs: Which has proved true about five hundred and
threescore years after, when Sultan Selim came from Constantinople, the chief
City of Romania, and took not only the City, but the whole Country; and
destroyed the Race of their Kings, by hanging the last.

Though they conceived that this Star would prove unlucky, they called the City
nevertheless Kahera, or Cairo, as we name it in Europe: which Name continues
till this day. This City is become very rich, powerful, and great, by its
Trade; insomuch, that of all the Cities of the Levant, this alone has deserved
the name of Great.

It is situate in a Champain, very delightful, at the Foot of a Mountain of
Sand, named in Arab. Gebel il mokattam, or the Mountain cut through, which
stands on the East Side, and incommodes the City; because it deprives it of the
benefit of the fresh Winds that blow from thence. This City has another
inconveniency, it is far from the River.

There is nothing in the World more delightful, than to take a prospect of it
from some eminent place: for you might from thence view an infinite number of
Houses, which, instead of Coverings, have Turrets; and see an innumerable
company of Mosques with their various colors of differing Buildings
intermingled, and surrounded with Palm Trees, and Gardens; all which together
represents a most beautiful Prospect.

It has seven Gates. The Names are, 1. Bab zucile; 2. Bab innassr; 3. Bab il
fetub; 4. Bab il Kantara; 5. Bab isscia a rye; 6. Bab issaade; 7. Bab il mahruk.

There are eight Lakes, very large, that belong to it: 1. Birket ittemalgie; 2.
Birket inassrie; 3. Birket ibn il ademe; 4. Birket il fill; 5. Birket il kar-a;
6. Birket il ferrain; 7. Birket il Ezbekie; and 8. Birket il kassarin.

There is a Channel cut through this City, from the West, to the North-East,
called the Calitz of Cairo. It is very ancient, Ibn abd il hokm, an Arabian
Historian, says; That Tarsis ibn Malia, one of the Pharaoh's; and, as he
believes, the King that took the Wife of Abraham when he was in Egypt, caused
it first to be cut. Since the Arabians conquered Egypt, and took it from the
Emperor Heraclius, they have named it Calitz Emir il Muminin, or The Channel
of the Prince of the faithful, because of Amru ibn Chottab, the second Califf
after Mahomet, who was the first surnamed The Prince of the faithful, because
he commanded Amru ibn ass to lead him as far as Colzim, a Town situate near
the Red Sea, that he might convey the Provisions of Cairo as far as this City,
and from thence by the Red Sea to Mecha; where there was, at that time, a great
want of Food. It continued in this manner till the Year 150 of the Hegira, when
Ciafer il Mansur, a Califf of Egypt, of the Race of Abbas, caused it to be
stopped on that side which is toward the Sea.

Now it is called Calitz il Hakemi, or the Calitz of Hakem; because Hakem-be
amr ille, another Califf of Egypt, caused this Channel, which was decayed
through the negligence of his Predecessors, to be repaired. It is called also
Merachemi, or the Calitz paved with Marble; as we may see by some Passages of
the Serrur, an Arabian History which I have brought with me from Egypt.

In my Relation of Egypt, Printed in Italian at Paris, 1671. I said that the
Turks, Copties, and Jews, open, in their turns, this Channel every Year: but I
understand since, that this Office belongs only to the Soubaschi of Cairo, who
strikes the first three, or four blows upon the Bank that hinders the River
from entering into the Channel, afterward all that will work have liberty
granted.

The Copies have but two Churches at Cairo; one in the Street named Haret
Zuele, and the other in the Greek's Street. The first is Dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, and was built by a renowned Physician, named Zabulon. He lived
about two-hundred-seventy years before the Arabians became Masters of Egypt. He
is yet famous for his wonderful Riches. They say that he hid them in a Well
which is in the same Church, and secured them with a Talisman, that none might
have them after his decease. The Patriarch of the Copties House is joining to
this Church.

The other in the Greek's Street is Dedicated to S. Barba. It is but small, and
obscure. I went to see it the 4th of November 1672.

Heretofore they had many Churches, and Monasteries; and a Bishop in the
Chandak, an old Suburb of Cairo, but now ruinated. But now they have but two;
one Dedicated to the Archangel Gabriel; the other to the Abbot Mercurius,
surnamed Roes. Here the Copties of Cairo have a Burying-place.

Of the many Mosques at Cairo, that which is called Giama ill assar is the
richest, and the greatest. It was built by Giauher, the first Founder of the
City: It is yet the Cathedral, where the four Mouftis, or Doctors of the
Mohammedan Law reside. It is a Refuge for Offenders, and a School for to teach
the Law of Mahomet, with its Revenues it entertains no less than eight hundred
Persons of that Profession; and receives for that purpose two thousand Ardebs
of Corn, from the Storehouses of the Grand Seignior; and seven thousand more
from other Benefactors.

There are four Mouftis at Cairo that borrow their Names from the four chief
Sects of Mahemet: 1. Of Sciaffei 2. Of Maleki; 3. Of Hambali; 4. Of Hanefi.
They are all equal in Dignity, because their Sects, whereof they are the chief,
are likewise equal.

They have power to excommunicate the Pacha's when they attempt to do any thing
against their Religion, or their Mosques. For Instance, they excommunicated
Pacha Ibrahim in the year 1672, because he offered to take away some of the
Gifts, and Rents, belonging to the Mosques of Cairo: By that means they
hindered him from executing his sacrilegious design. When the Excommunication
prevails not, they shut the Gates of this Mosque, which causes the People to
rise up in Arms; and they never are quiet, till they have killed the Offender.

In Cairo, and in its Suburbs, there are nine public Shambles belonging to the
Grand Seignior: 1. That of Hassenie, which is the greatest: 2. That of Haret
Jehud, or of the Street of the Jews: 3. That of Bab illuk, or of the Whore's
Quarter: 4. That of the Lions Bridge: 5. That of old Cairo: 6. That of Gize: 7.
That of Haret il sakkain: 8. That of Telun: 9. Two that are at Boulac; whereof,
in one the Oxen are killed; in the other, the Sheep and Goats.

The Heads, and the Skins of all the Beasts that are killed in these Markets,
unless it be of the Goats, belong to the Grand Seignior: out of this Custom he
receives a great profit.

It is very true, that in Cairo are seven differing Orders of the Militia.
Amongst these, the Montrosses, and Gunners, are not reckoned; but only the
Metferracas, three Cornets of Spahins, which be il Giumulli, il Tefakschi, and
il Cercassi. The Janissaries, the Chiaoux, and the Azapes, belong to them.

The Janissaries, the Spahins, the Azapes, and the Gebegis, are paid only every
three Months; but the Chiaoux, and Metferracas, the Jetams, or Orphelins, the
Giavalis, the Kescie, and the Metkaeds receive their pay every Month, without
any delay.

A Description of Old Cairo.
OLD Cairo, so called erroneously by the Francs, is named by the Arabians,
Massr, from Massr, or Mizraim, the Son of Cham, and Grandchild of Noah, that
caused it to be built. It is the ancientest City of Egypt, next to Memphis;
after the destruction of this, Old Cairo became the chief. It is situate on
the East Side of Nilus, over against the place where Memphis stood, next to New
Cairo. It was heretofore a stately City, but now it is almost all ruinated.

In the 18th year of the Hegira, which is about 1033 years since that Amru ibn
il ass, General of Amru ibn Chottab, a successor of Mahomet, took this City.
John Mekaukes, a noble Coptie, was then Governor for the Emperor Heraclius.
When Amru had taken it, he made Peace with Mekaukes, upon condition that every
Coptie should pay him, and all his Successors, twopence a year as a Tribute;
and that he should give entertainment, for three days, to all the Arabians that
should pass through Egypt; as may be seen more fully in the Macrizi.

This City has been increased many times, as the Conquerors, and Lords of the
Country, did think convenient to pitch upon a more pleasant place for their
abode.

The places where the Fostat, the Cassr iscemma, the Quarter of the Patriarch
of the Copties, Babylon, Cateia, the Caraff, and others.

Fostat is a Greek Name, which signifies a Tent of Goat Skins. The Arabians
name one side of Old Cairo thus, because the Tent of Amru ibn il ass, of this
substance, was planted there when he was busy in Conquering Egypt.

The same Amru caused it to be enclosed in with Walls; after that he had taken
the City of Alexdria, he settled there his abode, and that of his Successors:
Alexandria, that had been the Royal City of the Greeks for about nine hundred
years, was then forsaken; and the Fostat was the chief City of Egypt. It
continued so till Ahmed ibn Toulon built Cateia very near Fostat. His
Successors of his Race forsook it, and settled themselves in Cateia.

But when this Race was extinct, and Grand Cairo being built by Giauher, as we
have said, the Califfs chose it for their abode, causing Fostat to be burnt,
that the new City might be stronger, and fuller of People; and they left
Cateia, as we may see in Macrizi.

Cassr Isscemma, is a Castle, or Suburb, enclosed with Walls, near adjoining to
Fostat, built by Artaxerxes, King of Persia. Now only Christians inhabit there.
They have many Churches which we shall describe in this following Journal; for
I went to see them on the 18th day of July, 1672.

There are two differing Opinions concerning the Origin of this Name. Some
would have it written, Cassr iggiama; that is, the Castle of the Assembly: for
they say, that here the great Wits did meet to increase Learning; but this
Opinion is not well grounded. Others write it Cassr isscemma; this is likely to
be the truest; for I find it thus written by all Arabian Historians.

The Granaries and Storehouses, of the Grand Seignior, are adjoining to this
Castle. They are named by the Arabs, Scione. The Provisions of Corn, and other
necessaries for the Food of the Malitia, are here kept; not only for the
Malitia of Egypt, but also for all the other Countries that depend upon Egypt.

And that this Corn might be better distributed, there are four Aga's, or
Officers, named in Arab. Agavat beta il ghelal, or Aga's of the Stores in the
upper Egypt: One dwells at Benesuef, another at Minie, the third at Momfallat,
the fourth at Girge. Their Office is, to gather up the Provisions of Corn, and
to send them to the Emin il Scione, the Master of the Storehouses of the Grand
Seignior, who upon a certain day of the Month, causes these Provisions to be
distributed according as the Divan appoints.

But because sometimes this allowance is not sufficient, every one has liberty
to buy more, by paying for every Ardeb a thousand Meidins. When this Money is
once paid, every year one may fetch this allowance, during the Buyer's life.

Near this Cassr isscemma, on a side of Cairo, is the Quarter of the Patriarch
of the Copties, named in Arab. Haret il Batrak. It is separated from this
Castle with an high Wall, with which it is enclosed. The Patriarch has his
Abode a little above the Church of Mary Moncure; concerning which, I shall take
notice of some curiosities in the sequel of this Discourse.

Babylon was further toward the South of Cairo. Now there appears nothing but
great Mountains of its Ruins, and three Churches of the Copties; one dedicated
to the Virgin Mary, another to S. Theodorus, the third to S. John Abakir.

The Church of the Virgin, as the Copties relate, was the first that was built
at Cairo, after the coming of our Savior Christ. They say that S. Mark has
preached there; and that S. Peter mentions it at the end of his Epistle, when
he says, that the Church elect which is in Babylon Massr, or Babylon near
Cairo, salute you, as well as my Son Marcus. I did not go into it at this time,
but I saw it, and lay there one Night in my first Voyage to Egypt, in the year
1664.

Cateia was built near Fostat, by Ahmed ibn Toulon, Prince of Egypt, as we have
already said.

The Caraffa is the Burying-place of the Mahometans; highly esteemed, because
there be some Kindred of Mahomet, and some of their Saints, buried. In the
flourishing days of Egypt there were above three hundred and sixty Tombs, and
Mosques of Great Men; every one endowed with a sufficient allowance for poor
People, and the Pilgrims of that Religion that came thither. So that a Pilgrim,
at Cairo, could have subsisted a whole year without spending an Asper, by
visiting every day the Mosques and Tombs of this place; but in process of time
the Revenues being devoured, by the wickedness of the Pacha's, the Tombs and
Mosques are since gone to decay.

The Continuation of the Journal.
THE 16th of April 1672. Saturday before Easter, the French Consul went to
visit the Pacha, who was then in a Garden at the Village Besestein: he went to
speak to him about a business of his Nation. I took this occasion to offer him
my Letters of re-commendation which Ishac, Pacha of Seida, had given me to
deliver to him. In consideration of them, he promised me his protection and
favor.

The way of Hatching Chickens at Cairo.
The 21st of this Month I went to see the Ovens where the Chickens are hatched.
These Ovens are builded in the same manner as the Ovens of France, made to bake
Bread, only with this difference; they are not so high, nor so big as ours, nor
of burnt Brick, but of Brick dried in the Sun. They have also, on the top, a
round hole, as big as the circumference of a French Hat, through which the heat
mounts up and goes out, which Ovens for Bread have not.

In the House where I saw them, they were placed in this manner. There were
four and twenty: twelve on the right hand, and twelve on the left; six one upon
another. At the first sight one would have thought them to be so many
Sleeping-cells of Monks: but the Alley that was between was so narrow, that
when I entered in, the smoke and heat that came out had almost stifled me.

Now, to cause the Eggs to be hatched, they put them all in the lowermost Ovens;
and in the uppermost they kindle a small Fire, for eight days, with Straw.
Afterward they stop them, and leave them so six other days: Then they take
away the Eggs from the lowermost Ovens, and separate the good from the bad, by
examining them in the Sunshine. Afterward they cast away the addled, and put
all the good in the uppermost Ovens; making, with Straw, a small Fire in the
lowermost, for two days. They leave them in that condition one and twenty days,
without meddling with them: at which time the Chickens begin to break the Shell;
so that in two and twenty days they bring forth Chickens in this manner.

This is not to be practiced, but during four Months in the Year; namely, from
the Month of December, till the Month of April: The other part of the Year is
not fit for this purpose, because of the excessive heats.

Of the Pyramides.
IN my first Voyage to Egypt I had seen the Pyramides; but, having another
opportunity offered to me, I went thither to view again these rare Monuments of
Antiquity, to see whether I might not observe something more than I have taken
notice of in my first Relation.

On the 27th of April I went thither, in the Company of the French Consul, and
many other Merchants, and with almost all his Household: we had with us three
Janissaries to guard us, so that we were in all about fifty Cavaliers, well
mounted upon Asses; taking with us Provisions sufficient for three days.

When we were come to the Pyramides, and had observed exactly every thing: I
took notice that the place where they stood was a Burying-place. This is plain
to any that see the place; and doubtless it was the burying-place of the old
City Memphis; for all the Arabian Histories inform us, that this City stood
where the Pyramides now are, over against Old Cairo.

2. I took notice that all the Pyramides have an entrance that leads to a low
Alley, which is very long; and at the end is a Chamber, where the ancient
Egyptians did place the Bodies of those Persons, for whom the Pyramides was
built. This entrance is not to be seen in every one of the Pyramides, because
the Wind has stopped them with Sand. I saw upon some of them some Hierogliphick
Characters, but I had not time to write them out.

3. I took notice that all the Pyramides were builded in very good order; and
that each of the three greatest were at the head of ten lesser, which are not
well to be distinguished, because of the heaps of Sand: one may yet imagine, to
see the place, that in former Ages there have been here one hundred Pyramides,
little and great.

4. I took notice that they are all builded upon an even Rock, covered over
with white Sand; so that it is very probable that the Stones have been taken
from the place, and not brought from far, as some Travelers imagine, and old
Writers: for the greatest is nothing but a Rock cut as a Pyramide, and covered
over with a Wall of Stone.

5. I took notice that of all the Stones of the greatest, there is scarce one
entire, but either worn out with the Weather and Time, or broken by some other
Accident; so that, though one may ascend on all sides to the top, yet not in
all places with the same ease.

6. I have taken notice that none of the Pyramides are alike, or perfectly
square; but that all have two sides longer than the others. I intended to
measure the greatest: for that purpose I had with me a String of about thirty
Landyards; but because the Winds have heaped about it Mountains of Sand, I
could not possibly draw a Line strait from one Angle to the other.

On the 28th day of December I went to see the Pyramides the third time, with
some strangers. In our way we were mightily troubled with a very thick Mist,
which lasted till ten a Clock in the Morning; and we found a great deal of Mud
in the Trenches and Ditches, which was not yet dry since the retreat of the
River; so that we were carried over upon the Moors backs that were with us.

At this time I went up to the top of the great Pyramide; and I observed, as at
the first, that the place where the Pyramides stand, is a pure Rock, covered
over with white Sand; which appears sufficiently by the Ditches and Caves round
about the Pyramides cut in the Rock.

2. The Rock is to be seen, upon which stands the greatest Pyramide, by a hole
at one of the Angles, between the East and the North sides.

3. The Pyramides are not builded with Marble, as some say; but with a white
sandy Stone, very hard.

4. The greatest has but two hundred and six steps; and though Monsieur Th.
says that it has two hundred and eight, this proceeds from his not taking
notice that two steps are broken into four.

5. On the top of the greatest Pyramide there was anciently a Statue, or
Colosse. This appears, because it is not sharp as the others, but plain: And
there are yet to be seen great Pits, which were to keep fast the Colosse from
falling.

At present there is nothing on the top but many Letters of the Names of
Persons or all Nations, who have left them to witness that they had been there.
There is no sign of the Play at Mancala, which a Coptie told me was there
imprinted in the days of the Pharaoh's.

6. The Stones of the biggest Pyramide are not equal; for some of the undermost
are four Foot high, some three Foot and an half, and five Foot long. The Stones
of the middle are three Foot and five Inches high, and the uppermost Stones are
but two Foot high, and three and an half long.

7. The sides of the Pyramides are not equal; for in the greatest it is
visible, and so in the others, that the North-side is longer than that which
stretches from East to West.

8. In all the Pyramides there are very deep Wells cut in the Rock, square; as
I have seen in more than ten.

On the 26th day of June I went the fourth time to see the Pyramides, in the
Company of Monsieur Sabatery, Vice-Consul of Alexandria.

In the Passage to Old Cairo, on the other side of the River, I took notice of
one thing very remarkable in its Channel: The Water was perfectly green, as a
Cake covered over with green Grass. This was the first time that I saw it of
this color; which caused me to ask of the Boat-men, what this green color
was? They told me, tint the River Nilus did then putrify, that it had
continued so fifteen days, and would be so five more. Some of them said, that
there was none could remember to have seen the River so green as that year,
1672.

To return again to the Pyramides: I went up this time to the top of the
highest Pyramide: I entered into the Chamber, but saw no new thing which could
cause me either to change, or add to my former Observations. It is needless to
speak of its Dimensions, seeing so many Travelers have already published them,
as Monsieur Thevenot in his Levant Travels.

From the Pyramides we went to take a view of the Caves that are adjoining.
There are many, all cut in the side of a Rock: Their outsides are out of
order, without any proportion; but their inside very equal, and pollish'd. In
every one there is a deep Well square, cut in the Rock, where the Egyptians did
put the Body of that Person, for whom the Cave was made; for it was their
Sepulcher. The walls of many of these Caves are full of Hieroglyphick Figures,
carved in the Rock. In some they are but small, in others very lively. In one I
numbered sixteen great Figures, that represented eight Men and eight Women,
holding one another by the hands; with many other small Figures, or Shapes, on
both sides.

Of the Sphinx.
WE saw next the Sphinx, near the Pyramides, on the East Side. On the top
stands the Head of a Woman of an extraordinary bigness and height. The Arabians
call it Abulhon, or Abul-houl.

Pliny says that it was the Tomb of King Amasis. I imagine that this Sphinx
was a Sepulcher, but we cannot understand that it belonged to Amasis; for all
the Records and Traditions of this Sphinx are lost.

That it is a Tomb may appear, First by its situation, which is in a place
which was in former Ages a Burying-place; and near the Pyramides, and mortuary
Caves. Secondly it is to be imagined that it was a Sepulcher from its building.
In the hinder part is a Cave under ground, of a bigness answerable to that of
the Head, into which I have looked by an entrance that leads into it; so that
it could serve to no other purpose but to keep a dead Corpse.

Some Francs have, out of an excess of curiosity, climbed up by the means of
Rope-Ladders, to see whether this Head was hollow, or massy; and they have
found it to be hollow, but filled at present with Sand.

The Neck is worn out round about, which causes Men to imagine that it will
not be able to support the weight of that great Head.

Of the Wells where the Mommies are.
WHen we had fully viewed this Sphinx, we took the Road that leads to Saccara,
a Village, at four hours traveling from the Pyramides, and about eight from
Cairo toward the South. The Burying-place of the Mommies is near adjoining to
this Village.

And because it was very late, and that we were to agree with the Arabians of
the Village about the Price, the Number and Quality of the Wells that they were
to open for us. We stopped there all Night, and the next Morning we took with us
twelve Horsemen, to Guard us, of the Arabians; with them we went to this
Burying-place, where the Mommies are in Caves under ground.

The first Well that we saw was that of Birds Embalmed. When we had caused the
Sand that stops the Wells Mouth to be removed, through which we were to go
down, and from thence to enter into the Cave; we caused our selves to be let
down one after another, by tying a double Rope about our middles. As soon as we
were at the bottom, and that every one had lighted his Taper, and several
Matches that we had brought, we went into the Cave creeping upon our Bellies.
The Cave is an Alley in the Rock, about the height of a Man, and about the
breadth of a Perch; and of an extraordinary length. We found there many other
Alleys on both hands, cut in the Rock; where were many large stores, full of
Earthen Pots, covered over with Coverings of the same substance. In these Pots
were Embalmed Birds of all kinds, every Bird in its own Pot. And as I thought
that the remembrance of a Custom so ancient, and superstitious, was worthy of
our notice, I brought about half a dozen with me; some I have sent to the
King's Library. We found also some Hens Eggs, empty, but entire without any ill
smell or crack.

When we had viewed sufficiently this Cave, we returned up in the same manner
that we went down, and found another opened, called the Virgin; which is, that
was never opened before: According to our orders to the Arabians, Monsieur
Tiger and the others went down in the same manner as into the former; I alone
could not follow them, because of a Quartain Fever which had troubled me
fourteen months, and took me at that very Moment: But I lost nothing by that:
for these Gentlemen told me at their return, that they found an horrid stench,
and a close air, that put out their Candles, and their Matches also, every time
that they endeavored to light them; which caused them to get up again without
entering further. They told me that this Well was much deeper than the former.

We caused another to be opened, which was not a Virgin Well, as the former,
because it was not so deep. I ventured into that, notwithstanding my
indisposition.

We found there two Mommies, a great one, and a little one of a Child, both in
Coffins, the greatest was of Marble; upon the Covering it had the likeness of
the Person for whom it was made: We caused these Biers, or Coffins, to be
opened, but found nothing extraordinary; therefore we made no account of them,
and left them where we found them.

We went down next into a Cave, called The Church, which was not so deep as the
former. It was nothing but a long Alley under ground, well Plastered, and
Painted all over with Hieroglyphick Figures round about the sides. It was
almost all full of Sand, which caused us to creep along upon our Knees.

If the Reader desires a Prospect, and a Description of this ancient
Burying-place, let him think upon a boundless Champain, even and covered over
with Sand; where neither Trees, nor Grass, nor Houses, nor any such thing is to
be seen: Let him represent to himself the Superficies of this large Field full
of dry Bones of Arms, Legs, Feet, and Heads; full of scattered pieces of Wood
of Coffins, of little Idols, some of Wood, others of Plaster embollish'd with
green, and marked before and behind with Hieroglyphick Letters. These Idols the
Arabians have taken from the broken Mommies which they have cast away. In some
places you may see great Tomb-stones, full of Ciphers and enigmatical Figures
that represent something of Chemistry, and of other Sciences and Mysteries; and
full of strange Characters that are no Hieroglyphics. Whiles I was looking
upon this Spectacle the Arabians brought me two, whereof I caused the Coppies
to be drawn as soon as I was returned to Cairo.

You have here a Description of some Relics of the Grandeur and Vanity of the
ancient Egyptians, and the mournful signs of Man's Mortality. The first sight
is able to dash a Person newly arrived, out of Countenance, and to affright
him: I mean the sight of so many Bones all scattered up and down, one would
think that here has been a grievous fight.

In this Champain, or Field, here are fifteen Pyramides: three are of an
extraordinary bigness, which seem to have been favored by Time; for they
appear entire without much decay. Here is also an entrance in every one, that
shows a long Alley which leads to a Chamber; Monsieur de Tiger went into that
which is farthest from the Village, commonly named The Pyramide of Rodope,
where he found nothing in the Chamber.

This Pyramide is built as a Pavillion. The Francs say that Rodope, a famous
Strumpet, caused it to be built with the Money that she had gotten with the
loss of her honor. But this is doubtless an error, if it be true what Pliny
says, That the Pyramide of Rodope was but small, though very beautiful;
therefore this which is one of the greatest in all Egypt cannot be that of
Rodope. These are the words of Pliny: Supremumque illud ne quis Regum opes
miretur, minimam extitisse laudatissimam a Rodope meretricula factam. Aesopi
fabularum Philosophi conserva quondam, and contubernalis haec fuit, majore
miraculo tantas opes meretricio esse conquisitas quaestu.

For the others that are in the same Field, Time has almost worn them out; for
they are but so many heaps of Sand, which have scarce the shape and shadow of
what they have been heretofore.

Here is also a square heap of very great hewn Stones. The Arabians name it
Mastabet Faraoun: for they say, that when the Pharaoh's, Kings of Egypt, were
to declare and give a new Law to to the People, they stood on the top of this
heap. But these are the Traditions of the poor Arabians that have nothing of
certainty.

To return to the Wells of the Mommies: as soon as the Francs have visited any,
the Wind, or the Arabians, fill the entry again full of Sand, to get a little
Money at the second opening. This is the greatest gain of these Wretches. The
least they take for to open a Virgin Well is thirty Piasters, because they that
make the Well to be opened, have the liberty to carry away all the Curiosities
and Mommies that he finds there.

We returned, after two days absence, to the City Cairo again; and the 6th of
May I went to visit the Greek Archbishop of Mount Sinai, who was then resident
at Cairo about some concerns of his Monastery. Amongst other things, he told me
that he had a Manuscript of the Council of Florence, differing from all those
Copies that are Printed in Europe. Monsieur de Tiger has a Copy of this
supposed Original.

The Monks of this Monastery have a privilege from Mahomet, signed according
to the Custom of that time by the impression of his Hand, which frees them
from the Carach, or Tax, which the Mahometans require of the Christians subject
to them. This was the cause wherefore Mahomet granted them this favor, as the
Archbishop told me, to express his thanks to that House for the kind
entertainment which he had received at the hands of those Monks when he kept,
and watched over their Camels.

We discoursed afterward concerning the Plague of the former Year. He told me,
that it had swept away six hundred and fourscore thousand Persons, but that it
had scarce meddled with any but the poor; and that of the richer fort scarce
four hundred were dead.

This causes me to speak a word of Father Elzear of Nants, a very worthy
Person; and his Comrade, Father Portais; both of the Capuchin Order, and
zealous Missionaries, whom this Plague carried away. The first was buried out
of the City Cairo, in a Field where the poor Copies are buried, for whose
Conversion he was intended.

To honor the Memory of his Virtues, there is an Epitaph in Arab. and Latin,
upon a little Stone fixed upon his Grave; and because I was well acquainted
with him in my first Voyage which I made into Egypt, by the Orders and Commands
of Ernest, Duke of Saxa-Gota, in the Year 1664. I went to see his Grave, and to
repeat for the repose of his Soul, and as a Testimony of my remembrance and
esteem of his rare Qualities, the Prayer De profundis.

A Journey to Gemiane.
WHen the time was come that the Copties observe the Festival of the Aparitions
of the Saints at Gemiane; because I had not seen it in my first Voyage, I went
from Cairo on Monday the 9th of May, with a Servant of Monsieur de Tiger, named
Leonard, that could Paint very well, with several Copties who came in our
Company, because they had nothing to discharge the expense of this Journey. We
went aboard at Boulac, and set sail for the Town of Mansoura, where we landed
the 12th of the same Month.

The next day we left Mansoura, taking a Boat for Diast, a little Village
situate upon the West Side of Niltus; for here all Travelers that go to
Gemiane from Cairo are wont to land. It stands about four hours journying from
Mansoura. At our landing we left our Boat and went by Land to Bossat inossara,
a little Mile distant from the River, in the Land; we spent there the Night,
and lodg'din the Church of S. George, with several other Copties whom we found
there, who were bound also, as well as we, for Gemiane.

The 14th day very early we proceeded on toward the third branch of Nilus,
which begins, as I have already said in the Description of this River, at
Sciobret il Yemen; which it has passed near the Town of Mohelle Kebire, or
Great Mohelle, and near Gemiane it discharges it self into the Sea at Brullos.
We marched on into the Country, and when we came to this Branch of the River we
found several Boats ready to carry us with the Current to Gemiane, where we
landed about the Evening, not without suffering many crosses, and
inconveniences; because the Master of the Boat, an Arabian, was a wicked Rogue.

Gemiane is a famous Church of the Copties, built in a large Champain; very
even and boundless to the Eye, but very unfruitful, in the Province of Garbie
in the Isle of Delta. It stands near the place where was anciently the City
Degue, called by the Copties Tekebi. On the West it has the Great Mohelle, on
the East the Branch of the River that enters into the Sea at Brullos, and on
the North the Mediteranean Sea. This Church has five and twenty Arches, or
Isles, that yield at a distance a very beautiful Prospect, though they be not
in order nor equal in bigness.

The Church within is not yet finished, and there is but one Chapel whited
with Lime, namely that where the supposed Apparition happens: there is also but
one Altar, as in all other Churches of the Levant. All the Isles, or Arches,
serve to adorn the Church, and to give light to it; for in every one there is a
Window, and in some two. The Chapel where the Apparition happens is on the
North-side, on the right hand as one enters in, and over against the Door.

During three days I examined this Apparition, and the causes from whence it
proceeds as exactly as I could possibly; and found it to be nothing else but
the reflection of the Objects that went by the Church at a convenient distance,
which being carried into the Chapel, by the Air, through the two Windows that
give light. It represents, over against upon the Wall, the Shadow which is like
the Object that goes by: For Example; when a Horseman goes by, there is to be
seen upon the Wall, in a confused manner, a Shadow of a Man on Horseback. If
it be a Woman that has a Child in her Arms, one may see the Shadow of that
appearance; and so is it with all other things. Now the People being
superstitious and of a dull apprehension, not knowing how this happens, fancy
that the Saints appear to them.

They know and distinguish them, according as they are painted in their
Churches: For Example, when they see the Shadow that represents a Cavalier,
they say that it is S. George; for the Copties, as well as the other People of
the East, represent him as a Man on Horseback, killing a Dragon. When they see
a Woman carrying of an Infant in her Arms, they say that it is the blessed
Virgin, because they see her thus represented in the Pictures of their
Churches. When they see the Shadow of a Man on foot of a reddish color, they
say that it is S. Menna, because they paint him with a red Habit. They
distinguish the other Saints in the same manner. They are so much bewitched
with the fancy of the reality of these Apparitions, that if any Person should
offer to deny it, he would be in danger to be knocked on the head.

It is in vain to answer that the Shadows that appear in this Chapel cannot be
formed by the reflection of the Objects, because the Windows, through which
they come in, are at the North-side of the Church which never enjoys the
Sunshine; and that therefore they be true and real Apparitions.

To this I reply, that it is not needful that the Church be enlightened on that
side; but it is sufficient that the Objects that pass by be enlightened. Now if
the Church had the light of the Sun on that side, the brightness of the light
would discover too plainly the Shadows, and would take away all causes of
admiration.

If any will say that some ingenious Person amongst them has built this
Chapel, according to the Rules of the Optic Art, to deceive the People with
these Apparitions; I desire him to take notice that the Copties are so ignorant
that they know not what this Art is. This Chapel, as the other Churches, has
been built in this manner without any design to cozen the World; therefore this
Reflection, which they name Apparition of the Saints, has been discovered by
chance. Experience has taught me this in other Churches which have not been
builded no more than this to deceive the World with vain Apparitions. I have
taken notice of it in the Church Bossat inossara, where I was on the 13th of
the same Month, in the company of some Copties that were going to Gemiane*
There I saw the same Shadows, which two days after at Gemiane, they called S.
George, the Virgin Mary, and S. Menna; so that when the Copties perceived them
they knew not what to say. By this we may judge, that this Church has not been
built by the Optic Rules of Art, and that only by chance these Shadows have
appeared, and been taken notice of.

This Apparition continues three days following; in which time there is such a
great concourse of People, that one is ready to be stifled. I perceived that
they did call every Saint according to their devotion and respect, without
order: And when they saw some Shadows upon the Wall which had a relation with
those Saints that are painted in their Churches, they cry out for joy, in their
Language, Selam lak Kaddis Filan; I salute you o Saint N. N. To this they add
an Hymn proper to the Saint, and Prayers, tying upon the Wall some little
crosses of Wax. Of all the Saints that their Church worships, I have heard none
called upon but the blessed Virgin, S. George, S. Menna, and S. Porter.

On this Festival day all the Arabians thereabouts meet here, out of an ancient
Custom, to be treated for three days with the Revenues of this Church: When I
was there, they could make up near five hundred Horse, and five hundred Foot.
The Horsemen were Armed with a Lance, the Footmen with a Club upon their
Shoulders, pointed with Iron.

This Custom of feeding the Arabians thereabouts is very ancient; it comes
from their pretending to be the Lords of the Country round about where this
Church is built, and therefore for this consideration they hinder not the
Christians, as they are able, from coming to this Festival.

Therefore the Epitrope, or Treasurer of the Church, has care to provide all
things needful for their entertainment. He killed that year seven young Cows,
two every day: He provided for them Rice, Bread, and Barley for their Cattle: He
had a care also to send for Cooks, and all Implements necessary for a Kitchen;
so that the Arabians had nothing else to do here, but to eat and drink and
divert themselves.

Twice every every day, these Arabians performed their Warlike Exercises, to
show their jolly humor, and to give sport to the Assembly. The Horsemen played
at Girit, or the Dart, by casting it to one another, riding one against another
and fencing therewith with much dexterity: The Footmen likewise skirmish'd one
against another very pleasantly with their great Staves.

The third day of this Festival the Arabians have nothing given them but a
Dinner, as soon as they have eaten it they are to depart; so that if two hours
after any of them was found there, and that the Beys Lieutenant has any
knowledge of him; he will cause him to be punished, either by the Purse, or a
Bastinado: so that none have liberty to stay there that day, but Christians
whom the Epitrope treats in the same manner as he does the Arabians.

I was one of the chief Persons invited, the Treasurer entertained me under his
own tent with an extraordinary Banquet, only Wine was wanting; and Spoons,
Forks, Knives and Napkins were not used: The Meat was to be torn in pieces
between the Fingers, according to the Custom of the Country. Afterward, out
of the Tent, a long Skin of Leather was spread upon the ground for the ordinary
People, where they were very well treated. I shall finish this Relation with an
advice to all Francs that intend to see this Festival. They ought to take the
same Way as we have done, because it is the easiest, the most commodious, and
the less dangerous. Let them get a good Tent; for there are no Lodgings, but in
the open Air: Let them carry Wine, Strong Water, Meat, Hens, Bread, and other
things for nourishment during the Festival: Let them also carry with them the
Furniture of the Table, a Carpet, a Cushion to sit upon, and some Coverlets for
their convenience, and to appear handsomely. Water and Wood, are here plenty:
There is Fish also to be sold; for the Fishermen of Nilus, that is near
adjoining, bring hither a great deal. I was provided with all these things,
therefore I appeared very decently.

There is here no danger of being robbed; for the Lieutenant of the Bey of
Mohelle is also at this Festival with a good Guard of Spahins, to prevent
Disorders, Quarrels, and Robberies which might happen among rude and barbarous
People: So that in this place one may be with as much safety as at Cairo in a
House. Upon this account there happened a pleasant Accident; a poor Arabian had
taken from a Christian a handful of Barley to give it to his Ass, he was taken
upon the Fact: The Christians immediately dragged him with a great noise, to
the Beys Lieutenant to have him punished: Whiles they were leading him a great
Tumult of People ran to see him; some upbraided him with his boldness and
impudency to steal, without apprehending the punishment of the Saints that
appeared in their Church, and did so many great Miracles; another asked him
whether he did not fear that God would punish him? At which words he answered,
Ane Baaref rabbene; that is, What, do I know that there is a God? or, I know
not what is God. This caused me to wonder, both at the Copties settled
persuasion of the real Apparition of their Saints, and at the ignorance of the
Arabians, seeing that some of them know not that there is a God. At last this
Wretch was shut up in a Cage, and I know not what happened to him afterward.

It is time to prepare to depart when the Company withdraws it self; and if one
desires to return to Cairo by another way, one may go by Land to Brullos, from
thence to Rosetta; by this means one may go through the lower part of Delta: a
curious Journey which I never heard that any Franc has made. But in case any
danger is likely to be in this way, one may go from Gemiane to Great Mohelle,
where the ways are full of People; and from thence one may go by Land to Cairo,
and see all the Antiquities that be in Mohelle and all along the wav.

I went away on Wednesday morning when every one was departing, and returned to
Cairo the same way that I came, because the other ways seemed to be dangerous.
I arrived at Cairo the 20th of the same Month, eleven days after my departure.

The Representation of this Church is in the Cabinet of Monsieur C.

On the 27th of May I went to visit the Patriarch of the Copties, called
Muallim Mattaos, or Master Matthew, whom I had seen in my first Voyage. I
entreated him to give me a Letter to recommend me to the Monasteries of Saint
Macarius, whither I intended to go, which he granted me very willingly.

The 30th of this Month a Bey of Constantinople arrived at Cairo, bound for the
Island of Suaquen, situated in the Red Sea, where he was to Govern as Pacha.

At the same time came Don Pietro, an Abyssin, whom I had known at Rome, and
who had given me the Manuscripts of the Synods, and the Old Testament written
in the Ethiopian Language. He, and another of the same Nation named Peter of
Constantinople, went with this Pacha, with an intention to get into their own
Country. I heard some time after that this Pietro was become a Mohammedan at
Sues, to escape the Fire unto which he was condemned for striking a Moor.

A Voyage to Rosetta.
ON Monday the last of May, I went out of Cairo designed for Rosetta, with the
same Leonard who had been with me at Gemiane, and a Nubian Slave that I had. I
went thither on purpose to spend there the time of the violent heats, which are
not so fierce in that City as at Cairo; as also to see the Mouth of the River
Nilus at that City, and to satisfy a doubt that I had about the Water, of
Maadie; for I knew not whether it was a Gulf, or a Mouth of the River Nilus:
with an intention from thence to go to Alexandria to see its Curiosities.

We were four days going from Cairo to Rosetta; an extraordinary long time,
because the winds Maltam, or Maestraux, that blow against those that go down
the River, opposed our Voyage.

The most remarkable Towns in this way are, Fuva, Sindiun, Teirut, Motubis, and
Tfeni, by the River side.

Fuva, called by the Greeks Metelis, and in the Copties Dictionary Messil, is a
very ancient, great, and considerable Town, situated upon the East Side of
Nilus, seven hours traveling from Resetta. Its Territory is very delightful,
because of the pleasant Fields and Gardens round about. It bears Fruits that
are much esteemed in all Egypt.

Geziret Iddahab, or the Island of Gold, is over against this City.

Heretofore the River was so deep from the Mouth as far as this Town, that
great Barques laden were able to sail hither; at that time the Custom-house
was kept here. But in time the River becoming here so shallow that the Barques
being not able to come so far, the Custom-house has been since established at
Rosetta, where it continues yet.

Sindiun and Teirut are two other Towns situated upon the Banks of Nilus over
against one another; as are also Motubis and Tfeni: the first stands on the
East Side, the other on the West Side.

At Rosetta I lodged with Monsieur Reynaud, Vice-Consul of the French in this
City; he is a very honest Man: He employed all his credit to procure me the
sight of the Curiosities round about.

For the information of all European Travelers, I have taken notice that of
late there is a Carrier set up at Rosetta, who goes by Land to Damietta, when
any desires to travel that way, which convenience was not formerly; for when
any intended that Journey, he was to run many hazards and inconveniences. I had
first designed to go thither, but instead of that Journey I went to visit the
Monasteries of the Desert of S. Macarius, where I expected more satisfaction.

I have long doubted whether the Waters of Maadie, or the Pool, that is
halfway between Rosetta and Alexandria was a Branch of Nilus, or else a Gulf
of the Sea. In another Relation of Egypt which I Printed in Italian at Paris in
the Year 1671. I have said that it was a Branch of Nilus; but since I have
understood the truth that it was nothing but a Gulf, or Pool: for, 1. Its
Waters are very salt as far as Etku, its uttermost bounds; which Town, as I
conceive, is the same with Motubis. 2. This Water comes not from Nilus, neither
has any Correspondency with this River. True it is, when Nilus overflows it
becomes sweeter, because of the mixture of the River's-water with the Water of
this Gulf. It retains this sweetness about two Months, until Nilus leaves the
Fields; and as soon as the Tramontane, or Westerly Wind blows, the Waters of
this Pool return to their wonted saltness and acrimony.

The 10th of June I went to the Mouth of the River Nilus, about an hours
sailing from Rosetta, to take the Description of it.

I took notice that Nilus has there two Branches, or Mouths, though they be
reckoned but one. That which runs into the Sea toward the East, and is called
the Easterly Mouth; and that which runs into the Sea toward the West, and is
named the Westerly Mouth. They take the first to sail to Brullos, to Damietta,
to Seyda, and Constantinople, etc and by this last they go to Alexandria, and
other Western Parts. This separation proceeds from a low Island, very small,
which stands in the middle of the River next to the Sea.

The Mouth of Nilus next to this City, is Guarded with two Castles; one stands
at the East Side of the River, and the other at the West. That which is about a
Mile and a half from Rosetta is square, encompassed about with strong Walls,
built according to the old Model, having four Towers. In the middle is a high
Dungeon to retreat at last. One hundred fourscore and four Janissaries are
there in Garrison. They lie every Night in the Garrison, but in the Daytime they
have liberty to go into the City to work for their living. It is furnished with
threescore and fourteen Pieces of Cannon, seven are of an extraordinary
bigness. The Aga that Commanded here in chief, was a Spanish Renegado.

The other Castle is but a Mosque, before it stands seven Pieces of Artillery
on the Ground: Here Commands also an Aga over a Company of Moors, who examine
all that go in, or out of the City. When I attempted to go out, they came to my
Boat and obliged me to return into the City again, though the Janissary that
was with me, and well acquainted with them, offered to answer for me. They
treated me in this manner, for fear of a Pirat of Malta that sailed before the
Haven at that time; they were afraid that I had some intelligence with him, to
give him notice of some Ships that were ready to set sail laden from Rosetta:
Nevertheless I had another opportunity to take the Description of this Mouth
also. It is now in the Closet of that Person of Quality who has the others.

A Journey by Land from Rosetta to Alexandria.
THE 14th of June I went, in the Evening, from Rosetta toward Alexandria, with
a Moor recommended to me by the French Vice-Consul of this City: We had two
Mules to carry us, for which I paid seventeen Meidins for the whole Journey.

About Midnight we came to the Water, named by the Moors Maadie. After a little
stay in the Han, or public Inn, we proceeded on in our Journey in a
Moon-shining Night toward Alexandria; where we arrived the next day about
eight or nine a Clock. From Rosetta to Alexandria there is ten hours traveling
for a Horseman; the most part of the way is along the Seacoast, so that the
Beasts have a long way their Feet in Water.

The Country is so even, that there is no trouble for Travelers; and unless it
be the Han, in the Midway, there is neither Village, nor Tree, nor Grass to be
seen: It is nothing but a plain Champain of Sand, altogether unfruitful.

Every Franc is bound to pay, at the entrance into Alexandria, at the Gate of
Rosetta, three Para's; half to the Beduins, or Boemiens, and half to the
Janissaries, because they are there upon the Guard.

At my first arrival at Alexandria, on the 15th of the same Month, I went to
salute Monsieur Laurens, Vice-Consul in this City for the French; who expressed a
great deal of civility to me, and offered me his Table and a Chamber in his
House; but in regard I was recommended by Monsieur Brousson, the Factor of the
Levant Company, to Monsieur Sabatery, his intimate Friend, and Factor there,
and in regard he had a convenient Lodging which he offered me, to content them
both I lodged with Monsieur Sabatery, and made use of the Vice-Consul's Table
all the time I staid at Alexandria.

I went next to visit an intimate Friend, with whom I had an acquaintance in my
first Voyage to Egypt; he was called Komos Jean, Archpriest of the Church of
S. Mark of the Copties: He is an understanding, and an honest Man, and has
informed me much concerning the affairs of Egypt.

I understood from the French Merchants of this City, that their Fondego has
been built by the Grand Seignior's order for their Lodging; and since their
establishment in this City the Turkish Emperors were wont to pay to the French
Consuls ever Year two hundred Crowns for the Reparations of this House, but of
late they don't see this Money: The cause is not well known.

On the 16th of this Month I went to a Jews House, with an intention to buy of
him a curious Hieroglyphick Stone that stands at the Threshold of his Door. It
is about an Ell and a-half long, and about a Foot broad, of a Marble color;
upon which are graven three lines of Hieroglyphick Letters in very small
Characters, which are to be read from the left hand to the right.

This Stone was desired by Monsieur Thevenot, who endeavored to buy it; he
offered, as I was told, thirty Piasters to this Jew for it; but the other asked
an hundred.

All the People of the Levant have this foolish Custom to raise the Price of
their Commodities; when they see that a Franc desires any thing, though it were
but a trifle, the others desire makes them think it to be unvaluable; they
prize it therefore at such a rate that none dare meddle with it: They are so
simple to suffer the Commodity to lie upon their Hands and spoil, rather than
to sell it to a Franc at the same rate that they would give it to a Man of the
Levant.

Nevertheless I expected that the Jew had changed his mind since that time; I
offered him the same Price that this Franc had offered before: but when I saw
that my offer rendered him more proud, resolved in his first demand, I never
troubled him afterward.

The Lodgings of the seventy Interpreters, who Translated the Hebrew Bible into
Greek, are yet standing in this City, almost entire, with the Closets where
they performed their Work. The Turks have made a Mosque there, which they name
Giama il garbie, or the Mosque of the Levant. It is to be seen with Money:
Monsieur Brue, chief Interpreter of the French Consul of Cairo, has gone in.

The 19th of June, being Saturday, I went to see the Salt Pits of the Grand
Seignior, which are out of the City near the Calitz or Channel of Cleopatra,
from whence they have their Fresh Water when the River runs over the Banks, and
near the Garden of a Moor often visited by the French Merchants, which is
called Gheit il chavagie, or the Merchants Garden.

In these Salt Pits I have taken notice of two things very remarkable: First,
that the Water of Nilus, the sweetest Water and the freshest in the World,
makes a Salt, not only whiter than ordinary, but very excellent. Secondly, that
this Salt has the taste of Violets.

They that have the care of those Salt Pits cause a certain quantity of the
River-water to run into the Salt Pits; and sour or five days after the Water is
turned into a Salt the most beautiful to the Eye, afterward they carry it in
Baskets to dry in the Sun; then it is fit to be sold.

Salt is also to be made of the Lake Sebaka, named by the ancient Latins, Palus
Mareotis, which is at the South Side of this City; but its Water is naturally
salt, and its Salt is bitter when it is made, therefore they neglect it.

This Lake proceeds from the River Nilus when it overflows; the Waters there
continue, because they have no passage out. It is not very deep, but so large
that from one side one cannot well see the other.

The Copties of Alexandria, have in their Church of S. Mark, a Picture of the
Archangel S. Michael, drawn by S. Luke, as report goes.

Monsieur Lucasole, Chancellor of the French Nation in this City, told me that
the Venetians had carried away this Picture some time-since, and sailed with it
five times out of the Haven, but could not proceed on in their Voyage, because
they were stopped by an invisible Hand every time that they intended to sail
away, and could never depart till they had carried back the Picture.

The report of this Wonder being spread abroad in the City; the Beduins, or
Boemiens as we call them, took a resolution secretly to steal it away and sell
it to the Francs: Accordingly, when they had broken open the Doors of the
Church and pulled it down from the place where it stood, they could not
possibly get out with it; so that they were also forced to put it up again in
its place as the Venetians had done before, where it remains still, I have seen
it.

Monsieur Lucasole told me that this is very true, and that he himself was then
at Alexandria.

I have read something concerning the Waters of the Cisterns of Alexandria, in
the Book of Monsieur de la Chapter that treats of the overflowing of the River
Nilus: That they become salt about the Months of April and May; and that in the
Night that the fruitful Dew falls they return to their former sweetness, and
increase besides with the Waters of the River.

I shall not offer to deny flatly a thing that may be true, and which Monsieur
Burattini, cited by Monsieur de la Chapter says has been observed by several
Persons: But I dare say that in two several Voyages into Egypt, and during my
long abode at Alexandria in several seasons of the Year; though I have
observed, as exactly as I could, all things, I never heard that the Waters of
these Cisterns did become salt, or that they did increase with the Waters of
the River, or that they did recover their former freshness and sweetness: I
have nevertheless wondered a little to taste them somewhat salt, so that they
seem not to come from so fresh a River.

This quality proceeds from the nitrous Earth, which may be known by this
Experiment; if a piece of Earth about Alexandria be put in the hot Sun, it will
become white as Snow on that side that is toward the Sun.

Of the Pillar of Pompey, and of the Caves that are near Alexandria, not far
from it.
THE 21st of June I went to see the Pillar of Pompey, and other Rarities
thereabouts, in the company of Monsieur Truillard, the Elder, a French
Merchant, and of the Janissary that belongs to the Vice-Consul. We went out at
the Gate called Babissidr, where this Pillar stands upon a little Hill toward
the South.

When I drew near, I took notice that it leaned on one side; whereas eight
years before it stood very straight, when I saw it. The cause of this are the
Arabians, who out of a persuasion of some great Treasure hid under, have dug
and undermined it, and have drawn out of its Foundation many great heaps of
Stones that held it up; this causes it to lean a little on that side. They had
overthrown it, had they not found at the bottom Stones of a fearful bigness,
and so great that neither they nor any body else was able to draw them out.

The Description and Dimensions of this Pillar are found in the Book of
Monsieur Thevenot: Therefore I say no more of it here, because I will not stuff
this Book with ordinary things, mentioned before in other Travels.

After we had well viewed this Pillar, we marched along the Calitz, as far as
the place that is over against the City Walls, to observe the Passage of the
Waters. We went with this design on the other side of the Calitz, over the
little Bridge that is near it: When we came to the little Arches that are under
the Walls, through which the River enters into the City, we made our
observations, and took next the way that leads to the Caves that are in the
Fields at West-South-West of the Gate out of which we came; and about a quarter
of a League, in our way toward the Lake Sebaca, we came to the Caves; having
left at West-North-West a Mosque, in a plain Field, where was buried a certain
Schech of the Moors, called Sidi gams il gabbari.

At our entrance we went down a dozen steps into a very large Alley, dug in
the Rock, but open a-top; it may be the Vault is fallen by length of time. In
this Alley are fifteen great holes cut in the Rock, in the fashion of great
Gates; seven are on the right hand, and eight on the left; through which Men
enter into the Caves.

We went into four with our Torches lighted, our Janissary before us; we found
round about the Walls, in the firm Rock, from the top to the bottom, holes cut
in the Rock very orderly; and of a length and breadth fit to hold a Coffin:
Many of these Caves were cut, to open a way to others. This inconveniency we
found there, they were almost all filled up with Earth and Sand, which caused
us to kneel for the most part: this did not hinder us from taking notice of
that which was most remarkable. Whiles we were in one, at the end of the Alley,
one of our Company perceived, with the light of his Tapers, that one of the
holes opened a passage to another Cave; which caused us to see whether there
was not there any thing worthy of our notice: Though the hole was but small and
narrow, we crept in upon our Bellies with our lighted Tapers; and one after
another we came to the other side, where we sound one of the strangest and most
curious Caves that we had ever seen: It was greater, more complete, and cleaner
than any of the others; built long and square, and well Plastered with Lime;
at each side of the Wall, which is the main Rock, there are three ranks of
holes, like to those that we had seen in the former: In the longer sides were
fifteen in every rank, placed one a top of the other; in all they were
forty-five. The two ends, or sides, that were shortest, had likewise three
ranks, and three holes at every rank, nine in all. They were all empty and
clean, and no ill scent in all the Cave; unless it be in one hole, where we saw
the Skeleton of the Body of a Man dried up.

I conceive that the Learned may desire my judgment concerning these Caves and
Holes, and to what purpose they were made. To this I answer, that it is not
easy to give a just account of them; because Macrizi, who has spoken of all
the remarkable things of Egypt, makes no mention of these Caves: Nevertheless
it is easy to be seen, that they could be for no other use, but to bury and
place the dead. This may be gathered from the fashion of the holes, which are
just as long as high, and as large as needs must to place a Bier or Coffin;
besides, all the other Caves in Egypt were only for that purpose: it is
therefore very probable that this was for no other purpose, let the Reader
think what he pleases of them.

I do not deny but that they may have served the Christians to meet together,
and pray God in secret, for fear of the Heathens that persecuted them. I find
this Opinion in Seid ibn Patrik, a Patriarch of Alexandria, in his History, p.
399.

The Inhabitants of Alexandria name these Caves the Suk, or the Marketplace;
but there is no likelihood that they have been employed for that use.

The Rock in which they are cut, is much eaten and consumed by time; the holes
are likewise much decayed, chiefly those that are nearest to the Door, and in
the open air: They receive some light from above, through little square holes
that are made on purpose in the Vaults.

The 22th I went round the City, to take notice of the Walls and Towers. I went
into six of the chief: The first is that which is nearest to the French
Fondego, or French House, before you come to Bab il achdar, or the green Gate.
It is round, and supported within with three ranks of Pillars of red Stone,
seven in every one.

Next to this Tower, we went to the Gate of the old Haven, which at present is
walled in, because this Haven is not frequented: both are at the West Side of
the City. From this Gate we went to the Mosque of the seventy, called Giama il
garbis. We went next by the old Castle of Alexandria, named Borg Mustapha
Pacha, which served heretofore to guard the old Haven; at present there are
three hundred Janissaries in Garrison.

Till then we walked always toward the West; but when we had left this Castle,
we turned toward the East, and found next a great Tower; where we got upon the
Platform, not by any steps, but by a large way made sloping up.

Next to this Tower, we came to Bab issidr, out of which stands the Pillar of
Pompey: From thence we went to another, called Bab irrascid, or the Gate of
Rosetta, along the Walls of the City. I went out of the City, alone with the
Janissary, to see where the River Nilus goes into the Channel which answers to
the Cisterns of Alexandria, which I shall describe hereafter.

When I had fully viewed that which I desired, I returned into the Town to my
company, that waited for me in the shade; and all together we walked to the
Tower of the Indians, so called, because of late there lodges some Indian
Pilgrims. We went into it, and found its make very admirable.

We went next to the Tower of the old Custom-house, or Douane; so named,
because when the Sea came to the Walls: of the City on that side, the
Storehouses of the Customs were there: But since the Sea is gone from thence,
the Gate is shut, and the Custom-house is established and settled in another
place.

This Tower is very big, supported within with four ranks of Pillars of red
Stone. Here are many Rooms fit for stores, for lodgings, and to put Salt in,
though much of it is now ruinated. This was the last Tower that we saw in our
Walk, which continued four hours, reckoning the time that we spent in viewing
the Walls, and climbing up to the Towers.

I return at present to the Channel, by which the Cisterns are furnished with
Water.

It is out of the Gate of Rosetta, about six Foot high, vaulted in the inside,
about a quarter of a Mile from the City: It joins to the Calitz of Cleopatra,
that furnishes it with Water from the River Nilus; from thence the Water runs
to the Walls, where it meets with another Conduit not fat from this Gate; which
Conduit, or Channel, is made so ingeniously, that it furnishes all the Cisterns
of the City with Water.

We must also take notice, that though the Mouth of this Channel is as high as
the rest, almost the two thirds are walled from the top to the bottom; so that
there remains but a small hole where the Waters of the Calitz flow in, as
through a Window. And because they are very salt the first three days, and they
would fill the Cisterns with slime and filth, if the Water did enter in at that
time freely: To prevent this inconveniency, they that have the care of the
Water stop this hole, and leave it so three days; which being ended, they go to
the entry of the Channel, followed by a crowd of People, to unstop the hole,
and let in the Water to fill the Cisterns. This day is a day of great rejoicing
all over the City.

The City of Alexandria has six Gates; three are open, namely that toward the
South, called Bab issidr; that which is at the East, named Bab irrascid, or the
Gate of Rosetta; that which looks to the North-East, and is named the Sea-Gate.
The three Gates that are shut are, that of the old Custom-house; the green
Gate, called by the Arabs, Bab il achdar; and that of the old Haven.

I cannot positively affirm whether the Walls and the Gates that are now there,
be those that Alexander the Great caused to be builded, or whether the Califfs
have made them. I imagine that the Califfs have erected them, and not Alexander;
(though many Travelers are of a contrary opinion.) Because there is no Greek
Inscriptions to be seen, but all Arab.. Some are written in strange Characters,
others in the ordinary Arabian Character. These Inscriptions speak of the
Califf, and Year when they were builded, or re-edified. The Gates being high
where these Inscriptions were graven, and the Letters artificially put with
other works, I could not distinguish nor read them. 2. The manner of their
building proves this truth; for they are builded as the Gates of Cairo, which
were the work of the Califfs, who have been there many Ages after Alexander the
Great.

There are two Havens in Alexandria; the one called the old Haven, where Ships
enter in with the Westerly Wind; but now it is of no use, but to secure the
Vessels that sail from the East toward the West, when the bad Weather obliges
them to seek for shelter. The other is called the new Haven; there all the
Ships arrive, and where they now cast Anchor.

The Trade of the French Merchants in this City, is the greatest that they have
in all the Eastern Parts; for there is no place in Turkey where so many French
Ships come as into this Haven; from the beginning of the Year 1672, to the
Month of June, there was no less than nineteen French Ships that came hither;
and in the Month of June I reckoned fourteen.

This is a considerable number, but not to be compared with the number of
Vessels that frequented this Haven heretofore: For Monsieur Lucasole, that did
the Office of Chancellor of the French Nation, told me that he remembers that
there have been at Alexandria in one Year, ninety-four French Ships.

Seeing that I am speaking of the French Trade in Egypt, I shall for the
satisfaction of the Merchants, give here an exact account of all the
Commodities that are carried from Egypt into Europe, whether it be by the way
of Marseilles, or by that of Legorn, or by Venice, with their ordinary Price in
the Year 1673.

The Commodities that are ordinarily carried out of Egypt into Europe, are,

Gums.
As of Benjoin, whereof 110 Rotols cost 75 Piasters. Bdellion, whereof the
Quintal costs 50 Piasters. Arabic, whereof 133, 1. third of the Rotols of Cairo
cost 6 Abukelbs. Adragant, whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols costs 10 Piasters.
Lack, whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols costs 15 Piasters. Turick, whereof 130
Rotols cost 9 Abukelbs. Myrrh of Ethiopia, whereof 110 Rotols cost 40 Piasters.
Frankincense in tears, whereof 110 Rotols cost 12 Piasters. Storax.
Juices.
As Aloe Cicotrin, whereof the Quintal costs 8 Piasters. Called Epatick,
whereof 150 Rotols cost 28 Piasters. Opium, whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols
costs 120 Piasters. Indigo, named Serquis, whereof 130 Rotols cost 70 Piasters.
Indigo of Bagdat is worth nothing. Indigo of Balluder is likewise worth
nothing. Cassanad, whereof the Quintal costs 5 Piasters. Sugars in great
Loaves, whereof the Quintal costs 16 Piasters and a half. In little Loaves,
whereof the Quintal costs 16 Piasters. Sugar Candy costs 28 Piasters.
Sugar-soltani costs 28 Piasters. Sorbet, whereof the Quintal costs 20 Piasters.
Wood.
As Sandal-wood costs 33 Piasters. Citron-wood costs 25 Piasters. Turbit-wood
costs 30 Piasters. Ebene-wood costs 41 Piasters. Brasil-wood costs 28 Piasters.
Rinds of Trees.
As Cinnamon of Conchi, whereof 150 Rotols cost 60 Piasters. Of Malabari, cost
25 Piasters. Of Zeilani, cost 100 Piasters.
Fruits and Seeds.
As Cassia, costs 20 Piasters. Coco of Levant, whereof 133, and one third
Rotols, cost 23 Piasters. Coriander-seed, whereof the Quintal costs 3 Piasters.
Coffee, whereof the Quintal costs 25 Piasters. Dates, whereof the Quintal costs
3 Piasters. Mirabolans Kebus, whereof 150 Rotols cost 20 Piasters. Surnamed
Balludri, cost 23 Piasters. Surnamed Citrin, cost 6 Piasters; but are worth
nothing. Nutmegs, whereof 110 Rotols cost 200 Abukelbs. Nuts to vomit, whereof
110 Rotols cost 7 Piasters. Cardamum, whereof the Quintal of 139 Rotols cost
140 Piasters. Ben, a Fruit of the Indies, whereof the measure of a Rotol costs
7 Piasters and a half. Tamarindis, whereof 110 Rotols cost 15 Piasters.
Coloquinte, whereof 100 costs 10 Piasters. Pepper, whereof 100 Rotols cost 22
Piasters and a half. Cloves, whereof 125 Rotols costs 25 Piasters.
Herbs.
Flax combed, whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols costs 5 Piasters. Flax, or
Hemp, of Menuf, 6 or 7 Piasters. Flax, or Hemp, of Squinanti, whereof the
Schive costs 10 Piasters. Black Flax, whereof the Schive costs 10 Piasters.
Flax, or Hemp, of Fium, whereof the Schive costs 8 Piasters. Hemp of Forfeit,
seven Piasters and a quarter. Hemp of Oleb of the Besantins. Seen, the Quintal
costs 40 Piasters.
Flowers.
As Spikenard, whereof 133, 1 3d of Rotols cost 120 Piasters. Saffron of
Nambrosia, whereof 110 Rotols cost 12 Piasters. Saffron of Said, costs 6
Piasters. Cotton in Ramo, or Branches, costs 6 Piasters. Cotton in Thread,
costs 20 Piasters. Ordinary Cotton costs 10 Piasters.
Roots.
As Hermodats, whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols costs 3 Piasters. Roots called
Sine, of the finer sort, cost 200 Piasters. Ginger, whereof 133; 1 3d Rotols,
cost 25 Piasters. Cretonart, whereof 110 Rotols cost 15 Piasters. Rhubarb,
whereof the Rotol costs 5 Piasters. Salsepareille, whereof 110 Rotols cost 200
Piasters.
Teeth.
As fine and great Elephants Teeth, 110 Rotols cost 25 Piasters.
Wool.
As Wool unwash'd, 200 Rotols cost 6 Piasters. Washed, the Quintal costs 10
Piasters.
Feathers.
As of the Austrich of the first and second sort, whereof the Rotol costs 24
Piasters. Of the Tails, whereof four Rotols cost 24 Piasters. Of the black,
four Rotols cost the same price. Sharp, 1100 cost 1 Piaster and a half. Of the
Wings, 100 cost 6 Piasters.
Fish and other Sea Commodities.
As the Lizard green, 1100 cost 30 Piasters. Pearl Shells, whereof 1100 cost 10
Piasters. Salt-Fish, 200 clean cost 25 Piasters.
Mommies.
Whereof the Quintal of 110 Rotols costs 2 Abukelbs.
Salts.
As Ammoniac, whereof the Quintal of 204 Rotols costs 16 Piasters. Niter, or a
kind of a Salt-Peeter, whereof 140 Rotols clean, cost one Piaster. Roch-Alum,
whereof the Quintal of 139 Rotols costs 9 Piasters.
Linen.
Blue-Linen, the Piece containing 40 Else of Cario, costs 65 Meidins. Of
Alexandria, the Piece costs 55 Meidins. Of Menuf, the Piece of 83 Else costs 80
Meidins. Great Blue of Inbab, the Piece of 30 Else costs 150 Meidins. Little
Blue of Cairo, the Piece of 12 Else costs 19 Meidins. Of Alexandria, the Piece
costs 14 Meidins. Of Col, the Piece costs 15 Meidins. Painted, costs 60
Meidins. Battanones, the Piece costs 20 Meidins. Magrabines, whereof the Piece
costs 55 Meidins. Messaline, whereof the Piece costs 80 Meidins. Lizarde,
whereof the Piece costs 120 Meidins. Cambrasine, whereof the Piece costs 5
Piasters.
Stuffs.
As wrought Stuffs of Cairo, the Piece costs 18 Meidins. Of Damietta, between
25 and 28 Meidins. Of Alexandria, 24 Meidins. Fine Girdles of Rosetta, cost by
the dozen, 14 Piasters. Ordinary Girdles by the dozen, 10 Piasters. Fine
Handkerchiefs, at 18 to the Packet, cost 24 Meidins. Ordinary Handerchiefs, of
the same Number, 12 Meidins. Other ordinary ones, at 10 to the Packet, cost 10
Meidins.
Bladders.
As Musk, whereof the Dram costs a Piaster.
Carpets.
As fine Carpets by the Ell, cost about 2 Piasters, or one and a half. Course
Carpets, cost half a Piaster an Ell.
European Commodities, carried and sold in Egypt, with their ordinary price,
1673. are,

Minerals.
As Agarick, whereof the Ock, or 400 Drams, is worth a Piaster. White Arsenick
whereof the Quintal of 125 Rotols is worth 9 Piasters. Yellow Arsenick is worth
14 Piasters. Archifu, whereof 150 Rotols are worth 8 Piasters. Orpiment, the
Chest, or Box, is worth 25 Piasters. Antimony is worth by the Quintal, 200
Piasters. Sublimated, one Rotol is worth a Piaster and a half. Quicksilver,
102 Rotols are worth 100 Piasters. Vitriol by the Quintal, is worth 70
Piasters. Vermillion, whereof 110 Rotols are worth 14 Piasters. Cinaber by the
Quintal, containing 102 Rotols, is worth 150 Piasters. Salsepareille, whereof
110 Rotols are worth 200 Piasters. Fine Cine are worth 200 Piasters.
Flowers and Herbs.
As Nardum Celticum, whereof the Quintal, containing 110 Rotols, is worth 55
Abukelbs. Spiknard, whereof 110 Rotols are worth 150 Piasters.
Iron, Steel, Copper, Lead, and Pewter.
As Copper Thread, whereof 150 Rotols of the greatest cost 6 Piasters; and of
the least 50 Piasters. Beaten Brass 20 Piasters. White Iron, or Tin, by the
Barrel is worth 40 Piasters. Steel of Venice, 110 Rotols are worth 15 Piasters.
Lead, whereof 130 Rotols are worth 12 Piasters. Pewter, whereof 102 Rotols are
worth 45 Piasters.
Seeds.
As Cochenille, whereof the Ock is worth 20 Piasters.
Paper.
The Pack of 24 Reams is worth 20 Piasters. Of 14 Reams 22 Piasters. Of 12.
Reams 24 Piasters.
Silk Stuffs.
As Satin of Florence, is worth by the Ell 60 Meidins.
Clothes.
As of London, whereof the Pick is worth 5 Abukelbs. Of Bucioche, whereof the
Pick is worth 60 Meidins. Of the holy Bridge of Rome, whereof the Pick is worth
50 Meidins. Clothes of Holland fashion, whereof the Pick is worth 80 Meidins.
Scarlet by the Pick, is worth 90 Meidins. Ordinary Caps of Marseilles, by the
dozen, are sold for 5 Piasters. Other Caps of a half-make, are sold by the
dozen for 10 Piasters. Of a perfect make, 14. Piasters.
Corrals.
As rough Corrals of Messina are worth by the Quintal, 110 Piasters. Taraille
is worth 25 Piasters. Corrals wrought, whereof 100 Rotols of Cairo are worth
400 Piasters. White Tartre, whereof 125 Rotols are worth 14 Piasters. Red
Tartre, whereof 125 Rotols are worth 12 Piasters. Of Brasil, 110 Rotols that
make a Quintal, are worth 30 Piasters. Roch Alum, 139 Rotols are worth 10
Piasters.
And because we have mentioned in this place several Weights and Moneys that
are in use in Egypt, it is needful to give an explication of them, that the
Reader may make use of this Journal with satisfaction to himself.

The Ock contains 400 Drams.

The Rotol contains 144 Drams.

One hundred and ten Rotols of Cairo, are 108 pounds weight of Marseilles.

The Quintal gerouin, contains 217 Rotols of Cairo.

The Abukelb is the Doller of Holland, with the Lion rampant, and is worth 33
Meidins to be changed; but in Species 38 Meidins, and sometimes more.

The ordinary Piaster, which is but an imaginary Coin, is worth 30 Meidins; and
with it they trade and pay Money in Egypt.

The Reals of Spain are worth 33 Meidins in change, but in Species 40, and
sometimes more as they are in request.

The Sequin, or golden Ducat of Venice, which next to the Reals of Spain, is
the best Money to be used in all the Countries of the Grand Seignior, is worth
in trade 100 Meidins; but the Divan of Cairo takes it but for fourscore and
five.

The Meidin, or the Para, is the same piece of Money, made by the Pacha's of
Cairo in the Name of the Grand Seignior. It is current in all Parts of Egypt;
is worth one Penny Halfpenny of France, and about one Penny Farthing English.

A Purse contains 2500 Meidins, and is worth 500 Crowns of France.

The 23d of this Month, I saw a Moor return from a Race that he had made, to
show his strength, and to be admitted amongst the Posts that carry Letters from
Alexandria to Cairo.

He that will be admitted to be Post, or Messenger, or Carrier of Letters, must
carry upon his Shoulders a Fire lighted in an Iron Basket, made as a great
Chafing Dish, fastened at the end of a great Staff about the length of a Man,
to which are tied several Hoops of Iron, all weighing 36 Rotols. With this
burden he must go twenty-seven Miles in the way to Rosetta, and return the same
day to the City before the setting of the Sun, in all about 54 Miles; he is to
go always laden with the same burden. If he performs this, he is not only
admitted amongst the Carriers of Letters, but he wins the Wager that others
have made against him; but if his strength fails him, he loses his Wager, and
his Employment that he pretends to.

The Man that I saw returning the same day to the City, and finishing his
course with honor, because he was returned when the Sun was two hours high,
won a Wager of fifteen Piasters, and was admitted amongst the Posts, or
Carriers of Letters; and gathered besides, about eight Piasters, or
thereabouts, from the beholders of his glorious return; but he was in such a
sweat that one would have judged him to be coming out of some Bath. He was
followed by a great Company of People both Horse and Foot, some carrying Wood
to entertain his Fire, others Water to refresh and cool him; that before I knew
the cause of this Meeting, I thought there had been some Tumult in the City.

When I had continued so long time in Alexandria as was needful for my affairs,
and having lost my Quartane Fever that had plagued me sixteen Months, I
departed very well satisfied, for Rosetta, on the Festival day of S. Peter and
S. Paul. I went this time by Sea, because I had been so often by Land: I went
aboard a Ship, and in five hours we came to Rosetta, but not without danger of
Shipwreck at the Mouth of Nilus; for the Waters of the River meet so furiously
with the Waves of the Sea, that they are able to affright the most skilful
Pilots of Egypt.

A Voyage to the Monasteries of the Deserts of S. Macarius.
ON the 30th of June I went from Rosetta, with an intention to visit the four
Monasteries of the Deserts of S. Macarius: for that purpose I went aboard of a
Boat of a Janissary, ^amed Reus Ahmed il Curdi, a Man very well acquainted with
the Francs, to go with him to Tarane, or Terenut, as the Copties call it in
their Dictionary. It is a little Village in the Cascieflik of Beheire, four and
twenty hours traveling from Cairo, situate upon the East of Nilus, the place
where Men commonly go ashore when they design to travel to those Monasteries.
But, before I came to that Village, I received many affronts from some young
Turks, because I carried with me a little Box full of Wine. A zealous Cadi
being troubled in Conscience for being in the company of a Franc that drunk
Wine, encouraged them to ask me some, that he might have an occasion to quarrel
with me, if I did give them some. These Rogues having the Authority of a Cadi
to countenance their wicked design, four of the boldest asked me some very
earnestly; for they said they knew that I had some. I excused my self at first,
that I could not give them any to drink, because they were not to drink Wine;
and that I knew very well that it was a great Crime for a Franc to give Wine to
a Musulman, chiefly in a place where many others would be offended at it, and
that such an action might bring me into trouble. But all these reasons could
not prevail; they would have some Volens Nolens, threatening that if I denied
them they would cast my Wine into the River. When I saw my self in this danger,
I entreated the Reus, unto whom I was well recommended by the Vice-Consul of
Rosetta, to defend me. He did so much by his credit, that he pacified them for
that time.

At my arrival at Tarane, whither I was to go ashore, I hired in the Morning a
little Boat to carry me, and my Clothes and Provisions, to the Village; for our
Vessel was great and well laden, and could not at that time go near the shore,
because the Water was not deep. Three of these Turks cast themselves furiously
into my Boat, taking my Box in earnest to cast it into the River. I snatched it
from them, and run to my Musket as if I intended to shoot at them: my
Black-a-moor likewise, who was courageous, took one by the Neck and cast him
into the River, and with his Sword in his Hand put himself in a posture of
defense; When they saw that they had to do with Men of courage that were not
afraid of them, they went back into the Barque, and very furiously assaulted
the Reus with their Fists; besides, they accused him, as he himself told me
afterward, at his return to Cairo, before his Aga, to have drank Wine with a
Franc, making him pay, as a punishment, ten Piasters.

After this Rencounter, I had another Accident that happened to me, far more
grievous and dangerous. At my landing I wanted a Man to carry my Clothes to the
House where I intended to lodge; I called therefore some of the Arabians that
were newly arrived from the Deserts of S. Macarius with Nitre, or Saltpeter:
He that carried my Box of Wine finding it to be very heavy, and knowing not
what was in it, he thought it had been a Box of Money; therefore being proud of
his burden, he told all that he met with in the way, that he carried a Box full
of Money, that belonged to a Franc newly arrived, that was going to the
Monasteries. This lie spread about the Village, and was believed as true, so
that I was in no small danger; for there was no other talk in the Town but of
the rich Franc that was there, and of the means to get his Money: They thought
I had been some Consul that traveled incognito to see the Country, therefore
they resolved to wait for me in the way, and to take from me all my Treasure.

In this manner I landed at Tarane, on a Sunday, and went to lodge at a poor
Carpenters House, a Christian Coptie, the only Christian in that Village; he
allowed me for my Chamber, a place where he put Straw for his Beasts; it was
covered with the Faggots of Palm Trees, heaped one upon another, to hinder the
heats of the Sun: I found there two religious Persons of the Monasteries
whither I intended to go, with them I past my fears and apprehensions.

When I understood, from all hands, the Conspiracy that the Arabians had formed
against me; the danger obliged me the the next day, to desire the Cascief of
that place to give me a Guard, to bring me safe to the Monasteries; and that I
might persuade him the sooner, I gave him some Pounds of Coffee and Loaves of
Sugar, which I had brought with me for that purpose; for it is the Custom in
Turkey, when a favor is desired from a Turk, to begin with Gifts: But the
Cascief having heard what report went of me, answered me, that a small Guard
would do me but little good, because the Arabians had formed a design to wait
for me in the way, and to cut my Throat, and that it was needful that he should
Guard me himself; which he promised to do within a few days, after that he had
finished some business of importance.

I was mightily troubled when I heard what the Cascief offered me. It was to no
purpose when I told him that I was no Consul, as the report went of me without
any color of truth, but rather a poor Franc that went to the Monasteries to
perfect my self in the Language of the Country; That in this Box there was no
Money, but only some Glass Bottles of Wine which I carried with me, because I
was never used to drink Water. All this discourse was to no purpose, he was so
prepossessed with the false report that I could not be believed. When I saw
that I spent my labor in vain, I went to my Lodging without accepting his
offer.

At that time I had news that Nassr Alla, an Abbot of one of the Monasteries,
that I intended to visit, was at a Village at the other side of the River,
called Tuh inessara, not far from Tarane down the Current, about some concerns
of his Monastery. I sent him a Letter, written in Arabic, by one of the Lay
Monks whom I found at my arrival at Tarane, acquainting him with my intention,
and all that had happened between me and the Cascief, and Arabians, entreating
him to tell me how I should get free from those People; I assured him that I
should be for ever obliged to him, and that all the favor he should show me
would be pleasing to his Partriarch, who was my very good Friend, and had
recommended me to the Governors of those Monasteries. But this uncivil Abbot
was so far from answering to my Letter, as I expected, that he kept with him
the Messenger, and would not suffer him to return back.

When I saw the Abbots incivility, and being more desirous to proceed on in my
Journey, notwithstanding all these difficulties; I resolved once more to visit
the Cascief, to entreat him to give me a Guard, thinking to find him of another
judgment than he was before when I saw him first, but I received from him the
same answer; He told me that he would not have me venture, unless he Guarded me
himself; that he must answer to the Pacha for my Life, if any mischance did
happen to me in my Journey, and that he knew that I was but ill accommodated
with the Christian; he desired me therefore to take a Chamber at his House. I
must confess that this second offer, as well as the first, did strangely
trouble me: for this earnest desire that he did discover of Guarding me in his
own Person, was no good Omen to me; besides, his Reputation was but bad in the
Village; and when I should have had no reason to fear him, and that his
intentions had been very good, the expenses I must have been at for him and his
Company, and the Gifts that I must have bestowed upon him for his pains, would
have ruined me; for I knew that a Cascief never ventures out in a Journey
without a great train of Horse and Foot, and without expecting great matters.

When I saw the danger and trouble that I had in this Journey, I resolved to
return to Cairo as soon as I could. With this resolution I spent the rest of
the day in my Lodging, thinking how I might be able to compass it. About two
hours in the Night I heard knocking at the Door very earnestly, and because it
was no seasonable time to speak with me, and that the Person knocked very hard,
I began to think that I was in danger: That I might not be surpised, I awaked
the Persons in the House, and took my Weapons in my hand, sending my
Black-a-moor to see who was there; he returned to me, and told me that it was a
Groom of the Cascief that was desirous to speak with me, concerning a business
of the highest importance. I caused him to come in, and found that it was he
that had introduced me to his Masters presence, unto whom I had made some small
Gifts: As soon as he saw me, he entreated me by his Religion and mine, as the
Custom of the Country is, to go away immediately, as secretly as I could; for
his Master intended to kill me, because he thought I was a Man that traveled
up and down only to seek for the Treasures of the ancient Egyptians: And that
he might more conveniently perform this bloody design, he was resolved to lead
me himself toward the Monasteries to the middle of the Wilderness, where he
would suffer me to rest, and afterward cut my Throat: And if afterward any
should inquire for a Franc that was gone by Tarane to the Monasteries, he would
say that he is gone to Cairo by another way: He told me also, that about a
Month before that, his Master had killed a Mohammedan Traveller of Barbary, and
had cast his Body into the River, for the same cause.

As soon as I understood this bad news, I had no more mind to sleep, I gave him
the reward that he had deserved, and sent to seek a Camel to carry my Clothes;
and about one of the Clock in the Night I departed to go to the passage that
leads to Gizey, a Village situated on the other side of Nilus, about an hour
and a halfs traveling from Tarane down the Water: I agreed there with a Master
of a Boat to carry me and my Clothes over; and about break of the Day I went
aboard very speedily: As soon as we were lanch'd into the River, from Land, I
saw the Cascief galloping toward us with about thirty Men on Horse back to
catch me; but he missed of his intent, for I was out of his reach.

At Gizey, as I was waiting for an opportunity to return to Cairo, the Abbot
Nassr alla, mentioned before, came thither and offered to conduct me to the
Monasteries, if I would return to Tarane in his company; but I had no mind any
longer to visit them.

I went from Gizey the same day, being Friday, toward Cairo; and the next
Night we lodged at Verdan, a Village situate on the West Side of Nilus, not
far from Boulak; and on Saturday the 9th of July, I entered into Cairo, from
whence I departed the 7th of June.

Whilst I was at Tarane, the Cascief's Clark, who was a Coptie and a Christian,
came to see me sometimes. I understood from him what the Lakes of Saltpeter,
or Niter, yield to the Grand Seignior every Year. He told me, that this Year
within the space of nine Months, they had drawn four and twenty thousand
Quintals, and that they must take up twelve thousand more to make up the
ordinary Sum that is drawn: So that every Quintal being sold for 25 Meidins,
this Revenue comes to 36 Purses, or 18000 Crowns, French Money, by the Year.

As soon as it is taken out of the Lakes they carry it upon Camels to Tarane,
where it is weighed, and from thence sent to Cairo, or Alexandria, to be sold.

For this cause a Cascief dwells here, who though he be but little in
Authority, and subject to the Cascief of Beheire, he is forced to buy this
employment, and pay for it four and twenty Purses; one half to the Cascief of
Beheire, and the other half to the Pacha: he keeps also twenty Spahins to wait
upon him, and guard his Country; he is the Lord of these Monasteries.

But before I proceed on in my Journal, I will give a short account of some
remarkable things in this Desert, as I have heard them from one that has been
an Abbot in one of the Monasteries.

First there is to be seen, between the Monasteries of S. Macarius, and of Amba
Biscioi, and a little further in the Wilderness, a long rank of little heaps of
Earth, a Foot from one another, placed as in a way; which, as the Monks say,
was put there by the Angels, that the Hermites might be able to find the way to
the Church when they were desirous to hear Divine Service on Sundays; for
before they were apt to go out of the way: Therefore this way is called now,
Tarik il melaike, or, The way of Angels.

Secondly I have understood from an old Manuscript in Arab. that in the
Wilderness were heretofore seven great Monasteries; namely, 1. of S. Macarius;
2. Of S. John the little, surnamed Igumene; 3. Of Amba Biscioi; 4. Of S.
Massine, and Timothy; 5. That of Amba Moses, surnamed Black; 6. That of Amba
Kema; 7. That of the holy Virgin of Syria: and that besides these seven
Monasteries, there were three hundred dwellings of Hermites, and solitary
People that served God in this Wilderness.

But now, of all these Monasteries, there are but two remarkable; namely, the
Monastery of the Syrians, and that of Amba Biscioi. They are furnished with
very good Water. The first has two Churches; one for the Syrians, and another
for the Copties.

In that of the Syrians is to be seen a miraculous Tree, growing from the Staff
of S. Ephrem. This holy Man left it at the Gate when he went to visit one in
the Monastery, and immediately it shot forth Roots downwards, and Leaves
upwards, with Flowers. They say, that there is no such Tree to be found in all
Egypt besides.

Thirdly, in the Monastery of S. John the little, which now is much decayed, is
to be seen a Tree that grew likewise from this Saints Staff miraculously, when
he had fixed it into the Ground at his Superiors command, and watered it:
Therefore they call it, because of this Act of Obedience, Scieigiaret ittaa, or
the Tree of Obedience.

Fourthly, in the way that leads from the Monastery of the Syrians to the
Mountain of the Eagles Stones, is to be seen the Bed of Bahr Bela me, or River
without Water; which was dried up, as the Monks relate, at the Prayers of the
ancient Hermites that dwelt about its Banks; because they were grievously
troubled by the Pirates that sailed upon it, therefore they obtained from God
this favor.

Fifthly, in this Desert is to be seen another Curiosity, called by the
Arabians, Lahm iggiuf; but because I could not well understand what it was, I
could desire that some other Traveller would enquire it out, that we may better
know what to think of it.

A Walk to the Garden of Ma-Tarea.
THE 12th of July I went, in the Company of some French Merchants, to the
Village of Ma-Tarea, situate on the East of Cairo, about two hours riding on
Horseback, to visit the places which Christ and his most holy Mother have
sanctified with their abode, and the Garden where the Balm Plants were set
formerly.

At the entry into the Court which is before this Garden there is to be seen,
at the right hand, a small Oratory of the Turks, which one Ibrahim, who was
Pacha of Egypt about thirteen years ago, caused to be built out of a hatred of
the Copties, upon the ruins of a Church which belonged to them, and where they
reverenced some Relics and steps of our Lord, and of his most holy Mother.

This Pacha changed, as we have said, this Chapel into an Oratory of Turks,
that no Christian might have the liberty to enter in and visit it. But since
the Turks have forsaken it one may go in freely without hindrance; therefore it
is no longer named an Oratory, but il Makad, or the place of rest.

In this Makad is a little Cistern of Marble of diverse colors, full of Water,
which comes into it by a Channel from the miraculous Well that is near by. The
Copties say, from Tradition, that the blessed Virgin was wont to wash in it the
Linen of her divine Son; and that whilst she was employed in working, she laid
him in a little hole which is in the Wall of the Makad, a place where some
religious Francs have heretofore said Mass, out of devotion.

However it be, I will not deny a Tradition so ancient; but it is so hard to
reconcile all the Circumstances which they bring to prove it, that when I had
done all that I could to understand the truth, I sound such doubts as did
rather contradict, than establish any such thing.

Very near this Makad, or resting place, is the miraculous Well, very deep. Its
Waters are lighter and sweeter than the Waters of Nilus. This is so well known,
that the Pacha's drink of it, and prefer it to the Waters of the River.

The Tradition of the Copties say, and some Mohammedan Historians agree to it,
as Amru ibn il verdi, that our Savior has washed himself in this Well, and by
a Miracle he has given this sweetness, and extraordinary pleasantness to these
Waters.

Its Sourse, or Spring, is not well known. Some think that it came by a
Miracle, others say that it proceeds from Nilus under ground. But I think it
impossible; 1. Because of the great distance between the River and this Well;
2. Because when the Waters of Nilus are corrupt and thick, the Water of this
Well is clear, whereas if it proceeded out of the River, it would be as thick
as the Waters of Nilus; 3. because the Water of this Well never rises, nor
falls, as the River does, but is always equal in height; finally I conceive it,
from the name given to it, Ma-Tarea, which signifies fresh Water; this
signifies that it has a particular Sourse, and a quality not common with the
Waters of Nilus.

The Mahometans say, that it proceeds from the Well Bir issimsim, which is at
Mecha; a famous Well, because of a pretended Miracle of Mahomet. But this is a
Fable invented by some of their Sciechs, to obtain more credit to their
Prophet; for Mecha is distant from Cairo one and thirty days journey, as the
Caravan makes them, therefore it is impossible that a Well should be in Egypt
proceeding from a Sourse at such a distance.

After that we had eaten in the resting place, and drank of this good Water out
of devotion, we went into the Garden, where heretofore the Balm trees were
Planted, which yielded Balm only when they stood in this place, and were
watered with the Water of the miraculous Well. One may read my Book upon this
Subject, called The Church of Alexandria; where many remarkable things may be
found, very curious, concerning these Trees and this Well.

In this Garden was heretofore to be seen the Sicamore-tree, which, as the
Copties say, split in two miraculously, to hide our Lord Jesus Christ and his
most holy Mother, when the Soldiers of Herod pursued him: They say, that when
they hid themselves in this opening of the Sicamore, they saved themselves from
the Soldiers violence, by the favor of a Spiders Web that covered them
suddenly, and appeared very old, though it was made in an instant by a Miracle:
so that that they imagined not that any Person could be hid within, much less
the Persons whom they were seeking.

The Franciscans of the Holy Land, that dwell at Cairo, dispute with the
Keepers of this Garden, the possession of this Tree; and say, that it fell down
with old age in the year 1656. and that they gathered then up the pieces which
they keep carefully in their place of Relics; I have seen them there. The
Gardiners yet show in this Garden a Stump which I have seen, which they say are
the remains of this Sicamore. But this dispute concerns me not much, neither do
I think that I should oblige those Fathers to maintain their interest in this
case that is so trivial.

When we had seen this Sicamore, we went out of the Garden to see the Needle,
which is out of the Village, planted in the open Field, where stood anciently
the City Heliopolis.

This Needle is not equally square, for there are two sides larger than the
others: The largest are each of six Foot, and the narrowest of five and a half.
There be but few Characters graven upon it, but they be yet to be read; and
those that are graven in one side, are also in the three others. It is of a red
Stone, as all other Needles that I have seen in Egypt, Planted upon the ground
without any Basis to stand upon.

Near this Needle is a square Stone of an extraordinary bigness, which seems to
have been the Basis of some great Pillar; but it is worn on the sides,
therefore I neglected to take the measure of it.

In this Field Sultan Selim encamped with his Army, when he engaged in a Fight
with Sultan Cajed Bey, the last King of the Mammelucs; some of the Trenches of
his Camp are yet to be seen.

I went next alone from Ma-Tarea to Minied Sored, another Village hard by on
the West Side, to see a miraculous Image of the blessed Virgin, which the
Copties keep in their Church; of which I have read a Miracle in an Abyssin
Manuscript, which I found in the Monastery of Koskam, near Momfallot in the
middle Egypt, at my first Voyage into Egypt. As soon as I had seen it, I
returned to Cairo.

The 17th of July, Saturday Night, I went to the Monastery of S. Michael,
situated out of the Old Cairo at the East Side, about half an hours riding on
Horseback, in the Field called, in Arab. Birket siech Ombarek, or the Lake of
the blessed Sciech; where I spent the Night to hear Mass; for the Copties say
it ordinarily after Midnight.

The next day I returned back to my Lodging, and saw in my passage all the
Churches and Monasteries of the Copties which are in Old Cairo; leaving on our
left hand the three Churches which are in Babylon Massr, which was heretofore
part of Old Cairo, but is now totally destroyed. I began my visit by the
Churches that are in Cassr Isscemma.

Churches, and Monasteries of Cassr Isscemma.
THE first was that of Maallaca: It is a very ancient Church, stately and very
clear; and I may say that it is the most beautiful that the Copties have in
Egypt. It is the Metropolis in which the Patriarch performs his first Divine
Service.

The Copties bought it of Amru ibn il Ass, as may appear by the Contract
written upon the Walls of this Church with the Hand of this Prince, who curses
there all the Mahometans that shall offer to take it from them.

There be five Heikels, or Chapels, in a rank; but separated the one from the
other with little Grates of Wood: so that five Masses may be read at once, and
the Priests need not interrupt one another.

At the entry of this Church a little Image is to be seen, at the right hand,
upon one of the Pillars: which Image, the Copties say, spoke to S. Ephrem, one
of their Patriarchs, to comfort him in his affliction, when Meez le din alla,
the Califf, commanded him to transport Mount Gebel il mocattam, which now
stands behind the Castle of Cairo, from one place to another, to prove the
truth of his Religion; because our Savior Christ says in the Gospel, If you
had faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, you should say to this Mountain, remove
thence to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible
unto you. He threatened him therefore that if he did not remove it, that he
would destroy all his Nation, as a People that professed a false Religion, and
that deserved not to live amongst them that were Believers. Because this Image
spoke then to their Patriarch, to comfort him and assure him that he should
remove the Mountain in spite of the Jews, who had angered this Califf against
them, they highly respect it.

Next to Maallaca, I went to visit Sancta Barba; where, as my leader told me,
the Body of this Saint rests at the left hand of the Chapel. This Church is
great and very light, and therefore seems to me to be the most pleasant of all
the rest. There be also three Chapels in a rank.

I saw next the Church of Saint Sergius, which was built, as Said ibn Patrik
says in his History, by a Coptie, a Secretary to Abd ilaziz ibn Meruan, a
Califf of Egypt.

Under this Church is to be seen a Cave, in which, as the Copties hold by
Tradition, Christ with his most blessed Mother have lived a while. It is
divided into three Angles, or Parts, by little Pillars. In the first, at the
entrance, is the Baptismal Font of the Copties: At the bottom of the middle
separation is a place in the Wall, and in this place a Stone, which, as the
Copties believe, has been sanctified with the steps of our blessed Savior.
The religious Francs sometimes say Mass here. In the third separation is
another Stone sanctified also by our Savior's footsteps.

In the Cave, I remember not well in which separation, is to be seen the
Epitaph of a Gentleman of Europe, buried there about two hundred and seventy
five years ago, in Gothic Letters; but the Stone is placed upside-down,
through the ignorance of the Mason, as I believe; this is the Epitaph. Hic
jacet Nobilis Petrus Louys IX. Neapollonies, qui obiit M.CCCC.II. die. XI.
Februarii.

Next to this Church, I visited that of our blessed Lady, in the Street called
Darb ittaka. It is very small, and very obscure. Out of this Church I saw a
little round Stone of black Marble, lying upon the ground; about it were graven
small Hieroglyphick Letters.

At a little distance from this Church, through an Alley, is to be seen the
remains of a Persian Temple, called in Arab. Kobbet il fors, or the Temple of
the Persians, which Artaxerxes Ochus, King of Persia, caused to be built in
honor of the Fire; and though the Ruins are but small, they discover yet that
this Temple was heretofore very stately. In the inside, about the Walls, are to
be seen several standings, or holes, as high as a Man, in which it is probable
they placed their Idols.

I saw next the Church of Mary Girges, or of S. George, which is in the same
Street called Darb ittaka, or the Street of the Window. It is very ancient, and
of a mean beauty. At the entrance, on the right hand, is to be seen the Body of
Amba Bissura, Bishop and Martyr, with his Epitaph in Arabic, which I could not
place here, because the Printer had not the Characters.

Next to this Church I went to see the Monasteries of the Nuns, amongst the
Copties, called Der il benat, or the Monastery of the Maids, which was built,
as they say, by a King called Alexander; but it is a place so filthy and
stinking, that I could not stay there any time.

The last Church that I saw in this Castle, was that of the Monastery of S.
George, of the religious Greeks. In this Church is to be seen an Image of this
Saint, that, as they say, has the Power to heal and cure Fools. This Monastery
also is very ugly, and filthy.

Churches, and Monasteries, in the Patriarch's Quarters.
IN the Quarters of the Patriarch, named in Arab. Haret il Batrak, a Suburb of
it self, on this side of Cassr Isscemma, is the Church of Mary Moncure. It is
very great, high, and built with very strong Walls. In this Church the
Patriarch of the Copties is chosen and consecrated.

It has been ruinated by the Mahometans, and turned into a Storehouse of
Sugarcanes. It continued so to the days of the Patriarch Ephrem, who, in the
Reign of Meez le din alla, having transported the Mountain called Gebel il
mocattam, which now stands behind the Castle of Cairo, to prove the truth of
his Religion, and that of the Turks and Jews to be false, got an Order from him
to the Court of Beit il mal, or Treasure of the Goods of the deceased; that out
of this Treasure this Church should be rebuilt with all the Apartments that
are round about, and all the little Churches that are above it: Which was
accordingly performed, as may be seen in the History of the Patriarch's of
Macrizi.

Mekkin, an Arabian Historian, confirms this Relation; and ascribes this
Miracle to this Saint, as he says in his History.

Vadeh ibn Regia, a Noble Man amongst the Mahometans, who turned Christian; a
little while after being very thirsty at Mecha, he prayed to this Saint that he
might be carried into this Church, because at that time the River Nilus running
close by, he might there quench his violent thirst. This Saint carried him
immediately into this Church in one Night, a way that the Caravan cannot
perform in less than eight and thirty, or forty days.

At the entrance into this Church, on the left hand, is the Cave where dwelt
heretofore Amba Bersum il Erian, or Saint Bersum the naked; which was before
the abode of a Serpent that did much hurt to the Inhabitants round about. In
the Walls are to be seen the holes where he hid himself, but as soon as the
Saint was entered in to do Penance, the Serpent cast it self at his feet, to do
him homage, and afterward it never hurt any body. In this Cave is a little
Altar to say Mass.

A little above this same Church there is four or five small Churches which I
had liberty to see the night of the Festival of the Epiphany of the Copties, in
the Year 1673. I staid there to see the Ceremony they observe, in dipping
themselves in the Water, in remembrance of Christ's Baptism. The Reader may, in
the sequel of this Journal, see this described in the Month of January, 1673.

Near this Church, is that of Amba Scinude, or of Saint Sennodius; but the
Turks have shut it, to draw from the Copties a sum of Money, therefore I could
not see it.

When I was out of the Patriarch's Quarters, I went straight to Cairo to see
the other Churches and Monasteries that are thereabout: when I was come as far
as the Bridge called Kantaret iggibs, or the Plastered Bridge, I turned to my
right hand, and when I was past the heaps of Ruins and Rubbish that are there,
I came to the Monastery of Mary Mina, or S. Menna, which is an Hospital rather,
for poor old Men, than a Monastery.

Within the Walls of this Monastery are three Churches; one belongs to the
Copties, the other to the Armenians, and the third to the Syrians; but it is a
filthy place, and the Churches arc but dark.

A Journey to the City of Fium.
THE Province of Fium has been always esteemed one of the most excellent of
al^ Egypt, because of its fruitful Fields, of its great Riches, of its pleasant
Gardens, which are the rarest of all this Kingdom; and because of many
wonderful things that are there, I had so great a desire to travel in it, that
I thought I had seen nothing, if I did not see this Country also.

And because Egypt is such a Country that one cannot travel in it all the year,
and in every season, for sometimes you are hindered by the excessive heats that
burn and scorch your bodies, sometimes by the overflowing of Nilus that bury
all the Fields under water, and sometimes because the Arabians are scattered
about the ways; and when these inconveniences don't hinder, the Casciefs or
Governors sometimes are wont to fright Travelers, for commonly they be little
Tyrants, who live by extortion and oppression of the persons that have the
unhappiness to fall into their hands: Therefore to accomplish this Journey with
more safety, I waited for the Vintage of Fium, for then the ways are full of
persons that carry Grapes to Cairo, and then the Arabians retreat into the
Deserts, and there is nothing to be feared.

In this season I undertook this Journey that I had long designed; I went from
Cairo Monday the 21. of July.

And that I might not fall into the same danger as at Tarane, I took with me a
Janizary, to whom I gave 15 Piasters every Month; and I took my Blackmoor,
named Abul Kerun, whose courage I had experienced before; for them and my self,
I hired three Mules that were going back to that City; we went from Cairo the
prefixed day before Noon.

At our arrival at the Monastery of Aduvie, which is about an hours traveling
from Old Cairo, situate upon the East Side of Nilus, we past to the other side
of the River, and from thence we marched to Mocanan, a very good Town, a place
where dwells an Arabian Prince, very famous, called Ibn Chabir; at night we got
as far as Kahue Barnascht, a Coffee-house built at the entry in of the
Wilderness through which one goes to Fium.

After that we had rested our selves a little, we proceeded on in our journey
before the Sunset, marching through the Wilderness with many others in our
Company, who had overtaken as whiles we stayed.

We spent nine hours in going through this Desert, going all night through a
Campane very equal, full of Sand, and houndless, and in the morning before the
Sunrising we arrived at Tamieh, a very great and considerable Town, belonging
to the Cascieflik of Fium, situate at the end of the Wilderness, about five
hours journeying from Fium for a Horseman.

When we had rested here a while, and drunk some Coffee, according to the
custom of the Country, we marched on in our way, and entered into Fium about
Noon.

At my first arrival, I lodged in a public Inn called Ocalet Beida, situate
near the Market, and almost ruinated, till I could meet with a better and more
convenient abode. About ten days after I changed my dwelling, because I was too
much in the eye of the Turks, and caused them to be too jealous of me, which a
Franc ought to be careful of, that he may not be censured and affronted by
them. I took a lodging near the Christians dwellings, at a Turks house, called
Tatar Sciaban, who was a very honest man, notwithstanding his Religion.

As soon as the Turks see a Franc in a Village or Country, chiefly where they
never saw him before, they imagine immediately that he is laden with Diamonds
and Pearls. They take therefore notice of all his steps, to find out some
occasion to quarrel with him; and of all places of Turkey, this happens most
frequently in Egypt.

As soon as I was in the Town, the report spread about, that a rich Franc with
a great Train was come. The Cadi thinking therefore that he had a person from
whom he might draw a sum of Money, because he believed that I was a Merchant
come thither to buy Wines in the Vintagetime to carry them to Cairo, which
Commodity is forbidden in all the Territories of the Grand Seignior, he desired
the Naib Gaibe, or Soubachi of the place, to endeavor to find out my designs,
and to let him understand them; for he promised to give him half the money that
he should get out of me, if I did buy any Wines.

For this purpose the Naib Gaibe, or Soubachi, a Renegade Fleming, who spoke
well his Mothertongue, came to my lodging with two Ruffians, and entered into
my Chamber whiles I was taking out my Clothes, and without saluting any body,
sat down in a Corner, which is the place that belongs to the Master of the
house in the East-Countries: The Ruffians stood at the door, leaning upon their
Staves. I was mightily surpised to see such a person come to visit me. I
called to my Janizary to know what he would have; he answered, that he
understood that I was a Franc, and that he was come to know whether I would buy
any Wine, because he would recommend me to that which was very good. I replied,
that if he had no other business, he might spare himself the trouble and pains
that he took, that I was never a Merchant of Wines, and would not now begin;
and that we Francs care not much for the poor Wines of his Country. To this he
held his peace.

He inquired what Countryman I was; when I had told him that I was of the City
of Erford in Germany, he seemed to rejoice, because he had found one in such a
far Country whom he might name his Countryman, for he said he was of Amsterdam.
He promised me his friendship; we eat afterward together, and I caused him to
drink Wine as much as he would, which was very pleasing to him: when the liquor
had a little cheered his spirits, he discovered to me the design of the Cadi,
and the cause of his Visit; by this means he became one of my best Friends in
Egypt, and my safety whiles I continued in that Town, without whom I should not
have escaped the Train that was laid for me.

After a little rest in my lodging, I sought some means to strike acquaintance
with the Bishop of the place, called Amba Michel, who had a very good repute of
an honest and a learned man, because I was desirous to have some body to
converse with, and to spend my time with some advantage to my self; I obtained
this with ease, for he came a few days after and lodged at my house: I am much
beholding to him for many things that he has told me concerning their Belief
and Ceremonies, which I have inserted in my Church of Alexandria.

Let us now see the description of the Town and Territory of Fium.

The Town of Fium, the chief of the Province whereof it bears the name, is
large and full of people: It is built upon the Ruins of the old Arsinoe, which
is near adjoining on the West Side. Though the most part of the houses are but
little, and made of Bricks dried in the Sun, they are nevertheless commodious,
and some, where the Officers and Commanders dwell, are large and beautiful.
There be many Copties Christians, and a Bishop, but no Church within the Walls;
they perform their Devotions at Desie, a Village near by.

An artificial Channel cut from the River passes through this City, from East
to West: They name it Bahr Jusef, or the River of Joseph, for they believe that
Joseph, Jacobs Son, caused it to be made. It Is called also Calitz il Menhi, or
the Channel of Menhi. This Channel is remarkable, because it keeps fresh water
all the year, which proceeds from several Fountains there, but it is too
shallow to carry Boats but when the River overflows. It begins about three days
journey from Fium, drawing toward the South, near a Village named Tarut
Isscerif, where I have been. It runs, when it has left the Town, into the Lake
named Birket il Kern, or the Lake of Charon, where the waters become salt.

In this Town are to be seen many Relics of Antiquity, as Capitals, Antic
Works, Pillars of Marble broken. In the Corn-market is to be seen a great
Pillar, entire laid upon the ground, and a great Millstone, both of a red
stone; and almost in all houses is to be seen something very remarkable for its
antiquity.

Here is made much Linen for the house, and Canvas to pack up the Commodities
of the Country: They have a great deal of Flax, which yields a great benefit;
strak'd Linen is plentiful here, and very good, with which the Countrypeople
cloth themselves. The Leather of this Country is much esteemed, but chiefly
the Blankets that are made here are the finest of the Levant, and are carried
all over the world. Here are also made Sacks of Network of Cord, to carry upon
Camels Straw, or dried Dung to burn, or Stones, or some such thing, for they
never use Carts.

This Territory is very fruitful and pleasant, and all that grows here is of a
better taste than in the other Provinces. Here are Fields full of Rose-trees,
and Woods of Fig Trees, which are not in other parts of Egypt. The Gardens are
full of all manner of Trees, bearing Fruit; as Pear Trees, Orange Trees,
Lemon-tree, Peach-trees, Plumb-trees, Apricock-trees, and many others that are
sent to be sold at Cairo, which yields them a great profit.

In Fium only, of all the Provinces of Egypt, are Vineyards; and in these
Villages only, in Fidimin where I have been, in Nacalife, Seliin, Abukesa,
Agiamiin, Gerrado, and Tobhar.

They make Wine thus: They press the Grapes either with their Feet, or other
wise, into a great Earthen Vessel; they put afterward the new Wine into a Sack
of course Linen, and strain it into another Vessel; from thence they draw it,
and secure it in Jars well pitched within, which contain about twelve thousand
Drams. Now these Jars they place in the Sun during seven days, leaving them
open, that the new Wine might purge it self; they stop them afterward with
Palm-leaves, and cover them close with Mud. They leave their Wine in this
manner, till they intend to drink it.

This Wine is not much esteemed of by the Francs, because there remains so much
dregs that come out into the Cup with the Wine; but if they had but the art of
clearing and clarifying the Wine, it would be doubtless a very pleasant Wine,
for the Grapes are very sweet, and pleasing to the taste.

I have not seen a Province in Egypt that is so much cut into Channels as this:
They all proceed from Joseph's River, and they are made to water the Fields with
more ease; and because this great number of Ditches would hinder men from
traveling up and down, were it not for the Bridges, here be more than in any
other part of Egypt. They are all made with burnt Bricks, and very strong: The
Tradition says, that they were builded in the days of the Pharaoh's; and it is
the opinion of the Copties, that these Kings employed the Israelites in making
Bricks for these Bridges, which is very probable; for it is certain, that
almost an infinite number of men are needful to make such a prodigious quantity
of Bricks.

This Province of Fium anciently had three hundred threescore and five Towns
and Villages, but now there be but threescore and two; all the other have been
swallowed up in the Lake Kern, or destroyed by the tyranny of the Governors.

The Cascief dwells in the Town: He pays now to the Pacha five and twenty
Purses, and five to his Kehaja, or Lieutenant, and to his Agas. He pays for his
Province two hundred purses in four payments. The Divan of Cairo allows him
three Cornets of Horse, or Spahins, to keep his Country, unto whom he pays
every six Months five and twenty Piasters, which is but a small allowance; so
that they are but poorly clad, and appear as so many Beggars, rather than as
the Soldiers of so great an Emperor.

The ancient Town of Arsinoe, situated near Fium, on the North-East-side, is
now totally ruinated: There remains nothing of it now, but a great many
Mountains very high raised, with the ruins and rubbish of the Town. They show
sufficiently, that it was one of the greatest and most glorious Cities of
Egypt. The people of the Country call it, Medinet Fares, or the Town of the
Persian; but I could never understand the cause of this name.

They say that it was destroyed and burnt by Cats, which the Enemies set into
it when they had tied Firebrarnds at their Tails, which scattered the fire into
every corner of the City, and burnt it to ashes.

The Copties call it in their Books Arsinoe, and Pliny calls all that Province,
the Government of Arsinoe.

On the 24th of this Month I went to Fidintin, a Village distant from Fium
about two hours riding, toward the West, to visit the Bishop, who was gone
thither out of the Casciefs sight. I was clothed in a Turkish habit, with a
Janizary and a Negre well armed, upon good Horses. Our coming put the poor
Bishop into such a fright, that he thought himself already killed, when he
heard that three strange Horsemen asked for him. He thought at first that we
were some sent by the Cascief to do him an injury. These poor people are become
wonderful timorous, through the continual tyranny of those Barbarians, so that
at the least motion they tremble and shake. He was pretty well satisfied, when
I told him that I was a Franc come purposely to crave acquaintance with him: He
entertained us in a very poor dwelling, invited us into his Parlour, and
treated us with very good Wine of the Country. When we had spent some hours in
conversation with him, we went to see the Vines of that Quarter, and in the
Evening we returned home to the City.

The 29th of the same Month I went to Bijamuh, a Village about half a League
from Fium, toward the North, to see an ancient thing, the Body of a great
Statue of a Giant, of a red Stone, without Head or Arms, standing upon a Basis.
This Statue is behind the Village, in a great broad Road.

I could never learn what it is, because the Country People have no Tradition
of it; and in the Histories of Egypt there is no mention made of it. I have
only learnt that the people of the Country call it the Statue of Pharaoh; which
I think not to be true, because it is the custom of the Egyptians to entitle
all things of an extraordinary bigness with the name of Pharaoh, from a conceit
they have that they were all Giants.

The Basis of this Statue is square, of hewn stones that are very great, every
stone has two foot and a half in breadth, and almost ten foot in length; the
forefront has five Perches in length, that is about thirty foot.

Near this Basis five others stand in a Demicircle, but less, and without any
Statue upon them.

The Bishop informed me, that heretofore in this Village was an Agiasma, or
Fountain of holy Water, called by the Arab. Ein il Mandura; and that every
Holy-Thursday a great many Christians were wont to meet there to drink of this
Water out of devotion, but that the people of the place, who are all
Mahometans, have stopped it up, to prevent the continuance of this Superstition.

When we had well seen these things, we returned to the Town, and in our way we
went over the Ruins of the ancient Arsinoe, where I saw nothing remarkable,
but some old Walls which my Guide told me were the remains of a Bath.

When we were come near the Town, we left it on the left hand, and went to see
the Needle of Bibig, whereof this is the description.

This Needle is placed on the ground, without any Basis, in the middle of a
Corn-field, in a place where is no house, nor mark of any that has been there.

It is distant from Fium about a long half league, near a Village called Bibig,
from whence it borrows the name. This Village is situated on the South-west of
Fium, and belongs unto it.

It is built in a long square, very high; its largest sides have six foot, and
the narrowest are of four. This Needle abuts not into a sharp point, as others
in Egypt and Italy, but the top is made like an Asses back: On the South Side,
which is one of the largest, there are three ranks of Images, that represent
Men and Women holding one another by the hand: under these three ranks begin
fourteen ranks of Hieroglyphick Characters, about the bigness of a finger,
which are to be read from the top to the bottom; every rank is divided from the
other, which is near, with a line that is drawn between, all along the Needle:
So that without doubt this Needle is the most curious that may be seen. In
every one of the lesser sides is but one rank of lesser Characters, which yet
continue very clear and beautiful.

There is one thing to be lamented at, that time has almost blotted out the
Figures, from the middle of the Pillar to the bottom; and that the Stones have
not been able to defend themselves from corruption, being much worn out: It is
of a red Stone, as all others.

Its top is like an Asses back, and very large, sit for the Vultures and Hawks
to pitch upon it at night: These Birds have so whitened it with their dung,
that the uppermost Figures are scarce to be discerned.

I have taken notice, that all the Needles that I have seen in Egypt, stand not
upon any Basis, but upon the ground, which makes me believe that the invention
of planting them upon a Basis, is not derived from the Egyptians, but from the
Romans, who having taken notice that this kind of Pillar was very useful, and
contained great Mysteries in their Characters, they have raised them upon a
Basis, to render them more remarkable and considerable to the curious. We
returned to the Town about Noon.

A little Journey to Sennuris.
Sunday the 31. of July I went to Sennuris, a Village belonging to the
Cascieflik of Fium, situate on the North of this Town, and about four hours
traveling on Horseback, to see the remains of Antiquity that are there, and
thereabouts; besides my Servants, some other Copties Christians went with me.

When I had a little rested my self at Sennuris, in the house of Sciech il
Beled, the Chief of the Village, a Moor, where my friends obliged me to take my
lodging, I went to take notice of the Village, which is great, and very
beautiful; and at the same time I saw the Church of the Copties dedicated to
the Archangel S. Michael, but it is very mean.

Nevertheless, I took notice there of one thing very remarkable, namely, a
square stone, where are three little Figures cut the first represents the
Archangel S. Michael, the middle represents the Virgin Mary, who holds in her
Arms her Son, and the third the Angel Raphael. The names of every one is
written underneath in Greek Letters, in the Copties Language. This stone is a
foot and a half long from side to side: The Priests informed me, that this
Stone was heretofore in the Chancel, but when they saw that the people rendered
homage to these Figures, they placed them in a corner of the Church, that they
might hinder them from Idolatry. They offered it to me for a Piaster and a
half, because I seemed to value it at a high rate; I would not take it, because
I had no intent to return so soon to Cairo, but to go further into Sayda.

At the West Side of the Village, about a Musket Shot from it, is to be seen a
very ancient Bridge of Bricks, made for a Passage for the River when it
overflows. The People of the Country say, that Joseph, Jacob's Son, caused it
to be built. It is apparent by its Ruins, that heretofore it was very great,
but now there remains no more but four Arches.

Round about this Village is sown a great deal of Flax, but it is not esteemed
so good as that which grows in other parts of Egypt.

At that time there was, as well as at, Fium, a want of fresh Water, because
the people of the Country usually cast into the River their Hemp, where they
take their Water to drink; this had so poisoned the Waters, that they did
stink, so that I was forced to cause some fresh Water to be brought from Fium,
which is about four hours distant from this Village.

In an evening I walked to see the Lake Kern, which is very near Sennuris, on
the West Side.

This Lake is narrow, but long, for I was told that it is about two days
traveling for a Horse, in length. This is doubtless the Lake Miris mentioned
by Pliny, when he says, Inter Arsinoiten Prafecturam, ac Memphiten Lacus fuit,
circuitu CCL.M. passuum, aut ut Mutianus tradit, CCCCL.M. and latitudinis L.
passuum, manu factus a Rege qui fecerat Moeridis appellatus: For there is no
other Lake between Fium, which is Arsinoe, and the City of Memphis, or the
place where it stood.

At its Eastern end is placed the Village Tamich, mentioned before; and in its
West end is the famous Castle of Vizir Caron, of which I shall speak hereafter.

This Lake receives all the Waters that run from the Fields when Nilus is
overflown, and from the River of Joseph* they become salt because the Earth is
full of Niter.

Here is much Fish, chiefly a Fish called is Arab. Houd, which I have described
in the Chapter concerning the Fish of Nilus.

On the other side of the Lake are Deserts of Sand very large; I have heard
from Persons worthy to be believed, that there are to be seen many remarkable
Ruins of ancient Towns, particularly of Temeh issebag, or of Temeh of Lieus; a
Town so named because of the Statues of Lieus that were there to be seen.

Here is also to be seen the Ruins of an ancient Monastery named Deir Abulife,
or the Monastery of Abulife.

They told me, that they had seen the Labyrinth which is at the end of the Lake
Westerly, mentioned by Pliny, when he says, There was a Labyrinth in the Lake
of Moeridis, built without any Wood. This Labyrinth is named now by the
Egyptians, Cassr Carun, or the Castle of Vizir Caron; a famous Lord in the
Histories of the Arabians, because of his Treasures which are said to be here
buried, and kept by dreadful Talismans. They tell me, that this Castle has
three hundred and threescore and five Chambers, so entangled one into another
that a man cannot get out, if when he comes in he does not take notice of the
way.

This Report gave me a great desire to venture to see all these Wonders at any
rate: I had already agreed with the Chieftain of the Village, to have from him
a Guard of twelve Men, whom he knew to be faithful and trusty; but my
Janissary, a timorous Fellow, spoiled my design, by showing me the danger there
was of the Arabians; he threatened likewise the Guard, to tell the Cascief,
which would have created me some trouble.

I conceive that this Relation may beget a desire in some Traveller to go and
see this Curiosity, therefore I will give him a little advice which shall help
him to accomplish his design.

He must know, that he ought not to go to the Labyrinth from Sennuris, or to
the other side of the Lake, but to Senhur, a Village distant from Sennuris
about an hours traveling; for there the Fishermen of the Lake Caron dwell,
who are best able to carry Men thither: But it is very needful that a Franc,
who will undertake this Voyage, be well learned in the Arabian Tongue, that he
be well clothed according to the Mode of the Country, that he may not be
known, and chiefly let him dissemble his design as much as he can; for if he
fails in any of these particulars, he will doubtless be lost. The Moors, who
are very jealous of the Treasures that are said to be there, will knock him on
the head, that he may not carry them away.

I staid three days at Sennuris, for the place did please me, and the
Inhabitants were very civil. I returned to Fium, second day of August, very
much displeased with my Janissary, because he had crossed my design.

On the second day of this Month the Water of Nilus enters into the Channel of
Joseph, which passes through Fium, as we have said. Then its Waters are
purified, and purged from its stinking qualities which the Flax and Hemp give
it: Then the Cisterns of the Town are filled with Water, which the Inhabitants
drink all the year long, therefore this inundation makes all the people of the
Country round about to rejoice.

A Walk to the Pyramide of Havara.
BEtween the Towns of Fium and Benesuef, which are distant the one from the
other about a little days Journey, there be two great Pyramides; the one is
near Fium, the other nearer to Benesuef. The first is named Haram Havara, the
Pyramide of Havara: The other Haram Ilahun, the Pyramide of Ilahun.

Thursday, the 4th of August, I went to that of Havara, so called from the
neighboring Village Havara. It Stands about an hour and a halfs walking from
Fium, on the South side, situated in a sandy Wilderness, like that which is
over against Cairo, where the Pyramides stand: when we were gone beyond a
certain Bridge of Brick, very old, which is upon the Highway of Benesuef, we
left it, to take a shorter course; but we found cause to repent it, because the
way was craggy and full of Sand.

We were obliged also to go through the Bahr Belame, or the River without
Water, which caused us to endure much trouble and fear, in regard of the depth
that was extraordinary, and our being forced to climb up again. And when we had
overcome all these difficulties, and were near the Pyramide, about six hundred
Paces from it we met with a Ditch of the River of Joseph, full of Water; we
could not get over it, but were forced to stay on that side, and from thence
take a vi^w, at a distance, of the Pyramide, to my great displeasure. I took
notice, that in its elevation and breadth, it was much like the second Pyramide
which is at Gize, but the length of time has almost reduced it to Dust, so
that it appears like a sharp Mountain of Sand, rather than a Pyramide.

The Desert where it stands, is like that of the Mommies which is near Saccara.
Some Wells of Mommies are here to be found, whereof the entry is filled up with
Sand, and some are half empty. Upon the ground are scattered, here and there,
Bones of Mommies, broken Wood, and pieces of Coffins; so that one may say that
it is altogether like that of Saccara.

But because we were without any Guide, and my Janissary was a very Coward,
having none but him with me, he alarmed me several times with the fear of the
Arabians, besides, our Beasts were tired with the deep way; I was therefore
constrained to set bounds to my Curiosity, and to return to the Town, passing
through the River without Water, near its Mouth, leaving on our left hand, near
the Pyramide of Havara, the Ruins of an ancient Town, whereof I could never
understand the name; and a little further, on the same side, the Village of
Havara, from whence this Pyramide borrows the name, and at a little distance
from this Village, a very ancient Bridge, and very high, which is made to give
a passage to the River Nilus when it overflows: We returned to Fium again about
Noon.

For the other Pyramide, called of Ilahun; the Arabian Historians say, that
Joseph, Jacob's Son, caused into be built. It is so named from the Village
Ilahuis, near adjoining, belonging to the Cascieflik of Benesuef; but because I
could not look upon it, but at a distance, I cannot well describe it. The
Reader may see what Macrizi faith of it.

A Walk to the Monastery Casciabe.
ON the 19th of August I went to the Monastery of Casciabe, distant from Fium
about two hours walking, or thereabouts, drawing toward the South-East in the
Wilderness, called by the Arabians, Gebel Naklon, or the Mountain of Naklon.

In our way to this Monastery we went over several Bridges of Brick, very
strong, made by the ancient Egyptians: And we left at our right hand at the
entry of the Wilderness, which is about half way, the Monastery of Deir il
azeb; and a little further, at our left hand, the Ruins of an ancient Town
overthrown, of which I could never learn the name.

The Monastery of Casciabe is very ancient; it is almost totally ruinated,
unless it be the Church dedicated to the Archangel Gabriel, which is very
beautiful, and painted in the inside with the Passages of holy Writ. The top of
this Church is supported by Pillars that stand at a distance, and of diverse
Stones. Under this Church is another that I could not see, because the
Provisions of the Monastery were there shut up.

This Church was built by one named Vr, the Son of Ibrascit, a very famous
Magician; who, as the Arabian Histories relate, had this Child by a Daughter of
an Eastern King. When at last this Vr had left the Art of Magic which his
Father had taught him, he addicted himself to Virtue, so that afterward he
became Bishop of Fium, and built this Church, and Tradition says, that the
Virgin Mary laid the Foundation-stone of the Church, and of the Altar, and the
Archangel S. Michael marked out the Quire, and the rest of the Church.

Many remarkable things happened whiles this Church was building; I mention
them not for brevity sake, they that will understand them, may read the Arabian
Manuscript mentioned before, and now in the Kings Library.

On the top of the Mountain, behind this Monastery, on the South Side, are yet
to be seen the ruins of an ancient Town, which the Copties say was inhabited
by the Patriarch Jacob, and for this cause they name it yet Modsellet Jacub, or
the Tabernacle of Jacob.

A little higher, upon the same sandy Mountain, are to be seen many Caves where
the Hermits anciently lived; I went into some of them out of curiosity, they
are very little, and there is in them nothing extraordinary: when I had taken a
view of all that was remarkable, I returned to Fium in the Evening.

The Country had been some days dround about Fium, which obliged the Commanders
of the Militia, and the Cascief, to retreat to Cairo. And because the Robbers
are very formidable at this time, and commit many disorders, I was obliged to
return also to Cairo. I went from Fium the 16th of August in the morning, and
returned the same way that I came, and the next day I was at Cairo in the
Evening, after five and twenty days abode at Fium.

At my return to Cairo, I began my Church of Alexandria; a very curious work,
and very useful to the world, and chiefly to the Learned that desire to
understand how the Churches of the East agree with the Roman. It contains all
the Ceremonies and Doctrines of the Ancient and Venerable Church of the
Copties, which is that of Alexandria. I have taken them out of two Manuscripts
in Arab. very ancient and rare, unknown to us in Europe before now; the one is
called il Mosbah iddolme d' Abulbaracat, and the other, il Giauharet innefisse
fielm il Kenise. I have been very exact and diligent in composing this Book,
that it might render my name immortal. I shall endeavor to give it to the
Press as soon as I shall be returned to Rome, where I make my ordinary abode.

The second of September, which was the third Friday after the opening of the
Calitz, a skilful Swimmer caused himself to be admired of all the City, by a
very bold action; he had his arms tied behind his back, his feet tied at an
Iron Chain, which weighed ten pounds: In this manner he ventured to swim upon
his back, from the mouth of the Calitz. to the end of the Town, which is about
three quarters of an hour walking a-foot.

This custom has been anciently used in Cairo: A skilful Swimmer performs this
every year, two Fridays following after that the Calitz is opened. The Pacha
gives him for his reward a thousand Meidins, which make three and thirty
Piasters.

The Guards of the Soubachi went before him in a Boat, to hinder him from
receiving any harm: about five and twenty other Boats full of Spectators
followed. He swum this year but once, because Ibrahim Pacha, who loved not such
useless expenses, commanded him away when he came to demand his ordinary wages;
therefore instead of a thousand Meidins, he gave him but one hundred.

There is another that swims in the same manner as this, from the beginning of
the Calitz to the end of the City. He had his feet tied with a Chain, a Dish of
Coffee in one hand, and a Pipe of Tobacco lighted in the other, at his mouth.
The Pacha usually gives him the same reward; but because the former had not had
his usual Salary, this last would not this year show his dexterity. I was told
that these Swimmers eat nothing for three days but Cich-Peasen, and that they
swallow their breath so long time, which causes their Bellies to swell, and
become light as an empty Bladder. I was told also, that sometimes they kill
themselves, or at least become very sick.

On the 12th of September the Pacha caused the Treasure of the Grand Seignior
to depart for Constantinople with its ordinary guard and pomp.

There were one and thirty Mules laden with Spanish Coin, and Zequins of
Venice. This Treasure amounts usually to one thousand two hundred Purses, and
each Purse to five hundred Crowns. The Sangiac-Bey that carries it is obliged
to expend all the Moneys needful for this Voyage, and it costs him usually one
hundred Purses, or fifty thousand Crowns. The Caravan begins to march in the
beginning of the Moon and arrives at Constantinople at the end of one hundred
days.

This Treasure is taken first out of the Carache, or Tribute of the Lands and
Villages which the Farmers Rent of the Divan; for all the Lands of Egypt,
unless it be the Patrimony of the Mosques, and the Lands belonging to Micha,
are the Grand Seigniors, because he conquered Egypt with the Sword. 2. It is
taken out of the Douanes of Alexandria, of Rosetta, of Bouquir, of Damietta, of
Brullos, of Boulak, and of Ibrim. 3. Out of the Chordis. 4. It is taken out of
the Lakes and Pits of Nitre, which are in the Desert of S. Macarius, and out of
the Salt Pits near Alexandria. 5. From the Shambles of Cairo, whereof I have
already spoken. 6. From the Custom-house or Douane of the Bohars, or Spices;
and generally from all Merchandises imported from Mecha, Mocoa, and the Indies.
7 From the Mint. 8. From the Giavali, or Tribute which the Christians of the
Levant, and the Jems are obliged to pay for their Heads. 9. From the Treasure
called Beit il mal, which comprehends all the deceased goods. 10. From the
Office of Surveyor of the Provisions.

The same day I saw the Mosque of Califfe Hakem be amr ille: It stands out of
Cairo upon the Mountain called Gebel il mocattam; but now there appears nothing
but the Walls.

The same Califfe had made near this Mosque a place to observe the course of
the Stars, named in Arab. Rassad ve Mofatek beta Hakem, which is now ruinated;
he made use of it to make his Talismans, as art in which he was very skilful.
The Egyptians say that he could go in and out into all the Caves under ground,
where he knew the Treasures of the ancient Kings and Lords of Egypt to be hid,
and that he could make use of them when he pleased; and that by the power of
Magic, and the extraordinary skill that he had in that Art.

According to the example of those great men, a little before his death he
buried his own Treasures, and put a Crocodile made by the Talismanical Art to
keep them.

In this Mountain, and near this Mosque, he caused several Caves to be dug
wide and large in the Rock, so as to pass from one into the other; in the
furthermost he cause a Pond to be made to keep water in, cut in the Rock; in it
is a Crocodile that begins to fly at one as soon as a man enters in. Moreover,
in the bottom of the water, is to be seen a door which leads to other Caves
under ground, where the Records of Egypt declare that his Treasures are hid. No
man can imagine from whence this water can come, for the Cave is upon a high
Mountain which is very dry always, and in this place is no Spring: And it is
not known what this Crocodile is, and how he may be nourished, during so many
ages. To take this Treasure, you must know how to undo this Talisman, that is,
one must take away the water, and the life of the Crocodile; for both are the
effects of Magic, which depend upon the Art of the Talismans.

I have been very diligent in Egypt, to seek for, and send to Paris, amongst
other rare Manuscripts, the ancientest and best Authors of the Arabians, which
might give some light and knowledge of this Noble Science. I may say that I
have emptied Egypt of such kind of Books, with an intent that if I was ever
admitted to the service of him who had given me this Commission, I might have
the time and the means to discover with ease the admirable secrets of this
Science, and to unfold the Enigms under which it lies hid; and by the same
means to discover of what consequence those Manuscripts are, though they are
despised by some that understand not neither their price nor use.

The Reader may peruse an Arabian Manuscript in Quarto, called, Eijun it
hekajek, ve eidah il terajek, of Meimun the Magician that teaches the means to
destroy all manner of Talismans. He may read another in Octavo, called, Kitab
gaiet il maareb, Fi menajeh ve il chabaia, ve il medaleb, that discovers the
places of all the Treasures of Egypt, their value, the Figure of the Talisman
that keeps them, and how to destroy them; I have sent them both to the Kings
Library.

On the 12th and 20th of September, I went to see the Great Aqueduct, called in
Arab. it Migro, that conveys water from the River into the Pacha's Castle.

This Aqueduct is near Nilus in old Cairo; the Mouth there stands a Castle of a
Hexagone Figure very high, supported by as many Arches very lofty. There is an
ascent through a large way, open toward Heaven, made sloping about, for the
convenience of the Oxen that draw water out of the River, and cause it to mount
up by seven Wheels as high as the Platform on the top of the Castle, where
there is a large Pond or Basin to receive the water, and about it seven great
holes like Wells, which have given the name to this Castle of the Seven Wells.
The water runs from this Basin into the Aqueduct, which appears, and from
thence it goes into the Caraffe, which is at a great distance, where it meets
with the Earth as high as the Aqueduct; and then it stops there, and runs next
into a Channel under ground to the Pachas Stable, from whence it runs into his
Cistern, and furnishes the Castle.

This Aqueduct is supported by three hundred and seventeen high Arches, and not
by three hundred and fifty, as a certain Traveller says, for I have exactly
numbered them my self: They are made as well as the Castle of great square
stones, cut as we do Diamonds: One of the Supporters on the chief side is about
eight foot nine inches broad, and under the Arch it is only eight foot. The
opening of one of the Arches is fourteen foot and a half broad.

The Copties say that Mekaukes, a famous man of their Nation, and Governor for
the Emperor Heraclius, made this Aqueduct, but they are mistaken; for when
this man governed in Egypt, the Castle of Cairo was not in being, for it was
built four hundred and forty four years after; and therefore this Aqueduct that
now supplies it with water was not then needful; besides, the Inscriptions in
the Arabic Tongue declare, that this is a work of the Mohammedan Kings; if I be
not mistaken, I have read that it was Sultan Gauri, the last King but one of
the Mammelukes, that caused it to be built.

The Pacha takes out of the Revenues of the Grand Seignior all that is needful
to keep up this Aqueduct; for that purpose be nourishes threescore Oxen, and
gives wages to five men and a Ciurbachi that look after it.

On the 13th of the Month of September, I went to visit the Patriarch of the
Copties, one of my best Friends; and because I had often entreated him to come
and dine with me, I reiterated the same entreaty now again; but he answered me,
that he had not been out of his house a year before for fear of the Turks: He
complained, that all the Patriarchs of the other Sects had the liberty to go
about the Town, without fear of being disturbed by any, to visit whom they
pleased, and to travel whither they listed; but he was so narrowly observed by
the Turks, that he could not so much as go out of his house, nor talk with any
of other Nations openly, much less travel into any other place, but he must
give them a jealousy of plotting against the State; by this means his life
would be in danger.

I must needs confess, that there is no Nation in Egypt so much afflicted as
are the Copties, because they have no body amongst them who deserves to be
honored for his Knowledge, or feared for his Power and Authority* for all that
were rich and wealthy, are destroyed by the cruelty of the Mahometans:
therefore the rest are now looked upon as the Scum of the World, and worse than
the Jews. The Turks abuse them at their pleasure; they shut up their Churches,
and the doors of their Houses when they please, upon light occasions,
altogether unjust, to draw from them some sums of Money.

There was such a tyrannical Action practiced upon them in this Month of
September; for certain Janissaries cut the Throat of a Whore, and cast her Body
into the Lake Ezbekie. Upon that the Soubachi nailed up the Doors of all the
Houses of the Copties round about, and caused them wrongfully to lay down the
Sum of two thousand Piasters for this blood spilt, before they could have their
Houses opened again, and freedom for their lives.

They endured another Cruelty in the same Year; for Pacha Ibrahim increased
their ordinary Tax in this manner.

Till this Year they were not all obliged to pay the same Sum of Money. They
were not all bound to pay it into the Treasury of the Grand Seignior; for some
were bound to pay it to certain Mosques, othere to Sciech il Becri, who is a
great Lord, and comes from Abn Becr, Califf, or Successor of Mahomet; and
others to other Lords, called in Arab. Sadats. They that paid to the Mosques,
or Lords, were called Lay-Tributaries: And they that paid to the Treasure of
the Grand Seignior were called Tributaries of the Grand Seignior. The first
sort of Tribute is very moderate, because it seldom amounted to above two
Piasters; but the last has always been, and is yet, one hundred and twenty
Para's, that is, four Piasters and a quarter. Besides this, the Villages and
Towns were taxed only in common: For Example, such a Village was taxed to pay
such a Sum, according to the number of the Christians that dwell there; and
when the Chouli, or the Collector, went to receive it, he taxed every one
according to his ability: The poor paid little, the rich more; so that this
Tribute was equal.

But in this Year 1672. Ibrahim Pacha taxed them all as Tributaries to the
Grand Seignior; and upon the same account causing them all to pay equally one
hundred and twenty Para's; out of which the Pacha paid that which was due to
the Lords and Mosques, and the rest was put into the Grand Seigniors Coffers.

This novelty has reduced the poor Copties to despair; therefore when the
Collectors come into any Village to gather the Tribute, they fly to the
Mountains, leaving all to secure themselves from violence, and affronts that
would be done to their Persons.

That the Receivers of the Tribute might know them that have paid it, they
leave a little Ticket of colored Paper, sealed with the Seal of their
Chieftain, where the name of the Christian is written, his Village, his
Province, his Dwelling, his Age, the Day, the Month, and the Year that he has
paid.

But they put not into this Ticket the whole Sum of one hundred and eight and
twenty Para's, which they require, but only one hundred and three, because
there is no more that goes into the Treasury of the Grand Seignior; the other
five and twenty Meidins are for the Farmer of the Caraffe, paid to him because
of the great expenses which he is at, to entertain a great many Men for the
discharge of his Office. The Christians carry always with them this Ticket, to
show it when they are questioned by the Men that belong to the Farmer, and this
is their Acquittance.

The 18th of September I bought, of an Arabian, a great Lizard, alive, called
in their Language, Varal. I caused it to be skinned, and sent the Skin to
Monsieur Arnoul, Superintendent of the Kings Galleys at Marseilles.

The body of this Lizard was altogether like that of the Crocodile, the Skin
excepted, which was gray and spotted, as that of a Serpent, and without any
Shells. It was three-foot long, and had five Fingers to each Foot, and long
white Nails, as have the Crocodiles. Its Tongue was forked as that of a
Serpent, the Headlong, and the Muzzle sharp. Its Teeth were strong, and
cutting; the Arabians told me, that its biting was venomous and deadly.

I have since recovered another of a differing sort, when I was in the
Monastery of S. Anthony. The Head of this was like that of a Tortell, and its
Tail very big, and lessening by degrees, and ending into a small point. It was
full of knots round about, as so many Shells. This Lizard was not venomous, for
I took it with my Hand, and when I had well considered it, I gave it to an
Arabian Dog that eat it.

A Voyage to the Monastery of S. Anthony the Great.
WHEN I had rested my self, a considerable while, at Cairo, after my return
from Fium, and the great heats were over; I re^olved to travel to the Monastery
of S. Anthony, ^o see in this venerable place the footsteps of ^he Father, and
Founder of all the Monks. For that ^urpose I left off writing my Church of
Alex^ndria, and I embarked my self the 26th of September, in the Afternoon, at
Old Cairo, in a Vessel laden, and bound for the upper Egypt. I landed at
Benesuef, a great Town, in the Cascieflick of Be^nese, about two days
traveling from Cairo.

I saw nothing remarkable in this way. The Villages, and Monasteries, before
which we passed, were the Convent or Deir il aduvie mentioned before, the
Convent of the Abbot Bersum il erian, or or S. Bersom the naked, situate in
the East of Nilus, where his body rests. The Village of Scieh il etmani,
situate on the West Side, and the little Monastery of S. Anthony at the
East Side of Nilus. Bousche, a great Village on the West, where the Monks of S.
Anthony have their Farm: at last, Benesuef, on the West Side of this River.

He that will travel to the Monastery of S. Anthony, ought first to land at
Benesuef, and enquire from the Christians of that place, whether the ways be
free or not. If they be free, he ought to go to Beiha, which is a Village
situate almost over against Benesuef, on the East Side of Nilus, in the
Cascieflik of Atfieh. There he ought to bargain with the Arabians that dwell
there, concerning the price, the number of the Camels, and Men that he desires
to lead with him: which when he has done, he ought to cause them to confirm
the Bargain before some of their Chieftains, by repeating over the Fatha, which
is the first Chapter of their Alcoran; for which the Mahometans have a great
veneration, and as much as the Christians have for their Pater, or Credo;
otherwise he must not expect that they will be faithful. But when they have
said the Prayer he may go with them confidently, at if h^ were with his own
Brethren: which sufficiently declares, that there is no people in the World,
never so barbarous and savage, but have a respect for their own Religion. And
if at any time any other cross interest has blinded them to commit any
perfideous Action, God has punished them at the same instant for it with
severity; so that they would have wished that they had kept their Faith, as the
Reader may understand by what follows.

Besides the Price that he is to give them, he ought to grant them some
quantity of Beans for their Camels, and give them some Meidins to buy Sandals,
for the ways are full of sharp stones: He ought to buy them some Meal, black
Biscuit, ordinary Honey, and Tobacco, as much as will be needful, to accomplish
the Voyage, and the number of the Men. He must not forget every Morning and
Evening to give a Dish of Coffee to every one; if he delivers it generously,
and freely, he may promise to himself a happy Voyage, and to be well tended.
The Arabians have the care to provide Vessels to grease, and fill them with the
River-water, for there is none to be found in the way; or if there be, it is so
noisome, and ill-tasted, that it is not drinkable.

There is two ways that lead from this Village Beiha, to this Monastery. The
first called, by the Arabians, il Tarik il Kihli; the upper way: and the other
il Tarik il bahri, the under way; in respect of this Village from whence they
set out.

The under way is the shortest, the most frequented, and that which the Caravan
takes, keeping upon the bank of the River for a while; and when one leaves it,
the way turns at the right hand into the Wilderness, to a place called Gibei.
There is the first Well which Nature has dug deep in a firm Rock, into
which the Rainwater runs; which Water is white as Milk, and sweeter than that
of Nilus.

About a days Journey farther is another, at the left hand of the Highway, at
the foot of a high Mountain, called Gebel il cheleil; but its Water is noisome
and green, and the We^^ is full of Canes. A little farther is another, very
well known to Travelers, because it is near the Dwelling of a famous Arabian
called Eid il beidavi; but the Caravan never goes thither but when they want
Water, because it stands from the Highway, at a distance: Therefore when they
are furnished with Water at the second Well, they pass at the left hand
straight to the Monastery.

The upper way leads from Beiha toward the South-East, and after a day and a
halfs traveling it goes to the East. In this way are neither Waters, nor
Trees, nor Houses, nor Grass; therefore it is needful to make good Provision of
Water at Beiha for the whole Journey.

Therefore, knowing this before, I took at Beiha a Camel purposely to carry
Water, and four others for me and my followers, the Abyssin, the Coptie, and
Idris my Blackamoor. Besides these, I took with me five Arabians, armed with
Lances, to go on foot, and take charge of the Camels; and to protect us, if
perchance any Robbers should have assaulted us; so that we were in all ten in
number, and five Camels. When we had got all that was needful for the Voyage,
we went from Beiha on Friday the 30th of September, about three a Clock in the
Afternoon.

Though the under way was the shortest, and the most frequented, yet we chose
the upper way, that we might not meet with the Arabians, the declared Enemies
of those that conducted us. When we had traveled four days through a boundless
Plain of Sand, which was not moveable, but hard, and full of sharp cutting
stones, that cut as so many Razors, we arrived at last, through a thousand
turnings, to the Monastery, the third day of October.

The Monastery of S. Anthony, which includes another, anciently peopled by the
Abyssins, and now totally ruinated, is in the Wilderness, now called in Arab.
Gebel Araba, or the Mountain of Carts; because heretofore Provisions were
carried thither upon Carts, and not upon Camels, as now.

It is built upon the decline of the Mount Colzim, at its Eastern end, which
reaches from East to South: It appears like a long Square; and the Front of the
Monastery, which stretches from North-East to North, looks against another
Mountain called Gebel il Cheleil, of which I shall speak hereafter.

It is encompassed in with an high Mountain, but feeble, and unable to make any
resistance; for it is old, and built with Bricks dried in the Sun. There is no
Gate to the Monastery, one enters in by a Pulley, Men and Beasts are all drawn
up over the Wall.

It has a large Circuit, about six hundred Fiddans, or two thousand four
hundred Acres within the Walls.

The Monks of the Levant dwell not together in the same Cells, as those of
Europe, but every one has a little House or Cell to himself, and these Cells
are more or less beautiful and convenient, according as the Country has
experienced the cruelty of the Turks. Therefore the Monasteries of the Levant,
and chiefly those of the Archipelago, are like so many great Towns or Castles,
because of their Walls, Turrets, and number of houses that are within; but the
Monasteries of Egypt have nothing of that splendor, because the Mahometans
have been here more cruel than in any other Country subject to them.
Nevertheless, this Monastery is like those of Greece, for it is surrounded with
Walls: In the middle is a Dungeon, and round about many Houses where the Monks
live; but in regard it has been destroyed long ago by the Arabians, it has
remained in that condition threescore and ten years: The Copties who have lost,
under the tyranny of the Mahometans, all their strength and power, could never
yet restore it to its former estate.

Therefore the Cells now are very little, and poor, of yellowish Earth, without
Timber, Plaster, Order, or Symmetry: they are so low, that a man may easily
reach up to the top with his hand: therefore the Monks cannot well stand
upright: there is a little light that enters in through holes in the wall,
about a foot long; the doors are so low, that one must stoop low to go in; that
which is most commodious, is that they have all flat roofs for the Monks to
take the air at night, when the Sun is gone, and to sleep when they please.

Their dining-place is very dirty, and obscure: There is for Strangers a place
of it self, large and decent, with two other Chambers hard by to put their
Goods and Clothes; and a little Kitchen.

The Gardens are very large, and great, and considerable, because of the Herbs
and Fruits that they bring forth. One might make of them the most pleasant
Gardens of the World, because of their convenient scituations, for they lie
shelving, with beautiful Plains.

There are two small Vines that yield a sort of White Wind, very delightful:
They use it in saying of Mass, and in treating Strangers of Quality that come
thither.

In this Monastery is a great quantity of fresh water, as clear as Crystal, but
very salt. It runs from the Mount Colzim, near by, in little streams, under the
Walls, into the Gardens, where they receive it in places made on purpose. They
drink it, and make other uses of it. It is not very wholesome, chiefly for
those that are not accustomed to it; for the Niter that infects it, causes
Bladders to rise under the Skin, and torments such as drink of it with itching,
as I have found by experience.

Here are three Churches, the chief is that of S. Anthony; it is little, but
very ancient; and as the Monks told me, it is the same that S. Anthony built,
and the only thing of the Monastery that has escaped the rage of the Arabians.
Within are Pictures of many Saints, painted in an antic and simple fashion:
The smoke of the Frankincense that is burnt there at Divine Service, has made
them appear as black as a Chimney.

Near this Church is another dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul, within a little
Tower, and one Bell, about a foot and a half in Diameter: serves to call the
Monks to the Service of God, and to their other employments. There is no other
Bell in all Egypt.

The third Church is in the Garden, dedicated to a Lay Monk, called Mark, who
died with a Reputation of Holiness; his body is kept there.

In the middle of the Monastery there is a square Tower, with stone Walls, very
strong; from the bottom of the Tower to the Gate, which is about three Perches
high, it is very firm: on the top is a Drawbridge that leads to this Gate; but
to come to it, one must climb up to the top of an house, over against it. In
this Tower the Monks keep all their Provisions, and their best Movables; and
they fly to it when the Roguish Arabians threaten them: They then draw the
Bridge, and beat them off with Stones from the Platform.

Their Rule obliges them to renounce Matrimony for ever, all carnal desires,
their Parents, to possess no Estate, to dwell in the Wilderness, to be clothed
with Wool, to be girt with a Leathern Girdle, to eat no Flesh, nor drink Wine
all their lifetime, unless they be reduced to the last necessity, to shorten
their dinner, and to deny themselves all the nourishments without which the
body is able to live. It commands them to employ all their time in fasting, and
prayer, and worship, to have always their mind running upon God, to apply
themselves to the reading of the Holy Scriptures, and to understand the Truths
that are there contained.

It obliges them to sleep upon a Mat, or the ground, their Superior excepted,
and such as are sick; not to take off their Clothes, and their Girdle, never to
sleep two upon the same Pillow, nor near one another. In short, their Rules
oblige them to repeat the Canonical Prayers, to prostrate themselves before
they go to Bed, one hundred and fifty times, with their Faces and Bellies to
the ground, to spread out their arms in a cross, with the fist shut, and at
every rising to make the Sign of the Cross; which Prostrations they call
Metanoe. Besides these one hundred and fifty Prostrations, they perform seven
at the Church; one before every Canonical Prayer, which make up in all one
hundred and fifty seven Prostrations; which together with the poor nourishment
that their bodies take, renders them very lean, and cast down; so that they
appear like so many Skelletons, rather than men.

Their Clothes are first a Shirt of white Wool, which they wear always upon
their skin. 2. A Wastcoat of brown Wool, very course, not open before. 3. A
Vest of black Serge, with two large Sleeves. 4. Their Capuchin is likewise of
black Serge, very little, and made fit to the Head. 5. Their Girdle is of
Leather, three singers broad. 6. The Mezerre, called by the Copties (...), and
sometimes Biggos, is a great Mantle of black Stuff, lined with white, like the
Cloaks of the Jesuits, only it is without Collar; unless it be when they
Travel, they seldom use it. The 7. is Askim, or the Angelick Habit, called in
Greek (...), which few of the Monks wear, because they have not strength
enough, as they say, to do the Penance that the Canons have appropriated to it;
for they that bear it, are obliged to prostrate their Face and Belly to the
ground, with their arms across, three hundred times every night before they
sleep, besides the fasting, and other mortifications thereunto annexed. I have
sent one of these Askims to the Kings Library, which Amba Michel, Bishop of
Fium, gave me as a token of his love.

They carry always a stick in their hands, made in the form of a Tan, T, upon
which they lean when they are at their prayers; for they perform them standing,
and are very tedious in them. They have all upon their heads a Bonnet, called
in Arab. Cauk, which is like that which the Mahometans wear; about which they
wrap a Turbant of a Stuff straked with blew and white, which is the color of
all the Copties in Egypt: They never wear any Stockings, nor their Patriarch.

The Fast-days they observe, by eating then but one Meal; but on the Saturdays
and Sundays they never fast, but eat twice. On the Fast-days they dine
constantly about three a Clock in the Afternoon; then they end Mass.

Their ordinary diet are Pulse and Herbs seasoned with the stinking Oil of
Hemp: For their Desserts they have Fruits, as Onyons, dried Dates, rotten
Olives, Melons, or Cucumbers, or Pompions, or such like Fruits as are in season.

They never eat Flesh in the Monastery; but when they are out they may eat it;
for their Founder never forbad them, as they say: For fresh Fish they seldom
have any, because their Monastery is so far distant from Nilus, and there is no
convenient carriage to bring them any. And though the Red Sea be within a
little days Journey, they cannot have any fresh Fish, because the Seacoast
being not inhabited, they have no Instruments to catch Fish; and the ways are
dangerous, because of the Arabian Rogues and Robbers.

At Easter they never fast, but eat Eggs and Milk, which are sent to them from
their Farm; only three times a year they have liberty to drink Wine, at
Christmas, at Easter, and Pentecost.

They sleep always in their Clothes; and instead of a Blanket, they have only a
Mat, very course, made with Palm-leaves, and stretched along upon the ground.
They are the makers of them; they call them in Arab. Bursch.

Their employments are not the same, according to every man's ability: Some
manure and dress the Gardens, others are Cooks, others grind at the Mill; some
are upon the Guard, to give notice when any Travelers go by, or come, and
others are appointed to draw up those that will come in, and let down those
that desire to depart; such as have no employment, make Mats.

They never study; they are satisfied in reading Books of Devotion: amongst the
rest, they read often the Synaxar, or Book of Martyrs; the Paradise of Monks,
the Climax, or the Ladder of Virtue of John, Abbot of the Monastery of Mount
Sinai; the Sermons of Paul de Busch, upon the Festivals of the Blessed Virgin,
and such like. When I was there, I saw but two Priests, the Vicar of the
Monastery was one; and the other, who had not said his first Mass, was the
Steward. All the others, that were seventeen in number, were Laymen, and
almost all either with one eye, deaf, lame, and halt, or worn out with old age;
and if amongst them any were young, he did but seek the opportunity to escape
from such austerities.

In the Tower, mentioned before, were three or sour Trunks full of old Arabian
Manuscripts, and some in the Copties Language, which I have perused: And though
they were all Books of Devotion belonging to the Church, some of them deserved
to be in the Kings Library; but because the Monks were not willing to fell
them, for they belonged to the Monastery, fearing the Excommunication of their
Patriarch, which is written in the beginning of every Book; and because I had
brought with me but so much Money as was needful for my Journey, for fear of
the Thieves, I was not very earnest to buy them.

Two amongst the rest were very curious, which I had a great desire to have;
one was the Copties Grammar and Dictionary in Arabic, of Ibn il assal. It was
one of the exactest and largest that ever I faw: They esteemed it worth thirty
Crowns; I dare say, that with this Dictionary and Grammar it is possible to
re-establish the Copties Language, which now is lost: The other Book was a
Rubric of their Ceremonies in Folio, very well written.

In regard the Arabians are the Masters of the Wilderness, this Monastery is
obliged to entertain all that come thither, or pass by, whether Friends or
Foes: To their Friends they pay this hospitality to preserve their friendship,
and to their Enemies they perform it, to please them, and hinder them from
doing them a mischief. They treat not all in the same manner; for their Friends
they take them in with their Equipage, when they have need, and they nourish
them all the time that they desire to live there; but their Enemies never enter
in, but receive from them, by a Basket let down from the Wall, all necessaries.

They are often visited by these Arabians, so that they spend every year a
great deal of Meal, of Bread, of Biscuit, of Barley, of Beans and Lentils, and
other Provisions. I shall not mention the trouble that the Monks suffer, and
the displeasures that they receive from these ungrateful Wretches, who commonly
recompense them with affronts, and filthy speeches.

And because the Arabians that inhabit about Egypt are of diverse Families, and
differing Interests; they have so great a hatred for one another, that they
never meet without fighting.

Such a mischance happened the next day after my arrival; for the Caravan of
the Summer, of fifty Camels, laden with Provisions for the Monastery, led by
thirteen Horsemen of the Arabians, named Benevasel, arrived that day. They were
watched by other Arabians, named Ababde, their Enemies. And because it was the
time that the Dates began to be ripe upon the Trees, some of them when they had
unloaden would not return the same day, with their Companions, to their
Villages and Cabbins, but remained behind in the Monastery, to take their
pleasure a day or two. It happened the next night that those that slept out of
the Monastery, about their Beasts, were surprised at midnight, by a Company of
threescore Arabians, called Ababde, who took from them fifteen Camels, and
seven Horses, all their Equipage, and killed three of them, and wounded five,
of whom one dyed within three days after, and another was lost, none knowing
what was become of him; for four days after his Horse was found alone in the
Wilderness.

Their fury ended not with this Butchery; for they pursued, with the same heat,
those that had brought me to the Monastery. They overtook but four, and carried
away from them their Camels, all their Equipage, and Money that I had given
them, and wounded three very dangerously; so that these Wretches being not
able, in this sad condition, to proceed on in their Journey, they returned back
to the Monastery all naked, and in a pitiful manner. They were afraid to appear
before me, because they had falsified their Faith, contrary to the Laws of
their Nation, and broken their agreement with me, in making me pay five and
twenty Meidins more than I had agreed with them. Their Conscience did reproach
them of this baseness, so that they imagined that this mischance happened to
them to punish their perfideousness.

I cannot sufficiently express how much trouble this unhappiness created me, as
well as to the Monks; for these Arabians were enraged, some for the loss of
their Parents and Friends, others for their Goods, which they were resolved to
recover upon me and the Monks. They threatened to kill them, to plunder the
Monastery; and out of a persuasion that I was a very rich Franc, they threatened
to break open my Door, and carry away all that I had. So that the Monks had
much ado to pacify them, by giving the Shirts, Clothes, Caps, Girdles, in a
word, all that they wanted; and when they had nothing more left to give* they
came to me, entreating me to help them in their need; so that I was obliged to
give them a Coat, and a Shirt to bury an Arabian that dyed in the Monastery. I
gave them a red Cap, a Turban, Money very often, that I might not be betrayed
by those Monks who delivered all to the Arabians, without telling them from
whence it came.

But at last the Arabians were jealous, when they saw that I continued shut up,
without showing my self abroad, either to them, or any other of the Monastery;
and my privacy made them believe that I was some great Person that was afraid
of them. They resolved therefore to give me a visit, to know who I was. As soon
as the Vicar understood their intent, he came to give me notice of it, that I
might take a course accordingly. As soon as I understood it, I caused all my
Goods to be carried into the Tower of the Monastery, leaving nothing in my
Chamber but a course Mat of Palm Leaves stretched upon the Floor, upon which I
sat without Carpet or Cushion: And that they might not think me to be a Franc,
I took the Habit of a Monk of that Convent. In this manner I expected them, not
without fear. The next day about noon, three of the chief entered into my
Chamber with their Cangians, or Cutlasses, at their Girdle in their Bosoms.
They saluted me with a surly look, asking how I did. I answered their civility
as well as I could; I caused them to sit down near me, and told them that I was
grieved at their misfortune, and that I was not able to assist them in their
need. I exhorted them to trust upon God and S. Anthony, who was as well their
Father and Protector, as of the Monks; and that doubtless he would comfort
them, and give them one day the opportunity to overcome their Enemies. These
words pleased the Arabians mightily.

I caused my Dinner to be brought, and though I had with me all my Provisions
needful from Cairo, I suffered nothing to be brought but Lentils in a Wooden
Dish, with Bread soaked in it, and a few Onions, I entreated them to eat some
with me: They needed not much invitation. One may imagine what was in my mind,
when I had such Guess at my Table; but fear caused me to dissemble my thoughts.

After Dinner I gave them Pipes to take Tobacco, and Coffee according to the
Mode of the Country, which pleased them well, chiefly in this place where
little of that Drink was to be seen. When these Arabians saw me so free and
hearty, they conceived such an affection for me, that they promised to protect
me, if any of their Comrades should offer to affront me. When they had talked
with me some hours, they went away very well satisfied, and told their Comrades
how civil I had been. By this one may understand, that there is no Nation in
the World so barbarous; but is to be won by fair means.

Some days before; the Arabians had sent some of their Company to their
Parents, to inform them of their loss, and to entreat them to send them Beasts
to help home their sick and wounded. That day they received an answer, that
such of them as could return home on foot should venture, but that the others
should continue there till they were cured of their wounds; and that none durst
come, or send them Beasts, for fear of losing them. Therefore these Wretches
when they saw that they could not remain any longer in the Monastery, resolved
to depart together, as soon as their sick Persons should recover any strength.
I resolved also to be gone; for the little satisfaction that I found there,
took away all desire to continue there any longer; for I had cause to fear,
lest the news of this Massacre should spread about the Wilderness, which might
have caused me to stay there all the Winter, for want of an opportunity to
carry me away. I hastened therefore my departure as much as I could, and hired
three Camels of an Arabian that was left behind in the Monastery, who alone was
able to furnish us: I was to give him a Piaster and a half a-piece; moreover I
promised to give him a new Suit of Apparel for an Arabian of our Company that
had been stripped, whose Kinsman he said he was: We confirmed our Agreement
before all the Monks, by the Chapter of Fatha, according to the Custom of the
Country; and then I caused my self to be let down from the Window of the
Monastery, on Monday the 17th of October, leaving with joy a place where I had
met with many displeasures. We took the way and road of the Caravan, or the
under way, because the Camels that I had hired lived that way. The Arabian that
was to be my Guide having but one in the Monastery, the two others being near
his Lodging, which was in a Clift of Mount Gebel il cheleil, over against the
Monastery. We went to this Lodging, or about a days traveling from thence, in
a way very difficult and deep; and because this Arabian was a right Devil of
the Mountains, as they term themselves in boasting. As soon as we were a little
forwards in our way, he told me that the Price that we had agreed upon was not
sufficient, and that I must promise him as much more. I refused to grant him
his desire, which was contrary to all reason and justice, he led us therefore
two days up and down in the Wilderness, sometimes one way, sometimes another,
threatening to leave us and go away with his Camel, or to carry us back to the
Monastery: all this was to force me to give him what he demanded. I had much
difficulty to hold my hands from striking him, which I had done, had we but
known the way, and where to recover Water; but considering that I was lost if I
did abuse him, I was forced at last to consent to his desire, upon this
Condition, that he should remain at home and give us another Person to guide us
in our way; for he was of such a crooked disposition that it was impossible to
perform the Journey peaceably with him, which accordingly he did. When we had
thus satisfied him, he became of a good humor and led us to his Dwelling,
where his Wife and Children came to see us, and prepared for us a Supper,
according to the Mode of the Arabians; his Boys brought us some Wild-Fowl, and
presented me with a young Fawn alive, which I carried with me to Cairo. Thus we
spent that night very pleasantly.

The next day we caused him to repeat the Fatha the second time. He gave us a
Moor to conduct us, of a very good humor. We went with him on our way, and
arrived at Beisa the 22th of October, from whence we had been absent 22 days. I
passed immediately over to the other side of Nilus to Benesuef, and lodged
under a Tent, with a Turk my very good Friend, on the side of Nilus, till the
26th of October. I went aboard then to return to Cairo, where I landed the next
day, having spent 31 days in my Travels from thence.

I never undertook any Journey, or Voyage, that was so full of accidents, and
crosses, as this.

The convenience of a Guide caused me to undertake it. He was a young Abyssin,
of my Age, named Paul, a comely Person, wise and devout in appearance. I had a
little before got acquaintance with him; and because he understood by my
discourse, that I had a great desire to visit the Monastery of S. Anthony,
where he said he had been before, and that I expected but a Guide, because the
ways were difficult for a Franc who had never been there, chiefly because of
the Arabians, a brutish and fantastic People, he offered his service to
accompany me thither. And the rather I accepted his offer; because I have
always had a particular respect for the honest Men of his Country.

We resolved therefore upon all the Circumstances of our Journey, and left
Cairo the day mentioned before. But the familiarity ordinary amongst fellow
Travelers discovered to me his disposition and temper, more than I could
before; for all his visits at Cairo were studied and crafty. I found therefore
that he was a dissembler, and without judgment, too hasty; I resolved therefore
to shake him off, and to seek another, to prevent the mischiefs that his
indiscretion might procure tome.

I met at Benesuef, very happily, a Coptie born at Busch, by Profession a
Mebascier, or Arithmetician, who had traveled all about the upper Egypt. I
found him fit for my turn, I asked him to be my Guide in this Voyage; he
accepted of the offer, and I paid him beforehand. When the Abyssin understood
it, he was highly offended; so that he endeavored afterward to be revenged,
by causing a disturbance amongst us, which angered the Company against him.

The first night after our departure from Benesuef, when we lay in the
Wilderness, he commanded my Servant, contrary to my orders, to give no Coffee
to the Arabians, as if a Dish of Coffee, given to these Wretches, would have
impoverished me. They plotted to cut his Throat, and doubtless he had there
ended his days, had I not perceived it betimes and satisfied them; for as they
are extreme brutish when they are angered, they are very quiet when they are
flattered and kindly used.

The Arabians caused me, against their wills, to suffer another inconveniency.
They took no care when they greased the Leathern Bottles of Water, that the
Grease was moldy, it infected therefore the Water so much which we were to
drink, that I could not possibly taste of it: let any Man think if this was not
a sufficient mortification, seeing our Journey, or Voyage, lasted five days.

As this was the first time that I rid upon a Camel, I could hardly endure the
shakings, which the manner of walking of this fantastic Beast caused me to
suffer. I confess, when I saw my self upon this Colossus, without any stay,
lifted up in the Air, seated upon an ugly Beast; my Feet in two Ropes instead
of Stirrups, holding in my hand a Cord made with the Strings of a Palm Tree,
which cut my hands, it seemed to me very strange: I resolved nevertheless to
overcome all these difficulties; and instead of vexing my self, I made a sport
of that which would have troubled other Persons.

When I think upon the solemn reception of the Monks, when I first came into
the Monastery, I cannot but be yet displeased at my Abyssin. This Fool desired
me to let him go before the Caravan, to tell the Monks of my coming, and to
cause a Chamber to be prepared for me; but by the respects they paid me, I
understood that he had too much exaggerated my quality, thinking to do me a
pleasure. I endeavored to undeceive them, and caused all their Ceremonies to
cease, as soon as I perceived that they took me for a greater Person than
really I was.

I have already set down at large how the Arabians frighted me in the
Monastery; but they were not the only Persons that troubled me. The Monks, the
Vicars, the Copties, and the Abyssins vexed me one after another, as if they
had all agreed to try my patience.

The avaricious Monks, not contented with what I had given them, before my
departure caused their Vicar to tell me, that they expected that a Franc of my
reputation would have left them at least thirty golden Ducats of Venice. When I
told them of the great charges I had been at in this Voyage, besides the
expenses that I was yet to be at in my return; that I had received but little
satisfaction from them; that I wondered at their boldness, to tax a Stranger of
my quality, that came from far to see their miserable Monastery, and their
poverty. They were angry at this answer, and treated me afterward with
contempt.

The Vicar was afraid to want Bread in his Monastery; therefore he resolved to
quit it, and to seek another where he might be better treated: And because he
had no money to hire a Camel to carry him through a tedious and troublesome
way, he entreated me to give him some, which I did very generously, though I
had cause to be offended with him. But he put this money in his Purse, without
dreaming of hiring a Camel, believing that my men would suffer him to ride
sometimes upon their Camels: But in the way he found himself deceived; when he
was weary, and his feet cut with the sharp stones, he murmured at me; I told
him of his covetousness, unworthy of a man of his Profession, of his little
love for his Flock, whom he left in the time when they needed most his Fatherly
care, but he received these reproofs very ill; so that from thence it may
easily be imagined, how we traveled together.

The Abyssin and the Coptie were at a continual variance, because one thought
himself more useful to me than the other; so that at every foot, I was obliged
to make peace between them.

The night before the Arabians visited me, I was obliged to cause all my
Clothes to be carried into the Tower of the Monastery, into a secure place. In
that hurley-burley I lost some, valued at five or six Piasters; I cannot tell
whose fault it was, the Abyssin cast the fault upon the Coptie, to discredit
him with me: However, as soon as we were come to Beiha, the Coptie vanished
away suddenly, without bidding us farewell. This caused me to suspect that the
Abyssin had not accused him wrongfully.

To all these displeasures we must add the fear of Thieves in the way; for at
every step, we looked on the ground to see whether there were any footsteps in
the Sand; when we saw some that were fresh, we were then grievously afraid; but
our apprehensions increased, when we saw the footsteps turned our way, for we
imagined that we should meet them; fear alone made us take Beasts at a distance
for Men, and Bushes for Robbers that waited for us.

At last we were in sight of Beiha, we imagined then that all our fears were
over; but the Camels knowing the Fields where they were wont to feed, began to
leap for joy, because they were returned to their ordinary Pastures; so that
the Saddle of that upon which I rid being not well girded, nor the Bridle
sufficient to stop the Beast, it jolted, and cast me up into the Air several
times: at every moment I thought I should tumble down, and break my Neck, which
happened not, through the care of the Arabian that stopped the Camel.

This Relation is sufficient to make it appear, that if there is some pleasure
in traveling, and seeing Foreign Curiosities, one buys them very dear, with
the hazard of many dangers and crosses, chiefly in Egypt, where cruelty and
barbarism seem to dwell.

I shall add some other Curiosities which I have seen in the Deserts.

We left at our left hand when we came from the Monasteries, the ruins of a
very ancient Town, situate on the top of the barren Mountain, called, Gebel il
cheleil. This Town is in the midway between Beiha and the Monastery, in that
place where the Mountain separates it self, and by which one passes in coming
or going from Beiha, in the way of the Caravan. The Arabians were ignorant of
the name, and we had no time to stay there, having taken notice upon the Sand,
of fresh footsteps of Horsemen that had passed that way, which caused us to
conceive some danger, if we continued there any time.

I found there a Plant, which the Arabians call Barnub: It has a little full
Stalk, as a Moucheron, and at the top a little Butron, about the bigness of a
Nut, which is full of Powder, which the Dyers use in dying. Its leaves are as
slender as the leaves of Poppy; I gathered three or four of these Plants, but I
could not keep them long, because of their tenderness. I saw also an Herb which
is called by the Arabians Rabl, that smells as Mint, my Arabians fed upon it. I
saw there a great deal of Alcali, called in Arab. Kilu, which has the virtue
to take away from Clothes all manner of spots. Upon the Mount Colzim, there is
a Wood that grows, called Oud il akrab, or Scorpions Wood, the Monks of S.
Anthony reduced it to powder, which they judge to be a good remedy against the
biting of venomous Creatures, as well as to cure weak eyes, and eyes inflamed:
They gave me half a pound in Canes; I have sent it to Paris with the other
Curiosities. In this Desert is a great deal of Coloquinte, and under the Sand
much white salt very good, which my Arabians used to season their Fatir, and
their Mafruca.

Fatir are great Cakes, as thick as finger, and as large as a French Hat, baked
in the Coals.

Mafruca is made of the Fatir, by breaking it in pieces, when it is yet hot,
and taken from the fire; and by pouring upon it Oyl-Olive, and kneading it with
the hand in a wooden dish, as if it were Paste. My Arabians imagined to do me a
great pleasure to offer me some to eat, for this is highly esteemed amongst
them; but though I had a good Stomach, I had not the courage to taste of it,
for I had good cause to loath it.

I return now to speak of the things that happened at Cairo, where I landed the
30th of October.

That day they began the Zine, or Festival of public joy, because the Grand
Seignior had taken Caminiez from the Poles. This Festival lasted from Sunday
till Thursday in the Afternoon.

It is the custom at Cairo, that in such like Festivals every one adorns the
outside of his House or Shop with Carpets and Pavillions, lighting about them
all night many Lamps tied to wooden Engines, some made in an Hexagone figure,
others in an Octogone; some as Stars, others in another manner. These Engines
are suspended with Ropes tied cross the Streets, which are beautiful to look
upon. The Streets in all other times are shut in the night, but then are open,
and the Christians, during this Festival, may walk about more freely than at
other times at midday, because one cannot distinguish in that obscure light of
what color is the Turbant that they wear, nor discover whether it be straked,
or all white.

Besides these Lamps and Carpets, the Beys hang up in a good order before their
Palaces upon the Walls; their most beautiful Armor, as Head-pieces,
Breast-plates, Coats of Male, Muskets, Hangers, Targets, and other such
Instruments of War. The French Consuls, who never come short of them, cause
beautiful Carpets to be hung in all the Streets of their dwellings, and
Pavillions over the Streets, from one end to another, to keep off the heat of
the Sun. Monsieur de Tiger, Consul of the French Nation, caused a kind of a
resting place to be erected, beautifying it with Carpets and Cushions, to
receive the Persons of Quality; he put round about the Pictures of the King, of
the Queen, of the Dolphin, and other French Lords, in small ingravery, with
Tapers before them, to cause the Turks to admire the wit and invention of the
French, who can make Pictures much like the Originals. But the Turks were
surprised to see their Beards shaven off; they asked whether they were yet
Children.

These Festivals give much diversion to the people, but they are very
chargeable to those that will observe them, chiefly to the Consuls; for besides
the Tents and Carpets, and other Ornaments that they must hire, they are wont
to give Coffee and Tobacco to all that come to see them; and if they be persons
of Quality, they must have Sweetmeats: so that if a Consul will come off with
Honor, it will cost him three or four hundred Crowns. The people run about the
Streets, from morning till three hours after midnight, all the time of the
Festival.

On the first of November I went to see the Castle of Cairo with a Chiaoux, a
very good friend of mine.

The first thing that we saw was the Royal Hall, where the Pacha keeps the
Divan. He showed me in the middle of this Hall, a great Cord tied double to one
of the Beams of the Roof, where, according to the custom of the Country, the
Casciefs that have not sufficient to pay the Taxes of their Province, at the
end of the year are lifted up in the air, with their hands behind, tied to
their backs: besides, they are whipped upon their naked backs with a Whip of
Cords, whereunto are tied some Leaden Bullets.

We went up next to the top of the Ovens where they bake Bread, from whence the
place called Kara, or the place of exercise, is discoverable. There the Pacha's
men sport themselves with Bows and Arrows, and by running on Horseback, aiming
at a mark fixed at the top of a very high Tree.

We went to see next the Chambers where they make the Gunpowder, which are two
great Parlours or Rooms on the ground, over against the Royal Hall of the
Divan, with very strong walls, and vaulted over head. In each are twelve
Mortars of Pewter placed round, about a Cubit high, with their Pestels of Iron,
which receive their motion, to pound the matter in the Mortars to powder, from
a long Pole that answers to a Beam that stands in the middle of the Chamber,
which a Horse turns round. There are near several other Chambers, where are
many little Mortars, in which they refine the Gunpowder.

On the 19th of November I was present at a Marriage of two Copties; the
Ceremonies were performed in this manner.

After the Oration or Prayer of midnight, or as if we should say, after
Morning-prayer, the Friends and Parents led first the Bridegroom, and next the
Bride, from their Houses to the Church, with several lighted Tapers before
them, and singing through the Streets Hymns in the Copties Language, and
striking with little wooden Hammers against some sticks of Ebony wood, which is
their Music.

When they were come to the Church, they led the Bridegroom into the inner
Chancel, where usually the Prayers are said, and brought the Bride to the place
of the Women: Then the Priests and the People began in the Chancel their
Prayers mingled with Hymns, which lasted very long: At the end, he that
performed the Ceremony of the Marriage, went to the Bridegroom and read three
or four Prayers, making over him the Sign of the Cross, before, and at the end
of every Prayer. He caused him afterward to sit on the ground, having his face
turned toward the Heikel, holding behind him upon his Head, in a standing
posture, a Silver Cross, and continuing in Prayer.

Whiles this was doing in the Chancel, the Beadle caused the Bride, with one of
her Kindred, to sit down upon a Bench that he had there put out of the door of
the uttermost Chancel. As soon as the Priests had ended in the innermost
Chancel, the prayers of the Knot, as they name them. He that performed the
Ceremony, clothed the Bridegroom with a Surplice, and tied him about the
middle with a Girdle, putting upon his head a white Cloth.

In this manner he led him to the Bride, causing him to sit by her: He then
covered them both with this white Cloth, and made them put their heads
together. Then he anointed the Bridegroom with Oyl-Olive in the Forehead, and
above the Fist, and the Bride in the same manner: Afterward he caused them to
give one another their hands, reading aloud the Exhortation that contains the
Duties which they were to perform to one another. So with a long train of
Prayers, interrupted with several Ceremonies, this Solemnity of Marriage ended,
which they call the Coronation of the Married Couple.

Afterward they read Morning-prayer, or as we call them, the Lauds. They sung
next Mass, where the Bridegroom and the Bride received the Communion; which
being ended, they all returned to their several homes.

The beginning of the Year 1673.
THE night of the 16th of January, 1673. the Copties celebrate the Festival of
the Epiphany. I was then at Cairo in the Church of Mary Moncure, to see how
they dip themselves in Water in remembrance of the Baptism of our Lord and
Savior, which was performed that night according to the Traditions of the
Church. I took notice of these Particulars.

They said the Prayers of Midnight, where the Font stands, and where they
dipped themselves, which they call il Magtas. This Pond, or Basin: of Water is
in a Chamber near the Church, about three Perches square, as deep as a Man is
high. As soon as Prayers were ended, the Patriarch went to the Kolomie, or
Vestry, to put on his Pontifical Attire; from thence he returned to the Water,
with a Deacon and a Priest before him. The Deacon had on him a Cape, bearing in
his hand an Iron Cross, as long as a Pastoral Staff. The Priest was Clothed
with a Surplice, that he might be useful to the Patriarch in saying of Mass;
that is, that he might be his assistant, and Master of the Ceremonies.

When he was come to the Water, he began to bless it, by reading over it
several Lessons taken out of the Prophets and the Psalms, and out of the New
Testament; sometimes in the Copties Language, sometimes in Arabic. The
Patriarch perfumed it also, and stirred it cross-wise with the Pastoral Staff
of Iron, which the other Priests did also, every one in his turn. And whilst
they were blessing this Water, which lasted near two hours, there was a
Candlestick of Iron standing within, about the length of a Man, with three
Branches, upon which there were three Tapers burning all the time of this
Ceremony.

As soon as this blessing was ended, the Pond, or Basin, was all uncovered,
that the People might go in and dip themselves. Then there was heard a strange
confusion and noise, so great that I wondered; for every one endeavored to be
one of the three first, whom the Patriarch dips in the Water. They that could
not obtain this honor, dipped themselves, skipping and playing, all naked, in
the Water, without having any thing to cover their nakedness, and privy
Members; and all this in the presence of their Patriarch, and many Priests that
were there.

As soon as the Men had ended their washing, and were gone to the Chancel; the
Women, and the Maids drew near, and followed the Men's Example, skipping all
naked in the Water, and sportting one with the other. It is true that such as
did thus dip themselves were of the poorer sort, and that as many as were of
the wealthier, and better sort, washed their faces and hands.

When the Women had ended their bathing, they went away to their own places to
hear Mass, which was already begun.

Thus this Ceremony was performed, which I saw from the beginning to the end.

The 26th of this Month Monsieur de Tiger, who had been, till then, Consul of
the French Nation, left Cairo. He is a very able Man, and understands his duty
very well; but the Merchants of France made their complaints against him at
Court, and caused him to be dismissed. Monsieur de Bonnecorse, the Cousul of
Seyda, was named in his place.

The departure of the Mahmel toward Mecha.
SAturday, the 28th of this Month, the Pacha sent away, in great pomp, from
Cairo, the Mahmel, or Burying-Cloath, which the Kings of Egypt, and the Pacha's
are wont to send every Year to Mecha, to cover Mahomets Tomb; which was
performed in this manner.

First two Kisve, or Burying-Cloaths, of black Damask, richly wrought with
great Arabic Letters, expressing some Sentences of the Alcoran, were carried
before. These Letters were very great, Embroidered with Gold, and artificially
Interwoven. These Burying-Cloaths were each carried upon a Bier, made almost in
die same fashion as those that are in Europe, and they were about three Perches
long.

An infinite number of Schiechs, or Ecclesiastics, followed after in a
confusion, causing several Banners to be carried before them, which had been
taken out of the Mosques of Cairo: Some were on foot, others riding upon Asses,
and all clothed in a very strange manner, with Garbs made up with diverse
pieces of many colors patched together. They caused themselves to be wondered
at by their howling and grimaces, for they wagg'd their Heads, their Eyes, and
their Mouths, in a thousand ways; others pronounced the word Hu, which is one
of the Attributes and Names of God, with all the strength of their body; and
there was none without Armor, a Club, or a Halberd, or a wooden Sword, or some
other rusty Weapon.

After this Crowd came the Cloth with which they cover Mahomets Tomb, which
they call in Arabic, il Mahmel. It was carried upon a Camel painted yellow,
with an Herb called Hen, and very richly harnassed and trapped with gold
Embroidery, with feathers upon the Head, and about the Neck and Legs little
Bells.

This Mahmel was made like a Bed, but the kind of Stuff, and the color, was
not to be distinguished, because it was all covered with Flowers, and Arabic
Characters, very long, all Embroidered with Gold and Interwoven very
artificially. At the four corners were four great Bosses, covered over with a
rich Stuff; and from the middle of these Bosses, they rose up in Pyramides.

The Camel that carried this Engine, was followed by five others: Upon the
first was mounted an Arabian, sounding a Trumpet; upon the second a Moor that
played upon two Cymbals; and upon the three others, three young Boys; after
these went five and twenty Metferracas with their Swords by their sides, and
the Turban of the Chiaoux upon their heads; and after them seven other Persons
clothed with Coftans: A Troop of Scherifs, or Noble Men of Mecha, followed
next, on horseback; after them a Man who carried upon his head a little
Mortuary, or Burying-Cloath, Embroidered, square, stretched upon Staves; next
went four others that carried every one upon their shoulders a Cloth of the
same fashion. They told me, that they hanged them up where they celebrate the
memory of Abraham's Sacrifice. Eight and twenty Janissaries went next, two and
two, with their Caps upon their heads. They went immediately before the Emir
hag, or the Bey that commands this Caravan. This Bey was clothed with a
Coftan, and had upon his head a Turban, proper to the Beys, which is called in
Arabic, Emame Bersciani, which is like a Flowerpot turned up-side down. His
Domestics, who were twelve Archers well clothed, and a Troop of Musketeers
on Horses, waited upon him; after followed the Drummers, the Trumpeters, the
Pipers, either on Horseback, or riding upon Camels; and at last there was an
Engine, drawn by the strength of Men, upon which was representented the Porch
of the Temple of Mecha, in green Satin Embroidered with Gold: They call it
Arab. Burca.

The Money needful to make all these Clothes, is taken out of the Revenues of
the Lands which the ancient Kings of Egypt have appointed for that purpose,
which has been confirmed by the Ottoman Emperors. For that purpose they have
appointed a Superintendant, whom they call in Arabic Nadir il Kisve, or the
Superintendant of the Habit, who has the care to cause these Lands to be
Manured, and to gather the Revenues, and to employ them in the uses for which
they were appointed.

That which was worthy of notice in this Pomp, was the blind Devotion of these
Wretches for the things which are to be used by their Prophet, or employed in
their Religion. All the People, notwithstanding the extraordinary crowd in all
the Streets where these Clothes were to pass, pressed forward with incredible
earnestness, that they might cause their Handkerchiefs, or their Turbans, to
touch these Clothes that were designed for the Tomb of their Prophet, which
they kissed afterward, and rubbed them upon their Eyes with much devotion.

The Departure of the Caravan of the Pilgrims for Mecha.
EIght days after the Mahmel of the false Prophet Mahomet was gone, the Bey
went away also, with his Caravan, in this manner and order.

First six little Pieces of Artillery were drawn by Horses, with their
Ammunition that followed next; after followed nine and forty Camels, laden
with Provisions for the Bey, for his Kitchen; after them nine and fifty others
that were not laden, and fourteen others that carried Water; after them two
and twenty other Camels, well harnessed, but not laden; eight and twenty
Arabians marched after them, every one of them had, upon his shoulder, a Torch,
or Meschal, to give light in the Night, before the Caravan: nine and forty
Camels without burden, and two and twenty others laden with two Cradles
a-piece, to carry the sick and weak, and the poor, went after: next to them
went nineteen Camels laden with Water-pouches; and before and after them there
was a Troop of Moors that beat upon the Drum: after them followed twenty
beautiful Camels, without burden; they belong's to a Lord. A Troop of
Musicians, and eighteen Camels without burdens, the foremost bearing some
Musicians, went next. Eight of the Field Tapers, called in Arabic, Meschal,
were carried after; and them the train of a Ciurbachi, well horsed, succeeded:
after went two and two Musicians, mounted upon Camels that went before another
Camel with Trappings richly Embroidered; next a Troop of Drummers rode by upon
Camels; and after them three Camels, bearing in their Saddles many Colors
flying, that yielded a beautiful sight; Twelve Moors carried next twelve
Torches; next went twelve Camels laden with Water-pouches; some Ciurbachies
rode next on horseback, followed by two Camels that carried two Musicians, and
six and twenty others laden with Banners, as the former; between these, and
two others that were laden with Water, went two Men that carried Tapers; two
Camels laden followed after, with the Train of a Lord on horseback, two Drums,
and nine Camels; and after them some Ciurbachies, with their Servants, on
horseback; after went the seven orders of the Militia, and the Alai Chiaoux,
who are to be distinguished by their black Rod which they bear in their hands,
which has two Branches hooked, upon which hang two Silver Chains, furnished
with little Bell, tied at the middle of the Rod: next followed the Servants,
and Attendants of a Lord, all riding on Horses. The Imam, or Chaplain, of the
Emir-hag, clothed in white Searge, followed them upon a Camel; after him went
a Troop of young Men, mounted upon Camels; next went the Attendants of a Lord,
and a Troop of Janissaries on foot, with their Ceremonial Caps on their heads;
next followed their Serdar, or Colonel, with forty Chiaoux, two and two on
horseback, with their Swords by their sides: twelve Sangiac-Beys went after,
two and two, on Horses, with their Ceremonial Turbans on their heads, with
their Servants: next eight Chiaoux, and a Bey all alone, and the Vali, or
Provost Marshal, with the Methtesib, or Superintendant of the Provisions, on
Horses: they had after them a thousand Azappes on foot, walking two and two:
the Apprentices were at the head of their Troop, having a little Musket on
their shoulders, and a Cutlass at their sides: the young Men without Beard
followed them; next the Men of full age; next the old Men, all clothed with
skins of Tigers: after them a thousand Janissaries went on foot, in the same
order and at the last the Emir-hag, or the Bey that commanded this Caravan,
closed up the rear of thi^ Company, on horseback.

We must not think that all these Persons go with the Bey as far as Mecha: They
accompany him a little way out of Town, as far as the Caravan has a
Rendezvous; none remain, but such as are bound to go through with him.

A Voyage into the Upper Egypt.
ON the 24th of February, being Friday, S. Matthias's day, I went from Cairo
toward the Upper Egypt, with an intention to visit the Monastery of the Holy
Martyrs at Isne, and the other Antiquities that are about that City.

Besides Idris my Man, I took along with me a Moor, called Hagali, our near
Neighbor, to accompany me. We went aboard of a Bark that I had hired to carry
us to Momfallot, for five and twenty Paras. The Visiter of the Custom-House
caused us to stop till the Evening; so that this night we only went round about
the Isle Roude, which is at a Musket Shot over against Old Cairo.

Saturday the Rain fell betimes, and lasted till Noon; the Showers fell so
furiously, that our Bark sunk almost to the bottom: I wished then that such as
say that no Rain falls in Egypt had been there, for they would have seen the
contrary. This Rain was succeeded by cold and tempestuous Winds.

The next night there was another Rain fell as great as the former, which
continued till three hours after the rising of the Sun. As soon as it had
dissipated the Clouds, a good Wind, called Teijab, or North-west, began to
blow, and kept us company in all our Voyage.

Monday, very early, the 27th of the Month, we landed at Benesuef, a great Town
situated upon the West Side of Nilus, and tow hours after we went on board, to
proceed on in our Voyage, leaving at our right hand, on the West of the River,
Fesohn, a great Town, about three or four hours traveling from Benesuef,
toward the South: At the East we saw the Village Savadi Kedami, and about
Sunset we went by Heggiar Selame, a dangerous Bank of Nilus. At this place the
Lands of Egypt, which are at the East of Nilus, begin to be manured, for from
Cairo to this place, they are all covered with Sand.

Tuesday morning, the 28th of February, we left at the East of Nilus two
Castles ruinated, near one another, and passed by the Mountain called
Gebel-garanat, situate on the same side, where the Territory of Egypt begins
again to be unfruitful and sandy.

A little before Noon we saw our selves over against Serarie, a Village on the
East of Nilus, but within the Land, seated at the foot of this Mountain. In
this place our Bark ran in the Sand, and when the Boat-men were not able to
free her, the Janissaries that were with us forced all the other Travelers and
Christians with Cudgels to leap over into the water to help them.

As soon as it was freed, we proceeded on in our way, and we began to discover
the Caves of the Mountain which are at the East of Nilus, and a little after
the Mount of Birds, called in Arabic Gebel Teir, which is so equal from the
top to the bottom about half a mile, that it looks like a strait Wall, built by
hand, rather than a Rock made thus by Nature, which is a very delightful sight
to Travelers. The water of Nilus washes a great deal of it: On the top of this
Mountain is the Monastery of the Copties, called Deir il baccur, and a little
further several Caves, and the ruins if an Ancient Town.

Tuesday night we were in sight of Minie, but our Vessel ran a-ground once more
in the Banks of Sand, so that the Boat-men could not free it before night, and
there it stopped till next day.

Wednesday in the morning, whiles our Boat-men were busy in freeing the Boat,
I went to see the City of Minie, situate on the West of Nilus, belonging to
the Cascieflik of Behnese. I went also into the Mosques without fear, because I
was clothed in a Turkish Habit. When our Boat-men had freed the Bark, they
drew her up to Minie, for we sailed upwards; there I went on board to go
toward Melave.

About an hours sailing from Minie, we began to discover on the top of the
Mountain, which lies at the East, the Caves. This, in my judgment, is the
beginning of the Country of Thebes: They are to be seen along the Mountain, as
far as Momfallot; I counted four and thirty in a rank, but the Mouths of the
Caves were stopped up with Earth that was fallen in.

The same day, about three a Clock in the Afternoon, we passed by the Ruins of
the Ancient City Insine, leaving it at our left hand, and at night we went to
lie before Melave.

We sailed away on Thursday morning, the second of March, and we saw in our way
many Caves in the Mountain, which is at the East. At Noon we left the great
Channel of Nilus, because there was but little water, and we entered into one
of its Branches, which makes an Island, by meeting again with the great Stream.
We passed before the Mouth of the River of Joseph, of which I have spoken
sufficiently in the description of Fium.

Friday morning, the third day of the month, we landed at Momfallot, where I
lodged in an House called Ocalet Emir Otman, or the dwelling of Prince Otman,
which is in the Marketplace. It is an old dwelling much decayed, and though
there is another more beautiful, and more commodious, I would not lodge in it,
that I might not suffer the affronts of the Jamssaries and Spahins, who lodged
there, and who would have insulted over me, had they known me to be a Franc.

Momfallot, the abode of the Cascief of the Province, is a very great and
beautiful Town of Egypt, situate upon the banks of Nilus, on the West Side, in
the middle Egypt. There is made much Linen-cloth: A great many Christian
Copties live here, but they have no Church.

The name of this Town signifies in Arabic the Exile of Lot, because a certain
Lot was banished thither by his Brother, an ancient King of Egypt, as the
Copties say. Over against, on the other side of Nilus, are the signs of an
ancient Town, I could never understand the name.

From Cairo to Benesuef there are two days journeys by Land; and by water,
sometimes more, sometimes less, according to the wind; from Benesuef to Minie,
are three days journeys by Land, from Minie to Melave is a little days journey,
from Melave to Momfallot is a little more than a days journey, chiefly when the
Horse is not good; and from Momfallot one may go and dine at Siut, if one takes
the morning.

In the Province of Momfallot they reckon one and fifty Towns, six and thirty
at the West side of Nilus, and fifteen at the East; which agrees not with the
Relation of James Albert of Egypt, who reckons up two hundred and seventeen. In
this he is mistaken. Here are one and twenty Churches, or Monasteries; eleven
at the West Side of Nilus, namely Moharrak, with that of the Abyssins, near by.
The Church of the Angel Gabriel, at Buk: That of S. Theodore at Timsahte: That
of S. George at Ballot: That of the Archangel Raphael at Tetelie: That of S.
Philothea at Nemire: That of the Archangels, Gabriel and Raphael, at Benekelb:
That of S. Mercurius at Gauli: That of the holy Virgin at Meessera: That of S.
John of Heraclea at Om il Kossur.

There are twelve at the East Side of Nilus, namely, the Church of S. Theodore,
Martyr, S. John's Son, at Bossra: The Monastery of S. Menna, surnamed
Thoumatourgos at -- The Church of the holy Virgin at -- and another at Maabde:
The Church of Mary Poctor at Gebravi; another of the same Saint at Fadda: That
of the blessed Virgin at Been mohammed: That of S. George at Been morr: and
three that are at Ibnub il hammam; namely, the Monastery of the blessed Virgin:
the Church of S. John the Baptist, and that of Abufam il ghindi.

The 7th day of this Month I went, about seven a Clock in the morning, for
Siut, where I arrived about noon.

These are the Villages in the way; 1. Mandara, where several Ruins remain,
that bespeak it to have been a great Town: 2. Hantaca: 3. Gauli, where are to
be seen some ancient Ruins, and an old Bridge, to give passage to the River
Nilus, when it overflows the Country: 4. Negghe, where the Caravan commonly
rests that comes from Dungala, when it goes toward Cairo: 5. Benehsein, and a
little further Coum Benehsein, where is to be seen the Tomb of one called
Sciech Iscander: 6. Mongabat that new, which is a very good Town, at the West
of Nilus, and at the foot of the Mountain hard by old Mongabat, but now
ruinated: At last we came to Siut, which lies South-South-East from Momfallot.

When I was arrived at Siut, I took two Chambers in the House called Occalet il
hammam, or the Bathing-house; so named, because it is over against a Public
Bathe; and though it be but little, it is pleasant and commodious.

A few days after, I craved acquaintance with the Bishop of the City, called
Amba Joannes; he is a very honest Man, of a good life. He made me know a
certain Coptie, named Muallim Athanasius, the only Man of all the upper Egypt
that understood his natural Tongue, that is, the Copties; but I could not
benefit my self much by him, because he was deaf, and about fourscore years of
age: nevertheless I had the satisfaction to behold that Man, with whom the
Copties Language will be utterly loft.

Siut, called in Greek Lycopolis, is one of the most famous Towns of the Upper
Egypt, situate at the foot of a barren Mountain that stands on the West Side,
about half a league from Nilus. The Town is great and populous, full of
Christian Copties, who may be about five hundred Caraches, or Masters of
Families that pay Tribute. They have there a Bishop, and a poor Church
dedicated to the Abbot Der, whose Body, with that of his Sister Erazi, a
reputed Saint, with his Brother also, rests at Emsciul, which is a Village
belonging to Ischmunein. In Siut are wrought the best Linen Clothes of all
Egyppt. It is the chief Town of the Province, and the abode of a Cascief.

These are the Churches and Monasteries of Christian Copties that are in this
Province.

The Church of Doronke, dedicated to the three Children of Babylon cast into
the Furnace. The Monastery of the blessed Virgin, situate upon a Mountain that
is behind this Village. The Church of Rife, dedicated to Mary Colte. The
Monastery of the blessed Virgin, behind this Village, upon the same Mountain.
That of Sauvie, dedicated to Athanasius. The Church of Doveine, dedicated to S.
John the Baptist; but now there is nothing remaining of this Church, but the
Altar in the open Air. The Church of Bagur, dedicated to S. Claudius. That of
Cateia, dedicated to S. Philothea. That of Sciothe, dedicated to S. Moncure;
but it is now ruinated.

Upon the Mountain that is near Siut, on the West Side, amongst a great many
Caves cut in the Rock, there is one made like a Stable, therefore the People
call it by the name of il Stabl, or the Stable: It is so large that a thousand
Horsemen may easily draw up Battle in it. I have not seen it, though I had a
great desire; for no body would venture to lead me thither, for fear of the
Casciefs displeasure, who is afraid that some body should carry away the
Treasures that are said to be hid there.

A Voyage to Tahta.
Monday, the 13th of this Month, I went from Siut with the Bishop of the Town,
leaving my Men till my return, for Tahta; which is another City of the Upper
Egypt, about two little days Journey from Siut, toward the South.

At our left hand we left the Ruins of the ancient Town, Scioth, named by the
Copties (...): next Rife, a considerable Town at our right hand: next Muscie,
where the Copties had anciently a Church, dedicated to Mary Poctor Sciu, taking
its name from the City of Sciu, which was next to Abnub, but now ruinated. At
three of the Clock in the Afternoon we arrived at Doveine, where we continued
two days, because the Bishop of Sciut was to consecrate there an Altar.

This Village owes its beginning to Tuh Bekerim, a Village near adjoining,
whereof there appears not now the least sign: This is the cause.

A Gentlewoman of this place, called Vdeine, having built a Church out of Tuh
Bekerim, to the honor of S. John Baptist: many of the Inhabitants caused
Houses to be built near this Church; so by degrees, the number of People
increasing more and more, they left Tuh Bekerim empty, and the place where this
Church was built became a Village, which they called after the name of the
Gentlewoman, Vdeine, and now corruptly Doveine.

This Church was afterward overthrown by the Doveider, a Branch of Nilus
artificially made, which washed the Walls; now there remains nothing but the
Altar, upon which the Bishop says Mass after a re-consecration.

Over against Doveine, upon the side of the Mountain, Westerly, there are to be
seen the Relics of two ancient Towns; one was named Bablu, and the other
Billu; they are near together. I had an intent to see them, but the Bishop of
Siut dissuaded me.

Wednesday, the 15th of this Month, we went from Doveine toward Tahta, near
the Ruins of the ancient Town Abutig, called by the Copties (...), situate
upon the Banks of Nilus; there is a Cascief dwells there. 2. We passed by
Necheile, a Village upon the side of the same River, where were a great many
Copties. 3. The Ruins of the ancient Town Sitfe, called in the Arabian Books
Sedafe. 4. The Ruins of Amba Biscioi. 5. Other Mountains of Ruins, called
Kimam Selamun, which we left at our right hand. 6. Temeh, which was anciently a
Town, but now is but a poor Village. The Christian Copties that live here, make
a certain sort of black Searge, indifferent sine, which Persons of Quality, and
the Clergy of the Copties wear. Out of the Town they have a Church, dedicated
to Amba Fam il Aussimi, or to the Abbot Fam of Anssim; but it is pitiful. There
is in this Village a Cascief.

When we had well rested our selves at Temeh, in the House of a poor Christian,
we went on our way, passing first by a Village called Coum il arab, over
against Kau il Kubbara, which is at the East Side of Nilus, anciently a very
beautiful Town, called by the Copties (...), where the Bishop of Siut told me
is yet to be seen the Ruins of a beautiful Church of the ancient Egyptians. We
went next to Meschta, a pretty good Town, and next to Sciahrota; afterward we
went upon Mountains of Ruins of a Town called Abvaitg: Next night we lay at
Sciech zein Iddin, a poor Village, inhabited by Copties and Moors, very
miserable.

Thursday morning, the 16th of the Month, the day observed by the Copties in
remembrance of the Invention of the holy Cross, we went to Nezelet issciehid, a
little Village full of Coptier, all Dyers. Heretofore in this place was a
Church, dedicated to S. Cyriack; but it is now down, and there remains nothing
but the Altar in the open Air.

This day the Bishop of Siut made some young Men Deacons, and when Mass, and
the Ordination was ended, we went to Tahta, a great Town near to this Village,
where we lodged at the House of one Muallim Petrus, a Coptie, an honest, and
rich Man.

A Voyage to the White Monastery.
SAturday, the 18th of this Month, I went very early from Tahta, toward the
famous Monastery of S. Sennodius, surnamed the White, about a good days Journey
from Tahta. The Bishop of Siut gave me one of his Arabians, named Havaras, to
guide me.

At the going out of the Town I met with a kind of a Janissary, called Seimen,
who received no Sallary from the Grand Seignior, but lived by the orders of the
Casciefs; he was sitting in the Highway, where we were to pass, his Musket
upon his shoulder, a Cutlass at his side, and ready to march.

When we drew near him, he came to us, and stopped me bluntly, telling me that I
must alight. I was much surprised with this affront, and vexed that without
cause I was to lose my Beast, I seemed to be resolved not to alight; we
continued a pretty while to dispute together, till I saw him lift up his
Hatchet, which he wore at his Girdle, to cleave my head in two, and that my
Arabian looked idly upon us, as unconcerned, I was forced to yield him my Ass;
upon which he got immediately, and rode away.

I returned to the Town, on foot, to the Bishop, who understanding my
misfortune, caused another to be given me. I went on in my way, and at our
going out of Tahta, we passed by the Ruins of the ancient Town of Beneviet; we
lest at our left hand other signs of an ancient Town, called Posone; from
thence we passed to Sciendavil, a good Town, and at noon we got as far as
Gezire, which is a Town where the Cascief of the Province lives; when we had a
little rested our selves in a Coffee-house, we went on our way toward the
Monastery, leaving the way of Sohaitg, which we had kept till then; we turned
to the right hand, toward the Mountain which is on the West of the Town, we
went by Itfu, an ancient Town, called by the Copties (...); about noon we got
to the Monastery, where we lodged at night.

The Monastery of S. Sennodius, the Archimandrite, surnamed the White, is built
near the Ruins of the ancient Town Adribe. There are the Remains of one of the
most Magnificent Structures that has been in Egypt. It is foursquare; its
Walls are builded with hewn Stones, very white; every Stone is four foot long,
and a foot and three inches high. It is seven and thirty Perches and two foot
long, which make two hundred and twenty four foot, and eighteen Perches and
three foot broad, which make one hundred and eleven foot. There be six great
Gates of a red Stone, which now are walled up, one only excepted, which now
has an open place as high as a Man. The chief Gate that is walled up is now
called Bab il bagl, or the Mules Gate, in remembrance of what happened to a
Daughter of an Heathen King, who offered to go into the Church in contempt,
riding upon a Mule, and was swallowed up alive in a Pit that opened, to punish
her insolency; which Miracle happened by the Prayers of S. Sennodius, who
begged this punishment from God. This Gate is ten foot high, and six broad;
every one of the Supporters is made up with four great Marble Stones, as well
as the Lintil, upon which is graven three Crosses, one great in the middle, and
two little ones on the sides.

Round about the Building are two ranks of Windows, the lowest are in the
middle, and the others almost touch the top. The two longest sides of the
Building have each seven and twenty Windows in each Rank, and the shorter sides
each have nine in each rank, but all these Windows are walled up.

The inside of this Monastery is demollished, the Heikel excepted, where Mass
is said, and the middle. The body of the Church, called by the Copties
Giamelun, was heretofore supported with two ranks of Pillars, each having
fourteen; which are yet standing, but in the open Air; for the Vault is fallen
down.

All the Pillars are not of the same Stone, nor Workmanship, nor bigness, nor
height; for some are reasonably big, others are slenderer. And to such as are
small, they have clapped some Plaster, to make them as big as the others.

At the going in of the Chancel are to be seen two very beautiful Pillars of
Marble, at the entry of the Heikel. Upon that which stands at the left hand is
graven an Epitaph in Greek, of one named Heliodorus. These Pillars are yet
entire, and their Workmanship is very beautiful.

Almost every where in the Walls of the Monastery, in the Pavement that is
before the Chancel, and in the great and beautiful pair of Stairs that lead up
to the Sleeping-place of the Monks, are certain great Stones full of Ciphers
and Hieroglyphick Figures placed not right; by which we may understand, that
those that have put them there had no knowledge of this mysterious Tongue. In
the Walls within are six holes in each side, vaulted above, and curiously
adorned with carved Leaves, so handsomely wrought that I could not sufficiently
admire the Workmanship. Round about the Monastery there is much black Marble.

In one of the Apartments of the Monastery, toward the West, at the left hand
as one goes in, there is a large and deep Well. The Monks told me that the
Water was forty Cubits deep, and that it had been sanctified, or blessed, by
our Savior. It is very sweet and wholesome, and rises and falls with Nilus,
though it has no communication with this River.

The next day in the morning, being Sunday, and the ninth day of the Month,
after Mass, I went, with my Arabian, toward Red Monastery, about an hours
traveling from the White, at the foot of the same Mountain, toward Tahta.

The color of the Bricks with which this Monastery is built, has given it the
name of Red. It is built in the same manner as the White, but a great deal
less. At the South Side it has yet a Building standing, that was crested, as
the Monks say, by S. Helene, when she went to Isne to visit the bodies of the
holy Martyrs. It was intended to enclose the Well of the Monastery within the
Walls, and to hinder the Arabians, when they made in roads from their
Mountains, from troubling the Monks, or taking away from them the Water.

There remains nothing of this Church, but the Chancel, and the Heikel, or
place where Mass is read. The Pillars that kept up the body of the Church are
yet standing, all of an equal length and bigness. In this particular they
excel those of the White Monastery, as well as in the beauty of the
Workmanship, especially their Capitals.

The Builders of this Monastery was Amba Biscioi, who having a long time lived
as a Robber, as the Story of his Life says, at last he repented and ended his
days very well. Some told me, that the Club with which he used to knock down
Passengers is hung up in the Chancel of this Church. I saw it not, because I
was told of it after I was gone out of the Monastery.

There is a Pillar also at each side of the Door of the Heikel, of an excellent
Workmanship, especially their Capitals, which are the most beautiful that I
ever beheld.

But this Monastery, as well as the White, is altogether ruinated within.

When I had seen all that was worthy of notice, I returned to Tahta, where I
arrived, about noon, the 21th of the month, and the next day we went to Siut.

A few days after, I went with the Bishop of Siut to the Monastery of S.
Athanasius, which is about three hours traveling from thence, I fancied to see
there some rare Relics of Antiquity, but I was deceived; for I saw that it
was one of the most woeful Monasteries in Egypt, so that I shall not mention it
any more.

In our way to this Monastery, we saw that of the Virgin at Doronque, situate
upon the Mountain that stands at the right hand.

This Monastery, with its Church, are cut in the Rock; which is the only thing
there to be noted. All the rest was so far from satisfying my Curiosity, that I
beheld nothing but Ruins and misery.

But that I might not lose, altogether, my labor, in climbing up to the
Mountain, I went to see the Caves that were near. My Guide led me into one as
high as a Man on horseback, so extraordinary large, that without hyperbole a
thousand Horse might there draw up in Battle array, which caused me to wonder
not a little.

As soon as we were out of this large Cave, my Guide led me into another hard
by, larger than the former: when I was within about two hundred paces, he told
me to hearken to a certain place of the Wall, at the left hand as one goes in.
Use no doubt had made him take notice of this place; for I saw no sign outward
to cause one to mind it. I drew near to listen, and I heard behind the Wall,
the noise as of a Windmill, so distinct that I marvelled greatly, only the
noise seemed to come from far. I wondered the more, when he told me that behind
this Rock there was no empty place, nor passage, for the Air to make this
noise, which has continued during the memory of Man. All Persons of whom I
inquired for the cause of this Wonder, told me nothing else, but that it was a
Talisman, and that there was some hidden Treasure.

A little further, toward the South, upon the same Mountain, are to be seen
the Ruins of an ancient Monastery, dedicated to S. Severus, Patriarch of
Antioch, whom the Copties reverence as a Saint, because he maintained the
Doctrine of Dioscorus their Patriarch, whose opinions they follow. The Bishop
of Siut told me, that heretofore three hundred and threescore Monks inhabited
in this Monastery, who employed themselves in seeking for the Philosopher
Stone, and in the works of Chemistry; an excellent Employment for such as have
left the World, and forsaken their Riches.

My return from Siut to Momfallot.
THE 26th of March I returned to Momfallot, with an intent to take Boat for
Girge, and continue my Travels farther. I entered into the Town about noon; as
soon as I was in my former Lodging, a Man of my acquaintance gave me notice
that the Christians of that place, those very Persons to whom I had been
recommended by their Patriarch, had accused me to the Cascief, and told him
that I was a rich Franc, who made it my business to run up and down the Land,
to discover where the Treasures were hid, to inform the King of France, who
intended to come and Conquer Egypt. This Friend said also that the Cascief had
commanded to take me, where ever I should be found.

This wicked news made me think upon a retreat, and at that time there was no
convenience to go by Water to Girge, and because the Cascief might have sooner
taken me on that side, his Jurisdiction reaching a great way; I went back to
Melave, because his Dominion was but narrow thitherward. I took that way to
return to Cairo, the place of my ordinary abode, whither I went by Land; for I
had been by Water before.

At our going out of Momfallot we went by Om il Cossur, a Village, where great
Mountains of Ruins are to he seen. We left next at our left hand, the signs of
the ancient Town Cossie, which is called by the Greek Authors Apollonopolis. We
went by Sennabo next, which is a very good and populous Town. We saw Biblau,
Bamib, and after Sun set we came to Tarut Isscerif, a great Village, where we
were entertained gratis by an Arabian Lord, who keeps an House of Hospitality,
called in that Tongue Beit diafe, to lodge Strangers, that will stay there a
night, with their Beasts. He entertains them at his own charge.

The next day, the 28th of the Month, after that I had returned thanks to my
Benefactor, I went straight to Melave. At our going out of Tarut Isscerif, I
went through the Channel of Joseph's River on foot, for there it begins. I went
next to Tanuf, a Village, where some Ruins are yet to be seen; and about noon
we were at Melave, where I lodged at the Occale, or Inn, that is near the
Marketplace, at the West Side of the Town, near the great Mosque; and because
the upper Chambers were all taken up by Turks, I was obliged to lodge in a very
low Room, where I met with many inconveniences, because it was near the Door,
at the passage of all comers and goers.

Wednesday, the 29th of the Month, the Turks begin the Feast called Eid il
dehie, or the Easter of the Victims; for they use to kill Sheep during this
Festival, and give the Flesh to the Poor for Gods sake. This Festival continues
three days, during which time the Copties buy no Victuals from the Mahometans,
nor Bread, Wine, Flesh, Coffee, nor Water. By this they discover their
abhorrency of that Religion; for thereby they shun all occasions of
communicating with them.

At Melave I got acquaintance with an Archpriest of that place, called Nassr
alla. He was the honestest, civilest, and ablest Man that I ever knew of that
Nation. There are about seven hundred Caraches, or Heads, that pay Tribute.
They have there a Church, dedicaced to S. Michael, which is but little, poor,
and obscure.

The River Nilus swallowed up heretofore the ancient Melave, and now the River
runs in the place where that Town stood. The Town now is built in another
place, where was anciently a Wood that was a retreat for Robbers.

A Voyage into the Lower Thebes.
I Was loath to return to Cairo without seeing the Country of the Lower Thebes,
or at least a part of it, seeing that I was so near it; I resolved therefore to
follow the advice of my Friend, the Archpriest, and to go to the Monastery of
Abuhennis il Kessir, or of S. John the little, whereof he was Governor,
situate near the ancient Town Insine, on the East Side of Nilus, about an
hours traveling from Melave, to see the Rarities thereabouts.

Saturday, the first of April, I went from Melave to this Monastery; and the
next day, being our Easter-Sunday, I got a Guide to lead me upon the Mountain,
which is behind, on the East Side, to see the Caves of the ancient Hermites
that are round about, and near to the Town, which have given to it the name of
Thebes, as we shall see in the following discourse.

I went into many of these Caves that were all very large. I saw nothing worthy
of notice, but in some certain Crosses graven in the Rock; and upon the Walls
of one I saw two Angels, holding up with their hands a Cross in the Air.

The only thing that pleased me among these Caves, was a Monastery, with a
Church, all cut in a firm Rock. The Vault of the Church was smooth, and the
Paving very even. The Walls were painted in an antic fashion, with the
Histories of the New Testament, with Images of Hermites, and Saints, whose
names were written underneath in Coptick Letters. At the end of the Church,
Southward, I saw a Cross cut in the Rock, with a Greek Inscription, in ancient
Characters. And upon the Walls of another Cave, at a little distance from this
Church, and higher, about the top of the Mountain, I sound also another graven
upon the Wall; and near this, two others, which are all Epitaphs of Abbots
there Interred. I could not cause them to be put here, because the Printer
would not be at the charge of the Characters.

April the third, being Monday in Easter Week, I went to the ancient Town of
Insine, called in the Copties Dictionaries Antinoe, and Thebes.

I went to see first the Tomb of Mahomet Bey, a Bey of Girge, about fourteen
years ago. When he took arms against Pacha Gaze, he was defeated at Melave, and
his men forsook him; he was taken and strangled. His Tomb is out of the City in
the common burying place, and though there is nothing there extraordinary, I
was desirous to see it, because he has been, and is yet in great reputation
amongst the Inhabitants for his Justice and good Government, which has caused
him to be lamented by all the Upper Egypt.

When I had seen this Tomb, I walked into the Town, and the first thing that I
took notice of, as a great Antiquity, was the Pillar of Marcus Aurelius. Its
bottom is above five foot, the four uppermost are all even, and the fifth below
is adorned with carved leaves. In the Basis is a Greek Inscription containing
thirteen lines.

I saw near this Pillar the pieces of three others, very much resembling this,
but broken down; there was nothing of them standing but the Basis of one.

From the Pillar I went to see the Arch of Triumph, which is almost all
standing. I took a delight to climb up to it by a little pair of Stairs winding
up in the Wall of the Arch, containing fifty steps, or thereabouts. I rested my
self at the greatest Window which is upon the chief Vault, where I had the
satisfaction to discover all its ruins, and the situation of this Town,
heretofore so famous.

This Arch is alone, and altogether separated from the other Ruins, and about
four paces from the River Nilus; but for want of an Inscription, none knows for
whom, and by whom it has been raised. It is not enriched with carved Works, as
those of Orange and Rome; nevertheless it is one of the most beautiful that I
have ever seen.

One of its fronts has eight and forty foot in breadth, and one of its sides
four and twenty. The great Vault in the middle, which is between two little
ones, is about 16 foot broad, and each of the two little ones seven foot. The
thickness of the Wall which is between the great and the little Vaults, which
is but one stone, is of six foot and two inches: The thickness which is between
the little Vault, and the outward Angle of the Arch, is of five foot: The front
that looks toward Nilus, is on the South-East side.

There is yet fourteen Pillars of Marble on the left hand of this Arch, in a
straight line toward the River; some of them have their Capitals, others have
lost them; some are joined to the Huts of some Arabians that dwell there. On
the same side, toward the Monastery of Abuhennis, are to be seen three
beautiful Pillars of Porphyry standing; some of them have their tops; a fourth
lies along the ground near by.

In the Mosque of this Town is a Sciech, or Saint, whom the Arabians call
Sciech Abade, for whom they have a great Veneration, for they believe him to
have been a Mohammedan; but they are much deceived, he was a Christian, a Bishop
of Isne, he suffered Martyrdom at Isne. They have called him Sciech Abade, by
an error which the Surname of this Bishop has caused. He was called Ammonius
il Abed, or the devout Ammonius. The Arabians, through a mistake of the word
Abed, making it a proper name, whereas it is but an appellative, have called
him Sciech Abade. His Relics are kept in the Heikel of this Church, which now
is a Mosque.

I went afterward to take a view of a magnificent Palace, called by the
Arabians Abulkerun, or the horned Building, because, as I think, the Pillars
that are before this Palace have Capitals, whereof the Angles are so great,
that they appear as so many Horns to the beholders, which the word Kern
signifies. But when I had viewed so many old Relics, I was so weary, that I
returned to the Monastery; and the rather, because of the violent heat, with an
intent to return another day, and examine all things more exactly.

Tuesday the fourth of April, I went with my ordinary Guide to see the
Vadigamus, and the Caves that are there. Vadigamus is a narrow Valley, between
two Mountains, which are as high as one another, and flat on the top. This
Valley is like a Bugle, from whence I believe this Valley has borrowed the
name; for the word Vadigamus signifies the Valley of the Bugle. At the
beginning it has a large entrance, which answers to a great sandy Plain, which
is at one side of the Monastery of Abuhennis. It stretches it self Southwards,
about half an hours traveling over: Afterward it rises by degrees to the top
of the Mountains, where it unites and joins them, and represents the bottom of
a Sack.

On both sides of these two Mountains that face one another, are two Ranks of
Caves, each Rank containing fifty Caves, or thereabouts, which make one hundred
Caves upon each Mountain. I entered into some of them that were so high, that
three long Pikes tied to one another would not have reached to the top: They
are very large, but without order within, and uneven, and not perfectly square.

I have wondered at the capricious designs of the Ancient Egyptians, to make
such wide Caves so high, and so numerous, yielding so little convenience to the
Inhabitants, for they are made upon the steep Mountains of Sand, far from Towns
and Water, dug in the dark and main Rocks. If I had not perused the History
of Said ibn Patrik, who says, that the Pharaoh's, Kings of Egypt, employed the
Israelites in digging in these Mountains, I should be of the opinion of the
Country people, who believe that all these Caves have been made by Devils, who
have been thereunto forced by Conjurers, this Art having been always much
practiced in Egypt; for one would think that it is not possible for men to make
them: and I dare say, that when a Traveller has seen all the Curiosities of
Egypt, if he has not seen these Mountains and Caves of the Province of Thebes,
he has seen nothing.

Wednesday the fifth of the Month, I went again to Insine, to look upon its
Ruins with more exactness, and chiefly upon the Pillars that stand before the
Abulkerun, on the North-west side.

There are in all four before the front of this Palace, which heretofore was
very magnificent, but now there remains but little, encompassed about with the
Ruins. Two of these Pillars are on the one side of the door, and two on the
other; three are yet standing, only a third part of the fourth appears: they
are made of a certain white sandy stone, which is taken out of the Mountains
near this Town: they are hollow on the sides, from the bottom to the middle,
but the rest upwards is smooth: the bottom or bulk is nigh thirteen foot about;
their Capitals are of two pieces, seven foot in Diameter; every bottom is of
five pieces, and every piece is seven foot long.

There was behind this Palace, on the South-East side, four other Pillars of
the same bigness, form, and substance; but they are overthrown. I could scarce
discern where their Basis stood: the Pillar of Marcus Aurelius stands at the
North-West side of this old Palace.

The same day I went again to see the Pillar of Marcus Aurelius; its Basis is
thirteen foot high, made up with eight ranks of stones; the first and lowest is
half in the ground, and half out; the second is two foot high; the third a foot
and eight inches; the fourth, fifth, and sixth, upon which is the Inscription,
each two foot and two inches; the seventh bends out; the eighth is the
immediate Basis upon which the Pillar stands: This Basis is five foot long, and
two foot and ten inches high; it is square in the bottom, in the middle
Octogone, or of eight Angles, and in the top Oval: upon this stone is the
bottom of the Pillar, which is made up of five pieces; the lowermost is
beautified with Oaken leaves carved in the stone; I have never seen the like
elsewhere, it is three foot and a half high; the four other pieces are of seven
foot each, and three inches long; the Diameter of the Pillar is of three foot
and seven inches; the Capital is of one stone, three foot and an inch high; the
Circumference is of seven foot; upon the Capital stands an unpolished stone,
four foot and two inches long, and three foot high.

I perceived that in this Town heretofore there has been two Streets more
remarkable than the others; one begun at the Abulkerun, and ended at the four
Pillars of Marcus Aurelius, stretching from East to North. This Street was
adorned with two ranks of Pillars, one rank in each side: the second begins at
the Arch of Triumph, which is at one end of the Town, at the South-East,
drawing to the North-East. These Streets are very long, large, straight, and
full of ruins of stately Palaces.

About three a Clock in the Afternoon, I went the third time to see the
Monastery dug in the Rock, mentioned before. I have always taken a great
delight to view it, because the sight of it moved my Devotion: It stands about
half an hours traveling a-foot from the Monastery of Abuhennis, where I was,
and East from this Monastery.

In Insine, as well as in the Caves of the Mountains round about, are to be
seen in the ground great Pots, in which the ancient Inhabitants of this
Province kept their Wines: They have an Ear at each side, and are sharp at the
bottom, that they might be sixed in the ground: my Guide found many, which he
brought to me; but the Wine was dried within, and as black as Pitch: I have
sent two of them to Paris.

The seventh of April, the Good Friday of the Copties, I went with my Guide to
see the Caves that are near the Monastery of Amba Biscioi, about a mile from
the Convent, toward the South.

The first remarkable thing that I saw, was the Hieroglyphick Cave, which the
Country people commonly call the Church. I conceive this mistake proceeds from
the Crosses which are painted every where within.

To go into this Cave, one must pass through another before it. This was
heretofore very beautiful and great, but now it is much decayed. The top is
fallen down; there remains nothing but the two side-walls, full of
Hieroglyphick Figures graven in the Rock; some are great, others are little,
others are of a moderate size, but all very clean in good order.

From thence is a passage into the Hieroglyphick Cave, which I believe was a
Temple of the Heathens: It is square, very smooth within, cut in the Rock, sour
Perches long, three Perches and one foot broad, and two Perches high: The door
that leads into it is four foot and a half large. In this Cave, over against
the door, is a hole in the Wall, of a Perch and a foot deep, and four foot
broad, and a Perch and one foot and eight inches high. This Cave is full of
Images in the Walls, and above, which represent their Sciences by Emblemes, and
Hieroglyphick Figures, with very little Characters in their Language round
about. The colors of them are so beautiful and lively, that I could not but
wonder how they could continue so fresh, during so many Ages.

Besides this great number of Characters there painted, are to be seen some
lines of the same little Characters very clean carved in the Wall, some
reaching from one end to the other, others from the top to the bottom. These
Characters, and Figures, are so numerous, that they are not to be drawn by any
in less than a Months time.

Under these two Caves there is a rank of others in the Rock, very even within,
but they are without Figures, and less, and not so high as the former; for they
are but six foot high. In the bottom of every Cave is a Well, square, and deep
in the Rock, into which one may go down by the means of holes, or steps, made
on purpose in both sides of every Well. And in the bottom of every Well is an
Alley in the Rock, but because these Alleys are durty and obscure, none of our
Company would venture to go down. In the Walls of some of these Caves are
square holes, six foot deep, and two foot broad, about the bigness of a Coffin;
which makes me believe that the Egyptians did put here their dead in these
Caves.

A little farther, toward the South, is another large Cave. I saw on the left
hand an Hieroglyphick Picture in the Wall, with thirteen lines underneath, of
Characters cut in the Picture.

From this Cave, which is at the end of the Mountain, toward the South, we
went back to the Monastery of Abuhennis; and in our way we saw all the Caves
that are in order upon this Mountain, as far as the place where the Vadigamus
begins. We saw no rarity, only some painted Crosses, in red, roughly drawn;
from whence we gathered, that heretofore they have served as Churches.

By the differing Workmanship of these Caves, one may easily distinguish such
as have been made by the ancient Egyptians, by the Christians, and Anchorites
that caused this Province to flourish; for the former are very regular, out
within, with much care, and smooth; but the others are rough, and irregular.

And because the Country People think that there is no Cave without a rich
Treasure, the Arabians have dug every where, and spoiled also the
Hieroglyphick Cave, which is named the Church. They have so much undermined the
Walls that some of the top is fallen down, and the Rain has spoiled some of
the Emblems, and Characters that adorned the Wall. And, as if Time had not
blotted out enough, they have put out the Eyes of the Images, and Figures, in a
brutish manner, natural to them. I was highly displeased to see this; for were
it not for this brutality, this beautiful Cave would have kept it self* entire
till now.

When we had staid nine days in the Monastery of Abuhennis, I returned to
Melave, the 8th of April; from whence I went, the 15th of the same Month, to
Minie, altering my first design to go by Land; for I saw that it would be too
painful, and too dangerous.

Minie, in the Arabian Books called Miniet ibn chassit, is an ancient, great,
and beautiful Town, on the West Side of Nilus. Its Antiquity appears by its old
Buildings, by its strait Streets, so narrow that two Men can scarce to
abreast. In this Town the Bardaques, or Water-pots, are made, which are highly
esteemed at Cairo, for their fashion, and property, to cool Water. They are
made with a kind of Clay, taken about a days Journey from thence, on the
East Side of Nilus, in a place called Sciech fadl, from the name of a religious
Mohammedan there Interred.

The 19th of this Month, I went aboard a Vessel, bound for Benesuef; a good
Wind carried us a great way in a little space of time. At nine a Clock we were
over against Gebel Teir, or the Mountain of Birds; so called, because at a set
day of the year, all the Birds round about meet in a place, where a Talisman
draws them together from all sides, and causes them to stay there one day;
when they have continued there till night, they all fly away, one excepted,
which remains there, the Bill fixed in the Rock, till the same day the next
year; at which time it falls down, and another takes its place.

When we passed over against this Mountain, I saw on the top a Stone, which is
called the Camel, because, at a distance, it is like a Camel. A little further
in our way, we discovered Taka, or the Window, or a great hole which Nature
has made in the Rock, like a Window; which serves as a passage for the Birds
when they go to their Rendezvous whither the Talisman draws them, as the People
of the Country say, and their Historians affirm.

When the Moors are come to this Window, they use to say the Chapter of the
Fatha, or first Chapter of the Alcoran, for the poor People, who live, as they
say, in this part of the Mountain, as Beasts, feeding upon nothing but raw
Herbs. After Dinner we went by Been Mohammed il Kifur, a Village situate on
the West Side of Nilus. Over against it is an old Monastery, ruinated; and a
little further appear a great many Caves, upon the Mountain near by. After we
had passed by an old Castle destroyed, we went to lie at Benemzar, a great
Village, situate on the West Side of Nilus, this River having washed away
almost half the Buildings.

We went from thence, Thursday morning, the 20th of April, with a South-East
Wind, fit to carry us to Benesuef. It was yet in the morning when we sailed
before Heggiar Selame, which is a Bank in the River Nilus. Over against it are
the Ruins of an ancient Town, and the Tomb of a Sciech, or Saint. About noon
we were near the Ruins of another ancient Town, called Medinet Giahel, which
stands at the East of Nilus; there are to be seen yet several Remains of
Houses, made up with Bricks dried in the Sun. Over against it is Feggen, a
Village often mentioned in a Book called Sinaxar. After Dinner a strong Wind
arose, and forced us to stop at Bebe, a great Village which is near Benesuef,
where we found encamped a Troop of Arabians, called Ateijat, with whom I passed
the rest of the day in discourse.

Friday, the 21th of the Month, we arrived at Benesuef, where we continued till
the next day; and on the 24th of the Month I returned to Caire, without seeing
Isne, as I had an intent.

But that the Reader may know what rarities are to be seen in this Town, and
round about, I have here added that which has been taken notice of by Father
Portais, a Capuchin, in the year 1668. according to the account given me by the
Reverend Father Francis, his Brother, and Companion in his Travels. M. Thevenot
has already inserted it in his Collection of Travels, printed at Paris, in
Folio; but not so large, nor with the Particulars here added.

Of all the Towns of the Upper Egypt, where the Copties have Churches, that of
Isne is the furthest from Cairo. It is built at the West Side of Nilus, upon a
Hill that stretches along the River. It may be judged to be an ancient Town, by
a Temple of Pagans yet standing. The Copties have there two Churches, but very
poor; one is dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and the other to S. Pelagius. The
Christian Copties here may make twenty Caraches in number; they are all
Weavers, and ruled by two Arch-Priests, the one named Matthew, and the other
Soliman.

Half a mile from Isne is to be seen a Convent, which the Copties say has been
built by S. Helena, dedicated to the holy Martyrs of this Town, whom the
Governor of Dioclesian Massacred in such numbers, that their dead Corpses
covered fourscore Fiddans, or Acres of Ground. Round about this Burying-place
are to be seen Tombs curiously wrought, which they say were erected by this
holy Empress.

Three leagues from Isne is another Convent, dedicated to S. Matthew, where are
four or five Tombs, like those that we come from mentioning. Upon an Altar
Stone of a little Chapel, dedicated to St. Michael the Archangel, we sound
some Characters which were not Hyeroglyphick, in a Language that we understood
not.

About eleven leagues on this side of Isne, at the East of Nilus, is to be seen
Tuot, a great Town, where is a Temple of the ancient Egyptians.

Twelve leagues from Tuot, at the West of Nilus, is Arment, heretofore a great
Town, but now forsaken and ruinated. They call it in Arabic Beled Muse, or the
Country of Moses, because the Egyptians believe that Moses was born here. Here
is under ground an ancient Temple.

Two leagues on this side of Tuot, are two Villages very famous; namely, Luxor,
and Luxor il Kadim, or the old Luxor; they are about half a league from one
another.

At Luxor is to be seen the Remains of an ancient, and beautiful Temple of the
Egyptians, in which are threescore and eighteen Pillars of a prodigious
bigness, chiefly fourteen, placed in rank, two and two; so big that six Men can
scarce embrace them, but they are but six Perches high.

The bottom of this Temple is yet entire; here are several Chambers, and
separations, whereof the Walls are full, from the top to the bottom, of Figures
roughly drawn, and Hieroglyphick Letters carved over. Before the Door stands
two Needles, square, and very high and entire; so fresh that one would think
that the Workman has newly finished them. They are on every side eight foot
broad.

Near their Basis are two Statues of Women, of black Marble; and though they be
half under ground, to the Girdle, they stand out as high as three Men.

Their bigness is answerable to their height; for there is twelve foot from one
shoulder to another. They have a strange kind of covering upon their heads,
with a Globe on the top. Their Faces are disfigured, the rest is whole.

The description of the Frontispiece of this Temple, is with the other Pictures.

At the old Luxor is a very ancient Palace. Its Ruins show that it has been
very glorious. They say, that here dwelt one of the ancient Kings of Egypt. In
the Walks of this Palace are to be seen many Sphinxes, in ranks, on both sides
of the Alleys, two foot from one another, looking upon the Alley. They have
every one, one and twenty foot in length. This Palace has four Walks, that
answer to four Gates. In the first are one hundred and twenty Sphinxes,
threescore in each side; and in the second are one hundred and two, one and
fifty in aside. Every Walk is about the length of a place to play at Mall. the
Gates of the Palace are extraordinary high, made with the most beautiful Stones
in the World; one of the sides of the Gate is six and twenty foot high. (I find
in another Copy of this Relation, that it has thirty six foot.) The Palace is
so defaced, that there is no order, nor beauty, that appears; nevertheless
there are so many curious things in it, that no Man in a Month, can take a full
view of them; for there is above a Million of Figures, roughly drawn; some are
covered over, others appear with an open face. Here are also a great many
Pillars; I counted, says the Father, in a Parlour threescore, which are all so
great, that five Men can scarce embrace one of them about.

In the Court of the Palace is a Basin garnished about with beautiful Stones,
and full of a bitter Water, which, as the People say, whitens Linen very well.
I tried it, says the Father, by dipping into it my Handkerchief, which kept
above four days the smell of Soap. At one Front of the Palace are two Statues
of a Giant, of one Stone, as white as Alabaster. They have Swords by their
sides. In the middle of the Palace is another, as high as three Men, not well
pollish'd, but well proportioned.

A league on this side there is an ancient Town, called Habu, where are to be
seen many rarities, chiefly Mommies. At a distance one may there discover two
Statues; one of a Man, the other of a Woman. The Country People call that
Sciama, and this Tama, They seem to be at least as big as the Abulhon, or the
Sphinx over against Cairo. Near this place is a Village, where is to be seen
two Statues from the River Nilus, so new that one would think the Workman had
just perfected them.

Thirteen leagues on this side of the old Luxor, is a Town named Neggade, where
is a Bishop with about seventy Families of Christian Copties. Here is yet three
Monasteries, one is called Deir il Salib, or the Monastery of the holy Cross;
the second Deir il Megma; the third Deir Mary Poctor; but these two last are
not inhabited.

Two miles from Neggade, on the East Side of Nilus, is the ancient Town of Kus;
but here are but threescore Christian Copties, who have here a Church,
dedicated to S. Stephen.

Six leagues from Neggade, on this side, is Kenne, a Village situate on the
Eastern Bank of Nilus. It is a Mart-Town, and the Rendezvous of the Caravans
that go from Cairo to Cosseir, heretofore named Berenice, four days Journies
from this Village, and a Haven of the Red Sea. The Christians that live at
Kenne are very poor, and without any Church.

Two leagues on this side of Kenne is the ancient Town of Tentiris, now called
Dendera, where is a wonderful Temple of the ancient Egyptians, of a prodigious
bigness and height. It is to be seen at two leagues distance.

Macrizi says, that it has as many Windows as there are days in the year:
They are so placed, that every one answers to a degree of the Zodiac; so that
the Sun rising in a differing degree every day of the Zodiac, it sends in its
Beams into a distinct Window from the day before: And when at the end of the
year it has finished and run through every degree of the Zodiac, it has also
from the East cast in its Beams into every Window of this Temple: For this
cause it is looked upon as a Wonder in Egypt.

Ten Leagues on this side of Dendera, at the West of Nilus, is Cassr, a Village
where is an old Convent, dedicated to Amba Balamon: Over against this Village
is the ancient Town Hu, where is yet a Convent dedicated to S. Menna, but there
was then no Priest.

Two Leagues on this side of Hu, on the same Bank is Bahgiura, at a little
distance from the River: Its Port is called Sahel; there is two Convents, one
dedicated to S. Bidabe, the other to S. George. At two Leagues on this side of
Bahgiura, on the same Bank, is the Village Beliene, where is a very beautiful
Church under ground, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin. Girge, the chief Town of
the Upper Egypt, stands six Leagues from Beliene on this side.

Here ends the Relation of Father Portais. I could wish that this good man had
given us a more exact account, and more at large of the Rarities that he saw in
these places, for this Relation is superficial.

The 14th of June, I went at Cairo to see the Enchanted watering place, called
in Arabic, Houd il merasset, which is under the Mosque of the Palace, called
Kalet it Kebsch, no Taveller has over spoken of it.

It is a black Marble-stone, made like a Watering place, seven foot long,
arising out of the ground about a foot and a half: The sides, within and
without, are adorned with little Hieroglyphick Letters, as well as the Brims.
The people of Cairo say, that in the time of the ancient Egyptians, the sick
people did recover their health by drinking Water out of it; and that by the
virtue of a Rassem, or Charm, which the Priests of Egypt had given to it.

The 20th of this Month I went to see the wonderful Well which is in the
Castle, commonly named Joseph's Well. Its top is square, very large, cut in the
Rock; it is about one hundred and twenty Perches deep, the Perch containing six
foot. The water is drawn out with two Wheels, the one placed at the Mouth of
the Well, and the other about threescore and fifteen Perches underneath. There
are two Oxen at each Wheel to turn them; the lowest, which is fifty Perches
above the water, serves to draw the water into a Basin there on purpose; and
from thence, the upper Wheel draws the water to the top. The Beasts that work
there, go up and down very commodiously by a great large Path, which receives
the light through Windows cut on that side which looks to the water.

The Arabian Authors call it Bir haleizun, or the Snails Well, because there is
a Pathway that winds round about. The people commonly say, that it was dug
by Spirits; I am almost inclineable to believe it, for I cannot conceive how
men can compass so wonderful a work.

The Waters, as the Guardian told me, come out of the firm Rock, and yet
increase and decrease as the River Nilus: But I have heard others say, that
they come out of the great Aqueduct which is in old Cairo. Because I could not
understand the truth of it, I wish that some other Traveller would inform
himself better.

They that think that Joseph, Jacob's Son, caused it to be dug, are
deceived, for the Castle of Cairo was built many Ages after Joseph's death; and
it is the common opinion of all the Arabian Authors, that Joseph dwelt at
Memphis, which was on the other side of the River, near the Pynamids, and not
on this side where Cairo stands.

The 9th of this Month they cried about Town Ouf alla, that the River was risen
sixteen Cubits high. The next day, being S. Laurences day, they cut through the
Calitz with Ceremony; but there was no great rejoycings, because the Pacha had
observed that before, and every Pacha performs it but once in his time.

On the 18th of the same Month there happened a mischance to a French Merchant,
which discovers the wonderful jealousy of the Turks. As this Merchant was
taking the air at a Window of his house in the Even, on the Calitz side, a
Janissary that lived over against him, thinking that he made signs to his Women
and Slaves, shot off a Pistol at him, and wounded him in the hand. The French
Consul could never obtain from the Justice of Cairo to cause this Villain to be
punished.

On the first of September, Monsieur de Bonnecorse, before Consul of Seyda,
succeeded to Monsieur de Tiger, before Consul at Cairo, and landed at Boulac,
in the company of many great Merchants, upon a great Bark well trimmed, with a
Flag of the Arms of France on the Main Mast.

At his arrival he saluted Boulac with five little Brass-Pieces of Canon, which
were at the Stern of his Ship. He landed not at the Douane, for the Consuls are
free from that Visit, but in a pleasant house upon the River, near the Douane,
until he had got leave from the Pacha to go to Cairo. As soon as he had
received it, he mounted on Horseback without more ado, and rode into the City,
with all the Merchants of his Nation riding on Asses. The Pacha sent none to
bid him welcome; only the Venetian Consul sent his Servants to meet him, and
his Horse.

The same day, one of those Swimmers, whom I have already mentioned, swum all
along the Calitz, according to the Custom.

On the seventh of the Month, Ibrahim Pacha went from Cairo in Pomp.

On the 29th, I went with Monsieur Bonnecorse to Adelia, a Suburb of Cairo, on
the North-East side, where are the Tombs of the Kings of Egypt, to see the
coming in of the new Pacha.

It is not amiss to mention here two Customs, which all the Pacha's ought to
observe when they come first to this Government, and when they leave it.

Every Pacha, before he enters into Cairo, is bound to visit the Tomb of Sciech
il Sciafei, who is buried in the Caraffe, for he is the Protector of the
Ottoman Family; for the Turks following the Doctrines of the Mohammedan
Religion, believe that he is able to obtain for them from their Prophet, a
happy and peaceable Government: And when they depart, they are bound to render
the same respects to the Tomb of Sultan Cajed Bey, though an Enemy of the
Ottoman Race, and one of the last lawful Kings of Egypt, to thank him, because
he had suffered his Government to be without disorders and disgrace.

These two Customs are so Religiously to be observed by the Pacha's that the
people of Cairo say, that they have seen some that have neglected or contemned
them, to have been suddenly deposed, and to have met with unhappiness in their
time.

I have heard say, that when Sultan Selimus had overcome the Mamelucs, he was
afraid to go into Cairo, to take possession of his Conquest, till Sciech il
Sciafei appeared to him, to assure him, that he need not fear any thing. And
that the next day when he made his Entry, an unknown person led his Horse by
the Bridle into the Town, and then vanished away.

When I had continued in so incommodious a City, as Cairo is to the Francs,
twenty Months, the fear of some mishap which might have befallen me if the
Turks had known that I bought up their Books, caused me to think upon my
departure; and to secure my self, I imagined Constantinople to be the most fit
for my purpose. I resolved therefore to go thither: I left Cairo the 12th of
October, 1673. to sail to Rosetta; and because the River was then fullest, a
good Wind and a strong Current carried us thither in two Nights and a day. From
thence, I went aboard the same day in a Vessel of a Greek bound for
Constantinople. I landed at Chio, an Island of the Archipelague, the 25th of
November, where I staid two Months and a few days, wondering at the
delightsomness of this Island, and at the Civility of the Inhabitants to
Strangers: I went to visit tho famous Monastery of the Religious Greeks of
Neamoni, or of the Blessed and Only Virgin: I saw the Library, and all the
other Rarities of the Island. From thence I went to Smyrna, the 27th of
January, 1674. where I arrived the second of February, and staid till the 13th
of March. Then I went aboard with Sir John Finch, the King of Englands
Ambassador of Constantinople, where I arrived the 24th of March, being Holy
Saturday.

The 24th of July I went from Constantinople to the City Brousse, called by the
Europeans Bursia, the chief Town of Bythinia, and the ancient Seat of the
Ottoman Emperors, to see the Hot Baths, the Tombs, and the stately Mosques of
these Emperors: I staid there about eight days. On the fourth of September I
went to the Isle of Chio the second time, to see the gathering up of the
Mastick, a sweet Gum, which begins the 14th of this Month, according to the
Greek computation; and the 28th of October I returned to Constantinople.

On the second of January, 1676. the day that I was to depart with the Caravan
to Aleppo, that I might return the third time to Cairo, I found my self obliged
to go back for France; and because there was then no French Ships in that Haven
bound for France, only a small Bark laden and bound for Lisbon, which was gone
out of the Haven to wait for a good wind at the Islands near by. I went aboard
that Vessel, with an intent to leave her at the first Port of the Archipelague,
where I might find some French Vessel bound for France. I found one according
to my desire; for a furious Storm forced us to run into Suda, in the Island of
Candy. The 18th of this Month, I had news from the French Consul of Canea, that
there was a Vessel of Provence ready to set Sail for Thoulon; I left therefore
my Bark, to ride to Canea, in the company of many Persons on Horseback, whom
the Consul sent to meet me. The 24th we set fail for Milo, where we arrived the
26th day of the Month: There we stopped eight days. The 20th of February we
landed at Genoa, where we staid one day; and the 24th of this Month we arrived
happily at Thoulon, and the 22th of April I returned to Paris, after five full
years Traveling.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ABukelb. Page 127 Aduvie. Page 150 Agiasma. Page 158 Abulife. Page 162 Aleppo.
Page 2 Amsus. Page 6 Abulad il Arab. Page 8 Argenus. Page 42 Abeid. Page 44 St.
Anthonies Monast. Page 177 Amru. Page 78 Apparitions. Page 96 Arabians. Page 99
Alexandria. Page 106 Amba Biscioi. Page 137 Amba Bersum il Erian. Page 149 Amba
scinude. Page 148 Arsinoe. Page 156 Abutig. Page 221
B
BVni. Page 44 Birds of Egypt. Page 63 Bogas. Page 66 Babylon in Egypt. Page 81
Bedunis. Page 111 Bladders. Page 124 Bahr Joseph. Page 153 Bijakmuh. Page 157
Bibig. Page 158 Benesuef. Page 213
C
CVs. Page 3 Coptus. Page 4 Canopus. Page 6 Caliphs. Page 7 Copties. Page 10
Casciefs. Page 16 Crocodile. Page 44 Cheirbek. Page 50 Cairo. Page 72 Cassr
Isscemma. Page 79. and 143 Cateia. Page 81 Caraffa. Page 81 Caves. Page 90
Commodities of Egypt. Page 119 Carpets. Page 124 Coppers. Page 125 Clothes.
Page 126 Corals. Page 127 Casciabe. Page 166 Calitz. Page 168 Caravan of
Pilgrims going for Mecha. Page 210 Churches in Egypt. Page 217
D
DOlphins. Page 45 Doum. Page 61 Damietta. Page 67 Diast. Page 95 Drink. Page
219 Doveine. Page 220 Doveider. ib.
E
EGypt. Page 3 Egyptians. Page 25 Emir Hag. Page 212
F
FIshes of Nil. Page 44 Focaca. ib. Fostat. Page 79 Fuva. Page 103 Fondego.
Page 107 Fruits. Page 120 Flowers. Page 121 Feathers. Page 122 Fish. ib. Fium.
Page 148 Fatir. Page 200 Fatha. Page 178
G
GIauher. Page 73 Gebel il Mokattam. Page 74 Gates of Cairo. ib. Giama il
assar. Page 76 Granaries of the Grand Seignior. Page 80 Gemiane. Page 95 Gums.
Page 118 Gizey. Page 136
H
HOude. Page 44 Hasna. Page 59 Hilelgie. Page 60 Hakein. Page 75 Herbs. Page
121 Havara. Page 164
I
IChneumon. Page 48 Ibrah. Zughi. Page 50 Juyces. Page 119 Iron. Page 125
Ilahun. Page 165 Imam. Page 212 Amba Johannes. Page 218
K
KEschue. Page 44 Kern. Page 161
L
LErnica. Page 2 Lebaca. Page 60 S. Lewis. Page 69 Linen. Page 123 Lead. Page
125 Labyrinth. Page 162
M
MIsraim 's Child, Page 3 Mamaluks. Page 8 Moors. Page 9 Months. Page 21
Merissi. Page 22 Maltem. Page 25 Mikias. Page 39 Mansoura. Page 69 Mitgamr.
Page 71 Mousties. Page 77 Mekaukes. Page 78 Mommies. Page 89 Maadie. Page 104
Mareotis. Page 109 Minerals. Page 124 Meidins. Page 128 Monastery of S.
Macarius. Page 129 Ma-Tarea. Page 138 Mez le din alla. Page 142 Mary Girges.
Page 147 Mekkin. ib. Mocanan. Page 159 Menhi. Page 153 Miris, a Lake. Page 161
Migre. Page 173 Mafruca. Page 201 Marriage of the Copties. Page 204 Mahmel.
Page 207 Meschal. Page 211 Minie. Page 215 Momfallot. Page 216 Muallin Athanas.
Page 218 Marcus Aurel. Pillar. Page 231 Mahomet Bey. Page 232
N
NIcosia. Page 1 Noah 's Child. Page 3 Nilus. Page 27 Naibe, Gaibe. Page 151
Necheile. Page 221
O
OMara. Page 7 Ock. Page 127 Om il cossur. Page 229
P
PAcha's. Page 50, 51, etc. Plants. Page 62 Pigeon-houses. Page 70 Pyramides.
Page 83 Pharaoh. Page 92 Portais. Page 94 Pietro. Page 102 Pompey 's Pillar.
Page 111 Pewter. Page 125 Paper. Page 126 A Piaster, what. Page 127 A Purse,
what. Page 128 The Patriarch's Quarters. Page 146
Q
A Quintal. Page 127
R
ROdope. Page 92 Rosetta. Page 102 Rinds of Trees. Page 120 Roots. Page 121
Rotols. Page 127 Reals. ib. Reus, what. Page 131 Revenues of the Grand
Seignior. Page 170 Rife. Page 220
S
SEida. Page 2 Sultans. Page 8 Saida. Page 13 Seasons of Egypt. Page 20
Selimus. Page 50 Sangiack-Beys. Page 58 Sycamore. Page 60 Semennut. Page 70
Stife. Page 71 Suburbs of Cairo. Page 76 Sphinx. Page 88 Sinai. Page 93
Suaguen. Page 102 Sinduin. Page 103 Seventy Interpreters. Page 108 Salt Pits.
Page 109 Sebaca. ib. Stuffs. Page 122 Salts. ib. Sennuris. Page 160 Sequin.
Page 128 Sodats. Page 175 Sine. Page 201 Sciechs. Page 208 Serarie. Page 214
Siut. Page 218 Scioth. Page 220 Sedafe. Page 221 Sennabo. Page 229 Sciech
Abade. Page 233
T
TIrse. Page 48 Talismans. Page 50 Trees. Page 60 Tirut. Page 103 Teeth. Page
122 Tarane. Page 130 Treasure of Egypt. Page 170 Tahta. Page 220 Tuh-bekerim.
Page 220 Temeh. Page 221 Thebes. Page 231
V
VAriole. Page 44 Varal. Page 47 Vadeh ibn regia. Page 147 Vadigamus. Page 234
W
WOods. Page 119 Wools. Page 122 Wine, how made. Page 154 Washing of the
Copties. Page 205 White Monastery. Page 222
FINIS.
Histories, and other Curious Discourses, fit to be Read by Gentlemen. All
printed for, and sold by, John Starkey in Fleet Street.
THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Moscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in the year 1639.
containing a complete History of those Countries. Whereunto are added the
Travels of Mandelslo, from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and
finished in 1640. The whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures.
Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by J.
Davis. The second Edition, in Folio. Price bound 20 s.

2. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of
Florence; containing the History of Florence, the Prince, the Original of the
Guelf and Guibilin; the Life of Castruccio, Castracani; the Murder of Vitelli,
etc. by Duke Valentino; the State of France, the State of Germany, the
Discourses on Titus Livius; the Art of War; the Marriage of Belphegor. All from
the true Original, newly and faithfully translated into English. In Folio.
Price bound 18 s.

3. The History of Barbados, S. Christophers, Mevis, S. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight:
In two Books; containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described. In Folio. Price bound 10 s.

4. The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age; but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian, by Battista Nani,
Cavalier, and Procurator of S. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood, Knight. In
Folio. Price bound 14 s.

5. The Present State of the Ottoman Empire, in three Books; containing the
Maxims of the Turkish Polity; their Religion and Military Discipline.
Illustrated with diverse Figures. Written by Paul Ricaut Esquire late Secretary to
the English Ambassador there; now Consul of Smyrna. The fourth Edition. In
Octavo. Price bound 6 s.

6. The Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Lord of Agenton; containing the History
of Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
Occurrences in their particular Reigns, from the year 1464. to 1498. Revised
and Corrected from diverse Manuscripts, and ancient Impressions. By Denis
Godfrey, Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his
Edition lately Printed at Paris. Newly Translated into English. In Octavo.
Price bound 6 s.

7. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles II. to the great
Duke of Moscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, Performed by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663. and 1664. By an
Attendant on the Embassies. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s.

8. II Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time of
Sixtus IV. 1471. to the death of the late Pope Alexander VII. 1667. Written in
Italian, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. The second
Edition. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s.

9. A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces to its surrender, the 27th of September 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Volunteer in that service, and faithfully Englished. In
Octavo. Price bound 1 s.

10. An Historical, and Geographical Description of the great Country and River
of the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of
French. In Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

11. The Secret History of the Court of the Emperor Justinian. Written by
Procopius of Casaria. Faithfully Rendered into English. In Octavo. Price bound 1
s. 6 d.

12. The History of the late Revolutions of the Empire of the Great Mogul;
together with the most considerable Passages for five years following in that
Empire; with a new Map of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of
Indostan; the Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it
self there; as also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same; and the
principal cause of the decay of the States of Asia. By Monsieur F. Bernier,
Physician of the Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French by H. O.
Secretary to the Royal Society. In two Parts. In Octavo. Price bound 7 s.

13. The History of France under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. from
the death of King Lewis XIII. to the year 1664. Wherein all the Affairs of
State to that time, are exactly related. By Benjamin Priolo, and faithfully
Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s.

14. The History of the Twelve Casars, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
C. Suetonius Tranquillus. Newly Translated into English, and illustrated with
all the Casars Heads, in Copper Plates. In Octavo. Price bound 5 s.

15. A New Voyage into the Northern Countries: Being a Description, of the
Manners, Customs, Superstition, Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians,
Laplanders, Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Samopedes, Zemblans, and Islanders.
In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

16. The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Teritory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society. The second Edition. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

17. The Present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy. The second
Edition enlarged, with the manner of Election of Popes; and a Character of
Spain. Written originally in English, by John Gailhard, Gent. In Twelves. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

18. The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military
Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay; and faithfully Englished. In
Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

19. The Voyage of Italy: or, A Complete Journey through Italy. In two Parts.
With the Character of the People, and a Description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statutes, Antiquities; as also of
the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all the Princes; with
Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels, Gent. who traveled through
Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility. Opus Posthumum.
Corrected and set forth, by his old Friend and Fello-Traveller, S. W. Never
before extant. In Twelves. Price bound 5 s.

20. A Relation of the French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish
Netherlands, in the years 1677. and 1678. with an Introduction discoursing his
Title thereunto; and an account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May
2. 1667. Englished by G. H. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

21. A Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon Questions of
all sorts of Philosopy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of
the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenuous Persons of that Nation.
Englished by G. Havers. In Folio. Price bound 12 s.

22. The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the Policies, Councils,
Magistrates, and Laws of than State are fully related, and the use of the
balloting Box exactly described. Written in the year 1675. By the Sieur Amelott
de la Houscaie, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice. in Octavo. Price
bound 3 s. 6 d.

23. The Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier, a Noble Man of France, through
Turkey into Persia, and the East Indies, finished in the year 1670. Giving an
account of the State of those Countries. Illustrated with diverse Sculptures.
Together with a new Relation of the Present Grand Seigniors Seraglio. By the
same Author. Made English by J. P. To which is added a Description of all the
Kingdoms which encompass the Euxine and Caspian Seas. By an English Traveller.
Never before Printed. In Folio. Price bound 20 s.

24. The Complete Gentleman: or, Directions for the Education of Youth; as to
their Breeding at home, and Traveling abroad; by J. Gailhard, Gent. who has
been Tutor abroad to several of the Nobility and Gentry. In Oct. Price bound 3
s.

FINIS.

