Viri seraphici Joannis Done Quadragenarij Effigies vera, Qui post eam aetatem
Sacris initiatus Ecclesiae Sti Pauli Decanus obijt.

An^o Do^m 1631o AEtatis suae 59o



THE LIVES Of Dr. John Done, Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Richard Hooker, Mr. George
Herbert.

Written by IZAAK WALTON.

To which are added some Letters written by Mr. George Herbert, at his being in
Cambridge: with others to his Mother, the Lady Magdalen Herbert, written by
John Done, afterward Dean of St. Paul's.

Eccles. 44. 7. These were honorable men in their Generations.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Richard Marriott. Sold by most
Booksellers. 1670.

To the Right Honorable And Reverend Father in GOD GEORGE Lord Bishop of
Winchester, and Prelate of the most noble Order of the Garter.
My Lord,
I Did some years past, present you with a plain relation of the life of Mr
Richard Hooker, that humble man, to whose memory, Princes and the most learned
of this Nation have paid a reverence at the mention of his name -- And, now
with Mr. Hookers I present you also, the life of that pattern of primitive
piety, Mr. George Herbert; and, with his, the life of Doctor Done, and your
friend Sir Henry Wotton, all reprinted. -- The two first were written under
your roof: for which reason, if they were worth it, you might justly challenge
a Dedication. And indeed, so you might of Doctor Donnes, and Sir Henry Wottons:
because, if I had been fit for this Undertaking, it would not have been by
acquired Learning or Study, but by the advantage of forty years friendship, and
thereby the hearing of and discoursing with your Lordship, which has enabled
me to make the relation of these Lives passable in an eloquent and captious age.

And indeed, my Lord, though, these relations be well-meant Sacrifices to the
Memory of these Worthy men: yet, I have so little Confidence in my performance,
that I beg pardon for superscribing your name to them; And, desire all that
know your Lordship, to apprehend this not as a Dedication, (at least, by which
you receive any addition of honor;) but rather, as an humble, and a more
public acknowledgment of your long continued: and, your now daily Favors of

My Lord Your most affectionate and most humble Servant Izaak Walton.

To the Reader.
THough, the several Introductions to these several Lives, have partly declared
the reasons how, and why I undertook them: yet, since they are come to be
reviewed, and, augmented, and reprinted: and, the four are become one Book; I
desire leave to inform you that shall become my Reader, that when I look back
upon my mean abilities, it is not without some little wonder at my self, that I
am come to be publicly in print. And, though I have in those Introductions
declared some of the accidental reasons: yet, let me add this to what is there
said: that, by my undertaking to collect some notes for Sir Henry Wottons
writing the life of Doctor Done, and Sir Henry's dying before he performed it,
I became like those that enter easily into a Law-sute, or a quarrel, and having
begun, cannot make a fair retreat and be quiet, when they desire it. And
really, after such a manner, I became engaged, into a necessity of writing the
life of Doctor Done: Contrary, to my first Intentions. And that begot a like
necessity of writing the life of his and my honored friend, Sir Henry Wotton.

And, having writ these two lives; I lay quiet twenty years, without a thought
of either troubling my self or others, by any new engagement in this kind. But,
about that time, Doct. Ga. (then Lo. B. of Exeter) published the Life of Mr.
Ric. Hooker, (so he called it) with so many dangerous mistakes, both of him and
his Books: that discoursing of them with his Grace, Gilbert that now is Lord
Arch bishop of Canterbury, he enjoined me to examine some Circumstances, and
then rectify the Bishops mistakes, by giving the World a truer account of Mr.
Hooker and his Books; and I know I have done so. And, indeed, till his Grace
had laid this injunction upon me, I could not admit a thought of any fitness in
me to undertake it: but when he had twice enjoined me to it, I then trusted his
judgment, and submitted to his Commands; considering that if I did not, I could
not forbear accusing my self of disobedience: And, indeed of Ingratitude for
his many favors. Thus I became engaged into the third Life.

For the life of Mr. George Herbert, I profess it to be a Free-will-offering,
and writ, chiefly to please my self: but not without some respect to posterity,
for though he was not a man that the next age can forget, yet many of his
particular acts and virtues might have been neglected, or lost, if I had not
collected and presented them to the Imitation of those that shall succeed us:
for I conceive writing to be both a safer and truer preserver of men's Virtuous
actions, then tradition. I am to tell the Reader, that though this life of Mr.
Herbert was not by me writ in haste, yet, I intended it a Review, before it
should be made public: but, that was not allowed me, by reason of my absence
from London when 'twas printing; so that the Reader may find in it, some
double expressions, and some not very proper, and some that might have been
contracted, and, some faults that are not justly chargable upon me but the
Printer: and yet I hope none so great, as may not by this Confession purchase
pardon, from a good natured Reader.

And now, I wish that as Josephus (that learned Jew) and others, so these men
had also writ their own lives: and since it is not the fashion of these times;
that their friends would do it for them, before delays make it too difficult.
And I desire this the more: because it is an honor due to the dead, and a debt
due to those that shall live, and succeed us. For when the next age shall ( as
this does) admire the Learning and clear Reason which Doctor Sanderson (the
late Bishop of Lincoln) has demonstrated in his Sermons and other writings,
who, if they love virtue, would not rejoice to know that this good man was as
remarkable for the meekness and innocence of his life, as for his great
learning; and as remarkable for his Fortitude, in his long and patient
suffering (under them, that then called themselves the Godly Party) for that
Doctrine, which he had preached and printed, in the happy days of the Nations
and the Churches peace? And, who would not be content to have the like account
of Doctor Field, and others of noted learning? And though I cannot hope, that
my example or reason can persuade to this: Yet, I please my self, that I shall
conclude my Preface, with wishing that it were so.

J. W.

ERRATA.
If these mistakes (which spoil the sense) be first corrected by the Reader, he
will do me some, and himself a greater Courtesy.

Doct. Done. Page 29. lin. 15. r. perform 30. l. 24. r. do it 32. l. 2. r.
fortune 63. l. 121. r. Dort

In Sir H. Wotton. 29. l. 10. r. samed 35. l. 9. as well 37. l. 22. dele Mr.
Bedell 38. l. 17. dele mis- 41. l. 8. r. delivery 45. l. 5. r. mont 47. l. 19.
r. Syfiph^ 53. l. 7. r. against 56. l. 24. r. Elegy 75. l. 19. r. those.

In Mr. Hoooker. 25. l. 4. r. assiduous: still 42. l. 7. r. God and so These
must be thus corrected, or that Paragraph will not be sence^. 42 l. 11. r. and
in wicked 42. l. 15. dele (it) 56. l. 20. r. answers.

In George Herbert, 14. l. 4. r. his 24. dele of 32. l. 22. ^r. Parish Church
33. l. 26. r. she 34. l. 4. dele at 49. l. 10. r. wants it 63. l. 24. dele too
65. l. 24. r. spirits and 72. l. 3. r. for the 80. l. 1. r. to their.

The Copy of a Letter writ to Mr. Isaac Walton, by Doctor King Lord Bishop of
Chichester.
Honest Isaac,
THough a Familiarity of more then Forty years continuance, and the constant
experience of your Love even in the worst times, be sufficient to indear our
Friendship; yet, I must confess my Affection much improved, not only by
Evidences of private Respect to many that know and love you, but by your new
Demonstration of a public Spirit, testified in a diligent, true, and useful
Collection of so many Material Passages as you have now afforded me in the Life
of Venerable Mr. Hooker, of which, since desired by such a Friend as your self,
I shall not deny to give the Testimony of what I know concerning him and his
learned Books: but shall first here take a fair occasion to tell you, that you
have been happy in choosing to write the Lives of three such Persons, as
Posterity has just cause to honor; which they will do the more for the true
Relation of them by your happy Pen; of all which I shall give you my unfeigned
Censure.

I shall begin with my most dear and incomparable Friend Dr. Done, late Dean
of St. Paul's Church, who not only trusted me as his Executor, but three days
before his death delivered into my hands those excellent Sermons of his now
made public: professing before Dr. Winniff, Dr. Monford, and, I think, your
self then present at his bed side, that it was by my restless importunity, that
he had prepared them for the Press; together with which (as his best Legacy) he
gave me all his Sermon-Notes, and his other Papers, containing an Extract of
near Fifteen hundred Authors. How these were got out of my hands, you, who
were the Messenger for them, and how lost both to me and your self, is not now
seasonable to complain: but, since they did miscarry, I am glad that the
general Demonstration of his Worth was so fairly preserved, and represented to
the World by your Pen in the History of his Life; indeed so well, that beside
others, the best Critic of our later time (Mr. John Hales of Eaton College)
affirmed to me, He had not seen a Life written with more advantage to the
Subject, or more reputation to the Writer, then that of Dr. Donnes.

After the performance of this task for Dr. Done, you undertook the like
office for our Friend Sir Henry Wotton: betwixt which two there was a
Friendship begun in Oxford, continued in their various Travels, and more
confirmed in the religious Friendship of Age: and doubtless this excellent
Person had writ the Life of Dr. Done, if Death had not prevented him; by which
means his and your Precollections for that Work fell to the happy Menage of
your Pen: a Work which you would have declined, if imperious Persuasions had
not been stronger then your modest Resolutions against it. And I am thus far
glad, that the first Life was so imposed upon you, because it gave an
unavoidable Cause of Writing the second; if not? it is too probable, we had
wanted both, which had been a prejudice to all Lovers of Honor and ingenious
Learning. And let me not leave my Friend Sir Henry without this Testimony added
to yours; That he was a Man of as Florid a Wit and as Elegant a Pen, as any
former (or ours which in that kind is a most excellent) Age has ever produced.

And now having made this voluntary Observation of our two deceased Friends, I
proceed to satisfy your desire concerning what I know and believe of the
ever-memorable Mr. Hooker, who was Schismaticorum Mallcus, so great a Champion
for the Church of Englands Rights against the Factious Torrent of Separatists,
that then ran high against Church Discipline: and in his unanswerable Books
continues to be so against the unquiet Disciples of their Schism, which now
under other Names still carry on their Design; and, who (as the proper Heirs of
Irrational Zeal) would again take into the scarce closed Wounds of a newly
bleeding State and Church.

And first, though I dare not say that I knew Mr. Hooker; yet, as our
Ecclesiastical History reports to the honor of S. Ignatius, that he lived in
the time of St. John, and had seen him in his Childhood; so, I also joy that in
my Minority I have often seen Mr. Hooker with my Father, who was then Bishop of
London, from whom, and others, at that time, I have heard most of the material
passages which you relate in the History of his Life, and from my Father
received such a Character of his Learning, Humility, and other Virtues, that
like Jewels of unvaluable price, they still cast such a luster as Envy or the
Rust of Time shall never darken.

From my Father I have also heard all the Circumstances of the Plot to defame
him; and how Sir Edwin Sandys outwitted his Accusers, and gained their
Confession; and I could give an account of each particular of that Plot, but
that I judge it fitter to be forgotten, and rot in the same grave with the
malicious Authors.

I may not omit to declare, that my Fathers Knowledge of Mr. Hooker was
occasioned by the Learned Dr. John Spencer, who after the Death of Mr. Hooker
was so careful to preserve his unvaluable Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Books of
ECCLESIASTICAL POLITY, and his other Writings, that he procured Henry Jackson,
then of Corpus Christi College, to transcribe for him all Mr. Hookers
remaining written Papers, many of which were imperfect, for his Study had been
rifled, or worse used, by Mr Chark, and another, of Principles too like his:
but, these Papers were endeavored to be completed by his dear friend Dr.
Spencer who bequeathed them as a precious Legacy to my Father, after whose
Death they rested in my hand, till Dr. Abbot, then Archbishop of Canterbury,
commanded them out of my custody by authorizing Dr. John Barkcham to require,
and bring them to him to his Palace in Lambeth; at which time, I have heard,
they were put into the Bishops Library, and that they remained there till the
Martyrdom of Archbishop Laud; and, were then by the Brethren of that Faction
given with all the Library to Hugh Pe^ers, as a Reward for his remarkable
service in those sad times of the Churches Confusion; and though they could
hardly fall into a fouler hand; yet there wanted not other Endeavors to
corrupt and make them speak that Language for which the Faction then fought,
which, indeed was To subject the Sovereign Power to the People.

But I need not strive to vindicate Mr. Hooker in this particular, his known
Loyalty to his Prince whilst he lived, the Sorrow expressed by King James at
his Death, the Value our late Sovereign (of ever-blessed Memory) put upon his
Works, and now, the singular Character of his Worth by you given in the
passages of his Life, especially in your Appendix to it, do sufficiently clear
him from that Imputation: and I am glad you mention how much value Thomas
Stapleton, Pope Clement the VIII. and other Eminent men of the Romish
Persuasion, have put upon his Books: having been told the same in my Youth by
Persons of worth that have traveled Italy.

Lastly, I must again congratulate this Undertaking of yours, as now more
proper to you then any other person, by reason of your long Knowledge and
Alliance to the worthy Family of the Cranmers, (my old Friends also) who have
been men of noted Wisdom, especially Mr. George Cranmer, whose Prudence added
to that of Sir Edwin Sandys, proved very useful in the Completing of Mr.
Hookers matchless Books; one of their Letters I herewith send you, to make use
of, if you think fit. And let me say further; you merit much from many of Mr.
Hookers best Friends then living, namely, from the ever renowned Archbishop
Whitgift, of whose incomparable Worth, with the Charact^^ of ^he Times, you
have given us a more short and significant Account then I have received from
any other Pen. You have done much for Sir Henry Savile, his Contemporary and
familiar Friend; amongst the surviving Monuments of whose Learning (give me
leave to tell you so) two are omitted, his Edition of Euclid but especially his
Translation of King James his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance into elegant
Latin; which flying in that dress as far as Rome, was by the Pope and Conclave
sent to Salamanca unto Francisous Suarez, (then residing there as President of
that College) with a Command to answer it. When he had perfected the Work,
which he calls Defensio Fidei Catholicae, it was transmitted to Rome for a view
of the Inquisitors; who according to their custom blotted out what they
pleased, and (as Mr. Hooker has been used since his Death) added whatsoever
might advance the Popes Supremacy, or carry on their own Interest, commonly
coupling Deponere and Occidere, the Deposing and Killing of Princes; which
cruel and unchristian Language Mr. John Saltkel, his Amanuensis, when he wrote
at Salamanca, (but since a Convert, living long in my Fathers house) often
professed, the good Old man (whose Piety and Charity Mr. Saltkel magnified
much) not only disavowed, but detested. Not to trouble you further; your
Reader (if according to your desire, my Approbation of your Work carries any
weight) will here find many just Reasons to thank you for it; and for this
Circumstance here mentioned (not known to many) may happily apprehend one to
thank him, who heartily wishes your happiness, and is unfainedly,

Chichester, Novem. 17. 1664. Sir, Your ever-faithful and affectionate old
Friend Henry Chichester.

THE LIFE OF Dr. JOHN DONE, late Dean of St Paul's Church, LONDON.
The Introduction.
IF that great Master of Language and Art, Sir Henry Wotton, the late Provost
of Eaton College, had lived to see the Publication of these Sermons, he had
presented the World with the Authors Life exactly written; And, 'twas pity he
did not; for it was a work worthy his undertaking, and he fit to undertake it:
betwixt whom, and the Author, there was so mutual a knowledge, and such a
friendship contracted in their Youth, as nothing but death could force a
separation. And though their bodies were divided, their affections were not:
for, that learned Knight's love followed his Friends fame beyond death and the
forgetful grave; which he testified by entreating me, whom he acquainted with
his design, to inquire of some particulars that concerned it; not doubting but
my knowledge of the Author, and love to his memory, might make my diligence
useful: I did most gladly undertake the employment, and continued it with great
content 'till I had made my Collection ready to be augmented and completed by
his curious Pen: but then, Death prevented his intentions.

When I heard that sad news, and heard also that these Sermons were to be
printed, and want the Authors Life, which I thought to be very remarkable:
Indignation or grief (indeed I know not which) transperted me so far, that I
reviewed my forsaken Collections, and resolved the World should see the best
plain Picture of the Authors Life that my artless Pensil, guided by the hand of
truth, could present to it.

And, if I shall now be demanded as once Pompey's poor bondsman was, (The
grateful wretch had been left alone on the Seashore, with the forsaken dead
body of his once glorious lord and master: and, was then gathering the
scattered pieces of an old broken boat to make a funeral pile to burn it (which
was the custom of the Romans;) who art thou that alone have the honor to bury
the body of Pompey the great? so, who I am that do thus officiously set the
Authors memory on fire? I hope the question will prove to have in it more of
wonder then disdain; But wonder indeed the Reader may, that I who profess my
self artless should presume with my faint light to show forth his Life whose
very name makes it illustrious! but be this to the disadvantage of the person
represented: Certain I am, it is to the advantage of the beholder, who shall
here see the Authors Picture in a natural dress, which ought to beget faith in
what is spoken: for, he that wants skill to deceive may safely be trusted.

And if the Authors glorious spirit, which now is in Heaven, can have the
leisure to look down and see me, the poorest, the meanest of all his friends,
in the midst of this officious duty, confident I am that he will not disdain
this wellmeant sacrifice to his memory: for, whilst his Conversation made me
and many others happy below, I know his Humility and Gentleness was then
eminent; and, I have heard Divines say, those Virtues that were but sparks upon
Earth, become great and glorious flames in Heaven.

Before I proceed further, I am to entreat the Reader to take notice, that when
Doctor Donn's Sermons were first printed, this was then my excuse for daring to
write his life; and, I dare not now appear without it.

The Life.
MAster John Done was born in London, of good and virtuous Parents: and,
though his own Learning and other multiplied merits may justly appear
sufficient to dignifie both Himself and his Posterity: yet, the Reader may be
pleased to know, that his Father was masculinely and lineally descended from a
very ancient Family in Wales, where many of his name now live, that deserve and
have great reputation in that Country.

By his Mother he was descended of the Family of the famous and learned Sir
Tho. Moor, sometime Lord Chancellor of England: as also, from that worthy and
laborious Judge Rastall, who left Posterity the vast Statutes of the Law of
this Nation most exactly abridged.

He had his first breeding in his Fathers house, where a private Tutor had the
care of him, until the ninth year of his age; and, in his tenth year was sent
to the University of Oxford, having at that time a good command both of the
French and Latin Tongue. This and some other of his remarkable Abilities, made
one give this censure of him, That this age had brought forth another Picus
Mirandula; of whom Story says, That he was rather born than made wise by study.

There he remained in Hart-Hall, having for the advancement of his studies
Tutors of several Sciences to attend and instruct him, till time made him
capable, and his learning expressed in public exercises declared him worthy to
receive his first degree in the Schools, which he forbore by advice from his
friends, who being for their Religion of the Romish persuasion, were
conscionably averse to some parts of the Oath that is always tendered at those
times; and, not to be refused by those that expect the titulary honor of their
studies.

About the fourteenth year of his age he was transplanted from Oxford to
Cambridge; where, that he might receive nourishment from both Soils, he staid
till his seventeenth year; all which time he was a most laborious Student,
often changing his studies, but endeavoring to take no degree, for the reasons
formerly mentioned.

About the seventeenth year of his age, he was removed to London, and then
admitted into Lincolns-Inne, with an intent to study the Law; where he gave
great testimonies of his Wit, his Learning, and of his Improvement in that
profession: which never served him for other use than an Ornament and
Self-satisfaction.

His Father died before his admission into this Society; and being a Merchant
left him his portion in money (it was 3000 l.) His Mother and those to whose
care he was committed, were watchful to improve his knowledge, and to that end
appointed him Tutors in the Mathematics, and all the Liberal Sciences, to
attend him. But with these Arts they were advised to instill particular
Principles of the Romish Church, of which those Tutors professed (though
secretly) themselves to be members.

They had almost obliged him to their faith; having for their advantage
(besides many opportunities) the example of his dear and pious Parents, which
was a most powerful persuasion, and did work much upon him, as he professes in
his Preface to his Pseudo-Martyr; a Book of which the Reader shall have some
account in what follows.

He was now entered into the eighteenth year of his age, and at that time had
betrothed himself to no Religion that might give him any other denomination
than a Christian. And Reason and Piety had both persuaded him that there could
be no such sin as Schis me, if an adherence to some visible Church were not
necessary.

He did therefore at his entrance into the nineteenth year of his age (though
his youth and strength then promised him a long life) yet being unresolved in
his Religion, he thought it necessary to rectify all scruples that concerned
that: and therefore waving the Law, and betrothing himself to no Art or
Profession, that might justly denominate him; he begun to survey the Body of
Divinity, as it was then controverted betwixt the Reformed and the Roman
Church. And as Gods blessed Spirit did then awaken him to the search, and in
that industry did never forsake him, (they be his own words In his Preface to
PseudoMartyr.
) so he calls the same holy Spirit to witness this Protestation^ that, in that
disquisition and search, he proceeded with humility and diffidence in himself;
and, by that which he took to be the safest way; namely, frequent Prayers, and
an indifferent affection to both parties; and indeed truth had too much light
about her to be hid from so sharp an Inquirer, and he had too much ingenuity
not to acknowledge he had found her.

Being to undertake this search, he believed the Cardinal Bellarmine to be the
best defender of the Roman cause, and therefore betook himself to the
examination of his Reasons. The Cause was weighty, and wilful delays had been
inexcusable both toward God and his own Conscience; he therefore proceeded in
this search with all moderate haste, and before the twentieth year of his age,
did show the then Dean of Gloucester (whose name my memory has now lost) all
the Cardinals works marked with many weighty observations under his own hand;
which works were bequeathed by him at his death as a Legacy to a most dear
Friend.

The year following he resolved to travel; and the Earl of Essex going first
the Cales, and after the Island voyages, he took the advantage of those
opportunities, waited upon his Lordship, and was an eyewitness of those happy
and unhappy employments.

But he returned not back into England, till he had staid some years first in
Italy, and then in Spain, where he made many useful observations of those
Countries, their Laws and manner of Government, and returned perfect in their
Languages.

The time that he spent in Spain was at his first going into Italy designed for
traveling the Holy Land, and for viewing Jerusalem and the Sepulcher of our
Savior. But at his being in the furthest parts of Italy, the disappointment of
Company, or of a safe Convoy, or the uncertainty of returns for Money into
those remote parts, denied him that happiness which he did often occasionally
mention with a deploration.

Not long after his return into England, that exemplary Pattern of Gravity and
Wisdom, the Lord Elsemore, then Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Chancellor
of England, taking notice of his Learning, Languages, and other Abilities, and
much affecting his Person and Condition, took him to be his chief Secretary;
supposing and intending it to be an Introduction to some more weighty
Employment in the State; for which, his Lordship did often protest, he thought
him very fit.

Nor did his Lordship in this time of Master Donne's attendance upon him,
account him to be so much his Servant, as to forget he was his friend; and to
testify it, did always use him with much courtesy, appointing him a place at
his own Table, to which he esteemed his Company and Discourse a great Ornament.

He continued that employment for the space of five years, being daily useful,
and not mercenary to his Friends. During which time he (I dare not say
unhappily) fell into such a liking, as (with her approbation) increased into a
love with a young Gentlewoman that lived in that Family, who was Niece to the
Lady Elsemore, and daughter to Sir George Moor, then Chancellor of the Garter
and Lieutenant of the Tower.

Sir George had some intimation of it, and knowing prevention to be a great
part of wisdom, did therefore remove her with much haste from that to his own
house at Lothesley, in the County of Surry; but too late, by reason of some
faithful promises which were so interchangeably passed, as never to be violated
by either party.

These promises were only known to themseves, and the friends of both parties
used much diligence, and many arguments to kill o^ cool their affections to
each other: but in vain^ for, love is a flattering mischief, that has denied
aged and wise men a foresight of those evils that too often prove to be the
children of that blind father; a passion that carries u^ to commit Errors with
as much ease as whirlwinds remove feathers, and begets in us a^^unwearied
industry to the attainment of wha^ we desire. And such an Industry did,
notwithstanding much watchfulness against it, bring them secretly together (I
forbear to tell how^ and to a marriage too without the allowanc^ of those
friends, whose approbation alway^ was and ever will be necessary to make even^
virtuous love become lawful.

And that the knowledge of their marriag^ might not fall, like an unexpected
tempest, o^ those that were unwilling to have it so; bu^ that preapprehensions
might make it the les^ enormous, it was purposely whispered into the ears of
many that it was so, yet by none tha^ could attest it. But to put a period to
the jealousies of Sir George, (Doubt often begetting more restless thoughts
then the certain knowledge of what we fear) the news was i^ favor to Mr.
Done, and with his allowance, made known to Sir George^ by his honorable
friend and neighbor Henry Earl of Northumberland: but it was to Sir George so
immeasurably unwelcome, and so transported him, that as though his passion of
anger and inconsideration might exceed theirs of love and error, he presently
engaged his Sister the Lady Elsemore, to join with him to procure her Lord to
discharge Mr. Done of the place he held under his Lordship. This request was
followed with violence; and though Sir George were remembered, that Errors might
be overpunished, and desired therefore to forbear till second considerations
might clear some scruples, yet he became restless until his suit was granted,
and the punishment executed. And though the Lord Chancellor did not at Mr.
Donnes dismission, give him such a Commendation as the great Emperor Charles
the fifth, did of his Secretary Eraso, when he presented him to his Son and
Successor Philip the Second; saying, That in his Eraso, he gave to him a
greater gift then all his Estate, and all the Kingdoms which he then resigned
to him: yet he said, He parted with a Friend, and such a Secretary as was
fitter to serve a King then a subject.

And yet this Physic of Mr. Donnes dismission was not strong enough to purge
out all Sir George's choler, for he was not satisfied till Mr. Done and his
sometime Compupil in Cambridge that married him, namely, Samuel Brook (who was
after Doctor in Divinity, and Master of Trinity College) and his brother Mr.
Christopher Brook, sometime Mr. Donnes Chamber-fellow in Lincolns Inn, who gave
Mr. Done his Wife, and witnessed the marriage, were all committed, and to
three several prisons.

Mr. Done was first enlarged, who neither gave rest to his body or brain, nor
to any friend in whom he might hope to have an interest, until he had procured
an enlargement for his two imprisoned friends.

He was now at liberty, but his days were still cloudy: and being past these
troubles, others did still multiply upon him; for his wife was (to her extreme
sorrow) detained from him; and though with Jacob he endured not an hard service
for her, yet he lost a good one and was forced to make good his title to her,
and to get possession of her by a long and restless suit in Law; which proved
troublesome and chargeable to him, whose youth, and travel, and needless bounty,
had brought his estate into a narrow compass.

It is observed, and most truly, that silence and submission are charming
qualities, and work most upon passionate men; and it proved so with Sir George;
for these and a general report of Mr. Donnes merits, together with his winning
behavior, (which when it would entice, had a strange kind of elegant
irresistible art) these and time had so dispassionated Sir George, that as the
world had approved his Daughters choice, so he also could not but see a more
then ordinary merit in his new son: and this at last melted him into so much
remorse (for Love and Anger are so like Agues, as to have hot and cold fits;
and love in Parents, though it may be quenched, yet is easily rekindled, and
expires not, till death denies mankind a natural heat) that he labored his Sons
restoration to his place; using to that end both his own and his Sisters power
to her Lord; but with no success; for his Answer was, That though he was
unfeignedly sorry for what he had done, yet it was inconsistent with his place
and credit, to discharge and readmit servants at the request of passionate
petitioners.

Sir Georges endeavor for Mr. Donnes readmission, was by all means to be kept
secret (for men do more naturally reluct for errors, then submit to put on
those blemishes that attend their visible acknowledgment.) But however it was
not long before Sir George appeared to be so far reconciled, as to wish their
happiness, and not to deny them his paternal blessing, but yet refused to
contribute any means that might conduce to their livelihood.

Mr Donnes estate was the greatest part spent in many and chargeable Travels,
Books and dear-bought Experience: he out of all employment that might yield a
support for himself and wife, who had been curiously and plentifully educated;
both their natures generous, and accustomed to conferr, and not to receive
Courtesies: These and other considerations, but chiefly that his wife was to
bear a part in his sufferings surrounded him with many sad thoughts, and some
apparent apprehensions of want.

But his sorrows were lessened and his wants prevented by the seasonable
courtesy of their noble kinsman Sir Francis Wolly of Pirford in Surrie, who
entreated them to a cohabitation with him; where they remained with much
freedom to themselves, and equal content to him for many years; and, as their
charge increased (she had yearly a child) so did his love and bounty.

It has been observed by wise and considering men, that Wealth has seldom
been the Portion, and never the Mark to discover good People; but, that
Almighty God, who disposes all things wisely, has of his abundant goodness
denied it (he only knows why) to many, whose minds he has enriched with the
greater Blessings of Knowledge and Virtue, as ^he fairer Testimonies of his
love to Mankind; ^^^ this was the present condition of this man ^^^^^^
excellent Erudition and Endowments; whose necessary and daily expenses were
hardly reconcilable with his uncertain and narrow estate. Which I mention, for
that at this time there was a most generous offer made him for the moderating
of his worldly cares; the declaration of which shall be the next employment of
my Pen.

God has been so good to his Church, as to afford it in every age some such
men to serve at his Altar as have been piously ambitious of doing good to
mankind; a disposition that is so like to God himself, that it owes it self
only to him who takes a pleasure to behold it in his Creatures. These times he
did bless with many such; some of which still live to be Patterns of
Apostolical Charity, and of more than Humane Patience. I have said this,
because I have occasion to mention one of them in my following discourse;
namely, Dr. Morton, the most laborious and learned Bishop of Durham, one that
God has blessed with perfect intellectuals, and a cheerful heart at the age of
94 years (and is yet living:) one that in his days of plenty had so large a
heart as to use his large Revenue to the encouragement of Learning and Virtue;
and is now (be it spoken with sorrow) reduced to a narrow estate, which he
embraces without repining; and still shows the beauty of his mind by so liberal
a hand, as if this were an age in which to morrow were to care for it self. I
have taken a pleasure in giving the Reader a short, but true character of this
good man, from whom I received this following relation. He sent to Mr. Done,
and entreated to borrow an hour of his time for a Conference the next day.
After their meeting there was not many minutes passed before he spoke to Mr.
Done to this purpose; Mr. Done, The occasion of sending for you is to propose
to you what I have often revolved in my own thought since I last saw you:
which, nevertheless, I will not do but upon this condition, that you shall not
return me a present answer, but forbear three days, and bestow some part of
that time in Fasting and Prayer; and after a serious consideration of what I
shall propose, then return to me with your answer. Deny me not, Mr. Done, for
it is the effect of a true love, which I would gladly pay as a debt due for
yours to me.

This request being granted, the Doctor expressed himself thus:

Mr. Done, I know your Education and Abilities; I know your expectation of a
Stateemployment; and I know your fitness for it; and I know too the many delays
and contingencies that attend Court-promises; and let me tell you, my love
begot by our long friendship, our familiarity and your merits has prompted me
to such an inquisition of your present temporal estate, as makes me no stranger
to your necessities, which are such as your generous spirit could not bear, if
it were not supported with a pious Patience: you know I have formerly persuaded
you to wave your Court-hopes, and enter into holy Orders; which I now again
persuade you to embrace, with this reason added to my former request: The King
has yesterday made me Dean of Gloucester, and I am possessed of a Benefice,
the profits of which are equal to those of my Deanery; I will think my Deanery
enough for my maintenance (who am and resolve to die a single man) and will
quit my Benefice, and estate you in it, (which the Patron is willing I shall
do) if God shall incline your heart to embrace this motion. Remember, Mr.
Done, no man's Education or Parts make him too good for this employment, which
is to be an Ambassador for the God of glory, who by a vile death opened the
gates of life to mankind. Make me no present answer, but remember your promise,
and return to me the third day with your Resolution.

At the hearing of this, Mr. Donne's faint breath and perplexed countenance gave
a visible testimony of an inward conflict; but he performed his promise and
departed without returning an answer till the third day, and then it was to
this effect;

My most worthy and most dear friend, since I saw you I have been faithful to
my promise, and have also meditated much of your great kindness, which has
been such as would exceed even my gratitude; but that it cannot do; and more I
cannot return you; and I do that with an heart full of Humility and Thanks,
though I may not accept of your offer; but, Sir, my refusal is not for that I
think my self too good for that calling, for which Kings, if they think so, are
not good enough: nor for that my Education and Learning, though not eminent,
may not, being assisted with God's Grace and Humility, ^ender me in some
measure fit for it: but, I ^^e make so dear a friend as you are my C^^fessor;
some irregularities of my life have been so visible to some men, that though I
have, I thank God, made my peace with him by penitential resolutions against
them, and by the assistance of his Grace banished them my affections; yet this,
which God knows to be so, is not so visible to man, as to free me from their
censures, and it may be that sacred calling from a dishonor. And besides,
whereas it is determined by the best of Casuists, that God's Glory should be
the first end, and a maintenance the second motive to embrace that calling; and
though each man may propose to himself both together; yet the first may not be
put last without a violation of Conscience, which he that searches the heart
will judge. And truly my present condition is such, that if I ask my own
Conscience, whether it be reconcilable to that rule, it is at this time so
perplexed about it, that I can neither give my self nor you an answer. You
know, Sir, who says, Happy is that man whose Conscience does not accuse him
for that thing which he does. To these I might add other reasons that dissuade
me; but I crave your favor that I may forbear to express them, and thankfully
decline your offer.

This was his present resolution, but the heart of man is not in his own
keeping; and he was destined to this sacred service by an higher hand; a hand
so powerful, as at last forced him to a compliance: of which I shall give the
Reader an account before I shall give a rest to my Pen.

Mr. Donnne and his wife continued with Sir Francis Wolly till his death: a
little before which time, Sir Francis was so happy as to make a perfect
reconciliation betwixt Sir George and his forsaken son and daughter; Sir George
conditioning by bond, to pay to Mr. Done 800 l. at a certain day, as a portion
with his wife, or 20 l. quarterly for their maintenance: as the interest for
it, till the said portion was paid.

Most of those years that he lived with Sir Francis, he studied the Civil and
Cannon Laws; in which he acquired such a perfection, as was judged to hold
proportion with many who had made that study the employment of their whole life.

Sir Francis being dead, and that happy family dissolved, Mr. Done took for
himself an house in Micham (near to Croydon in Surrey) a place noted for good
air and choice company: there his wife and children remained: and for himself
he took lodgings in London, near to White Hall, whither his friends and
occasions drew him very often, and where he was as often visited by many of the
Nobility and others of this Nation, who used him in their Counsels of greatest
consideration.

Nor did our own Nobility only value and favor him, but his acquaintance and
friendship was sought for by most Ambassadors of foreign Nations, and by many
other strangers, whose learning or business occasioned their stay in this
Nation.

He was much importuned by many friends to make his constant residence in
London, but he still denied it, having settled his dear wife and children at
Micham, and near some friends that were bountiful to them and him: for they,
God knows, needed it: and that you may the better now judge of the then present
Condition of his mind and fortune, I shall present you with an extract
collected out of some few of his many Letters.

-- And the reason why I did not send an answer to your last weeks letter, was,
because it found me under too great a sadness; and at present it is thus with
me: There is not one person, but my self, well of my family: I have already
lost half a Child, and with that mischance of hers, my wife is fallen into such
a discomposure, as would afflict her too extremely, but that the sickness of
all her children stupifies her: of one of which, in good faith, I have not much
hope: and these meet with a fortune so ill provided for Physic, and such
relief, that if God should ease us with burtals, I know not how to perfome even
that: but I flatter my self with this hope, that I am dying too: for, I cannot
waste faster then by such griefs. As for, --

Aug. 10. From my hospital at Micham, JOHN DONE.


Thus he did bemoan himself: And thus in other letters.

-- For, we hardly discover a sin, when it is but an omission of some good, and
no accusing act; with this or the former, I have often suspected my self to be
overtaken; which is, with an over earnest desire of the next life: and though I
know it is not mearly a weariness of this, because I had the same desire when I
went with the tide, and enjoyed fairer hopes then I now do: yet I doubt
worldly troubles have increased it: it is now Spring, and all the pleasures of
it displease me; every other tree blossoms, and I wither: I grow older and not
better; my strength deminisheth and my lode grows heavier; and yet, I would
fain be or do something; but that I cannot tell what, is no wonder in this time
of my sadness, for, to choose is to do, but to be no part of my body, is as to
be nothing, and so I am, and shall so judge my self, unless I could be so
incorporated into a part of the world, as by business to contribute some
sustentation to the whole. This I made account, I began early when I understood
the study of our Laws: but was diverted by leaving that and embracing the worst
voluptuousness, an hydroptique immoderate desire of humane learning and
languages: Beautiful ornaments indeed to men of great fortunes; but mine was
grown so low as to need an occupation: which I thought I entered well into it,
when I subjected my self to such a service as I thought might exercise my poor
abilities: and there I stumbled, and fell too: and now I am become so little,
or such a nothing, that I am not a subject good enough for one of my own
letters, -- I fear my present discontent does not proceed from a good root,
that I am so well content to be nothing, that is, dead. But, Sir, though my
fortune has made me such, as that I am rather a Sickness or a Disease of the
world, than any part of it, and therefore neither love it nor life; yet I would
gladly live to become some such thing as you should not repent loving me: Sir,
your own Soul cannot be more zealous of your good then I am, and, God who loves
that zeal in me, will not suffer you to doubt it: you would pity me now, if you
saw me write, for my pain has drawn my head so much awry, and holds it so,
that my eye cannot follow my pen. I therefore receive you into my Prayers with
mine own weary soul, and, Commend my self to yours. I doubt not but next week
will bring you good news, for I have either mending or dying on my side: but,
If I do continue longer thus, I shall have Comfort in this, That my blessed
Savior in exercising his Justice upon my two worldly parts, my Fortune and my
Body, reserves all his Mercy for that which most needs it, my Soul? that is, I
doubt, too like a Porter, which is very often near the gate, and yet goes not
out. Sir, I profess to you truly, that my lothness to give over writing now,
seems to my self a sign that I shall write no more --

Sept. 7. Your poor friend, and Gods poor patient JOHN DONE.


By this you have seen a part of the picture of his narrow fortune, and the
perplexities of his generous mind, and thus it continued with him for about
two years; all which time his family remained constantly at Micham, and to
which place he often retired himself, and destined some days to a constant
study of some points of Controversy betwixt the English and Roman Church; and
especially those of Supremacy and Allegiance: and, to that place and such
studies he could willingly have wedded himself during his life: but the earnest
persuasion of friends became at last to be so powerful as to cause the removal
of himself and family to London, where Sir Robert Drewry, a Gentleman of very
noble estate, and a more liberal mind, assigned him a very choice and useful
house rentfree, next to his own in Drewry-lane; and was also a cherisher of his
studies, and such a friend as sympathized with him and his in all their joy and
sorrows.

Many of the Nobility were watchful and solicitous to the King for some secular
preferment for him: His Majesty had formerly both known and put a value upon
his company, and had also given him some hopes of a State-employment, being
always much pleased when Mr. Done attended him, especially at his meals,
where there were usually many deep discourses of general learning, and very
often friendly debates or disputes of Religion betwixt his Majesty and those
Divines, whose places required their attendance on him at those times:
particularly the Dean of the Chapel; who then was Bishop Montague) the
publisher of the learned and eloquent Works of his Majesty) and the most
reverend Doctor Andrews, the late learned Bishop of Winchester, who then was
the Kings Almoner.

About this time there grew many disputes that concerned the Oath of Supremacy
and Allegiance, in which the King had appeared and engaged himself by his
public writings now extant: and his Majesty discoursing with Mr. Done
concerning many of the reasons which are usually urged against the taking of
those Oaths, apprehended such a validity and clearness in his stating the
Questions, and his Answers to them, that his Majesty commanded him to bestow
some time in drawing the Arguments into a method, and then write his Answers to
them: and having done that, not to send, but be his own messenger and bring
them to him. To this he presently applied himself, and within six weeks brought
them to him under his own handwriting, as they be now printed, the Book
bearing the name of Pseudo-martyr.

When the King had read and considered that Book, he persuaded Mr. Done to
enter into the Ministry; to which at that time he was, and appeared very
unwilling, apprehending it (such was his mistaking modesty) to be too weighty
for his Abilities; and though his Majesty had promised him a favor, and many
persons of worth mediated with his Majesty for some secular employment for him,
to which his Education had apted him, and particularly the Earl of Somerset,
when in his height of favor; who being then at Th^obalds with the King, where
one of the Clerks of the Council died that night, and the Earl having sent for
Mr. Done to come to him immediately, said, Mr. Done, To testify the reality
of my Affection, and my purpose to prefer you, Stay in this Garden till I go
up to the King and bring you wor^ that you are Clark of the Council: doubt not
my doing this, for I know the King loves you, and will not deny me. But the
King gave a positive denial to all requests; and having a discerning spirit,
replied, I know Mr. Done is ^ learned man, has the abilities of a learned
Divine; and will prove a powerful Preacher, and my desire is to prefer him that
way. After that time, as he professes, In his Book of Dev^tions.
The King descended to a persuasion, almost to a solicitation of him to enter
into sacred Orders: which though h^ then denied not, yet he deferred it for
almost three years. All which time he applied himself to an incessant study of
Textual Divinity, and to the attainment of a greater perfection in the learned
Languages, Greek and Hebrew.

In the first and most blessed times of Christianity, when the Clergy were
looked upon with reverence, and deserved it, when they overcame their opposers
by high examples of Virtue, by a blessed Patience and long Suffering: those
only were then judged worthy the Ministry, whose quiet and meek spirits did
make them look upon that sacred calling with an humble adoration and fear to
undertake it; which indeed requires such great degrees of humility, and labor
and care, that none but such were then thought worthy of that celestial
dignity. And such only were then sought out, and solicited to undertake it.
This I have mentioned because forwardness and inconsideation, could not in Mr.
Done, as in many others, be an argument of insufficiency or unfitness for he
had considered long, and had many strifes within himself concerning the
strictness of life and competency of learning required in such as enter into
sacred Orders; and doubtless, considering his own demerits, did humbly ask God
with St. Paul, Lord, who is sufficient for these things? and, with meek Moses,
Lord, who am I? And sure, if he had consulted with flesh and blood, he had not
put his hand to that holy lough. But, God who is able to prevail, wrestled with
him, as the Angel did with Jacob, and marked him; marked him for his own;
marked him with a blessing; a blessing of obedience to the motions of his
blessed Spirit. And then, as he had formerly asked God with Moses, Who am I? So
now being inspired with an apprehension of Gods particular mercy to him, in the
Kings and others solicitations of him, he came to a^^^ King David's thankful
question, Lord who am I, tha^ thou art so mindful of me? So mindful o^ me as to
lead me for more then forty years through this wilderness of the many
temptations, and various turnings of a dangerous life: so merciful to me, as to
move the learned^st of Kings to descend to move me to serve at thy Alter so
merciful to me, as at last, to move my l^^a to embrace this holy motion: thy
motions will and do embrace: And, I now say with the blessed Virgin, Be it with
thy servant as seems best in thy sight: and so, blessed Jesus, I ^^ take the
cup of Salvation, and will call upon thy Name, and will preach thy Gospel.

Such strifes as these St. Austine had, when St. Ambrose endeavored his
conversion to Christianity, with which he confesses, he acquai^^ted his friend
Alipius. Our learned Author (a man sit to write after no mean Copy) d^ the
like. And declaring his intentions to ^^ dear friend Dr. King then Bishop of
London, man famous in his generation, and no strangth to Mr. Donnes abilities.
(For he had been Chaplain to the Lord Chancellor, at the ti^^ of Mr. Donnes
being his Lordships Secretary^ That Reverend man did receive the news wi^^ much
gladness; and, after some expressions ^^ joy, and a persuasion to be constant
in his pious purpose, he proceeded with all convenient speed to ordain him both
Deacon and Priest.

Now the English Church had gained a second St. Austine, for, I think, none was
so like him before his Conversion: none so like St. Ambrose after it: and if
his youth had the infirmities of the one, his age had the excellencies of the
other, the learning and holiness of both.

And now all his studies which had been occasionally diffused, were all
concentred in Divinity. Now he had a new calling, new thoughts, and a new
employment for his wit and eloquence. Now all his earthly affections were
changed into divine love; and all the faculties of his own soul were engaged in
the Conversion of others: In preaching the glad tidings of Remission to
repenting Sinners; and peace to each troubled soul. To these he app'yed himself
with all care and diligence; and now, such a change was wrought in him, that he
could say with David, Oh how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts!
Now he declared openly, that when he required a temporal, God gave him a
spiritual blessing. And that, he was now gladder to be a doorkeeper in the
house of God, then he could be to enjoy the noblest of all temporal employments.

Presently after he entered into his holy profession, the King sent for him, and
made him his Chaplain in ordinary; and promised to take a particular care for
his preferment.

And though his long familiarity with Scholars and persons of greatest quality,
was such as might have given some men boldness enough to have preached to any
eminent Auditory, yet his modesty in this employment was such, that he could
not be persuaded to it, but went usually accompanied with some one friend, to
preach privately in some village, not far from London: his first Sermon being
preached at Paddington. This he did, till His Majesty sent and appointed him a
day to preach to him at White Hall, and, though much were expected from him,
both by His Majesty and others yet he was so happy (which few are) as to
satisfy and exceed their expectations: preaching the Word so, as showed his
own heart was po^ssest with those very thoughts, and joys that h^ labored to
distill into others: A Preacher ^^ earnest weeping sometimes for his Auditory
sometimes with them: always preaching ^^ himself, like an Angel from a cloud,
but ^^ none; carrying some, as St. Paul was, ^^ Heaven in holy raptures, and
enticing other^ by a sacred Art and Courtship to amen^ their lives; here
picturing a vice so as to make it ugly to those that practiced it; and a virtue
so, as to make it be beloved even by tho^ that loved it not; and, all this with
a most particular grace and an unexpressible addition of comeliness.

There may be some that may incline to think (such indeed as have not heard
him) that my affection to my Friend, has transported me to an immoderate
Commendation of his Preaching. If this meets with any such, Let me entreat,
though I will omit many, yet that they will receive a double witness for what I
say, it being attested by a Gentleman of worth, (Mr. Chidley, a frequent hearer
of his Sermons) being part of a funeral Elogie writ by him on Doctor Done, and
a known truth, though it be in Verse.

-- Each Altar had his fire --
He kept his love, but not his object: wi^,
He did not banish, but transplanted it;
Taught it both time and place, and brought it home
To Piety, which it does best become.
For say, had ever pleasure such a dress?
Have you seen crimes so sh^p't, or loveliness
Such as his lips did clothe Religion in?
Had not reproof a beauty, passing sin?
Corrupted nature sorrowed that she stood
So near the danger of becoming good.
And, when he preach^t she wished her ears exempt
From Piety, that had such power to tempt.
How did his sacred flattery beguile
Men to amend? --
More of this, and more witnesses might be brought, but I forbear and return.

That Summer, in the very same month in which he entered into sacred Orders,
and was made the Kings Chaplain, His Majesty then going his Progress, was
entreated to receive an entertainment in the University of Cambridge. And Mr.
Done attending his Majesty, at that time, his Majesty was pleased to recommend
him to the University, to be made Doctor in Divinity; Doctor Harsnet (after
Archbishop of York) was then Vice Chancellor, who knowing him to be the Author
of that learned Book the Pseudo-Martyr, required no other proof of his
Abilities, but proposed it to the University, who presently assented, and
expressed a gladness, that they had such an occasion to entitle him to be theirs.

His Abilities and Industry in his Profession were so eminent, and he so known
and so beloved by Persons of Quality, that within the first year of his entering
into sacred Orders, he had fourteen Advowsons of several Benefices presented to
him: But they were in the Country, and he could not leave his beloved London,
to which place he had a natural inclination, having received both his Birth and
Education in it, and, there contracted a friendship with many, whose
conversation multiplied the joys of his life: But, an employment that might
affixe him to that place would be welcome, for he needed it.

Immediately after his return from Cambridge, his wife died, leaving him a man
of an unsettled estate, and (having buried five) the careful father of seven
children then living, to whom he gave a voluntary assurance never to bring them
under the subjection of a stepmother; which promise he kept most faithfully,
burying with his tears all his earthly joys in his most dear and deserving
wives grave; betaking himself to a most retired and solitary life.

In this retiredness which was often from the sight of his dearest friends, he
became crucified to the world, and all those vanities, those imaginary
pleasures that are daily acted on that restless stage; and, they crucified to
him. Nor is it hard to think (being passions may be both changed and heightened
by accidents) but that that abundant affection which once was betwixt him and
her, who had long been the delight of his eyes, the Companion of his youth;
her, with whom he had divided so many pleasant sorrows and contented fears, as
Common People are not capable of; She, being now removed by death, a
commeasurable grief took as full a possession of him as joy had done; and so
indeed it did: for, now his very soul was elemented of nothing but sadness; now
grief took so full a possession of his heart, as to leave no place for joy: If
it did, It was a joy to be alone, where like a Pelican in the wilderness, he
might bemoan himself without witness or restraint, and pour forth his passions
like Job in the days of his affliction, Oh that I might have the desire of my
heart! Oh that God would grant the thing that I long for! For then, as the
grave is become her house, so I would hasten to make it mine also; that we two
might there make our beds together in the dark. Thus as the Israelites sat
mourning by the rivers of Babylon, when they remem^red Sion; so he gave some
ease to his oppressed heart by thus venting his sorrows: Thus he began the day,
and ended the night; ended the restless night and began the weary day in
Lamentations. And, thus he continued till a consideration of his new
engagements to God, and St. Paul's W^ is me, if I preach not the Gospel:
disper'st those sad clouds that had now benighted his hopes, and forced him to
behold the light.

His first motion from his house was to preach, where his beloved wife lay
buried (in St Clements Church, near Temple Bar London) and his Text was a part
of the Prophet Jeremy's Lamentation: Lo, I am the man that have seen affliction.

And indeed, his very words and looks testified him to be truly such a man; and
they, with the addition of his sighs and tears, expressed in his Sermon, did so
work upon the affections of his hearers, as melted and molded them into a
companionable sadness; and so they left the Congregation; but then their houses
presented them with objects of diversion, and his presented him with no
diversions, but with fresh objects of sorrow, in beholding many helpless
children, a narrow fortune, and, a consideration of the many cares and
casualties that attend their education.

In this time of sadness he was importuned by the grave Benchers of Lincolns
Inn, once the friends of his youth, to accept of their Lecture, which by
reason of Dr. Gatakers removal from thence was then void: of which he accepted;
being most glad to renew his intermitted friendship with those whom he so much
loved, and where he had been a Saul, though not to persecute Christianity, or
to deride it, yet in his irregular youth to neglect the visible practice of it:
there to become a Paul, and preach salvation to his beloved brethren.

And now his life was as a Shining light among his old friends: now he gave an
ocular testimony of the strictness and regularity of it; now he might say as St
Paul advises his Corinthians, Be ye followers of me, as I follow Christ, and
walk as ye have me for an example; not the example of a busie-body; but, of a
contemplative, a harmless, an humble and an holy life and conversation.

The love of that noble society was expressed to him many ways: for, besides
fair lodgings that were set apart and newly furnished for him, with all
necessaries, other courteesies were daily added; indeed so many and so freely,
as if they meant their gratitude should exceed his merits; and, in this
love-strife of desert and liberality, they continued for the space of two
years, he preaching ^uthfully and constantly to them, and^ they liberally
requiting him. About which time the Emperor of Germany died, and the
Palsgrave, who had lately married the Lady Elizabeth the Kings only daugher,
was elected and crowned King of Bohemia, the unhappy beginning of many miseries
in that Nation.

King James, whose Motto ( Beati pacifici) did truly speak the very thoughts of
his heart, endeavored first to prevent, and after to compose the discords of
that discomposed State; and amongst other his endeavors did then send the Lord
Hay Earl of Doncaster his Ambassador to those unsettled Princes; and by a
special command from his Majesty Dr Done was appointed to assist and attend
that employment to the Princes of the Union: for which the Earl was most glad,
who had always put a great value on him, and taken a great pleasure in his
conversation and discourse: and his friends of Lincolns Inn were as glad, for,
they feared that his immoderate study and sadness for his wives death, would,
as Jacob said, make his days few, and respecting his bodily health, evil too:
and of this there were some visible signs.

At his going he left his friends of Lincolns-Inne, and they him with many
reluctations: for, though he could not say as S. Paul to his Ephesians, Behold
you to whom I have preached the Kingdom of God, shall from henceforth see my
face no more; yet, he believing himself to be in a Consumption, questioned, and
they feared it: all concluding that his troubled mind, with the help of his
unintermitted studies, hastened the decays of his weak body: And God turned it
to the best; for this employment (to say nothing of the event of it) did not
only divert him from those too serious studies and sad thoughts, but seemed to
give him a new life by a true occasion of joy, to be an eyewitness of the
health of his most dear and most honored Mistress the Qu. of Bohemia, in a
foreign Nation; and, to be a witness of that gladness which she expressed to
see him: Who, having formerly known him a Courtier, was much joyed to see him
in a Canonical habit, and more glad to be an ear-witness of his excellent and
powerful Preaching.

About fourteen months after his departure out of England, he returned to his
friends of Lincolns-Inne with his sorrows moderated, and his health improved;
and there betook himself to his constant course of Preaching.

About a year after his return out of Germany, Dr. Carry was made Bishop of
Exeter, and by his removal the Deanery of St. Paul's being vacant, the King sent
to Dr. Done, and appointed him to attend him at Dinner the next day. When his
Majesty was sat down, before he had eat any meat, he said after his pleasant
manner, Dr. Done, I have invited you to Dinner; and, though you sit not down
with me, yet I will carve to you of a dish that I know you love well; for
knowing you love London, I do; therefore make you Dean of Paul's; and when I
have dined, then do you take your beloved dish home to your study; say grace
there to your self, and much good may it do you.

Immediately after he came to his Deanery, he employed workmen to repair and
beautify the Chapel; suffering, as holy David once vowed, his eyes and
temples to take no rest, till he had first beautified the house of God.

The next quarter following, when his Father-in-law Sir George Moor, (whom Time
had made a lover and admirer of him,) came to pay to him the conditioned sum
of twenty pounds; he refused to receive it, and said (as good Jacob did, when
he heard his beloved son Joseph was alive, It is enough,) You have been kind to
me and mine: I know your present condition is such as not to abound: and I hope
mine is or will be such as not to need it: I will therefore receive no more
from you upon that contract; and in testimony of it freely gave him up his bond.

Immediately after his admission into his Deanery, the Vicarage of St. Dunstan
in the West, London, fell to him by the death of Dr. White, the Advowson of it
having been given to him long before by his honorable friend, Richard Earl of
Dorset, then the Patron, and confirmed by his brother the late deceased Edward,
both of them men of much honor.

By these and another Ecclesiastical endowment which fell to him about the same
time, given to him formerly by the Earl of Kent, he was enabled to become
charitable to the poor, and kind to his friends, and to make such provision for
his children, that they were not left scandalous, as relating to their or his
Profession and Quality.

The next Parliament, which was within that present year, he was chosen
Prolocutor to the Convocation; and about that time was appointed by his
Majesty, his most gracious Master, to preach very many occasional Sermons, as
at St. Paul's Cross, and other places. All which employments he performed to
the admiration of the Representative Body of the whole Clergy of this Nation.

He was once, and but once, clouded with the Kings displeasure; and, it was
about this time; which was occasioned by some malicious whisperer, who had told
his Majesty that Dr. Done had put on the general humor of the Pulpits, and
was become busy in insinuating a fear of the Kings inclining to Popery, and a
dislike of his Government: and particularly, for his then turning the Evening
Lectures into Catechizing, and expounding the Prayer of our Lord, and of the
Belief, and Commandments. His Majesty was the more inclineable to believe this,
for that a Person of Nobility and great note, betwixt whom and Dr. Done, there
had been a great friendship, was at this very time discarded the Court (I shall
forbear his name, unless I had a fairer occasion) and justly committed to
prison; which begot many rumors in the common people, who in this Nation think
they are not wise, unless they be busy about what they understand not: and
especially about Religion.

The King received this news with so much discontent and restlesness, that he
would not suffer the Sun to set and leave him under this doubt; but sent for
Dr. Done, and required his answer to the Accusation; which was so clear and
satisfactory, that the King said he was right glad he rested no longer under
the suspicion. When the King had said this, Doctor Done kneeled down and
thanked his Majesty, and protested his answer was faithful and free from all
collusion, and therefore desired that he might not rise, till, as in like cases
he always had from God, so he might have from his Majesty, some assurance that
he stood clear and fair in his opinion. Then the King raised him from his knees
with his own hands, and protested he believed him: and that he knew he was an
honest man, and doubted not but that he loved him truly. And, having thus
dismissed him, he called some Lords of his Council into his Chamber, and said
with much earnestness, My Doctor is an honest man: and my Lords, I was never
better satisfied with an answer then he has now made me: and I always rejoice
when I think that by my means he became a Divine.

He was made Dean the fiftieth year of his age; and in his fifty fourth year a
dangerous sickness seized him, which inclined him to a Consumption. But God, as
Job thankfu^ly acknowledged, preserved his spirit, and ke^t his intellectuals
as clear and perfect, as when that sickness first seized his body: but it
continued long and threatened him with death; which he dreaded not.

In this distemper of body, his dear friend Doctor Henry King (then chief
Residenciary of that Church, and late Bishop of Chich^ster) a man generally
known by the Clergy of this Nation, and as generally noted for his o^liging
nature, visited him daily; and observing that his sickness rendered his recovery
doubtful, he chose a seasonable time to speak to him, to this purpose.

Mr. Dean, I am by your favor no stranger to your temporal estate, and you are
no stranger to the offer lately made us, for the renewing a Lease of the best
Prebends Corpse belonging to our Church; and you know, 'twas denied, for that
our Tenant being very rich, offered to fine at so low a rate as held not
proportion with his advantages: but I will either raise him to an higher sum,
or procure that the other Residenciaries shall join to accept of what was
offered: one of these I can and will by your favor do without delay, and
without any trouble either to your body or mind; I beseech you to accept of my
offer, for I know it will be a considerable addition to your present estate,
which I know needs it.

To this, after a short pause, and raising himself upon his bed, he made this
reply.

My most dear friend, I most humbly thank you for your many favors, and this
in particular: But, in my present condition, I shall not accept of your
proposal; for doubtless there is such a Sin as Sacrilege; if there were not it
could not have a name in Scripture: And the Primitive Clergy were watchful
against all appearances of that evil; and indeed the^ all Christians looked upon
it with horror and detestation: Judging it to be even an open defiance of the
Power and Providence of Almighty God, and a sad presage of a declining
Religion. But in stead of such Christians, who had selected times set apart to
fast and pray to God, for a pious Clergy which they then did obey; Our times
abound with men that are busy and litigious about trifles and
Church-Ceremonies; and yet so far from scrupling Sacrilege, that they make not
so much as a quaere what it is: But, I thank God I have; and, dare not now upon
my sickbed, when Almighty God has made me useless to the service of the
Church, make any advantages out of it. But, if he shall again restore me to
such a degree of health, as again to serve at his Altar, I shall then gladly
take the reward which the bountiful Benefactours of this Church have designed
me; for God knows my Children and Relations will need it. In which number my
Mother (whose Credulity and Charity has contracted a very plentiful to a very
narrow estate) must not be forgotten: But Doctor King, if I recover not, that
little worldly estate that I shall leave behind me, (that very little, when
divided into eight parts,) must, if you deny me not so Charitable a favor,
fall into your hands as my most faithful friend and Executor; of whose Care and
Justice, I make no more doubt then of Gods blessing on that which I have
conscientiously collected for them; but it shall not be augmented on my
sickbed; and, this I declare to be my unalterable resolution.

The reply to this was only a promise to observe his request.

Within a few days his distempers abated; and as his strength increased, so did
his thankfulness to Almighty God, testified in his most excellent Book of
Devotions, which he published at his Recovery. In which the Reader may see, the
most secret thoughts that then possessed his Soul, Paraphrased and made public:
a book that may not unfitly be called a a Sacred picture of Spiritual Ecstasies,
occasioned and applyable to the emergencies of that sickness; which book being
a composition of Meditations, Disquisitions and Prayers, he writ on his
sickbed; herein imitating the Holy Patriarchs, who were wont to build their
Altars in that place, where they had received their blessings.

This sickness brought him so near to the gates of death, and he saw the grave
so ready to devour him, that he would often say his recovery was supernatural:
But that God that then restored his health continued it to him, till the
fifty-ninth year of his life. And then in August 1630. being with his eldest
Daughter Mrs. Harvy at Abury hatch in Essex, he there fell into a fever, which
with the help of his constant infirmity (vapors from the spleen) hastened him
into so visible a Consumption, that his beholders might say, as St Paul of
himself, H^dies daily; and he might say with Job, My welfare passes away as a
cloud, the days of my affliction have taken hold of me, and weary nights are
appointed for me.

Reader, This sickness continued long, not only weakening but wearying him so
much, that my desire is, he may now take some rest: and that before I speak of
his death, thou will not think it an impertinent digression to look back with
me, upon some observations of his life, which, whilst a gentle slumber gives
rest to his spirits, may, I hope, not unfitly exercise thy consideration.

His marriage was the remarkable error of his life; an error which though he
had a wit able and very apt to maintain Paradoxes, yet, he was very far from,
justifying it: and though his wives Competent years, and other reasons might be
justly urged to moderate severe Censures; yet he would occasionally condemn
himself for it: and doubtless it had been attended with an heavy Repentance, if
God had not blessed them with so mutual and cordial affections, as in the midst
of their sufferings made their bread of sorrow taste more pleasantly then the
banquets of dull and low-spirited people.

The Recreations of his youth were Poetry, in which he was so happy, as if
nature and all her varieties had been made only to exercise his sharp wit, and
high facy; and in those pieces which were facetiously Composed and carelessly
scattered (most of them being written before the twentieth year of his age) it
may appear by his choice Metaphors, that both Nature and all the Arts joined to
assist him with their utmost skill.

It is a truth, that in his penitential years, viewing some of those pieces too
loosely scattered in his youth, he wished they had been abortive, or so short
lived that his own eyes had witnessed their funerals: But, though he was no
friend to them, he was not so fallen out with heavenly Poetry as to forsake
that: no not in his declining age; witnessed then by many Divine Sonnets, and
other high, holy, and harmonious Composures. Yea, even on his former sickbed
he wrote this heavenly Hymn, expressing the great joy that then possessed his
soul in the Assurance of Gods favor to him.

An Hymn to God the Father.
Will thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin, though it were done before?
Will thou forgive that sin through which I run,
And do run still though still I do deplore?
When thou have done, thou have not done?
For I have more.
Will thou forgive that sin, which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their door?
Will thou forgive that sin which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in a score?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
I have a sin of fear, that when I Have spun
My last thread, I shall perish on the shore:
But swear by thy self, that at my death thy Son
Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
And having done that thou have done,
I fear no more.
I have the rather mentioned this Hymn, for that he caused it to be set to a
most grave and solemn Tune, and to be often sung to the Organ by the Choristers
of St. Paul's Church, in his own hearing, especially at the Evening Service; and
at his return from his Customary Devotions in that place, did occasionally say
to a friend, The words of this Hymn have restored to me the same thoughts of
joy that possessed my Soul in my sickness when I composed it. And, O the power of
Church-musick! that Harmony added to it has raised the Affections of my heart,
and quicned my graces of zeal and gratitude; and I observe, that I always
return from paying this public duty of Prayer and Praise to God, with an
unexpressible tranquillity of mind, and a willingness to leave the world.

After this manner did the Disciples of our Savior, and the best of Christians
in those Ages of the Church nearest to his time, offer their praises to
Almighty God. And the reader of St. Augustines life may there find, that
toward his dissolution he wept abundantly, that the enemies of Christianity
had broke in upon them, and profaned and ruined their Sanctuaries, and because
their Public Hymns and Lauds were lost out of their Churches. And after this
manner have many devout Souls lifted up their hands and offered acceptable
Sacrifices unto Almighty God where Dr. Done offered his,

But now, oh Lord -- 1656.

Before I proceed further, I think fit to inform the reader, that not long
before his death he caused to be drawn a figure of the Body of Christ extended
upon an Anchor, like those which Painters draw when they would present us with
the picture of Christ crucified on the Cross: his, varying no otherwise then to
affix him to an Anchor (the Emblem of hope) this he caused to be drawn in
little, and then many of those figures thus drawn to be engraven very small in
Helitropian Stones, and set in gold, and of these he sent to many of his
dearest friends to be used as Seals, or Rings, and kept as memorials of him,
and of his affection to them.

His dear friends and benefactors, Sir Henry Goolier, and Sir Robert Dr^wry,
could not be of that number; Nor could the Lady Magdalen Herbert, the mother of
George Herbert, for they had put off mortality, and taken possession of the
grave before him: But Sir Henry Wootton, and Dr. Hall the then late deceased
Bishop of Norwitch were; and, so were Dr. Duppa Bishop of Salisbury, and Dr.
Henry King Bishop of Chichester, (lately deceased) men in whom there was such a
Commixture of general Learning, of natural eloquence, and Christian humility,
that they deserve a Commemoration by a pen equal to their own, which none has
exceeded.

And in this enumeration of his friends, though many must be omitted, yet that
man of primitive piety Mr. George Herbert may not; I mean that George Herbert,
who was the Author of the Temple or Sacred Poems and Ejaculations. (A Book, in
which by declaring his own spiritual Conflicts he has Comforted and raised
many a dejected and discomposed Soul, and charmed them into sweet and quiet
thoughts: A Book, by the frequent reading whereof, and the assistance of that
Spirit that seemed to inspire the Author, the Reader may attain habits of Peace
and Piety, and all the gifts of the Holy Ghost and Heaven: and may by still
reading, still keep those sacred fires burning upon the Altar of so pure an
heart, as shall free it from the anxieties of this world, and keep it fixed upon
things that are above;) betwixt him and Dr. Done there was a long and dear
friendship, made up by such a Sympathy of inclinations, that they coveted and
joyed to be in each others Company; and this happy friendship was still
maintained by many sacred indearments; of which, that which follows may be
some Testimony.

To Mr. George Herbert; sent him with one of my Seals of the Anchor and
Christ. (A sheaf of Snakes used heretofore to be my Seal, which is the Crest of
our poor Family.)

Qui prius assuetus serpeatum falce tabellas
Signare, haec nostrae Symbola parva domus
Adscitus domui domini. --
Adopted in Gods family, and so
My old Coat lost into new Arms I go.
The Cross my seal in Baptism, spread below,
Does by that form into an Anchor grow.
Crosses grow Anchors, bear as thou should do
Thy Cross, and that Cross grows an Anchor too.
But he that makes our Crosses Anchors thus
Is Christ; who there is crucified for us.
Yet with this I may my first Serpents hold:
(God gives new blessings, and yet leaves the old)
The Serpent may as wise my pattern be;
My poison, as he feeds on dust, that is me.
And, as he rounds the earth to murder, sure
He is my death; but on the Cross my cure:
Crucisie nature then; and then implore
All grace from him, crucified there before:
When all is Cross, and that Cross Anchor grown,
This seals a Catechism, not a seal alone.
Under that little seal great gifts I send,
Both works and prayers, pawns and fruits of a friend,
Oh may that Saint that rides on our great Seal,
To you that bear his name large bounty deal.
J. Done.
In Sacram Anchoram Piscatoris Geo. Herbert.
Quod Crux nequibat fixa clavique additi,
Tenere Christum scilicet ne ascenderet
Tuive Christum --
Although the Cross could not Christ here detain,
When nailed unto't, but he ascends again:
Nor yet thy eloquence here keep him still,
But only whilst thou speak; this Anchor will:
Nor can thou be content, unless thou to
This certain Anchor add a seal, and so
The water and the earth, both unto thee
Do owe the Symbol of their certainty.
Let the world reel, we and all ours stand sure,
This Holy Cable's from all storms secure.
G. Herbert.
I return to tell the Reader, that besides these verses to his dear Mr.
Herbert, and that Hymn that I mentioned to be sung in the Quire of St Paul's
Church; he did also shorten and beguile many sad hours by composing other
sacred Di^ties; and he writ an Hymn on his deathbed, which bears this title.

An Hymn to God, my God, in my sickness, March 23. 1630.
Since I am coming to that holy room,
Where, with thy quire of Saints for ever more
I shall be made thy music, as I come
I tune my Instrument here at the door,
And, what I must do then, think here before.
Since my Physicians by their loves are grown
Cosmographers! and I their map, who lie
Flat on this bed --
--
So, in his purple wrapped, receive me, Lord!
By these, his thorns, give me his other Crown:
And, as to other souls I preached thy Word,
Be this my text: my Sermon to mine own.
That, he may raise; therefore, the lord throws down.
If these fall under the censure of a soul, whose too much mixture with earth
makes it unfit to judge of these high raptures and illuminations; let him know
that many holy and devout men have thought the Soul of Prudentius to be most
refined, when not many days before his death he charged it to present his God
each morning and evening with a new and spiritual song; justified by the
example of King David and the good King Hezekias, who upon the renovation of
his years paid his thankful vows to Almighty God in a royal Hymn, which he
concludes in these words, The Lord was ready to save, therefore I will sing my
songs to the stringed instruments all the days of my life in the temple of my
God.

The latter part of his life may be said to be a continued study; for as he
usually preached once a week, if not oftener, so after his Sermon he never gave
his eyes rest, till he had chosen out a new Text, and that night cast his
Sermon into a form, and his Text into divisions; and the next day betook
himself to consult the Fathers, and so commit his meditations to his memory,
which was excellent. But upon Saturday he usually gave himself and his mind a
rest from the we^^y burden of his weeks meditations, and usually spent that
day in visitation of friends, or some other diversions of his thoughts; and
would say, that he gave both his body and mind that refreshment, that he might
be enabled to do the work of the day following, not faintly, but with courage
and cheerfulness.

Nor was his age only so industrious, but in the most unsettled days of his
youth, his bed was not able to detain him beyond the hour of four in a morning:
and it was no common business that drew him out of his chamber till past ten.
All which time was employed in study; though he took great liberty after it:
and if this seem strange, it may gain a belief by the visible fruits of his
labors: some of which remain as testimonies of what is here written: for he
left the resultance of 1400. Authors, most of them abridged and analyzed with
his own hand; he left also sixscore of his Sermons, all written with his own
hand; also an exact and laborious Treatise concerning Self-murder, called
Biathanatos; wherein all the Laws violated by that Act are diligently surveyed
and judiciously censured: a Treatise written in his younger days, which alone
might declare him then not only perfect in the Civil and Canon Law, but in
many other such studies and arguments, as enter not into the consideration of
many that labor to be thought great Clerks, and pretend to know all things.

Nor were these only found in his study; but all businesses that past of any
public consequence, either in this, or any of our neighbor nations, he
abbreviated either in Latin, or in the Language of that Nation, and kept them
by him for useful memorials. So he did the copies of diverse Letters and cases
of Conscience that had concerned his friends, with his observations and
solutions of them; and, diverse other businesses of importance; all particularly
and methodically digested by himself.

He did prepare to leave the world before life left him, making his will when
no faculty of his soul was damped or made defective by pain or sickness, or he
surprised by a sudden apprehension of death: but it was made with mature
deliberation, expressing himself an impartial father by making his childrens
portions equal; and a lover of his friends, whom he remembered with Legacies
fitly and discreetly chosen and bequeathed. I cannot forbear a nomination of
some of them; for, methinks they be persons that seem to challenge a
recordation in this place; as namely, to his Brother-in-law Sir Th. Grimes, he
gave that striking Clock which he had long worn in his pocket -- to his dear
friend and Executor Dr. King (late Bishop of Chicester) that model of gold of
the Synod of Dcrt, with which the States presented him at his last being at the
Hague -- and the two Pictures of Padre Paulo and Fulgentio, men of his
acquaintance when he traveled Italy, and of great note in that Nation for
their remarkable learning. -- To his ancient friend Dr. Brook, (that married
him) Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, he gave the Picture of the
blessed Virgin and Joseph. -- To Dr. Winniff (who succeeded him in the Deanery)
he gave a Picture called the Sceleton. -- To the succeeding Dean, who was not
then known, he gave many necessaries of worth, and useful for his house; and
also several Pictures and Ornaments for the Chapel, with a desire that they
might be registered, and remain as a Legacy to his Successors. -- To the Earls
of Dorset and of Carlisle, he gave several Pictures, and so he did to many other
friends; Legacies, given rather to express his affection, than to make any
addition to their Estates: but unto the Poor he was full of Charity, and unto
many others, who by his constant and long continued bounty might entitle
themselves to be his Alms-people; for all these he made provision, and so
largely, as having then six children living, might to some appear more than
proportionable to his Estate. I forbear to mention any more, lest the Reader
may think I trespass upon his patience: but I will beg his favor to present
him with the beginning and end of his Will.

In the Name of the blessed and glorious Trinity, Amen. I John Done, by the
mercy of Christ Jesus, and by the calling of the Church of England Priest,
being at this time in good health and perfect understanding (praised be God
therefore) do hereby make my last Will and Testament in manner and form
following:

First, I give my gracious God an entire sacrifice of body and soul, with my
most humble thanks for that assurance which his blessed Spirit imprints in me
now of the salvation of the one, and the Resurrection of the other; and for
that constant and cheerful resolution which the same Spirit has established in
me to live and dye in the Religion now professed in the Church of England. In
expectation of that Resurrection, I desire my body may be buried (in the most
private manner that may be) in that place of St. Paul's Church London, that the
now Residentiaries have at my request designed for that purpose, etc. And this
my l^st Will and Testament, made in the fear of God (whose mercy I humbly beg,
and constantly rely upon in Jesus Christ) and in perfect love and charity with
all the world (whose pardon I ask, from the lowest of my servants, to the
highest of my Superiors) written all with my own hand, and my name subscribed
to every page, of which there are five in number.

Sealed December. 13. 1630.

Nor was this blessed sacrifice of Charity expressed only at his death, but in
his life also, by a cheerful and frequent visitation of any friend whose mind
was dejected, or his fortune necessitous; he was inquisitive after the wants of
Prisoners, and redeemed many from thence that lay for their Fees or small
Debts; he was a continual Giver to poor Scholars, both of this and foreign
Nations. Besides what he gave with his own hand, he usually sent a Servant, or
a discreet and trusty Friend, to distribute his Charity to all the Prisons in
London at all the Festival times of the year, especially at the Birth and
Resurrection of our Savior. He gave an hundred pounds at one time to an old
Friend, whom he had known live plentifully, and by a too liberal heart and
carelessness became decayed in his Estate: and, when the receiving of it was
denied, by the Gentleman's saying, He wanted not; for as there be some spirits
so generous as to labor to conceal and endure a sad poverty, rather than those
blushes that attend the confession of it; so there be others to whom Nature and
Grace have afforded such sweet and compassionate souls, as to pity and prevent
the Distresses of Mankind; which I have mentioned because of Dr. Donne's Reply,
whose Answer was, I know you want not what will sustain nature, for a little
will do that; but my desire is, that you who in the days of your plenty have
cheered and raised the hearts of so many of your dejected friends, would now
receive this from me, and use it as a cordial for the cheering of your own: and
so it was received. He was an happy reconciler of many differences in the
Families of his Friends and Kindred, (which he never undertook faintly; for
such undertakings have usually faint effects;) and they had such a faith in his
judgment and impartiality, that he never advised them to any thing in vain. He
was even to her death a most dutiful Son to his Mother, careful to provide for
her supportation, of which she had been destitute, but that God raised him up
to prevent her necessities; who having sucked in the Religion of the Roman
Church with her Mothers Milk, spent her Estate in foreign Countries, to enjoy a
liberty in it, and died in his house but three Months before him.

And to the end it may appear how just a Steward he was of his Lord and Masters
Revenue, I have thought fit to let the Reader know, that after his entrance
into his Deane^y, as he numbered his years, he (at the foot of a private account
(to which God and his Angels were only witnesses with him) computed first his
Revenue, then what was given to the Poor, and other Pious Uses: and lastly,
what rested for him and his; he then blessed each years poor remainder with a
thankful Prayer; which, for that they discover a more than common Devotion, the
Reader shall partake some of them in his own words:

So all is that remains this year

Deo Opt. Max benigno
Largitori, a me^ and ab iis
Quibus haec a me reservantur,
Gloria and gratia in aeternum.
Amen.
So, that this year, God has blessed me and mine with

Multiplicatae a sunt super
Nos misericordiae tuae
Domine. --
Da Domine, ut quae ex immensa
Bonitate tu^ nobis elargiri
Dignatus sis, in quorumcunque
Manus devenerint, in tuam
Semper cedant gloriam.
Amen.
In fine horum sex Annorum manet --

Quid habeo quod non accepi a Domino?
Largitur etiam ut quae largitus est
Sua iterum fiant, bono eorum usu; ut
Quemadmodum nec officiis hujus mundi,
Nec loci in quo me posuit; dignitati, nec
Servis, nec egenis, in toto hujus anni
Curriculo mihi conscius sum me defuisse;
Ita and liberi, quibus quae supersunt,
Supersunt, grato animo ea accipiant,
Et beneficum authorem recognescant.
Amen.
But I return from my long Digression.

We left the Author sick in Essex, where he was forced to spend much of that
Winter, by reason of his disability to remove from that place: And having never
for almost twenty years omitted his personal attendance on His Majesty in that
month in which he was to attend and preach to him; nor, having ever been left
out of the Roll and number of Lent-Preachers; and there being then (in January
1630.) a report brought to London, or raised there, that Dr. Done was dead:
That report, gave him occasion to write this following Letter to a dear friend.

Sir,
This advantage you and my other friends have by my frequent fevers, that I am
so much the oftener at the gates of Heaven; and this advantage by the solitude
and close imprisonment that they reduce me to after, that I am so much the
oftener at my prayers, in which I shall never leave out your happiness; and I
doubt not among his other blessings, God will add some one to you for my
prayers. A man would almost be content to dye (if there were no other benefit
in death) to hear of so much sorrow, and so much good testimony from good men
as I (God be blessed for it) did upon the report of my death; yet I perceive it
went not through all, for one writ to me that some (and he said of my friends)
conceived I was not so ill as I pretended, but withdrew my self to live at
ease, discharged of preaching. It is an unfriendly, and God knows an
ill-grounded interpretation; for I have always been sorrier when I could not
preach, than any could be they could not hear me. It has been my desire, and
God may be pleased to grant it, that I might dye in the Pulpit; if not that,
yet, that I might take my death in the Pulpit, that is, dye the sooner by
occasion of those labors. Sir, I hope to see you presently after Candlemas,
about which time will fall my Lent-Sermon at Court, except my Lord Chamberlain
believe me to be dead, and so leave me out of the Roll; but as long as I live,
and am not speechless, I would not willingly decline that service. I have
better leisure to write, than you to read; yet I would not willingly oppress
you with too much Letter. God bless you and your Son as I wish,

Your poor friend and servant in Christ Jesus, J. Done.


Before that month ended, he was appointed to preach upon his old constant day,
the first Friday in Lent; he had notice of it, and had in his sickness so
prepared for that employment, that as he had long thirsted for it: so, he
resolved his weakness should not hinder his journey; he came therefore to
London, some few days before his appointed day of preaching. At his coming
thither, many of his friends (who with sorrow saw his sickness had left him
only so much flesh as did only cover his bones) doubted his strength to
perform that task, and, did therefore dissuade him from undertaking it,
assuring him however, it was like to shorten his life; but, he passionately
denied their requests; saying, he would not doubt that that God who in so many
weaknesses had assisted him with an unexpected strength, would now withdraw it
in his last employment; professing an holy ambition to perform that sacred
work. And, when to the amazement of some beholders he appeared in the Pulpit,
many of them thought he presented himself not to preach mortification by a
living voice: but, mortality by a decayed body and dying face. And doubtless,
many did secretly ask that question in Ezekiel; Ezekiel. 37. 3.
Do these bones live? or, can that soul organize that tongue, to speak so long
time as the sand in that glass will move toward its center, and measure out an
hour of this dying man's unspent life? Doubtless it cannot; and yet, after some
faint pauses in his zealous prayer, his strong desires enabled his weak body to
discharge his memory of his preconceived meditations, which were of dying, the
Text being, To God the Lord belong the issues from death. Many that then saw
his tears, and heard his faint and hollow voice, professing they thought the
Text prophetically chosen, and that Dr. Done had preached his own funeral
Sermon.

Being full of joy that God had enabled him to perform this desired duty, he
hastened to his house, out of which he never moved, till like St. Stephen, he
was carried by devout men to his Grave.

The next day after his Sermon, his strength being much wasted, and his spirits
so spent, as indisposed him to business, or to talk: A friend that had often
been a witness of his free and facetious discourse, asked him, Why are you sad?
To whom he replied with a countenance so full of cheerful gravity, as gave
testimony of an inward tranquillity of mind, and of a soul willing to take a
farewell of this world. And said,

I am not sad, but most of the night past I have entertained my self with many
thoughts of several friends that have left me here, and are gone to that place
from which they shall not return: And, that within a few days I also shall go
hence, and be no more seen. And, my preparation for this change is become my
nightly meditation upon my bed, which my infirmities have now made restless to
me. But, at this present time I was in a serious contemplation of the
providence and goodness of God to me, who am less than the least of his
mercies; and looking back upon my life past, I now plainly see it was his hand
that prevented me from all temporal employment; and, it was his Will that I
should never settle nor thrive till I entered into the Ministry; in which, I
have now lived almost twenty years (I hope to his glory) and by which I most
humbly thank him, I have been enabled to require most of those friends which
showed me kindness when my fortune was very low, as God knows it was: and (as
it has occasioned the expression of my gratitude) I thank God most of them
have stood in need of my requital. I have lived to be useful and comfortable to
my good Father-in-law Sir George Moore, whose patience God has been pleased to
exercise with many temporal Crosses; I have maintained my own Mother, whom it
has pleased God after a plentiful fortune in her younger days, to bring to a
great decay in her very old age. I have quieted the Consciences of many that
have groaned under the burden of a wounded spirit, whose prayers I hope are
available for me. I cannot plead innocence of life, especially of my youth:
But, I am to be judged by a merciful God, who is not willing to see what I have
done amiss. And, though of my self I have nothing to present to him but sins
and misery; yet, I know he looks not upon me now as I am of my self, but as I
am in my Savior, and has given me even at this time some testimonies by his
Holy Spirit, that I am of the number of his Elect: I am therefore full of joy,
and shall dye in peace.

I must here look so far back, as to tell the Reader, that at his first return
out of Essex to preach his last Sermon, his old Friend and Physician, Dr. Fox,
a man of great worth, came to him to consult his health; and that after a sight
of him, and some queries concerning his distempers, he told him, That by
Cordials, and drinking milk twenty days together, there was a probability of
his restoration to health; but he passionately denied to drink it.
Nevertheless, Dr. Fox, who loved him most entirely, wearied him with
solicitations, till he yielded to take it for ten days; at the end of which
time, he told Dr. Fox, he had drunk it more to satisfy him, than to recover
his health; and that he would not drink it ten days longer upon the best moral
assurance of having twenty years added to his life, for he loved it not; and
that he was so far from fearing death, which is the King of terrors, that he
longed for the day of his dissolution.

It is observed, that a desire of glory or commendation is rooted in the very
nature of man; and, that those of the severest and most mortified lives, though
they may become so humble as to banish self-flattery, and such weeds as
naturally grow there; yet, they have not been able to kill this desire of
glory, but that like our radical heat it will both live and dye with us; and,
many think it should do so; and, we want not sacred examples to justify the
desire of having our memory to outlive our lives: which I mention, because Dr.
Done, by the persuasion of Dr. Fox, easily yielded at this very time to have a
Monument made for him; but Dr. Fox undertook not to persuade how or what it
should be; that was left to Dr. Done himself.

This being resolved upon, Dr. Done sent for a Carver to make for him in wood
the figure of an Urn, giving him directions for the compass and height of it;
and, to bring with it a board of the height of his body. These being got, then
without delay a choice Painter was to be in a readiness to draw his picture,
which was taken as follows. -- Several Charcole-fires being first made in his
large Study, he brought with him into that place his winding sheet in his hand;
and, having put off all his clothes, had this sheet put on him, and so tied
with knots at his head and feet, and his hands so placed, as dead bodies are
usually fitted to be shrouded and put into the grave. Upon this Urn he thus
stood with his eyes shut, and with so much of the sheet turned aside as might
show his lean, pale, and death-like face; which was purposely turned toward the
East, from whence he expected the second coming of his and our Savior. Thus he
was drawn at his just height; and when the picture was fully finished, he
caused it to be set by his bedside, where it continued, and became his hourly
object till his death: and, was then given to his dearest friend and Executor
Dr. King, who caused him to be thus carved in one entire piece of white Marble,
as it now stands in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's; and by Dr. Donne's own
appointment, these words were to be affixed to it as his Epitaph: JOHANNES
DONE Sac. Theol. Professor
Post varia Studia quibus ab annis tenerrimis fideliter, nec infeliciter
incubuit; Instinctu and impulsu Sp. Sancti, Monitu and Hortatu
REGIS JACOBI, Ordines Sacros amplexus Anno sui Jesu, 1614. and suae aetatis 42.
Decanatu hujus Ecclesiae indutus 27. Novembris 1621.
Exutus morte ultimo Die Martii 1631.
Hic licet in Occiduo Cinere Aspicit Eum Cujus nomen est Oriens.


Upon Monday following, he took his last leave of his beloved Study; and, being
sensible of his hourly decay, retired himself to his bedchamber: and, that week
sent at several times for many of his most considerable friends, with whom he
took a solemn and deliberate farewell; commending to their considerations some
sentences useful for the regulation of their lives, and then dismissed them, as
good Jacob did his sons, with a spiritual benediction. The Sunday following he
appointed his servants, that if there were any business undone that concerned
him or themselves, it should be prepared against Saturday next; for, after that
day he would not mix his thoughts with any thing that concerned this world; nor
ever did: But, as Job, so he waited for the appointed time of his dissolution.

And now he had nothing to do but to dye; to do which, he stood in need of no
longer time, for he had studied long, and to so happy a perfection, that in a
former sickness he called God to witness In his Book of Devotions.
he was that minute ready to deliver his soul into his hands, if that minute
God would determine his dissolution. In that sickness he begged of God the
constancy to be preserved in that estate for ever; and his patient expectation
to have his immortal soul disrobed from her garment of mortality, makes me
confident he now had a modest assurance that his Prayers were then heard, and
his Petition granted. He lay fifteen days earnestly expecting his hourly
change; and, in the last hour of his last day, as his body melted away and
vapoured into spirit, his soul having, I verily believe, some Revelation of the
Beatifical Vision, he said, I were miserable if I might not dye; and after
those words closed many periods of his faint breath, by saying often, Thy
Kingdom come, Thy Will be done. His speech, which had long been his ready and
faithful servant, left him not till the last minute of his life, and then
forsook him; not to serve another Master, but dyed before him; for that it was
become useless to him that now conversed with God on earth, as Angels are said
to do in heaven, only by thoughts and looks. Being speechless, he did as St.
Stephen, look steadfastly toward heaven, till he saw the Son of God standing at
the right hand of his Father: and being satisfied with this blessed sight, as
his soul ascended, and his last breath departed from him, he closed his own
eyes; and then, disposed his hands and body into such a posture as required not
the least alteration by those that came to shroud him.

Thus variable, thus virtuous was the Life; thus excellent, thus exemplary was
the Death of this memorable man.

He was buried in that place of St. Paul's Church which he had appointed for
that use some years before his death; and, by which he passed daily to pay his
public devotions to Almighty God (who was then served twice a day by a public
form of Prayer and Praises in that place) but, he was not buried privately
though he desired it; for, beside an unnumbred number of others, many persons
of Nobility, and of eminency for Learning, who did love and honor him in his
life, did show it at his death, by a voluntary and sad attendance of his body
to the grave, where nothing was so remarkable as a public sorrow.

To which place of his Burial some mournful Friend repaired, and, as Alexander
the Great did to the grave of the famous Achilles, so they strewed his with an
abundance of curious and costly Flowers; which course they (who were never yet
known) continued morning and evening for many days; not ceasing till the
stones that were taken up in that Church to give his body admission into the
cold earth (now his bed of rest) were again by the Masons art so levelled and
firmed, as they had been formerly; and, his place of Burial undistinguishable
to common view.

Nor was this all the Honor done to his reverend Ashes; for, as there be some
persons that will not receive a reward for that for which God accounts himself
a Debtor: persons, that dare trust God with their Charity, and without a
witness; so there was by some grateful unknown Friend, that thought Dr. Donnes
memory ought to be perpetuated, an hundred Marks sent to his two faithful
Friends Dr. King and Dr. Monfort
and Executors, toward the making of his Monument. It was not for many years
known by whom; but, after the death of Dr. Fox, it was known that it was he
that sent it; and he lived to see as lively a representation of his dead
Friend, as Marble can express; a Statue indeed so like Dr. Done, that (as his
Friend Sir Henry Wotton has expressed himself) it seems to breath faintly;
and, Posterity shall look upon it as a kind of artificial Miracle.

He was of Stature moderately tall, of a strait and equally proportioned body,
to which all his words and actions gave an unexpressible addition of Comeliness.

The melancholy and pleasant humor were in him so contempered, that each gave
advantage to the other, and made his Company one of the delights of Mankind.

His fancy was unimitably high, equalled only by his great wit, both being
made useful by a commanding judgment.

His aspect was cheerful, and such as gave a silent testimony of a clear
knowing soul, and of a Conscience at peace with it self.

His melting eye showed that he had a soft heart, full of noble compassion; of
too brave a soul to offer injuries, and too much a Christian not to pardon them
in others.

He did much contemplate (especially after he entered into his Sacred Calling)
the mercies of Almighty God, the immortality of the Soul, and the joys of
Heaven; and would often say, Blessed be God that he is God divinely like
himself.

He was by nature highly passionate, but more apt to reluct at the excesses of
it. A great lover of the offices of humanity, and of so merciful a spirit, that
he never beheld the miseries of Mankind without pity and relief.

He was earnest and unwearied in the search of knowledge; with which his
vigorous soul is now satisfied, and employed in a continual praise of that God
that first breathed it into his active body; that body which once was a Temple
of the Holy Ghost, and is now become a small quantity of Christian dust:

But I shall see it reanimated.

J. W.
An EPITAPH written by Dr. Corbet, late Bishop of Oxford, on his Friend Dr.
Done.
HE that would write an Epitaph for thee,
And write it well, must first begin to be
Such as thou were; for, none can truly know
Thy life and worth^ but he that has lived so.
He must have wit to spare, and to hurl down,
Enough to keep the Gallants of the Town.
He must have learning plenty, both the Laws,
Civil and Common, to judge any Cause.
Divinity great store above the rest,
No^ of the last Edition, but the best.
He must have language, travel, all the Arts,
Judgment to use, or else he wants thy parts.
He must have friends the highest, able to do,
Such as Mecoenas, and Augustus too.
He must have such a sickness, such a death,
Or else his vain descriptions come beneath.
He that would write an Epitaph for thee,
Should first be dead; let it alone for me.
To the Memory of my ever desired Dr. Done. An Elegy by H. King, late Bishop
of Chicester.
TO have lived eminent in a degree
Beyond our loftiest thoughts, that is like thee;
Or to have had too much merit, is not safe,
For such excesses find no Epitaph.
At common graves we have poetic eyes,
Can melt themselves in easy Elegies;
Each quill can drop his tributary verse,
And pin it like the hatchments to the hearse:
But at thine, Poem or Inscription
(Rich soul of wit and language) we have none.
Indeed a silence does that Tomb b^fit,
Where is no Herald left to blazon it.
Widowed invention justly does forbear
To come abroad, knowing thou art not there:
Late her great Patron, whose prerogative
Maintained and cloa^h'd her so, as none alive
Must now presume to keep her at thy rate,
Though he the Indies for her dower estate.
Or else that awful fire which once did burn
In thy clear brain, now fallen into thy Urn,
Lives there to fright rude Empericks from thence,
Which might profane thee by their Ignorance.
Whoever writes of thee, and in a style
Unworthy such a theme, does but revile
Thy precious dust, and wakes a learned spirit,
Which may revenge his rapes upon thy merit:
For all a low-pitch't fancy can devise
Will prove at best but hallowed injuries.
Thou like the dying Swan did lately sing
Thy mournful dirge in audience of the King;
When pale looks and faint accents of thy breath
Presented so to life that piece of death,
That it was feared and prophesi'd by all
Thou thither came to preach thy Funeral.
Oh had thou in an Elegiack knell
Rung out unto the World thine own farewell,
And in thy high victorious numbers beat
The solemn measures of thy grieved retreat,
Thou might the Poets service now have mist,
As well as then thou did prevent the Priest:
And never to the World beholden be,
So much as for an Epitaph for thee.
I do not like the office; nor is it fit
Thou who did lend our age such sums of wit,
Should now re-borrow from her bankrupt mine
That oar to bury thee which first was thine:
Rather still leave us in thy debt, and know,
Exalted Soul, more glory it is to owe
Thy memory what we can never pay,
Than with embased Coin those Rites defray.
Commit we then thee to thy self, nor blame
Our drooping loves that thus to thine own fame
Leave thee Executor, since but thine own
No pen could do thee Justice, nor bays Crown
Thy vast deserts; save that, we nothing can
Depute to be thy ashes guardian:
So, Jewellers no Art or Metal trust
To form the Diamond, but the Diamonds dust.
H. K.
An ELEGY on Dr. DONE.
OUr Done is dead: and, we may sighing say,
We had that man where language chose to stay
And show her utmost power. I would not praise
That, and his great Wit, which in our vain days
Makes others proud; but, as these served to unlock
That Cabinet his mind, where such a stock
Of knowledge was reposed, that I lament
Our just and general cause of discontent.
And, I rejoice I am not so severe,
But as I write a Line, to weep a tear
For his decease: such sad Extremities
Can make such men as I write Elegies.
And wonder not; for, when so great a loss
Falls on a Nation, and they slight the Cross,
God has raised Prophets to awaken them
From their dull Lethargy: witness my Pen,
Not used to upbraid the World: though now it must
Freely, and boldly, for, the Cause is just.
Dull age! oh, I would spare thee, but you are worse:
Thou art not only dull, but, have a Curse
Of black Ingratitude: if not, Could thou
Part with this matchless man, and make no vow
For thee and thine successively to pay,
Some sad remembrance to his dying day?
Did his Youth scatter Poetry, wherein
Lay Loves Philosophy? Was every sin
Pictured in his sharp Satyrs, made so foul
That some have feared sins shapes, and kept their soul
Safer by reading Verse? Did he give days,
Past marble Monuments to those whose praise
He would perpetuate? Did he (I fear
Envy will doubt) these at his twentieth year?
But more matur'd: did his rich soul conceive,
And, in harmonious holy numbers weave
A Crown of Sacred La Corona.
Sonnets, sit to adorn
A dying Martyrs brow: or, to be worn
On that blessed head of Mary Magdalen,
After she wiped Christ's feet; but not, till then.
Did he (fit for such Penitents as she
And he to use) leave us a Letanie,
Which all devout men love: and, doubtless shall
As times grow better, grow more Classical.
Did he write Hymns, for Piety and Wit,
Equal to those great grave Prudentius writ?
Spoke he all Languages? Knew he all Laws?
The grounds and use of Physic: but, because
'Twas mercenary, waved it: went to see
That happy place of Christ's Nativity.
Did he return and preach him? preach him so
As since St. Paul none ever did! they know:
Those happy souls that heard him know this truth.
Did he confirm thy aged? convert thy youth?
Did he these wonders! and, is his dear loss
Mourned by so few? few for so great a Cross.
But sure, the silent are ambitious all
To be close Mourners at his Funeral.
If not, in common pity, they forbear
By Repititions to renew our care:
Or knowing grief conceived, and bid, consumes
Man's life insensibly, as poison fumes
Corrupt the brain, take silence for the way
To'inlarge the soul from these walls, mud, and clay,
Materials of this body: to remain
With him in Heaven, where no promiscuous pain
Lessens those joys we have: for, with him all
Are satisfied, with joys essential.
Dwell on these joys my thoughts: oh, do not call
Grief back, by thinking on his Funeral:
Forget he loved me: waste not my swift years
Which haste to David's seventy, filled with fears
And sorrows for his death. Forget his parts,
They find a living grave in good men's hearts.
And, for my first is daily paid for sin:
Forget to pay my second sigh for him.
Forget his powerful preaching: and, forget
I am his Convert. Oh my frailty! let
My flesh be no more heard: it will obtrude
This Lethargy: so should my gratitude,
My vows of gratitude should so be broke;
Which, can no more be, than his virtues spoke
By any but himself: for which cause, I
Write no Incomiums, but this Elegy.
Which, as a Free Will offering, I here give
Fame and the World: and, parting with it, grieve,
I want abilities, fit to set forth,
A Monument, great, as Donne's matchless worth.
April 7. 1631. Iz: Wa.

FINIS.


THE LIFE OF Sr HENRY WOTTON, SOMETIME Provost of Eaton College.

There are them that have left a name behind them; so that their praise shall
be spoken of: Ecclus. 44. 8.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, for Richard Marriot, and sold by most
Booksellers. 1670.

THE LIFE OF Sir HENRY WOTTON.
SIR Henry Wotton, (whose Life, I now intend to write) was born in the year of
our Redemption, 1568. in Bocton-hall, (commonly called, Bocton, or Bougton
place) in the Parish of Bocton Malherb, in the fruitful Country of Kent:
Bocton-hall being an ancient and goodly structure, beautifying, and being
beautified by the Parish Church of Bocton Malherb adjoining unto it: and, both
seated within a fair Park of the Wottons, on the Brow of such a Hill, as gives
the advantage of a large Prospect, and of equal pleasure to all Beholders.

But this House and Church, are not remarkable for any thing so much, as for
that the memorable Family of the Wottons have so long inhabited the one, and
now lie buried in the other, as appears by their many Monuments in that Church;
the Wottons being a Family, that has brought forth diverse Persons eminent for
Wisdom and Valor, whose Heroic Acts, and Noble Employments, both in England
and in foreign parts, have adorned themselves, and this Nation: which they
have served abroad faithfully, in the discharge of their great trust, and
prudently in their Negotiations with several Princes; and also served it at
home with much Honor and Justice, in their wise managing a great part of the
public affairs thereof, in the various times both of War and Peace.

But, lest I should be thought by any, that may incline, either to deny or
doubt this Truth, not to have observed Moderation in the commendation of this
Family; And also, for that I believe the Merits and Memory of such persons,
ought to be thankfully recorded; I shall offer to the consideration of every
Reader, out of the testimony of their Pedigree, and our Chronicles, a part (and
but a part) of that just Commendation which might be from thence enlarged, and
shall then leave the indifferent Reader to judge, whether my error be an
excess or defect of Commendations.

Sir Robert Wotton of Bocton Malherb Knight, was born in the year of Christ
1463. He living in the Reign of King Edward the fourth, was by him trusted to
be Lieutenant of Guisnes, to be Knight Porter, and Comptroller of Callais;
where he dyed, and lies honorably buried.

Sir Edward Wotton of Bocton Malherb Knight, (Son and Heir of the said Sir
Robert) was born in the year of Christ, 1489. in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh. He was made Treasurer of Callais, and of Privie-Councel to King Henry
the Eight, who offered him to be Lord Chancellor of England, but (says In his
Chronicle
Hollinshed) out of a virtuous modesty he refused it.

Thomas Wotton of Bocton Malherb Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir Edward,
(and the Father of our Sir Henry, that occasions this relation) was born in the
year of Christ 1521. He was a Gentleman excellently educated, and studious in
all the Liberal Arts; in the knowledge whereof, he attained unto a great
perfection, who though he had (besides those abilities, a very Noble, and
plentiful estate, and the ancient Interest of his Predecessors) many
invitations from Queen Elizabeth to change his Country Recreations and
Retirement for a Court-Life, offering him a Knighthood (she was then with him
at his Bocton-hall) and that to be but as an earnest of some more honorable and
more profitable employment under Her, yet, he humbly refused both; being a man
of great modesty, of a most plain and single heart, of an ancient freedom, and
integrity of mind. A commendation which Sir Henry Wotton took occasion often to
remember with great gladness, and thankfully to boast himself the Son of such a
Father: From whom indeed he derived that noble ingenuity that was always
practiced by himself, and which he ever both commended and cherished in others.
This Thomas was also remarkable for Hospitality, a great Lover, and much
beloved of his Country; to which may justly be added, that he was a Cherisher
of Learning, as appears by that excellent Antiquary M. William Lambert, in his
perambulation of Kent.

This Thomas had four sons, Sir Edward, Sir James, Sir John, and Sir Henry.

Sir Edward was Knighted by Queen Elizabeth, and made Comptroller of Her
Majesty's Household. He was (says Cambden) a man remarkable for many and great
Employments in the State, during her Reign, and sent several times Ambassador
into Foreign Nations. After her death, he was by King James made Comptroller
of his Household, and called to be of his Privy-Councel, and by him advanced to
be Lord Wotton, Baron of Merley in Kent, and made Lord Lieutenant of that
County.

Sir James (the second son) may be numbered among the Martial men of his age,
who was in the 38 of Queen Elizabeth's Reign (with Robert Earl of Sussex, Count
Lodowick of Nassaw, Don Christophoro, son of Antonio King of Portugal, and
diverse other Gentlemen of Nobleness and Valor) Knighted in the Field near
Cadiz in Spain, after they had gotten great Honor and Riches, besides a
notable retaliation of Injuries by taking that Town.

Sir John, being a Gentleman excellently accomplished, both by Learning and
Travel, was Knighted by Queen Elizabeth, and by her looked upon with more then
ordinary favor, and intentions of preferment; but Death, in his younger years,
put a period to his growing hopes.

Of Sir Henry, my following discourse shall give an account.

The descent of these forenamed Wottons, were all in a direct Line; and most
of them and their actions, in the memory of those with whom we have conversed:
But, if I had looked so far back, as to Sir Nicolas Wotton, (who lived in the
Reign of King Richard the second;) or before him, upon diverse others of great
note in their several Ages, I might by some be thought tedious; and yet others
may more justly think me negligent, if I omit to mention Nicholas Wotton, the
fourth Son of Sir Robert, whom I first named.

This Nicholas Wotton was Doctor of Law, and sometime Dean of Canterbury: a man
whom God did not only bless with a long life, but with great abilities of
mind, and an inclination to employ them in the service of his Country, as is
testified by his several Employments; Cambden in his Britannia.
having been sent nine times Ambassador unto foreign Princes; and being a
Privy- Councellor to King Henry the eighth, to Edward the sixth, to Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth; who also, after he had (during the Wars between England,
Scotland and France) been three several times (and not unsuccessfully) employed
in Committies for settling of peace betwixt this and those Kingdoms, dyed
(says learned Cambden) full of Commendations for Wisdom and Piety. He was also
by the Will of King Henry the eighth, made one of his Executors, and chief
Secretary of State to his Son, that pious Prince Edward the sixth. Concerning
which Nicholas Wotton, I shall say but this little more; That he refused (being
offered it by Queen Elizabeth) to be Holinshed.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and that he dyed not rich, though he lived in that
time of the dissolution of Abbeys.

More might be added: but by this it may appear, that Sir Henry Wotton, was a
Branch of such a kindred as left a Stock of Reputation to their Posterity; such
Reputation, as might kindle a generous emulation in strangers, and preserve a
noble ambition in those of his name and Family to perform Actions worthy of
their Ancestors.

And, that Sir Henry Wotton did so, might appear more perfectly then my Pen can
express it, if of his many surviving friends, some one of higher parts and
employment, had been pleased to have commended his to Posterity; But, since
some years are now past, and they have all (I know not why) forborne to do it;
my gratitude to the memory of my dead friend, and the renewed request of some
Mr. Nic. Oudert, and others.
that still live solicitous to see this duty performed; these have had a power
to persuade me to undertake it; which, truly, I have not done, but with some
distrust of mine own Abilities, and yet so far from despair, that I am modestly
confident my humble language shall be accepted, because I present all Readers
with a Commixture of truth, and Sir Henry Wotton's merits.

This being premised, I proceed to tell the Reader, that the father of Sir
Henry Wotton was twice married, first to Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir John
Rudstone Knight; after whose death, though his inclination was averse to all
Contentions; yet, necessitated he was to several Suits in Law: in the
prosecution whereof, (which took up much of his time, and were the occasion of
many Discontents) he was by diverse of his friends earnestly persuaded to a
re-marriage; to whom he as often answered, That if ever he did put on a
resolution to marry, he was seriously resolved to avoid three sorts of persons:
namely, those that had Children. that had Lawsuits. that were of his Kindred.



And yet, following his own Lawsuits, he met in Westminster Hall with one
Mistress Morton, Widow to Morton of Kent Esquire: who was also engaged in
several suits in Law, and, he observing her Comportment at the time of hearing
one of her Causes before the Judges, could not but at the same time, both
compassionate her Condition, and yet, so affect her Person, that although there
were in her a concurrence of all those accidents, against which he had so
seriously resolved; yet his affection to her grew then so strong, that he
resolved to solicit her for a Wife; and did; and obtained her.

By her (who was the Daughter of Sir William Finch of Eastwell in Kent) he had
Henry his youngest son. His Mother undertook to be Tutoress unto him during
much of his Childhood; for whose care and pains, he paid her each day with such
visible signs of future perfection in Learning, as turned her employment into
a pleasing-trouble: which she was content to continue, till his Father took him
into his own particular care, and disposed of him to a Tutor in his own House
at Bocton.

And, when time and diligent instruction, had made him fit for a removal to an
higher Form, (which was very early) he was sent to Winchester-School: a place
of strict Discipline and Order: that so, he might in his youth be molded into
a Method of living by Rule; which his wise Father knew to be the most necessary
way, to make the future part of his life, both happy to himself, and useful for
the discharge of all business, whether public or private.

And, that he might be confirmed in this regularity, he was at a fit age
removed from that School, to New-Colledge in Oxford; both being founded by
William Wickham Bishop of Winchester.

There he continued, till about the eighteenth year of his Age: and was then
transplanted into Queens-Colledge; where within that year, he was by the chief
of that College, perswasively enjoined to write a play for their private use:
(it was the Tragedy of Tancredo) which was so interwoven with Sentences, and
for the Method and exact personating those humors, passions, and dispositions,
which he proposed to represent, so performed; that the gravest of that society
declared, he had in a slight employment, given an early, and a solid testimony
of his future abilities. And, though there may be some sower dispositions,
which may think this not worth a memorial; yet, that wise Knight Baptista
Guarini (whom learned Italy accounts one of her ornaments) thought it neither
an uncomely, nor an unprofitable employment for his Age.

But I pass to what will be thought more serious.

About the nineteenth year of his Age, he proceeded Master of Arts; and at that
time read in Latin three Lectures ^e Oculo: wherein, he having described the
Form, the Motion, the curious composure of the Eye; and, demonstrated, how of
those very many, every humor and nerve performs its distinct Office, so as the
God of Order has appointed, without mixture or confusion; and all this, to the
advantage of man, to whom it is given; not only as the bodies guide: but,
whereas all other of his senses require time to inform the Soul: this, in an
instant apprehends and warns him of danger; teaching him in the very eyes of
others to discover wit, folly, love, and hatred. After these observations he
fell to dispute this Optique question, Whether we see by the Emission of the
Beams from within; or Reception of the Species from without? and after that,
and many other like learned disquisitions, in the Conclusion of his Lectures,
he took a fair occasion to beautify his discourse with a Commendation of the
blessing and benefit of Seeing: By which, we do not only discover Natures
Secrets: but, with a continued content (for the eye is never weary of seeing)
behold the great Light of the World, and by it discover the Fabric of the
Heavens, and both the Order and Motion of the Celestial Orbs; nay, that if the
eye look but downward, it may rejoice to behold the bosom of the Earth, our
common Mother, embroidered and adorned with numberless and various Flowers,
which man sees daily grow up to perfection; and then, silently moralize his own
condition, who in a short time (like those very Flowers) decays, withers, and
quickly returns again to that Earth, from which both had they first being.

These were so exactly debated, and so Rhetorically heightened, as, among other
admirers, caused that learned Italian, Albericus Gentilis (then Professor of
the Civil Law in Oxford) to call him Henrice mi ocelle; which dear expression
of his, was also used by diverse of Sir Henry's dearest Friends, and by many
other persons of Note, during his stay in the University.

But his stay there was not long; at least, not so long as his ^riends once
intended: for, the year after Sir Henry proceeded Master of Arts, his father
(whom Sir Henry did never mention without this, or some like reverential
expression; as, That good man my father; or, My father the best of men:) about
that time, this good man changed this for a better life; leaving to Sir Henry,
as to his other younger sons, a rentcharge of an hundred Mark a year^ to be
paid for ever, out of some one of his Manors of a much greater value.

And here, though this good man be dead, yet I wish a Circumstance or two that
concern him, may not be buried without a Relation; which I shall undertake to
do, for that I suppose, they may so much concern the Reader to know, that I may
promise my self a pardon for a short Digression.

IN the year of our Redemption, 1553. Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury (whom
I formerly mentioned) being then Ambassador in France, dreamed, that his
Nephew, this Thomas Wotton, was inclined to be a party in such a project, as,
if he were not suddenly prevented, would turn both to the loss of his life, and
ruin of his Family.

Doubtless, the good Dean did well know, that common Dreams are but a senseless
paraphrase on our waking thoughts; or, of the business of the day past; or, are
the result of our over engaged affections, when we betake our selves to rest;
and, that the observation of them, may turn to silly Superstitions, as they too
often do: But, though he might know this, and, might also believe that
Prophesies are ceased; yet, doubtless he could not but consider, that all
Dreams are not to be neglected or cast away; and did therefore rather lay this
Dream aside, than intend totally to lose it; for that dreaming the same again
the Night following, when it became a double Dream; like that of Pharaoh (of
which dreams, the learned have made many observations) and that, it had no
dependence ^n is waking thoughts, much less on the desires of his heart; then,
he did more seriously consider it, and remembered that Almighty God was pleased
in a Dream to reveal and to assure St. Austin's confession.
Monica the Mother of St. Austin, that he, her son (for whom she wept so
bitterly, and prayed so much) should at last become a Christian: This the good
Dean considered; and, considering also, that Almighty God (though the causes of
Dreams be often unknown) has even in these latter times, by a certain
illumination of the soul in sleep, discovered many things that humane wisdom
could not foresee: Upon these considerations, he resolved to use so prudent a
remedy by way of prevention, as might introduce no great inconvenience to
either party. And to that end, he wrote to the Queen ('it was Queen Mary) and
besought her, That she would cause his Nephew Thomas Wotton, to be sent for out
of Kent: and, that the Lords of her Council might interrogate him in some such
feigned questions, as might give a color for his Commitment into a favorable
Prison; declaring, that he would acquaint her Majesty with the true reason of
his request, when he should next become so happy as to see, and speak to her
Majesty.

'Twas done as the Dean desired: and in Prison I must leave Mr. Wotton, till I
have told the Reader what followed.

At this time a Marriage was concluded betwixt our Queen Mary, and Philip King
of Spain: And though this was concluded with the advice, if not by the
persuasion of her Privy Council, as having many probabilities of advantage to
this Nation: yet, diverse persons of a contrary persuasion, did not only
declare against it, but also raised Forces to oppose it; believing (as they
said) it would be a means to bring England under subjection to Spain, and make
those of this Nation slaves to strangers.

And of this number Sir Thomas Wyat of Boxley-Abby in Kent (betwixt whose
Family, and the Family of the Wottons, there had been an ancient and entire
friendship) was the principal Actor; who having persuaded many of the Nobility
and Gentry (especially of Kent) to side with him; and, being defeated, and
taken Prisoner, was legally arraigned, condemned, and lost his life: So did the
Duke of Suffolk, and diverse others, especially many of the Gentry of Kent, who
were there in several places executed as Wyats assistants.

And of this number, in all probability, had Mr. Wotton been, if he had not
been confined: for, though he was not ignorant that another man's Treason, makes
it mine by concealing it; yet, he durst confess to his Uncle, when he returned
into England, and came to visit him in Prison, that he had more than an
intimation of Wyats intentions; and, thought he had not continued actually
innocent, if his Uncle had not so happily dreamed him into a Prison; out of
which place, when he was delivered by the same hand that caused his Commitment,
they both considered the Dream more seriously; and then, both joined in
praising God for it; That God, who ties himself to no Rules, either in
preventing of evil, or in showing of mercy to those, whom of his good pleasure
he has chosen to love.

And this Dream was the more considerable, because many of the Dreams of this
Thomas Wotton did most usually prove ture, both in foretelling things to come,
and discovering things past: of which I will give the Reader but one particular
more, namely this; This Thomas, a little before his death, dreamed that the
University Treasury was robbed by Townsmen, and poor Scholars; and, that the
number was five: And being that day to write to his Son Henry at Oxford, he
thought it worth so much pains, as by a Postscript in his Letter, to make a
slight inquiry of it; the Letter (which was writ out of Kent,and dated three
days before) came to his Sons hands the very morning after the night in which
the Robbery was committed; and when the City and University were both in a
perplexed Enquest of the Thieves, then did Sir H. Wotton show his fathers
Letter, and by it such light was given of this work of darkness, that the five
guilty persons were presently discovered, and apprehended, without putting the
Univesity to so much trouble, as the casting of a Figure.

And it may yet be more considerable, that this Nicholas and Thomas Wotton
should both (being men of holy lives, of even tempers, and much given to
fasting and prayer) foresee and foretell the very days of their own death:
Nicholas did so, being then Seventy years of age, and in perfect health. Thomas
did the like in the 65 year of his age; who being then in London (where he
dyed) and foreseeing his death there, gave direction that his Body should be
carried to Bocton; and though he thought his Uncle Nicholas worthy of that
noble Monument which he built for him in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury;
yet, this humble man gave direction concerning himself, to be buried privately,
and especially without any pomp at his Funeral.

BUt it may now seem more then time that I return to Sir Henry Wotton at
Oxford; where, after his optic Lecture, he was taken into such a bosom
friendship with the learned Albericus Gentilis (whom I formerly named) that if
it had been possible, Gentilis would have breathed all his excellent knowledge
both of the Mathematics and Law, into the breast of his dear Harry (for so
Gentilis used to call him:) and though he was not able to do that, yet, there
was in Sir Henry such a propenfity and connaturalness to the Italian Language,
and those Studies whereof Gentilis was a great Master, that this friendship
between them did daily increase, and proved daily advantageous to Sir Henry,
for the improvement of him in several Sciences, during his stay in the
University.

From which place, before I shall invite the Reader to follow him into a
foreign Nation, though I must omit to mention diverse persons that were then in
Oxford, of memorable note for Learning, and Friends to Sir Henry Wotton, yet I
must not omit the mention of a love that was there begun betwixt him and Dr.
Done (sometimes Dean of St. Paul's) a man, of whose abilities I shall forbear
to say any thing, because he who is of this Nation, that pretends to Learning
or Ingenuity, and is ignorant of Dr. Done, deserves not to know him. The
friendship of these two, I must not omit to mention, being such a friendship as
was generously elemented: And as it was begun in their Youth, and in an
University, and there maintained by correspondent Inclinations and Studies, so
it lasted till Age and Death forced a Separation.

In Oxford he stayed till about two years after his fathers death: at which
time, he was about the two and twentieth year of his Age; and having to his
great Wit, added the ballast of Learning, and knowledge of the Arts, he then
laid aside his Books, and betook himself to the useful Library of Travel, and a
more general Conversation with Mankind, employing the remaining part of his
Youth, his industry and fortune to adorn his mind, and to purchase the rich
treasure of foreign knowledge; of which, both for the secrets of Nature, the
dispositions of many Nations, their several Laws and Languages, he was the
possessor in a very large measure, as I shall faithfully make to a^pear, before
I take my Pen from the following Narration of his Life.

In his Travels, which was almost nine years before his return into England, he
stayed but one year in France, and most of that in Geneva; where he became
acquainted with Theodor Bez^ (then very aged) and with Isaac Causabon, in whose
fathers house (if I be rightly informed) Sir Henry Wotton was lodged, and there
contracted a most worthy friendship with him and his most learned Son.

Three of the remaining eight years, were spent in Germany, the other five in
Italy (the Stage on which God appointed he should act a great part of his life)
where both in Rome, Venice, and Florence, he became acquainted with the most
eminent men for Learning, and all manner of Arts, as Picture, Sculpture,
Chemistry, Architecture, and diverse other manual Arts; even Arts of inferior
nature; of all which, he was a most dear Lover, and a most excellent Judge.

He returned out of Italy into England about the Thirtieth year of his Age,
being then noted by many, both for his person and comportment; for indeed he
was of a choice shape, tall of stature, and of a most persuasive behavior;
which was so mixed with sweet Discourse, and Civilities, as gained him much
love from all persons with whom he entered into an acquaintance.

And whereas he was noted in his Youth to have a sharp wit, and apt to jest;
that by Time, Travel, and Conversation, was s^ polished, and made so useful,
that his company seemed to be one of the delights of Mankind; insomuch, as
Robert Earl of Essex (then one of the darlings of fortune, and in greatest
favor with Queen Elizabeth) invited him first into a friendship, and after a
knowledge of his great abilities, to be one of his Secretaries; the other being
Mr. Henry Cuffe, sometimes of Merton College in Oxford (and there also the
acquaintance of Sir Henry Wotton in his Youth) Mr. Cuffe being then a man of no
common note in the University for his Learning; nor after his removal from that
place, for the great abilities of his mind; nor indeed, for the fatalness of
his end.

Sir Henry Wotton being now taken into a serviceable friendship with the Earl
of Essex, did personally attend his Counsels and Employments in two Voyages at
Sea against the Spaniard, and also in that (which was the Earls last) into
Ireland; that Voyage wherein he did so much provoke the Queen to anger then,
and worse at his return into England; upon whose immovable favor he had built
such sandy hopes, as encouraged him to those undertakings which (with the help
of a contrary Faction) suddenly caused his Commitment to the Tower.

Sir Henry Wotton observing this, though he was not of that Faction (for the
Earls followers were also divided into their several interests) which
encouraged the Earl to those undertakings which proved so fatal to him, and
diverse of his Confederation: yet, knowing Treason to be so comprehensive, as to
take in even Circumstances, and out of them to make such Conclusions as subtle
Statesmen shall project, either for their revenge or safety; considering this,
he thought prevention by absence out of England, a better security than to stay
in it, and plead his innocence in a Prison. Therefore did he, so soon as the
Earl was apprehended, very quickly, and as privately glide through Kent to
Dover, without so much as looking toward his native and beloved Bocton; and was
by the help of favorable winds, and liberal payment, within Sixteen hours
after his departure from London, set upon the French shore; where he heard
shortly after, that the Earl was Arraigned, Condemned, and Beheaded; that his
Friend Mr. Cuffe was hanged, and diverse other persons of Eminent Quality
executed.

The Times did not look so favorably upon Sir Henry Wotton, as to invite his
return into England; having therefore procured of his elder brother (the Lord
Wotton) an assurance that his Annuity should be paid him in Italy, thither he
went, happily renewing his intermitted friendship and interest, and indeed, his
great content, in a new conversation with his old acquaintance in that Nation;
and more particularly in Florence, which City is not more eminent for the great
Dukes Court, then for the great recourse of men of choicest note for Learning
and Arts; in which number he there met with his old Friend, Seignior Vietta, (a
Gentleman of Venice, and) then taken to be Secretary to the Great Duke of
T^^cany.

After some stay in Florence, he went the 4th time to visit Rome, where in the
English College he had very many Friends (their humanity made them really so,
though they knew him to be a dissenter from many of their Principles of
Religion;) and having enjoyed their company, and satisfied himself concerning
some Curiosities that did partly occasion his Journey thither, he returned back
to Florence, where a most notable accident befell him; an accident, that did
not only find new employment for his choice Abilities, but introduce him a
knowledge and an interest with our King James, then King of Scotland; which I
shall proceed to relate.

But first, I am to tell the Reader, That though Queen Elizabeth (or she and
her Council) were never willing to declare her Successor; yet, James then King
of the Scots, was confidently believed by most to be the man upon whom the
sweet trouble of Kingly Government would be imposed; and the Queen declining
very fast, both by age, and visible infirmities, those that were of the Romish
persuasion in point of Religion (even Rome it self, and those of this Nation)
knowing that the death of the Queen, and the establishing of her Successor,
were taken to be critical days for destroying or establishing the Protestant
Religion in this Nation, did therefore improve all opportunities for preventing
a Protestant Prince to succeed Her. And, as the Pope's Excommunication of Queen
Elizabeth, had both by the judgment and practice of the Jesuited Papist,
exposed Her to be warrantably destroyed; so (if we may believe an angry
Adversary, (a Watson in his Quodlibets.
secular Priest against a Jesuit) you may believe, that about that time there
were many endeavors, first to excommunicate, and then to shorten the life of
King James.

Immediately after Sir Henry Wotton's return from Rome to Florence (which was
about a year before the death of Queen Elizabeth) Ferdinand the great Duke of
Florence had intercepted certain Letters that discovered a design to take away
the life of the then King of Scots. The Duke abhorring the Fact, and resolving
to endeavor a prevention of it, advised with his Secretary Vietta, by what
means a caution might be best given to that King; and after consideration, it
was resolved to be done by Sir Henry Wotton, whom Vietta first commended to the
Duke, and the Duke had noted and approved of above all the English that
frequented his Court.

Sir Henry was gladly called by his Friend Vietta to the Duke, who after much
profession of trust and friendship, acquainted him with the secret; and being
well instructed, dispatched him into Scotland with Letters to the King, and
with those Letters, such Italian Antidotes against poison, ^s the Scots till
then had been strangers to.

Having partel from the Duke, he took up the name and language of an Italian;
and thinking it best to avo^d the line of English intelligence and dange^, he
posted into Norway, and through that C^untry toward Scotland, where he found
the King at Sterling; then he used means (by Bernard Lindsey, one of the Kings
Bedchamber to procure him a speedy and private conference with His Majesty;
assuring him, That the business which he was to negotiate, was of such
consequence, as had caused the great Duke of Tuscany, to enjoin him suddenly ^o
leave his Native Country of Italy, to impart it to his King.

This being by Bernard Lindsey m^de known to the King, the King after a little
wonder, (mixed with jealousy) to hear of an Italian Ambassador, or Messenger,
required his name, (which was said to be Octavio Baldi) and appointed him to be
heard privately ^t a fixed hour that Evening.

When Octavio Baldi came to the Presence^ Chamber Door, he was requested to lay
aside his long Rapier (which Italian-like he then wore) and being entered the
Chamber, he found there with the King three or four Scotch Lords standing
distant in several corrers of the Chamber. At the sight of whom he made a
stand; which the King observing, b^d him be bold, and deliver his Message for
he wou^d undertake for the secrecy of all that were present. Then did Octavio
Baldi deliver his Letter^s and his Message to the King in Italian; which, ^hen
the King had graciously ^eceived, after a little pause, Octavio Baldi steps to
the Table, an^ whispers to the King in his own Language, that he was an English
man, beseeching Him for a more private conference with His Majesty; and, that
he might be concealed during h^s stay in that Nation; which was promised, and
really performed by the King, during all his abode there; (which was about
three Months) all which time was spent with much pleasantness to the King, and,
with as much to Octavio Baldi himself, as that Country could afford; from
which he departed as true an Italian as he came thither.

To the Duke at Florence he returned with a fair and grateful account of his
employment, and within some few Months after his return, there came certain
News to Florence, that Queen Elizabeth was dead, and James King of the Scots
proclaimed King of England. The Duke knowing travel and business to be the best
Schools of wisdom, and that Sir Henry Wotton had been tutored in both, advised
him to return presently to England, and joy the King with his new and better
Title, and there wait upon Fortune for a better employment.

When King James came into England, he found, amongst other of the late Queens
Officers, the Lord Wotton, Comptroller of the House, of whom he demanded, If he
knew one Henry Wotton, that had spent much time in foreign Travel? The Lord
replied, he knew him well, and that he was his Brother; then the King asking
where he then was, was answered, at Venice, or Florence; but by late Letters
from thence, he understood, he would suddenly be at Paris. Send for him, said
the King, and when he shall come into England, bid him repair to me. The Lord
Wotton after a little wonder, asked the King, If he knew him? to which the King
answered, You must rest unsatisfied of that, till you bring the Gentleman to me.

Not many Months after this Discourse, the Lord Wotton brought his brother to
attend the King, who took him in His Arms, and bade him welcome by the name of
Octavio Baldi, saying, he was the most honest, and therefore the best
Dissembler that ever he met with: And said, Seeing I know you neither want
Learning, Travel, nor Experience, and that I have had so real a Testimony of
your faithfulness and abilities to manage an Embassage, I have sent for you to
declare my purpose; which is, to make use of you in that kind hereafter: And
indeed the King did so most of those two and twenty years of his Reign; but
before he dismissed Octavio Baldi from his present attendance upon him, he
restored him to his old name of Henry Wotton, by which he then knighted him.

Not long after this, the King having resolved, according to his Motto ( Beati
pacifici) to have a friendship with his Neighbor Kingdoms of France and Spain,
and also for diverse weighty reasons, to enter into an Alliance with the State
of Venice, and to that end to send Ambassadors to those several places, did
propose the choice of these Employments to Sir Henry Wotton; who considering
the smallness of his own Estate (which he never took care to augment) and
knowing the Courts of great Princes to be sumptuous, and necessarily expensive,
inclined most to that of Venice, as being a place of more retirement, and best
suiting with his Genius, who did ever love to join with Business Study, and a
trial of natural Experiments; for both which fruitful Italy, that Darling of
Nature, and Cherisher of all Arts, is so justly framed in all parts of the
Christian World.

Sir Henry having after some short time and consideration, resolved upon
Venice, and a large allowance being appointed by the King for his voyage
thither, and a settled maintenance during his stay there, he left England, nobly
accompanied through France to Venice, by Gentlemen of the best families and
breeding that this Nation afforded; they were too many to name, but these two,
for following reasons may not be omitted; Sir Albertus Morton his Nephew, who
went his Secretary, and William Bedel, a man of choice Learning, and sanctified
Wisdom, who went his Chaplain. And, though his dear friend Dr. Done (then a
private Gentleman) was not one of that Number that did personally accompany him
in this Voyage, yet the reading of this following Letter sent by him to Sir
Henry Wotton, the morning before he left England, may testify he wanted not
his friends best wishes to attend him.

SIR,
AFter those reverend papers, whose soul is
Our good, and great Kings loved hand, and feared name,
By which to you he derives much of his;
And, how he may, makes you almost the same;
A Taper of his Torch, a Copy writ
From his Original, and a fair Beam
Of the same warm and dazzling Sun, though it
Must in another Sphere his virtue stream;
After those Learned Papers which your hand
Has stored with notes of use and pleasure too;
From which rich treasury you may command
Fit matter whether you will write or do.
After those loving Papers where Friends send
With glad grief to your Sea-ward-steps farewell,
Which thicken on you now as prayers ascend
To heaven on troops at a good man's passing bell.
Admit this honest Paper, and allow
It such an audience as your self would ask;
What you would say at Venice, this says now,
And has for nature what you have for task.
To swear much love; nor to be changed before
Honor alone will to your fortune fit,
Nor shall I then honor your fortune more,
Than I have done your honour-wanting-wit.
But it is an easier load (though both oppress)
To want, than govern greatness; for we are
In that, our own, and only business;
In this, we must for others vices care.
It Is therefore well, your spirits now are placed ore-past
In their last furnace, in activity;
Which fits them: Schools, and Courts, and Wars
To touch and taste in any best degree.
For me! (if there be such a thing as I)
Fortune (if there be such a thing as she)
Finds that I bear so well her tyranny,
That she thinks nothing else so fit for me.
But, though she part us, to hear my often prayers
For your increase, God is as near me here;
And, to send you what I shall beg, his stairs
In length, and ease, are alike every where.
J. Done.


SIR Henry Wotton was received by the State of Venice, with much honor and
gladness, both for that he delivered his Embassage most elegantly in the
Italian Language, and came also in such a Juncture of time, as his Masters
friendship seemed useful for that Republic: the time of his coming thither was
about the year 1604. Leonardo Donato being then Duke; a wise and resolved man,
and to all purposes such (Sir Henry Wotton would often say it) as the State of
Venice could not then have wanted; there having been formerly in the time of
Pope Clement the eighth, some contests about the privileges of Churchmen, and
the power of the Civil Magistrate; of which, for the information of common
Readers, I shall say a little, because it may give light to some passages that
follow.

About the year 1603. the Republic of Venice made several Injunctions against
Laypersons giving Lands or Goods to the Church, without License from the
Civil-Magistrate; and in that inhibition, they expressed their reasons to be, For
that when it once came into the hands of the Ecclesiastics, it was not subject
to alienation; by reason whereof, (the lay people being at their death
charitable even to excess) the Clergy grew every day more numerous, and,
pretending exemption from all public service and taxes, the burden did grow
too heavy to be born by the Laity.

Another occasion of difference was, That about this time complaints were
justly made by the Venetians against two Clergymen, the Abbot of Nervesa, and
a Canon of Vicenza, for committing such sins, as I think not fit to name; nor
are these mentioned with an Intent to fix a Scandal upon any Calling; (for
holiness is not tied to Ecclesiastical Orders, and Italy is observed to breed
the most virtuous, and most vicious men of any Nation) these two having been
long complained of at Rome in the name of the State of Venice, and no
satisfaction being given to the Venetians, they seized their persons, and
committed them to prison.

The justice, or injustice of such power, then used by the Venetians, had
formerly had some calm debates betwixt the present Pope Clement the Eighth, and
that Republic: for he did not excommunicate them; considering (as I conceive)
that in the late Council of Trent it was at last (after many Politic
disturbances, and delays, and endeavors to preserve the Popes present power)
declared, in order to a general reformation of those many Errors which were in
time crept into the Church: that though Discipline, and especial
Excommunication be one of the chief sinews of Church government; and intended
to keep men in obedience to it: for which end, it was declared to be very
profitable; yet it was also declared, and advised to be used with great
sobriety and care: because experience had informed them, that when it was
pronounced unadvisedly, or rashly, it became more contemned then feared. And,
though this was the advice of that Council at the Conclusion of it, which was
not many years before this quarrel with the Venetians: yet this prudent,
patient Pope Clement dying: Pope Paul the fi^t, who succeeded him, being a man
of a much hotter temper, brought this difference with the Venetians to a much
higher Contention: objecting those late acts of that State, to be a diminution
of his just power, and limited a time for their revocation; threatening, if he
were not obeyed, to proceed to excommunication of the Republic; who still
offered to show both reason and ancient custom to warrant their Actions. But
this Pope, contrary to his Predecessors moderation, required absolute obedience
without disputes.

Thus it continued for about a year; the Pope still threatening Excommunication,
and the Venetians still answering him with fair speeches, and no performance,
till at last, the Popes zeal to the Apostolic Sea, did make him to
excommunicate the Duke, the whole Senate, and all their Dominions; and then
shut up all their Churches; charging the whole Clergy to forbear all sacred
Offices to the Venetians, till their Obedience should render them capable of
Absolution.

But this act of the Popes did the more confirm the Venetians in their
resolution not to obey him; And to that end, upon the hearing of his Interdict,
they presently published by sound of Trumpet, a Proclamation to this effect.

That whosoever has received from Rome any Copy of a Papal interdict,
published there, well against the Law of God, as against the Honor of this
Nation, shall presently render it to the Council of Ten, upon pain of death.

Then was the Inquisition presently suspended by Order of the State; and the
Floodgates being thus set open, any pleasant or scoffing wit might safely vent
it self against the Pope, either by free speaking, or in Print.

Matters thus heightened, the State advised with Father Paul, a holy and Learned
Friar (the Author of the History of the Council of Trent) whose advice was,
Neither to Provoke the Pope, nor lose their own Right; he declaring publicly
in Print, in the name of the State, That the Pope was trusted to keep two
Keys; one of Prudence, and the other of Power; And that if they were not both
used together, Power alone is not effectual in an Excommunication.

And thus it continued, till a report was blown abroad, that the Venetians were
all turned Protestants: which was believed by many, for that it was observed,
the English Ambassador was so often in conference with the Senate, and his
Chaplain Mr. Bedel, more often with Father Paul: And also, for that the
Republic of Venice was known to give Commis^^on to Gregory Justiniano, then
their Ambassador in England, to make all these proceedings known to the King,
and to crave a Promise of his assistance, if need should require: and in the
mean time, the King's advice and judgment; which was the same that he gave to
Pope Clement at his first coming to the Crown of England; (that Pope then
moving him to an Union with the Roman Church) namely; To endeavor the calling
of a free Council, for the settlement of peace in Christendom: And that he
doubed not, but that the French King, and diverse other Princes would join to
assist in so good a work; and in the mean time, the sin of this Breach, both
with his, and the Venetians Dominions, must of necessity lie at the Pope's door.

In this contention (which lasted several years) the Pope grew still higher,
and the Venetians more resolved and careless; still acquainting King James with
their proceedings, which was done by the help of Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Bedel,
and Padre Paulo, whom the Venetians did then call to be one of their Consultors
of State, and with his Pen to defend their Cause: which was by him so
performed, that the Pope saw plainly, he had weakened his Power by exceeding it,
and offered the Venetians Absolution upon very easy terms; which the Venetians
still slighting did at last obtain, by that which was scarce so much as a show
of acknowledging it: For they made an order, that in that day, in which they
were absolved, there should be no public rejoicing: nor any Bonefires that
night; lest the Common people might judge they were absolved for committing a
fault.

These Contests were the occasion of Padre Paulo his knowledge and interest
with King James, for whose sake principally Padre Paul compiled that eminent
History of the remarkable Council of Trent; which History was, as fast as it
was written, sent in several sheets in Letters by Sir Henry Wotton, Mr Bedel,
and Mr. Bedel, and others, unto King James, and the then Bishop of Canterbury
in England; and there first made public both in English; and in the universal
Language.

For eight years after Sir Henry Wottons going into Italy, he stood fair, and
highly valued in the Kings opinion, but at last became much clouded by an
accident, which I shall proceed to relate.

At his first going Ambassador into Italy; as he passed through Germany, he
stayed some days at Augusta; where having been in his former Travels, well
known by many of the best note for Learning and Ingeniousness, (those that are
esteemed the Virtuosi of that Nation) with whom he passing an evening in
merriments, was requested by Christopher Flecamore to write some Sentence in
his Albo; (a Book of white paper, which, for that purpose many of the German
Gentry usually carry about then.) and Sir Henry Wotton consenting to the
motion, took an occasion from some accidental discourse of the present Company,
to write a pleasant definition of an Ambassador, in these very words.

Legatus est vir bonus peregre mismissus ad mentiendum Reipublicae causa.

Which Sir Henry Wotton could have been content should have been thus Englished:

An Ambassador is an honest man, sent to lie abroad for the good of his
Country.

But the word for lie being the hinge upon which the Conceit was to turn) was
not so expre^s'd in Latin as would admit (in the hands of an enemy especially)
so fair a construction as Sir Henry thought in English. Yet as it was, it slept
quietly among other Sentences in this Albo, almost eight years, till by
accident it fell into the hands of Jasper Scioppius; a Romanist, a man of a
restless spirit, and a malicious Pen: who with Books against King James, prints
this as a Principle of that Religion professed by the King and his Ambassador
Sir Henry Wotton, then at Venice; and in Venice it was presently after written
in several GlassWindowes, and spitefully declared to be Sir Henry VVottons.

This coming to the knowledge of King James, he apprehended it to be such an
oversight, such a weakness, or worse, in Sir Henry Wotton, as caused the King
to express much wrath against him; and this caused Sir Henry Wotton to write
two Apologies, one to Velserus (one of the Chiefs of Augusta) in the Universal
Language, which he caused to be printed, and given, and scattered in the most
remarkable places both of Germany and Italy, as an Antidote against the
venomous books of Scioppius: and another Apology to King James, which were both
so ingenious, so clear, and so choicely Eloquent, that his Majesty (who was a
pure Judge of it) could not forbear at the receipt thereof, to declare
publicly, That Sir Henry Wotton had commuted sufficiently for a greater
offense.

And now, as broken bones well set become stronger; so Sir Henry Wotton did not
only recover, but was much more confirmed in his Majesty's estimation and
favor then formerly he had been.

And as that man (his friend) of great wit and useful fancy, gave in a Will Dr.
Done.
of his (a Will of conceits) his Reputation to his Friends, and his Industry to
his Foes, because from thence he received both: so those friends, that in this
time of trial labored to excuse this facetious freedom of Sir Henry Wottons,
were to him more dear, and by him more highly valued; and those acquaintance
that urged this as an advantage against him: caused him by this error, to grow
both more wise, and which is the best fruit error can bring forth) for the
future to become more industriously watchful over his tongue and pen.

I have told you a part of his employment in Italy, where (notwithstanding the
accusation of Scioppius) his interest still increased with this Duke Leonardo
Donato; after whose death (as though it had been an entailed love) it was still
found living in the succeeding Dukes, during all the time of his employment to
that State: (which was almost Twenty years.) All which time he studied the
dispositions of those Dukes, and the other Consultors of State; well knowing,
that he who negotiates a continued business, and neglects the study of
dispositions, usually fails in his proposed ends: But this Sir Henry Wotton did
not, for by a fine sorting of fit Presents, curious, and not costly
entertainments, always sweetened by various and pleasant discourse; with which,
and his choice application of stories, and his so elegant delivered of all
these, even in their Italian Language, he first got, and still preserved such
interest in the State of Venice, that it was observed (such was either his
merit or his modesty) they never denied him any request.

But all this shows but his abilities, and his fitness for that Employment:
'Twill therefore be needful to tell the Reader, what use he made of the
Interest which these procured him; and that indeed was, rather to oblige
others, then to enrich himself; he still endeavoring that the reputation of
the English might be maintained, both in the German Empire, and in Italy; where
many Gentlemen, whom Travel had invited into that Nation, received from him
cheerful Entertainments, advice for their behavior, and shelter, or
deliverance from those accidental storms of adversity, which usually attend
upon Travel.

And because these things may appear to the Reader to be but Generals, I shall
acquaint him with two particular Examples; one, of his merciful disposition,
and one, of the Nobleness of his Mind: which shall follow.

There had been many English Soldiers brought by Commanders of their own
Country, to serve the Uenetians for pay against the Turk: and those English,
having by Irregularities, or Improvidence, brought themselves into several
Galleys and Prisons, Sir Henry Wotton, became a Petitioner to that State for
their Lives, and Enlargement; and his request was granted; so that those (which
were many hundreds, and there made the sad Examples of humane misery, by hard
imprisonment, and unpitied poverty in a strange Nation) were by his means
released, relieved, and in a comfortable Condition sent to thank God and him
for their Lives and Libertyes, in their own Country.

And this I have observed as one testimony of the compassionate Nature of him,
who was (during his stay in those parts) as a City of Refuge for the Distressed
of this and other Nations.

And for that which I offer as a Testimony of the Nobleness of his mind: I
shall make way to the Readers clearer understanding of it, by telling him that
Sir Henry Wotton was sent thrice Ambassador to the Republic of Uenice; and
that at his second going thither, he was employed Ambassador to several of the
German Princes, and to the Emperor Ferdinando the second; and, that his
employment to him, and those Princes, was to incline them to equitable
Conditions, for the restoration of the Queen of Rohemia and her Descendents to
their Patrimonial Inheritance of the Palatinate.

This was by his eight months constant endeavors and attendance upon the
Emperor, his Court and Counsel) brought to the probability of a succesful
Conclusion without bloodshed, there being at that time two opposite armies in
the field but, as they were treating, the Armies met; and there was a battle
fought, the managery whereof was so full of miserable errors on the one side
(so Sir Henry Wotton expresses it in a dispatch to the King) and so
advantageous to the Emperor, as put an end to all Hopes of a succcessful
Treaty: so that Sir Henry seeing the face of Peace altered by that Victory,
prepared for a Removal from that Court; and at his departure from the Emperor,
was so bold as to remember him, That the Events of every Battle move ^n the
unseen wheels of Fortune, which are this moment up, and down the next; and
therefore, humbly advised him to use his Victory so soberly, as still to put on
thoughts of Peace. Which advice, though it seemed to be spoke with some
Passion, his dear Mistress the Queen of Bohemia, being concerned in it, was yet
taken in good part, by the Emperor, who was much pleased with his carriage,
all the time that he resided in his Court; and said, That the King his Master
was looked on as an Abettor of his Enemy the Palsgrave, but yet, he took him to
be a Person of much Honor and Merit, and did therefore desire him to accept of
that Jewel, as a Testimony of his good opinion of him; which was a Jewel of
Diamonds, of more value then a thousand pounds.

This was received with all Circumstances and terms of Honor, by Sir Henry
Wotton; but the next morning, at his departing from Vienna, at his taking leave
of the Countess of Sabrina (an Italian Lady) in whose House the Emperor had
appointed him to be lodged, and honorably entertained: He acknowledged her
Merits, and besought her to accept of that Jewel, as a testimony of his
gratitude for her Civilities: presenting her with the same that was given him
by the Emperor; which being suddenly discovered by the Emperor, was by him
taken for a high affront, and Sir Henry Wotton told so: To which he replied,
That though he received it with thankfulness; yet he found in himself an
indisposition to be the better for any gift that came from an Enemy to his
Royal Mistress the Queen of Bohemia, for so she was pleased, he should always
call her.

Many other of his services to his Prince, and this Nation, might be insisted
upon, as namely his procuration of Privileges, and courtesies with the German
Princes, and the Republic of Venice, for the English Merchants, and what he
did by direction of King James with the Venetian State, concerning the Bishop
of Spalato's return to the Church of Rome. But for the particulars of these,
and many more, that I mean to make known; I want a view of some papers that
might inform me, (his late Majesty's Letter-Office having suffered a strange
alienation) and, indeed I want time too; for, the Printers Press-stayes; so
that I must haste to bring Sir Henry Wotton in an instant from Venice to
London, leaving the Reader to make up what is defective in this place, by this
small supplement of the inscription under his Arms, which he left at all those
houses where he rested, or lodged, when he returned from his last Embassy into
England.

Henricus Wottonius Anglo-Cantianus, Thomae optimi viri filius natu minimus, a
serenissimo Jacobo I. Mag. Britt. Rege, in equestrem titulum adscitus,
ejusdemque ter ad Rempublicam Venetam Legatus Ordinarius, semel ad
confaederatarum Provinciarum Ordines in Juliacensi negotio. Bis ad Carolum
Emanuel, Sabaudiae Ducem; semel ad unitos superioris G^rmaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbrunensi, postremo ad Archiducem Leopoldum, Ducem Wittembergensem,
Civitates imperiales, Argentinam, Ulmamque, and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem
Ferdinandum secundum, Legatus Extraordinarius, tandem hoc didicit,

Animas fieri sapientiores quiescendo.

To London he came that year in which King James dyed; who having for the
reward of his foreign service, promised him the reversion of an Office which
was fit to be turned into present money, for a supply of his present
necessities, and also granted him the reversion of the Master of the Rolls
place, if he outlived charitable Sir Julius Caesar, who then possessed it: and
then, grown so old, that he was said to be kept alive beyond Natures Course, by
the prayers of those many poor which he daily relieved.

But, these were but in hope; and his condition required a present support: For
in the beginning of these employments he sold to his elder brother the Lord
Wotton, the Rentcharge left by his good Father, and (which is worse) was now at
his return indebted to several persons, whom he was not able to satisfy, but
by the Kings payment of his Arrears due for his foreign Employments: He had
brought into England many servants, of which some were German and Italian
Artists; this was part of his condition, who had many times hardly sufficient
to supply the occasions of the day. (For it may by no means be said of his
providence, as himself said of Sir Philip Sidney's wit, That it was the very
measure of congruity) He being always so careless of money, as though our
Saviors wores, Care not for to morrow, were to be literally understood.

But it pleased God, that in this juncture of time, the Provostship of His
Majesty's College of Eaton became void by the death of^ Murray, for which
there were (as the place deserved) many earnest and powerful Suitors to the
King. Sir Henry who had for many years (like Siciphus) rolled the restless
stone of a State employment; and knowing experimentally, that the great
blessing of sweet content was not to be found in multitudes of men or business;
and, that a College was the fittest place to nourish holy thoughts, and to
afford rest both to his body and mind, which his age (being now almost
threescore years) seemed to require, did therefore use his own, and the
interest of all his friends to procure it. By which means, and quitting the
King of his promised reversionary Offices, and a piece of honest policy (which
I have not time to relate) he got a Grant of it from His Majesty.

And this was a fair settlement for his mind: but money was wanting to furnish
him with those necessaries which attend removes, and a settlement in such a
place; and to procure that, he wrote to his old friend Mr. Nicholas Pey, for
his assistance; of which Nicholas Pey, I shall here say a little, for the
clearing of something that I shall say hereafter.

He was in his youth a Clerk, or in some such way, a servant to the Lord
Wotton, Sir Henry's brother; and by him, when he was Comptroller of the Kings
Household, was made a great Officer in His Majesty's house. This, and other
favors being conferred upon Mr. Pey (in whom was a radical honesty) were
always thankfully acknowledged by him, and his gratitude expressed by a willing
and unwearied serviceableness to that Family even till his death. To him Sir
Henry Wotton wrote, to use all his in^ ^^^ at Court, to procure Five hundred
pounds of his Arrears (for less would not settle him ^^^ College) and the want
of it, wrinkled ^ ^^^^ with care; ('it was his own expression) and th^r being
procured, he should the next day after find him in his College, and Invidiae
remedium, writ over his Study door.

This money, being part of his Arrears, was by his own, and the help of honest
Nicholas Pey's interest in Court, quickly procured him; and he as quickly in
the College, the place where indeed his happiness then seemed to have its
beginning, the College being to his mind, as a quiet Harbor to a
Sea-faring-man after a tempestuous voyage; where, by the bounty of the pious
Founder, his very Food and Raiment were plentifully provided for him in kind;
where he was freed from all corroding cares, and seated on such a Rock, as the
waves of want could not probably shake, where he might sit in a Calm, and
looking down, behold the busy multitude turmoyl'd and tossed in a tempestuous
Sea of dangers! And (as Sir William Davenant has happily expressed the like of
another person)

Laugh at the graver business of the State,
Which speaks men rather wise than fortunate.
Being thus settled according to the desires of his heart, his first study was
the Statutes of the College: by which, he conceived himself bound to enter
into Holy Orders, which he did; being made Deacon with convenient speed,
shortly after, as he came in his Surplice from the Churchservice, an old
Friend, a person of Quality, met him so attired, and joyed him of his new
habit; to whom Sir Henry Wotton replied, I thank God and the King, by whose
goodness I now am in this condition; a condition, which that Emperor Charles
the Fifth, seemed to approve: who, after so many remarkable Victories, when his
glory was great in the eyes of all men, freely gave up his Crown, and the many
cares that attended it, to Philip his son, making a holy retreat to a
Cloysteral life, where he might by devout meditations consult withGod, (which
the rich or busy men seldom do) and have leisure both to examine the errors of
his life past, and prepare for that great day, wherein all flesh must make an
account of their actions: And after a kind of tempestuous life, I now have the
like advantage from him, that makes the outgoings of the morning to praise
him; even from my God, whom I daily magnify for this particular mercy, of an
exemption from business, a quiet mind, and a liberal maintenance, even in this
part of my life, when my age and infirmities seem to sound me a retreat from
the pleasures of this world, and invite me to contemplation, in which I have
ever taken the greatest felicity.

And now to speak a little of the employment of his time: After his customary
public Devotions, his use was to retire into his Study, and there to spend
some hours in reading the Bible, and Authors in Divinity, closing up his
meditations with private prayer; this was, for the most part, his employment in
the Forenoon: But, when he was once sat to Dinner, then nothing but cheerful
thoughts possessed his mind; and, those still increased by constant company at
his Table, of such persons as brought thither additions both of Learning and
Pleasure; but some part of most days was usually spent in Philosophical
Conclusions. Nor did he forget his innate pleasure of Angling, which he would
usually call, his idle time, not idely spent; saying, he would rather live five
May-months, than forty Decembers.

He was a great lover of his Neighbors, and a bountiful entertainer of them
very often at his Table, where his meat was choice, and his discourse better.

He was a constant Cherisher of all those youths in that School, in whom he
found either a constant diligence, or a genius that prompted them to Learning;
for whose encouragement, he was (beside many other things of necessity and
beauty) at the charge of setting up in it two rows of Pillars, on which he
caused to be choicely drawn, the pictures of diverse of the most famous Greek
and Latin Historians, Poets, and Orators; persuading them not to neglect
Rhetoric, because Almighty God has left Mankind affections to be wrought upon:
And he would often say, That none despised Eloquence, but such dull souls as
were not capable of it. He would also often make choice of some Observations
out of those Historians and Poets: and would never leave the School, without
dropping some choice Greek or Latin Apothegm or sentence, that might be worthy
of a room in the memory of a growing Scholar.

He was pleased constantly to breed up one or more hopeful Youths, which he
picked out of the School, and took into his own Domestic care, and to attend
him at his Meals; out of whose Discourse and Behavior, he gathered
observations for the better completing of his intended work of Education: of
which, by his still striving to make the whole better, he lived to leave but
part to Posterity.

He was a great Enemy to wrangling Disputes of Religion, concerning which I
shall say a little, both to testify that, and to show the readiness of his Wit.

Having in Rome made acquaintance with a pleasant Priest, who invited him one
Evening to hear their Vesper Music at Church; the Priest seeing Sir Henry
stand obscurely in a corner, sends to him by a Boy of the Quire this question,
writ in a small piece of paper, Where was your Religion to be found before
Luther? To which question Sir H^nry presently under-writ, My Religion was to be
found then, where yours is not to be found now, in the written Word of God.

The next Vesper, Sir Henry went purposely to the same Church, and sent one of
the Quireboyes with this Question, to his honest, pleasant friend, the Priest;
Do you believe all those many Thousands of poor Christians were dam^d, that
were Excommunicated, because the Pope, and the Duke of Venice, could not agree
about their temporal power? Speak your Conscience. To which he under-writ in
French, Monsieur, excusay moy

To one that asked him, Whether a Papist may be saved? he replied, You may be
saved without knowing that. Look to your self.

To another, whose earnestness exceeded his knowledge, and was still railing
again^ the Papists, he gave this advice, Pray Sir forbear, till you have
studied the Points better; for the wise Italians have this Proverb, He that
understands amiss, concludes worse: And take heed of thinking, The farther you
go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to God.

And to another that spoke indiscreet, and bitter words against Arminius, I
heard him reply to this purpose:

In my travel toward Venice, as I past through Germany, I rested almost a year
at Leyden, where I entered into an acquaintance with Arminius (then the
Professor of Divinity in that University) a man much talked of in this Age,
which is made up of opposition and Controversy: And indeed, if I mistake not
Arminius in his expressions (as so weak a brain as mine is may easily do) then
I know I differ from him in some points; yet, I profess my judgment of him to
be, that he was a man of most rare Learning, and I knew him to be of a most
strict life, and of a most meck spirit. And that he was so mild, appears by his
Proposals to our Master Perkins of Cambridge, from whose Book, of the Order and
Causes of Salvation (which was first writ in Latin) Arminius took the occasion
of writing some Queries to him concerning the consequents of his Doctrine,
intending them ('it is said) to come privately to Mr. Perkin's own hands, and to
receive from him, a like private, and a like loving Answer: But, Mr. Perkins
dyed before those Queries came to him; and it is thought Arminius meant them to
dye with him; for though he lived long after, I have heard he forbore to
publish them, (but since his death, his sons did not:) And it is pity (if God
had been so pleased) that Mr. Perkins did not live to see, consider, and answer
those proposals himself; for he was also of a most meek spirit, and of great
and sanctified Learning: And though since their deaths, many (of high parts and
piety) have undertaken to clear the Controversy; yet, for the most part, they
have rather satisfied themselves, than convinced the dissenting party. And
doubtless, many middle-witted men (which yet may mean well) many Scholars that
are not in the highest Form for Learning (which yet may preach well) men that
shall never know, till they come to Heaven, where the questions stick betwixt
Arminius and the Church of England, will yet in this world be tampering with,
and thereby perplexing the Controversy, and do therefore justly fall under the
reproof of St. Jude, for being Busiebodies, and for meddling with things they
understand not.

And here it offers it self (I think not unfitly) to tell the Reader, that a
friend of Sir Henry Woltons, being designed for the employment of an
Ambassador, came to Eaton, and requested from him some experimental Rules for
his prudent and safe carriage in his Negotiations; to whom he smilingly gave
this for an infallible Aphorism; That, to be in safety himself, and serviceable
to his Country, he should always, and upon all occasions speak the truth ( it
seems a StateParadox) for, says Sir Henry Wotton, you shall never be believed;
and by this means, your truth will secure your self, if you shall ever be
called to any account; and 'twill also put your Adversaries (who will still
hunt counter) to a loss in all their disquisitions, and undertakings.

Many more of this nature might be observed, but they must be laid aside; for I
shall here make a little stop, and invite the Reader to look back with me,
whilst (according to my promise) I shall say a little of Sir Albertus Morton,
and Mr. William Bedel, whom I formerly mentioned.

I have told you that are the Readers, that at Sir Henry Wottons first going
Ambassador into Italy, his Cousin, Sir Albert Morton, went his Secretary; and am
next to tell you, that Sir Albertus dyed, Secretary of State to our late King;
but cannot, am not able to express the sorrow that possessed Sir Henry Wotton at
his first hearing the news that Sir Albertus was by death lost to him and this
world; and yet, the Reader may partly guess by these following expressions: The
first in a Letter to his Nicholas Pey, of which this that follows is a part.

-- And My dear Nick, When I had been here almost a fortnight, in the midst of
my great contentment, I received notice of Sir Albertus Morton his departure
out of this World, who was dearer to me, than mine own being in it; what a
wound it is to my heart, you that knew him, and knew me, will easily believe:
but, our Creators Will must be done, and unrepiningly received by his own
Creatures, who is the Lord of all Nature, and of all Fortune, when he takes to
himself now one, and then another, till that expected day, wherein it shall
please him to dissolve the whole, and wrap up even the Heaven it self as a
Scrole of parchment: This is the last Philosophy that we must study upon Earth;
let us therefore that yet remain here, as our days and friends waste,
reinforce our love to each other; which of all virtues, both spiritual and
moral, has the highest privilege, because death it self cannot end it. And my
good Nick, etc.

This is a part of his sorrow thus expressed to his Nick Pey; the other part is
in this following Elogy, of which the Reader may safely conclude, 'twas too
hearty to be dissembled.

Tears wept at the Grave of Sir Albertus Morton, by Henry Wotton.
SIlence in truth, would speak my sorrow best,
For deepest wounds, can least their feelings tell;
Yet let me borrow from mine own unrest,
A time to bid him whom I loved, farewell.
Oh my unhappy Lines, you that before
Have served my youth to vent some wanton cries,
And now congealed with grief, can scarce implore
Strength to accent, Here my Albertus lies.
This is that Sable stone, this is the Cave
And womb of earth, that does his Corpse embrace:
While others sing his praise, let me ingrave
These bleeding numbers to adorn the place.
Here will I paint the Characters of woe:
Here will I pay my tribute to the dead;
And here, my faithful tears in showers shall flow
To humanize the flints on which I tread.
Where, though I mourn my matchless loss alone,
And none between my weakness judge and me;
Yet, even these pensive walls allow my moan,
Whose doleful Echoes to my plaints agree.
But is he gone? and live I riming here,
As if some Muse would listen to my lay?
When all dis-tun'd sit waiting for their dear,
And bathe the Banks where he was wont to play.
Dwell then in endless bliss with happy souls,
Discharged from natures and from fortunes trust:
Whilst on this fluid Globe, my Hourglass rowls,
And runs the rest of my remaining dust.
H. Wotton.
This concerning his Sir Albertus Morton.

And for what I shall say concerning Mr. William Bedel, I must prepare the
Reader, by telling him, That when King James sent Sir Henry Wotton Ambassador
to the State of Venice, he sent also an Ambassador to the King of France, and
another to the King of Spain; with the Ambassador of France, went Joseph Hall
(late Bishop of Norwich) whose many and useful works, speak his great merit;
with the Ambassador of Spain, went Ja. Wadsworth; and with Sir Henry Wotton
went William Bedel.

These three Chaplains, to these three Ambassadors, were all bred in one
University, all of one Emanuel College in Cambridge.
College, all Beneficed in one Diocese, and all most dear and int^^e Friends:
But in Spain, Mr. Wadsworth met with temptations, or reasons, such as were so
powerful, as to persuade him (who of the three, was formerly observed to be the
most averse to that Religion that calls itself Catholic) to disclaim himself a
Member of the Church of England, and declare himself for the Church of Rome,
discharging himself of his attendance on the Ambassador, and betaking himself
to a Monasterial life; in which he lived very regularly, and so dyed.

When Dr. Hall (the late Bishop of Norwich) came into England, he wrote to Mr.
Wadsworth, ('it is the first Epistle in his printed Decads) to persuade his
return, or the reason of his Apostasy; the Letter seemed to have in it many
sweet expressions of love, and yet, there was something in it that was so
unpleasant to Mr. Wadsworth, that he chose rather to acquaint his old friend
Mr. Bedel with his motives; by which means, there past betwixt Mr. Bedel, and
Mr. Wadsworth very many Letters, which be extant in Print, and did well deserve
it; for in them there seems to be a controversy, not of Religion on only, but,
who should answer each other with most love and meekness; which I mention the
rather, because it seldom falls out so in a BookWar.

There is yet a little more to be said of Mr. Bedel, for the greatest part of
which, the Reader is referred to this following Letter of Sir Henry Wottons,
writ to our late King Charles.

May it please Your most Gracious Majesty,
HAving been informed that certain persons have, by the good wishes of the
Archbishop of Armagh, been directed hither, with a most humble Petition unto
Your Majesty, that You will be pleased to make Mr. William Bedel (now resident
upon a small Benefice in Suffolk) Governor of your College at Dublin, for the
good of that Society; and my self being required to render unto Your Majesty
some testimony of the said William Bedel, who was long my Chaplain at Venice,
in the time of my first employment there; I am bound in all Conscience and
Truth (so far as Your Majesty will vouchsafe to accept my poor judgment) to
affirm of him, That I think hardly a fitter man for that Charge, could have
been propounded unto Your Majesty in Your whole Kingdom, for singular Erudition
and Piety, Conformity to the Rites of the Church, and Zeal to advance the Cause
of God; wherein his Travels abroad, were not obscure, in the time of the
Excommunication of the Venetians.

For it may please Your Majesty to know, that this is the man whom Padre Paulo
took, I may say, into his very soul, with whom he did communicate the inwardest
thoughts of his heart, from whom he professed to have received more knowledge
in all Divinity, both Scholastical and Positive, than from any that he had ever
practiced in his days; of which, all the passages were well known to the King
Your Father, of most blessed memory. And so with Your Majesty's good favor, I
will end this needless Office; for the general Fame of his Learning, his Life,
and Christian temper, and those Religious Labors which himself has dedicated
to your Majesty, do better describe him than I am able.

Your MAJESTY'S Most humble and faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.


TO this Letter, I shall add this; That he was (to the great joy of Sir Henry
Wotton) made Governor of the said College; and that after a fair discharge of
his duty and trust there, he was thence removed to be Bishop of Kilmore: In
both which places, his life was so holy, as seemed to equal the primitive
Christians; for as they, so he kept all the Emberweeks, observed (besides his
private devotions) the Canonical hours of Prayer very strictly; and so he did
all the Feasts, and Fast-dayes of his Mother, the Church of England; his
Patience and Charity were both such, as showed his affections were set upon
things that are above; for indeed his whole life brought forth the fruits of
the Spirit; there being in him such a remarkable meekness, that as St. Paul
advised his Timothy in the Election of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 7.
That he have a good report of those that be without; so had he: for those that
were without, even those that in point of Religion, were of the Roman
persuasion (of which there were very many in his Diocese) did yet ever look
upon him with respect and reverence; and, testified it, by a concealing, and
safe protecting him, in the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, when the fury of
the wild Irish knew no distinction of persons; and yet there, and then, he was
protected and cherished by those of a contrary persuasion; and there, and then
he dyed, though not by violence: And with him was lost many of his learned
Writings, which were thought worthy of preservation; and amongst the rest, was
lost the Bible, which by many years labor, and conference, and study, he had
translated into the Irish Tongue, with an intent to have printed it for public
use.

More might be said of Mr. Bedel, who (I told the Reader) was Sir Henry Wottons
first Chaplain; and much of his second Chaplain, Isaac Bargrave, Doctor in
Divinity, and the late learned and hospitable Dean of Canterbury; as also, of
the Merit of many others, that had the happiness to attend Sir Henry in his
foreign employments: But, the Reader may think that in this digression, I have
already carried him too far from Eaton-Colledge, and therefore I shall lead him
back as gently, and as orde^ly as I may to that place, for a further conference
concerning Sir Henry Wotton.

Sir Henry Wotton had proposed to himself, before he entered into his Collegiate
life, to write the life of Martin Luther; and in it, the History of the
Reformation, as it was carried on in Germany: For the doing of which, he had
many advantages by his several Embassies into those parts, and his interest in
the several Princes of the Empire; by whose means he had access to the Records
of all the Hans Towns, and the knowledge of many secret passages that fell not
under common view; and in these he had made a happy progress, as is well known
to his worthy friend Dr. Duppa, the late Reverend Bishop of Salisbury; but in
the midst of this design, His late Majesty (King Charles) that knew the value
of Sir Henry Wottons Pen) did by a persuasive loving violence (to which may be
added a promise of 500 l. a year) force him to lay Luther aside, and betake
himself to write the History of England; in which he proceeded to write some
short Characters of a few Kings, as a foundation upon which he meant to build;
but, for the present, meant to be more large in the story of Henry the sixth,
the Founder of that College, in which he then enjoyed all the worldly
happiness of his present being; but Sir Henry dyed in the midst of this
undertaking, and the footsteps of his labors are not recoverable by a more
than common diligence.

This is some account both of his inclination, and the employment of his time
in the College, where he seemed to have his Youth renewed by a continual
conversation with that Learned Society, and a daily recourse of other Friends
of choicest breeding and parts, by which that great blessing of a cheerful
heart was still maintained; he being always free, even to the last of his
days, from that peevishness which usually attends Age.

And yet his mirth was sometimes damped by the remembrance of diverse old Debts,
partly contracted in his foreign Employments, for which his just Arrears due
from the King, would have made satisfaction; but, being still delayed with
Cou^t-promises, and finding some decays of health, he did (about two years
before his death) out of a Christian desire, that none should be a loser by it,
make his last Will; concerning which, a doubt still remains, whether it
discovered more holy wit, or conscionable policy: But there is no doubt, but
that his chief design was a Christian endeavor that his Debts might be
satisfied.

And that it may remain as such a Testimony, and a Legacy to those that loved
him, I shall here impart it to the Reader, as it was found writ with his own
hand.

IN the Name of God Almighty and All-merciful, I Henry Wotton, Provost of His
Majesty's College by Eaton, being mindf^^^ of mine own mortality, which the
sin of our first Pa^^ents did bring upon all flesh, Do by this last Will and
Testament, thus dispose of my self, and the poor things I shall leave in this
World. My Soul, I bequeath to the Immortal God my Maker, Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, my blessed Redeemer, and Mediator, through his all-sole
sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, and efficient for his
Elect; in the number of whom, I am one by his mere grace, and thereof most
unremoveably assured by his holy Spirit, the true Eternal Comforter. My Body I
bequeath to the Earth, if I shall end my transitory days at, or near Eaton, to
be buried in the Chapel of the said College, as the Fellows shall dispose
thereof, with whom I have lived (my God knows) in all loving affection; or if I
shall dye near Bocton Malherb, in the County of Kent, then I wish to be laid in
that Parish Church, as near as may be to the Sepulcher of my good Father,
expecting a joyful Resurrection with him in the Day of Christ.

After this account of his Faith, and this Surrender of his Soul to that God
that inspired it; and this direction for the disposal of his body; he proceeded
to appoint that his Executours should lay over his grave a Marble stone, plain,
not costly: And considering that time moulders even Marble to dust; (for Javen.
Monuments themselves must die.) therefore did he (^^aving the common way)
think fit rather to prese^ve his name (to which the Son of Sirac advises all
men) by an useful Apothegm, then by a large enumeration of his descent or
merits, (of both which he might justly have boasted:) but, he was content to
forget them, and did choose only this prudent, pious, Sentence, to discover his
Disposition, and preserve his Memory. 'Twas directed by him, to be thus
inscribed:

Hic jacet hujus Sententiae primus Author.
DISPUTANDI PRURITUS, ECCLESIARUM SCABIES.
Nomen alias quaere.
Which may be Englished thus,

Here lies the first Author of this Sentence.
THE ITCH OF DISPUTATION, WILL PROVE THE SCAB OF THE CHURCH.
Inquire his name elsewhere.
And if any shall object (^as I think some have) That Sir Henry Wotton was not
the first Author of this Sentence; but, that this, or a Sentence like it, was
long before his time; To him I answer, that Solomon says, Nothing can be
spoken that has not been spoken; for there is no new thing under the Sun. But
grant, that in his various reading, he had met with this, or a like Sentence;
yet reason will persuade all Readers to believe, That Sir Henry Wotton's mind
was then so fixed on that part of the Communion of Saints which is above, that
an holy Lethargy did surprise his Memory. For doubtless, if he had not believed
himself to be the first Author of -- what he said, he was too prudent first to
own, and then expose it to the public view, and censure of every Critic (with
which that Age abounded, and this more.) And questionless, 'twill be Charity in
all Readers, to think his mind was then so fixed on Heaven, that a holy zeal
did transport him; and in this Sacred Ecstasy, his thoughts being only of the
Church Triumphant, (into which he daily expected his admission) Almighty God
was pleased to make him a Prophet, to tell the Church Militant, (and
particularly that part of it in this Nation) where the weeds of controversy
grow to be daily both more numerous, and more destructive to humble Piety;
where men have Consciences which boggle at Ceremonies, and scruple not to speak
and act such sins as the ancient humble Christians believed to be a sin to
think; where (as our Revered Hooker says) former Simplicity, and softness of
Spirit, is not now to be found; because Zeal has drowned Charity, and Skill
Meekness:) These sad changes have proved this Epitaph to be a useful Caution
unto us of this Nation; and the sad effects thereof in Germany have proved it
to be a mournful Truth.

This by way of Observation concerning his Epitaph: The rest of his Will
follows in his own words.

Further, I the said Henry Wotton, do constitute and ordain to be joint
Executors of this my last Will and Testament, my two GrandNephews, Albert
Morton, second son to Sir Robert Morton Knight, late deceased, and Thomas
Bargrave, eldest son to Dr Bargrave, Dean of Canterbury, Husband to my Right
Virtuous and only Niece. And I do pray the foresaid Dr. Bargrave, and Mr.
Nicholas Pey, my most faithful and chosen friends, together with Mr. John
Harrison one of the Fellows of Eaton College, best acquainted with my Books
and Pictures, and other Utensils, to be Supervisors of this my last Will and
Testament. And I do pray the foresaid Dr. Bargrave, and Mr. Nicholas Pey, to be
Solicitors for such Arrearages as shall appear due unto me from his Majesty's
Exchequer at the time of my death; and to assist my forenamed Executors in
some reasonable and conscientious satisfaction of my Creditours, and discharge
of my Legacies now specified; or, that shall be hereafter added unto this my
Testament, by any Codicil or Schedule, or left in the hands, or in any Memorial
with the aforesaid Mr. John Harison. And first, To my most dear Sovereign and
Master of incomparable Goodness, (in whose gracious opinion, I have ever had
some portion, as far as the interest of a plain honest man) I leave four
Pictures at large of those Dukes of Venice, in whose time I was there employed,
with their names written on the back side, which hang in my great ordinary
Dining Room, done after the Life by Edoardo Fialetto. Likewise a Table of the
Venetian College, where Ambassadors had their Audience, hanging over the
Mantle of the Chimney in the said Room, done by the same hand, which contains
a draught in little, well resembling the famous D. Leonardo Donato, in a time
which needed a wise and constant man. It' The Picture of a Duke of Venice
hanging over against the door, done either by Titiano, or some other principal
hand long before my time. Most humbly beseeching his Majesty, that the said
Pieces may remain in some corner of any of his Houses, for a poor Memorial of
his most humble vassal.

It' I leave his said Majesty all the Papers and Negotiations of Sir Nich.
Throgmorton Knight, during his famous employment under Queen Elizabeth, in
Scotland and in France, which contain diverse secrets of State, that perchance
his Majesty will think fit to be preserved in his PaperOffice, after they have
been perused and sorted by Mr. Secretary Windebanck, with whom I have
heretofore, as I remember, conferred about them. They were committed to my
disposal by Sir Arthur Throgmorton his son, to whose worthy memory I cannot
better discharge my faith, then by assigning them to the highest place of
trust. It' I leave to our most Gracious and Virtuous Queen Mary, Dioscorides,
with the Plants naturally colored, and the Text translated by Matthiolo, in the
best Language of Tuscany, whence her said Majesty is lineally descended, for a
poor token of my thankful devotion, for the honor she was once pleased to do
my private study with her presence. I leave to the most hopeful Prince, the
Picture of the elected and crowned Queen of Bohemia, his Aunt, of clear and
resplendent virtues through the clouds of her Fortune. To my Lords Grace of
Canterbury now being, I leave my Picture of Divine Love, rarely copied from one
in the Kings Galleries, of my presentation to his Majesty: beseeching him to
receive it as a pledge of my humble reverence to his great Wisdom. And to the
most worthy Lord Bishop of London, Lord high Treasurer of England, in true
admiration of his Christian simplicity, and contempt of earthly pomp; I leave a
Picture of Heraclitus bewailing, and Democritus laughing at the world: Most
humbly beseeching the said Lord Archbishop his Grace, and the Lord Bishop of
London, of both whose favors I have tasted in my life time, to intercede with
our most gracious Sovereign after my death, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, That
out of compassionate memory of my long Services (wherein I more studied the
public Honor, then mine own Utility) some Order may be taken out of my
Arrears due in the Exchequer, for such satisfaction of my Creditors, as those
whom I have Ordained Supervisors of this my ^ast Will and Testament shall
present unto their Lordships, without their farther trouble: Hoping likewise in
his Majesty's most indubitable Goodness, that he will keep me from all
prejudice, which I may otherwise suffer by any defect of formality in the
Demand of my said Arrears. To -- for a poor addition to his Cabinet, I leave as
Emblems of his attractive Virtues, and Obliging Nobleness, my great Lodestone;
and a piece of Amber of both kinds naturally united, and only differing in
degree of Concoction, which is thought somewhat rare. Item, A piece of Crystal
Sexangular, (as they grow all) grasping diverse several things within it, which
I bought among the Rh^^tian Alps, in the very place where it grew: recommending
most humbly unto his Lordship, the reputation of my poor Name in the point of
my debts, as I have done to the forenamed Spiritual Lords; and am heartily
sorry, that I have no better token of my humble thankfulness to his honored
Person. It' I leave to Sir Francis Windebank, one of his Majesty's principal
Secretaries of State, (whom I found my great friend in point of Necessity) the
four Seasons of old Bassano, to hang near the Eye in his Parlour, (being in
little form) which I bought at Venice, where I first entered into his most
worthy Acquaintance.

To the above named Doctor Bargrave Dean of Canterbury, I leave all my Italian
Books not disposed in this Will. I leave to him likewise my Viol de Gamba,
which has been twice with me in Italy, in which Country I first contracted
with him an unremovable Affection. To my other Supervisor Mr. Nicholas Pey, I
leave my Chest, or Cabinet of Instruments and Engines of all kinds of uses: in
In it were Italian locks, picklocks, screws to force open doors; and things of
worth and rarity, that he had gathered in his foreign Travel.
the lower box whereof, are some fit to be bequeathed to none but so entire an
honest man as he is. I leave him likewise forty pound for his pains in the
solicitation of my Arrears, and am sorry that my ragged Estate can reach no
further to one that has taken such care for me in the same kind, during all my
foreign Employments. To the Library at Eaton College I leave all my
Manuscripts not before disposed, and to each of the Fellows a plain Ring ^of
Gold, enameld black; all save the verge, with this Motto within, Amor unit
omnia.

This is my last Will and Testament, save that shall be added by a Schedule
thereunto annexed. Written on the first of October, in the present year of our
Redemption 1637. And subscribed by my self, with the Testimony of these
Witnesses.

Nich. Oudert.
Geo. Lash.
H. Wotton.


ANd now, because the mind of man is best satisfied by the knowledge of Events,
I think fit to declare, that every one that was named in his Will, did gladly
receive their Legacies; by which, and his most just and passionate desires for
the payment of his debts, they joined in assisting the Overseers of his Will;
and by their joint endeavors to the King (then whom none was more willing)
conscionable satisfaction was given for his just debts.

The next thing wherewith I shall acquaint the Reader, is, That he went usually
once a year, if not oftener, to the beloved Boctonhall, where he would say, he
found both cure for all cares, by the company (which he called the living
furniture) of that place: and, a restorative of his strength, by the
Connaturalness of that, which he called his genial air.

He yearly went also to Oxford. But the Summer before his death he changed that
for a journey to Winchester- College; to which School he was first removed
from Bocton. And as he returned from Winchester, toward Eaton College, said
to a friend, his Companion in that Journey; How useful was that advice of a
Holy Monk, who persuaded his friend to perform his Customary devotions in a
constant place; because in that place, we usually meet with those very thoughts
which possessed us at our last being there; And I find it thus far
experimentally true; that, at my now being in that School, and seeing that very
place where I sat when I was a boy, occasioned me to remember those very
thoughts of my youth which then possessed me; sweet thoughts indeed, that
promised my growing years numerous pleasures, without mixtures of cares; and
those to be enjoyed, when time (which I therefore thought slow paced) had
changed my youth into manhood. But age and experience have taught me, that
those were but empty hopes. And though my days have been many, and those mixed
with more pleasures, than the sons of men do usually enjoy: yet, I have alw^^es
found it true, as my Savior did foretell, Sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof. Nevertheless, I saw there a succession of boys using the same
recreations; and questionless possessed with the same thoughts that then
possessed me. Thus one generation succeeds another, both in their lives,
recreations, hopes, fears, and d^aths.

After his return from Winchester (which was about nine Months before his
death) he fell into a dangerous Fever, which weakened him much; he was then also
much troubled with an Asthma, or continual short spitting, but that infirmity
he seemed to overcome in a good degree by leaving Tobacco, which he had taken
somewhat immoderately: And about two months before his death (in October
1639.) he again fell into a Fever, which though he seemed to recover, yet,
these still left him so weak, that those common infirmities, which were wont
like civil Friends to visit him, and after some short time to depart; came both
oftener, and at last took up their constant habitations with him, still weakening
his body; of which he grew daily more sensible, retiring oftener into his Study,
and making many Papers that had past his Pen, both in the days of his youth
and business, useless by fire. These, and several unusual expressions to his
Friends, seemed to foretell his death, for which he seemed to those many
friends that observed him, to be well prepared, and still free from all fear,
and cheerful; (as several Letters writ in his bed, and but a few days before
his death may testify.) And in the beginning of December following, he fell
again into a Quartan Fever, land in the tenth fi^, his better part, that part
of Sir Henry Wotton which could not dye, put off Mortality with as much content
and cheerfulness, as humane frailty is capable of: he being in perfect peace
with God and man.

And thus the Circle of his Life, (that Circle which began at Bocton, and in
the Circumference thereof, did first touch at WinchesterSchool, then at Oxford,
and after upon so many remarkable parts and passages in Christendom;) That
Circle of his Life, was by Death thus closed up and completed, in the seventy
and second year of his Age, at Eaton College, where (according to his Will) he
now lies buried, dying worthy of his Name and Family, worthy of the love and
favor of so many Princes, and Persons of eminent Wisdom and Learning, worthy
of the trust committed unto him, for the Service of his Prince and Country.

And all Readers are requested to believe, that he was worthy of a more worthy
Pen, to have preserved his Memory, and commended his Merits to the imitation of
Posterity.

AN ELEGY ON Sir HENRY WOTTON, WRIT By Mr ABRAM COWLEY.
WHat shall we say, since silent now is he,
Who when he spoke all things woul'd silent be.
Who had so many languages in store,
That only fame shall speak of him in more.
Whom England now no more returned must see:
He Is gone to Heaven, on his fourth Embassy.
On Earth he travailed often, not to say
H'ad been abroad to pass loose time away:
For, in what ever land he chanced to come,
He read the men and manners: bringing home
Their Wisdom, Learning, and their Piety,
As if he went to Conquer, not to see.
So well he understood the most and best
Of Tongues, that Babel sent into the West:
Spoke them so truly, that he had (you would swear)
Not only lived, but, been born every where.
Justly each Nations speech to him was known:
Who, for the World was made, not us alone.
Nor, ought the Language of that man be less
Who in his breast had all things to express:
We say that Learning's endless, and blame Fate
For not alowing life a longer date:
He did the utmost bounds of Knowledge find;
And found them not so large as was his mind:
But, like the brave Pellean youth did moan:
Because that Art had no more Worlds then one.
And, when he saw that he through all had past,
He died, least he should Idle grow at last.
A. Cowley.
FINIS.
Mr RICHARD HOOKER Author of those -- Learned Books of Ecclesiastical --
pollitie --


The LIFE OF Mr. RICH. HOOKER, THE AUTHOR of those Learned Books OF THE Laws of
Ecclesiastical Polity.

Psalm. 145. 4.

One generation shall praise thy works to another:

Prove. 2. 15.

The tongue of the wise uses knowledge rightly.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Rich: Marriot, sold by most Booksellers.
M.DC.LXX.

To his very Worthy Friend Mr. Isaac Walton, upon his Writing and Publishing
the Life of the Venerable and Judicious Mr. Richard Hooker.
I.
HAyle, Sacred Mother, British Church, all hayle!
From whose fruitful Loins have sprung
Of Pious Sons so great a throng,
That Heav'nt oppose their force of strength did fail:
And, let the mighty Conquerors, over Almighty arms prevail;
How art thou changed from what thou were a late,
When destitute, and quite forlorn,
(And scarce a Child of thousands, with thee left to mourn)
Thy veil all rent, and all thy garments torn:
With tears thou did bewail thine own, and childrens fate?
Too much (alas!) thou did resemble then
Sion thy pattern; Sion, in ashes laid,
Despised, Forsaken, and betrayed;
Sion, thou do resemble once again:
And raised, like her, the glory of the World art made.
Threnes only to thee could that time belong,
B^t now thou art the lofty Subject of my Song.
II.
Begin my Verse, and where the doleful Mother sat,
(As it in Vision was to Esdras shown
Lamenting, with the rest, her dearest Son,
(Blessed CHARLES, who his Forefathers has outgon,
And to the Royal, joined the Martyrs brighter Crown)
Let a new City rise, with beauteous state:
And, beauteous let its Temple be, and beautiful the Gate!
Lo! how the Sacred Fabric up does rise!
The Architects so skilful All,
So grave, so humble, and so wise:
The Axes, and the Hammers noise
Is drowned in silence, or, in numbers Musical!
It Is up; and, at the Altar stand
The Reverend Fathers; as of Old,
With Harps. and Incense in their hand:
Nor, let the pious service grow or stiff, or cold.
The Inferior Priests, the while,
To Praise continually employed, or Pray,
Need not the weary hours beguile,
Enough's the single Duty of each day.
Thou thy self, Woodford, on thy humbler Pipe must play;
And, tho but lately entered there,
So gracious those thou honour'st all appear,
So ready and attent to hear
An easy part, proportioned to thy skill, may bear.
III.
But where (alas!) where will thou fix thy choice?
The Subjects are so noble all,
So great their beauties, and thy art so small,
They Will judge, I fear, themselves disparaged by thy voice:
Yet try, and since thou can not take
A name^ so despicably low,
But 'twill exceed what thou can do,
Tho thy whole Mite thou away at once should throw,
Thy Poverty a virtue make;
And, that thou may Immortal live,
(Since Immortality thou can not give)
From one, who has enough to spare, be ambitious to receive!
Of Reverend, and Judicious Hooker sing;
Hooker, does to the Church belong,
The Church, and Hooker claim thy Song,
And inexhausted Riches to thy Verse will bring:
So far, beyond it self, will make it grow,
That life, his gift to thee, thou shall again on him bestow.
IV.
How great, blessed Soul, must needs thy Glories be,
Thy Joys how perfect, and thy Crown how fair,
Who made the Church thy chiefest care;
This Church, which owes so much to thee,
That all Her Sons are studious of thy memory?
'Twas a bold work the Captived to redeem,
And not so only, but th'Oppress'd to raise,
(Our aged Mother) to that due Esteem
She had, and merited in her younger days;
When Primitive Zeal, and Piety,
Were all her Laws, and Policy:
And decent Worship kept the mean,
It Is too wide stretched Extremes between,
The rudely scrupulous, and extravagantly vain.
This was the work of Hookers Pen;
With Judgment, Candor, and such Learning writ,
Matter, and Words so exactly fit,
That, were it to be done again,
Expected 'twould be, as its Answer hitherto has been.
RITORNATA.
To Chelsea, Song; there, tell Thy Patrons Friend
The Church is Hookers Debtor: Hooker His;
And strange 'twould be, if he should Glory miss,
For whom two such most powerfully contend.
Bid him, cheer up, the Day's his own:
And, he shall never die
Who after Seventy's past and gone,
Can all the Assaults of Age defy:
Is, master still, of so much youthful heat,
A Child, so perfect, and so sprightly to beget.
Bensted Hants. Mar. 10. 1669/70. Sam: Woodford.

THE LIFE OF Mr. RICHARD HOOKER.
The Introduction.
I Have been persuaded, by a Friend whom I reverence, and ought to obey, to
write The Life of RICHARD HOOKER, the happy Author of Five (if not more) of the
Eight learned Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity. And, though I have
undertaken it, yet it has been with some unwillingness; because I foresee that
it must prove to me, and especially at this time of my Age, a work of much
labor to enquire, consider, research, and determine what is needful to be
known concerning him: For, I knew him not in his Life, and must therefore not
only look back to his Death, now 64 years past; but, almost 50 years beyond
that, even to his Childhood and Youth, and gather thence such Observations and
Prognostics, as may at least adorn, if not prove necessary for the completing
of what I have undertaken.

This trouble I foresee; and foresee also, that it is impossible to escape
Censures; against which I will not hope my well-meaning and diligence can
protect me (for I consider the Age in which I live) and shall therefore but
entreat of my Reader a suspension of them, till I have made known unto him some
Reasons, which I my self would now fain believe do make me in some measure fit
for this undertaking: and, if these Reasons shall not acquit me from all
Censures, they may at least abate of their severity, and this is all I can
probably hope for.

My Reasons follow.

About forty years past (for I am now past the Seventy of my Age) I began a
happy affinity with William Cranmer (now with God) grand Nephew unto the great
Archbishop of that name, a Family of noted prudence and resolution; with him
and two of his Sisters, I had an entire and free friendship: one of them was
the Wife of Doctor Spencer, a Bosom-friend, and sometime Com-pupil with Mr.
Hooker in Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, and after President of the same. I
name them here, for that I shall have occasion to mention them in this
following Discourse; as also George Cranmer their Brother, of whose useful
abilities my Reader may have a more authentic Testimony, than my Pen can
purchase for him, by that of our learned Cambden, and others.

This William Cranmer, and his two forenamed Sisters, had some affinity, and a
most familiar friendship with M. Hooker; and, had had some part of their
Education with him in his house, when he was Parson of Bishops-Borne near
Canterbury, in which City their good father then lived. They had (I say) a part
of their Education with him, as my self since that time a happy Cohabitatio^
with them; and having some years before read part of Mr. Hookers Works with
great liking and satisfaction, my affection to them made me a diligent
Inquisitor into many things that concerned him; as namely, of his Person, his
Nature, the management of his Time his Wife, his Family, and the Fortune of him
and his. Which inquiry has given me much advantage in the knowledge of what is
now under my consideration, and intended for the satisfaction of my Reader.

I had also a friendship with the Reverend Dr. Usher, the late learned
Archbishop of Armagh, and with Dr. Morton, the late learned and charitable
Bishop of Durham; as also with the learned John Hales of Eaton-Colledge; and
with them also (who loved the very name of Mr. Hooker) I have had many
discourses concerning him: and from them, and many others that have now put off
Mortality, I might have had more Informations, if I could then have admitted a
thought of any fitness for what by persuasion I have now undertaken. But,
though that full Harvest be irrecoverably lost, yet, my Memory has preserved
some gleanings, and my Diligence made such additions to them, as I hope will
prove useful to the completing of what I intend, In the discovery of which I
shall be faithful, and with this assurance put a period to my Introduction.

The Life.
IT is not to be doubted but that Richard Hooker was born at Heavy-tree near or
within the Precincts, or in the City of Exeter; a City which may justly boast,
that it was the Birth place of him, and Sir Tho. Bodley; as indeed the County
may in which it stands, that it has furnished this Nation with Bishop Jewel,
Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, and many others, memorable for their
Valor and Learning. He was born about the Year of our Redemption 1553, and of
Parents that were not so remarkable for their Extraction or Riches, as for
their Virtue and Industry, and Gods blessing upon both; by which they were
enabled to educate their Children in some degree of Learning, of which our
Richard Hooker may appear to be one fair testimony; and that Nature is not so
partial, as always to give the great blessings of Wisdom and Learning, and
with them the greater blessings of Virtue and Government, to those only that
are of a more high and honorable Birth.

His Complexion (if we may guess by him at the age of Forty) was Sanguine, with
a mixture of Choler; and yet, his Motion was slow even in his Youth, and so was
his Speech, never expressing an Earnestness in either of them, but a Gravity
suitable to the Aged. And it is observed (so far as Inquiry is able to look back
at this distance of Time) that at his being a Schoolboy he was an early
Questionist, quietly inquisitive Why this was, and that was not, to be
remembered? Why this was granted and that denied? This being mixed with a
remarkable Modesty, and a sweet serene quietness of Nature, and with them a
quick apprehension of many perplexed part^ of Learning imposed then upon him as
a Scholar, made his Master and others to believe him to have an inward blessed
Divine Light, and therefore to consider him to a little wonder. For in that,
Children were less pregnant, less confident, and more malleable, than in this
wiser, but not better, Age.

This Meekness and conjuncture of Knowledge, with Modesty in his Conversation,
being observed by his Schoolmaster, caused him to persuade his Parents (who
intended him for an Apprentice) to continue him at School, till he could find
out some means, by persuading his rich Uncle, or some other charitable person,
to ease them of a part of their care and charge; assuring them, that their son
was so enriched with the blessings of Nature and Grace, that God seemed to
single him out as a special Instrument of his Glory. And the good man told them
also, that he would double his diligence in instructing him, and would neither
expect nor receive any other Reward, than the content of so hopeful and happy
an employment.

This was not unwelcome News, and especially to his Mother, to whom he was a
dutiful and dear Child; and all Parties were so pleased with this proposal,
that it was resolved ^o it should be. And in the mean time his Parents and
Master laid a foundation for his future happiness, by instilling into his Soul
the seeds of Piety, those conscientious principles of loving and fearing God;
of an early belief that he knows the very secrets of our Souls; That he
punishes our Vices, and rewards our Innocence; That we should be free from
hypocrisy, and appear to man what we are to God, because first or last the
crafty man is caught in his own snare. These seeds of Piety were so seasonably
planted, and so continually watered with the daily dew of Gods blessed Spirit,
that his Infant virtues grew into such holy habits, as did make him grow daily
into more and more favor both with God and man, which with the great Learning
that he did attain to, has made Richard Hooker honored in this^ and will
continue him to be so to succeeding Generations.

This good Schoolmaster, whose Name I am not able to recover (and am sorry, for
that I would have given him a better memorial in this humble Monument,
dedicated to the memory of his Scholar) was very sollicitous with John Hooker,
then Chamberlain of Exeter, and Uncle to our Richard, to take his Nephew into
his care, and to maintain him for one Year in the University, and in the mean
time to use his endeavors to procure an admission for him into some College;
still urging and assuring him, that his Charge would not continue long, for the
Lads Learning and Manners were both so remarkable, that they must of necessity
be taken notice of; and that doubtless God would provide him some second
Patron, that would free him and his Parents from their future care and charge.

These Reasons, with the affectionate Rhetoric of his good Master, and Gods
blessing upon both, procured from his Uncle a faithful promise, that he would
take him into his care and charge before the expiration of the Year following,
which was performed by the assistance of the Learned John Jewel, who left, or
was about the first of Queen Mary's Reign, expelled out of Corpus-Christi
College in Oxford (of which he was a Fellow) for adhering to the Truth of
those Principles of Religion, to which he had assented in the days of her
Brother and Predecessor Edward the Sixth; and he having now a just cause to
fear a more heavy punishment than Expulsion, was forced, by forsa^ing this, to
seek safety in another Nation; and, with that safety the enjoyment of that
Doctrine and Worship, for which he suffered.

But the Cloud of that Persecution and Fear ending with the Life of Queen Mary,
the Affairs of the Church and State did then look more clear and comfortable;
so that he, and with him many others of the same judgment, made a happy return
into England about the first of Queen Elizabeth; in which Year, this John
Jewel was sent a Commissioner or Visitor of the Churches of the Western parts
of this Kingdom, and especially of those in Devonshire, in which County he was
born, and then and there he contracted a friendship with John Hooker, the Uncle
of our Richard.

In the second or third Year of her Reign, this John Jewel was made Bishop of
Salisbury, and there being always observed in him a willingness to do good,
and to obliege his Friends, and now a power added to it, John Hooker gave him a
Visit in Salisbury, and be sought him for Charity's sake to look favorably
upon a poor Nephew of his, whom Nature had fitted for a Scholar, but the Estate
of his Parents was so narrow, that they were unable to give him the advantage
of Learning; and that the Bishop would therefore become his Patron, and prevent
him from being a Tradesman; for he was a Boy of remarkable hopes. And though
the Bishop knew men do not usually look with an indifferent eye upon their own
Children and Relations yet he assented so far to John Hooker, that he appointed
the Boy and his Schoolmaster should attend him about Easter next following at
that place, which was done accordingly; and then after some Questions and
observations of the Boys learning and gravity, and behavior, the Bishop gave
his Schoolmaster a reward, and took order for an annual Pension for the Boys
Parents^ promising also to take him into his care for a future preferment,
which was performed; for about the Fifteenth Year of his age, which was Anno
1567, he was by the Bishop appointed to remove to Oxford, and there to attend
Dr. Cole, then President of Corpus-Christi College. Which he did; and Dr. Cole
had (according to a promise made to the Bishop) provided for him both a Tutor
(which was said to be the learned Dr. John Reynolds) and a Clerks place in that
College: which place, though it were not a full maintenance, yet with the
contribution of his Uncle, and the continued Pension of his Patron the good
Bishop, gave him a comfortable subsistence. And in this condition he continued
unto the Eighteenth Year of his age, still increasing in Learning and Prudence,
and so much in Humility and Piety, that he seemed to be filled with the Holy
Ghost, and even like St. John Baptist, to be sanctified from his Mothers womb,
who did often bless the day in which she bare him.

About this time of his age he fell into a dangerous Sickness, which lasted two
Months; all which tim his Mother, having notice of it, did in her hou^ly
prayers as earnestly beg his life of God, as the Mother of St. Augustine did
that he might become a true Christian; and their prayers were both so heard as
to be granted. Which Mr. Hooker would often mention with much joy, and as often
pray that he might never live to occasion any sorrow to so good a Mother, of
whom he would often say, he loved her so dearly, that he would endeavor to be
good even as much for hers, as for his own sake.

As soon as he was perfectly recovered from this Sic^ness, he took a j^urney
from Oxford to Exeter, to satisfy and see his good Mother, being accompanied
with a Countreyman and Companion of his own College, and both on foot; which
was then either more in fashion, or want of money, or their humility made it
so: But on foot they went, and took Salisbury in their way, purposely to see
the good Bishop, who made Mr. Hooker and his Companion dine with him at his own
Table; which Mr. Hooker boasted of with much joy and gratitude when he saw his
Mother and Friends: And at the Bishops parting with him, the Bishop gave him
good Counsel, and his Benediction, but forgot to give him money; which when the
Bishop had considered, he sent a Servant in all haste to call Richard back to
him, and at Richards return, the Bishop said to him, Richard, I sent for you
back to lend you a Horse, which has carried me many a Mile, and I thank God
with much ease; and presently delivered into his hand a Walking-staff, with
which he professed he had traveled through many parts of Germany; and he said,
Richard, I do not give, but lend you my Horse; be sure you be honest, and bring
my Horse back to me at your return this way to Oxford. And I do now give you
Ten Groats to bear your charges to Exeter; and here is Ten Groats more, which I
charge you to deliver to your Mother, and tell her, I send her a Bishops
Benediction with it, and beg the continuance of her prayers for me. And if you
bring my Horse back to me, I will give you Ten Groats more to carry you on foot
to the College, and so God bless you, good Richard.

And this, you may believe, was performed by both Parties. But, alas! the next
News that followed Mr. Hooker to Oxford, was, that his learned and charitable
Patron had changed this for a better life. Which may be believed, for that as
he lived, so he dyed, in devout meditation and prayer; and in both so
zealously, that it became a religious question, Whether his last Ej^culations,
or his Soul, did first enter into Heaven?

And now Mr. Hooker became a man of sorrow and fear; of sorrow, for the loss of
so dear and comfortable a Patron; and of fear, for his future subsistence: But
Dr. Cole raised his spirits from this dejection, by bidding him go cheerfully
to his Studies, and assuring him he should neither want food nor raiment (which
was the utmost of his hopes) for he would become his Patron.

And so he was for about nine months, and not longer; for about that time, this
following accident did befall Mr. Hooker.

Edwin Sandys (then Bishop of London, and after Archbishop of York) had also
been in the days of Queen Mary forced, by forsaking this, to seek safety in
another Nation; where for some Years Bishop Jewel and he were Companions at
Bed and Board in Germany, and where in this their Exile they did often eat the
bread of sorrow; and by that means they there began such a friendship, as
lasted till the death of Bishop Jewel, which was in September 1571. A little
before which time, the two Bishops meeting, Jewel began a story of his Richard
Hooker, and in it gave such a Character of his Learning and Manners, that
though Bishop Sandys was educated in Cambridge, where he had obliged and had
many Friends; yet his resolution was, that his Son Edwin should be sent to
Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, and by all means be Pupil to Mr. Hooker,
though his Son Edwin was not then much younger: for, the Bishop said, I will
have a Tutor for my Son that shall teach him Learning by Instruction, and
Virtue by Example; and my greatest care shall be of the last, and (God willing)
this Richard Hooker shall be the Man into whose hands I will commit my Edwin.
And the Bishop did so about twelve months, or not much longer after this
resolution.

And doubtless as to these two a better choice could not be made; for Mr.
Hooker was now in the nineteenth year of his age, had spent five in the
University, and had by a constant unwearied diligence attained unto a
perfection in all the learned Languages; by the help of which, an excellent
Tutor, and his unintermitted Study, he had made the subtilty of all the Arts
easy and familiar to him, and useful for the discovery of such Learning as
lay hid from common Searchers; so that by these added to his great Reason, and
his Industry added to both, He did not only know more, of Causes and effects,
but what he knew, he knew better then other men. And with this Knowledge he had
a most blessed and clear Method of Demonstrating what he knew, to the great
advantage of all his Pupils, (which in time were many) but especially to his
two first, his dear Edwin Sandys, and his as dear George Cranmer, of which
there will be a fair Testimony in the ensuing Relation.

This for his Learning. And for his Behavior, amongst other Testimonies this
still remains of him, That in four years, he was but twice absent from the
Chapel prayers; and that his Behavior there was such as showed an awful
reverence of that God which he then worshipped and prayed to; giving all
outward testimonies that his Affections were set on heavenly things. This was
his Behavior toward God; and for that to Man, it is observable that he was
never known to be angry, or passionate, or extreme in any of his Desires; never
heard to repine or dispure with Providence, but by a quiet gentle submission
and resignation of his will to the Wisdom of his Creator, bore the burden of
the day with patience; never heard to utter an uncomly word: and by this and a
grave Behavior, which is a Divine Charm, he begot an early Reverence unto his
Person, even from those that at other times, and in other companies, took a
liberty to cast off that strictness of Behavior and Discourse that is required
in a Collegiate Life. And when he took any liberty to be pleasant, his Wit was
never blemished with Scoffing, or the utterance of any Conceit that bordered
upon, or might beget a thought of Looseness in his hearers. Thus mild, thus
innocent and exemplary was his Behavior in his College, and thus this good
man continued till his death, still increasing in Learning in Patience, and
Piety.

In this nineteenth year of his age, he was December 24. 1573, admitted to be
one of the twenty Scholars of the Foundation, being elected and so admitted as
born in Devon or Hantshire, out of which Countries a certain number are to be
elected in Vacancies by the Founders Statutes. And now, as he was much
encouraged, so now he was perfectly in o^porated into this beloved College,
which was then noted for an eminent Library, strict students, and remarkable
^cholars. And indeed it may glory, that it had Cardinal Poole, Bishop Jewel,
Doctor John Reynolds, and Doctor Thomas Jackson of that Foundation: The First,
famous for his Learned Apology for the Church of England, and his Defense of it
against Harding. The Second, for the learned and wise Menage of a public
Dispute with John Heart (of the Romish persuasion) about the Head and Faith of
the Church, and then printed by consent of both parties. And, the Third, for
his most excellent Exposition of the Creed, and other Treatises: All such as
have given greatest satisfaction to men of the greatest Learning. Nor was this
man more Noteworthy for his Learning, than for his strict and and pious Life,
testified by his abundant love and charity to all men.

And in the year 1576. Febr. 23. Mr. Hookers Grace was given him for Inceptor
of Arts, Doctor Herbert Westphaling, a man of note for Learning, being then
Vice Chancellor. And the Act following he was completed Master, which was
Anno 1577. his Patron Doctor Cole being Vice Chancellor that year, and his
dear friend Henry Savill of Merton College being then one of the Proctors.
'Twas that Henry Savill, that was after Sir Henry Savill, Warden of Merton
College, and Provost of Eaton: He which founded in Oxford two famous Lectures,
and endowed them with liberal maintenance.

'Twas that Sir Henry Savil, that translated and enlightened the History of
Cornelius Tacitus, with a most excellent Comment; and enriched the world by his
laborious and chargeable collecting the scattered pieces of S. Chrysostom, and
the publication of them in one entire Body in Greek; in which Language he was a
most judicious Critic. 'Twas this Sir Henry Savill, that had the happiness to
be a Contemporary, and familiar friend to Mr. Hooker; and let Posterity know it.

And in this year of 1577. He was admitted Fellow of the College; happy also
in being the Contemporary and Friend of Dr. John Reynolds, of whom I have
lately spoken; and of Dr. Spencer: both which were after, and successively,
made Presidents of Corpus-Christi College; men of great Learning and Merit,
and famous in their Generations.

Nor was Mr. Hooker more happy in his Contemporaries of his Time and College,
than in the Pupillage and Friendship of his Edwin Sandys and George Cranmer; of
whom my Reader may note, that this Edwin Sandys was after Sir Edwin Sandys, and
as famous for his Speculum Europae, as his brother George for making Posterity
beholden to his Pen by a learned Relation and Comment on his dangerous and
remarkable Travels; and for his harmonious Translation of the Psalms of David,
the Book of Job, and other Poetical parts of Holy Writ, into most high and
elegant Verse. And for Cranmer, his other Pupil, I shall refer my Reader to the
printed Testimonies of our learned Mr. Cambden, of Fines Morison, and others.

This Cranmer, whose Christen name was George, was a Gentleman of singular
hopes, the eldest Son of Thomas Cranmer, Son of Edmund Cranmer, the Archbishops
brother: he spent much of his youth in Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, where
he continued Master of Arts for many years before he removed, and then betook
himself to Travel, accompanying that worthy Gentleman Sir Edwin Sandys into
France, Germany, and Italy, for the space of three years; and after their happy
return he betook himself to an Employment under a Privy Counselor of note,
for an unhappy undertaking, after whose Fall, he went in place of Secretary
with Sir Henry Killegrew in his Embassage into France: and after his death he
was sought after by the most Noble Lord Mount-Joy, with whom he went into
Ireland, where he remained until in a battle against the Rebels, near
Carlingford, an unfortunate wound put an end both to his Life, and the great
Hopes that were conceived of him: he being then but in the 36 year of his age.

Betwixt Mr. Hooker and these his two Pupils, there was a sacred Friendship, a
Friendship made up of Religious Principles, which increased daily by a
similitude of Inclinations to the same Recreations and Studies; a Friendship
elemented in Youth, and in an University, free from self ends, which the
Friendships of Age usually are not: and in this sweet, this blessed, this
spiritual Amity they went on for many years; and as the Holy Prophet says, so
they took sweet counsel together, and walked in the House of God as Friends. By
which means they improved it to such a degree of Amity as as bordered upon
Heaven; a Friendship so sacred, that when it ended in this world, it began in
the next, where it shall have no end.

And, though this world cannot give any degree of Pleasure equal to such a
Friendship: yet, Obedience to Parents, and a desire to know the Affairs,
Manners, Laws, and Learning of other Nations, that they might thereby become
the more serviceable unto their own, made them put off their Gowns, and leave
the College and Mr. Hooker to his Studies, in which he was daily more
assiduous still: enriching his quiet and capacious Soul with the precious
Learning of the Philosophers, Cas^ists, and Schoolmen; and with them the
foundation and reason of all Laws, both Sacred and Civil: and with such other
Learning as lay most remote from the track of common Studies. And as he was
diligent in these, so he seemed restless in searching the scope and intention
of Gods Spirit revealed to Mankind in the Sacred Scripture: for the
understanding of which, he seemed to be assisted by the same Spirit with which
they were written: He that regards truth in the inward parts, making him to
understand wisdom secretly: And the good man would often say, that the
Scripture was not writ to beget Disputations, and Pride, and Opposition to
Government; but, Charity and Humility, Moderation, Obedience to Authority, and
peace to Mankind: of which virtues, no man did ever repent himself at his
death. And, that this was really his judgment, did appear in his future
writings, and in all the actions of his life: Nor was this excellent man a
stranger to the more light and airy parts of Learning, as Music and Poetry;
all which he had digested, and made useful: and of all which, the Reader will
have a fair testimony, in what will follow.

In the Year 1579. the Chancellor of the University was given to understand,
that the public Hebrew Lecture was not read according to the Statutes; nor
could be, by reason of a distemper that had seized the brain of Mr. Kingsmill,
who was to read it; so that, it lay long unread, to the great detriment of
those that were studious of that language: Therefore, the Chancellor writ to
his Vice Chancellor, and the University, that he had heard such commendations
of the excellent knowledge of Mr. Richard Hooker in that tongue, that he
desired he might be procured to read it: And he did, and continued to do so,
till he left Oxford.

Within three months after his undertaking this Lecture (namely in October
1579.) he was with Dr. Reynolds, and others expelled his College; and this
Letter transcribed from Dr. Reynolds his own hand, may give some account of it.

To Sir Francis Knolles.
I Am sorry, Right Honorable, that I am enforced to make unto you such a suit,
which, I cannot move, but I must complain of the unrighteous deaing of one of
our College; who has taken upon him against all Law and Reason, to expel out
of our house, both me and Mr. Hooker, and three other of our Fellows, for doing
that which by Oath we were bound to do. Our matter must be heard before the
Bishop of Winchester, with whom I do not doubt, but we shall find equity.
Howbeit, forasmuch as some of our adversaries have said, that the Bishop is
already forestalled, and will not give us such audience as we look for;
therefore I am humbly to beseech your Honor, that you will desire the Bishop,
by your Letters, to let us have Justice; though it be with rigor, so it be
Justice: our Cause is so good, that I am sure we shall prevail by it. Thus much
I am bold to request of your Honor for Corpus Christi College sake, or rather
for Christ's sake; whom I beseech to bless you with daily increase of his
manifold gifts, and the blessed graces of his holy Spirit.

London, October. 9. 1579. Your HONORS in Christ to command, JOHN REYNOLDS.


This Expulsion was by Dr. John Barfoote, Chaplain to Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
and then Vice President of the College: I cannot learn the pretended cause;
but, that they were restored the same Month is most certain.

I return to Mr. Hooker in his College, where he continued his studies with
all quietness, for the space of three years; about which time, he entered into
Sacred Orders, and was made Deacon and Priest; and, not long after, was
appointed to preach at St. Paul's Cross.

In order to which Sermon, to London he came, and immediately to the Shunamites
house; which is a House so called, for that, besides the Stipend paid the
Preacher, there is provision made also for his Lodging and Diet two days
before, and one day after his Sermon; this house was then kept by John
Churchman, sometimes a Draper of good Note in Watling-street, upon whom Poverty
had at last come like an armed man, and brought him into a necessitous
condition; which, though it be a punishment, is not always an argument of Gods
disfavour, for he was a virtuous man: I shall not yet give the like testimony
of his Wife, but leave the Reader to judge by what follows. But to this house
Mr. Hooker came so wet, so weary, and weatherbeaten, that he was never known to
express more passion, than against a Friend that dissuaded him from footing it
to London, and for finding him no easier an Horse; supposing the Horse trotted,
when he did not: And at this time also, such a faintness and fear possessed him,
that he would not be persuaded two days quietness, or any other means could be
used to make him able to preach his Sundays Sermon; but a warm Bed, and Rest,
and Drink, proper for a Cold, given him by Mrs. Churchman, and her diligent
attendance added unto it, enabled him to perform the office of the day, which
was in or about the Year 1581.

And in this first public appearance to the World, he was not so happy as to
be free from Exceptions against a point of Doctrine delivered in his Sermon,
which was, That in God there were two Wills, an Antecedent, and a Consequent
Will; his first Will, that all Mankind should be saved; but his second Will
was, that those only should be saved, that did live answerable to that degree
of Grace which he had offered, or afforded them. This seemed to cross a late
Opinion of Mr. Calvin's, and then taken for granted by many that had not a
capacity to examine it, as it had been by him, and has been since by Dr.
Jackson, and Dr. Hammond, and others of great Learning, who believe that a
contrary Opinion trenches upon the Honor and Justice of our merciful God. How
he justified this, I will not undertake to declare, but it was not excepted
against (as Mr. Hooker declares in an Orational Answer to Mr. Travers) by John
Elmer, then Bishop of London, at this time one of his Auditors, and at last one
of his Advocates too, when Mr. Hooker was accused for it.

But the justifying of this Doctrine did not prove of so bad consequence, as
the kindness of Mrs. Churchmans curing him of his late Distemper and Cold; for
that was so gratefully apprehended by Mr. Hooker, that he thought himself bound
in conscience to believe all that she said; so that the good man came to be
persuaded by her, that he was a man of a tender consti^tion, and that it was
best for him to have a Wife, that might prove a Nurse to him; such an one as
might both prolong his life, and make it more comfortable; and such a one she
could and would provide for him, if he thought fit to marry. And he not
considering, that the children of this world are wiser in their generation,
than the children of light; but, like a true Nathanael, fearing no guile,
because he meant none, did give her such a power as Eleazar was trusted with,
when he was sent to choose a Wife for Isaac; for even so he trusted her to
choose for him, promising upon a fair Summons to return to London, and accept
of her choice; and he did so in that or the year following. Now the Wife
provided for him, was her Daughter Joan, who brought him neither Beauty nor
Portion; and for her Conditions, they were too like that Wife's which is by
Solomon compared to a dripping house; so that he had no reason to rejoice in
the Wife of his Youth, but too just cause to say with the holy Prophet, Woe is
me that I am constrained to have my habitation in the tents of Kedar.

This choice of Mr. Hookers (if it were his choice) may be wondered at; but let
us consider that the Prophet Ezekiel says, There is a wheel within a wheel, a
secret Sacred wheel of Providence (especially in Marriages) guided by his hand,
that allows not the race to the swift, nor bread to the wise, nor good wives to
good men: and he that can bring good out of evil, (for Mortals are blind to
this Reason) only knows why this blessing was denied to patient Job, to meek
Moses, and to our as meek and patient Mr. Hooker. But so it was; and, let the
Reader cease to wonder, for Affliction is a Divine diet, which though it be not
pleasing to Mankind, yet Almighty God has often, very often imposed it as
good, though bitter Physic to those children whose Souls are dearest to him.

And by this means the good man was drawn from the tranquillity of his
College, from that Garden of Piety, of Pleasure, of Peace, and a sweet
Conversation, into the thorny Wilderness of a busy World, into those corroding
cares that attend a married Priest, and a Country Parsonage, which was Draiton
Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire, not far from Alesbury, and in the Diocese of
Lincoln, to which he was presented by John Cheny Esquire, then Patron of it,
the 9 th of December 1584. where he behaved himself so as to give no occasion
of evil, but (as St. Paul advises a Minister of God) in much patience, in
afflictions, in anguishes, in necessities; in poverty, and no doubt in
long-suffering: yet troubling no man with his discontents and wants.

And in this condition he continued about a year, in which time his two Pupils,
Edwin Sandys and George Cranmer, took a journey to see their Tutor, where they
found him with a Book in his hand (it was the Odes of Horace) he being then
like humble and innocent Abel, tending his small allotment of sheep in a common
field, which he told his Pupils he was forced to do then, for that his servant
was gone home to Dine, and assist his Wife to do some necessary household
business. When his servant returned and released him, his two Pupils attended
him unto his house, where their best entertainment was his quiet company, which
was presently denied them, for Richard was called to rock the Cradle; and the
rest of their welcome was so like this, that they staid but till next morning,
which was time enough to discover and pity their Tutors condition; and having
in that time remembered and paraphrased on many of the innocent recreations of
their younger days, and other like diversions, given him as much present
comfort as they were able, they were forced to leave him to the company of his
wife Joan, and seek themselves a quieter Lodging: But at their parting from
him, Mr. Cranmer said, Good Tutor, I am sorry your lot is fallen in no better
ground as to your Parsonage; and, more sorry that your Wife proves not a more
comfortable Companion after you have wearied your self in your restless
studies. To whom the good man replied, My dear George, If Saints have usually a
double share in the miseries of this life, I that am none, ought not to repine
at what my wise Creator has appointed for me, but labor, as indeed I do
daily, to submit mine to his Will, and possess my soul in patience, and peace.

At their return to London, Edwin Sandys acquaints his father^ who was then
Bishop of London, and after Archbishop of York, with his Tutors sad condition,
and sollicits for his removal to some Benefice that might give him a more
comfortable subsistence; which his father did most willingly grant him, when it
should next fall into his power. And not long after this time, which was in the
year 1585, Mr. Alvie (Master of the Temple) dyed, who was a man of a strict
Life, of great Learning, and of so venerable Behavior, as to gain so high a
degree of love and reverence from all men, that he was generally known by the
name of Father Alvie. At the Temple-Reading, next after the death of this
Father Alvie, he the said Archbishop of York being then at Dinner with the
Judges, the Reader, and Benchers of that Society, met with a Condolement for
the death of Father Alvie, an high commendation of his Saint-like life, and of
his great merit both to God and man: and as they bewailed his death, so they
wished for a like pattern of Virtue and Learning to succeed him. And here came
in a fair occasion for the Bishop to commend Mr. Hooker to Father Alvies place,
which he did with so effectual an earnestness, and that seconded with so many
other Testimonies of his worth, that Mr. Hooker was sent for from Draiton
Beauchamp to London, and there the Mastership of the Temple proposed unto him
by the Bishop, as a greater freedom from his Country cares, and the advantage
of a better Society, and a more liberal Pension than his Country Parsonage did
afford him. But these Reasons were not powerful enough to incline him to a
willing acceptance of it; his wish was rather to gain a better Country living,
where he might see Gods blessings spring out of the Earth, and be free from
Noise (so he expressed the desire of his heart) and eat that bread which he might
more properly call his own in privacy and quietness. But, notwithstanding this
aversness, he was at last persuaded to accept of the Bishops proposal, and was
by This you may find in the Temple Records. William Ermstead was Master of the
Temple at the Dissolution of the Priory, and dyed 2 Eliz.

Richard Alvey Bat. Divinity, Pat. 13 Febr. 2 Eliz. Magister five Custos Domu^s
and Ecolesiae novi Templi, dyed 27 Eliz.

Richard Hooker succeeded that year by Patent in terminis, as Alvey ^ad it, and
he left it, 33 Eliz.

That year Dr. Balgey succeeded Richard Hooker.


Patent for Life, made Master of the Temple the 17 th of March 1585. he being
then in the 34 th year of his age.

And, here I shall make a stop; and, that the Reader may the better judge of
what follows, give him a character of the Times, and Temper of the people of
this Nation, when Mr. Hooker had his admission into this place, a place which
he accepted, rather than desired; and yet here he promised himself a virtuous
quietness, that blessed Tranquillity which he always prayed and labored for;
that so he might in peace bring forth the fruits of peace, and glorify God by
uninterrupted prayers and praises: for this he always thirsted, and yet this
was denied him. For his admission into this place, was the very beginning of
those oppositions and anxieties, which till then this good man was a stranger
to, and of which the Reader may guess by what follows.

In this character of the Times, I shall, by the Readers favor, and for his
information, look so far back as to the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, a time in which the many pretended Titles to the Crown, the frequent
Treasons, the Doubts of her Successor, the late Civil War, and the sharp
Persecution that raged to the effusion of so much blood in the Reign of Queen
Mary, were fresh in the memory of all men; and, begot fears in the most pious
and wisest of this Nation, lest the like days should return again to them, or
their present posterity. And the apprehension of these dangers, begot a hearty
desire of a settlement in the Church and State, believing there was no other
probable way left to make them sit quietly under their own Vines and Fig Trees,
and enjoy the desired fruit of their Labors. But, Time, and Peace, and Plenty,
begot Self Ends, and these begot Animosities, Envy, Opposition, and
Unthankfulness for those very blessings for which they lately thirsted, being
then the very utmost of their desires, and even beyond their hopes.

This was the temper of the Times in the beginning of her Reign, and thus it
continued too long; for those very people that had enjoyed the desires of their
hearts in a Reformation from Rome, became at last so like the grave, as never
to be satisfied; but were still thirsting for more and more, neglecting to pay
that Obedience, and perform those Vows which they made in their days of
adversities and fear: so that in short time, there appeared three several
Interests, each of them fearless and restless in the prosecution of their
designs; they may for distinction be called, The active Romanists, The restless
Non-conformists (of which there were many sorts) and, The passive peaceable
Protestant. The Counsels of the first considered, and resolved on in Rome: the
second in Scotland, in Geneva, and in diverse selected, secret, dangerous
Conventicles, both there, and within the bosom of our own Nation: the third
pleaded and defended their Cause by established Laws, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil; and if they were active, it was to prevent the other two from destroying
what was by those known Laws happily established to them and their Posterity.

I shall forbear to mention the very many and dangerous Plots of the Romanists
against the Church and State, because what is principally intended in this
digression, is an account of the Opinions and Activity of the Non-conformists;
against whose judgment and practice, Mr. Hooker became at last, but most
unwillingly, to be engaged in a Book-war; a War, which he maintained not as
against an Enemy, but with the spirit of meekness and reason.

In which number of Non-conformists, though some might be sincere, well-meaning
men, whose indiscreet Zeal might be so like Charity, as thereby to cover a
multitude of their Errors; yet, of this party, there were many that were
possessed with a high degree of spiritual wickedness, I mean, with an innate
restless pride, and malice. I do not mean the visible carnal sins of Gluttony,
and Drunkenness, and the like (from which good Lord deliver us) but, sins of a
higher nature, because they are more unlike God, who is the God of love and
mercy, and order, and peace; and more like the Devil, who is not a Glutton, nor
can be drunk, and yet is a Devil; but I mean those spiritual wickednesses of
malice and revenge, and an opposition to Government. Men that joyed to be the
Authors of misery, which is properly his work that is the enemy and disturber
of Mankind; and, greater sins than Gluttony or Drunkenness, though some will
not believe it. And of this party, there were also many, whom prejudice and a
furious Zeal had so blinded, as to make them neither to hear reason, nor adhere
to the ways of peace. Men, that were the dregs of Mankind, whom Pride and
Self-conceit, had made to overvalue their own pitiful, crooked wisdom so much,
as not to be ashamed to hold foolish and unmannerly Disputes against those men
whom they ought to reverence; and, those Laws which they ought to obey. Men,
that labored and joyed to find out the faults, and to speak evil of
Government; and then, to be the Authors of Confusion. Men, whom Company, and
Conversation, and Custom, had at last so blinded, and made so insensible that
these were sins; that, like those that perished in the gainsaying of Core, so
these dyed without repenting of these spiritual wickednesses: of which the
practices of Copinger, and Hacket in their lives; and the death of them and
their adherents, are God knows too sad examples; and, ought to be cautions to
those men that are inclined to the like spiritual wickednesses.

And in these Times which tended thus to Confusion, there were also many others
that pretended a tenderness of Conscience, refusing to take an Oath before a
lawful Magistrate; and yet these men, in their secret Conventicles, did
covenant and swear to each other, to be assiduous and faithful in using their
best endeavors to set up the Presbyterian Doctrine and Discipline; and, both
in such a manner as they themselves had not yet agreed on. To which end, there
were many that wandered up and down, and were active in sowing Discontents and
Sedition, by venomous and secret murmurings, and a dispersion of scurrilous
Pamphlets and Libels against the Church and State, but especially against the
Bishops; by which means, together with indiscreet Sermons, the common people
became so phanatick, as to believe the Bishops to be Antichrist, and the only
obstructers of Gods Discipline; and then given over to such a desperate
delusion, as to find out a Text in the Revelation of St. John, that Antichrist
was to be overcome by the Sword. So that those very men, that began with tender
and meek Petitions, proceeded to Admonitions, then to Satirical Remonstrances;
and at last, having numbered who was not, and who was, for their Cause, they got
a supposed certainty of so great a Party, that they durst threaten first the
Bishops, then the Queen and Parliament; to all which they were secretly
encouraged by the Earl of Leicester, then in great favor with Her Majesty, and
the reputed Cherisher and Patron general of these pretenders to Tenderness of
Conscience; his design being, by their means, to bring such an odium upon the
Bishops, as to procure an Alienation of their Lands, and a large proportion of
them for himself: which avaritious desire had so blinded his reason, that his
ambitious and greedy hopes had almost put him into a present possession of
Lambeth-house.

And to these undertakings, the Non-conformists of this Nation were much
encouraged and heightened by a Correspondence and Confederacy with that
Brotherhood in Scotland; so that here they became so bold, that Mr. Dering.
one told the Queen openly in a Sermon, She was like an untamed Heyfer, that
would not be ruled by Gods people, but obstructed his Discipline. And in
Scotland they were more confident, for there Vide Bishop Spotswoods History of
the Church of Scotland.
they declared Her an Atheist, and grew to such an height, as not to be
accountable for any thing spoken against Her, nor for Treason against their own
King, if spoken in the Pulpit; showing at last such a disobedience to Him, that
His Mother being in England, and then in distress, and in prison, and in danger
of death, the Church denied the King their prayers for her: and at another
time, when He had appointed a day of Feasting; the Church declared for a
general Fast, in opposition to His Authority.

To this height they were grown in both Nations, and by these means there was
distilled into the minds of the common people such other venomous and turbulent
principles, as were inconsistent with the safety of the Church and State: and
these vented so daringly, that, beside the loss of life and limbs, they were
forced to use such other severities as will not admit of an excuse, if it had
not been to prevent Confusion, and the perilous consequences of it; which,
without such prevention, would have been Ruin and Misery to this numerous
Nation.

These Errors and Animosities were so remarkable, that they begot wonder in an
ingenious Italian, who being about this time come newly into this Nation, writ
scoffingly to a friend in his own Country, to this purpose, That the Common
people of England were wiser than the wisest of his wiser Nation; for, here the
very Women and Shopkeepers, were able to judge of Predestination, and
determine what Laws were fit to be made concerning Church Government; and then,
what were fit to be obeyed or abolisht. That they were more able (or at least
thought so) to raise and determine perplexed Cases of Conscience, than the
wisest of the most learned Colleges in Italy. That men of the slightest
Learning, and the most ignorant of the Common people, were mad for a new or
Super- or Re-reformation of Religion; and that in this they appeared like that
man, who would never cease to whet and whet his knife, till there was no steel
left to make it useful. And he concluded his Letter with this observation, That
those very men that were most busy in Oppositions, and Disputations, and
Controversies, of finding out the faults of their Governors, had usually the
least of Humility and Mortification, or of the power of Godliness.

And to heighten all these Discontents and Dangers, there was also sprung up a
generation of Godless men; men that had so long given way to their own lust of
delusion, and so highly opposed the blessed motions of his Spirit, and the
inward light of their own Consciences, that they had thereby sinned themselves
into a belief which they would, but could not believe; into a belief which is
repugnant even to humane Nature (for the Heathens believe that there are many
gods) but these had sinned themselves into a belief that there was no God, so
finding nothing in themselves but what was worse than nothing, began to wish
what they were not able to hope for, that they should be like the beasts that
perish: And wicked company, which is the Atheists Sanctuary, were so bold as to
say so, though the worst of Mankind when he is left alone at midnight, may
wish, but cannot then think it a belief that there is no God. Into this
wretched, this reprobate condition, many had then sinned themselves.

And now when the Church was pestered with them, and with all these other
Irregularities; when her Lands were in danger of Alienation, her Power at least
neglected, and her Peace torn to pieces by several Schisms, and such Heresies
as do usually attend that sin (for Heresies do usually outlive their first
Authors) when the Common people seemed ambitious of doing those very things
that were attended with most dangers, that thereby they might be punished, and
then applauded and pitied; when they called the Spirit of opposition a Tender
Consciouce, and complained of persecution, because they wanted power to
persecute others; when the giddy multitude raged, and became restless to find
out misery for themselves and others; and the Rabble would herd themselves
together, and endeavor to govern and act in spite of Authority. In this
extremity of fear, and danger of the Church and State, when to suppress the
growing evils of both, they needed a man of prudence and piety, and of an high
and fearless fortitude, they were blessed in all by John Whitgift his being made
Archbishop of Canterbury; of whom Sir Henry Wotton (that knew him well, for he
was his Pupil) gives this true Character: That he was a man of Reverend and
Sacred memory; and, of the primitive temper; such a temper, as when the Church
by lowliness of Spirit did flourish in highest examples of Virtue.

And though I dare not undertake to add to this excellent and true character of
Sir Henry Wotton, yet I shall neither do right to this Discourse, nor to my
Reader, if I forbear to give him a further and short account of the life and
manners of this excellent man; and it shall be short, for I long to end this
digression, that I may lead my Reader back to Mr. Hooker, where we left him at
the Temple.

John Whitgift was born in the County of Lincoln, of a Family that was ancient,
and noted to be both prudent, and affable, and Gentile by nature; he was
educated in Cambridge, much of his Learning was acquired in Pembroke-Hall,
(where Mr. Bradford the Martyr was his Tutor) from thence he was removed to
Peter-house, from thence to be Master of Pembroke Hall, and from thence to the
Mastership of Trinity College: About which time, the Queen made him Her
Chaplain and not long after Pre^end of Ely, and then Dean of Lincoln; and
having for many years past look'^ upon him with much reverence and favor, gave
him a fair testimony of both, by giving him the Bishopric of Worcester, and
(which was not a usual favor) forgiving him his First Fruits; then by
constituting him Vice President of the principality of Wales. And having
experimented his Wisdom, his Justice, and Moderation in the menage of Her
affairs, in both these places; She, in the 26 th of Her Reign, made him
Archbishop of Canterbury, and not long after of Her Privy Council, and trusted
him to manage all Her Ecclesiastical Affairs and Preferments. In all which
Removes, he was like the Ark, which left a blessing upon the place where it
rested; and in all his Employments was like Jchoida, that did good unto Israel.

These were the steps of this Bishops ascension to this place of dignity and
cares; in which place (to speak Mr. Cambdens very words in ^ is Annals) he
devoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, and his painful labors to the
^^od of his Church. And yet in this place he met with many oppositions in the
regulation of Church Affairs, which were much disordered at his entrance, by
reason of the age and remisness of Bishop Grindall, his immediate Predecessor,
the activity of the Non-consormists, and their chief assistant the Earl of
Leicester, and indeed by too many others of the like Sacrilegious principles.
With these he was to encounter; and, though he wanted neither courage, nor a
good cause, yet he foresaw, that without a great measure of the Queens favor,
it was impossible to stand in the breach that was made into the Lands and
Immunities of the Church, or to maintain the remaining rights of it. And
therefore by justifiable sacred Insinuations such as St. Paul to Agrippa
(Agrippa, believe thou? I know thou believe) he wrought himself into so
great a degree of favor with Her, as by his pious use of it, has got both of
them a great degree of Fame in this World, and of Glory in that into which they
are now entered.

His merits to the Queen, and Her favors to him were such, that She called him
Her little black Husband, and called his Servants Her Servants: and She saw so
visible and blessed a sincerity shine in all his cares and endeavors for the
Churches, and for Her good, that She was supposed to trust him with the very
secrets of Her Soul, and to make him Her Confessor; of which She gave many fair
testimonies, and of which one was, that She would never eat Flesh in Lent
without obtaining a License from her little black Husband: and would often say,
She pitied him because She trusted him, and had eased Her self, by laying the
burden of all Her Clergycares upon his shoulders, which he managed with
prudence and piety.

I shall not keep my self within the promised Rules of brevity in this account
of his Interest with Her Majesty, and his care of the Churches Rights, if in
this digression I should enlarge to particulars; and therefore my desire is,
that one Example may serve for a Testimony of both. And that the Reader may the
better understand it, he may take notice, that not many years before his being
made Archbishop, there passed an Act or Acts of Parliament, intending the
better preservation of Church Lands, by recalling a power which was vested in
others to Sell or Lease them, by lodging and trusting the future care and
protection of them only in the Crown: And amongst many that made a bad use of
this power or trust of the Queens, the Earl of Leicester was one; and the
Bishop having by his Interest with Her Majesty, put a stop to the Earls
sacrilegious designs, they two fell to a open opposition before Her; after
which they both quitted the Room, not friends in appearance; but the Bishop
made a sudden and a seasonable return to Her Majesty (for he found Her alone)
and spoke to Her with great humility and reverence, and to this purpose.

I Beseech Your Majesty to hear me with patience, and to believe that Yours,
and the Churches safety, are dearer to me than my Life; but, my Conscience
dearer than both: and therefore give me leave to do my Duty, and tell You, that
Princes are deputed Nursing Fathers of the Church, and owe it a protection; and
therefore God forbid that You should be so much as Passive in her Ruins, when
You may prevent it; or that I should behold it without horror and detestation,
or should forbear to tell Your Majesty of the sin and danger of Sacrilege:
And, though You and my self were born in an Age of Frailties, when the
primitive piety and care of the Churches Lands and Immunities are much decayed;
yet (Madam) let me beg that you would first consider that there are such sins
as Profaneness and Sacrilege; and, that if there were not, they could not
have names in Holy Writ, and particularly in the New Testament. And I beseech
You to consider, that though our Savior said. He judged no man; and to
testify it, would not judge nor divide the inheritance betwixt the two
Brethren; nor would judge the Woman taken in Adultery: yet, in this point of
the Churches Rights he was so zealous, that he made himself both the Accuser,
and the Judge, and the Executioner too, to punish these sins; witnessed, in
that he himself made the Whip to drive the Prophaners out of the Temple,
overthrew the Tables of the Moneychangers, and drove them out of it. And
consider that it was St. Paul that said to those Christians of his time that
were offended with Idolatry, yet committed Sacrilege; Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Supposing (I think) Sacrilege the greater
sin. This may occasion Your Majesty to consider that there is such a sin as
Sacriledg; and to incline You to prevent the Curse that will follow it, I
beseech You also to consider, that Constantine the first Christian Emperor,
and Helena his Mother; that King Edgar, and Edward the Confessor, and indeed
many others of Your Predecessors, and many private Christians, have also given
to God, and to his Church, much Land, and many Immunities, which they might
have given to those of their own Families, and did not: but, gave them as an
absolute Right and Sacrifice to God: And, with these Immunities and Lands they
have entailed a Curse upon the Alienators of them; God prevent Your Majesty
from being liable to that Curse.

And, to make You that are trusted with their preservation, the better to
understand the danger of it, I beseech You forget not, that, besides these
Curses, the Churches Land and Power have been also endeavored to be preserved,
as far as Humane Reason, and the Law of this Nation have been able to preserve
them, by an immediate and most sacred Obligation on the Consciences of the
Princes of this Realm. For, they that consult Magna Charta, shall find, that as
all Your Predecessors were at their Coronation so You also were sworn before
all the Nobility and Bishops then present, and in the presence of God, and in
his stead to him that anointed You, To maintain the Church Lands, and the
Rights belonging to it; and this testified openly at the holy Altar, by laying
Your hands on the Bible then lying upon it. And not only Magna Charta, but many
modern Statutes have denounced a Curse upon those that break Magna Charta: A
Curse like the Leprosy, that was entailed on the Jews; for, as that, so these
Curses have and will cleave to the very stones of those buildings that have
been consecrated to God; and, the fathers sin of Sacrilege, will prove to be
entailed on his Son and Family. And now what account can be given for the
breach of this Oath at the last great day, either by Your Majesty, or by me, if
it be wilfully, or but negligently violated, I know not?

And therefore, good Madam, let not the late Lords Exceptions against the
failings of some few Clergymen, prevail with You to punish Posterity, for the
Errors of this present Age; let particular men suffer for their particular
Errors, but let God and his Church have their right: And though I pretend not
to Prophecy, yet I beg Posterity to take notice of what is already become
visible in many Families, That Church-land added to an ancient Inheritance,
has proved like a Moth fretting a Garment, and secretly consumed both: Or like
the Eagle that stole a coal from the Altar, and thereby set her Nest on fire,
which consumed both her young Eagles, and her self that stole it. And though I
shall forbear to speak reproachfully of Your Father, yet I beg You to take
notice, that a part of the Churches Rights, added to the vast Treasure left him
by his Father, has been conceived to bring an unavoidable Consumption upon
both, notwithstanding all his diligence to preserve them.

And consider that after the violation of those Laws, to which he had sworn in
Magna Charta, God did so far deny him his restraining Grace, that as King Saul
after he was forsaken of God, fell from one sin to another; so he, till at last
he fell into greater sins than I am willing to mention. Madam Religion is the
Foundation and Cement of humane Societies: and when they that serve at Gods
Altar, shall be exposed to Poverty, then, Religion it self will be exposed to
scorn, and become contemptible, as You may already observe in too many poor
Vicaridges in this Nation. And therefore, as You are by a late Act or Acts of
Parliament entrusted with a great power to preserve or waste the Churches
Lands; yet, dispose of them for Jesus sake, as the Dono^s intended; let neither
Falsehood nor Flattery beguile You to do otherwise: but put a stop to Gods and
the Levites portion (I beseech You) and to the approaching Ruins of his
Church, as You expect comfort at the great day; for, Kings must be judged;
Pardon this affectionate plainness, my most dear Sovereign, and let me beg
still to be continued in Your favor, and the Lord still continue You in his.

The Queens patient hearing this affectionate Spe^^, and her future Care to
preserve the Churches Rights, which till then had been neglected, may appear a
fair Testimony, that he made hers and the Churches Good the chiefest of his
Cares, and that she also thought so. And of this there were such daily
testimonies given, as begot betwixt them so mutual a joy and confidence, that
they seemed born to believe and do good to each other; she not doubting his
Piety to be more than all his Opposers, which were many; nor his Prudence equal
to the chiefest of her Council, who were then as remarkable for active Wisdom,
as those dangerous Times did require, or this Nation did ever enjoy. And in
this condition he continued twenty years; in which time he saw some Flowings,
but many more Ebbings of her Favor toward all men that opposed him,
especially the Earl of Leicester: so that God seemed still to keep him in her
Favor, that he might preserve the remaining Church Lands and Immunities from
Sacrilegious Alienations. And this Good man deserved all the Honor and Power
with which she trusted him; for he was a pious man, and naturally of Noble and
Grateful Principles: he eased her of all her Church-cares by his wise Menage of
them; he gave her faithful and prudent Counsels in all the Extremities and
Dangers of her Temporal Affairs, which were many; he lived to be the Chief
Comfort of her Life in her Declining age, to be then most frequently with her,
and her Assistant at her private Devotions, to be the greatest Comfort of her
Soul upon her Deathbed, to be present at the Expiration of her last Breath,
and to behold the closing of those Eyes that had long looked upon him with
Reverence and Affection. And let this also be added, that he was the Chief
Mourner at her sad Funeral; nor let this be forgotten, that within a few hours
after her death, he was the happy Proclaimer, that King James (her peaceful
Successor) was Heir to the Crown.

Let me beg of my Reader to allow me to say a little, and but a little, more of
this good Bishop, and I shall then presently lead him back to Mr. Hooker; and,
because I would hasten, I will mention but one part of the Bishops Charity and
Humility, but this of both: He built a large Almes-house near to his own Palace
at Croyden in Surry, and endowed it with Maintenance for a Master and twenty
eight poor Men and Women; which he visited so often, that he knew their Names
and Dispositions, and was so truly humble, that he called them Brothers and
Sisters: and whenever the Queen descended to that lowlines to dine with him
at his Palace in Lambeth, (which was very often) he would usually the next day
show the like lowliness to his poor Brothers and Sisters at Croydon, and dine
with them at his Hospital; at which time, you may believe, there was Joy at the
Table. And at this place he built also a fair Free School, with a good
Accommodation and Maintenance for the Master and Scholars; Which gave just
occasion for Boyse Sisi, then Ambassador for the French King, and Resident
here, at the Bishops death to say, The Bishop had published many learned Books,
but a Freeschool to train up Youth, and an Hospital to lodge and maintain aged
and poor People, were the best Evidences of Christian Learning that a Bishop
could leave to Posterity. This good Bishop lived to see King James settled in
Peace, and then fell sick at his Palace in Lambeth; of which when the King had
notice, he went to visit him, and found him in his Bed in a declining
condition, and very weak; and after some short discourse betwixt them, the
King, at his departure assured him, He had a great Affection for him, and a
very high value for his Prudence and Virtues, and would endeavor to beg his
life of God. To which the good Bishop replied, Pro Ecclesia Dei, Pro Ecclesia
Dei: which were the last words he ever spoke; therein testifying, that as in
his Life, so at his Death, his chiefest care was of Gods Church.

This John Whitgift was made Archbishop in the year 1583. In which busy place,
he continued twenty years and some months; and in which time, you may believe,
he had many Trials of his Courage and Patience; but his Motto was, Vincit, qui
patitur.

And he made it good. Many of his many Trials were occasioned by the then
powerful Earl of Leicester, who did still (but secretly) raise and cherish a
Faction of Non-conformists to oppose him; especially one Thomas Cartwright, a
man of noted Learning, sometime Contemporary with the Bishop in Cambridge, and
of the same College, of which the Bishop had been Master; in which place there
began some Emulations (the particulars I forbear) and at last open and high
Oppositions betwixt them; and in which you may believe Mr. Cartwright was most
faulty, if his Expulsion out of the University can incline you to it.

And in this discontent after the Earls death (which was 1588) Mr. Cartwright
appeared a chief Cherisher of a Party that were for the Geneva
Church Government; and to effect it, he ran himself into many dangers both of
Liberty and Life; appearing at the last to justify himself and his Party in
many Remonstrances, which he caused to be printed, and to which the Bishop made
a first Answer, and Cartwright replied upon him; and then the Bishop having
rejoyned to his first Reply, Mr. Cartwright either was, or was persuaded to be,
satisfied: for he wrote no more, but left^ the Reader to be judge which had
maintained their Cause with most Charity and Reason. After some silence, Mr.
Cartwright received from the Bishop many personal Favors, and retired himself
to a more private Living, which was at Warwick, where he was made Master of an
Hospital, and lived quietly, and grew rich, and where the Bishop gave him a
License to Preach, upon promises not to meddle with Controversies, but incline
his Hearers to Piety and Moderation; and this Promise he kept during his Life,
which ended 1602, the Bishop surviving him but some few months: each, ending
his days in perfect Charity with the other.

And now after this long Digression made for the Information of my Reader
concerning what follows, I bring him back to venerable Mr. Hooker, where we
left him in the Temple, and where we shall find him as deeply engaged in a
Controversy with Walter Trevers, a Friend and Favorite of Mr. Cartwrights, as
the Bishop had ever been with Mr. Cartwright himself; and of which I shall
proceed to give this following account.

And first this; That though the Pens of Mr. Cartwright and the Bishop were now
at rest, yet there was sprung up a new Generation of restless men, that by
Company and Clamours became possessed of a Faith which they ought to have kept to
themselves, but could not; men that were become positive in asserting, That a
Papest cannot be saved: insomuch that about this time, at the Execution of the
Queen of Scots, the Bishop that preached her Funeral Sermon (which was Doctor
Howland, then Bishop of Peterborough) was reviled for not being positive for
her Damnation. And beside this Boldness of their becoming Gods, so far as to
set limits to his Mercies; there was not only one Martin Mar-prelate, but
other venomous Books daily printed and dispersed; Books that were so absurd and
scurrilous, that the graver Divines disdained them an Answer. And yet these
were grown into high esteem with the Common people, till Tom Nash appeared
against them all, who was a man of a sharp wit, and the Master of a scoffing
Satirical merry Pen, which he employed to discover the Absurdities of those
blind malicious senseless Pamphlets, and Sermons as senseless as they; Nash his
Answer being like his Books, which bore these Titles, An Almond for a Parrot. A
Fig for my God-son. Come crack me this Nut, and the like: so that his merry Wit
made such a discovery of their Absurdities, as (which is strange) he put a
greater stop to these malicious Pamphlets, than a much wiser man had been able.

And now the Reader is to take notice, That at the Death of Father Alvie, who
was Master of the Temple, this Walter Travers was Lecturer there for the
Evening Sermons, which he preached with great approbation, especially of the
younger Gentlemen of that Society; and for the most part approved by Mr. Hooker
himself, in the midst of their oppositions. For he continued Lecturer a part of
his time, Mr. Travers being indeed a man of a Competent Learning, of a winning
Behavior, and of a blameless Life. But he had taken Orders by the Presbytery
in Antwerp, (and with them some opinions, that could never be eradicated) and
if in any thing he was transported, it was in an extreme desire to set up that
Government in this Nation: For the promoting of which, he had a correspondence
with Theodore Beza at Geneva, and others in Scotland; and was one of the
chiefest assistants to Mr. Cartwright in that Design.

Mr. Travers had also a particular hope to set up this Government in the
Temple, and to that end used his endeavors to be Master of it, and his being
disappointed by Mr. Hookers admittance, proved some occasion of opposition
betwixt them, in their Sermons. Many of which were concerning the Doctrine, and
Ceremonies of this Church: Insomuch that, as Saint Paul withstood Saint Peter
to his face, So did they, for as one has pleasantly expressed it, The Forenoon
Sermon upake Canterbury, and the Afternoons, Geneva.

In these Sermons there was little of bitterness, but each party brought all
the Reasons he was able to prove his Adversaries Opinion erroneous. And thus it
continued a long time, till the Oppositions became so visible, and the
Consequences so dangerous, especially in that place, that the prudent
Archbishop put a stop to Mr. Travers his Preaching by a positive Prohibition:
Against which Mr. Travers Appealed and Petitioned Her Majesty's Privy Council
to have it recalled: and where he met with many assisting Friends; but they
were not able to prevail with or against the Archbishop, whom the Queen had
entrusted with all Church Power: and he had received so fair a Testimony of Mr.
Hookers Principles, and of his Learning and Moderation, that he withstood all
Solicitations. But the denying this Petition of Mr. Travers was unpleasant to
diverse of his Party; and, the Reasonableness of it became at last to be so
magnified by them and many others of that party, as never to be answered; so
that intending the Bishops and Mr. Hookers disgrace, they procured it to be
privately printed, and scattered abroad: and then Mr. Hooker was forced to
appear publicly, which he did, and Dedicated it to the Archbishop; and it
proved so full an Answer, an answer that had in it so much of clear Reason, and
writ with so much Meekness and Majesty of Style, that the Bishop began to
wonder at the Man, to rejoice that he had appeared in his Cause, and disdained
not earnestly to beg his Friendship, even a familiar Friendship, with a man of
so much quiet Learning and Humility.

To enumerate the many particular points, in which Mr. Hooker and Mr. Travers
dissented, (all or most of which, I have seen written) would prove at least
tedious; and therefore, I shall impose upon my Reader no more then two, which
shall immediately follow, and by which he may judge of the rest.

Mr. Travers excepted against Mr. Hooker, for that in one of his Sermons he
declared, That the assurance of what we believe by the Word of God, is not to
us so certain as that which we perceive by sense. And Mr. Hooker confesses he
said so; and endeavors to justify it by the Reasons following.

First, I taught, That the things which God promises in his Word are surer than
what we touch, handle, or see; but are we so sure and certain of them? if we
be, why does God so often prove his Promises to us, as he does, by Arguments
drawn from our sensible Experience? For we must be surer of the Proof than of
the things Proved; otherwise it is no Proof. For Example: How is it that many
men looking on the Moon at the same time; every one knows it to be the Moon,
as certainly as the other does: but many believing one and the same Promise,
have not all one and the same Fullness of Persuasion? For how falls it out,
that men being assured of any thing by Sense, can be no surer of it than they
are; when as the strongest in Faith that lives upon the Earth, has always
need to labor, strive and pray, that his Assurance concerning Heavenly and
Spiritual things may grow, increase, and be augmented?

The Sermon that gave him the cause of this his Justification makes the Case
more plain, by declaring that there is besides this Certainty of Evidence, a
Certainty of Adherence: in which having most excellently demonstrated what the
Certainty of Adherence is, he makes this comfortable use of it, Comfortable (he
says) as to weak Believers, who suppose themselves to be faithless, not to
believe, when notwithstanding they have their Adherence; the Holy Spirit has
his private operations, and works secretly in them, and effectually too,
though they want the inward Testimony of it.

Tell this to a man that has a mind too much dejected by a sad sense of his
sin; to one that by a too severe judging of himself, concludes that he wants
Faith, because he wants the comfortable Assurance of it; and his Answer will
be, Do not persuade me against my knowledge, against what I find and feel in
my self; I do not, I know, I do not believe. (Mr. Hookers own words follow)
Well then, to favor such men a little in their weakness, Let that be granted
which they do imagine; be it that they adhere not to Gods Promises, but are
faithless and without belief; but are they not grieved for their unbelief? they
confess they are; do they not wish it might, and also strive that it may be
otherwise? we know they do; whence comes this, but from a secret Love and
Liking that they have of those things believed? For, no man can love those
things which in his own opinion are not; and, if they think those things to be,
which they show they love when they desire to believe them; then must it be
that by desiring to believe, they prove themselves true believers; For, without
Faith no man thinks that things believed are: which argument all the
Subtilties of ^^^ernal powers will never be able to dissolve. This is an
abridgement of part of the Reasons he gives for his Justification of this his
Opinion for which he was excepted against by Mr. Travers.

Mr. Hooker was also accused by Mr. Travers^ for that he in one of his Sermons
had declared, that he doubted not but that God was merciful to many of our
forefathers living in Popish Superstition, for as much as they Sinned
ignorantly: and Mr. Hooker in his answer professes it to be his Judgment, and
declares his Reasons for this Charitable opinion to be as follows.

But first he states the question about Justification and Works, and how the
Foundation of Faith is overthrown; and then he proceeds to discover that way
which Natural men and some others have mistaken to be the way by which they
hope to attain true and everlasting happiness; and having discovered the
mistaken, he proceeds to direct to that True way, by which and no other,
everlasting life and blessedness is attainable; and, these two ways he
demonstrates thus: (they be his own words that follow) That, the way of Nature,
This, the way of Grace; the end of that way, Salvation merited, presupposing
the righteousness of men's works; their Righteousness, a Natural ability to do
them; that ability, the goodness of God which created them in such perfection.
But the end of this way, Salvation bestowed upon men as a gift: presupposing
not their righteousness, but the forgiveness of their Unrighteousness,
Justification; their Justification, not their Natural ability to do good, but
their hearty Sorrow for not doing, and unfeigned belief in him for whose sake
not doers are accepted, which is their vocation; their Vocation, the Election
of God, taking them out of the number of lost Children; their Election a
Mediator in whom to be elected; this mediation inexplicable mercy; this mercy,
supposing their misery for whom he vouchsafed to dye, and make himself a
Mediator.

And he also declares, There is no meritorious cause for our Justification but
Christ, no effectual but his Mercy; and says also, We deny the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we abuse, disanul, and annihilate the benefit of his
Passion, if by a proud imagination we believe we can merit everlasting life, or
can be worthy of it. This belief (he declares) is to destroy the very essence
of our Justification, and he makes all opinions that border upon this, to be
very dangerous. Yet nevertheless, (and for this he was accused) Considering how
many virtuous and just men, how many Saints and Martyrs have had their
dangerous opinions, amongst which this was one, that they hoped to make God
some part of amends by voluntary punishments which they laid upon themselves;
because by this or the like erroneous opinions which do by consequence
overthrow the merits of Christ, shall man be so bold as to write on their
Graves, such men are demned, there is for them no Salvation? St. Austin says,
errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo. And except we put a difference betwixt
them that err Ignorantly, and them that Obstinately persist in it, how is it
possible that any man should hope to be saved; give me a Pope or a Cardinal,
whom great afflictions have made to know himself, whose heart God has touched
with true sorrow for all his Sins, and filled with a Love of Christ and his
Gospel, whose eyes are willingly open to see the truth, and his mouth ready to
renounce all error, this one opinion of merit excepted, which he thinks God
will require at his hands, and because he wants, trembles, and is
discouraged, and yet can say, Lord cleanse me from all my secret sins, shall I
think because of this or a like error such men touch not so much as the Hem of
Christ's Garment; if they do, wherefore should I doubt but that virtue may
proceed from Christ to save them? no, I will not be afraid to say to such a
one, you err in your opinion, but be of good comfort, you have to do with a
merciful God who will make the best of that little which you hold well and not
with a captious Sophister, who gathers the worst out of every thing in which
you are mistaken.

But it will be said, The admittance of Merit in any degree, overthrows the
foundation, excludes from the hope of mercy, from all possibility of
Salvation. ( And now Mr. Hookers own words follow.)

What though they hold the truth sincerely in all other parts of Christian
Faith; although they have in some measure all the Virtues and Graces of the
Spirit? although they have all other tokens of Gods Children in them; although
they be far from having any proud opinion that they shall be saved by the
worthiness of their deeds; although the only thing that troubles and
molesteth them be a little too much dejection, somewhat too great a fear
arising from an erroneous conceit, that God will require a worthiness in them,
which they are grieved to find wanting in themselves? although they be not
obstinate in this opinion? although they be willing and would be glad to
forsake it, if any one reason were brought sufficient to disprove it? although
the only cause why they do not forsake it ere they dye, be their Ignorance of
that means by which it might be disproved? although the cause why the Ignorance
in this point is not removed, be the want of knowledge in such as should be
able, and are not to remove it; Let me dye (says Mr. Hooker) if it be ever
proved, that simply an Error does exclude a Pope or Cardinal in such a case
utterly from hope of life. Surely I must confess, that if it be an Error to
think that God may be merciful to save men even when they err; my greatest
comfort is my error: were it not for the love I bear to this error, I would
never wish to speak or to live.

I was willing to take notice of these two points, as supposing them to be very
material; and that as they are thus contracted, they may prove useful to my
Reader; as also for that the answers be arguments of Mr. Hookers great and
clear reason, and equal Charity. Other exceptions were also made against him,
as, That he prayed before and not after his Sermons; that in his Prayers he
named Bishops; that he kneeled both when he prayed and when he received the
Sacrament, and (says Mr. Hooker in his defense) other exceptions so like
these, as but to name, I should have thought a greater fault then to commit
them.

And it is not unworthy the noting, that in the manage of so great a
controversy, a sharper reproof than this, and one like it, did never fall from
the happy pen of this Humble man. That like it was upon a like occasion of
exceptions, to which his answer was, Your next argument consists of railing and
of reasons; to your Railing, I say nothing, to your Reasons, I say what
follows. And I am glad of this fair occasion, to testify the Dove-like temper
of this meek, this matchless man; and doubtless if Almighty God had blessed the
Dissenters from the Ceremonies and Discipline of this Church, with a like
measure of Wisdom and Humility, instead of their pertinacious zeal, then
Obedience and Truth had kissed each other; then Peace and Piety had flourished
in our Nation, and this Church and state had been blessed like Jerusalem that is
at unity with it self; But this can never be expected, till God shall bless the
common people with a belief that Schism is a Sin, and That there may be
offenses taken which are not given, and, That Laws are not made for private men
to dispute, but to Obey.

And this also may be worthy of noting, That these Exceptions of Mr. Travers
against Mr. Hooker, were the cause of his Transcribing several of his Sermons,
which we now see printed with his Books; of his Answer to Mr. Travers, his
Supplication, and of his most learned and useful discourse of Justification of
Faith and Works; and by their Transcription they fell into the hands of others,
and have been thereby preserved from being lost, as too many of his other
matchless writings were, and from these I have gathered many observations in
this Discourse of his Life.

After the publication of his Answer to the Petiton of Mr. Travers, Mr. Hooker
grew daily into greater repute with the most learned and wise of the Nation;
but it had a contrary effect in very many of the Temple that were zealous for
Mr. Travers and for his Church Discipline: insomuch that though Mr. Travers
left the place, yet the seeds of Discontent could not be rooted out of that
Society, by the great Reason, and as great Meekness of this humble man: for
though the chief Benchers gave him much Reverence and Encouragement, yet he
there met with many neglects and oppositions by those of Master Travers
Judgment; in so much that it turned to his extreme grief and that he might
unbeguile and win them, he designed to write a deliberate sober Treatise of the
Churches power to make Canons for the use of Ceremonies, and by Law to impose
an obedience to them, as upon her Children; and this he proposed to do in eight
Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity; intending therein to show such
Arguments as should force an assent from all men, if Reason, delivered in sweet
Language and void of any provocation, were able to do it; And that he might
prevent all prejudice, he wrote before it a large Preface or Epistle to the
Dissenting Brethren, wherein there were such Bowels of Love, and such a
Commixture of that Love with Reason, as was never exceeded but in Holy Writ,
and particularly by that of St. Paul to his dear Brother and fellow Labourer
Philemon, than which none ever was more like this Epistle of Mr. Hookers; so
that his dear friend and Companion in his Studies Doctor Spenser might after
his death justly say, What admirable height of Learning and depth of Judgment
dwelt in the lowly mind of this truly humble man, great in all wise men's eyes
except his own; with what gravity and Majesty of speech his Tongue and Pen
uttered Heavenly Mysteries; whose eyes in the Humility of his Heart were
always cast down to the ground; how all things that proceeded from him were
breathed as from the Spirit of Love, as if he, like the Bird of the Holy Ghost,
the Dove, had wanted Gall, let those that knew him not in his Person, judge by
these living Images of his soul, his Writings.

The foundation of these Books was laid in the Temple; but he found it no fit
place to finish what he had there designed; and therefore solicited the
Archbishop for a remove, to whom he spoke to this purpose, My Lord, When I
lost the freedom of my Cell, which was my College, yet I found some degree of
it in my quiet Country Parsonage: but I am weary of the noise and oppositions
of this place; and indeed, God and Nature did not intend me for Contentions,
but for Study and quietness: My Lord, My particular contests with Mr. Travers
here, have proved the more unpleasant to me, because I believe him a good man,
and that belief has occasioned me to examine mine own Conscience concerning
his opinions, and to satisfy that, I have consulted the Scripture, and other
laws both humane and divine, whether the Conscience of him and others of his
judgment ought to be so far complied with as to alter our frame of Church
Government, our manner of Gods worship, our praising and praying to him, and
our established Ceremonies as often as their tender Consciences shall require
us, and in this examination, I have not only satisfied my self, but have begun
a treatise, in which I intend the Justification of our Laws of
Church Government, and I shall never be able to finish it, but where I may
Study, and pray for Gods blessing upon my endeavors, and keep my self in Peace
and Privacy, and behold Gods blessing spring out of my Mother Earth, and eat my
own bread without oppositions; and therefore if your Grace can Judge me worthy
such a favonr, let me beg it, that I may perfect what I have begun.

About this time the Parsonage or Rectory of Boscum, in the Diocese of Sarum,
and six miles from that City, became void. The Bishop of Sarum is Patron of it,
but in the vacancy of that See (which was three years betwixt the Translation
of Bishop Pierce to the Sea of York, and Bishop Caldwells admission into it)
the disposal of that and all Benefices belonging to that See, during this said
vacancy, came to be disposed of by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and he
presented Richard Hooker to it, in the year 1591. And Richard Hooker was also
in the said year Instituted, July 17. to be a minor Prebend of Salisbury, the
Corpse to it being Nether-Havin, about ten miles from that City, which Prebend
was of no great value, but intended chiefly to make him capable of a better
preferment in that Church. In this Boscum he continued till he had finished
four of his eight proposed Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, and
these were entered into the register Book in Stationers Hall, the 9. of March
1592. but not published till the year 1594. and then with the beforementioned
large and affectionate Preface, which he directs to them that seek (as they
term it) the Reformation of the laws and orders Ecclesiastical in the Church of
England; of which Books I shall yet say nothing more, but that he continued his
laborious diligence to finish the remaining four during his life (of all which
more properly hereafter) but at Boscum he finished and published but only the
first four; being then in the 39 th year of his Age.

He left Boscum in the year 1595. by a surrender of it into the hands of Bishop
Caldwell, and he presented Benjamin Russel, who was Instituted into it the 23.
of June in the same year.

The Parsonage of Bishops Borne in Kent, three miles from Canterbury, is in
that Archbishops gift, but in the latter end of the year 1594. Doctor William
Redman the Rector of it was made Bishop of Norwich, by which means the power of
presenting to it was pro ea vice in the Queen; and she presented Richard
Hooker, whom she loved well, to this good living of Borne the 7. of July 1595.
in which living he continued till his Death, without any addition of Dignity or
Profit.

And now having brought our Richard Hooker, from his Birth place to this where
he found a Grave, I shall only give some account of his Books, and of his
behavior in this Parsonage of Borne, and then give a rest both to my self and
my Reader.

His first four Books and large Epistle have been declared to be printed at his
being at Boscum, Anno 1594. Next I am to tell that at the end of these four
Books there is printed this Advertisement to the Reader. I have for some causes
thought it at this time more fit to let go these first four Books by
themselves, than to stay both them and the rest, till the whole might together
be published. Such generalities of the cause in question as are here handled,
it will be perhaps not amiss to consider apart, by way of Introduction unto the
Books that are to follow concerning particulars, in the mean time the Reader is
requested to mend the Printers errors, as noted underneath.

And I am next to declare that his fifth Book (which is larger than his first
four) was first also printed by it self Anno 1597. and dedicated to his Patron
(for till then he chose none) the Archbishop. These Books were read with an
admiration of their excellency in This, and their just fame spread it self into
foraign Nations. And I have been told more than forty years past, that either
Cardinal Allen, or learned Doctor Stapleton (both English men, and in Italy
about the time when Hookers four Books were first printed: meeting with this
general fame of them, were desirous to read an Author that both the Reformed
and the learned of their own Church did so much magnify, and therefore caused
them to be sent for; and after reading them, boasted to the Pope (which then
was Clement the eighth) that though he had lately said he never met with an
English Book whose Writer deserved the name of Author; yet there now appeared a
wonder to them, and it would be so to his Holiness, if it were in Latin, for a
poor obscure English Priest had writ four such Books of Laws, and Church
Polity, and in a Style that expressed so Grave and such Humble Majesty with clear
demonstration of Reason, that in all their readings they had not met with any
that exceeded him; and this begot in the Pope an earnest desire that Doctor
Stapleton should bring the said four Books, and looking on the English read a
part of them to him in Latin, which Doctor Stapleton did, to the end of the
first Book; at the conclusion of which, the Pope spoke to this purpose; There
is no Learning that this man has not searched into, nothing too hard for his
understanding: this man indeed deserves the name of an Author; his books will
get reverence by Age, for there is in them such seeds of Eternity, that if the
rest be like this, they shall last till the last fire shall consume all
Learning.

Nor was this high, the only testimony and commendations given to his Books;
for at the first coming of king James into this Kingdom, he inquired of the
Archbishop Whitgift for his friend Mr. Hooker that writ the Books of Church
Polity; to which the answer was, that he dyed a year before Queen Elizabeth,
who received the sad news of his Death with very much Sorrow; to which the King
replied, and I receive it with no less, that I shall want the desired happiness
of seeing and discoursing with that man, from whose Books I have received such
satisfaction: Indeed, my Lord, I have received more satisfaction in reading a
leaf, or paragragh in Mr. Hooker, though it were but about the fashion of
Churches, or Church music, or the like, but especially of the Sacraments, than
I have had in the reading particular large Treatises written but of one of
those Subjects by others, though very learned men; and, I observe there is in
Mr. Hooker no affected language, but a grave, comprehensive, clear
manifestation of Reason, and that backed with the Authority of the Scripture,
the Fathers and Schoolmen and with all Law both Sacred and Civil. And though
many others write well, yet in the next age they will be forgotten; but
doubtless there is in every page of Mr. Hookers Book the picture of a Divine
Soul, such Pictures of Truth and Reason, and drawn in so sacred Colors, that
they shall never fade, but give an immortal memory to the Author. And it is so
truly true, that the King thought what he spoke, that as the most learned of
the Nation have and still do mention Mr.Hooker with reverence, so he also did
never mention him but with the Epithet of Learned, or Judicious, or Reverend,
or Venerable Mr. Hooker.

Nor did his Son, our late King Charles the First, ever mention him but with
the same reverence, enjoining his Son, our now gracious King, to be studious in
Mr. Hookers Books. And our learned Antiquary Mr. Cambden In his ^ ^nnals ^199.
mentioning the death, the modesty, and other virtues of Mr. Hooker, and
magnifying his Books, wished, That for the honor of this, and benefit of other
Nations, they were turned into the Universal Language. Which work, though
undertaken by many, yet they have been weary, and forsaken it; but the Reader
may now expect it, having been long since begun, and lately finished, by the
happy Pen of Dr. Earl, late Lord Bishop of Salisbury, of whom I may justly say
(and let it not offend him, because it is such a truth as ought not to be
concealed from Posterity, or those that now live, and yet know him not) that
since Mr. Hooker dyed, none have lived whom God has blessed with more innocent
Wisdom, more sanctified Learning, or a mo^e pious^ peaceable, primitive temper:
so that this excellent person seems to be only like himself, and our veerbale
Rich. Hooker; and only fit to make the learned of all Nations happy, in knowing
what has been too long confined to the language of our little Island.

There might be many more and just occasions taken to speak of his Books, which
none ever did, or can commend too much, but I decline them, and hasten to an
account of his Christian behavior and death at Borne, in which place he
continued his customary Rules of Mortification and Self-denial; was much in
Fasting, frequent in Meditation and Prayers, enjoying those blessed returns,
which only men of strict lives feel and know, and of which men of loose and
godless lives, cannot be made sensible, for spiritual things are spiritually
discerned.

At his entrance into this place, his friendship was much sought for by Dr.
Hadrian Saravia, then or about that time made one of the Prebends of
Canterbury, a German by Birth, and sometimes a Pastor both in Flanders and
Holland, where he had studied and well considered the controverted points
concerning Episcopacy and Sacrilege; and, in England had a just occasion to
declare his judgment concerning both, unto his Brethren Ministers of the Low
Countries, which was excepted against by Theodor Beza, and others; against
whose exceptions, he rejoyned, and thereby became the happy Author of many
learned Tracts, writ in Latin, especially of three; one, of the Degrees of
Ministers, and of the Bishops superiority above the Presbytery; a second
against Sacrilege; and, a third of Christian Obedience to Princes; the last
being occasioned by Gretzerus the Jesuit. And it is observable, that when in a
time of Churchtumults, Beza gave his reasons to the Chancellor of Scotland for
the abrogation of Episcopacy in that Nation, partly by Letters, and more fully
in a Treatise of a threefold Episcopacy (which he calls Divine, Humane, and
Satanical) this Dr. Saravia had by the help of Bishop Whitgift made such an
early discovery of their intentions, that he had almost as soon answered that
Treatise as it became public; and therein discovered how Beza's opinion did
contradict that of Calvin's, and his adherents, leaving them to interfere with
themselves in point of Episcopacy; but of these Tracts it will not concern me
to say more, than that they were most of them dedicated to his and the Church
of Englands watchful Patron John Whitgift the Archbishop, and printed about the
time in which Mr. Hooker also appeared first to the World in the publication of
his first four Books of Ecclesiastical Polity.

This friendship being sought for by this learned Doctor, you may believe was
not denied by Mr. Hooker, who was by fortune so like him, as to be engaged
against Mr. Travers, Mr. Cartwright, and others of their judgment, in a
Controversy too like Dr. Saravia's; so that in this year of 1595, and in this
place of Borne, these two excellent persons began a holy friendship, increasing
daily to so high and mutual affections, that their two wills seemed to be but
one and the same, and their designs both for the glory of God, and peace of the
Church, still assisting and improving each others virtues, and the desired
comforts of a peaceable piety which I have willingly mentioned, because it
gives a foundation to some things that follow.

This Parsonage of Borne is from Canterbury three miles, and near to the common
Road that leads from that City to Dover, in which Parsonage Mr. Hooker had not
been Twelve months, but his Books, and the innocence and sanctity of his life
became so remarkable, that many turned out of the Road, and others (Scholars
especially) went purposely to see the man, whose life and learning were so much
admired; and alas, as our Savior said of St. John Baptist, What went they out
to see, a man clothed in purple and fine linen? no indeed, but an obscure,
harmless man, a man in poor Clothes, his Loins usually girt in a course Gown,
or Canonical Coat; of a mean stature, and stooping, and yet more lowly in the
thoughts of his Soul; his Body worn out, not with Age, but Study, and Holy
Mortifications; his Face full of Heat-pimples, begot by his unactivity and
sedentary life. And to this true character of his person, let me add this of
his disposition and behavior; God and Nature blessed with so blessed a
bashfulness, that as in his younger days his Pupils might easily look him out
of countenance; so neither then, nor in his age, did he ever willingly look any
man in the face; and was of so mild and humble a nature, that his poor Parish
Clerk and he did never talk but with both their Hats on, or both off at the
same time: And to this may be added, that though he was not purblind, yet he
was short or weak-sighted; and where he fixed his eyes at the beginning of his
Sermon, there they continued till it was ended; and the Reader has a liberty to
believe that his modesty and dim-sight, were some of the reasons why he trusted
Mrs. Churchman to choose his Wife.

This Parish-Clerk lived till the third or fourth year of the late Long
Parliament, betwixt which time and Mr. Hookers death, there had come many to
see the place of his Burial, and the Monument dedicated to his memory by Sir
William Cooper (who still lives) and the poor Clerk had many rewards for
showing Mr. Hookers Grave-place, and his said Monument, and did always hear
Mr. Hooker mentioned with commendations and reverence, to all which he added
his own knowledge and observations of his humility and holiness; and in all
which Discourses, the poor man was still more confirmed in his opinion of Mr.
Hookers virtues and learning; but it so fell out, that about the said third or
fourth year of the Long Parliament, the then present Parson of Borne was
Sequestered (you may guess why) and a Genevian Minister put into his good
Living; this, and other like Sequestrations, made the Clerk express himself in
a wonder, and say, They had Sequestered so many good men, that he doubted if his
good Master Mr. Hooker had lived till now, they would have Sequestered him too.

It was not long, before this intruding Minister had made a Party in and about
the said Parish, that were desirous to receive the Sacrament as in Geneva; to
which end, the day was appointed for a select Company, and Forms and Stools set
about the Altar or Communion Table, for them to sit and eat, and drink; but
when they went about this work, there was a want of some Joint-stools, which
the Minister sent the Clerk to fetch, and then to fetch Cushions; when the
Clerk saw them begin to sit down, he began to wonder, but the Minister bad him
cease wondering, and lock the Church-door; to whom he replied, Pray take you
the Keys, and lock me out, I will never come more into this Church; for all
men will say, my Master Hooker was a good Man, and a good Scholar, and I am
sure it was not used to be thus in his days: And the report says, the old man
went presently home, and dyed; I do not say dyed immediately, but within a few
days after.

But let us leave this grateful Clerk in his quiet Grave, and return to Mr.
Hooker himself, continuing our observations of his Christian behavior in this
place, where he gave a holy Valediction to all the pleasures and allurements of
Earth, possessing his Soul in a virtuous quietness, which he maintained by
constant Study, Prayers, and Meditations; his use was to preach once every
Sunday, and he or his Curate to Catechize after the second Lesson in the
Evening Prayer; his Sermons were neither long nor earnest, but uttered with a
grave zeal, and an humble voice; his eyes always fixed on one place to prevent
his imagination from wandering, insomuch, that he seemed to study as he spoke;
the design of his Sermons (as indeed of all his Discourses) was to show Reasons
for what he spoke; and with these Reasons, such a kind of Rhetoric, as did
rather convince and persuade, than frighten men into piety; studying not so
much for matter (which he never wanted) as for apt illustrations to inform and
teach his unlearned Hearers by familiar Examples, and then make them better by
convincing Applications; never laboring by hard words, and then by needless
distinctions and sub-distinctions, to amuse his Hearers, and get glory to
himself; but glory only to God. Which intention, he would often say, was as
discernable in a Preacher, as an Artificial, from a Natural beauty.

He never failed the Sunday before every Ember-week, to give notice of it to
his Parishioners, persuading them both to fast, and then to double their
devotions for a learned and pious Clergy, but especially the last, saying
often, That the life of a pious Clergyman was visible Rhetoric, and so
Convincing, that the most Godless men, (though they would not deny themselves
the enjoyment of their present lusts) did yet secretly wish themselves like
those of the strictest lives: And to what he persuaded others, he added his own
example of Fasting and Prayer; and did usually every Ember-week, take from the
Parish-Clerk the Key of the Church-door; into which place he retired every day,
and locked himself up for many hours; and did the like most Frydayes, and other
days of Fasting.

He would by no means omit the customary time of Procession, persuading all
both rich and poor, if they desired the preservation of Love, and their Parish
Rights and Liberties to accompany him in his Perambulation, and most did so; in
which Perambulation, he would usually express more pleasant Discourse than at
other times, and would then always drop some loving and facetious observations
to be remembered against the next year, especially by the boys and young
people; still inclining them and all his present Parishioners, to meekness, and
mutual kindnesses, and love; because Love thinks not evil, but covers a
multitude of Infirmities.

He was diligent to inquire who of his Parish were sick, or any ways distressed,
and would often visit them, unsent for; supposing, that the fittest time to
discover those Errors to which health and prosperity had blinded them; and
having by pious reasons and prayers, molded them into holy resolutions for the
time to come, he would incline them to confession, and bewailing their sins,
with purpose to forsake them, and then to receive the Communion, both as a
strengthening of those holy resolutions, and as a seal betwixt God and them of
his Mercies to their Souls, in case that present sickness did put a period to
their lives.

And as he was thus watchful and charitable to the sick, so he was as diligent
to prevent Law-sutes, still urging his Parishioners and Neighbors, to bear
with each others infirmities, and live in love, because (as St. John says) he
that lives in love, lives in God, for God is love. And to maintain this holy
fire of love constantly burning on the Altar of a pure heart, his advice was to
watch and pray, and always keep themselves fit to receive the Communion; and
then to receive it often, for it was both a confirming and a strengthening of
their graces; this was his advice: And at his entrance or departure out of any
house, he would usually speak to the whole Family, and bless them by name;
insomuch, that as he seemed in his youth to be taught of God, so he seemed in
this place to teach his precepts, as Enoch did by walking with him, in all
holiness and humility, making each day a step toward a blessed Eternity. And
though in this weak and declining Age of the World, such Examples are become
barren, and almost incredible, yet let his memory be blessed with this true
Recordation, because he that praises Richard Hooker, praises God, who has
given such gifts to men; and let this humble and affectionate Relation of him,
become such a pattern, as may invite Posterity to imitate his virtues.

This was his constant behavior at Borne, so he walked with God; thus he did
tread in the footsteps of primitive piety; and yet, as that great example of
meekness and purity, even our blessed Jesus was not free from false
accusations, no more was this Disciple of his, this most humble, most innocent
holy man; his was a slander parallel to that of chaste Susannah's by the wicked
Elders, or that against St. Athanasius, as it is recorded in his life, for that
holy man had heretical enemies, and which this Age calls Trepanning; the
particulars need not a repetition; and that it was false, needs no other
Testimony than the public punishment of his Accusers, and their open
confession of his Innocence; 'twas said that the accusation was contrived by a
dissenting Brother, one that endured not Church-Ceremonies, hating him for his
Books sake, which he was not able to answer; and his name has been told me,
but I have not so much confidence in the relation, as to make my Pen fix a
scandal on him to posterity; I shall rather leave it doubtful till the great
day of Revelation: But this is certain, that he lay under the great charge, and
the anxiety of this accusation, and kept it secret to himself for many months;
and being a helpless man, had lain long under this heavy burden, but that the
protector of the innocent gave such an accidental occasion as forced him to
make it known to his two dearest friends, Edwyn Sandys, and George Cranmer, who
were so sensible of their Tutors sufferings, that they gave themselves no rest,
till by their disquisitions and diligence they had found out the fraud, and
brought him the welcome News, that his Accusers did confess they had wronged
him, and begged his pardon: To which, the good man's reply was to this purpose,
The Lord forgive them, and the Lord bless you for this comfortable News: Now I
have a just occasion to say with Solomon, Friends are born for the days of
adversity, and such you have proved to me; and to my God I say, as did the
mother of St. John Baptist, Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the day
wherein he looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men: And, oh my God,
neither my life, nor my reputation are safe in mine own keeping, but in thine,
who did take care of me, when I yet hanged upon my mothers breast; blessed
are they, that put their trust in thee O Lord; for when false Witnesses were
risen up against me, when shame was ready to cover my face, when I was bowed
down with an horrible dread, and went mourning all the day long, when my nights
were restless, and my sleeps broken with a fear worse than death, when my Soul
thirsted for a deliverance, as the Heart pants after the rivers of waters,
then thou Lord did hear my complaints, pity my condition, and art now become
my deliverer; and as long as I live I will hold up my hands in this manner, and
magnify thy mercies, who did not give me over as a prey to mine enemies. Oh
blessed are they that put their trust in thee; and no prosperity shall make me
forget those days of sorrows, or to perform those vows that I have made to
thee in the days of my affliction; for with such Sacrifices, thou, O God, art
well pleased, and I will pay them.

Thus did the joy and gratitude of this good man's heart break forth; and it is
observable, that as the invitation to this slander was his meek behavior and
Dove-like simplicity, for which he was remarkable; so his Christian charity
ought to be imitated: for, though the spirit of revenge is so pleasing to
Mankind, that it is never conquered but by a supernatural grace, being indeed
so deeply rooted in humane Nature, that to prevent the excesses of it (for men
would not know Moderation) Almighty God allows not any degree of it to any man,
but says, Vengeance is mine. And, though this be said by God himself, yet this
revenge is so pleasing, that man is hardly persuaded to submit the menage of it
to the Time, and Justice, and Wisdom of his Creator, but would hasten to be his
own Executioner of it. And yet nevertheless, if any man ever did wholly
decline, and leave this pleasing passion to the time and measure of God alone,
it was this Richard Hooker of whom I write; for when his Slanderers were to
suffer, he labored to procure their pardon; and when that was denied him, his
Reply was, That however he would fast and pray, that God would give them
repentance, and patience to undergo their punishment. And his prayers were so
far returned into his own bosom, that the first was granted, if we may believe
a penitent behavior, and an open confession. And it is observable, that after
this time he would often say to Dr. Saravia, Oh with what quietness did I enjoy
my Soul after I was free from the fears of my Slander! and how much more after
a conflict and victory over my desires of Revenge!

About the Year 1600, and of his Age 46, he fell into a long and sharp
sickness, occasioned by a cold taken in his passage betwixt London and
Gravesend, from the malignity of which he was never recovered; for, till his
death he was not free from thoughtful Days, and restless Nights; but a
submission to his Will that makes the sick man's Bed easy by giving rest to his
Soul, made his very languishment comfortable: and yet all this time he was
sollicitous in his Study, and said often to Dr. Saravia (who saw him daily, and
was the chief comfort of his life) That he did not beg a long life of God, for
any other reason, but to live to finish his three remaining Books of POLITY;
and then, Lord, let thy servant depart in peace, which was his usual
expression. And God heard his prayers, though he denied the Church the benefit
of them, as completed by himself; and it is thought he hastened his own death,
by hastening to give life to his Books: But this is certain, that the nearer he
was to his death, the more he grew in Humility, in Holy Thoughts and
Resolutions.

About a month before his death, this good man, that never knew, or at least
never considered the pleasures of the Palate, became first to lose his
appetite, then to have an aversness to all food; insomuch, that he seemed to
live some intermitted weeks by the smell of meat only, and yet still studied
and writ. And now his guardian Angel seemed to foretell him, that the day of
his dissolution drew near, for which his vigorous Soul appeared to thirst. In
this time of his Sickness, and not many days before his Death, his House was
robbed; of which he having notice, his Question was, Are my Books and written
Papers safe? And being answered, That they were; his Reply was, then it matters
not, for no other loss can trouble me.

About one day before his Death, Dr. Saravia, who knew the very secrets of his
Soul, (for they were supposed to be Confessors to each other) came to him, and
after a Conference of the Benefit, the Necessity, and Safety of the Churches
Absolution, it was resolved the Doctor should give him both that and the
Sacrament the day following. To which end, the Doctor came, and after a short
retirement and privacy, they returned to the company, and then the Doctor gave
him, and some of those friends which were with him, the blessed Sacrament of
the body and blood of our Jesus. Which being performed, the Doctor thought he
saw a reverend gaity and joy in his face; but it lasted not long, for his
bodily Infirmities did return suddenly, and became more visible, in so much
that the Doctor apprehended Death ready to seize him; yet, after some
amendment, left him at Night, with a promise to return early the day following,
which he did, and then found him in better appearance, deep in Contemplation,
and not inclinable to Discourse; which gave the Doctor occasion to require his
present Thoughts: to which he replied, That he was meditating the number and
nature of Angels, and their blessed obedience and order, without which, peace
could not be in Heaven; and oh that it might be so on Earth. After which words
he said, I have lived to see this world is made up of perturbations, and I have
been long preparing to leave it, and gathering comfort for the dreadful hour of
making my account with God, which I now apprehend to be near; and though I have
by his grace loved him in my youth, and feared him in mine age, and labored to
have a conscience void of offense to him, and to all men; yet, if thou, O Lord,
be extreme to mark what I have done amiss, who can abide it? and therefore,
where I have failed, Lord show mercy to me, for I plead not my righteousness,
but, the forgiveness of my unrighteousness, for his merits who dyed to purchase
pardon for penitent sinners; and since I owe thee a death, Lord let it not be
terrible, and then take thine own time, I submit to it; let not mine, O Lord,
but let thy Will be done; with which expression he fell into a dangerous
slumber, dangerous as to his recovery; yet recover he did, but it was to speak
only these few words, Good Doctor, God has heard my daily petitions, for I am
at peace with all men, and he is at peace with me; and from that blessed
assurance I feel that inward joy, which this world can neither give nor take
from me^ More he would have spoken, but his spirits failed him; and, after a
short conflict betwixt Nature and Death, a quiet Sigh put a period to his last
breath, and so he fell asleep.

And here I draw his Curtain, till with the most glorious company of the
Patriarchs and Apostles, the most Noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, this
most learned, most humble, holy man, shall also awake to receive an eternal
Tranquillity, and with it a greater degree of Glory than common Christians
shall be made partakers of.

In the mean time, bless O Lord! Lord bless his Brethren, the Clergy of this
Nation, with effectual endeavors to attain, if not to his great learning, yet
to his remarkable meekness, his godly simplicity, and his Christian moderation;
for, these bring peace at the last: And, Lord! let his most excellent Writings
be blessed with what he designed, when he undertook them: which was, Glory to
Thee O God on High, Peace in thy Church, and, Good Will to Mankind. Amen, Amen.

This following Epitaph was long since presented to the World, in memory of Mr.
Hooker, by Sir William Cooper, who also built him a fair Monument in Borne
Church, and acknowledges him to have been his Spiritual Father.

THough nothing can be spoke worthy his fame,
Or the remembrance of that precious name,
Judicious Hooker; though this cost be spent
On him, that has a lasting Monument
In his own Books, yet ought we to express,
If not his Worth, yet our Respectfulness.
Church-Ceremonies he maintained, then why
Without all Ceremony should be dye?
Was it because his Life and Death should be
Both equal patterns of Humility?
Or that perhaps this only glorious one
Was above all to ask, why had he none?
Yet he that lay so long obscurely low,
Does now preferred to greater Honors go.
Ambitious men, learn hence to be more wise,
Humility is the true way to rise:
And God in me this Lesson did inspire,
To bid this humble man, Friend sit up higher.
AN APPENDIX To the LIFE of Mr. RICH. HOOKER.
ANd now having by a long and laborious search satisfied my self, and I hope my
Reader, by imparting to him the true Relation of Mr. Hookers Life: I am
desirous also to acquaint him with some observations that relate to it, and
which could not properly fall to be spoken till after his death, of which my
Reader may expect a brief and true account in the following Appendix.

And first it is not to be doubted, but that he dyed in the Forty-seventh, if
not in the Forty-sixth year of his Age; which I mention, because many have
believed him to be more aged; but I have so examined it, as to be confident I
mistake not; and for the year of his death, Mr. Cambden, who in his Annals of
Queen Elizabeth 1599. mentions him with a high commendation of his life and
learning, declares him to dye in the year 1599. and yet in that Inscription of
his Monument set up at the charge of Sir William Cooper in Borne Church, where
Mr. Hooker was buried, his death is said to be in Anno 1603. but doubtless both
mistaken; for I have it attested under the hand of William Somner the
Archbishops Register for the Province of Canterbury, that Richard Hookers Will
bears date October. 26. in Anno 1600. and that it was proved the third of
December following. Sin(...)this Appendix to the Life of Mr. Hooker, Mr. Fulman
o(...) Christi College, has showed me a good Authority for the very(...) and
hour of Mr. Hookers death, in one of his Books of Politi^^ which was Archbishop
Lauds. In which Book, beside many considerable Marginal Notes of some passages
of his time, under the Bishops own hand, there is also written in the Title
page of that Book (which now is Mr. Fulmans) this Attestation:

Richardus Hooker vir summis Doctrinae dutibus ornatus de Ecclesia praecipue
Anglicana optime meritus, obiit November. 2. circite^ horam secundam post
neridianam. Anno 1600.




And that at his death he left four Daughters, Alice, Cicily, Jane and
Margaret, that he gave to each of them an hundred pound; that he left Jone his
Wife his sole Executrix, and that by his Inventory, his Estate (a great part of
it being in Books) came to 1092 l. 9 s. 2 d. which was much more than he
thought himself worth; and, which was not got by his care, much less by the
good huswifery of his Wife, but saved by his trusty servant Thomas Lane, that
was wiser than his Master in getting money for him, and more frugal than his
Mistress in keeping of it; of which Will I shall say no more, but that his dear
friend Thomas, the father of George Cranmer, of whom I have spoken, and shall
have occasion to say more, was one of the witnesses to it.

One of his elder Daughters was married to one Chalinor, sometime a
Schoolmaster in Chichester, and both dead long since, Margaret his youngest
Daughter was married unto Ezekiel Chark, Bachelor in Divinity, and Rector of
St. Nicholas in Harble down near Canterbury, who dyed about 16 years past, and
had a son Ezekiel, now living, and in Sacred Orders, being at this time Rector
of Waldron in Sussex; she left also a Daughter, with both whom I have spoken
not many months past, and find her to be a Widow in a condition that wants not,
but far from abounding; and these two attested unto me, that Richard Hooker
their Grandfather had a Sister, by name Elizabeth Harvey, that lived to the Age
of 121 Years, and dyed in the month of September, 1663.

For his other two Daughters I can learn little certainty, but have heard they
both dyed before they were marriageable; and for his Wife, she was so unlike
Jeptha's Daughter, that she staid not a comely time to bewail her Widdow-hood;
nor lived long enough to repent her second Marriage, for which doubtless she
would have found cause, if there had been but four months betwixt Mr. Hookers
and her death: But she is dead, and let her other infirmities be buried with
her.

Thus much briefly for his Age, the Year of his Death, his Estate, his Wife,
and his Children. I am next to speak of his Books, concerning which, I shall
have a necessity of being longer, or shall neither do right to my self, or my
Reader, which is chiefly intended in this Appendix.

I have declared in his Life, that he proposed eight Books, and that his first
four were printed Anno 1594. and his fifth Book first printed, and alone, Anno
1597. and that he lived to finish the remaining three of the proposed eight,
but whether we have the last three as finished by himself, is a just and
material Question; concerning which I do declare, that I have been told almost
40 Years past, by one that very well knew Mr. Hooker, and the affairs of his
Family, that about a month after the death of Mr. Hooker, Bishop Whitgift, then
Archbishop of Canterbury, sent one of his Chaplains to enquire of Mrs. Hooker,
for the three remaining Books of Polity, writ by her Husband, of which she
would not, or could not give any account; and that about three months after,
the Bishop procured her to be sent for to London, and then by his procurement
she was to be examined, by some of Her Majesty's Council, concerning the
disposal of those Books, but by way of preparation for the next days
examination, the Bishop invited her to Lambeth, and, after some friendly
questions, she confessed to him, That one Mr. Charke, and another Minister that
dwelt near Canterbury, came to her, and desired that they might go into her
Husbands Study, and look upon some of his Writings; and that there they two
burnt and tore many of them, assuring her, that they were Writings not fit to
be seen, and that she knew nothing more concerning them. Her lodging was then
in King Street in Westminster, where she was found next morning dead in her
Bed, and her new Husband suspected and questioned for it, but declared innocent
of her death.

And I declare also, that Dr. John Spencer (mentioned in the life of Mr.
Hooker) who was of Mr. Hookers College, and of his time there, and betwixt
whom there was so friendly a friendship, that they continually advised together
in all their Studies, and particularly in what concerned these Books of Polity:
This Dr. Spencer, the three perfect Books being lost, had delivered into his
hands (I think by Bishop Whitgift) the imperfect Books, or first rough draughts
of them, to be made as perfect as they might be, by him, who both knew Mr.
Hookers hand writing, and was best acquainted with his intentions. And a fair
Testimony of this may appear by an Epistle first and usually printed before Mr.
Hookers five Books (but omitted, I know not why, in the last impression of the
eight printed together in Anno 1662. in which the Publishers seem to impose the
three doubtful, as the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker) with these two Letters J.
S. at the end of the said Epistle, which was meant for this John spencer, in
which Epistle the Reader may find these words, which may give some Authority to
what I have here written.

And though Mr. Hooker hastened his own death by hastening to give life to his
Books, yet he held out with his eyes to behold these Benjamins, these sons of
his right hand, though to him they proved Benonies, sons of pain and sorrow.
But some evil disposed minds, whether of malice, or covetousness, or wicked
blind zeal, it is uncertain, as soon as they were born, and their father dead,
smothered them, and, by conveying the perfect Copies, left unto us nothing but
the old imperfect mangled draughts dismembered into pieces; no favor, no grace,
not the shadow of themselves remaining in them; had the father lived to behold
them thus defaced, he might rightly have named them Benonies, the sons of
sorrow; but being the learned will not suffer them to dye and be buried, it is
intended the world shall see them as they are; the learned will find in them
some shadows and resemblances of their fathers face. God grant, that as they
were with their Brethren dedicated to the Church for messengers of peace; so,
in the strength of that little breath of life that remains in them, they may
prosper in their work, and by satisfying the doubts of such as are willing to
learn, they may help to give an end to the calamities of these our Civil Wars.

J. S.


And next the Reader may note, that this Epistle of Dr. Spencers, was writ and
first printed within four years after the death of Mr. Hooker, in which time
all diligent search had been made for the perfect Copies; and, then granted not
recoverable, and therefore endeavored to be completed out of Mr. Hookers
rough draughts, as is expressed by the said Dr. Spencer, since whose death it is
now 50 Years.

And I do profess by the faith of a Christian, that Dr. Spencers Wife (who was
my Aunt and Sister to George Cranmer, of whom I have spoken) told me forty
Years since, in these, or in words to this purpose, That her Husband had made
up, or finished Mr. Hookers last three Books; and that upon her Husbands
Deathbed, or in his Last Sickness, he gave them into her hand, with a charge
they should not be seen by any man, but be by her delivered into the hands of
the then Archbishop of Canterbury, which was Dr. Abbot, or unto Dr. King then
Bishop of London, and that she did as he enjoined her.

I do conceive, that from Dr. Spencers, and no other Copy, there have been
diverse Transcripts, and were to be found in several places, as namely, Sir
Thomas Bodlies Library, in that of Dr. Andrews, late Bishop of Winton, in the
late Lord Conwayes, in the Archbishop of Canterburies, and in the Bishop of
Armaghs, and in many others, and most of these pretended to be the Authors own
hand, but much disagreeing, being indeed altered and diminisht, as men have
thought fittest to make Mr. Hookers judgment suit with their fancies, or give
authority to their corrupt designs; and for proof of a part of this, take these
following Testimonies.

Dr. Barnard, sometime Chaplain to Dr. Usher, late Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
has declared in a late Book called Clavi Trebales, printed by Richard
Hodgkinson, Anno 1661. that in his search and examination of the said Bishops
Manuscripts, he found the three written Books which were supposed the 6, 7, and
8, of Mr. Hookers Books of Ecclesiastical Polity; and that in the said three
Books (now printed as Mr. Hookers) there are so many omissions, that they
amount to many Paragraphs, and which cause many incoherencies; the omissions
are by him set down at large in the said printed Book, to which I refer the
Reader for the whole; but think fit in this place to insert this following
short part of them.

First, as there could be in Natural Bodies no Motion of any thing, unless
there were some first which moved all things, and continued unmovable; even so
in Politic Societies, there must be some unpunishable, or else no man shall
suffer punishment; for since punishments proceed always from Superiors, to whom
the administration of justice belongs, which administration must have
necessarily a fountain that deriveth it to all others, and receives not from
any, because otherwise the course of justice should go infinitely in a Circle,
every Superior having his Superior without end, which cannot be; therefore, a
Wellspring, it follows, there is, a Supreme head of Justice whereunto all
are subject, but it self in subjection to none. Which kind of preheminency if
some ought to have in a Kingdom, who but the King shall have it? Kings
therefore, or no man can have lawful power to judge.

If private men offend, there is the Magistrate over them which judges; if
Magistrates, they have their Prince; if Princes, there is Heaven, a Tribunal,
before which they shall appear; on Earth they are not accomptable to any. Here,
says the Doctor, it breaks off abruptly.

And I have these words also attested under the hand of Mr. Fabian Philips, a
man of Note for his useful Books. I will make Oath, if I shall be required,
that Dr. Sanderson, the late Bishop of Lincoln, did a little before his death,
affirm to me, he had seen a Manuscript, affirmed to him to be the handwriting
of Mr. Richard Hooker, in which there was no mention made of the King or
Supreme Governors being accomptable to the People; this I will make Oath that
that good man attested to me.

Fabian Philips.


So that there appears to be both Omissions and Additions in the said last
three printed Books; and this may probably be one reason why Dr. Sanderson, the
said learned Bishop (whose Writings are so highly and justly valued) gave a
strict charge near the time of his Death, or in his last Will, That nothing of
his that was not already printed, should be printed after his Death.

It is well known how high a value our learned King James put upon the Books
writ by Mr. Hooker, as also that our late King Charles (the Martyr for the
Church) valued them the second of all Books, testified by his commending them
to the reading of his Son Charles, that now is our gracious King; and you may
suppose that this Charles the First, was not a stranger to the pretended three
Books, because in a Discourse with the Lord Say, when the said Lord required
the King to grant the truth of his Argument, because it was the judgment of
Mr. Hooker (quoting him in one of the three written Books) the King replied,
They were not allowed to be Mr. Hookers Books; but, however he would allow them
to be Mr. Hookers, and consent to what his Lordship proposed to prove out of
those doubtful Books, if he would but consent to the Judgment of Mr. Hooker in
the other five that were the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker.

In this relation concerning these three doubtful Books of Mr. Hookers, my
purpose was to enquire, then set down what I observed and know, which I have
done, not as an engaged person, but indifferently; and now leave my Reader to
give sentence, for their legitimation, as to himself, but so, as to leave
others the same liberty of believing, or disbelieving them to be Mr. Hookers;
and it is observable, that as Mr. Hooker advised with Dr. Spencer, in the design
and manage of these Books, so also, and chiefly with his dear Pupils George
Cranmer (whose Sister was the Wife of Dr. Spencer) of which this following
Letter may be a Testimony, and does also give Authority to some things
mentioned both in this Appendix, and in the Life of Mr. Hooker, and is
therefore added.

GEORGE CRANMER'S LETTER unto Mr. Richard Hooker. February 1598.
WHat Posterity is likely to judge of these matters concerning
Church Discipline, we may the better conjecture, if we call to mind what our
own Age, within few years, upon better Experience; has already judged
concerning the same. It may be remembered, that at first the greatest part of
the Learned in the Land, were either eagerly affected, or favorably inclined
that way. The Books then written for the most part, savoured of the
Disciplinary style; it sounded everywhere in Pulpits, and in common phrase of
men's speech: the contrary part began to fear they had taken a wrong course,
many which impugned the Discipline, yet so impugned it, not as not being the
better Form of Government, but as not being so convenient for our State, in
regard of dangerous Innovations thereby like to grow; John Whitgift the
Archbishop.
one man alone there was, to speak of (whom let no suspicion of flattery
deprive of his deserved commendation) who in the defiance of the one part, and
courage of the other, stood in the gap, and gave others respite to prepare
themselves to the defense, which by the sudden eagerness and violence of their
adversaries, had otherwise been prevented, wherein God has made good unto him
his own Impress, Vincit qui patitur; for what contumelious indignities he has
at their hands sustained, the World is witness; and what reward of Honor above
his Adversaries God has bestowed upon him, themselves (though nothing glad
thereof) must needs confess. Now of late years the heat of men toward the
Discipline is greatly decayed, their judgments begin to sway on the other
side: the Learned have weighed it, and found it light; wise men conceive some
fear, left it prove not only not the best kind of Government, but the very bane
and destruction of all Government. The cause of this change in men's Opinions,
may be drawn from the general nature of Error, disguised and clothed with the
name of Truth; which did mightily and violently possess men at first, but
afterward, the weakness thereof being by time discovered, it lost that
reputation, which before it had gained; as by the outside of an house the
passers by, are oftentimes deceived, till they see the convenience of the Rooms
within: so by the very name of Discipline and Reformation, men were drawn at
first to cast a fancy toward it, but, now they have not contented themselves
only to pass by and behold afar off the Forefront of this reformed house, they
have entered in, even at the special request of Master-workmen and chief
builders thereof: thy have perused the Rooms, the Lights, the Conveniences,
and they find them not answerable to that report which was made of them, not
to that opinion which upon report they had conceived: So as now, the Discipline
which at first triumphed over all, being unmasked, begins to droop and hang
down her head.

This cause of change in opinion concerning the Discipline, is proper to the
Learned, or to such as by them have been instructed; another cause there is
more open, and more apparent to the view of all, namely, the course of
Practice, which the Reformers have had with us from the beginning; the first
degree was only some small difference about the Cap and Surplice, but not such
as either bred division in the Church, or tended to the ruin of the Government
established. This was peaceable; the next degree more stirring. Admonitions
were directed to the Parliament in peremptory sort against our whole Form of
Regiment; in defense of them, Volumes were published in English, and in Latin;
yet, this was no more than writing. Devices were set on foot to erect the
Practice of the Discipline without Authority: yet, herein some regard of
Modesty, some moderation was used; Behold, at length it brake forth into open
outrage, first in writing by Martin, in whose kind of dealing these things may
be observed; first, that whereas T. C. and others his great Masters had always
before set out the Discipline as a Queen, and as the Daughter of God; He
contrariwise, to make her more acceptable to the people, brought her forth as a
Vice upon the Stage. 2. This conceit of his was grounded (as may be supposed)
upon this rare policy, that seeing the Discipline was by writing refuted, in
Parliament rejected, in secret corners hunted out and deciyed, it was imagined
that by open railing (which to the Vulgar is commonly most plausible) the State
Ecclesiastical might have been drawn into such contempt and hatred, as the
overthrow thereof should have been most grateful to all men, and in a manner
desired by all the Common people. 3. It may be noted (and this I know my self
to be true) how some of them, although they could not for shame approve so lewd
an Action: yet, were content to lay hold on it to the advancement of their
cause, by acknowledging therein the secret Judgments of God against the
Bishops: and hoping that some good might be wrought thereby for his Church; as,
indeed there was, though not according to their construction. For, 4. contrary
to their expectation, that railing Spirit did not only not further, but
extremely disgrace and prejudice their Cause, when it was once perceived from
how low degrees of contradiction, at first, to what outrage of Contumely and
Slander they were at length proceeded; and were also likely to proceed further.

A further degree of outrage was also in Fact; Certain Hacket and Coppinger.
Prophets did arise, who deeming it not possible that God should suffer that to
be undone, which they did so fiercely desire to have done, Namely, that his
holy Saints, the favorers and Fathers of the Discipline, should be enlarged,
and delivered from persecution; and seeing no means of Deliverance Ordinary,
were fain to persuade themselves that God must need raise some extraordinary
means; and being persuaded of none so well as of themselves, they forth with
must needs be the instruments of this great work. Hereupon they framed unto
themselves an assured hope that upon their Preaching out of a Pease Cart, all
the multitude would have presently joined unto them; and, in amazement of mind
have asked them, Viri fratres, quid agimus? whereunto it is likely they would
have returned an answer far unlike to that of St. Peter, Such and such are men
unworthy to govern, pluck them down; Such and such are the dear Children of
God, let them be advanced.

Of two of these men it is meet to speak with all Commiseration: yet so, that
others by their example may receive instruction, and withal some light may
appear, what stirring affections the Discipline is like to inspire, if it light
upon apt and prepared minds.

Now if any man doubt of what Society they were? or, if the Reformers disclaim
them, pretending, that by them they were condemned; let these points be
considered. 1. Whose associates were they before they entered into this
frantic Passion? whose Sermons did they frequent? whom did they admire? 2.
Even when they were entering into it, whose advice did they require? and when
they were in, whose approbation? whom advertised they of their purpose? whose
assistance by Prayer did they request? But we deal injuriously with them to lay
this to their charge; for they reproved and condemned it. How? did they
disclose it to the Magistrate, that it might be suppressed? or were they not
rather content to stand aloof of, and see the end of it, as being loath to
quench that Spirit, No doubt these mad practitioners were of their society,
with whom before, and in the practice of their madness they had most affinity.
Hereof, read Dr. Bancrofts Book.

A third inducement may be to dislike of the Discipline, if we consider not
only how far the Reformers themselves have proceeded, but what others upon
their Foundations have built. Here come the Brownists in the first rank: their
lineal descendants: who have seized upon a number of strange opinions: whereof,
although their Ancestors, the Reformers, were never actually possessed, yet by
right and interest from them derived, the Brownists and Barrowists have taken
possession of them; for, if the positions of the Reformers be true, I cannot
see how the main and general Conclusions of Brownism should be false; for, upon
these two points, as I conceive, they stand.

1. That because we have no Church, they are to sever themselves from us. 2.
That without Civil Authority they are to erect a Church of their own. And if
the former of these be true, the latter, I suppose will follow; for if above
all things, men be to regard their Salvation; and, if out of the Church, there
be no Salvation; it follows, that if we have no Church, we have no means of
Salvation; and therefore Separation from us, in that respect, is both lawful
and necessary; as also that men so separated from the false and counterfeit
Church, are to associate themselves unto some Church; not to ours; to the
Popish much less; therefore to one of their own making. Now the grownd of all
these Inferences being this, ( That in our Church there is no means of
Salvation) is out of the Reformers Principles most clearly to be proved. For,
wheresoever any matter of Faith unto Salvation necessary is denied, there can
be no means of Salvation; But in the Church of England, the Discipline (by them
accounted a matter of Faith,) and, necessary to Salvation, is not only denied,
but impugned, and the Professors thereof oppressed. Ergo.

Again, (but this reason perhaps is weak) Every true Church of Christ
acknowledges the whole Gospel of Christ: The Discipline, in their opinion, is
a part of the Gospel, and yet by our Church resisted. Ergo.

Again, the Discipline is essentially united to the Church: by which term
Essentially, they must mean either an essential part, or an essential property.
Both which ways it must needs be, that where that essential Discipline is not,
neither is there any Church. If therefore between them and the Brownists, there
should be appointed a Solemn disputation, whereof with us they have been
oftentimes so earnest Challengers: it does not yet appear what other answer
they could possibly frame to these and the like arguments, wherewith they may
be pressed, but fairly to deny the Conclusion (for all the Premises are their
own) or rather ingeniously to reverse their own Principles before laid, whereon
so foul absurdities have been so firmly built. What further proofs you can
bring out of their high words, magnifying the Discipline, I leave to your
better remembrance: but above all points, I am desirous this one should be
strongly enforced against them, because it wringeth them most of all, and is of
all other (for ought I see) the most unanswerable; you may notwithstanding say,
that you would be heartily glad these their positions might be salved as the
Brownists might not appear to have issued out of their Loins: but until that
be done, they must give us le^ve to think that they have cast the Seed whereout
these tares are grown.

Another sort of men there are, which have been content to run on with the
Reformers for a time and to make them poor instruments of their own designs:
These are a sort of Godless Politics, who perceiving the Plot of Discipline to
consist of these two parts, the overthrow of Episcopal, and erections of
Presbyterial Authority, and that this latter can take no place till the former
be removed, are content to join with them in the Destructive part of
Discipline, bearing them in hand, that in the other also they shall find them
as ready. But when time shall come, it may be they would be as loath to be
yoaked with that kind of Regiment, as now they are willing to be released from
this; These men's ends in all their actions, is Distraction, their pretense and
color, Reformation. Those things which under this color they have effected to
their own good, are, 1. By maintaining a contrary faction, they have kept the
Clergy always in Aw; and thereby, made them more pliable and willing to buy
their peace. 2. By maintaining an Opinion of Equality among Ministers, they
have made way to their own purposes for devouring Cathedral Churches, and
Bishops livings. 3. By exclaiming against abuses in the Church, they have
carried their own corrupt dealings in the Civil State more covertly; for such
is the Nature of the multitude, that they are not able to apprehend many things
at once: so as being possessed with a dislike or liking of any one thing, many
other in the mean time, may escape them without being perceived. 4. They have
sought to disgrace the Clergy, in entertaining a conceit in men's minds, and
confirming it by continual practice, That men of Learning, and specially of the
Clergy, which are employed in the chiefest kind of Learning are not to be
admitted or sparingly admitted to matters of State; contrary to the practice of
all well-governed Commonwealths, and of our own till these late years.

A third sort of men there are, though not descended from the Reformers, yet in
part raised and greatly Strengthened by them; namely, the cursed crew of
Atheists. This also is one of those points, which I am desirous you should
handle most effectually, and strain your self therein to all points of motion
and affection; as in that of the Brownists, to all strength and sinews of
Reason. This is a sort mo^ d^mnable, and yet by the general suspicion of the
world at this day most common. The causes of it, which are in the parties
themselves, although you handle in the beginning of the fifth Book,^ yet here
again they may be touched; but the occasions of help and furtherance, which by
the Reformers have been yielded unto them, are, as I conceive, two; namely,
Senceless Preaching, and disgracing of the Ministry; for how should not men
dare to impugn that, which neither by force of Reason, nor by Authority of
Persons is maintained; But in the parties themselves these two causes I
conceive of Atheism, 1. more abundance of Wit then Judgment, and of Witty than
Judicious Learning; whereby, they are more inclined to contradict any thing,
than willing to be informed of the Truth. They are not therefore, men of sound
Learning for the most part, but Smatterers; neither is their kind of Dispute so
much by force of Argument, as by Scoffing; which humor of scoffing, and
turning matters most serious into merriment, is now become so common, as we are
not to marvail what the Prophet means by the Seat of Scorners, nor what the
Apostles by foretelling of Scorners to come; for our own age has verified
their speech unto us; which also may be an Argument against these Scoffers and
Atheists themselves, seeing it has been so many ages ago foretold, that such
men the later days of the world should afford: which, could not be done by any
other Spirit, save that whereunto things future and present are alike. And even
for the main question of the Resurrection, whereat they stick so mightily! was
it not plainly foretold, that men should in the latter times say, Where is the
Promise of his Coming? Against the Creation, the Ark, and diverse other points,
exceptions are said to be taken; the ground whereof is superfluity of Wit,
without ground of Learning and Judgment. A second cause of Atheism is
Sensuality, which makes men desirous to remove all stops and impediments of
their wicked life; among which, because Religion is the chiefest, so as neither
in this life without shame they can persist therein, nor (if that be true)
without Torment in the life to come: they therefore whet their wits to
annihilate the joys of Heaven, wherein they see (if any such be) they can have
no part, and likewise the pains of Hell, wherein their portion must needs be
very great. They labor therefore, not that they may not deserve those pains,
but that deserving them, there may be no such pains to seize upon them; But,
what conceit can be imagined more base, than that man should strive to persuade
himself even against the secret Instinct (no doubt) of his own Mind, that his
Soul is as the Soul of a Beast, mortal and corruptible with the Body? Against
which barbarous Opinion, their own Atheism is a very strong Argument. For were
not the Soul a Nature separable from the Body, how could it enter into
discourse of things merely Spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining to the
Body? Surely the Soul were not able to conceive any thing of Heaven, no not so
much as to dispute against Heaven and against God, if there were not in it
somewhat Heavenly and derived from God.

The last which have received strength and encouragement from the Reformers are
Papists; against whom although they are most bitter Enemies, yet unwittingly
they have given them great advantage. For, what can any Enemy rather desire
than the Breach and Dissension of those which are Confederates against him?
Wherein they are to remember, that if our Communion with Papists in some few
Ceremonies do so much strengthen them as is pretended, how much more does this
Division and Rent among our selves, especially seeing it is maintained to be,
not in light matters only, but even in matter of Faith and Salvation? Which
overreaching Speech of theirs, because it is so open an advantage for the
Barrowist and the Papist, we are to wish and hope for, that they will
acknowledge it to have been spoken rather in heat of Affection, than with
soundness of Judgment; and that though their exceeding love to that Creature of
Discipline which themselves have bred, nourished, and maintained, their mouth
in commendation of her did so often overflow.

From hence you may proceed (but the means of connection I leave to your self)
to another discourse, which I think very meet to be handled either here or
elsewhere at large; the parts whereof may be these. 1. That in this cause
between them and us, men are to sever the proper and essential points and
controversy, from those which are accidental. The most essential and proper are
these two: overthrow of Episcopal, and erection of Presbyterial Authority. But
in these two points whosoever joyneth with them is accounted of their number;
whosoever in all other points agrees with them, yet thinks the Authority of
Bishops not unlawful, and of Elders not necessary, may justly be severed from
their retinue. Those things therefore, which either in the Persons, or in the
Laws and Orders themselves are faulty, may be complained on, acknowledged and
amended; yet they no whit the nearer their main purpose; for what if all
errors by them supposed in our Liturgy were amended, even according to their
own hearts desire? if Non-residence, Pluralities, and the like, were utterly
taken away? are their Lay Elders therefore presently Authorized? or their
Sovereign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction established?

But even in their complaining against the outward and accidental matters in
Church Government, they are many ways faulty: 1. In their end which they
propose to themselves. For in Declaming against Abuses, their meaning is not to
have them redressed, but by disgracing the present State, to make way for their
own Discipline. As therefore in Venice, if any Senator should discouse against
the Power of their Senate, as being either too Sovereign, or too weak in
Government, with purpose to draw their Authority to a Moderation, it might well
be suffered; but not so, if it should appear he spoke with purpose to induce
another State by depraving the present: So, in all Causes belonging either to
Church or Commonwealth, we are to have regard what mind the Complaining part
does bear, whether of Amendment or Innovation; and, accordingly either to
suffer or suppress it. Their Objection therefore is frivolous, Why may not men
speak against Abuses? Yes; but with desire to cure the part affected, not to
destroy the whole. 2. A second fault is in their Manner of Complaining, not
only because it is for the most part in bitter and reproachful Terms, but also
it is to the Common people, who are Judges incompetent and insufficient, both
to determine any thing amiss, and for want of Skill and Authority to amend it.
Which also discovers their Intent and Purpose to be rather Destructive than
Corrective. 3. Thirdly, those very exceptions which they take are frivolous and
impertinent: Some things indeed they accuse as impious, which if they may
appear to be such, God forbid they should be maintained.

Against the rest it is only alleged, that they are Idle Ceremonies without
use, and that better and more profitable might be devised. Wherein they are
doubly deceived; for neither is it a sufficient Plea to say, This must give
place, because a Better may be devised; because in our Judgments of Better and
Worse, we oftentimes conceive amiss, when we compare those things which are in
Devise, with those which are in Practice; for the Imperfections of the one are
hid, till by Time and Trial they be discovered: The others are already manifest
and open to all. But last of all (which is a Point in my Opinion of great
regard, and which I am desirous to have enlarged) they do not see that for the
most part when they strike at the State Ecclesiastical, they secretly wound the
Civil State: for Personal faults, What can be said against the Church, which
may not also agree to the Commonwealth? In both States Men have always been,
and will be always, Men; sometimes blinded with Error, most commonly
perverted by Passions: many Unworthy have been and are advanced in both, many
Worthy not regarded. And as for Abuses which they pretend to be in the Laws
themselves, when they inveigh against Non-residence, do they take it a matter
lawful or expedient in the Civil State for a man to have a great and gainful
Office in the North, himself continually remaining in the South? He that has
an Office, let him attend his office. When they condemn Plurality of Livings
Spirtual to the pit of Hell, what think they of the Infinite of Temporal
Promotions? By the great Philosopher, Pol. lib. 2. c. 9. it is forbidden as a
thing most dangerous to Commonwealths, that by the same man many great Offices
should be exercised. When they deride our Ceremonies as vain and frivolous,
were it hard to apply their Exceptions even to those Civil Ceremonies, which at
the Coronation, in Parliament, and all Courts of Justice, are used; Were it
hard to argue even against Circumcision, the Ordinance of God, as being a cruel
Ceremony? against the Passover, as being ridiculous? should be girt, a Staff
in their hand, to eat a Lamb.

To conclude; you may exhort the Clergy, (or what if you direct your Conclusion
not to the Clergy in general, but only to the Learned in or of both
Universities?) you may exhort them to a due Consideration of all things, and to
a right Esteem and Valuing of each thing in that degree wherein it ought to
stand. For it oftentimes falls out, that what Men have either devised
themselves, or greatly delighted in, the Price and the Excellency thereof they
do admire above desert. The chiefest Labor of a Christian should be to know;
of a Minister, to preach Christ crucified: in regard whereof, not only Worldly
things, but things otherwise precious, even the Discipline it self is vile and
base: Whereas now by the heat of Contention, and violence of Affection, the
Zeal of men toward the one has greatly decayed their Love to the other.
Hereunto therefore they are to be exhorted, to Preach Christ crucified, the
Mortification of the Flesh, the Renewing of the Spirit; not those things which
in time of Strife seem precious, but (Passions being allayed) are vain and
childish.

FINIS.
The Effigies of Mr: George Herbert Author of those Sacred Poems called The
Temple.



The LIFE OF Mr. GEORGE HERBERT.

Wisdom of Salom. 4.10.

He pleased God, and was beloved of him: so that whereas he lived among
sinners, he translated him.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Richard Marriott, sold by most
Booksellers. M. DC. LXX.

IMPRIMATUR, Sam: Parker Reverendissim^ in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino
Gilberto Archi-ep: Cantuan a Sac: Domest:

April 21. 1670.

To his very Worthy and much Honored FRIEND, Mr. Izaack Walton, upon his
Excellent Life of Mr. George Herbert.
I.
Heavens youngest Son, its Benjamin,
Divinity's next Brother, Sacred Poesy,
No longer shall a Virgin reckoned be,
(What ere with others it is) by me,
A Female Muse, as were the Nine:
But (full of Vigor Masculine)
An Essence Male, with Angels his Companions shine.
With Angels first the heavenly youth was bred;
And, when a Child, instructed them to sing,
The praises of the Immortal King,
Who Lucifer in Triumph led:
For, as in Chains the Monster sank to Hell,
And tumbling headlong down the precipice fell,
By him first taught, How art thou fallen thou morning star? they said
Too fondly then, we have fancied him a Maid:
We, the vain Brethren of the rhyming trade;
A femal Angel less would Raphael Urbin the famous painter.
Urbins skill upbraid.
II.
Thus 'twas in Heaven This, Poesy's Sex and Age;
And, when he thence to our lower World came down,
He chose a Form more like his own,
And Iesse's youngest Son inspired with holy rage.
The sprightly Shepherd felt unusual Fire,
And up he took his tuneful Lyre;
He took it up, and struck't, and his own soft touches did admire.
Thou, Poesy, on him did bestow:
Thy choicest gift, a honor showed before to none;
And, to prepare his way to th'Hebrew Throne,
Gav'st him thy Empire, and Dominion;
The happy Land of Verse, where flow
Rivers of milk, and Woods of Laurel grow;
Wherewith, thou, did adorn his brow,
And made his first, more flourishing, and triumphant Crown,
Assist me thy great Prophets praise to sing,
David, the Poets, and blessed Isreal's King;
And, with the dancing Echo, let the mountains ring!
Then, on the wings of some auspicious wind,
Let his great name from earth, be raised on high,
And in the starry volume of the Sky
A lasting Record find:
Be with his mighty Psaltery joined;
Which, taken long since up in to the Air,
And called the Harp, makes a bright Constellation there.
III.
Worthy it was to be translated hence,
And, there, in view of all, exalted hang:
To which so often the Princely Prophet sang,
And mystic Oracles did dispense.
Though, had it still remained below,
More wonders of it we had seen,
How great the mighty Herberts skill had been;
Herbert, who could so much without it do;
Herbert, who did its Chords distinctly know;
More perfectly, than any Child of Verse below.
O! Had we known him half so well!
But then, my friend, there had been left for you
Nothing so fair, and worthy praise to do;
Who, so exactly all his Story tell,
That, though he did not want his Bays,
Nor all the Monuments virtue can raise,
Your hand, he did, to Eternize his Praise.
Herbert, and Done, again are joined,
Now here below, as they are above;
These friends, are in their old embraces twined;
And, since by you the Enterview's designed,
Too weak, to part them, death does prove;
For, in this book they meet again: as, in one Heaven they love.
Bensted, Apr. 3. 1670. Sam: Woodforde.

The LIFE OF Mr. GEORGE HERBERT.
THE Introduction.
IN a late retreat from the business of this World, and those many little cares
with which I have too often encumbered my self, I fell into a Contemplation of
some of those Historical passages that are recorded in Sacred Story; and, more
particularly, of what had past betwixt our Blessed Savior, and that wonder of
Women, and Sinners, and Mourners, Saint Mary Magdalen. I call her Saint,
because I did not then, nor do now consider her, as when she was possessed with
seven Devils; not as when her wanton Eyes, and dissheveld Hair, were designed
and managed, to charm and ensnare amorous Beholders: But, I did then, and do
now consider her as after she had expressed a visible and sacred sorrow for her
sensualities; as, after those Eyes had wept such a flood of penitential tears
as did wash, and that hair had wiped, and she most passionately kissed the feet
of hers, and our blessed Jesus. And, I do now consider, that because she loved
much, not only much was forgiven her: but that, beside that blessed blessing of
having her sins pardoned, she also had from him a testimony, that her
alablaster box of precious ointment poured on his head and feet, and that
Spikenard, and those Spices that were by her dedicated to embalm and preserve
his sacred body from putrefaction, should so far preserve her own memory, that
these demonstrations of her sanctified love, and of her officious, and generous
gratitude should be recorded and mentioned wheresoever his Gospel should be
read; intending thereby, that as his, so her name should also live to
succeeding generations, even till time shall be no more.

Upon occasion of which fair example, I did lately look back, and not without
some content (at least to my self) that I have endeavored to deserve the love,
and preserve the memory of my two deceased friends, Dr. Done, and Sir Henry
Wotton, by declaring the various employments and accidents of their Lives: And,
though Mr. George Herbert (whose Life I now intend to write) were to me a
stranger as to his person: yet, since he was, and was worthy, to be their
friend; and, very many of his have been mine, I judge it may not be
unacceptable to those^ that knew any of them in their lives, or do now know
their Writings, to see this Conjunction of them after their deaths; without
which many things that concerned them, and some things that concerned the Age
in which they liv^d, would be less perfect, and lost to posterity.

For these Reasons I have undertaken it, and if I have prevented any abler
person, I beg pardon of him, and my Reader.

The Life.
GEorge Herbert was born the Third day of April, in the Year of our Redemption
1593. The place of his Birth was near to the Town of Montgomery, and in that
Castle that did then bear the name of that Town and County; that Castle was
then a place of state and strength, and had been successively happy in the
Family of the Herberts, who had long possessed it: and, with it, a plentiful
Estate, and hearts as liberal to their poor Neighbors. A Family, that has
been blessed with men of remarkable wisdom, and with a willingness to serve their
Country, and indeed, to do good to all Mankind; for which, they were eminent:
But alas! this Family did in the late Rebellion suffer extremely in their
Estates; and the Heirs of that Castle, saw it laid level with that earth that
was too good to bury those Wretches that were the cause of it.

The Father of our George, was Richard Herbert the Son of Edward Herbert
Knight, the Son of Richard Herbert Knight, the Son of the famous Sir Richard
Herbert of Colebrook in the County of Monmouth Banneret, who was the youngest
Brother of that memorable William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, that lived in the
Reign of our King Edward the fourth.

His Mother was Magdalen Newport, the youngest Daughter of Sir Richard, and
Sister to Sir Francis Newport of High Arkall in the County of Salop Knight, and
Grandfather of Francis Lord Newport, now Comptroller of His Majesty's
Household. A Family, that for their Loyalty, have suffered much in their
Estates, and seen the ruin of that excellent Structure, where their Ancestors
have long lived, and been memorable for their Hospitality.

This Mother of George Herbert (of whose person, and wisdom, and virtue, I
intend to give a true account in a seasonable place) was the happy Mother of
seven Sons, and three Daughters, which she would often say, was Jobs number;
and as often bless God, that they were neither defective in their shapes, or in
their reason; and, often reprove them that did not praise God for so great a
blessing. I shall give the Reader a short account of their names, and not say
much of their Fortunes.

Edward the eldest was first made Knight of the Bath, at that glorious time of
our late Prince Henry's being installed Knight of the Garter; and after many
years useful travel, and the attainment of many Languages, he was by King James
sent Ambassador Resident to the then French King, Lewis the Thirteenth. There,
he continued about two Years; but, he could not subject himself to a compliance
with the humors of the Duke de Luines, who was then the great and powerful
Favorite at Court: so that upon a complaint to our King, he was called back
into England in some displeasure; but at his return he gave such an honorable
account of his employment, and so justified his Comportment to the Duke, and
all the Court, that he was suddenly sent back upon the same Embassy, from
which he returned in the beginning of the Reign of our good King Charles the
first, who made him first Baron of Castle-Island; and not long after of
Cherberie in the County of Salop: He was a man of great learning and reason, as
appears by his printed Book de veritate; and, by his History of the Reign of
King Henry the Eight, and by several other Tracts.

The second and third Brothers were Richard and William, who ventured their
lives to purchase Honor in the Wars of the Low Countries, and dyed Officers in
that employment. Charles was the fourth, and dyed Fellow of New-Colledge in
Oxford. Henry was the sixth, who became a menial servant to the Crown in the
days of King James, and has continued to be so for fifty years: during all
which time he has been Master of the Revels; a place, that requires a diligent
wisdom, with which God has blessed him. The seventh Son was Thomas, who being
made Captain of a Ship in that Fleet with which Sir Robert Mansell was sent
against Algiers, ^id there show a fortunate and true English valor. Of the
three Sisters, I need not say more, then that they were all married to persons
of worth, and plentiful fortunes; and, lived to be examples of virtue, and to
do good in their generations.

I now come to give my intended account of George, who was the fifth of those
seven Brothers.

George Herbert spent much of his Childhood in a sweet content under the eye
and care of his prudent mother, and the tuition of a Chaplain or Tutor to him,
and two of his Brothers in her own Family (for she was then a Widow) where he
continued, till about the age of twelve years; and being at that time well
instructed in the Rules of Grammar, he was not long after commended to the care
of Dr. Neale, who was then Dean of Westminster; and by him to the care of Mr.
Ireland, who was then chief Master of that School; where the beauties of his
pretty behavior and wit, shined and became so eminent and lovely in this his
innocent age, that he seemed to be marked out for piety, and to become the care
of Heaven, and of a particular Angel to guard and guide him. And thus, he
continued in that School, till he came to be perfect in the learned Languages,
and especially in the Greek Tongue, in which he after proved an excellent
Critic.

About the age of Fifteen, he, being then a Kings Scholar, was elected out of
that School for Trinity College in Cambridge, to which place he was
transplanted about the year 1608. And his prudent mother well knowing, that he
might easily lose, or lessen that virtue and innocence which her advice and
example had planted in his mind; did therefore procure the generous and liberal
Dr. Nevil, who was then Dean of Canterbury, and Master of that College, to
take him into his particular care, and provide him a Tutor; which he did most
gladly undertake, for he knew the excellencies of his Mother, and how to value
such a friendship.

This was the method of his Education, till he was settled in Cambridge, where
we will leave him in his Study, till I have paid my promised account of his
excellent mother, and I will endeavor to make it short.

I have told her birth, her Marriage, and the Number of her Children, and, have
given some short account of them: I shall next tell the Reader, that her
husband dyed when our George was about the Age of four years: and that she
continued twelve years a Widow: that she then married hapily to a Noble
Gentleman, the brother and Heir of the Lord Danvers Earl of Danby, who did
highly value both her person and most excellent endowments of her mind.

In this time of her Widowhood, she being desirous to give Edward her eldest
son, such advantages of Learning, and other education as might suit his birth
and fortune: and thereby make him the more fit for the service of his Country:
did at his being of a fit age, remove from Montgomery Castle with him, and some
of her younger sons to Oxford; and, having entered Edward into Queens College,
and provided him a fit Tutor, she commended him to his Care; yet, she continued
there with him, and still kept him in a moderate awe of herself: and so much
under her own eye, as to see and converse with him daily; but she managed this
power over him without any such rigid sourness, as might make her company a
torment to her Child, but, with such a sweetness and compliance with the
recreations and pleasure of youth, as did incline him willingly to spend much
of his time in the company of his dear and careful mother: which was to her
great content; for, she would often say, That as our bodies take a nourishment
suitable to the meat on which we feed: so, our souls do as insensibly take in
vice by the example or Conversation with wicked Company: and, would therefore,
as often say, That ignorance of Vice was the best preservation of Virtue: and,
that the very knowledge of wickedness was as tinder to inflame and kindle sin,
and to keep it burning: For these reasons, she indeared him to her own Company:
and, continued with him in Oxford four years: in which time, her great and
harmless wit, her cheerful gravity, and her oblieging behavior, gained her an
acquaintance and friendship with most of any eminent worth or learning, that
were at that time in or near that University: and particularly, with Mr. John
Done, who then came accidentally to that place, in this time of her being
there: it was that John Done who was after Doctor Done, and Dean of Saint
Paul's London: and he at his leaving Oxford, writ and left there a Character of
the Beauties of her body, and mind; of the first, he says, No Spring nor
Summer-Beauty, has such grace
As I have seen in an Autumnal face.


Of the latter he says, In all her words to every hearer fit
You may at Revels, or at Council sit.


The rest of her Character, may be read in his printed Poems, in that Elegy
which bears the name of the Autumnal Beauty. For both he and she were then past
the meridian of man's life.

This Amity begun at this time, and place, was not Amity that polluted their
Souls; but, an Amity made up of a chain of suitable inclinations and virtues; an
Amity, like that of St. Chrysostoms to his dear and virtuous Olimpias; whom, in
his Letters, he calls his Saint: Or, an Amity indeed more like that of St.
Hierom to his Paula; whose affection to her was such, that he turned Poet in
his old Age, and then made her Epitaph; wishing, all his Body were turned into
Tongues, that he might declare her just praises to posterity. And this Amity
betwixt her and Mr. Done, was begun in a happy time for him, he being then
about the Fortieth year of his Age (which was some years before he entered into
Sacred Orders:) A time, when his necessities needed a daily supply for the
support of his Wife, seven Children, and a Family: And in this time she proved
one of his most bountiful Benefactors; and he, as grateful an acknowledger of
it. You may take one testimony of what I have said of them, from this following
Letter, and Sonnet.

MADAM,
YOur Favors to me are every where; I use them, and have them. I enjoy them at
London, and leave them there; and yet find them at Micham: Such Riddles as
these become things unexpressible; and, such is your goodness. I was almost
sorry to find your Servant here this day, because I was loath to have any
witness of my not coming home last Night, and indeed of my coming this Morning:
But, my not coming was excusable, because earnest business detained me; and my
coming this day, is by the example of your St. Mary Magdalen, who rose early
upon Sunday, to seek that which she loved most, and so did I. And, from her and
my self, I return such thanks as are due to one to whom we owe all the good
opinion, that they whom we need most, have of us -- by this Messenger, and on
this good day, I commit the enclosed Holy Hymns and Sonnets (which for the
matter, not the workmanship, have yet escaped the fire) to your judgment, and
to your protection too, if you think them worthy of it; and I have appointed
this enclosed Sonnet to usher them to your happy hand.

Micham, July ^^, 1607 Your unworthiest Servant, unless your accepting him,
have mended him. Jo. Done.


To the Lady Magdalen Herbert, of St. Mary Magdalen.
HEr of your name, whose fair inheritance
Bethina was, and jointure Magdalo:
An active faith so highly did advance,
That she once knew, more than the Church did know
The Resurrection; so much good there is
Delivered of her, that some Fathers be
Loath to believe one Woman could do this;
But, think these Magdalens were two or three.
Increase their number, Lady, and their fame:
To their Devotion, add your Innocence;
Take so much of the example, as of the name;
The latter half; and in some recompense
That they did harbor Christ himself, a Guest,
Harbor these Hymns, to his dear name addressed.
J. D.
These Hymns are now lost to us; but, doubtless they were such, as they two now
sing in Heaven.

There might be more demonstrations of the Friendship, and the many sacred
Indearments betwixt these two excellent persons (for I have many of their
Letters in my hand) and much more might be said of her great prudence and
piety; but my design was not to write hers, but the life of her Son; and
therefore I shall only tell my Reader, that about that very day twenty years,
that this Letter was dated, and sent her, I saw and heard this Mr. John Done
(who was then Dean of St. Paul's) weep, and preach her Funeral Sermon, in the
Parish Church of Chelsey near London, where she now rests in her quiet Grave,
and where we must now leave her, and return to her Son George, whom we left in
his Study in Cambridge.

And in Cambridge we may find our George Herberts behavior to be such, that we
may conclude, he consecrated the first fruits of his early age to virtue, and a
serious study of learning. And that he did so, this following Letter and Sonnet
which were in the first year of his going to Cambridge sent his dear Mother for
a New Years gift, may appear to be some testimony.

-- But I fear the heat of my late Ague has dried up those springs, by which
Scholars say, the Muses use to take up their habitations. However, I need not
their help, to reprove the vanity of those many Love-poems, that are daily writ
and consecrated to Venus; nor to bewail that so few are writ, that look toward
God and Heaven. For my own part, my meaning ( dear Mother) is in these Sonnets,
to declare my resolution to be, that my poor Abilities in Poetry, shall be all,
and ever consecrated to Gods glory. And --

MY God, where is that ancient heat toward thee,
Wherewith whole showls of Martyrs once did burn,
Besides their other flames Does Poetry
Wear Venus Livery? only serve her turn?
Why are not Sonnets made of thee? and lays
Upon thine Altar burnt? Cannot thy love
He ghten a spirit to sound out thy praise
As well as any she? Cannot thy Dove
Outstrip their Cupid easily in flight?
Or, since thy ways are deep, and still the same,
Will not a verserun smooth that bears thy name!
Why does that fire, which by thy power and might
Each breast does feel, no braver fuel choose
Than that, which one day, Worms, may chance refuse.
Sure Lord, there is enough in thee to dry
Oceans of Ink; for, as the Deluge did
Cover the Earth, so does thy Majesty:
Each Cloud distills thy praise, and does forbid
Poets to turn it to another use.
Roses and Lillies speak thee; and to make
A pair of Cheeks of them, is thy abuse.
Why should I Women's eyes for Crystal take?
Such poor invention burns in their low mind
Whose fire is wild, and does not upward go
To praise, and on thee Lord, some Ink bestow.
Open the bones, and you shall nothing find
In the best face but filth, when Lord, in thee
The beauty lies, in the discovery.
G. H.
This was his resolution at the sending this Letter to his dear Mother; about
which time, he was in the Seventeenth year of his Age; and, as he grew older,
so he grew in learning, and more and more in favor both with God and man:
insomuch, that in this morning of that short day of his life, he seemed to be
marked out for virtue, and to become the care of Heaven; for God still kept his
soul in so holy a frame, that he may, and ought to be a pattern of virtue to
all posterity; and especially, to his Brethren of the Clergy, of which the
Reader may expect a more exact account in what will follow.

I need not declare that he was a strict Student, because, that he was so,
there will be many testimonies in the future part of his life. I shall
therefore only tell, that he was made Minor Fellow in the year 1609. Bachelor
of Art in the year 1611. Major Fellow of the College, March 15. 1615. And,
that in that year, he was also made Master of Arts, he being then in the 22 d
year of his Age; during all which time, all, or the greatest diversion from his
Study, was the practice of Music, in which he became a great Master; and of
which, he would say, That it did relieve his drooping spirits, compose his
distracted thoughts, and raised his weary Soul so far above Earth, that it gave
him an earnest of the joys of Heaven, before he possessed them. And it may be
noted, that from his first entrance into the College, the generous Dr. Nevil
was a cherisher of his Studies, and such a lover of his person, his behavior,
and the excellent endowments of his mind, that he took him often into his own
company, by which he confirmed his native gentileness; and, if during this time
he expressed any Error, it was, that he kept himself too much retired, and at too
great a distance with all his inferiors; and, his clothes seemed to prove,
that he put too great a value on his parts and parentage.

This may be some account of his disposition, and of the employment of his
time, till he was Master of Arts, which was Anno 1615. and in the year 1619. he
was chosen Orator for the University. His two precedent Orators, were Sir
Robert Nanton, and Sir Francis Nethersoll: The first was not long after made
Secretary of State; and, Sir Francis, not long after his being Orator, was made
Secretary to the Lady Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia. In this place of Orator, our
George Herbert continued eight years; and managed it with as becoming, and
grave a gaity, as any had ever before, or since his time. For, He had acquired
great Learning, and was blessed with a high fancy, a civil and sharp wit, and
with a natural elegance, both in his behavior, his tongue, and his pen. Of all
which, there might be very many particular evidences, but I will limit my self
to the mention of but three.

And the first notable occasion of showing his fitness for this employment of
Orator, was manifested in a Letter to King James, who had sent the University
his Book, called Basilicon Doron; and their Orator was to acknowledge this
great honor, and return their gratitude to His Majesty for such a
condescension; at the close of which Letter, he writ,

Quid Vaticanam Bodleianamque objicis hospes!
Unicus est nobis Bibliotheca Liber.
This Letter was writ in such excellent Latin, was so full of Conceits, and all
the expressions so suited to the genius of the King, that he inquired the
Orators name, and then asked William Earl of Pembroke, if he knew him? whose
answer was, That he knew him very well; and, that he was his Kinsman, but he
loved him more for his learning and virtue, than for that he was of his name
and family. At which answer, the King smiled, and asked the Earl leave, that he
might love him too; for, he took him to be the Jewel of that University.

The next occasion that he had to show his great Abilities, was, with them, to
show also his great affection to that Church in which he received his Baptism;
and, of which he professed himself a member, and the occasion was this: There was
one Andrew Melvin, a Gentleman of Scotland, who was in his own Country possessed
with an aversness, if not a hatred of Churchgovernment by Bishops; and, he
seemed to have a like aversness to our manner of Public Worship, and of
Church-prayers and Ceremonies. This Gentleman had travailed France, and resided
so long in Geneva, as to have his opinions the more confirmed in him by the
practice of that place; from which he returned into England some short time
before, or immediately after Mr. Herbert was made Orator. This Mr. Melvin was a
man of learning, and was the Master of a great wit, a wit full of knots and
clenches: a wit sharp and satirical; exceeded, I think, by none of that Nation,
but their Bucanen. At Mr. Melvins return hither, he writ and scattered in
Latin, many pieces of his wit against our Altars, our Prayers, and our Public
Worship of God; in which, Mr. Herbert took himself to be so much concerned,
that as fast as Melvin writ and scattered them, Mr. Herbert writ and scattered
answers, and reflections of the same sharpness, upon him and them; I think, to
the satisfaction of all un-ingaged persons. But, this Mr. Melvin, was not only
so busy against the Church, but at last so bold with the King and State, that
he rayl'd, and writ himself into the Tower; at which time, the Lady Arabella
was an innocent prisoner there; and, he pleased himself much in sending the
next day after his Commitment, these two Verses to the good Lady; which, I will
under-write, because they may give the Reader a taste of his others, which were
like these.

Causa tibi mecum est communis, Carceris, AraBella; tibi causa est, Araque
sacra mihi.

I shall not trouble my Reader with an account of his enlargement from that
Prison, or his Death; but tell him, Mr. Herberts Verses were thought so worthy
to be preserved, that Dr. Duport the learned Dean of Peterborough, has lately
collected, and caused them to be printed, as an honorable memorial of his
friend Mr. George Herbert, and the Cause he undertook.

And, in order to my third, and last observation of his great Abilities, it
will be needful to declare, that about this time King James came very often to
hunt at New Market and Royston; and was almost as often invited to Cambridge,
where his entertainment was suited to his pleasant humor Albumizer. Ig^oramus.
, and where Mr. George Herbert was to welcome him with Gratulations, and the
Applauses of an Orator; which he always performed so well, that he still grew
more into the Kings favor; insomuch, that he had a particular appointment to
attend His Majesty at Royston, where after a Discourse with him, His Majesty
declared to his Kinsman, the Earl of Pembroke, That he found the Orators
learning and wisdom, much above his age or wit. The year following, the King
appointed to end His progress at Cambridge, and to stay there certain days; at
which time, he was attended by the great Secretary of Nature, and all Learning,
Sir Francis Bacon (Lord Virulam) and by the ever memorable and learned Dr.
Andrews Bishop of Winchester, both which did at that time begin a desired
friendship with our Orator. Upon whom the first put such a value on his
judgment, that he usually desired his approbation, before he would expose any
of his Books to be printed; and thought him so worthy of his friendship, that
having translated many of the Prophet David's Psalms into English Verse, he made
George Herbert his Patron of them, by a public dedication of them to him, as
the best Judge of Divine Poetry. And, for the learned Bishop, it is observable,
that at that time, there fell to be a modest debate about Predestination, and
Sanctity of life; of both which, the Orator did not long after send the Bishop
some safe and useful Aphorisms, in a long Letter written in Greek; which, was
so remarkable for the language, and matter, that after the reading of it, the
Bishop put it into his bosom, and did often show it to Scholars, both of this,
and foreign Nations; but did always return it back to the place where he
first lodged it, and continued it so near his heart, till the last day of his
life.

To these, I might add the long and entire friendship betwixt him and Sir Henry
Wotton, and Dr. Done, but I have promised to contract my self, and shall
therefore only add one testimony to what is also mentioned in the Life of Dr.
Done; namely, that a little before his death, he caused many Seals to be made,
and in them to be engraven the figure of Christ crucified on an Anchor, which
is the emblem of hope, and of which Dr. Done would often say, Crux mihi
Anchora. These Seals, he sent to most of those friends on which he put a value;
and, at Mr. Herberts death, these Verses were found wrapped up with that Seal
which was by the Doctor given to him.

When my dear Friend, could write no more,
He gave this Seal, and, so gave ore.
When winds and waves rise highest, I am sure,
This Anchor keeps my faith, that, me secure.
At this time of being Orator, he had learnt to understand the Italian,
Spanish, and French Tongues very perfectly; hoping, that as his Predecessor, so
he might in time attain the place of a Secretary of State, being then high in
the Kings favor; and, not meanly valued and loved by the most eminent and most
powerful of the Court Nobility: This, and the love of a Court-conversation mixed
with a laudable ambition to be something more then he then was, drew him often
from Cambridge to attend the King, who then gave him a Sine Cure, which fell
into His Majesty's disposal, I think, by the death of the Bishop of St. Asaph.
It was the same, that Queen Elizabeth had formerly given to her Favorite Sir
Philip Sidney; and valued to be worth an hundred and twenty pound per Annum.
With this, and his Annuity, and the advantage of his College, and of his
Oratorship, he enjoyed his gentile humor for Clothes, and Court-like company,
and seldom looked toward Cambridge, unless the King were there, and then he
never failed; but, at other times, left the manage of his Orators place, to his
learned friend Mr. Herbert Thorndike, who is now Prebend of Westminster.

I may not omit to tell, that he had often designed to leave the University,
and decline all Study, which he judged did impair his health; for he had a body
apt to a Consumption, and to Fevers, and other infirmities which he judged were
increased by his Studies; for he would often say, He had a Wit, like a
Penknife in a narrow sheath, too sharp for his Body: But his Mother would by
no means allow him to leave the University, or to travel; to which, though he
inclined very much, yet he would by no means satisfy his own desires at so
dear a rate, as to prove an undutiful Son to so affectionate a Mother; but, did
always submit to her wisdom: And, what I have now said, may partly appear in a
Copy of Verses in his printed Poems; it is one of those that bears the title of
Affliction: And it appears to be a pious reflection on Gods providence, and
some passages of his life, and in which he says, WHereas my birth and spirit
rather took
The way that takes the Town:
Thou did betray me to a lingering Book,
And wrap me in a Gown.
I was entangled in a World of strife,
Before I had the power to change my life.
Yet f^r I threatened often the Siege to raise,
Not simpring all mine age:
Thou often did with Academick praise,
Melt, and dissolve my rage;
I took the sweetened Pill, till I came where
I could not go away, nor persevere.
Yet, least perchance, I should too happy be
In my unhappiness;
Turning my purge to food, theu throw'st me
Into more sicknesses.
Thus does thy power, Cross-byas me, not making
Thine own gifts good; yet, me from my ways taking.
Now I am here, what thou will do with me
None of my Books will show:
I read, and sigh, and wish I were a Tree,
For then sure I should grow
To fruit or shade; at least, some Bird would trust
Her Household with me, and I would be just.
Yet, though thou troublest me, I must be meek;
In weakness must be stout:
Well, I will change my service, and go seek
Some other Master out:
Ah my dear God! though I am clean forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.
G. H.


In this time of Mr. Herberts attendance and expectation of some good occasion
to remove him from Cambridge, to Court; God, in whom there is an unseen Chain
of Causes, did in a short time put an end to the lives of two of his most
oblieging and most powerful friends, Lodowick Duke of Richmond, and James
Marquess of Hamilton; and not long after him, King James dyed, and with them,
all Mr. Herbert's Court-hopes: So that he presently betook himself to a Retreat
from London, to a Friend in Kent, where he lived very privately, and was such a
lover of solitariness, as was judged to impair his health. In this time of
Retirement, he had many Conflicts with himself, Whether he should return to the
painted pleasures of a Court-life, or betake himself to a study of Divinity,
and enter into Sacred Orders? (to which his dear Mother had often persuaded
him) These were such Conflicts, as they only can know, that have endured them;
for, ambitious Desires, and the outward Glory of this World, are not easily
laid aside; but, at last, God inclined him to put on a resolution to serve at
his Altar.

He did at his return to London, acquaint a Court-friend with his resolution to
enter into Sacred Orders, who persuaded him to alter it, as too mean an
employment, and too much below his birth, and the excellent abilities and
endowments of his mind. To whom he replied, It has been formerly judged, that
the Domestic Servants of the King of Heaven, should be of the noblest Families
on Earth: and, though the Iniquity of the late Times have made Clergymen
meanly valued, and the sacred name of Priest contemptible; yet, I will labor
to make it honorable, by consecrating all my learning, and all my poor
abilities, to advance the glory of that God that gave them; knowing, that I can
never do too much for him, that has done so much for me, as to make me a
Christian. And I will labor to be like my Savior, by making Humility lovely
in the eyes of all men, and by following the merciful and meek example of my
dear Jesus.

This was then his resolution, and the God of Constancy, who intended him for a
great example of virtue, continued him in it; for within that year he was made
Deacon, but the day when, or by whom, I cannot learn; but that he was about
that time made Deacon, is most certain; for I find by the Records of Lincoln,
that he was made Prebend of Layton Ecclesia, in the Dioces of Lincoln, July 15.
1626. and that this Prebend was given him, by John, then Lord Bishop of that
See. And now, he had a fit occasion to show that Piety and Bounty that was
derived from his generous Mother, and his other memorable Ancestors, and the
occasion was this.

This Layton Ecclesia, is a Village near to Spalden in the County of
Huntington, and the greatest part of the Parish was fallen down, and that of it
which stood, was so decayed, so little, and so useless, that the Parishioners
could not meet to perform their Duty to God in public prayer and praises; and
thus it had been for almost 20 years, in which time there had been some faint
endeavors for a public Collection, to enable the Parishioners to rebuild it;
but, with no success, till Mr. Herbert undertook it; and he, by his own, and
the contribution of many of his Kindred, and other noble Friends, undertook the
Re^edification of it; and, made it so much his whole business, that he became
restless, till he saw it finished as it now stands; being, for the workmanship,
a costly Mosaic: for the form, an exact Cross; and, for the decency and
beauty, I am assured it is the most remarkable Parish Church, that this Nation
affords. He lived to see it so Wainscoated, as to be exceeded by none; and, by
his order, the Reading Pew, and Pulpit, were a little distant from each other,
and both of an equal height; for, he would often say, They should neither have
a precedence or priority of the other: but, that Prayer and Preaching being
equally useful, might agree like Brethren, and have an equal honor and
estimation.

Before I proceed farther, I must look back to the time of Mr. Herberts being
made Prebend, and tell the Reader, that not long after, his Mother being
informed of his intentions to Rebuld that Church; and, apprehending the great
trouble and charge that he was like to draw upon himself, his Relations, and
Friends, before it could be finished; sent for him from London to Chelsey (where
he then dwelt) and at his coming, said -- George, I sent for you, to persuade
you to commit Simony, by giving your Patron as good a gift as he has given to
you; namely, that you give him back his Preb^nd; for, George, it is not for
your weak body, and empty purse, to undertake to build Churches. To which, he
desired he might have a Days time to consider, and then make her an Answer:
And at his return to her at the next Day, when he had first desired her
blessing, and she given it him, his next request was, That she would at the Age
of Thirty three Years, allow him to become an undutiful Son; for, he had made a
kind of Vow to God, that if he were able, he would Re-build that Church: And
then, showed her such reasons for his resolution, that she presently subscribed
to be one of his Benefactors, and undertook to solicit William Earl of
Pembroke, to be another, who subscribed for 50 l. and not long after, by a
witty, and persuasive Letter from Mr. Herbert, made it 50 l. more. And in this
nomination of some of his Benefactors, James Duke of Lenox, and his brother Sir
Henry Herbert, ought to be remembered; and the bounty of Mr. Nicholas Farrer,
and Mr. John Woodnot; the one, a Gentleman in the Neighborhood of Layton, and
the other, a Goldsmith in Fosterlane, London, ought not to be forgotten; for
the memory of such men ought to outlive their lives. Of Mr. Farrer, I shall
hereafter give an account in a more seasonable place; but before I proceed
farther, I will give this short account of Mr. John Woodnot.

He was a man, that had considered, overgrown Estates do often require more
care and watchfulness to preserve, than get them; and, that there be many
Discontents, that Riches cure not; and did therefore set limits to himself as
to the desire of wealth: And having attained so much as to be able to show some
mercy to the Poor, and preserve a competence for himself, he dedicated the
remaining part of his life to the service of God; and being useful for his
Friends, he proved to be so to Mr. Herbert; for, beside his own bounty, he
collected and returned most of the money that was paid for the Re-building of
that Church; he kept all the account of the charges, and would often go down to
state them, and see all the Workmen paid. When I have said, that this good man
was a useful Friend to Mr. Herberts Father, to his Mother, and continued to be
so to him, till he closed his eyes on his Deathbed; I will forbear to say
more, till I have the next fair occasion to mention the holy friendship that
was betwixt him, and Mr. Herbert.

About the year 1629. and the 34 th of his Age, Mr. Herbert was seized with a
sharp Quotidian Ague, and thought to remove it by the change of Air; to which
end, he went to Woodford in Essex, but thither more chiefly, to enjoy the
company of his beloved Brother Sir Henry Herbert, and other Friends. In his
House he remained about Twelve Months, and there became his own Physician, and
cured himself of his Ague, by forbearing Drink, and eating no Meat, no not
Mutton, nor a Hen, or Pidgeon, unless they were salted; and by such a constant
Diet, he removed his Ague, but with inconveniences that were worse; for he
brought upon himself a disposition to Rheums, and other weaknesses, and a
supposed Consumption. And it is to be Noted, that in the sharpest of his
extreme Fits, he would often say, Lord abate my great affliction, and increase
my patience; but, Lord I repine not, I am dumb, Lord, before thee, because thou
do it. By which, and a sanctified submission to the Will of God, he showed
he was inclinable to bear the sweet yoke of Christian Discipline, both then,
and in the latter part of his life; of which, there will be many true
Testimonies.

And now his care was to recover from his Consumption by a change, from
Woodford into such an air as was most proper to that end. And his remove was
from Woodford to Dantsey in Wiltshire, a noble House which stands in a choice
Air, the owner of it then was, the Lord Danvers Earl of Danby, who loved Mr.
Herbert much, and allowed him such an apartment in that House, as might best
suit Mr. Herberts accommodation and liking. And, in this place, by a spare Diet,
declining all perplexing Studies, moderate exercise, and a cheerful
conversation; his health was apparently improved to a good degree, of strength
and cheerfulness: And then, he declared his resolution to marry, and to enter
into the Sacred Orders of Priesthood: These had long been the desires of his
Mother, and his other Relations; but, she lived not to see either: for, she
dyed in the year 1627. And, though he was disobedient to her about Layton
Church, yet, in conformity to her will, he kept his Fellowship in Cambridge,
and his Orators place, till after her death; and then, declined both: And, the
last, the more willingly, that he might be succeeded by his friend Robert
Creighton, who now is Dr. Creighton, and the worthy Dean of Wells.

I shall now proceed to his Marriage, in order to which, it will be convenient,
that I first give the Reader a short view of his person, and then, an account
of his Wife, and of some circumstances concerning both. -- He was for his
person of a stature inclining toward Tallness; his body was very strait, and
so far from being cumbred with too much flesh, that he was lean to an
extremity. His aspect was cheerful, and his speech and motion did both declare
him a Gentleman; and were all so meek and oblieging, that both then, and at his
death, he was said to have no Enemy.

These, and his other visible virtues, begot him so much love from a Gentleman
of a Noble fortune, and a near Kinsman to his friend the Earl of Danby; namely,
from Mr. Charles Danvers of Bainton, in the County of Wilts Esquire That Mr.
Danvers having known him long, and familiarly, did so much affect him, that he
often, and publicly declared a desire that Mr. Herbert would marry any of his
Nine Daughters (for he had so many) but rather, his Daughter Jane, than any
other, because Jane was his beloved Daughter: And he had often said the same to
Mr. Herbert himself; and, that if he could like her for a Wife, and she him for
a Husband, Jane should have a double blessing: And Mr. Danvers had so often
said the like to Jane, and so much commended Mr. Herbert to her, that Jane
became so much a Platonic, as to fall in love with Mr. Herbert unseen.

This was a fair preparation for a Marriage; but alas, her father dyed before
Mr. Herberts retirement to Dantsey; yet some friends to both parties, procured
their meeting; at which time, a mutual affection entered into both their
hearts; and as a Conqueror, enters into a surprised City, so Love having got
that possession governed, and made there such Laws and Resolutions, as neither
party was able to resist; insomuch, that she changed her name into Herbert, the
third day after this first Interview.

This haste, might in others be thought a Love-phrensie, or worse, but it was
not; for they wooed so like Princes, as to have select Proxies; such, as were
friends to both parties; such, as well understood Mr. Herberts, and her temper
of mind; and, their Estates so well, before this Interview, that, the
suddenness was justifiable, by the st^ictest Rules of prudence: And, the more,
because it proved so happy to both parties; for, the eternal lover of Mankind,
made them happy in each others mutual affections, and compliance; so happy,
that there never was any opposition betwixt them, unless it were a Contest
which should most incline to a compliance with the others desires. And, though
this begot, and continued in them, such a mutual love and joy, and content, as
was no way defective; yet, this mutual content and love, and joy, did receive a
daily augmentation, by such daily obligingness to each other, as still added
such new affluences to the former fullness of these divine Souls, as was only
improvable in Heaven, where they now enjoy it.

About three months after his Marriage, Dr. Curle, who was then Rector of
Bemerton in Wiltshire, was made Bishop of Bath and Wells, (and not long after
Translated to Winchester) and by that means the presentation of a Clerk to
Bemerton, did not fall to the Earl of Pembroke (who was the undoubted Patron of
it) but to the King, by reason of Dr. Curles advancement: But Philip, then Earl
of Pembroke (for William was lately dead) requested the King to bestow it upon
his Kinsman George Herbert; and the King said, Most willingly to Mr. Herbert,
if it were worth his acceptance: And the Earl as willingly and suddenly sent it
him, without seeking; but though Mr. Herbert had formerly put on a resolution
for the Clergy: yet, the apprehension of the last great Account that he was to
make for the Cure of so many Souls, made him fast and pray, and consider, for
not less than a month: in which time, he had some resolutions to decline both
the Priesthood, and that living. And in this time of considering, He endured
(as he would often say) such spiritual Conflicts, as none can think, but only
those that have endured them.

In the midst of these Conflicts, his old and dear friend Mr. John Woodnot,
took a journey to salute him at Bainton (where he then was with his Wives
Friends and Relations) and was joyful to be an Eyewitness of his Health, and
happy Marriage. And after they had rejoiced together some few days, they two
took a Journey to Wilton, the famous Seat of the Earls of Pembroke; at which
time, the King, the Earl, and the whole Court were there, or at Salisbury,
which is near to it. At which time Mr. Herbert presented his Thanks to the
Earl, for his presentation to Bemerton, but had not yet resolved to accept of
it, and told him the reason why; but that Night, the Earl acquainted Dr. Laud,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, with his Kinsmans irresolution. And the Bishop
did the next day so convince Mr. Herbert, That the refusal of it was a sin;
that a Tailor was sent for to come speedily from Salisbury to Wilton, to take
measure, and make him Canonical Clothes, against next day, which the Tailor
did; and Mr. Herbert being so habited, went with his presentation to the
learned Dr. Davenant, who was then Bishop of Salisbury, and he gave him
Institution immediately (for Mr. Herbert had been made Deacon some years
before) and he was also the same day (which was April 26. 1630. inducted into
the good and more pleasant, than healthful Parsonage of Bemerton, which is a
Mile from Salisbury.

I have now brought him to his Parsonage of Bemerton, and to the Thirty sixth
Year of his Age, and must now stop, and bespeak the Reader to prepare for an
almost incredible story, of the great sanctity of the short remainder of his
holy life; a life so full of Charity, Humility, and all Christian virtues, that
it deserves the eloquence of St. Chrysostom to commend and declare it. A life,
that if it were related by a Pen like his, there would then be no need for this
Age to look back into times past for the examples of primitive piety; for they
might be all found in the life of George Herbert. But now, alas, who is fit to
undertake it, I confess I am not, and am not pleased with my self that must;
and profess my self amazed, when I consider how few of the Clergy lived like
him then; and, how many live so unlike him now: But it becomes not me to
censure, my design is rather to assure the Reader, that I have used very great
diligence to inform my self, that I might inform him of the truth of what
follows, and I will do that with sincerity.

When at his Induction he was shut into Bemerton Church, being left there alone
to Toll the Bell, as the Law requires him; he staid so much longer than an
ordinary time, before he returned to his Friends that staid expecting him at
the Church-door; that his Friend, Mr. Woodnot, looked in at the Church-window,
and saw him lie prostrate on the ground before the Altar: at which time and
place (as he after told Mr. Woodnot) he set some Rules to himself, for the
future manage of his life; and then and there made a vow, to labor to keep
them.

And the same night that he had his Induction, he said to Mr. Woodnot, I now
look back upon my aspiring thoughts, and think my self more happy than if I had
attained what I so ambitiously thirsted for: And, I can now behold the Court
with an impartial Eye, and see plainly, that it is made up of Fraud, and
Titles, and Flattery, and many other such empty, imaginary painted Pleasures.
Pleasures, that are so empty, as not to satisfy when they are enjoyed; but, in
God and his service, is a fullness of all joy and pleasure, and no satiety: And
I will now use all my endeavors to bring my Relations and Dependants to a love
and reliance on him, who never fails those that trust him. But above all, I
will be sure to live well because the virtuous life of a Clergyman, is the
most powerful eloquence to persuade all that see it, to reverence and love, and
at least to desire to live like him. And this I will do, because I know we live
in an Age that has more need of good examples, than precepts. And I beseech
that God, who has honored me so much as to call me to serve at his Altar:
that, as by his special grace he has put into my heart these good desires, and
resolutions: so, he will be his assisting grace enable me to bring the same to
good effect; and, that my humble and charitable life, may so win upon others,
as to bring glory to my Jesus, whom I have this day taken to be my Master and
Governor; and am so proud of his service, that I will always observe, and
obey, and do his Will, and always call him Jesus my Master: and I will always
contemn my birth, or any title or dignity that can be conferred upon me, when I
shall compare them with any title of being a Priest, and serving at the Altar
of Jesus my Master.

And that he did so, may appear in many parts of his Book of Sacred Poems;
especially, in that which he calls the Odor. In which he seems to rejoice in
his thoughts of that word Jesus, and to say the adding these words my Master to
it, and the often repetition of them, seemed to persume his mind, and leave an
oriental fragrancy in his very breath. And for his unforced choice to serve at
Gods Altar, he seems in another place ( the Pearl, Matthew. 13.) to rejoice and
say -- He knew the ways of Learning: knew, what nature does willingly; and
what, when it is for^'d by fire: knew the ways of honor, and when glory
^nclines the Soul to noble expressions; know ^^^ Court; knew the ways of
pleasure, of lo^^ of wit, of music, and upon what terms he declined all these
for the service of his Master Jesus; and concludes, saying, That, through these
Labyrinths, not my grovelling Wit:
But, thy Silk-twist, let down from Heaven to me;
Did, both conduct, and teach me, how by it,
To climb to thee.


The third day after he was made Rector of Bemerton, and had changed his sword
and silk Clothes into a Canonical Coat; he returned so habited with his friend
Mr. Woodnot to Bainton: And, immediately after he had seen and saluted his
Wife, he said to her -- You are now a Ministers Wife, and must now so far
forget your fathers house, as not to claim a precedence of any of your
Parishioners; for you are to know, that a Priests Wife can challenge no
precedence or place, but that which she purchases by her obliging humility;
and, I am sure, places so purchased, do best become them. And, let me tell you,
That I am so good a Herald, as to assure you that this is truth. And she was so
mee^ a Wife, as to assure him it was no vexing News to her, and that he should
see her observe it with a cheerful willingness. And indeed her unforced
humility, that humility that was in her so original, as to be born with her,
made her so happy as to do so; and her doing so, begot her an unfeigned love,
and a serviceable respect from all that converst with her; and this love
followed her in all places, as inseparably, as shadows follow substances in
Sunshine.

It was not many days before he returned back to Bemerton, to view the Church,
and repair the Chancel; and indeed, to re-build three parts of his house which
was fallen down by reason of his Predecessors living at a better Parsonage
house; namely, at Minal, 16 or 20 miles from this place. At which time of Mr.
Herberts coming alone to Bemerton, there came to him a poor old Woman, with an
intent to acquaint him with her necessitous condition, and with some troubles
of her mind; but after she had spoke some few words to him, she was surpised
with a fear and shortness of breath, so that her spirits and speech failed her;
which he perceiving, did so compassionate her, that he took her by the hand,
and said, Speak good Mother, be not afraid to speak to me; for, I am a man that
will hear you with patience; and will relieve your necessities too, if I be
able: and this I will do willingly, and therefore, Mother, be not afraid to
acquaint me with what you desire. After which comfortable speech, he again took
her by the hand, made her sit down by him, and understanding she was of his
Parish, he told her, He would be acquainted with her, and take her into his
care: And having with patience heard and understood her wants (and it is some
relief to be but heard with patience) he comforted her by his meek behavior
and counsel; but because that cost him nothing, he relieved her with money too,
and so sent her home with a cheerful heart, praising God, and praying for him.
Thus worthy, and (like David's blessed man) thus lowly, was Mr. George Herbert
in his own eyes.

At his return that Night to his Wife at Bainton, he gave her an account of the
passages 'twixt him and the poor Woman, with which she was so affected, that
she went next day to Salisbury, and there bought a pair of Blankets, and sent
them as a Token of her love to the poor Woman, and with them a Message, That
she would see and be acquainted with her, when her house was built at Bemerton.

There be many such passages both of him and his Wife, of which, some few will
be related; but I shall first tell, that he hasted to get the Parish Church
repaired; then, to beautify the Chapel (which stands near his house) and that
at his own great charge. He then proceeded to re-build the Parsonage-house,
which he did also very completely, and at his own charge; and having done this
good work, he caused these Verses to be writ upon, or engraven in the Mantle of
the Chimney in his Hall. TO MY SUCCESSOR.
If thou chance for to find
A new House to thy mind,
And built without thy Cost:
Be good to the Poor,
As God gives thee store,
And then, my Labor's not lost.


We will now by the Readers favor suppose him fixed at Bemerton, and grant him
to have seen the Church repaired, and the Chapel belonging to it very decently
adorned, at his own great charge (which is a real Truth) and having now fixed
him there, I shall proceed to give an account of the rest of his behavior to
his Parishioners, and those many others that knew him.

Doubtless Mr. Herbert had considered and given Rules to himself for his
Christian carriage both to God and man before he entered into Holy Orders. And
it is not unlike, but that he renewed those resolutions at his prostration
before the Holy Altar, at his Induction into the Church of Bemerton; but as yet
he was but a Deacon, and therefore longed for the next Ember-week, that he
might be ordained Priest, and made capable of administering both the Sacraments.
At which time, the Reverend Doctor Humphrey Hinchman, now Lord Bishop of London
(who does not mention him, but with some veneration for the life and excellent
learning of Mr. George Herbert) tells me, He laid his hand on Mr. Herberts
Head, and (alas!) within less than three Years, lent his Shoulder to carry his
dear Friend to his Grave.

And, that Mr. Herbert might the better preserve those holy Rules which such a
Priest as he intended to be, ought to observe; and, that time might not
insensibly blot them out of his memory, but the next year show him his
variations from this years resolutions; he therefore, did set down his Rules in
that order, as the World now sees them printed in a little Book, called, The
Country Parson, in which some of his Rules are: The Parsons Knowledge. The
Parson on Sundays. The Parson Praying. The Parson Preaching. The Parsons
Charity. The Parson comforting the Sick. The Parson Arguing. The Parson
Condescending. The Parson in his Journey. The Parson in his Mirth. The Parson
with his Churchwardens. The Parsons Blessing the People.


And his behavior toward God and man, may be said to be a practical Comment on
these, and the other holy Rules set down in that useful Book. A Book, so full
of plain, prudent and useful Rules, that, that Country Parson, that can spare
12 d. and yet wants, is scarce excusable; because it will both direct him what
he is to do, and convince him for not having done it.

At the Death of Mr. Herbert, this Book fell into the hands of his friend Mr.
Woodnot; and he commended it into the trusty hands of Mr. Bar. Oly. who
published it with a most conscientious, and excellent Preface; from which I
have had some of those Truths, that are related in this life of Mr. Herbert.

The Text for his first Sermon, was taken out of Solomon's Proverbs, and the
words were, Keep thy heart with all diligence. In which first Sermon, he gave
his Parishioners many necessary, holy, safe Rules, for the discharge of a good
Conscience, both to God and man. And, delivered his Sermon after a most florid
manner, both with great learning and eloquence. And at the close of his Sermon,
told them, That should not be his constant way of Preaching, and that he would
not fill their heads with unnecessary Notions^ but, that for their sakes, his
language and his expressions should be more plain and practical in his future
Sermons. And he then made it his humble request, That they would be constant to
the Afternoons Service, and Catechizing. And showed them convincing reasons why
he desired it; and his obliging example and persuasions, brought them to a
willing conformity to his desires.

The Texts for all his Sermons, were constantly taken out of the Gospel for the
day; and he did as constantly declare why the Church did appoint that portion
of Scripture to be that day read: And in what manner the Collect for every
Sunday does refer to the Gospel, or to the Epistle then read to them; and, that
they might pray with understanding, he did usually take occasion to explain,
not only the Collect for every particular day, but the reasons of all the other
Collects and Responses in our Service; and, made it appear to them, that, the
whole Service of the Church, was a reasonable, and therefore an acceptable
Sacrifice to God; as namely, that we begin with Confession of our selves to be
vile, miserable sinners; and, that we begin so, because till we have confessed
our selves to be such, we are not capable of that mercy which we acknowledge we
need, and pray for; but having in the prayer of our Lord, begged pardon for
those sins which we have confessed: And hoping, that as the Priest has declared
our Absolution, so by our public Confession, and real Repentance, we have
obtained that pardon: Then, we dare proceed to beg of the Lord, to open our
lips, that our mouths may show forth his praise; for, till then, we are neither
able, nor worthy to praise him: But this being supposed, we are then fit to
say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; and fit to
proceed to a further service of our God, in the Collects, and Psalms, and Lands
that follow in the Service.

And, as to these Psalms and Lauds, he proceeded to inform them, why they were
so often, and some of them daily repeated in our Churchservice: namely, the
Psalms every Month, because they be an Historical and thankful repetition of
mercies past; and, such a composition of prayers and praises, as ought to be
repeated often, and publicly; for, with such Sacrifices, God is honored, and
well-pleased. This, for the Psalms.

And for the Hymns and Lauds, appointed to be daily repeated or sung after the
first and second Lessons were read to the Congregation, he proceeded to inform
them, that it was most reasonable, after they have heard the will and goodness
of God declared or preached by the Priest in his reading the two Chapters, that
it was then a seasonable Duty to rise up and express their gratitude to
Almighty God for those his mercies to them, and to all Mankind, and say with
the blessed Virgin, That their Souls do magnify the Lord, and that their
spirits do also rejoice in God their Savior: And that it was their Duty also
to rejoice with Simeon in his Song, and say with him, That their eyes have also
seen their salvation; for they have seen that salvation which was but
prophesied till his time; and he then broke out in expressions of joy to see
it: but they live to see it daily, in the History of it, and therefore ought
daily to rejoice, and daily to offer up their Sacrifices of praise to their
God, for that and all his mercies. A service, which is now the constant
employment of that blessed Virgin, and Simeon, and all those blessed Saints
that are possessed of Heaven; and where they are at this time interchangeably,
and constantly singing, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God, Glory be to God on High, and
on Earth peace. And he taught them, that to do this, was an acceptable service
to God, because the Prophet David says in his Psalms, He that praises the
Lord, honors him.

He made them to understand, how happy they be that are freed from the
encumbrances of that Law which our Forefathers groaned under: namely; from the
Legal Sacrifices; and from the many Ceremonies of the Levitical Law: freed from
Circumcision, and from the strict observation of the Jewish Sabbath, and the
like: And he made them know, that having received so many, and so great
blessings, by being born since the days of our Savior, it must be an
acceptable Sacrifice to Almighty God, for them to acknowledge those blessings,
and stand up and worship, and say as Zacharias did, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has (in our days) visited and redeemed his people; and (he
has in our days) remembered, and showed that mercy which by the mouth of the
Prophets, he promised to our Forefathers: and this he has done, according to
his holy Covenant made with them: And we live to see and enjoy the benefit of
it, in his Birth, in his Life, his Passion, his Resurrection and Ascension into
Heaven, where he now sits sensible of all our temptations and infirmities; and
where he is at this present time making intercession for us, to his, and our
Father, and therefore they ought daily to express their public gratulations,
and say daily with Zacharias, Blessed be that Lord God of Israel that has thus
visited, and thus redeemed his people. -- These were some of the reasons by
which Mr. Herbert instructed his Congregation for the use of the Psalms, and
the Hymns appointed to be daily sung or said in the Church Service.

He informed them, when the Priest did pray only for the Congregation, and not
for himself; and when they did only pray for him, as namely, after the
repetition of the Creed, before he proceeds to pray the Lords prayer, or any of
the appointed Collects, the Priest is directed to kneel down, and pray for
them, saying -- The Lord be with you -- And then they pray for him, saying --
And with thy spirit. and he assured them, that when there is such mutual love,
and such joint prayers offered for each other, then the holy Angels look down
from Heaven, and are ready to carry such charitable desires to God Almighty,
and he as ready to receive them; and that a Christian Congregation calling thus
upon God, with one heart, and one voice, and in one reverend and humble posture
look as beautifully as Jerusalem, that is at peace with it self.

He instructed them, why the prayer of our Lord was prayed often in every full
service of the Church; namely, at the conclusion of the several parts of that
Service; and prayed then, not only because it was composed and commanded by our
Jesus that made it, but as a perfect pattern for our less perfect Forms of
prayer, and therefore fittest to sum up and conclude all our imperfect
Petitions.

He instructed them, that as by the second Commandment we are required not to
bow down, or worship an Idol, or false god; so, by the contrary Rule, we are to
bow down and kneel, or stand up and worship the true God: And he instructed
them, why the Church required the Congregation to stand up, at the repetition
of the Creeds; namely, because they did thereby declare both their obedience to
the Church, and an assent to that faith into which they had been baptiz^d. And
he taught them, that in that sho^ter Creed, or Doxology so often repeated
daily; they also stood up to testify their belief to be, that, the God that
they trusted in was one God, and three persons the Father the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; to whom, the Priest gave glory: And because there had been Heretic ^s
that had denied some of these three persons to be God, therefore the
Congregation stood up and honored him, by con^essing and saying, It was so in
the beginning is now so, and shall ever be so World without end. And as gave
their assent to this be^^ef, by saying Amen.

He instructed them, what benefit they had, by the Churches appointing the ^
elebration of Holy Days, and the excellent use of them; namely, that they were
set apart for particular Commemorations of particular mercies received from
Almighty God; and (as Reve^end Mr. Hooker says) to be the Land mar^s to
distinguish times; for by them we are taught to take notice how the years pass
by us; and, that we ought not to let them pass without a Celebration of praise
for those mercies which they give us occasion to remember: and therefore the
year is appointed to begin the 25th day of March; a day, in which we
commemorate the Angels appearing to the B. Virgin, with the joyful tidings that
she should conc^ive and bear a Son, that should be the redeemer of Mankind:
and, she did so Forty weeks after this joyful salutation; namely, at our
Christmas, a day in which we commemorate his Birth, with joy and praise; and
that eight days after this happy Birth, we celebrate his Circumcision; namely,
in that which we call New Years day. And that upon that we call Twelfth-day, we
commemorate the manifestation of the unsearchable riches of Jesus to the
Gentiles: And that day we also celebrate the memory of his goodness in sending
a Star to guide the three wise men from the East to Bethlem, that they might
there worship, and present him with their oblations of Gold, Frankincense, and
Myrrh. And he (Mr. Herbert) instructed them, that Jesus was Forty days after
his Birth, presented by his blessed mother in the Temple; namely, on that day
which we call, the Purification of the blessed Virgin, Saint Mary. And he
instructed them, that by the Lent-fast, we imitate and commemorate our Saviors
humiliation in fasting Forty days; and, that we ought to endeavor to be like
him in purity. And, that on Good friday we commemorate and condole his
Crucifixion. And, at Easter, commemorate his glorious Resurrection. And he
taught them, that after Jesus had manifested himself to his Disciples, to be
that Christ that was crucified, dead and buried; that then by his appearing and
conversing with them for the space of Forty days after his Resurrection, he
then, and not till then, ascended into Heaven, in the sight of his Disciples,
namely, on that day which we call the Ascension, or Holy Thursday. And that we
then celebrate the performance of the promise which he made to his Disciples,
at or before his Ascension; namely, that though he left them, yet he would send
them the Holy Ghost to be their Comforter; and he did so on that day which the
Church calls Whit sunday -- Thus the Church keeps an Historical and circular
Commemoration of times, as they pass by us; of such times, as ought to incline
us to occasional praises, for the particular blessings which we do, or might
receive at those holy times.

He made them know, why the Church has appointed Ember-weeks; and, to know the
reason why the Commandments, and the Epistles and Gospels were to be read at
the Altar, or Communion Table: why the Priest was to pray the Litany Kneeling;
and, why to pray some Collects standing; and he gave them many other
observations, fit for his plain Congregation, but not fit for me now to
mention; for I must set limits to my Pen, and not make that a Treatise, which I
intended to be a much shorter account than I have made it; but I have done,
when I have told the Reader, that he was constant in Catechizing every Sunday
in the Afternoon, and that his Catechizing was after his second lesson, and in
the Pulpit, and that he never exceeded his half hour, and was always so happy
as to have a full Congregation,

But to this I must add, That if he were at any time too zealous in his
Sermons, it was, in reproving the indecencies of the peoples behavior, in the
time of Divine Service; and of those Ministers that hudled up the
Churchprayers, without a visible reverence and affection; namely, such as
seemed to say the Lords prayer, or a Collect in a breath; but for himself, his
custom was, to stop betwixt every Collect, and give the people time to consider
what they had prayed, and to force their desires affectionately to God, before
he engaged them into new Petitions.

And by this account of his diligence, to make his Parishioners understand
what, and why they prayed, and praised, and adored their Creator. I hope I
shall the more easily obtain the Readers belief to the following account of Mr.
Herberts own practice; which was, to appear constantly with his Wife, and three
Neeces (the daughters of a deceased Sister) and his whole Family, twice a day
at the Churchprayers, in the Chapel which does almost join so his
Parsonage-house. And for the time of his appearing, it was strictly ^t the
Canonical hours of Ten and Four; and then, and there, he lifted up pure and
charitable hands to God in the midst of the Congregation. And he would joy to
have spent that time in that place, where the honor of his Master Jesus
dwells; and there, by that inward devotion which he testified constantly by
an humble behavior, and visible adoration, he, like David, brought not only
his own Household thus to serve the Lord; but brought most of his Parishioners,
and many Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, constantly to make a part of his
Congregation twice a day; and some of the meaner sort of his Parish, did so
love and reverence Mr. Herbert, that they would let their Plow rest when Mr.
Herberts Saints-Bell rung to Prayers, that they might also offer their
devotions to God with him, and would then return back to their Plow. And his
most holy life was such, that it begot such reverence to God, and to him, that
they thought themselves the happier, when they carried Mr. Herberts blessing
back with them to their labor. Thus powerful was his reason, and example, to
persuade others to a practical piety.

And his constant public Prayers did never make him to neglect his own private
devotions, nor those prayers that he thought himself bound to perform with his
Family; which always were a Set-form, and not long; and he did always
conclude them with that Collect which the Church has appointed for the day or
week. -- Thus he made every days sanctity a step toward that Kingdom where
Impurity cannot enter.

His chiefest recreation was Music, in which heavenly Art he was a most
excellent Master, and, composed many divine Hymns and Anthems, which he set and
sung to his Lute or Viol; and, though he was a lover of re^iredness, yet his
love to Music was such, that he went usually twice every week on certain
appointed days, to the Cathedral Church in Salisbury; and at his return would
say, That his time spent in Prayer, and Cathedral Music, elevated his Soul,
and was his Heaven upon Earth: But before his return thence to Bemerton, he
would usually sing and play his part, at an appointed private Music meeting;
and, to justify this practice, he would often say, Religion does not banish
mirth, but only moderates, and sets rules to it.

And, as his desire to enjoy his Heaven upon Earth, drew him twice every week
to Salisbury, so, his walks thither, were the occasion of many happy accidents
to others, of which, I will mention some few.

In one of his walks to Salisbury, he overtook a Gentleman that is still living
in that City, and in their walk together, Mr. Herbert took a fair occasion to
talk with him, and humbly begged to be excused, if he asked him some account of
his faith; and said, I do this, the rather, because though you are not of my
Parish, yet I receive Tithe from you by the hand of your Tenant; and, Sir, I am
the bolder to do it, because I know there be some Sermonhearers, that be like
those Fishes, that always live in salt water, and yet are always fresh.

After which expression, Mr. Herbert asked him some needful Questions, and
having received his answer, gave him such Rules for the trial of his sincerity,
and for a practical piety, and in so loving and meek a manner, that the
Gentleman did so fall in love with him, and his discourse, that he would often
contrive to meet him in his walk to Salisbury, or to attend him back to
Bemerton; and still mentions the name of Mr. George Herbert with veneration,
and still praises God that he knew him.

In another of his Salisbury walks, he met with a Neighbor Minister, and after
some friendly Discourse betwixt them, and some Condolement for the wickedness
of the Times, and Contempt of the Clergy, Mr. Herbert took occcasion to say,

One Cure for these Distempers, would be for the Clergy themselves to keep the
Ember-Weeks strictly, and beg of their Parishioners to join with him in
Fasting and Prayers, for a more Religious Clergy.

And another Cure would be, for them to restore the great and neglected duty of
Catechizing, on which the salvation of so many of the poor and ignorant
Lay People does depend; but principally, that the Clergy themselves would be
sure to live unblameably; and that the dignified Clergy especially, which
preach Temperance, would avoid Surfeting, and take all occasions to express a
visible humility, and charity in their lives; for this would force a love and
an imitation, and an ^nfeigned reverence from all that knew them: ( And for
proof of this, we need no other Testimony, than the life and death of Dr. Lake,
late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells) This, ( said Mr. Herbert) would be a Cure
for the wickedness and growing Atheism of our Age. And, my dear Brother, till
this be done by us, and done in earnest, let no man expect a reformation of the
manners of the Laity: for it is not learning, but this, this only, that must do
it; and till then, the fault must lie at our doors.

In another walk to Salisbury, he saw a poor man, with a poorer horse, that was
fallen under his Load; they were both in distress, and needed present help;
which Mr. Herbert perceiving, put off his Canonical Coat, and helped the poor
man to unload, and after to load his horse: The poor man blessed him for it; and
he blessed the poor man, and was so like the good Samaritan, that he gave him
money to refresh both himself and his horse; and told him, That if he loved
himself, he should be merciful to his Beast. ^hus he left the poor man, and at
his coming to his musical friends at Salisbury,they began to wonder that Mr.
George Herbert, which used to be so trim and clean, came into that company so
soyl'd and discomposed; but he told them the occasion: And when one of the
company told him, He had disparaged himself by so dirty an employment; his
answer was, That the thought of what he had done, would prove Music to him at
Midnight; and the omission of it, would have upbraided and made discord in his
Conscience, whenever he should pass by that place; for if I be bound to pray
for all that be in distress, I am sure I am bound so far as it is in my power
to practice what I pray for. And though I do not wish for the like occasion
every day yet let me tell you, I would not willingly pass one day of my life,
without comforting a sad soul, or showing mercy; and I praise God for this
occasion: And now let us tune our Instruments.

Thus, as our blessed Savior after his Resurrection, did take occasion to
interpret the Scripture to Cleopas, and that other Disciple which he met with
and accompanied too in their journey to Emmaus; so Mr. Herbert, in his path
toward Heaven, did daily take any fair occasion to instruct the ignorant, or
comfort any that were in affliction; and did always confirm his precepts, by
showing mercy.

And he was most happy in his Wifes unforced compliance with his acts of
Charity, whom he made his Almoner, and paid constantly into her hand, a tenth
penny of what money he received for Tithe, and gave her a power to dispose that
to the poor of his Parish, and with it a power to dispose a tenth part of the
Corn that came yearly into his Barn; which trust she did most faithfully
perform, and would often offer to him an account of her stewardship, and as
often beg an enlargement of his bounty, for she rejoiced in the employment; and
this was usually laid out by her in Blankets and Shoes, for some such poor
people, as she knew to stand in most need of them. This, as to her Charity --
And for his own, he set no limits to it; nor did ever turn his face from any
that he saw in want; but would relieve them, especially his poor Neighbors, to
the meanest of whose Houses, he would go and inform himself of their wants, and
relieve them cheerfully if they were in distress; and would always praise God,
as much for being willing, as for being able to do it. And, when he was advised
by a friend to be more frugal, because he might have Children, his answer was,
He would not see the danger of want so far off; but, being the Scripture does
so commend Charity, as to tell us, that Charity is the top of Christian
virtues, the covering of sins, the fulfilling of the Law, the life of Faith.
And, that Charity has a promise of the blessings of this life, and of a reward
in that life which is to come; being these, and more excellent things are in
Scripture spoken of thee O Charity; and being all my Tithes, and Churchdues,
are a Deodate from thee O my God; make me, O my God, so far to trust thy
promise, as to return them back to thee; and, by thy grace, I will do so, in
distributing them to any of thy poor members that are in distress, or do but
bear the image of Jesus my Master. Sir (said he to his friend) my Wife has a
competent maintenance secured her after my death, and therefore as this is my
prayer, so this my resolution shall by Gods grace be unalterable.

This may be some account of the excellencies of the active part of his life,
and thus he continued, till a Consumption so weakened him, as to confine him to
his House, or to the Chapel, which does almost join to it; in which, he
continued to read Prayers constantly twice every day, though he were very weak;
in one of which times of his reading, his Wife observed him to read in pain,
and told him so, and that it wasted his spirits, weakened him, and he confessed
it, but said, His life could not be better spent, than in the service of his
Master Jesus, who had done and suffered so much for him: But, he said, I will
not be wilful, for Mr. Bostock shall be appointed to read Prayers for me to
morrow, and I will now be only a hearer of them, till this mortal shall put on
immortality. And Mr. Bostock did the next day undertake and continue this happy
employment, till Mr. Herberts death. -- This Mr. Bostock was a learned and
virtuous man, an old friend of Mr. Herberts, and then his Cu^are to the Church
of Fulston, which is a mile from Bemerton, to which Church, Bemerton is but a
Chapel of ease. -- And, this Mr. Bostock did also constantly supply the
Churchservice for Mr. Herbert in that Chapel, when the Musick-meeting at
Salisbury, caused his absence from it.

About one month before his death, his friend Mr. Farrer (for an account of
whom I am by promise indebted to the Reader, and intend to make him sudden
payment) sent Mr. Edmund Duncon (who is now Rector of Friar Barnet in the
County of Middlesex) from his House of Gidden Hall, which is near to
Huntington, to see Mr. Herbert, and to assure him, he wanted not his daily
prayers for his recovery; and Mr. Duncon was to return back to Gidden, with an
account of Mr. Herberts condition. Mr. Duncon found him at that time lying on
his Bed, or on a Pallet; but at his seeing Mr. Duncon, he raised himself
vigorously, saluted him, and with some earnestness inquired the health of his
brother Farrer, of which Mr. Duncon satisfied him; and after a conference of
Mr. Farrers holy life and the manner of his constant serving God, he said to
Mr. Duncon -- Sir, I see by your habit that you are a Priest, and I desire you
to pray with me; which being granted, Mr. Duncon asked him, what Prayers? to
which, Mr. Herberts answer was, O Sir, the Prayers of my Mother, the Church of
England, no other Prayers are equal to them; but, at this time, I beg of you to
pray only the Litany. for I am weak and faint, and Mr. Duncon did so After
which, and some other discourse of Mr. Farrer, Mrs. Herbert provided Mr. Duncon
a plain Supper, and a clean Lodging, and he betook himself to rest -- This Mr.
Duncon tells me; and, that at his first view of Mr. Herbert, he saw majesty and
humility so reconciled in his looks and behavior, as begot in him an awful
reverence for his person, and says, his discourse was so pious, and his motion
so gentile and meek, that after almost forty years, they remain still fresh in
his memory.

The next morning, Mr. Duncon left him, and betook himself to a Journey to
Bath, but with a promise to return back to him within five days, and he did
so; but before I shall say any thing of what discourse then fell betwixt them
two, I will pay my promised account of Mr. Farrer.

Mr. Nicholas Farrer (who got the reputation of being called Saint Nicholas, at
the age of six years) was born in London, and doubtless had good education in
his youth; but certainly, was at a fit age made Fellow of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge, where he continued to be eminent for his temperance and learning.
About the 26 th year of his Age, he betook himself to Travel, in which he added
to his Latin and Greek, a perfect knowledge of all the Languages spoken in the
Western parts of our Christian world, and understood well the principles of
their Religion, and their manner, and the reasons of their worship. In this his
Travel, he met with many persuasions to come into a communion with that Church
which calls it self Catholic, but he returned from his Travels as he went,
eminent for his obedience to his Mother, the Church of England. In his absence
from England, Mr. Farrers father (who was a Merchant) allowed him a liberal
maintenance; and, not long after his return into England, he had by the death
of his father, or an elder brother, an Estate left him, that enabled him to buy
Land to the value of 500 l. a year, the greatest part of which Land was at
Little Gidden, four or six miles from Huntington, and about 18 from Cambridge,
which place he chose for the privacy of it, and the Hall, which had the
Parish Church, or Chapel belonging, and adjoining near to it; for Mr. Farrer
having seen the manners and vanities of the World, and found them to be, as Mr.
Herbert says, A nothing between two Dishes; he did so contemn the World, that
he resolved to spend the remainder of his life in mortifications, and in
devotion, and charity, and to be always prepared for Death. -- And his Life
was spent thus.

He, and his Family, which were like a little College, and about Thirty in
number, did most of them keep Lent, and all Ember-weeks strictly, both in
fasting, and using all those prayers that the Church has appointed to be then
used; and he and they, did the like on Fridayes, and on the Vigils, or Eves
appointed to be fasted before the Saints days; and, this frugality and
abstinence, turned to the relief of the Poor; but, this was but a part of his
charity, none but God and he knew the rest.

This Family, which I have said to be in number about Thirty, were a part of
them his Kindred, and the rest chosen to be of a temper fit to be molded into
a devout life; and all of them were for their dispositions serviceable and
quiet, and humble, and free from scandal. Having thus fitted himself for his
Family, he did about the year 1630. betake himself to a constant and methodical
service of God, and it was in this manner. -- He did himself use to read the
Common prayers (for he was a Deacon) every day, at the appointed hours of ten
and four, in the Church which was very near his House, and which he had both
repaired and adorned; for it was fallen into a great ruin, by reason of a
depopulation of the Village before Mr. Farrer bought the Manor. And he did
also constantly read the Mattins every morning at the hour of six, either in
the Church, or in an Oratory, which was within his own House: And many of the
Family did there continue with him after the Prayers were ended, and there they
spent some hours in singing Hymns, or Anthems, sometimes in the Church, and
often to an Organ in the Oratory. And, they sometimes betook themselves to
meditate, or to pray privately, or to read a part of the New Testament, or to
continue their praying or reading the Psalms; and in case the Psalms were not
all read in the day, then Mr. Farrer, and others of the Congregation, did at
Night, at the ring of a Watch-bell, repair to the Church or Oratory, and there
betake themselves to prayers, and lauding God, and reading the Psalms that had
not been read in the day; and when these, or any part of the Congregation grew
weary, or faint, the Watch-bell was rung, sometimes before, and sometimes after
Midnight; and then a part of the Family rose, and maintained the Watch,
sometimes by praying, or singing Lands to God, or reading the Psalms, and when
after some hours they also grew we^^y or ^a^nt, then they rung the Watchbell,
and were relieved by some of the former, or by a new part of the Society, which
continue^ their devotions (as has been mentioned) until morning. -- And it is
to be noted, that in this continued serving of God, the Psalter, or whole Book
of Psalms, was in every four and twenty hours, sung or read over, from the
first to the last verse, and this done as constantly, as the Sun runs his
Circle every day about the World, and then begins it again the same instant
that it ended.

Thus did Mr. Farrer and his happy Family, serve God day and night. Thus did
they always behave themselves, as in his presence. And they did always eat
and drink by the strictest rules of Temperance; eat and drink so, as to be
ready to rise at Midnight, or at the call of a Watch-bell, and perform their
devotions to God. -- And it is fit to tell the Reader, that many of the Clergy
that were more inclined to practical pretty, and devotion, then to doub full and
needless Disputations, did often come to Gidden Hall, and make themselves a
part of that happy Society, and stay a week or more, and join with Mr. Farrer,
and the Family in these Devotions, and assist and ease him or them in their
Watch by Night; and these various Devotions, had neverless than two of the
domestic Family in the Night; and the Watch was always kept in the Church or
Oratory unless in extreme cold Winter-nights, and then it was maintained in a
Parlor which had a fire in it, and the Parlor was fitted for that purpose; and
this course of piety, and great liberality to his poor Neighbors, Mr. Farrer
maintained till his death, which was in the year 1639.

Mr. Farrers, and Mr. Herberts devout lives, were both so noted, that the
general report of their sanctity, gave them occasion to renew that slight
acquaintance which was begun at their being Contemporaries in Cambridge; and,
this new holy friendship was maintained without any interview, but only by
loving and endearing Letters. And, one testimony of their friendship, and pious
designs, may appear by Mr. Farrers commending the considerations of John
Valdesso (a Book which he had met with in his Travels, and Translated out of
Spanish into English) to be examined and censured by Mr. Herbert; which Book,
Mr. Herbert did read, and return back with many marginal Notes, as they be now
printed with that excellent Book; and with them, Mr. Herberts affectionate
Letter to Mr. Farrer.

This John Valdesso was a Spaniard, and was for his Learning and Virtue, much
valued and loved by the great Emperor Charles the fifth, whom Valdesso had
followed as a Cavalier all the time of his long and dangerous Wars; and when
Valdesso grew old, and weary of the World, he took his fair opportunity to
declare to the Emperor, that his resolution was to decline His Majesty's
Service, and betake himself to a quiet and contemplative life, because there
ought to be a vacancy of time, betwixt fighting and dying. -- The Emperor had
himself, for the same, or other reasons, put on the same resolutions; but God
and himself did then only know them; and he did for those, or other reasons,
desire Valdesso to consider well of what he had said, but keep his purpose
within his own breast, till they two had another like opportunity of a friendly
Discourse, which Valdesso promised.

In the mean time, the Emperor appoints privately a day for him and Valdesso
to receive the Sacrament publicly, and appointed an eloquent and devout Friar,
to preach a Sermon of contempt of the World, and of the happiness sand benefit
of a quiet and contemplative life, which the Friar did most affectionately.
After which Sermon, the Emperor declared openly, That the Preacher had begot
in him a resolution to lay down his Dignities, to forsake the World, and betake
himself to a Monastical life. And, he pretended, he had persuaded John Valdesso
to do the like; but this is most certain, that after the Emperor had called
his son Philip out of England, and resigned to him all his Kingdoms, that then
the Emperor, and John Valdesso, did perform their resolutions.

This account of John Valdesso, I received from a Friend, that had it from the
mouth of Mr. Farrer: And, the Reader may note, that in this retirement, John
Valdesso writ his 110 considerations, and many other Treatises of worth, which
want a second Mr. Farrer to procure, and Translate them.

After this account of Mr. Farrer, and John Valdesso, I proceed to my account
of Mr. Herbert, and Mr. Duncon, who, according to his promise, returned the
fifth day, and found Mr. Herbert much weaker than he left him, and therefore
their Discourse could not be long; but at Mr. Duncons parting with him, Mr.
Herbert spoke to this purpose -- Sir, I pray give my brother Farrer an account
of my decaying condition, and tell him, I beg him to continue his prayers for
me, and let him know, that I have considered, That God only is what he would
be; and, that I am by his grace become now so like him, as to be pleased with
what pleases him, and do not repine at my want of health; and tell him, my
heart is fixed on that place where true joy is only to be found; and, that I
long to be there, and will wait my appointed change with hope and patience.-And
having said this, he did with such a humility as seemed to exalt him, bow down
to Mr. Duncon, and with a thoughtful and contented look, say to him, Sir, I
pray deliver this little Book to my dear brother Farrer, and tell him, he shall
find in it a picture of the many spiritual Conflicts that have past betwixt God
and my Soul, before I could subject mine to the will of Jesus my Master, in
whose service I have now found perfect freedom; desire him to read it. and then
if he can think it may turn to the advantage of any dejected poor Soul, let it
be made public; if not, let him burn it, for I and it, are less than the least
of Gods mercies. -- Thus meanly did this humble man think of this excellent
Book, which now bears the name of The TEMPLE: Or, Sacred Poems, and Private
Ejaculations; of which, Mr. Farrer would say, There was the picture of a Divine
Soul in every page; and, that the whole Book, was such a harmony of holy
passions, as would enrich the World with pleasure and piety. And, it appears to
have done so, for there have been Ten thousand of them sold since the first
Impression.

And this ought to be noted, that when Mr. Farrer sent this Book to Cambridge
to be Licensed for the Press, the Vice Chancellor would by no means allow the
two so much noted Verses Religion stands a Tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand.
to be printed; and, Mr. Farrer, would by no means allow the Book to be
printed, and want them: But after some time, and some arguments for, and
against their being made public, the Vice Chancellor said, I knew Mr. Herbert
well, and know that he had many heavenly Speculations, and was a Divine Poet;
but, I hope the World will not take him to be an inspired Prophet, and
therefore I License the whole Book: So that it came to be printed, without the
diminution or addition of a syllable, since it was delivered into the hands of
Mr. Duncon, save only, that Mr. Farrer has added that excellent Preface that
is printed before it.

At the time of Mr. Duncons leaving Mr. Herbert, which was about three Weeks
before his death, his old and dear friend Mr. Woodnot, came from London to
Bemerton, and never left him, till he had seen him draw his last breath, and
closed his Eyes on his Deathbed. In this time of his decay, he was often
visited and prayed for by all the Clergy that lived near to him, especially by
the Bishop and Prebends of the Cathedral Church in Salisbury; but by none more
devoutly, than his Wife, his three Neeces (then a part of his Family) and Mr.
Woodnot, who were the sad Witnesses of his daily decay, to whom he would often
speak to this purpose. -- I now look back upon the pleasures of my life past,
and see the content I have taken in beauty, in wit, in music, and pleasant
Conversation, how they are now all past by me, as a shadow that returns not,
and are all become dead to me, or I to them; that as my father and generation
has done before me, so I shall now suddenly ( with Job) make my Bed also in
the dark; and, I praise God, I am prepared for it; and, that I am not to learn
patience, now I stand in such need of it; and, that I have practiced
Mortification, and endeavored to dye daily, that I might not dye eternally;
and, my hope is, that I shall shortly leave this valley of tears, and be free
from all fevers and pain; and which will be a more happy condition, I shall be
free from sin, and all the temptations and anxieties that attend it; and this
being past, I shall dwell in the new Jerusalem, dwell there with men made
perfect; dwell, where these eyes shall see my Master and Savior Jesus; and,
with him, see my dear mother, and relations, and friends; but I must dye, or
not come to that happy place: And, this is my content, that I am going daily
toward it; and, that every day that I have lived, has taken a part of my
appointed time from me; and, that I shall live the less time, for having lived
this, and the day past. -- These, and the like expressions, which he uttered
often, may be said to be his enjoyment of Heaven, before he enjoyed it. The
Sunday before his death, he rose Suddenly from his Bed or Couch, called for one
of his Instruments, took it into hand, and said --

My God, my God,
My Music shall find thee,
And every string
Shall have his attribute to sing.
And having tuned it, he played and sung: The Sundays of man's life,
Thredded together on times string,
Make Bracelets, to adorn the Wife
Of the eternal glorious King:
On Sundays, Heavens door stands open;
Blessings are plentiful and rife,
More plentiful than hope.


Thus he sung on earth such Hymns and Anthems, as the Angels and he, and Mr.
Farrer, now sing in Heaven.

Thus he continued meditating and praying, and rejoicing, till the day of his
death, and on that day said to Mr. Woodnot, My dear Friend, I am sorry I have
nothing to present to my merciful God but sin and misery; but the first is
pardoned, and a few hours will put a period to the latter. Upon which
expression, Mr. Woodnot took occasion to remember him of the Re-edifying Layton
Church, and his many Acts of mercy; to which he made answer, saying, They be
good works, if they be sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and not otherwise.
After this Discourse, he became more restless, and his Soul seemed to be weary
of her earthly Tabernacle; and this uneasiness became so visible, that his
Wife, his three Neeces, and Mr. Woodnot, stood constantly about his Bed,
beholding him with sorrow, and an unwillingness to lose the sight of him whom
they could not hope to see much longer. As they stood thus beholding him, his
Wife observed him to breath faintly, and with much trouble; and, observed him
to fall into a sudden Agony; which so surpised her, that she fell into a
sudden passion, and required of him to know how he did? to which his answer
was, That he had past a Conflict with his last Enemy, and had overcome him, by
the merits of his Master Jesus. After which answer, he looked up, and saw his
Wife and Neeces weeping to an extremity, and charged them, If they loved him,
to withdraw into the next Room, and there pray every one alone for him, for
nothing but their lamentations could make his death uncomfortable. To which
request, their sighs and tears would not suffer them to make any reply, but
they yielded him a sad obedience, leaving only with him Mr. Woodnot, and Mr.
Bostock. Immediately after they had left him, he said to Mr. Bostock, Pray Sir
open that door, then lock into that Cabinet, in which you may easily find my
last Will, and give it into my hand; which being done, he delivered it into the
hand of Mr. Woodnot, and said, My old Friend, I here deliver you my last Will,
in which you will find that I have made you my sole Executor for the good of my
Wife and Neeces, and I desire you to show kindness to them, as they shall need
it; I do not desire you to be just, for I know you will be so for your own
sake; but I charge you, by the Religion of our friendship, to be careful of
them And having obtained Mr. Woodnots promise to be so, he said, I am now ready
to dye; after which words he said, Lord, grant me mercy, for the merits of my
Jesus, and now, Lord, receive my Soul. And with those words breathed forth his
Divine Soul, without any apparent disturbance, Mr. Woodnot, and Mr. Bostock,
attending his last breath, and closing his eyes.

Thus he lived, and thus he died like a Saint, unspotted of the World, full of
Alms-deeds, full of Humility, and all the examples of virtuous life; which I
cannot conclude better, than with this borrowed observation: -- All must to the
cold Graves:
But, the religious actions of the just,
Smell sweet in death, and blossom in the dust.


Mr. George Herberts have done so to this, and will doubtless do so to
succeeding Generations.

FINIS.
THere is a Debt justly due to the memory of Mr. Herberts virtuous Wife, a part
of which I will endeavor to pay by a very short account of the remainder of
her life, which shall follow.

She continued his disconsolate Widow five years, bemoaning her self, and
complaining, That she had lost the delight of her eyes; but more, that she had
lost the spiritual guide for her poor soul; and would often say, O that I had
like holy Mary, the Mother of Jesus, treasured up all his sayings in my heart;
but since I have not been able to do that, I will labor to live like him, that
where he now is, I may be also. And she would often say (as the Prophet David
for his son Absolon) O that I had dyed for him. Thus she continued mourning,
till time and conversation had so moderated her sorrows, that she became the
happy life of Sir Robert Cook of Higham in the County of Gloucester Knight:
And, though he put a high value on the excellent accomplishments of her mind
and body; and was so like Mr. Herbert, as not to govern like a Master, but as
an affectionate Husband; yet, she would even to him often take occasion to
mention the name of Mr. George Herbert, and say, That name must live in her
memory, till she put off mortality. By Sir Robert, she had only one Child, a
Daughter, whose parts and plentiful estate make her happy in this world, and
her well using of them, gives a fair testimony, that she will be so in that
which is to come.

Mrs. Herbert was the Wife of Sir Robert eight years, and lived his Widow nine;
all which time, she took a pleasure in mentioning, and commending the
excellencies of Mr. George Herbert. She dyed in the year 1663. and lies buried
at Higham, Mr. Herbert in his own Church, under the Altar, and covered with a
Gravestone without any inscription.

This Lady Cook, had preserved many of Mr. Herberts private Writings, which she
intended to make public; but they, and Higham house, were burnt together, by
the late Rebels; and by them was also burnt or destroyed a choice Library,
which Mr. Herbert had fastened with Chains, in a sit room in Mountgomery Castle,
being by him dedicated to the succeeding Herberts, that should become the
owners of it. He dyed without an Enemy, if Andrew Melvin dyed before him?

FINIS.
LETTERS WRITTEN BY Mr. GEORGE HERBERT, At his being in Cambridge:

With others to his Mother, the Lady MAGDALEN HERBERT: WRITTEN BY

John Done, AFTERWARD Dean of St. PAUL'S.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Richard Marriott, Sold by most
Booksellers. M. DC. LXX.

Mr. GEORGE HERBERT to N. F. the TRANSLATOUR of Valdesso.
MY dear and deserving Brother, your Valdesso I now return with many thanks,
and some notes, in which perhaps you will discover some care, which I forbear
not in the midst of my griefs; First for your sake; because, I would do nothing
negligently that you commit unto me; Secondly for the Authors ^ak^, whom I
conceive to have been a true servant of God; and to such, and all that is
theirs, I ^^ d^^ gence; Thirdly for the Churches sake, to ^^ by Printing it, I
would have you consecrate it. You owe the Church a debt, and God has put this
into your hands (as he sent the Fish with money to St. Peter) to discharge it:
happily also with this (as his thoughts are fruitful) intending the honor of
his servant the Author, who being obscured in his own Country, he would have
to flourish in this land of light, and region of the Gospel, among his chosen.
It is true, there are some things which I like not in him, as my fragments will
express, when you read them; nevertheless I wish you by all means to publish
it, for these three eminent things observable therein: First, that God in the
midst of Popery should open the eyes of one to understand and express so
clearly, and excellently the intent of the Gospel in the acceptance of Christ's
righteousness: (as he shows through all his Considerations,) a thing
strangely buried, and darkened by the Adversaries, and their great stumbling
block. Secondly, the great honor and reverence, which he everywhere bears
toward our dear Master and Lord; concluding every Consideration almost with
his holy Name, and setting his merit forth so piously; for which I do so love
him, that were there nothing else, I would Print it, that with it the honor of
my Lord might be published. Thirdly, the many pious rules of ordering our life,
about Mortification, and observation of Gods Kingdom within us, and the working
thereof; of which he was a very diligent observer. These three things are very
eminent in the Author, and overweigh the Defects (as I conceive) toward the
publishing thereof.

From his Parsonage of Bemerton, near Salisbury, Sept. 29. 1632.
To Sir J. D.
SIR,
THough I had the best wit in the World, yet it would easily tire me, to find
out variety of thanks for the diversity of your favors, if I sought to do so;
but, I profess it not: And therefore let it be sufficient for me that the same
heart, which you have won long since, is still true to you, and has nothing
else to answer your infinite kindnesses, but a constancy of obedience; only
hereafter I will take heed how I propose my desires unto you, since I find you
so willing to yield to my requests; for, since your favors come a Horseback,
there is reason, that my desires should go a-fost: neither do I make any
question, but that you have performed your kindness to the full, and that the
Horse is every way fit for me, and I will strive to imitate the compleatness of
your love, with being in some proportion, and after my manner,

Your most obedient Servant, George Herbert.

For my dear sick Sister.
Most dear Sister,
THink not my silence forgetfulness; or, that my love is as dumb as my papers,
though businesses may stop my hand, yet my heart, a much better member, is
always with you: and which is more, with our good and gracious God,
incessantly begging some ease of your pains, with that earnestness, that
becomes your griefs, and my love. God who knows and sees this Writing, knows
also that my soliciting him has been much, and my tears many for you; judge me
then by those waters, and not by my ink, and then you shall justly value

December. 6. 1620. Trin: Coll. Your most truly, most heartily, affectionate
Brother, and Servant, George Herbert.

SIR,
I Dare no longer be silent, least while I think I am modest, I wrong both my
self, and also the confidence my Friends have in me; wherefore I will open my
case unto you, which I think deserves the reading at the least; and it is this,
I want Books extremely; You know Sir, how I am now setting foot into Divinity,
to lay the platform of my future life, and shall I then be fain always to
borrow Books, and build on another foundation? What Tradesman is there who
will set up without his Tools? Pardon my boldness Sir, it is a most serious
Case, nor can I write coldly in that, wherein consists the making good of my
former education, of obeying that Spirit which has guided me hitherto, and of
atchieving my (I dare say) holy ends. This also is aggravated, in that I
apprehend what my Friends would have been forward to say, if I had taken ill
courses, Follow your Book, and you shall want nothing: You know Sir, it is
their ordinary speech, and now let them make it good; for, since, I hope, I
have not deceived their expectation, let not them deceive mine: But perhaps
they will say, you are sickly, you must not study too hard; it is true (God
knows) I am weak, yet not so, but that every day, I may step one step toward
my journies end; and I love my friends so well, as that if all things proved
not well, I had rather the fault should lie on me, than on them; but they will
object again, What becomes of your Annuity? Sir, if there be any truth in me, I
find it little enough to keep me in health. You know I was sick last Vacation,
neither am I yet recovered, so that I am fain ever and anon, to buy somewhat
tending toward my health; for infirmities are both painful and costly. Now
this Lent I am forbid utterly to eat any Fish, so that I am fain to diet in my
Chamber at mine own cost; for in our public Halls, you know, is nothing but
Fish and Whit-meats: Out of Lent also, twice a Week, on Fridayes and
Saturdayes, I must do so, which yet sometimes I fast. Sometimes also I ride to
Newmarket, and there lie a day or two for fresh Air; all which tend to avoiding
of costlier matters, if I should fall absolutely sick: I protest and vow, I
even study Thrift, and yet I am scarce able with much ado to make one half
years allowance, shake hands with the other: And yet if a Book of four or five
Shillings come in my way, I buy it, though I fast for it; yea, sometimes of Ten
Shillings: But, alas Sir, what is that to those infinite Volumes of Divinity,
which yet every day swell, and grow bigger. Noble Sir, pardon my boldness, and
consider but these three things. First, the Bulk of Divinity. Secondly, the
time when I desire this (which is now, when I must lay the foundation of my
whole life.) Thirdly, what I desire, and to what end, not vain pleasures, nor
to a vain end. If then, Sir, there be any course, either by engaging my future
Annuity, or any other way, I desire you, Sir, to be my Mediator to them in my
behalf.

Now I write to you, Sir, because to you I have ever opened my heart; and have
reason, by the Patents of your perpetual favor to do so still, for I am sure
you love

March 18. 1617. Trin: Coll. Your faithfullest Servant, George Herbert.

SIR,
THis Week has loaded me with your Favors; I wish I could have come in person
to thank you, but it is not possible; presently after Michaelmas, I am to make
an Oration to the whole University of an hour long in Latin, and my Lincoln
journey, has set me much behind hand: neither can I so much as go to Bugden,
and deliver your Letter, yet have I sent it thither by a faithful Messenger
this day: I beseech you all, you and my dear Mother and Sister to pardon me,
for my Cambridge necessities are stronger to tie me here, than yours to London:
If I could possibly have come, none should have done my message to Sir Fr:
Nethersole for me; he and I are ancient acquaintance, and I have a strong
opinion of him, that if he can do me a courtesy, he will of himself; yet your
appearing in it, affects me strangely. I have sent you here enclosed a Letter
from our Master in my behalf, which if you can send to Sir Francis before his
departure, it will do well, for it expresses the Universities inclination to
me; yet if you cannot send it with much convenience, it is no matter, for the
Gentleman needs no incitation to love me.

The Orators place (that you may understand what it is) is the finest place in
the University, though not the gainfullest; yet that will be about 30 l. per
an. but the commodiousness is beyond the Revenue; for the Orator writes all the
University Letters, makes all the Orations, be it to King, Prince, or whatever
comes to the University; to requite these pains, he takes place next the
Doctors, is at all their Assemblies and Meetings, and sits above the Proctors,
is Regent or Non-regent at his pleasure, and such like Gaynesses, which will
please a young man well.

I long to hear from Sir Francis, I pray Sir send the Letter you receive from
him to me as soon as you can, that I may work the heads to my purpose. I hope I
shall get this place without all your London helps, of which I am very proud,
not but that I joy in your favors, but that you may see, that if all fail, yet
I am able to stand on mine own legs. Noble Sir, I thank you for your infinite
favors, I fear only that I have omitted some fitting circumstance, yet you
will pardon my haste, which is very great, though never so, but that I have
both time and work to be

Your extreme Servant, George Herbert.

SIR,
I Have received the things you sent me, safe; and now the only thing I long
for, is to hear of my dear sick Sister; first, how her health fares, next,
whether my peace be yet made with her concerning my unkind departure. Can I be
so happy, as to hear of both these that they succeed well? Is it not too much
for me? Good Sir, make it plain to her, that I loved her even in my departure,
in looking to her Son, and my charge. I suppose she is not disposed to spend
her eyesight on a piece of paper, or else I had wrote to her; when I shall
understand that a Letter will be seasonable, my Pen is ready. Concerning the
Orators place all goes well yet, the next Friday it is tried, and accordingly
you shall hear. I have forty businesses in my hands, your Courtesy will pardon
the haste of

Jan. 19. 1619. Trin: Coll. Your humblest Servant, George Herbert.

SIR,
I Understand by Sir Francis Nethersols Letter, that he fears I have not fully
resolved of the matter, since this place being civil may divert me too much
from Divinity, at which, not without cause, he thinks, I aim; but, I have wrote
him back, that this dignity, has no such earthiness in it, but it may very
well be joined with Heaven; or if it had to others; yet to me it should not,
for ought I yet knew; and therefore I desire him to send me a direct answer in
his next Letter. I pray Sir therefore, cause this enclosed to be carried to his
brothers house of his own name (as I think) ^t the sign of the Peddler and the
Pack on London Bridge, for there he assigns me. I cannot yet find leisure to
write to my Lord, or Sir Benjamin Ruddyard; but I hope I shall shortly, though
for the reckoning of your favors, I shall never find time and paper enough,
yet am I

October. 6. 1619. Trin: Coll. Your readiest Servant, George Herbert.
I remember my most humble duty to my Mother, who cannot think me lazy, since I
rode 200 mile to see a Sister, in a way I knew not, in the midst of much
business, and all in a Fortnight, not long since.



To the truly Noble Sir J. D.
SIR,
I Understand by a Letter from my Brother Henry, that he has bought a parcel
of Books for me, and that they are coming over. Now though they have hitherto
traveled upon your charge, yet if my Sister were acquainted that they are
ready, I dare say she would make good her promise of taking five or six pound
upon her, which she has hitherto deferred to do, not of her self, but upon the
want of those Books which were not to be got in England; for that which
surmounts, though your noble disposition is infinitely free, yet I had rather
sly to my old ward, that if any course could be taken of doubling my Annuity
now, upon condition that I should surcease from all title to it, after I
entered into a Benefice, I should be most glad to entertain it, and both pay
for the surplusage of these Books, and for ever after cease my clamorous and
greedy bookish requests. It is high time now that I should be no more a burden
to you, since I can never answer what I have already received; for your favors
are so ancient, that they prevent my memory, and yet still grow upon

Your humblest Servant,George Herbert.
I remember my most humble duty to my Mother. I have wrote to my dear sick
Sister this week already, and therefore now I hope may be excused.

I pray Sir, pardon my boldness of enclosing my Brothers Letter in yours, for
it was because I know your Lodging, but not his.



To the worthiest Lady, Mrs. Magdalen Herbert.
Madam,
EVery excuse has in it somewhat of accusation; and since I am innocent, and
yet must excuse, how shall I do for that part of accusing. By my ^oth, as
desperate and perplexed me^ grow from thence bold; so must I take the boldness
of accusing you, who would draw so dark a ^^^tain betwixt me and your purposes,
as that I had no glimmering, neither of your goings, nor the way which my
Letters might haunt. Yet, I have given this License to Travel, but I know not
whether, nor it. It is therefore rather a Pinnace to discover; and the entire
Colony of Letters, of Hundreds and Fifties, must follow; whose employment is
more honorable, than that which our State meditates to Virginia, because you
are worthier than all that Country, of which that is a wretched inch; for you
have better treasure, and a harmlessness. If this sound like a flattery, tear
it out. I am to my Letters as rigid a Puritan, as Caesar was to his Wife. I^
can as ill endure a suspicious and misinterpretable word as a fault; but
remember, that nothing is flattery which the Speaker believes; and of the
grossest flatteries there is this good use, that they tell us what we should
be. But, Madam, you are beyond instruction, and therefore there can belong to
you only ^aise; of which, though you be no good hearer, yet allow all my
Letters leave to have in them one part of it, which is thankfulness toward you.

Michin, July 11. 1607. Your unworthiest Servant, Except your accepting have
mended him, John Done.

To the worthiest Lady, Mrs. Magdalen Herbert.
Madam,
THis is my second Letter, in which though I cannot tell you what is good, yet
this is the worst, that I must be a great part of it; yet to me, that is
recompensed, because you must be mingled. After I knew you were gone (for I
must, little less than accusingly tell you, I knew not you would go) I sent my
first Letter, like a Bevis of Hampton, to seek Adventures. This day I came to
Town, and to the best part of it, your House; for your memory, is a State-cloth
and Presence; which I reverence, though you be away; though I need not seek
that there, which I have about and within me. There, though I found my
accusation, yet any thing to which your hand is, is a pardon; yet I would not
burn my first Letter, because as in great destiny no small passage can be
omitted or frustrated, so in my resolution of writing almost daily to you, I
would have no link of the Chain broke by me, both because my Letters interpret
one another, and because only their number can give them weight: If I had your
Commission and Instructions to do you the service of a Legier Ambassador here,
I could say something of the Countess of Devon: of the States, and such things.
But since to you, who are not only a World alone, but the Monarchy of the World
your self, nothing can be added, especially by me; I will sustain my self with
the honor of being

London, July 23. 1607. Your Servant Extraordinary, And without place, John
Done.

To the worthiest Lady, Mrs. Magdalen Herbert.
Madam,
AS we must dye before we can have full glory and happiness, so before I can
have this degree of it, as to see you by a Letter, I must almost dye, that is,
come to London, to plaguey London; a place full of danger, and vanity, and vice,
though the Court be gone. And such it will be, till your return redeem it: Not
that, the greatest virtue in the World, which is you, can be such a Marshal, as
to defeat, or disperse all the vice of this place; but as higher bodies remove,
or contract themselves when better come, so at your return we shall have one
door open to innocence. Yet Madam, you are not such an Ireland, as produces
neither ill, nor good; no Spiders, nor Nightingales, which is a rare degree of
perfection: But you have found and practiced that experiment, That even nature,
out of her detesting of emptiness, if we will make that our work, to remove
bad, will fill us with good things. To abstain from it, was therefore but the
Childhood, and Minority of your Soul, which has been long exercised since, in
your manlier active part, of doing good. Of which since I have been a witness
and subject, not to tell you some times, that by your influence and example I
have attained to such a step of goodness, as to be thankful, were both to
accuse your power and judgment of impotency and infirmity.

August 2d. 1607. Your Ladyships in all Services, John Done.

FINIS.
On Mr. George Herbert's Book, Entitled, The Temple of Sacred Poems, sent to a
Gentlewoman.
KNow you Fair, on what you look?
Divinest Love lies in this Book:
Expecting Fire from your Eyes,
To kindle this his Sacrifice.
When your hands untye these strings,
Think you have an Angel by the wings.
One that gladly will be nigh,
To wait upon each morning sigh.
To flutter in the balmy Air,
Of your well perfumed Prayer.
These white Plumes of his He Will lend you,
Which every day to Heaven will send you,
To take acquaintance of the Sphere,
And all the smooth-faced Kindred there.
And though Herberts Name do owe
These Devotions, Fairest; know
That while I lay them on the shrine
Of your white Hand, they are mine:
FINIS.

