Imprimatur.
Ex AEd. Lamb. Oct. 29. 1664.

Geo. Stradling, S.T.P. Rev: in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Do.

Mr RICHARD HOOKER Author of those -- Learned Books, of Eoclesiasticoll --
pollitie -- W.DolleF.


THE LIFE OF Mr. RICH. HOOKER,

The Author of those Learned Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity.

Prove. 2.15.

The tongue of the wise uses knowledge rightly.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for Rich. Marriott, and are to be sold at his Shop
under the King's Head Tavern, over against the Inner Temple gate in Fleetstreet.
1665.

To the Right Honorable, AND Right Reverend Father in God, GEORGE Lord Bishop
of Winchester, Dean of His Majesty's Chapel Royal, and Prelate of the most
Noble Order of the Garter.
MY LORD,
THere present you with a Relation of the Life of that Humble man, to whom (at
the mention of his Name) Princes, and the most Learned of this Nation, have
paid a Reverence.

It was written by me under your Roof; for which, and more weighty Reasons, you
might (if it were worthy) justly claim a Title to it: But indeed, my Lord,
though this be a well-meant Sacrifice to the Memory of that Venerable man; yet,
I have so little Confidence in my Performance, that I beg your Pardon for
Supscribing your Name to it; and desire all that know your Lordship to receive
it, not as a Dedication, by which you receive any Access of Honor, but rather
as a more humble and a more public Acknowledgment of your long-continued, and
your now daily, Favors to

Your most Affectionate, and most Humble Servant, Nov. 28. 1664. IZAAK WALTON.

The Copy of a Letter writ to Mr. Walton by Dr. King, Lord Bishop of Chichester.
THough a Familiarity of almost Forty years continuance, and the constant
experience of your Love even in the worst times, be sufficient to indear our
Friendship; yet I must confess my Affection much improved, not only by
Evidences of private Respect to many that know and love you, but by your new
Demonstration of a Public Spirit, testified in a diligent, true, and useful
Collection of so many Material Passages as you have now afforded me in the Life
of Venerable Mr. Hooker. Of which, since desired by such a Friend as your self,
I shall not deny to give the Testimony of what I know concerning him and his
learned Books: but shall first here take a fair occasion to tell you, that you
have been happy in choosing to write the Lives of three such Persons, as
Posterity has just cause to honor; which they will do the more for the true
Relation of them by your happy Pen; of all which I shall give you my unfeigned
Censure.

I shall begin with my most dear and incomparable Friend Dr. Done, late Dean
of S. Paul's Church, who not only trusted me as his Executor, but three days
before his death delivered into my hands those excellent Sermons of his now
made public: professing before Dr. Winniff, Dr. Montford, and I think your
self then present at his bedside, that it was by my restless importunity that
he had prepared them for the Press; together with which (as his best Legacy) he
gave me all his Sermon-Notes, and his other Papers, containing an Extract of
near Fifteen hundred Authors. How these were got out of my hands, you, who were
the Messenger for them, and how lost both to me and your self, is not now
seasonable to complain: but, since they did miscarry, I am glad that the
general Demonstration of his Worth was so fairly preserved, and represented to
the World by your Pen in the History of his Life; indeed so well, that beside
others, the best Critic of our later time (Mr. John Hales of Eaton College)
affirmed to me, He had not seen a Life written with more advantage to the
Subject, or more reputation to the Writer, than that of Dr. Donnes.

After the performance of this task for Dr. Done, you undertook the like
office for our Friend Sir Henry Wotton, betwixt which two there was a
Friendship begun in Oxford, continued in their various Travels, and more
confirmed in the religious Friendship of Age: and doubtless this excellent
Person had writ the Life of Dr. Done, if Death had not prevented him; by which
means his and your Pre-collections for that Work fell to the happy Menage of
your Pen: a Work which your would have declined, if imperious Persuasions had
not been stronger than you modest Resolutions against it. And I am thus far
glad, that the first Life was so imposed upon you, because it gave an
unavoidable Cause of Writing the second; if not, it is too probable we had
wanted both, which had been a prejudice to all Lovers of Honor and ingenious
Learning. And let me not leave my Friend Sir Henry without this Testimony added
to yours, That he was a Man of as Florid a Wit and Elegant a Pen, as any
former, or ours which in that kind is a most excellent Age has ever produced.

And now having made this voluntary Observation of our two deceased Friends, I
proceed to satisfy your desire concerning what I know and believe of the
ever-memorable Mr. Hooker, who was Schismaticorum Malleus, so great a Champion
for the Church of Englands Rights against the Factious Torrent of Separatists,
that then ran high against Church Discipline, and in his unanswerable Books
continues to be so against the unquiet Disciples of their Schism; which now
under other Names still carry on their Design, and who (as the proper Heirs of
their Irrational Zele) would again rake into the scarce-closed Wounds of a
newly bleeding State and Church.

And first, though I dare not say that I knew Mr. Hooker; yet, as our
Ecclesiastical History reports to the honor of Ignatius, that he lived in the
time of S. John, and had seen him in his Childhood; so I also joy that in my
Minority I have often seen Mr. Hooker with my Father, from whom and others at
that time I have heard most of the material passages which you relate in the
History of his Life, and from my Father received such a Character of his
Learning, Humility, and other Virtues, that like Jewels of unvaluable price,
they still cast such a luster as Envy or the Rust of Time shall never darken.

From my Father I have also heard all the Circumstances of the Plot to defame
him; and how Sir Edwin Sandys outwitted his Accusers, and gained their
Confession; and could give an account of each particular of that Plot, but that
I judge it fitter to be forgotten, and rot in the same Grave with the Malicious
Authors.

I may not omit to declare, that my Fathers Knowledge of Mr. Hooker was
occasioned by the Learned Dr. John Spencer who after the Death of Mr. Hooker
was so careful to preserve his unvaluable Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Books of
ECCLESIASTICAL POLITY, and his other Writings, that he procured Henry Iacksow,
then of Corpus-Christi College, to transcribe for him all Mr. Hookers remaining
written Papers, many of which were imperfect, for his Study had been rifled or
worse used by Mr. Charke, and another of Principles too like his: but, as these
Papers were endeavored to be completed by his dear Friend Dr. Spencer, who
bequeathed them as a precious Legacy to my Father, then Bishop of London; after
whose Death they rested in my hand, till Dr. Abbot, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, commanded them out of my Custody, authorizing Dr. John Barkeham to
require and bring them to him to Lambeth; at which time I have heard they were
put into the Bishops Library, and that they remained there till the Martyrdom
of Archbishop Laud, and were then by the Brethren of that Faction given with
the Library to Hugh Peter's, as a Reward for his remarkable Service in those sad
times of the Churches Confusion; and though they could hardly fall into a
fouler hand, yet there wanted not other Endeavors to corrupt and make them
speak that Language for which the Faction then fought, which was To subject the
Sovereign Power to the People.

I need not strive to vindicate Mr. Hooker in this particular, his known
Loyalty to his Prince whilst he lived, the Sorrow expressed by K. James at his
Death, the Value our late Sovereign (of ever-blessed Memory) put upon his
Works, and now, the singular Character of his Worth by you given in the
passages of his Life, especially in your Appendix to it, do sufficiently clear
him from that Imputation: and I am glad you mention how much value Robert
Stapleton, Pope Clement the VIII. and other Eminent Men of the Romish
Persuasion, have put upon his Books, having been told the same in my Youth by
Persons of worth that have traveled Italy.

Lastly, I must again congratulate this Undertaking of yours, as now more
proper to you than any other person, by reason of your long Knowledge and
Alliance to the worthy Family of the Cranmers, (my old Friends also) who have
been Men of noted Wisdom, especially Mr. George Cranmer, whose Prudence added
to that of Sir Edwin Sandys, proved very useful in the Completing of Mr.
Hookers matchless Books; one of their Letters I herewith send you, to make use
of, if you think sit. And let me say further; you merit much from many of Mr.
Hookers best Friends then living, namely from the ever renowned Archbishop
Whitgift, of whose incomparable Worth, with the Character of the Times, you
have given us a more short and significant Account that I have received from
any other Pen. You have done much for Sir Henry Savile, his Contemporary and
familiar Friend; amongst the surviving Monuments of whose Learning (give me
leave to tell you so) two are omitted, his Edition of Euclid, but especially
his Translation of King James his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance into
elegant Latin; which flying in that dress as far as Rome, was by the Pope and
Conclave sent to Salamanca unto Franciscus Suarez, (then residing there as
President of that College) with a Command to Answer it. When he had perfected
the Work, which he calls Defensio Fidei Catholica, it was transmitted to Rome
for a view of the Inquisitors, who according to their custom blotted out what
they pleased, and (as Mr. Hooker has been used since his Death) added
whatsoever might advance the Popes Supremacy, or carry on their own Interest,
commonly coupling Deponere and Occidere, the Deposing and Killing of Princes;
which cruel and unchristian Language Mr. John Saltkell his Amanuensis, when he
wrote at Salamanca, (but since a Convert, living long in my Fathers house)
often professed the good Old man (whose Piety and Charity Mr. Saltkell
magnified much) not only disavowed, but detested. Not to trouble you further;
your Reader (if according to your desire my Approbation of your Work carries
any weight) will find many just Reasons to thank you for it; and for this
Circumstance here mentioned (not known to many) may happily apprehend one to
thank him, who is,

Chichester, Nov. 13 1664. Sir, Your ever-faithful and affectionate old Friend,
Henry Chichester.

To the Reader.
I Think it necessary to inform my Reader that Dr. Gauden (the late Bishop of
Worcester) has also lately wrote and published the Life of Mr. Hooker; and
though this be not writ by design to oppose the Life of Mr. Hooker written by
him, yet I am put upon a necessity to say, That in it there be many Material
Mistakes, and more Omissions. I do conceive some of his Mistakes did proceed
from a Belief in Mr. Thomas Fuller, who had too hastily published what he has
since most ingenuously retracted. And for the Bishops Omissions, I suppose his
more weighty Business and Want of Time, made him pass over many things without
that due Examination, which my better Leisure, my Diligence, and my accidental
Advantages, have made known unto me.

And now for my self, I can say I hope, or rather know, there are no Material
Mistakes in what I here present to him that shall become my Reader. Little
things that I have received by Tradition (to which there may be too much and
too little Faith given) I will not at this distance of Time undertake to
justify; for though I have used great Diligence, and compared Relations and
Circumstances, and probable Results and Expressions, yet I shall not impose my
Belief upon my Reader; I shall rather leave him at liberty: But if there shall
appear any Material Omission, I desire every Lover of Truth and the Memory of
Mr. Hooker, that it may be made known unto me. And to incline him to it, I here
promise to acknowledge and rectify any such Mistake in a second Impression,
which the Printer says he hopes for; and by this means my weak (but faithful)
Endeavors may become a better Monument, and in some degree more worthy the
Memory of this Venerable Man.

I confess, that when I consider the great Learning and Virtue of Mr. Hooker,
and what Satisfaction and Advantages many Eminent Scholars and Admirers of him
have had by his Labors; I do not a little wonder that in Sixty years no man
did undertake to tell Posterity of the Excellencies of his Life and Learning,
and the Accidents of both; and sometimes wonder more at my self, that I have
been persuaded to it; and indeed I do not easily pronounce my own Pardon, nor
expect that my Reader shall, unless my Introduction shall prove my Apology.

Errata.
Page 6. line 10. read to my introduction. p. 58. l. 22. r. vented. p. 106. l.
16. r. of so great a Controvertie. p. 108. r. many. p. 111. l. 3. add Dr.
Spencer. p. 113. r. Salisbury. p. 117. l. 10. r. by it self. p. 137. l. 6. r.
facetious. p. 167. l. 11. after Dr. Abbot add or the Bishop of London. p. 171.
l. 2. r. Fabian. ibid. l. 5. r. Fabian.

THE LIFE OF Mr. Richard Hooker.
The Introduction.
I Have been persuaded, by a Friend that I ought to obey, to write The Life of
RICHARD HOOKER, the happy Author of five (if not more) of the eight learned
Books of The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity. And though I have undertaken it,
yet it has been with some unwillingness; foreseeing that it must prove to me,
and especially at this time of my Age, a work of much labor to enquire,
consider, re-search, and determine what is needful to be known concerning him.
For I knew him not in his Life, and must therefore not only look back to his
Death, now 64 years past; but almost 50 years beyond that, even to his
Childhood and Youth, and gather thence such Observations and Prognostics, as
may at least adorn, if not prove necessary for the completing of what I have
undertaken.

This trouble I foresee; and foresee also that it is impossible to escape
Censures; against which I will not hope my well-meaning and diligence can
protect me, (for I consider the Age in which I live) and shall therefore but
entreat of my Reader a Suspension of them, till I have made known unto him some
Reasons, which I my self would now fain believe do make me in some measure fit
for this Undertaking: and if these Reasons shall not acquit me from all
Censures, they may at least abate of their severity; and this is all I can
probably hope for.

My Reasons follow.
About forty years past (for I am now in the seventieth of my Age) I began a
happy affinity with William Cranmer, (now with God) grand Nephew unto the great
Archbishop of that name; a Family of noted prudence and resolution; with him
and two of his Sisters I had an entire and free friendship: one of them was the
Wife of Dr. Spencer, a Bosom friend, and sometime Com-pupil with Mr. Hooker in
Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, and after President of the same. I name them
here, for that I shall have occasion to mention them in this following
Discourse; as also George Cranmer their Brother, of whose useful Abilities my
Reader may have a more Authentic Testimony than my Pen can purchase for him,
by that of our learned Cambden.

This William Cranmer and his two forenamed Sisters had some affinity, and a
most familiar friendship, with Mr. Hooker, and had had some part of their
Education with him in his house, when he was Parson of Bishops-Borne near
Canterbury, in which City their good Father then lived. They had (I say) a
great part of their Education with him, as my self since that time a happy
Cohabitation with them; and having some years before read part of Mr. Hookers
Works with great liking and satisfaction, my affection to them made me a
diligent Inquisitor into many things that concerned him; as namely, of his
Person, his Nature, the Management of his Time, his Wife, his Family, and the
Fortune of him and his. Which has given me much advantage in the knowledge of
what is now under my consideration, and intended for the satisfaction of my
Reader.

I had also a frienship with the Reverend Dr. Usher, the late learned
Archbishop of Armagh; and with Dr. Morton, the late learned and charitable
Bishop of Durham; as also with the learned John Hales of Eaton College; and
with them also (who loved the very Name of Mr. Hooker) I have had many
discourses concerning him: and from them, and many others that have now put off
Mortality, I might have had more Informations, if I could then have admitted a
thought of any fitness for what by persuasion I have now undertaken. But,
though that full harvest be irrecoverably lost, yet my Memory has preserved
some gleanings, and my Diligence made such additions to them, as I hope will
prove useful to the completing of what I intend. In the discovery of which I
shall be faithful, and with this assurance put a period to Introduction.

THE LIFE.
IT is not to be doubted but that Richard Hooker was born within the Precincts,
or in the City, of Exeter; a City that may justly boast that it was the
Birthplace of him and Sir Thomas Bodley; as indeed the County may in which it
stands, that it has furnished this Nation with Bishop Jewel, Sir Francis
Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, and many others memorable for their Valor and
Learning. He was born about the year of our Redemption 1553, and of Parents
that were not so remarkable for their Extraction or Riches, as for their Virtue
and Industry, and Gods blessing upon both; by which they were enabled to
educate their Children in some degree of Learning, of which our Richard Hooker
may appear to be one fair testimony; and that Nature is not so partial, as
always to give the great blessings of Wisdom and Learning, and with them the
greater blessings of Virtue and Government, to those only that are of a more
high and honorable Birth.

His Complexion (if we may guess by him at the age of Forty) was Sanguine, with
a mixture of Choler; and yet his Motion was slow even in his Youth, and so was
his Speech, never expressing an Earnestness in either of them, but a Gravity
suitable to the Aged. And it is observed (so far as Inquiry is able to look back
at this distance of Time) that at his being a Schoolboy he was an early
Questionist, quietly inquisitive Why this was, and that was not, to be
remembered? Why this was granted, and that denied? This being mixed with a
remarkable Modesty, and a sweet serene Quietness of Nature, and with them a
quick Apprehension of many perplexed parts of Learning imposed then upon him as
a Scholar, made his Master and others to believe him to have an inward blessed
Divine Light, and therefore to consider him to a little wonder. For in that,
Children were less pregnant, less consident, and more malleable, than in this
wiser, but not better, Age.

This Meekness and conjuncture of Knowledge, with Modesty in his Conversation,
being observed by his Schoolmaster, caused him to persuade his Parents (who
intended him for an Apprentice) to continue him at School till he could find
out some means, by persuading his rich Uncle, or some other charitable person,
to ease them of a part of their care and charge; assuring them that their Son
was so enriched with the blessings of Nature and Grace, that God seemed to
single him out as a special Instrument of his Glory. And the Good man told them
also, that he would double his diligence in instructing him, and would neither
expect nor receive any other Reward, than the content of so happy an employment.

This was not unwelcom news, and especially to his Mother, to whom he was a
dutiful and dear Child; and all Parties were so pleased with this proposal,
that it was resolved so it should be. And in the mean time his Parents and
Master laid a foundation for his future happiness, by instilling into his Soul
the seeds of piety, those conscientious principles of Loving and fearing God;
of A belief that he knows the very secrets of our Souls; That he punishes our
vices, and rewards our innocence; That we should be free from hypocrisy, and
appear to Man what we are to God, because first or last the crafty man is
caught in his own snare. These seeds of Piety were so seasonably planted, and
so continually watered with the daily dew of Gods blessed Spirit, as has made
Richard Hooker honored in this, and will continue him to be so to succeeding
Generations.

This good Schoolmaster, whose Name I am not able to recover, (and am sorry,
for that I would have given him a better Memorial in this humble Monument,
dedicated to the memory of his Scholar) was very sollicitous with John Hooker,
then Chamberlain of Exeter, and Uncle to our Richard, to take his Nephew into
his care, and to maintain him for one year in the University, and in the mean
time to use his endeavors to procure an admission for him into some College,
still urging and assuring him that his Charge would not continue long, for the
Lads Learning and Manners were both so remarkable, that they must of necessity
be taken notice of; and that God would provide him some second Patron, that
would free him and his Parents from their future care and charge.

These Reasons, with the affectionate Rhetoric of his good Master, and Gods
blessing upon both, procured from his Uncle a faithful promise that he would
take him into his care and charge before the expiration of the year following,
which was performed.

This promise was made about the fourth year of the Reign of Queen Mary: and
the learned John Jewel (after Bishop of Salisbury) having been in the first of
this Queens Reign expelled out of Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, (of which
he was a Fellow) for adhering to the Truth of those Principles of Religion, to
which he had assented in the days of her Brother and Predecessor Edward the
Sixth; and he having now a just cause to fear a more heavy punishment than
Expulsion, was forced by forsaking this, to seek safety in another Nation, and
with that safety the enjoyment of that Doctrine and Worship for which he
suffered.

But the Cloud of that Persecution and Fear ending with the Life of Queen Mary,
the Affairs of the Church and State looked more clear and comfortable; so that
he, and many others of the same Judgment, made a happy return into England
about the first of Queen Elizabeth; in which year this John Jewel was sent a
Commissioner or Visitor of the Churches of the Western parts of this Kingdom,
and especially of those in Devon-shire, in which County he was born, and then
and there he contracted a friendship with John Hooker the Uncle of our Richard.

In the third year of her Reign this John Jewel was made Bishop of Salisbury,
and there being always observed in him a willingness to oblige his Friends, and
now a power added to it, John Hooker gave him a Visit in Salisbury, and
besought him for Charity's sake to look favorably upon a poor Nephew of his,
whom Nature had fitted for a Scholar, but the Estate of his Parents was so
narrow, that they were unable to give him the advantage of Learning; and that
the Bishop would therefore become his Patron, and prevent him from being a
Tradesman; for he was a boy of remarkable hopes. And though the Bishop knew men
do not look with an indifferent eye upon their own Children and Relations, yet
he assented so far to John Hooker, that he appointed the Boy and his
Schoolmaster should attend him about Easter next following at that place, which
was done accordingly; and then after some Questions and Observations of the
Boys gravity and behavior, the Bishop gave his Schoolmaster a reward, and took
order for an annual Pension for the Boy's Parents, promising also to take him
into his care for a future preferment, which was performed; for about the
fourteenth year of his age, which was Anno 1567, he was by the Bishop appointed
to remove to Oxford, and there to attend Dr. Cole, then President of
Corpus-Christi College. Which he did; and Dr. Cole had (according to a promise
made to the Bishop) provided for him both a Tutor (which was said to be Dr.
John Reynolds) and a Clarks Place in that College: which Place, though it were
not a full maintenance, yet with the Contribution of his Uncle, and the
continued Pension of his Patron the good Bishop, it gave him a comfortable
Subsistence. And in this condition he continued unto the Eighteenth year of his
age, still increasing in Learning and Prudence, and so much in Humility and
Piety, that he seemed to be filled with the Holy Ghost even from his Mothers
womb, who did often bless the Day in which she bare him.

About this time of his age he fell into a dangerous Sickness, which lasted two
months; all which time his Mother, having notice of it, did in her hourly
prayers as earnestly beg his Life of God, as the Mother of S. Augustine did
that he might become a true Christian; and their prayers were both so heard as
to be granted. Which Mr. Hooker would often mention with much joy, and as often
pray that he might never live to occasion any sorrow to his good Mother, whom
he loved so dearly, that he would endeavor to be good even as much for hers as
for his own sake.

As soon as he was perfectly recovered from this Sickness, he took a journey
from Oxford to Exeter, to satisfy and see his good Mother, being accompanied
with a Countreyman and Companion of his own College, and both on foot; which
was then either more in fashion, or want of Money, or their Humility made it
so: But on foot they went, and took Salisbury in their way, purposely to see
the good Bishop, who made Mr. Hooker and his Companion dine with him at his own
Table; which Mr. Hooker boasted of with much joy and gratitude when he saw his
Mother and Friends: And at the Bishops parting with him, the Bishop gave him
good counsel and his Benediction, but forgot to give him Money; which when the
Bishop had considered, he sent a Servant in all haste to call Richard back to
him, and at Richards return the Bishop said, Richard, I sent for you back to
lend you a Horse, which has carried me many a mile, and I thank God with much
ease; and presently delivered into his hand a Walking-staff, with which he
professed he had traveled through many parts of Germany; and he said, Richard,
I do not give, but lend, you my Horse; be sure you be honest, and bring my
Horse back to me at your return this way to Oxford. And I do now give you ten
Groats to bear your charges to Exeter; and here is ten Groats more, which I
charge you to deliver to your Mother, and tell her, I send her a Bishops
blessing with it, and beg the continuance of her prayers for me. And if you
bring my Horse back to me, I will give you ten Groats more to carry you on foot
to the College; and so God bless you, good Richard.

And this, you may believe, was performed by both Parties. But, alas! the next
news that followed Mr. Hooker to Oxford was, that his learned and charitable
Patron had changed this for a better Life. Which may be believed, for that as
he lived, so he died, in devout meditation and prayer; and in both so zelously,
that it became a religious question, Whether his last Ejaculations, or his
Soul, did first enter into Heaven?

And now Mr. Hooker became a Man of Sorrow and Fear; of Sorrow, for the loss of
so dear and comfortable a Patron; and of Fear, for his future Subsistence. But
Dr. Cole raised his spirits from this dejection, by bidding him go cheerfully
to his Studies, and assuring him he should neither want Food nor Raiment,
(which was the utmost of his hopes) for he would become his Patron.

And so he was for about nine months, and not longer; for about that time this
following accident did befall Mr. Hooker.

Edwin Sandys (then Bishop of London, and after Archbishop of York) had also
been in the days of Queen Mary forced, by forsaking this, to seek safety in
another Nation; where for many years Bishop Jewel and he were Companions at
Bed and Board in Germany, and where in this their Exile they did often eat the
bread of sorrow, and by that means they there began such a friendship, as
lasted till the death of Bishop Jewel, which was 1571. A little before which
time the two Bishops meeting, Jewel began a story of his Richard Hooker, and
in it gave such a Character of his Learning and Manners, that though Bishop
Sandys was educated in Cambridge, where he had obliged and had many Friends;
yet his resolution was, that his Son Edwin should be sent to Corpus-Christi
College in Oxford, and by all means be Pupil to Mr. Hooker, though his Son
Edwin was then almost of the same Age; for the Bishop said, I will have a Tutor
for my Son that shall teach him Learning by Instruction, and Virtue by Example;
and my greatest care shall be of the last, and (God willing) this Richard
Hooker shall be the Man into whose hands I will commit my Edwin. And the Bishop
did so about twelve months after this resolution.

And doubtless as to these two a better choice could not be made; for Mr.
Hooker was now in the nineteenth year of his age, had spent five in the
University, and had by a constant unwearied diligence attained unto a
perfection in all the learned Languages; and by the help of them, an excellent
Tutor, and an unintermitted Study, had made the subtilty of all the Arts easy
and familiar to him, and useful for the discovery of such Learning as lay hid
from common Searchers; so that by these added to his great Reason, and his
Industry added to both, He did not only know more, but what he knew he knew
better than other men. And with this Knowledge he had a most blessed and clear
Method of Demonstrating what he knew, to the great advantage of all his Pupils,
(which in time were many) but especially to his two first, his dear Edwin
Sandys, and his as dear George Cranmer, of which there will be a fair Testimony
in the ensuing Relation.

This for his Learning. And for his Behavior, amongst other Testimonies this
still remains of him, That in four years he was but twice absent from the
Chapel prayers; and that his Behavior there was such as showed an awful
reverence of that God which he then worshipped and prayed to; giving all
outward testimonies that his Affections were set on heavenly things. This was
his Behavior toward God; and for that to Man, it is observable that he was
never known to be angry, or passionate, or extreme in any of his Desires; never
heard to repine or dispute with Providence, but by a quiet gentle submission
bore the burden of the day with patience; never heard to utter an uncomly
word: and by this and a grave Bahaviour, which is a Divine Charm, he begot an
early Reverence unto his Person, even from those that at other times, and in
other companies, took a liberty to cast off that strictness of Behavior and
Discourse that is required in a Collegiate Life. And when he took any liberty
to be pleasant, his Wit was never blemished with Scoffing, or the utterance of
any Conceit that bordered upon, or might beget a thought of Looseness in his
hearers. Thus innocent and exemplary was his Behavior in his College, and thus
this Good man continued till his death, still increasing in Learning, in
Patience, and Piety.

In this nineteenth year of his age he was chosen, December 24. 1573, to be one
of the twenty Scholars of the Foundation, being elected and admitted as born in
Devon-shire, out of which Country a certain number are to be elected in
Vacancies by the Founders Statutes. And now he was much encouraged, for now he
was perfectly incorporated into this beloved College, which was then noted for
an eminent Library, strict Students, and remarkable Scholars. And indeed it may
glory, that it had Bishop Jewel, Doctor John Reynolds, and Doctor Tho. Iackson
of that Foundation; The First, famous by his Learned Apology for the Church of
England, and his Defense of it against Harding. The Second, for the learned and
wise Menage of a public Dispute with John Heart about the Head and Faith of
the Church, and now printed. And the Third, for his most excellent Exposition
of the Creed, and other Treatises: All such as have given greatest satisfaction
to men of the greatest Learning. Nor was this man more Note-worthy for his
Learning, than for his strict and pious Life, testified by his abundant love
and charity to all men.

And in the year 1576. Febr. 23. his Grace was given him for Inceptor of Arts,
Doctor Herbert Westphaling, a man of note for Learning, being then
Vice Chancellor. The Act following he was completed Master, which was Anno
1577. his Patron Doctor Cole being Vice Chancellor that year, and his dear
friend Henry Savill of Merton College being then one of the Proctors. 'Twas
that Henry Savill, that was after Sir Hen: Savill, Warden of Merton College,
and Provost of Eaton: He which founded in Oxford two famous Lectures, and
endowed them with liberal maintenance.

'Twas that Sir Henry Savill, that translated and enlightened the Annals of
Cornelius Tacitus, with a most excellent Comment; and enriched the world by his
laborious and chargeable collecting the scattered pieces of S. Chrysostom, and
the publication of them in one entire Body in Greek; in which Language he was a
most judicious Critic. 'Twas this Sir Hen: Savill, that had the happiness to
be a Contemporary, and familiar friend to Mr. Hooker, and let Posterity know it.

And in this year of 1577. he was chosen Fellow of the College; Happy also in
being the Contemporary and Friend of Dr. John Reynolds, of whom I have lately
spoken; and of Dr. Spencer: both which were after, and successively, made
Presidents of Corpus-Christi College; men of great Learning and Merit, and
famous in their Generations.

Nor was Mr. Hooker more happy in his Contemporaries of his Time and College,
than in the Pupillage and Friendship of his Edwin Sandys and George Cranmer; of
whom my Reader may note, that this Edwin Sandys was after Sir Edwin Sandys, and
as famous for his Speculum Europae, as his brother George for making Posterity
beholden to his Pen by a learned Relation and Comment on his remarkable
Travels; and for his harmonious Translation of the Psalms of David, the Book of
Job, and other Poetical parts of Holy Writ, into most high and elegant Verse.
And for Cranmer, his other Pupil, I shall refer my Reader to the Testimonies of
our learned Mr. Cambden, the Lord Tottenes, Fines, Morison, and others.

This Cranmer, whose Christen name was George, was a Gentleman of singular
hopes, the eldest Son of Thomas Cranmer, Son of Edward Cranmer, the Archbishops
Brother: he spent much of his youth in Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, where
he continued Master of Arts for many years before he removed, and then betook
himself to Travel, accompanying that worthy Gentleman Sir Edwin Sandys into
France, Germany, and Italy, for the space of three years; and after their happy
return he betook himself to an Employment under Secretary Davison, after whose
Fall he went in place of Secretary with Sir Henry Killigrew in his Embassage
into France; and after his death he was sought after by the most Noble Lord
Mount-Ioy, with whom he went into Ireland, where he remained until in a battle
against the Rebels, near Carlingford, an unfortunate wound put an end both to
his Life, and the great Hopes that were conceived of him.

Betwixt Mr. Hooker and these his two Pupils there was a sacred Friendship, a
Friendship made up of Religious Principles, which increased daily by a
similitude of Inclinations to the same Recreations and Studies; a Friendship
elemented in Youth, and in an University, free from self ends, which usually
the Friendships of Age are not: and in this sweet, this blessed, this spiritual
Amity they went on for many years; and, as the holy Prophet says, so they took
sweet counsel together, and walked in the House of God as Friends. By which
means they improved it to such a degree of Amity as bordered upon Heaven; a
Frienship so sacred, that when it ended in this world, it began in the next,
where it shall have no end.

And, though this World cannot give any degree of Pleasure equal to such a
Friendship, yet Obedience to Parents, and a desire to know the Affairs, and
Manners, and Learning of other Nations, that they might thereby become the more
serviceable unto their own, made them put off their Gowns, and leave Mr. Hooker
to his College. Where he was daily more assiduous in his Studies, still
enriching his quiet and capacious Soul with the precious Learning of the
Philosophers, Casuists and Schoolmen; and with them the Foundation and Reason
of all Laws, both Sacred and Civil: and with such other Learning as lay most
remote from the track of common Studies. And as he was diligent in these, so he
seemed restless in searching the scope and intention of Gods Spirit revealed to
Mankind in the sacred Scripture: for the understanding of which he seemed to be
assisted by the same Spirit with which they were written; and he would often
say, The Scripture was not writ to beget Pride and Disputations, and Opposition
to Government; but Humility, and Obedience, and Peace, and Piety in Mankind.
And that this was really his Judgment, did appear in his future Writings, and
in all the Actions of his Life. Nor was this excellent man a stranger to the
more light and aerie parts of Learning, as Music and Poetry; all which he had
digested and made uselful, and of all which the Reader will have a fair
testimony in what follows.

Thus he continued his Studies in all quietness for the space of three or more
years; about which time he entered into Sacred Orders, and was made Deacon and
Priest; and not long after, in obedience to the College Statutes, he was to
preach either at S. Peter's Oxford, or at S. Paul's Cross London, and the last
fell to his allotment.

In order to which Sermon, to London he came, and immediately to the Shunamites
house; which is a House so called, for that, besides the Stipend paid the
Preacher, there is provision made also for his Lodging and Diet two days before
and one day after his Sermon; this House was then kept by John Churchman,
sometimes a Draper of good note in Watling-street, upon whom Poverty had at
last come like an armed man, and brought him into a Necessitous condition;
which, though it be a punishment, is not always an argument of Gods disfavour,
for he was a good man: I shall not yet give the like testimony of his Wife, but
leave the Reader to judge by what follows. But to this House Mr. Hooker came so
wet, so weary, and weather-beaten, that he was never known to express more
passion, than against a Friend that dissuaded him from Footing it to London,
and for finding him no easier an Horse, supposing the Horse trotted when he did
not; and at this time also such a Faintness and Fear possessed him, that he would
not be persuaded two days Quietness, or any other means could be used to make
him able to preach his Sundays Sermon: but a warm Bed, and Rest, and Drink
proper for a Cold given him by Mrs. Churchman, and her diligent Attendance
added unto it, enabled him to perform the office of the day; which was in or
about the year 1581.

And in this first public appearance to the World, he was not so happy as to
be free from Exceptions against a point of Doctrine delivered in his Sermon,
which was, That in God there were two Wills, an Antecedent, and a Consequent
Will; his first Will that all mankind should be saved; but his second Will was,
that those only should be saved that did live answerable to that degree of
Grace which he had offered or afforded them. This seemed to cross a late
Opinion of Mr. Calvin's, and then taken for granted by many that had not a
Capacity to examine it, as it had been by him, and has been since by Dr.
Iackson and Dr. Hammond, who believe that a contrary Opinion trenches upon the
Honor and Justice of God. How he justified this, I will not undertake to
declare; but it was not excepted against (as Mr. Hooker declares in his Answer
to Mr. Travers) by John Elmer, then Bishop of London, at this time one of his
Auditors, and at last one of his Advocates too, when Mr. Hooker was accused for
it.

But the Justifying of this Doctrine did not prove of so bad consequence, as
the Kindness of Mrs. Churchmans curing him of his late Distemper and Cold; for
that was so gratefully apprehended by Mr. Hooker, that he thought himself bound
in conscience to believe all that she said; so that the Good man came to be
persuaded by her, that he was a man of a tender constitution, and that it was
best for him to have a Wife, that might prove a Nurse to him, such an one as
might both prolong his life, and make it more comfortable; and such a one she
could and would provide for him, if he though fit to marry. And he not
considering that the children of this world are wiser in their generation than
the children of light, but, like a true Nathanael, fearing no guile, because he
meant none, did give her such a power as Eleazar was trusted with when he was
sent to choose a Wife for Isaac; for he trusted her to choose for him, promising
upon a fair summors to return to London, and accept of her choice. And he did
so. Now the Wife provided for him was her Daughter Joan, who brought him
neither Beauty nor Portion; and for her Conditions, they were too like that
Wife's which is by Solomon compared to a dripping house; so that he had no
reason to rejoice in the Wife of his youth, but too just cause to say with the
holy Prophet, Woe is me that I am constrained to have my habitation in the tents
of Kedar.

This Choice of Mr. Hookers (if it were his Choice) may be wondered at; but let
us consider that the Prophet Ezekiel says, There is a wheel within a wheel, a
secret sacred Wheel of Providence (especially in Marriages) guided by his hand
that allows not the race to the swift, nor bread to the wise, nor good Wives to
good Men: and he that can bring good out of evil, (for Mortals are blind to
this Reason) only knows why this blessing was denied to patient Job, and (as
some think) to meek Moses, and to our as meek and patient Mr. Hooker. But so it
was; and let the Reader cease to wonder, for Affliction is a Divine diet, which
though it be not pleasing to Mankind, yet Almighty God has often imposed it as
Physic to those children whose Souls are dearest to him.

And by this means the Good man was drawn from the tranquillity of his College;
from that Garden of Piety, of Pleasure, of Peace, and a sweet Conversation,
into the thorny Wilderness of a busy World; into those corroding cares that
attend a married Priest, and a Country Parsonage, which was Draiton Beauchamp
in Buckingham-shire, not far from Alesbury, and in the Diocese of Lincoln; to
which he was presented by John Cheny Esquire, then Patron of it, the 9. of
December, 1594. where he behaved himself so as to give no occasion of Evil, but
(as S. Paul advises a Minister of God) in much patience, in afflictions, in
anguishes, in necessities, in poverty, and no doubt in long-suffering: yet
troubling no man with his discontents and wants.

And in this condition he continued about a year, in which time his two Pupils,
Edwin Sandys and George Craumer, were returned from Travel, and took a journey
to see their Tutor, where they found him with a Book in his hand, (it was the
Odes of Horace) he being then tending his small allotment of Sheep in a common
Field, which he told his Pupils he was forced to do, for that his Servant was
gone home to dine, and assist his Wife to do some necessary household business.
When his Servant returned and released him, his two Pupils attended him unto
his House, where their best Entertainment was his Company, which was presently
denied them, for Richard was called to rock the Cradle; and the rest of their
Welcome was so like this, that they staid but till next morning, which was time
enough to discover and pity their Tutors condition; and having given him as
much present comfort as they were able, they were forced to leave him to the
company of his Wife Joan, and seek themselves a quieter Lodging.

At their returns to London, Edwin Sandys acquaints his Father, then Archbishop
of York, with his Tutors sad condition, and sollicits for his removal to some
Benefice that might give him a more comfortable subsistence; which his Father
did most willingly grant him, when it should next fall into his power. And not
long after this time, which was in the year 1585, Mr. Alvie (Master of the
Temple) died, who was a man of a strict Life, of great Learning, and of so
venerable Behavior, as to gain such a degree of love and reverence from all
men, that he was generally known by the name of FATHER ALVIE. At the Temple
Reading, next after the death of this Father Alvie, the Archbishop of York
being then at Dinner with the Judges, the Reader, and Benchers of that Society,
met with a Condolement for the Death of Father Alvie, an high commendation of
his Saint-like Life, and of his great Merit both to God and Man: and as they
bewailed his Death, so they wished for a like Pattern of Virtue and Learning to
succeed him. And here came in a fair occasion for the Bishop to commend Mr.
Hooker to Father Alvies Place, which he did with so effectual an earnestness,
and that seconded with so many other Testimonies of his worth, that Mr. Hooker
was sent for from Draiton Beauchamp to London, and there the Mastership of the
Temple proposed unto him by the Bishop, as a greater freedom from Cares, and
the advantage of a better Society, and a more liberal Pension than his Country
Parsonage did afford him. But these Reasons were not powerful enough to incline
him to a willing acceptance of it: his wish was rather to gain a better
Country Living, where he might see Gods blessings spring out of the Earth, and
be free from Noise, (so he expressed the desire of his Heart) and eat that bread
which he might more properly call his own in privacy and quietness. But,
notwithstanding this aversness, he was at last persuaded to accept of the
Bishops Proposal; and was by This you may find in the Temple Records. William
Ermstead was Master of the Temple at the Dissolution of the Priory, and died 2.
Eliz.

Richard Alvey Bat. Divinity, pat. 13 Feb. 2 Eliz Magisles sive Custos Domus
and Ecclesiae novi Templi, died 27 Eliz.

Richard Hooker succeeded that year by Patent in terminie as Alvey had it, and
he left it 33 Eliz.

That year Dr. Balgey succeeded Richard Hooker.


Patent for Life made Master of the Temple the 17. of March, 1585.

And here I shall make a stop; and, that the Reader may the better judge of
what follows, give him a Character of the Times, and Temper of the people of
this Nation, when Mr. Hooker had his Admission into this Place. A Place which
he accepted, rather than desired; and yet here he promised himself a virtuous
quietness, that blessed Tranquillity which he always prayed and labored for;
that so he might in peace bring forth the fruits of peace, and glorify God by
uninterrupted prayers and praises: for this he always thirsted, and yet this
was denied him. For his Admission into this Place was the very beginning of
those Oppositions and Anxieties, which till then this Good man was a stranger
to, and of which the Reader may guess by what follows.

In this Character of the Times, I shall, by the Readers favor and for his
information, look so far back as to the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; a time in which the many pretended Titles to the Crown, the frequent
Treasons, the Doubts of her Successor, the late Civil War, and the sharp
Persecution that raged to the effusion of so much Blood in the Reign of Queen
Mary, were fresh in the memory of all men, and begot fears in the most Pious
and Wisest of this Nation, left the like days should return again to them or
their present Posterity. And the apprehension of these Dangers begot a hearty
desire of a Settlement in the Church and State; believing there was no other
probable way left to make them fit quietly under their own Vines and Fig Trees,
and enjoy the desired fruit of their Labors. But Time, and Peace, and Plenty,
begot Self Ends; and these begot Animosities, Envy, Opposition, and
Unthankfulness for those very blessings for which they lately thirsted, being
then the utmost of their Desires, and even beyond their Hopes.

This was the temper of the Times in the beginning of her Reign; and thus it
continued too long: For those very people that had enjoyed the desires of their
hearts in a Reformation from Rome, became at last so like the Grave, as never
to be satisfied; but were still thirsting for more and more, neglecting to pay
that Obedience, and perform those Vows which they made in their days of
Adversities and Fear: so that in short time there appeared three several
Interests, each of them fearless and restless in the prosecution of their
Designs; they may for distinction be called The active Romanists, The restless
Non-conformists (of which there were many sorts) and The passive peaceable
Protestant. The Counsels of the first considered and resolved on in Rome: the
second in Scotland, in Geneva, and in diver; selected, secret, dangerous
Conventicles, both there, and within the bosom of our own Nation: the third
pleaded and defended their Cause by Established Laws, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil; and if they were active, it was to prevent the other two from destroying
what was by those known Laws happily established to them and their Posterity.

I shall forbear to mention the many and dangerous Plots of the Romanists
against the Church and State, because what is principally intended in this
Digression, is an account of the Opinions and Activity of the Non-conformists;
against whose judgment and practice, Mr. Hooker became at last, but most
unwillingly, to be engaged in a Book-war; a war which he maintained not as
against an Enemy, but with the spirit of Meekness and Reason.

In which number of Non-conformists, though some might be sincere and
well-meaning men, yet of this Party there were many that were possessed with an
high degree of Spiritual wickedness; I mean with an innate radical Pride and
Malice; I mean not those lesser sins that are more visible and more properly
carnal, as Gluttony, and Drunkenness, and the like, (from which good Lord
deliver us;) but sins of an higher nature, more unlike to the nature of God,
which is Love, and Mercy, and Peace; and more like the Devil, (who cannot be
drunk, and yet is a Devil) those wickednesses of Malice, and Revenge, and
Opposition, and a Complacence in working and beholding Confusion, which are
more properly his work, and greater sins, though many will not believe it; Men
whom a furious Zele and Prejudice had blinded, and made incapable of hearing
Reason, or adhering to the ways of Peace; Men whom Pride and a Self-conceit had
made to overvalue their own Wisdom, and become pertinacious, and dispute
against those Laws which they ought to obey; Men that labored and joyed to
speak evil of Government, and then to be the Authors of Confusion; whom
Company, and Conversation, and Custom had blinded, and made insensible that
these were Errors; and at last became so hardened, that they died without
repenting these spiritual wickednesses.

And in these times which tended thus to Confusion, there were also many others
that pretended a Tenderness of Conscience, refusing to take an Oath before a
lawful Magistrate; and yet in their secret Conventicles did covenant and swear
to each other, to be faithful in using their best endeavors to set up the
Presbyterian Discipline. To which end there were many that wandered up and
down, and were active in sowing Discontents and Sedition, by venomous and
secret Murmurings, and a Dispersion of scurrilous Pamphlets and Libels against
the Church and State, but especially against the Bishops: by which means,
together with indiscreet Sermons, the Common people became so Phanatick, as to
believe the Bishops to be Antichrist, and the only Obstructers of Gods
Discipline; and then given over to such a desperate delusion, as to find out a
Text in the Revelation of S. John, that Antichrist was to be overcome by the
sword. So that those very men, that began with tender and meek Petitions,
proceeded to Admonitions, then to Satirical Remonstrances, and at last, having
numbered who was not, and who was, for their Cause, they got a supposed
Certainty of so great a Party, that they durst threaten first the Bishops, then
the Queen and Parliament; to all which they were secretly encouraged by the
Earl of Leicester, then in great favor with her, and the reputed Cherisher and
Patron general of these pretenders to Tenderness of Conscience; his Design
being by their means to bring such an odium upon the Bishops, as to procure an
Alienation of their Lands, and a large proportion of them for himself: which
Avaritious desire had so blinded his Reason, that his ambitious and greedy
Hopes had almost put him into present possession of Lambeth-house.

And to these Undertakings the Non-conformists of this Nation were much
encouraged and heightened by a Correspondence and Confederacy with that
Brotherhood in Scotland; so that here they became so bold, that Mr. Dering.
one told the Queen openly in a Sermon, She was like an untamed Heyfer, that
would not be ruled by Gods people, but obstructed his Discipline. And in
Scotland they were more confident, for there Vide Bishop Spotswoods Hist of the
Church of Scotl.
they declared her an Atheist, and grew to such an height, as not to be
accountable for any thing spoken against her, nor for Treason against their own
King, if spoken in the Pulpit; showing at last such a disobedience to him, that
his Mother being in England, and then in distress, and in prison, and in danger
of Death, the Church denied the King their prayers for her: and at another
time, when he had appointed a Day of Feasting, the Church declared for a
general Fast, in opposition to his Authority.

To this height they were grown in both Nations, and by these means there was
distilled into the minds of the Common people such other venomous and turbulent
Principles, as were inconsistent with the safety of the Church and State: and
these vented' so daringly, that, beside the loss of Life and Limbs, they were
forced to use such other Severities as will not admit of an Excuse, if it had
not been to prevent Confusion, and the consequence of it, which without such
prevention would have been Ruin and Misery to this numerous Nation.

These Errors and Animosities were so remarkable, that they begot wonder in an
ingenious Italian, who being about this time come newly into this Nation, writ
pleasantly to a Friend in his own Country, That the Common people of England
were wiser than the wisest of his wiser Nation; for here the very Women and
Shopkeepers were able to judge of Predestination, and determine what Laws were
fit to be made concerning Church Government, then what were fit to be obeyed or
abolisht. That they were more able (or at least thought so) to raise and
determine perplexed Cases of Conscience, than the wisest of the most learned
Colleges in Italy. That men of the slightest Learning, and the most Ignorant of
the Common people, were mad for a Super or Re-reformation of Religion; and that
in this they appeared like that man, who would never cease to whet and whet his
knife, till there was no Steel left to make it useful. And he concluded his
Letter with this Observation, That those very men that were most busy in
Opposition, and Disputations, and Controversies, had usually the least of
Humility and Mortification, or of the power of Godliness.

And to heighten all these Discontents and Dangers, there was also sprung up a
Generation of Godless men; men that had so often and so long opposed the
blessed motions of his Spirit, and the inward light of their own Consciences,
that they had thereby sinned themselves into a Belief which they would, but
could not believe; into a Belief which is not in Nature, (for the Heathens
believe that there are many Gods) into a Belief that there is no God. Into this
Reprobate condition many had then sinned themselves.

And now when the Church was pestered with them, and with all these other
Irregularities, when her Lands were in danger of Alienation, her Power at least
neglected, and her Peace torn to pieces by several Schisms, and such Heresies
as do usually attend that sin; When the Common people seemed ambitious of doing
those very things that were attended with most dangers, that thereby they might
be applauded and pitied, when they called the Spirit of Opposition a Tender
Conscience, and complained of Persecution because they wanted power to
persecute others: When the giddy Multitude raged, and became restless to find
out Misery for themselves and others; and the Rabble would herd themselves
together, and would govern and act in spite of Authority. In this Extremity,
Fear, and Danger of the Church and State, when to suppress the growing Evils of
both they needed a man of Prudence and Piety, and of an high and fearless
Fortitude, they were blessed in all by John Whitgift his being made Archbishop of
Canterbury; of whom Sir Hen. Wotton (that knew him well) gives this true
Character, That he was a man of Reverend and Sacred memory, and of the
Primitive temper; such a temper, as when the Church by lowliness of Spirit did
flourish in high examples of Virtue.

And though I dare not undertake to add to his Character, yet I shall neither
do right to this Discourse, nor to my Reader, if I forbear to give him a
further and short account of the Life and Manners of this Excellent Man: and it
shall be short, for I long to end this Digression, that I may lead my Reader
back to Mr. Hooker, where we left him at the Temple.

John Whitgift was born in the County of Lincoln, of a Family that was ancient,
and noted to be both Affable and Gentile by nature: he was educated in
Cambridge, much of his Learning was acquired in Pembroke-hall, (where Mr.
Bradford the Martyr was his Tutor) from thence he was removed to Peter-house,
from thence to be Master of Pembroke-hall, and from thence to the Mastership of
Trinity College. About which time the Queen made him her Chaplain, and not long
after Prebend of Ely, and then Dean of Lincoln; and having for many years past
looked upon him with much Reverence and Favor, gave him a fair testimony of
both, by giving him the Bishopric of Worcester, and forgiving him his
First Fruits; then by constituting him Vice President of the Principality of
Wales. And having experimented his Wisdom, his Justice, and Moderation in the
menage of her Affairs, in both these places; She in the 26. of her Reign made
him Archbishop of Canterbury, and not long after of her Privy Council, and
trusted him to manage all her Ecclesiastical Affairs and Preferments. In all
which Removes he was like the Ark, which left a blessing upon the place where
it rested; and in all his Employments was like Iehoida, that did good unto
Israel.

These were the steps of this Bishops Ascension to this place of Dignity and
Cares; in which place (to speak Mr. Cambdens very words) he devoutly
consecrated both his whole Life to God, and his painful Labors to the good of
his Church. And yet in this place he met with many Oppositions in the
Regulation of Church Affairs, which were much disordered at his entrance, by
reason of the age and remisness of Bishop Grindall, his immediate Predecessor,
the Activity of the Non-conformists, and their chief Assistant the Earl of
Leicester, and by others of the like Sacrilegious Principles. With these he was
to encounter; and though he wanted neither Courage nor a Good Cause, yet he
foresaw that without a great measure of the Queens Favor, it was impossible to
stand in the Breach that was made into the Lands and Immunities of the Church,
or to maintain the remaining Rights of it. And therefore by justifiable sacred
Insinuations, such as S. Paul to Agrippa; (Agrippa, believe thou? I know thou
believe) he wrought himself into so great a degree of Favor with her, as by
his pious use of it has got both of them a greater degree of Fame in this
world, and of Glory in that into which they are now entered.

His Merits to the Queen, and her Favors to him were such, that she called him
her little black Husband, and called his Servants her Servants: and she saw so
visible and blessed a Sincerity shine in all his Cares and Endeavors for the
Churches and for her good, that she was supposed to trust him with the very
secrets of her Soul, and to make him her Confessor: Of which she gave many
fair testimonies; and of which one was, that she would never eat Flesh in Lent
without obtaining a License from her little black Husband: and would often say,
She pitied him because she trusted him, and had eased herself by laying all
her Clergie-cares upon his shoulders, which he managed with prudence and piety.

I shall not keep my self within the promised Rules of Brevity in this account
of his Interest with Her Majesty, and his Care of the Churches Rights, if in
this Digression I should enlarge to particulars; and therefore my desire is,
that one Example may serve for a Testimony of both. And that the Reader may the
better understand it, he may take notice, that not many years before his being
made Archbishop, there passed an Act or Acts of Parliament intending the better
Preservation of Church Lands, by recalling a Power which was in others to sell
or Lease them, by lodging and trusting the future Care and Protection of them
in the Crown: And amongst many that made a bad use of this Power or Trust of
the Queens, the Earl of Leicester was one; and the Bishop having by his
Interest with Her Majesty put a stop to the Earls Sacrilegious designs, they
two fell to an open Opposition before her; after which they both quitted the
Room, not Friends in appearance. But the Bishop made a sudden and a seasonable
return to Her Majesty, (for he found her alone) and spoke to her with great
humility and reverence, and to this purpose.

I beseech your Majesty to hear me with patience, and to believe that yours and
the Churches Safety are dearer to me than my Life, but my Conscience dearer
than both: and therefore give me leave to do my Duty, and tell you that Princes
are deputed Nursing Fathers of the Church, and owe it a Protection; and
therefore God forbid that you should be so much as Passive in her Ruins, when
you may prevent it; or that I should behold it without horror and detestation,
or should sorbear to tell your Majesty of the Sin and Danger. And though you
and my self are born in an Age of Frailties, when the Primitive Piety and Care
of the Churches Lands and Immunities are much decayed; yet (Madam) let us first
consider that there are such sins as Profaneness and Sacrilege; and that if
there were not, they could not have Names in Holy Writ, and particularly in the
New Testament. And I beseech you to consider, that though our Savior said, He
judged no man; and to testify it, would not judge nor divide the Inheritance
betwixt the two Brethren, nor judge the Woman taken in Adultery; yet in this
point of the Churches Rights he was so zealous, that he made himself both the
Accuser, and the Judge, and the Executioner to punish these sins; witnessed in
that he himself made the Whip to drive the Prohaners out of the Temple,
overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, and drove them out of it. And
consider that S. Paul said to those Christians of his time that were offended
with Idolatry, yet Thou that abborrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Supposing I think Sacrilege the greater sin. This may occasion your Majesty to
consider that there is such a sin as Sacrilege; and to incline you to prevent
the Curse that will follow it, I beseech you also to consider that Constantine
the first Christian Emperor, and Helena his Mother, that King Edgar, and
Edward the Confessor, and indeed many others of your Predecessors, and many
private Christians, have also given to God and to his Church, much Land and
many Immunities, which they might have given to those of their own Families,
and did not; but gave them as an absolute Right and Sacrifice to God: And with
these Immunities and Lands they have entailed a Curse upon the Alienators of
them; God prevent your Majesty from being liable to that Curse.

And, to make you that are trusted with their Preservation, the better to
understand the danger of it, I beseech you forget not, that, besides these
Curses, the Churches Land and Power have been also endeavored to be preserved,
as far as Humane Reason and the Law of this Nation have been able to preserve
them, by an immediate and most sacred Obligation on the Consciences of the
Princes of this Realm. For they that consult Magna Charta shall find, that as
all your Predecessors were at their Coronation, so you also were sworn before
all the Nobility and Bishops then present, and in the presence of God, and in
his stead to him that anointed you, To maintain the Church Lands, and the
Rights belonging to it; and this testified openly at the holy Altar, by laying
your Hands on the Bible then lying upon it. And not only Magna Charta, but
many modern Statutes have denounced a Curse upon those that break Magna Charta.
and now what account can be given for the breach of this Oath at the last Great
Day, either by Your Majesty, or by me, if it be wilfully, or but negligently
violated, I know not.

And therefore, good Madam, let not the late Lords Exceptions against the
failings of some few Clergymen, prevail with you to punish Posterity, for the
Errors of this present Age; let particular Men suffer for their particular
Errors, but let God and his Church have their right; And let Posterity take
notice of what is already become visible in many Families, That Church-land
added to an ancient Inheritance, has proved like a Moth fretting a Garment,
and secretly consume both: Or like the Eagle that stole a coal from the Altar,
and thereby set her Nest on fire, which consumed both her young Eagles, and her
self that stole it. And though I shall forbear to speak reproachfully of your
Father, yet I beg you to take notice, that a part of the Churches Rights, added
to the vast Treasure left him by his Father, has been conceived to bring an
unavoidable Consumption upon both, notwithstanding all his diligence to
preserve it.

And consider that after the violation of those Laws, to which he had sworn in
Magna Charta, God did so far deny him his Restraining Grace, that he fell into
greater sins than I am willing to mention. Madam, Religion is the Foundation
and Cement of humane Societies: and when they that serve at Gods Altar shall be
exposed to Poverty, then Religion it self will be exposed to Scorn, and become
contemptible, as you may already observe in too many poor Vicaridges in this
Nation. And therefore as you are by a late Act or Acts entrusted with a great
Power to preserve or waste the Churches Lands, yet dispose of them for Jesus
sake as the Donors intended; let neither Falsehood nor Flattery beguile you to
do otherwise, and put a stop (I beseech you) to the approaching Ruins of Gods
Church, as you expect comfort at the last Great day; for Kings must be judged.
Pardon this affectionate plainness, my most dear Sovereign, and let me still be
continued in your Favor, and the Lord still continue you in his.

The Queens patient hearing this affectionate Speech, and her future care to
preserve the Churches Rights, which till then had been neglected, may appear a
fair Testimony, that he made hers and the Churches Good the chiefest of his
cares, and that she also thought so. And of this there were such daily
testimonies given, as begot betwixt them so mutual a joy and confidence, that
they seemed born to believe and do good to each other; she not doubting his
Piety to be more than all his Opposers, which were many; nor his Prudence equal
to the chiefest of her Council, who were then as remarkable for Wisdom, as
those dangerous Times did require, or this Nation did ever enjoy. And in this
condition he continued twenty years; in which time he saw some Flowings, but
many more Ebbings of her Favor toward all men that opposed him, especially
the Earl of Leicester: so that God seemed still to keep him in her Favor, that
he might preserve the remaining Church Lands and Immunities from Sacrilegious
Alienations. And this Good man deserved all the Honor and Power with which she
trusted him; for he was a Pious man, and naturally of Noble and Grateful
Principles: he eased her of all her Church-cares by his wife Menage of them; he
gave her faithful and prudent Counsels in all the Extremities and Dangers of
her Temporal Affairs, which were many; he lived to be the chief Comfort of her
Life in her Declining age, to be then most frequently with her, and her
Assistant at her private Devotions, to be the greatest Comfort of her Soul upon
her Deathbed, to be present at the Expiration of her last Breath, and to
behold the closing of those Eyes that had long looked upon him with Reverence
and Affection. And let this also be added, that he was the Chief Mourner at her
sad Funeral; nor let this be forgotten, that within a few hours after her
death, he was the happy Proclaimer, that King James (her peaceful Successor)
was Heir to the Crown.

Let me beg of my Reader to allow me to say a little, and but a little, more of
this good Bishop, and I shall then presently lead him back to Mr. Hooker; and,
because I would hasten, I will mention but one part of the Bishops Charity and
Humility, but this of both: He built a large Almes-house near to his own House
at Croydon in Surrey, and endowed it with Maintenance for a Master and twenty
eight poor Men and Women; which he visited so often, that he knew their Names
and Dispositions, and was so truly humble, that he called them Brothers and
Sisters: and whenever the Queen descended to that lowliness to dine with him
at his Palace in Lambeth, (which was very often) he would usually the next day
show the like lowliness to his poor Brothers and Sisters at Croydon, and dine
with them at his Hospital; at which time, you may believe, there was Joy at the
Table. And at this place he built also a fair Free School, with a good
Accommodation and Maintenance for the Master and Scholars. Which gave just
occasion for Boyse Sisi, then Ambassador for the French King, and Resident
here, at the Bishops death to say, The Bishop had published many learned Books,
but a Free School to train up Youth, and an Hospital to lodge and maintain aged
and poor People, were the best Evidences of Christian Learning that a Bishop
could leave to Posterity. This good Bishop lived to see King James settled in
peace, and then fell sick at Lambeth; of which the King having notice, went to
visit him, and found him in his Bed in a declining condition and very weak, and
after some short discourse, the King assured him, He had a great Affection for
him, and high value for his Prudence and Virtues, and would beg his Life of
God. To which he replied, Pro Ecclesia Dei, Pro Ecclesia Dei: which were the
last words he ever spoke, therein testifying, that as in his Life, so at his
Death, his chiefest care was of Gods Church.

This John Whitgift was made Archbishop in the year 1583. In which busy place,
he continued twenty years and some months; and in which time you may believe
he had many Trials of his Courage and Patience; But his Motto was, Vincit, qui
patitur.

And he made it good. Many of his many Trials were occasioned by the then
powerful Earl of Leicester, who did still (but secretly) raise and cherish a
Faction of Non conformists to oppose him; especially one Thomas Cartwright, a
man of noted Learning, sometime Contemporary with the Bishop in Cambridge, and
of the same College, of which the Bishop had been Master; in which place there
began some Emulations, (the particulars I forbear) and at last open and high
Oppositions betwixt them; and in which you may believe Mr. Cartwright was most
faulty, if his Expulsion out of the University can incline you to it.

And in this discontent after the Earls death (which was 1588) Mr. Cartwright
appeared a chief Cherisher of a Party that were for the Geneva
Church Government; and to effect it, he ran himself into many dangers both of
Liberty and Life; appearing at the last to justify himself and his Party in
many Remonstrances, which he caused to be printed, and to which the Bishop made
a first Answer, and Cartwright replied upon him; and then the Bishop having
rejoyned to his Reply, Mr. Cartwright either was, or was persuaded to be,
satisfied; for he wrote no more, but left the Reader to be judge which had
maintained their Cause with most Charity and Reason. After some silence, Mr.
Cartwright received from the Bishop many personal Favors, and retired himself
to a more private Living, which was at Warwich, where he lived quietly, and
grew rich, and where the Bishop gave him a License to Preach, upon promise not
to meddle with Controversies, but incline his Hearers to Piety and Moderation;
and this Promise he kept during his Life, which ended 1602, the Bishop
surviving him but one year, each ending his days in perfect Charity with the
other.

And now after this long Digression made for the Information of my Reader
concerning what follows, I bring him back to venerable Mr. Hooker, where we
left him in the Temple, and where we shall find him as deeply engaged in a
Controversy with Walter Trevers, a Friend and Favorite of Mr. Cartwrights, as
the Bishop had ever been with Mr. Cartwright himself; and of which I shall
proceed to give this following account.

And first this; That though the Pens of Mr. Cartwright and the Bishop were now
at rest, yet there was sprung up a new Generation of restless men, that by
Company and Clamours became possessed of a Faith which they ought to have kept to
themselves, but could not; men that were become positive in asserting That a
Papist cannot be saved: insomuch that about this time at the Execution of the
Queen of Scots, the Bishop that preached her Funeral Sermon (which was Dr.
Dove, then Bishop of Peterborough) was reviled for not being positive for her
Damnation. And beside this Boldness of their becoming Gods, so far as to set
limits to his Mercies; there was not only Martin Mar-prelate, but other
venomous Books daily printed and dispersed; Books that were so absurd and
scurrilous, that the graver Divines disdained them an Answer. And yet these
were grown into high esteem with the Common people, till Tom Nash appeared
against them all, who was a man of a sharp wit, and the master of a scoffing
Satirical merry Pen, which he employed to discover the Absurdities of those
blind malicious senseless Pamphlets, and Sermons as senssess as they; Nash his
Answers being like his Books, which bore these Titles, An Almond for Parrot. A
Fig for my God-son. Come crack me this Nut, and the like: so that his merry Wit
made such a discovery of their Absurdities, as (which is strange) he put a
greater stop to these malicious Pamphlets, than a much wiser man had been able.

And now the Reader is to take notice, That at the Death of Father Alvie, who
was Master of the Temple, this Walter Trevers was Lecturer there for the
Evening Sermons, which he preached with great approbation, especially of the
younger Gentlemen of that Society; and for the most part approved by Mr. Hooker
himself, in the midst of their oppositions. For he continued Lecturer a part of
his time, Mr. Trevers being indeed a man of competent Learning, of a winning
Behavior, and of a blameless Life. But he had taken Orders by the Presbytery
in Antwerp, and if in any thing he was transported, it was in an extreme desire
to set up that Government in this Nation: For the promoting of which, he had a
correspondence with Theodore Beza at Geneva, and others in Scotland; and was
one of the chiefest assistants to Mr. Cartwright in that Design.

Mr. Trevers had also a particular hope to set up this Government in the
Temple, and to that end used his endeavors to be Master of it, and his being
disappointed by Mr. Hookers admittance, proved some occasion of opposition
betwixt them, in their Sermons. Many of which were concerning the Doctrine,
Discipline, and Ceremonies of this Church: Insomuch that, as one has
pleasantly expressed it, The Forenoon Sermon spoke Canterbury, and the
Afternoons, Geneva.

In these Sermons there was little of bitterness, but each party brought all
the Reasons he was able to prove his Adversaries Opinion, Erroneous. And thus
it continued a long time, till the Oppositions became so visible, and the
Consequences so dangerous, especially in that place, that the prudent
Archbishop put a stop to Mr. Trevers his Preaching, by a positive Prohibition:
And Mr. Trevers Appealed and Petitioned Her Majesty and Her Privy Council to
have it recalled, where he met with many assisting Friends; but they were not
able to prevail with or against the Archbishop, whom the Queen had entrusted
with all Church Power; and he had received so fair a Testimony of Mr. Hookers
Principles, and of his Learning and Moderation, that he withstood all
Solicitations. But the denying this Petition of Mr. Trevers was unpleasant to
diverse of his Party, and the Reasonableness of it became at last to be so
magnified by them and many others, as never to be answered; so that intending
the Bishops and Mr. Hookers disgrace, they procured it to be privately printed,
and scattered abroad: and then Mr. Hooker was forced to appear publicly, and
print an Answer to it, which he did, and Dedicated it to the Archbishop; and it
proved so full an Answer, to have in it so much of clear Reason, and writ with
so much Meekness and Majesty of Style, that the Bishop began to wonder at the
Man, to rejoice that he had appeared in his Cause, and disdained not earnestly
to beg his Friendship, even a familiar Friendship with a man of so much quiet
Learning and Humility.

To enumerate the many particular points, in which Mr. Hooker and Mr. Trevers
dissented, would prove at least tedious; and therefore I shall impose upon my
Reader no more than two, which shall immediately follow.

Mr. Trevers excepted against Mr. Hooker, for that in one of his Sermons he
declared, That the assurance of what we believe by the Word of God, is not to
us so certain as that which we perceive by sense. And Mr. Hooker confesses he
said so; and endeavors to justify it by the Reasons following.

First, I taught, That the things which God promises in his Word are surer to
us than what we touch, handle, or see; but are we so sure and certain of them?
if we be, why does God so often prove his Promises to us, as he does, by
Arguments drawn from our sensible Experience? For we must be surer of the Proof
than of the things Proved; otherwise it is no Proof. For Example: How is it
that many men looking on the Moon at the same time, every one knows it to be
the Moon as certainly as the other does: but many believing one and the same
Promise, have not all one and the same Fullness of Persuasion? For how falls
it out, that men being assured of any thing by Sense, can be no surer of it
than they are; when as the strongest in Faith that lives upon the Earth, has
always need to labor, strive and pray, that his Assurance concerning Heavenly
and Spiritual things may grow, increase, and be augmented?

The Sermon that gave him the cause of this his Justification makes the Case
more plain, by declaring that there is besides this Certainty of Evidence, a
Certainty of Adherence: in which having most excellently demostrated what the
Certainty of Adherence is, he makes this comfortable use of it, Comfortable (he
says) as to weak Believers, who suppose themselves to be faithless, not to
believe, when notwithstanding they have their Adherence; the Holy Spirit has
his private operations, and works secretly in them, and effectually too,
though they want the inward Testimony of it.

Tell this to a man that has a mind too much dejected by a sad sense of his
sin; to one that by a too severe judging of himself, concludes that he wants
Faith, because he wants the comfortable Assurance of it; and his Answer will
be, Do not persuade me against my knowledge, against what I find and feel in my
self; I do not, I know I do not believe. (Mr. Hookers own words follow) Well
then, to favor such men a little in their weakness, let that be granted which
they do imagine; be it that they adhere not to Gods Promises, but are faithless
and without belief; but are they not grieved for their unbelief? they confess
they are; do they not wish it might, and also strive that it may be otherways?
we know they do; whence comes this but from a secret Love and Liking that they
have of those things believed? For, no man can Love those things which in his
own opinion are not; and, if they think those things to be, which they show
they Love when they desire to believe them; then must it be that by desiring to
believe, they prove themselves true believers; for, without faith no man
thinks that things believed are: which argument all the Subtilties of
infernal powers will never be able to dissolve. This is an abridgement of part
of the reasons he gives for his Justification of this his Opinion for which he
was excepted against by Mr. Trevers.

Mr. Hooker was also accused by Mr. Trevers, for that he in one of his Sermons
had declared, that he doubted not but that God was merciful to many of our
forefathers living in Popish Superstition, for as much as they Sinned
ignorantly: and Mr. Hooker in his answer professes it to be his Judgment, and
declares his Reasons for this Charitable opinion to be as follows.

But first he states the question about Justification and works, and how the
Foundation of Faith is overthrown; and then he proceeds to discover that way
which Natural men and some others have mistaken to be the way by which they
hope to attain true happiness; and having discovered the Mistaken, he proceeds
to direct to that True way, by which and no other, everlasting life and
blessedness is attainable; and, these two ways he demonstrates thus: (they be
his own words that follow) That the way of Nature, This the way of Grace; the
end of that way Salvation merited, presupposing the righteousness of men's
works; their righteousness, a Natural ability to do them; that ability, the
goodness of God which Created them in such perfection. But the end of this way
Salvation bestowed upon men as a gift: presupposing not their righteousness,
but, the forgiveness of their Unrighteousness, Justification; their
Justification, not their Natural ability to do good, but their hearty Sorrow
for not doing, and unfeigned belief in him for whose sake not doers are
accepted, which is their Vocation; their Vocation, the Election of God taking
them out of the number of lost Children; their Election a Mediator in whom to
be elect; this mediation inexplicable mercy; this mercy, supposing their misery
for whom he vouchsafed to dye, and make himself a Mediator.

And he also declares, there is no meritorious cause for our Justification but
Christ, no effectual but his Mercy; and says also, we deny the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we abuse, disanul, and anihilate the benefit of his Passion,
if by a proud imagination we believe we can merit everlasting life, or can be
worthy of it. This belief (he declares) is to destroy the very essence of our
Justification, and he makes all opinions that border upon this to be very
dangerous. Yet nevertheless, (and for this he was accused) Considering how many
virtuous and just men, how many Saints and Martyrs have had their dangerous
opinions, amongst which this was one, that they hoped to make God some part of
amends by voluntary punishments which they laid upon themselves; because by
this or the like erroneous opinions which do by consequent overthrow the merits
of Christ, shall man be so bold as to write on their Graves such men are
damned, there is for them no Salvation? St. Austin says, errare possum,
Haereticus esse nolo. And except we put a difference betwixt them that err
Ignorantly, and them that Obstinately persist in it, how is it possible that
any man should hope to be saved? give me a Pope or a Cardinal, whom great
afflictions have made to know himself, whose heart God has touched with true
sorrow for all his Sins, and filled with a Love of Christ and His Gospel, whose
eyes are willingly open to see the truth, and his mouth ready to renounce all
error, this one opinion of merit excepted, which he thinks God will require
at his hands, and because he wants, trembles, and is discouraged, and yet
can say, Lord cleanse me from all my secret sins, shall I think because of this
or a like error such men touch not so much as the Hem of Christ's Garment? if
they do, wherefore should I doubt but that virtue may proceed from Christ to
save them? no, I will not be afraid to say to such a one, you err in your
opinion, but be of good comfort, you have to do with a merciful God who will
make the best of that little which you hold well, and not with a captious
Sophister, who gathers the worst out of every thing in which you are mistaken.

But it will be said, The admittance of Merit in any degree, overthrows the
foundation, excludes from the hope of mercy, from all possibility of
salvation. (And now M. Hookers own words follow.)

What though they hold the truth sincerely in all other parts of Christian
Faith? although they have in some measure all the Virtues and Graces of the
Spirit? although they have all other tokens of Gods Children in them? although
they be far from having any proud opinion that they shall be saved by the
worthiness of their deeds? although the only thing that troubles and
molesteth them be a little too much dejection, somewhat too great a fire
arising from an erroneous conceit, that God will require a worthiness in them,
which they are grieved to find wanting in themselves? although they be not
obstinate in this opinion? although they be willing, and would be glad to
forsake it, if any one reason were brought sufficient to disprove it? although
the only cause why they do not forsake it ere they dye, be their Ignorance of
that means by which it might be disproved? although the cause why the Ignorance
in this point is not removed, be the want of knowledge in such as should be
able, and are not, to remove it? Let me die (says Mr. Hooker) if it be ever
proved, that simply an Error does exclude a Pope or Cardinal in such a case
utterly from hope of life. Surely I must confess, that if it be an Error to
think that God may be merciful to save men even when they err; my greatest
comfort is my error: were it not for the love I bear to this error, I would
never wish to speak or to live.

I was willing to take notice of these two points, as supposing them to be very
material; and that as they are thus contracted, they may prove useful to my
Reader; as also for that the answers be arguments of Mr. Hookers great and
clear reason, and equal Charity. Other exceptions were also made against him,
as that he prayed before and not after his Sermons; that in his Prayers be
named Bishops; that he kneeled both when he prayed and when he received the
Sacrament, and (says Mr. Hooker in his defense) other exceptions so like these,
as but to name, I should have thought a greater than fault to commit them.

And it is not unworthy the noting, that in the manage of great controversy, a
sharper reproof than this and one like it did never fail from the happy pen of
this Humble man. That like it was upon a like occasion of exceptions, to which
his answer was, Your next argument consists of railing and of reasons; to your
Railing I say nothing, to your Reasons I say what follows. And I am glad of
this fair occassion, to testify the Dove-like temper of this meek, this
matchless man; and doubtless if Almighty God had blessed the Dissenters from
the Ceremonies and Discipline of this Church, with a like measure of Wisdom
and Humility, instead of their pertinacious zele, then Obedience and Truth had
kissed each other; then Peace and Piety and flourished in our Nation, and this
Church and State had been blessed like Jerusalem that is at unity with it self;
which can never be expected, till God shall bless the common people with a
belief, That there may be offenses taken which are not given, and That Laws
are not made for private men to Dispute, but to Obey.

And this also may be worthy of noting, That these Exceptions of Mr. Trevers
against Mr. Hooker, were the cause of his transcribing several of his Sermons,
which we now see printed with this Books; of his Answer to Mr. Trevers, his
Supplication, and of his most learned and useful discourse of Justification of
Faith and Works; and by their Transcription they fell into the hands of others,
and have been thereby preserved from being lost, as too many of his other
matchless wrirings were and from these I have gathered my observations in this
Discourse of his Life.

After the publication of his answer to the Petition of Mr. Trevers, Mr. Hooker
grew daily into repute with the most learned and wise of the Nation; but it had
a contrary effect in every many of the Temple that were zealous for Mr. Trevers
and for his Church Discipline; insomuch that though Mr. Trevers left the place,
yet the seeds of Discontent could not be rooted out of that Society, by the
great Reason, and as great Meekness of this humble man: for though the chief
Benchers gave him much Reverence and Encouragement, yet he there met with many
neglects and oppositions by those of Mr. Trevers Judgment; insomuch that it
turned to his extreme grief and that he might unbeguile and win them, he
designed to write a deliberate sober Treatise of the Churches power to make
Canons for the use of Ceremonies, and by Law to impose an obedience to them, as
upon her Children; and this he proposed to do in eight Books of the Laws of
Ecclesiastical Polity; intending therein to show such Arguments as should force
an assent from all men, if Reason, delivered in sweet Language, and void of any
provocation, were able to do it; And that he might prevent all prejudice, he
wrote a large Preface or Epistle to the Dissenting Brethren, wherein there were
such Bowels of Love, and such a Commixture of that Love with Reason, as was
never exceeded but in Holy Writ, and particularly by that of St. Paul to his
dear Brother and fellow Labourer Philemon, than which none ever was more like
this Epistle of Mr. Hookers; so that his dear friend and companion in his
Studies might after his death justly say, What admirable height of Learning and
depth of Judgment dwelt in the lowly mind of this truly humble man, great in
all wise men's eyes except his own with what gravity and Majesty of speech his
Tongue and Pen uttered Heavenly Mysteries; whose eyes in the Humility of his
Heart were always cast down to the ground; how all things that proceeded from
him were breathed as from the Spirit of Love, as if he, like the Bird of the
Holy Ghost, the Dove, had wanted gall, let those that knew him not in his
Person, judge by these living Images of his soul, his Writings.

The foundation of these Books were laid in the Temple; but he sound it no fit
place to finish what he had there designed; and therefore solicited the Arch
Bishop for a remove, saying, When I lost the freedom of my Cell, which was my
College, yet I found some degree of it in my quiet Country Parsonage: but I am
weary of the noise and oppositions of this place; And indeed God and Nature did
not intend me for Contentions, but for Study and quietness: I have begun a work
in which I intend the Justification of our Laws of Church Government, and I
shall never be able to finish it, but where I may Study, and pray for Gods
blessing upon my endeavors, and keep my self in Peace and Privacy, and behold
Gods blessing spring out of my Mother Earth, and eat my own bread without
oppositions; and therefore if your Grace can Judge me worthy such a favor, let
me beg it, that I may perfect what I have begun.

About this time the Parsonage or Rectory of Boscum, in the Diocese of Sarum,
and six miles from that City, became void. The Bishop of Sarum is Patron of it,
but in the vacancy of that Sea (which was three years betwixt the death of
Bishop Pierce and Bishop Caldwells admission into it) the disposal of that and
all Benefices belonging to that Sea, during this said vacancy, came to be
disposed of by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and he presented Richard Hooker to
it in the year 1591. And Richard Hooker was also in this said year Instituted,
July 17. to be a minor Prebend of Salisbury, the Corpse to it being
nether-Havin, about ten miles from that City, which Prebend was of no great
value, but intended chiefly to make him capable of a better preferment in that
Church. In this Boscum he continued till he had finished four of his eight
proposed Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, and these were entered
into the register Book in Stationers Hall the 9. of March 1592. but not
published till the year 1594. and then with the before mentioned large and
affectionate Preface to them that seek (as they termit) the Reformation of the
laws and orders Ecclesiastical in the Church of England; of which Books I shall
yet say nothing more, but that he continued his laborious diligence to finish
the remaining four during his life (of all which more properly hereafter) but
at Boscum he finished and published but only the first four.

He left Boscum in the year 1595. by a surrender of it into the hands of Bishop
Caldwell, and he presented Benjamin Russel, who was Instituted into it 23. of
June in the same year.

The Parsonage of Bishops Borne in Kent, three miles from Canterbury, is in
that Archbishops gift, but in the latter end of the year 1594. Doctor William
Redman the Rector of it was made Bishop of Norwich, by which means the power of
presenting to it was pro ea vice in the Queen; and she presented Richard
Hooker, whom she loved well, to this good living of Borne the 7. of July 1595.
in which Living he continued till his Death, without any addition of Dignity or
Profit.

And now having brought our Richard Hooker from his Birthplace Place, to this
where he found a Grave, I shall only give some account of his Books, and of his
behavior in this Parsonage of Borne, and then give a rest both to my self and
my Reader.

His first four Books and large Epistle have been declared to be printed at his
being at Boscum, Anno 1594. Next I am to tell that at the end of these four
Books there is printed this Advertisement to the Reader. I have for some causes
thought it at this time more fit to let go these first four Books by
themselves, than to stay both them and the rest, till the whole might together
be published. Such generalities of the cause in question as are here handled,
it will be perhaps not amiss to consider apart, by way of Introduction unto the
Books that are to follow concerning particulars, in the mean time the Reader is
requested to mend the Printers errors, as noted underneath.

And I am next to declare that his fifth Book (which is larger than his first
four) was first also printed by itself Anno 1597. and dedicated to his Patron
the Archbishop. These Books were read with an admiration of their excellency in
This, and their just fame spread it self into forain Nations. And I have been
told more than forty years past, that Cardinal Alen, or learned Doctor
Stapleton (both English men, and in Italy when Mr. Hookers four Books were
first printed) meeting with this general fame of them, were desirous to read an
Author that both the Rerformed and the Learned of their own Church did so much
magnify, and therefore caused them to be sent for; and, after reading them,
boasted to the Pope (which then was Clement the eight) that though he had
lately said he never met with an English Book whose Writer deserved the name of
an Author; yet there now appeared a wonder to them, and it would be so to his
Holiness, if it were in Latin, for a poor obscure English Priest had writ four
such Books of Laws, and Church Polity, and in a Style that expressed so Grave and
such Humble Majesty with clear demonstration of Reason, that in all their
readings they had not met with any that exceeded him; and this begot in the
Pope an earnest desire that Doctor Stapleton should bring the said four Books,
and looking on the English read a part of them to him in Latin, which Doctor
Stapleton did, to the end of the first Book; at the conclusion of which, the
Pope spoke to this purpose; there is no Learning that this man has not searched
into, nothing too hard for his understanding: This man indeed deserves the name
of an Author; his books will get reverence by Age, for there is in them such
seeds of Eternity, that if the rest be like this, they shall last till the last
Fire shall consume all Learning.

Nor was this high, the only testimony and commendations given to his Books;
for at the first coming of King James into this Kingdom, he inquired of the
Archbishop Whitegift for his friend Mr. Hooker that writ the Books of Church
Polity; to which the answer was, that he dyed a year before Queen Elizabeth,
who received the sad news of his Death with very much Sorrow; to which the King
replied, and I receive it with no less, that I shall want the desired
happiness of seeing and discoursing with that man from whose Books I have
received such satisfaction: Indeed my Lord I have received more satisfaction in
reading a Leaf, or Paragraph in Mr. Hooker, though it were but about the
fashion of Churches, or Church Music, or the like, but especially of the
Sacraments, than I have had in the reading particular large Treatises written
but of one of those subjects by others, though very Learned men; and, I observe
there is in Mr. Hooker no affected Language, but a comprehensive, deer
manifestation of Reason, and that backed with the Authority of the Scripture,
the Fathers and Schoolmen, and with all Law both Sacred and Civil. And, though
many others write well, yet in the next age they will be forgotten; but
doubtless there is in every page of Mr. Hookers Book the picture of a Divine
Soul, such Pictures of Truth and Reason, and drawn in so sacred colors, that
they shall never fade, but give an immortal memory to the Author. And it is so
truly true, that he thought what he spoke, that as the most Learned of the
Nation have and still do mention Mr. Hooker with reverence, so he also did
never mention him but with the Epithet of Learned, or Judicious, or Reverend,
or Venerable Mr. Hooker.

Nor did his Son our late King Charles the first, ever mention him but with the
same reverence, enjoining his Son our now gracious King, to be studious in Mr.
Hookers Books. And our learned Antiquary Mr. Cambden In his Annals 1599.
mentioning the Death, the modesty, and other virtues of Mr. Hooker, and
magnifying his Books, wished, that for the honor of this, and benefit of other
Nations, they were turned into the Universal Language. Which work though
undertaken by many, yet they have been weary and forsaken it; but the Reader
may now expect it, having been long since begun, and lately finished, by the
happy pen of Doctor Earl, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, of whom I may justly
say (and let it not offend him, because it is such a truth as ought not to be
concealed from Posterity, or those that now live and yet know him not) that
since Mr. Hooker died, none have lived whom God has blessed with more innocent
Wisdom; more sanctified Learning, or a more pious, peaceable, primitive Temper:
so that this excellent person seems to be only like himself and our venerable
R. Hooker; and only fit to make the learned of all Nations happy in knowing
what has been too long confined to the language of our little I stand.

There might be many more and just occasions taken to speak of his Books, which
none ever did or can commend too much, but I decline them, and hasten to an
account of his Christian behavior and Death at Borne; in which place he
continued his customary rules of Mortification and Self-denial; was much in
Fasting, frequent in Meditation and Prayers, enjoying those blessed Returns,
which only men of strict lives feel and know, and to which men of loose and
Godless lives are Strangers.

At his entrance into this place, his Friendship was much sought for by Doctor
Hadrian Saravia, then one of the Prebends of Canterbury, a German by birth, and
sometimes a Pastor both in Flanders and Holland, where he had studied and well
considered the controverted points concerning Episcopacy and Sacrilege, and in
England had a just occasion to declare his Judgment concerning both, unto his
Brethren Ministers of the Low Countries, which was excepted against by Theodor
Beza and others; against whose exceptions he rejoyned, and thereby became the
happy Author of many Learned Tracts, writ in Latin, especially of three; one of
the Degrees of Ministers, and of the Bishops Superiority above the Presbytery;
a second against Sacrilege; and a third of Christian Obedience to Princes; the
last being occasioned by Gretzerus the Jesuit. And it is observable, that when
Beza gave his reasons to the Chancellor of Scotland for the abrogation of
Episcopacy in that Nation, partly by Letters, and more fully in a Treatise of a
threefold Episcopacy (which he calls Divine, Humane, and Satanical) this
Doctor Saravia had by the help of Bishop Whitgift made such an early discovery
of their intentions, that he had almost as soon answered that Treatise as it
became Public; and therein discovered how Beza's opinion did contradict that
of Calvin's, and their adherents, leaving them to interfere with themselves in
point of Episcopacy; but these Tracts it will not concern me to say more, than
that they were most of them dedicated to his and the Church of Englands
watchful Patron John Whitgift the Archbishop, and printed about the year in
which Mr. Hooker also appeared first to the world in the Publication of his
first four Books of Ecclesiastical Polity.

This Friendship being sought for by this Learned Doctor, you may believe was
not denied by M. Hooker, who was fortune so like him as to be engaged against
Mr. Trevers, Mr. Cartwright and others in a controversy too like Doctor
Saravia's; So that in this year of 1595. and in this place of Borne, these two
excellent persons began a Holy Friendship, increasing daily to so high and
mutual affections, that their two wills seemed to be but one, still assisting
and improving each others virtues, and the desired comforts of a peaceable
Piety, which I have willingly mentioned, because it gives a foundation to some
things that follow.

This Parsonage of Borne is from Canterbury three miles, and near to the common
Road that leads from that City to Dover, in which Parsonage Mr. Hooker had not
been twelve months, but his Books, and Innocence and Sanctity of his Life
became so remarkable, that many turned out of the road, and others (Scholars
especially) went purposely to see the man whose Life and Learning were so much
admired; and alas, as our Savior said of St. John Baptist, what went they out
to see, a man Clothed in Purple and fine Linen? no indeed, but an obscure
harmless man, a man in poor Clothes, his Loins usually girt in a corse Gown or
Canonical Coat, of a mean Stature, and stooping, and yet more lowly in the
thoughts of his Soul; his body worn out, not with Age, but Study and Holy
Mortifications; his face full of Heat-Pimples, begot by his unactivity and
sedentary life. And to this true Character of his Person, let me add this of
his Disposition and behavior, that as in his younger days his Pupils might
easily look him out of countenance; so neither then, nor in his age, did he
ever willingly look any man in the face: and was of so mild and humble a
Nature, that his poor Parish Clark and he did never talk but with both their
Hats on, or both off at the same time; and to this may be added, that though he
was not purblind, yet he was short or weak sighted, and where he fixed his eyes
at the beginning of his Sermon, there they continued till it was ended; and the
Reader has a Liberty to believe that his Modesty and Dim sight were the reasons
why he trusted Mistress Churchman to choose his Wife.

This Parish Clark lived till the third or fourth year of the long Parliament,
betwixt which time and Mr. Hookers Death there had come many to see the place
of his Burial, and the Monument dedicated to his memory by Sir William Cooper
(who still lives) and the poor Clark had many rewards for showing Mr. Hookers
Grave-place, and his said Monument, and did always hear Mr. Hooker mentioned
with Commendations and Reverence, to all which he added his own knowledge and
observations of his Humility and Holiness, and in all which Discourses, the
poor man was still more confirmed in his opinion of Mr. Hookers Virtues and
Learning; but it so fell out that about the said third or fourth year of the
long Parliament, the present Parson of Borne was Sequestered (you may guess
why) and a Genevian Minister put into his good living; this and other like
Sequestrations made the Clark express himself in a wonder, and say, they had
sequestered so many good men that he doubted if his good Master Mr. Hooker had
lived till now they would have Sequestered him too.

It was not long before this intruding Minister had made a party in and about
the said parish, that were desirous to receive the Sacrament as in Geneva; to
which end, the day was appointed for a Select Company, and Forms and Stools set
about the Altar or Communion Table for them to sit and eat and drink, but when
they went about this work there was a want of some Joynd-stools, which the
Minister sent the Clark to fetch, and then to fetch Cushions; when the Clark
saw them begin to sit down, he began to wonder, but the Minister bad him cease
wondering, and lock the Church door; to whom he replied, pray take you the Keys
and lock me out, I will never come more into this Church, for all men will say
my Master Hooker was a good Man and a good Scholar, and I man sure it was not
used to be thus in his days; and report says, the old man went presently home,
and died; I do not not say died immediately, but within a few days after.

But let us leave this grateful Clark in his quiet Grave, and return to Mr.
Hooker himself, continuing our observations of his Christian behavior in this
place, where he gave a holy Valediction to all the pleasures and alurements of
Earth, possessing his Soul in a virtuous quietness, which he maintained by
constant Study, Prayers, and Meditations; his use was to Preach once every
Sunday, and he or his Curate to Catechize after the second Lesson in the
Evening Prayer; his Sermons were neither long nor earnest, but uttered with a
Grave zeal, and an humble voice; his eyes always fixed on one place to prevent
his Imagination from wandering, in so much, that he seemed to Study as he spoke;
the design of his Sermons (as indeed of all his discourses) was to show Reasons
for what he spoke; and with these Reasons such a kind of Rhetoric as did
rather convince and persuade, than frighten men into Piety; Studying not so
much for matter (which he never wanted) as for apt Illustrations to inform and
teach his unlearned hearers by familiar Examples, and then make them better by
Convincing Applications; never laboring by hard words, and then by needless
Distinctions and subdistinctions to amuse his hearers, and get glory to
himself: But glory only to God. Which intention he would say was as discernable
in a Preacher as an Artificial from a Natural Beauty.

He never failed the Sunday before every Ember week to give notice of it to his
Parishioners, persuading them both to fast, and then to double their Devotions
for a Learned and Pious Clergy, but especially the last; saying often, that the
Life of a pious Clergy man was visible Rhetoric, and so Convincing, that the
most Godliess men (though they would not deny themselves the enjoyment of their
present lusts) did yet secretly wish themselves like those of the strictest
lives: And to what he persuaded others he added his own example of Fasting and
Prayer; and did usually every Ember week take from the Parish Clark the Key of
the Church door; into which place he retired every day and locked himself up for
many hours; and did the like most Frydays and other days of Fasting.

He would by no means omit the customary time of Procession, persuading all
both Rich and Poor, if they desired the preservation of Love, and their Parish
Rights and Liberties, to accompany him in his Perambulation, and most did so;
in which Perambulation he would usually express more pleasant discourse than at
other times, and would then always drop some loving and efficacions
observations to be remembered against the next year, especially by the boys and
young people; still inclining them and all his present Parishioners to mutual
kindnesses and Love; because Love thinks not evil, but covers a multitude of
Infirmities.

He would often visit the Sick, unsent for; supposing that the fittest time to
discover those errors to which health and prosperity had blinded them; and
having by pious Reasons and Prayers, molded them into holy Resolutions for the
time to come, he would incline them to Confession, and bewailing their sins,
with purpose to forsake them, and then to receive the Communion, both as a
strengthening of those holy Resolutions, and as a seal betwixt God and them of
his Mercies to their Souls in case that present sickness did put a period to
their lives.

And as he was thus watchful and charitable to the sick, so he was as diligent
to prevent Law-sutes, still urging his Parishioners and Neighbors, to bear
with each others infirmities, and live in love, because (as S. John says) he
that lives in Love, lives in God, for God is Love. And to maintain this holy
fire of Love constantly burning on the Altar, of a pure heart, his advice was
to watch and pray, and always keep themselves fit to receive the Communion;
and then to receive it often, for it was both a Confirming and a Strengthening
of their Graces; this was his advice; and at his entrance or departure out of
any House, he would usually speak to the whole Family and bless them; insomuch
that as he seemed in his youth to be taught of God, so he seemed in this place
to teach his Precepts, as Enoch did by walking with him, in all Holiness and
Humility, making each day a step toward a blessed Eternity. And though in this
weak and declining Age of the World, such examples are become barren and almost
incredible, yet let his Memory be blessed with this true Recordation, because he
that praises Richard Hooker, praises God, who has given such gifts to men, and
let this humble and affectionate relation of him become such a pattern as may
invite posterity to imitate his virtues.

This was his constant behavior at Borne; thus did he tread in the footsteps
of Primitive Piety; and yet, as our blessed Jesus was not free from false
accusations, no more was this Disciple of his, this most humble, most innocent
holy man; his was a slander parallel to that of chaste Susannaes by the wicked
Elders, and which this age calls Trepaning; the particulars need not a
repetion, and that it was false, needs no other Testimony than the public
punishment of his Accusers, and their open Confession of his Innocence; 'twas
said that the accusation was contrived by a dissenting Brother, one that
endured not Church Ceremonies, hating him for his Books sake, which he was not
able to answer; and his Name has been told me, but I have not so much
confidence in the relation as to make my Pen fix a scandal on him to posterity;
I shall rather leave it doubtful till the great day of Revelation. But this is
certain, that he lay under the great charge, and the Anketiety of this
Accusation, and kept it secret to himself for many months; and being a
helpless man had layn longer under this heavy burden but that the Protector
of the innocent gave such an accidental occasion as forced him to make it known
to his two dear Friends Edwin Sandys, and George Cranmer, who were so sensible
of their Tutors sufferings, that they gave themselves no rest till by their
disquisitions and diligence they had found out the Fraud, and brought him the
welcome news hat his Accusers did confess they had wronged him, and begged his
pardon; to which the good man's reply was to this purpose; the Lord forgive
them, and the Lord bless you for this comfortable news. Now I have a just
occasion to say with Solomon, Friends are born for the days of adversity, and
such you have proved to me; and to my God I say, as did the mother of St. John
Baptist, thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the day wherein he looked upon
me, to take away my reproach among men: And oh my God, neither my Life nor my
Reputation are safe in mine own keeping, but in thine, who did take care of
me, when I yet hanged upon my Mothers breast; blessed are they that put their
trust in thee O Lord; for when false witnesses were risen up against me, when
shame was ready to cover my face, when I was bowed down with an horrible Dread,
and went mourning all the day long, when my nights were restless, and my Sleeps
broken with a fear worse than Death, when my Soul thirsted for a deliverance,
as the Heart pants after the rivers of waters, then thou Lord did hear my
Complaints, pity my condition, and become my deliverer; and as long as I live
I will hold up my hands in this manner, and magnify thy mercies, who did not
give me over as a prey to mine enemies. Oh blessed are they that put their
trust in thee; and no prosperity shall make me forget to perform those vows
that I have made to thee in the days of my affliction; for with such sacrifices
thou O God art well pleased; and I will pay them.

Thus did the Joy and Gratitude of this Good man's heart break forth; and it is
observable, that as the invitation to this Slander was his Meek behavior and
Dove-like simplicity, for which he was remarkable; so his Christian Charity
ought to be imitated: For, though the Spirit of Revenge is so pleasing to
Mankind, that it is never conquered but by a Supernatural Grace, being indeed
so deeply rooted in Humane Nature, that to prevent the Excesses of it (for men
would not know Moderation) Almighty God allows not any Degree of it to any man,
but says, Vengeance is mine. And, though this be said by God himself, yet this
Revenge is so pleasing, that Man is hardly persuaded to submit the menage of it
to the Time, and Justice, and Wisdom of his Creator, but would hasten to be his
own Executioner of it. And yet nevertheless, if any man ever did wholly
decline, and leave this pleasing Passion to the Time and Measure of God alone,
it was this Richard Hooker of whom I write; for when his Slanderers were to
suffer, he labored to procure their Pardon; and when that was denied him, his
Reply was, That however he would fast and pray that God would give them
repentance, and patience to undergo their punishment. And his Prayers were so
far returned into his own bosom, that the first was granted, if we may believe
a penitent Behavior, and an open Confession. And it is observable, that after
this time he would often say to Dr. Saravia, Oh with what quietness did I enjoy
my Soul after I was free from the fears of my Slander! and how much more after
a Conflict and Victory over my Desires of Revenge!

In the Year 1600, and of his Age 46, he fell into a long and sharp Sickness,
occasioned by a Cold taken in his Passage betwixt London and Gravesend, from
the Malignity of which he was never recovered, for till his death he was not
free from thoughtful Days and restless Nights; but a submission to his Will
that makes the Sick man's Bed easy by giving rest to his Soul, made his very
Languishment comfortable: and yet all this time he was solicitous in his Study,
and said often to Dr. Saravia, (who saw him daily, and was the chief Comfort of
his Life) That he did not beg a Long life of God for any other reason, but to
live to finish his three remaining Books of POLITY; and then, Lord, let thy
Servant depart in peace, which was his usual Expression. And God heard his
Prayers, though he denied the Church the Benefit of them as completed by
himself; and it is thought he hastened his own Death, by hastening to give Life
to his Books. But this is certain, that the nearer he was to his Death, the
more he grew in Humility, in holy Thoughts and Resolutions.

About a month before his death, this Good man, that never knew, or at least
never considered, the pleasures of the Palate, became first to lose his
Appetite, then to have an aversness to all Food; insomuch that he seemed to
live some intermitted weeks by the smell of Meat only; and yet still studied
and writ. And now his Guardian Angel seemed to foretell him, that the day of
his Dissolution drew near; for which his vigorous Soul appeared to thirst. In
this time of his Sickness, and not many days before his Death, his House was
robbed; of which he having notice, his Question was, Are my Books and written
Papers safe? and being answered that they were; his Reply was, then it matters
not, for no other loss can trouble me.

About one day before his death Dr. Saravia, who knew the very Secrets of his
Soul, (for they were supposed to be Confessors to each other) came to him, and
after a Conference of the Benefit, the Necessity, and Safety of the Churches
Absolution, it was resolved the Doctor should give him both that and the
Sacrament the day following. To which end the Doctor came, and after a short
Retirement and Privacy they returned to the Company, and then the Doctor gave
him and some Friends with him the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
our Jesus. Which being performed, the Doctor thought he saw a reverend Gaity
and Joy in his Face; but it lasted not long, for his bodily Infirmities did
return suddenly, and became more visible, insomuch that the Doctor apprehended
Death ready to seize him; yet, after some amendment, left him at night, with a
promise to return early the day following, which he did, and then found him
better in appearance, deep in Contemplation, and not inclinable to Discourse;
which gave the Doctor occasion to require his present Thoughts: to which he
replied, that he was meditating the Number and Nature of Angels, and their
blessed Obedience and Order, without which Peace could not be in Heaven; and oh
that it might be so on Earth. After which words he said, I have lived to see
this World is made up of Perturbations, and I have been long preparing to leave
it, and gathering Comfort for the dreadful hour of making my Account with God,
which I now apprehend to be near; and though I have by his Grace loved him in
my Youth, and feared him in mine Age, and labored to have a Conscience void of
offense to him and to all men; yet, if thou, O Lord, be extreme to mark what I
have done amiss, who can abide it? and therefore, where I have failed, Lord
show mercy to me; and since I owe thee a Death, Lord let it not be terrible,
and then take thine own time, I submit to it: Let not mine, O Lord, but let thy
Will be done; with which Expression he fell into a dangerous Slumber, dangerous
as to his Recovery; yet recover he did, but it was to speak only these few
words, Good Doctor, God has heard my daily Petitions, for I am at peace with
all men, and he is at peace with me; and from that blessed assurance I feel
that inward joy, which this World can neither give nor take from me. More he
would have spoken, but his Spirits failed him; and, after a short Conflict
betwixt Nature and Death, a quiet Sigh put a period to his last breath, and so
he fell asleep.

And here I draw his Curtain, till with the most blessed Martyrs and
Confessors, this most Learned, most Humble, Holy Man, shall also awake to
receive an Eternal Tranquillity, and with it a greater Degree of Glory than
common Christians shall be made Partakers of; till which blessed time,

Let Glory be to God on high, let Peace be upon Earth, and Goodwill to Mankind.

Amen, Amen.
This following Epitaph was long since presented to the world in memory of Mr.
Hooker, by Sir William Cooper, who also built him a fair Monument in Borne
Church, and acknowledges him to have been his Spiritual Father.

Though nothing can be spoke worthy his Fame,
Or the Remembrance of that precious Name,
Judicious Hooker; though this cost be spent
On him, that has a Lasting Monument
In his own Books, yet ought we to express,
If not his Worth, yet our Respectfulness.
Church Ceremonies he maintained; then why
Without all Ceremony should he dye?
Was it because his Life and Death should be
Both equal paterns of Humility;
Or that perhaps this only glorious one
Was above all to ask, why had he none?
Yet he that lay so long Obscurely low,
Does now preferred to greater Honors go.
Ambitious men, learn hence to be more wise,
Humility is the true way to rise:
And God in me this lesson did Inspire,
To bid this Humble man, Friend sit up higher.
AN APPENDIX To the LIFE of Mr. Richard Hooker.
ANd now having by a long and Laborious search satisfied my self, and I hope my
Reader by imparting to him the true relation of Mr. Hookers Life: I am desirous
also to acquaint him with some Observations that relate to it, and which could
not properly fall to be spoken till after his Death, of which my Reader may
expect a brief and true account in the following Appendix.

And first it is not to be doubted but that he died in the forty-seventh, if
not in the forty-sixt year of his Age; which I mention, because many have
believed him to be more aged; but I have so examined it, as to be confident I
mistake not; and for the year of his death, Mr. Cambden, who in his Annals of
Queen Elizabeth 1599. mentions him with a high commendation of his Life and
Learning, declares him to die in the year 1599. and yet in that Inscription of
his Monument set up at the charge of Sir William Cooper in Borne Church, where
Mr. Hooker was buried, his Death is said to be in Anno 1603. but doubtless both
mistaken; for I have it attested under the hand of William Somner the
Archbishops Register for the Province of Canterbury, that Richard Hookers Will
bears date October the 26. in Anno 1600. and that it was proved the third of
December following. And that at his Death he left four Daughters, Alice,
Cicily, Jane and Margaret, that he gave to each of them a hundred pound, that
he left Jove his Wife his sole Executrix, and that by his Inventory his Estate
(a great part of it being in Books) came to 1092 l. 9 s. 2 d. which was much
more than he thought himself worth, and which was not got by his Care, much
less by the good Huswifery of his Wife, but saved by his trusty servant Thomas
Lane, that was wiser than his Master in getting Money for him, and more frugal
than his Mistress in keeping it; of which Will I shall say no more, but that
his dear Friend Thomas, the father of George Cranmer, of whom I have spoken and
shall have occasion to say more, was one of the Witnesses to it.

One of his elder Daughters was married to one Chalinor, sometime a
Schoolmaster in Chichester, and both dead long since. Margaret his youngest
Daughter was married unto Ezekiel Chark, Bachelar in Divinity, and Rector of
St. Nicholas in Harble down near Canterbury, who died about 16. years past, and
had a Son Ezekiel, now living, and in Sacred Orders, being at this time Rector
of Waldron in Sussex; She left also a Daughter, with both whom I have spoken
not many months past, and find her to be a widow in a condition that wants
not, but far from abounding; and these two attested unto me, that Richard
Hooker their Grandfather had a Sister, by name Elizabeth Harvey, that lived to
the Age of 121. years, and died in the month of September, 1623.

For his other two Daughters I can learn little certainty, but have heard they
both died before they were Marriageable; and for his Wife, she was so unlike
Iepthaes Daughter, that she staid not a comely time to bewail her Widdow-hood;
nor lived long enough to repent her second Marriage, for which doubtless she
would have found cause, if there had been but four months betwixt Mr. Hookers
and her death. But she is dead, and let her other infirmities be buried with
her.

Thus much briefly for his Age, the year of his Death, his Estate, his Wife,
and his Children. I am next to speak of his Books, concerning which I shall
have a necessity of being longer, or shall neither do right to my self or my
Reader, which is chiefly intended in this Appendix.

I have declared in his Life, that he proposed eight Books, and that his first
four were Printed Anno 1594. and his fifth Book first printed and alone Anno
1597. and that he lived to finish the remaining three of the proposed eight,
but whether we have the last three as finished by himself, is a just and
Material Question; concerning which I do declare, that I have been told almost
40. years past by one that very well knew Mr. Hooker and the affairs of his
Family, that about a month after the death of Mr. Hooker, Bishop Whitgift,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, sent one of his Chaplains to enquire of Mrs.
Hooker, for the three remaining Books of Polity, writ by her Husband, of which
she would not, or could not give any account; and that about three months
after the Bishop procured her to be sent for to London, and then by his
procurement she was to be examined, by some of her Majesty's Council,
concerning the disposal of those Books, but by way of preparation for the next
days examination the Bishop invited her to Lambeth, and, after some friendly
questions, she confessed to him, that one Mr. Charke and another Minister that
dwelt near Canterbury, came to her, and desired that they might go into her
Husbands Study, and look upon some of his writings; and that there they two
burnt and tore many of them, assuring her that they were writings not fit to be
seen, and that she knew nothing more concerning them. Her lodging was then in
Kingstreet in Westminster, where she was found next morning dead in her Bed,
and her new Husband suspected and questioned for it, but declared innocent of
her Death.

And I declare also, that Doctor John Spencer (mentioned in the life of Mr.
Hooker) who was of Mr. Hookers College, and of his time there, and betwixt whom
there was so friendly a friendship that they continually advised together in
all their Studies, and particularly in what concerned these Books of Polity:
this Doctor Spencer, the three perfect Books being lost, had delivered into his
hands (I think by Bishop Whitgift) the imperfect Books, or first rough draughts
of them, to be made as perfect as they might be, by him, who both knew Mr.
Hookers handwriting, and was best acquainted with his intentions. And a fair
Testimony of this may appear by an Epistle first and usually printed before Mr.
Hookers five Books (but omitted, I know not why, in the last impression of the
eight Printed together in Anno 1662. in which the Publishers seem to impose the
three doubtful as the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker) with these two Letters I.
S. at the end of the said Espistle, which was meant for this John Spencer, in
which Epistle the Reader may find these words, which may give some Authority to
what I have here written.

And though Mr. Hooker hastened his own Death by hastening to give Life to his
Books, yet he held out with his eyes to behold these Benjamins, these Sons of
his right Hand, though to him they proved Benonies, Sons of pain and sorrow.
But some evil disposed minds, whether of Malice, or Covetousness, or wicked
blind Zeal it is uncertain, as soon as they were born and their Father dead,
smothered them, and, by conveying the perfect copies, left unto us nothing but
the old imperfect mangled draughts dismembered into pieces; no favor, no grace,
not the shadow of themselves remaining in them; had the Father lived to behold
them thus defaced, he might rightly have named them Benonies, the Sons of
Sorrow; but being the learned will not suffer them to die and be buried, it is
intended the world shall see them as they are: the learned will find in them
some shadows and resemblances of their Fathers face. God grant, that as they
were with their Brethren dedicated to the Church for messengers of Peace; so,
in the strength of that little breath of Life that remains in them, they may
prosper in their work, and by satisfying the Doubts of such as are willing to
learn, they may help to give an end to the calamities of these our Civil Wars.

I. S. And next the Reader may note, that this Epistle of Doctor Spencers was
writ and first Printed within four years after the death of Mr. Hooker, in
which time all diligent search had been made for the perfect Copies, and then
granted not recoverable, and therefore endeavored to be completed out of Mr.
Hookers rough draughts, as is expressed by the said Doctor Spencer, since whose
death it is now 50. years.

And I do profess by the Faith of a Christian, that Doctor Spencers wife (who
was my Aunt and Sister to George Cranmer of whom I have spoken) told me forty
years since, in these, or in words to this purpose, that her Husband had made
up or finished Mr. Hookers last three Books; and that upon her Husbands
Deathbed, or in his last sickness, he gave them into her hand, with a charge
they should not be seen by any man, but be by her delivered into the hands of
the then Archbishop of Canterbury, which was Dr. Abbot, and that she did as he
enjoined her.

I do conceive, that from Doctor Spencers and no other Copy, there have been
diverse Transcripts, and were to be found in several places, as namely Sir
Thomas Bodlies Library, in that of Doctor Andrews late Bishop of Winton, in the
late Lord Conwayes, in the Archbishop of Canterburies, and in the Bishop of
Armaghs, and in many others, and most of these pretended to be the Authors own
hand, but much disagreeing, being indeed altered and diminisht as men have
thought fittest to make Mr. Hookers Judgment suit with their Fancies, or give
authority to their corrupt designs; and for proof of a part of this, take these
following testimonies.

Doctor Barnard, sometime Chaplain to Doctor Usher late Lord Archbishop of
Armagh, has declared in a late Book called Clavi Trebales, Printed by Richard
Hodgkinson Anno 1661. that in his search and examination of the said Bishops
Manuscripts, he found the three written Books which were supposed the 6.7. and
8. of Mr. Hookers Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, and that in the said three
Books (now printed as Mr. Hookers) there are so many omissions that they amouut
to many paragraphs, and which cause many incoherencies; the Omissions are by
him set down at large in the said Printed Book, to which I refer the Reader for
the whole; but think fit in this place to insert this following short part of
them.

First, as there could be in Natural Bodies no Motion of any thing, unless
there were some first which moved all things and continued Unmovable, even so
in Politic Societies, there must be some unpunishable, or else no man shall
suffer punishment; for since punishments proceed always from Superiors to whom
the administration of Justice belongs, which administration must have
necessarily a Fountain that deriveth it to all others, and receives not from
any, because otherwise the course of Justice should go infinitely in a Circle,
every Superior having his Superior without end, which cannot be; therefore, a
wellspring, it follows, there is, a Supreme head of Justice whereunto all
are subject, but it self in subjection to none. Which kind of Preheminency if
some ought to have in a Kingdom, who but the King shall have it? Kings
therefore, or no man can have lawful power to Judge.

If Private men offend, there is the Magistrate over them which Judges; if
Magistrates, they have their Prince; if Princes, there is Heaven, a Tribunal,
before which they shall appear: on Earth they are not accomptable to any. Here
says the Doctor it breaks off abruptly.

And I have these words also attested under the hand of Mr. Fabian Phillips a
man of note for his useful Books. I will make Oath if I shall be required, that
Doctor Sanderson the late Bishop of Lincoln did a little before his Death
affirm to me he had seen a Manuscript, affirmed to him to be the handwriting
of Mr. Richard Hooker, in which there was no mention made of the King or
Supreme Governors being accomptable to the People; this I will make Oath that
that good man attested to me. Fabian Phillips.

So that there appears to be both Omissions and Additions in the said last
three printed Books; and this may probably be one Reason why Doctor Sanderson,
the said Learned Bishop (whose writings are so highly and justly valued) gave a
strickt charge near the time of his Death, or in his last Will, that nothing of
his that was not already Printed should be Printed after his Death.

It is well known how high a value our Learned King James put upon the Books
writ by Mr. Hooker, as also that our late King Charles (the Martyr for the
Church) valued them the second of all Books, testified by his commending them
to the reading of his Son Charles that now is our gracious King; and you may
suppose that this Charles the First was not a stranger to the pretended three
Books, because in a discourse with the Lord Say, when the said Lord required
the King to grant the truth of his argument, because it was the Judgment of
Mr. Hooker (quoting him in one of the three written Books,) the King replied,
they were not allowed to be Mr. Hookers Books; but, however he would allow them
to be Mr. Hookers, and consent to what his Lordship proposed to prove out of
those doubtful Books, if he would but consent to the Judgment of Mr. Hooker in
the other five that were the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker.

In this relation concerning these three doubtful Books of Mr. Hookers, my
purpose was to enquire, then set down what I observed and know, which I have
done, not as an engaged Person, but indifferently, and now leave my Reader to
give Sentence, for their Legitimation, as to himself, but so, as to leave
others the same Liberty of believing, or disbelieving them to be Mr. Hookers;
and it is observable, that as Mr. Hooker advised with Doctor Spencer, in the
design and manage of these Books, so also, and chiefly with his dear Pupils
George Cranmer (whose Sister was the wife of Doctor Spencer) of which this
following Letter may be a Testimony, and does also give authority to some
things mentioned both in this Appendix and in the Life of Mr. Hooker, and is
therefore added.

GEORGE CRANMERS Letter unto MR. Richard Hooker. February 1598.
WHat Posterity is likely to judge of these matters concerning
Church Discipline, we may the better conjecture, if we call to mind what our
own age, within few years, upon better Experience has already judged
concerning the same. It may be remembered, that at first the greatest part of
the Learned in the Land were either eagerly affected, or favorably inclined
that way. The Books then written for the most part favored of the Disciplinary
Style: it sounded every where in Pulpits, and in common phrase of men's speech:
the contrary part began to fear they had taken a wrong course; many which
impugned the Discipline, yet so impugned it, not as not being the better form
of Government, but as not being so convenient for our State, in regard of
dangerous Innovations thereby like to grow; John Whitgift the Archbishop.
one man alone there was, to speak of, (whom let no suspicion of Flattery
deprive of his deserved Commendation,) who in the defiance of the one part, and
courage of the other, stood in the gap, and gave others respite to prepare
themselves to the defense, which by the sudden eagerness and violence of their
Adversaries had otherwise been prevented; wherein God has made good unto him
his own Impress, Vincit qui patitur; for what contumelious indignities he has
at their hands sustained, the world is witness, and what reward of Honor above
his Adversaries God has bestowed upon him, themselves (though nothing glad
thereof) must needs confess. Now of late years the heat of men toward the
Discipline is greatly decayed, their Judgments begin to sway on the other
side: the Learned have weighed it, and found it light; wise men conceive some
fear, lest it prove not only not the best kind of Government, but the very bane
and destruction of all Government. The cause of this Change in men's Opinions
may be drawn from the general nature of Error, disguised and clothed with the
name of Truth; which is mightily and violently to possess men at first, but
afterward, the weakness thereof being by time discovered, to lose that
reputation, which before it had gained; as by the outside of an House the
Passers by, are oftentimes deceived, till they see the conveniencie of the
Rooms within: so by the very name of Discipline and Reformation, men were drawn
at first to cast a fancy toward it, but now they have not contented themselves
only to pass by and behold a far off the Forefront of this reformed house;
they have entered in, even at the special request of Master-workmen and chief
Builders thereof; they have perused the Rooms, the Lights, the Conveniences,
they find them not answerable to that report which was made of them, nor to
that opinion which upon report they had conceived: So as now the Discipline
which at first triumphed over all, being unmasked, begins to droop and hang
down her head.

This cause of change in opinion concerning the Discipline, is proper to the
Learned, or to such as by them have been instructed; another cause there is
more open, and more apparent to the view of all, namely, the course of
Practice, which the Reformers have had with us from the beginning; the first
degree was only some small difference about Cap and Surplice, but not such as
either bred division in the Church, or tended to the ruin of the Government
established. This was peaceable; the next degree more stirring, Admonitions
were directed to the Parliament in peremptory sort against our whole Form of
Regiment; in defense of them, Volumes were published in English, and in Latin;
yet this was no more than writing. Devices were set on foot to erect the
Practice of the Discipline without Authority: yet herein some regard of
Modesty, some moderation was used; Behold, at length it brake forth into open
outrage, first in writing by Martin, in whose kind of dealing these things may
be observed; first that whereas T. C. and others his great Masters had always
before set out the Discipline as a Queen, and as the Daughter of God; He
contrariwise, to make her more acceptable to the people, brought her forth as a
Vice upon the Stage. 2. This conceit of his was grounded (as may be supposed)
upon this rare policy, that seeing the Discipline was by writing refuted, in
Parliament rejected, in secret corners hunted out and decried, it was imagined
that by open railing (which to the vulgar is commonly most plausible) the State
Ecclesiastical might have been drawn into such contempt and hatred, as the
overthrow thereof should have been most grateful to all men, and in manner
desired of the common people. 3. It may be noted (and this I know my self to be
true) how some of them, although they could not for shame approve so lewd an
Action, yet were content to lay hold on it to the advancement of their cause,
acknowledging therein the secret judgments of God against the Bishops, and
hoping that some good might be wrought thereby for his Church, as indeed there
was, though not according to their construction. For 4. contrary to their
expectation, that railing Spirit did not only not further, but extremely
disgrace and prejudice their Cause, when it was once perceived from how low
degrees of contradiction, at first, to what outrage of Contumely and Slander
they were at length proceeded; and were also likely further to proceed.

A further degree of outrage was in Fact; Certain Hacket and Co pinger.
Prophets did arise, who deeming it not possible that God should suffer that to
be undone, which they did so fiercely desire to have done, Namely, that his
holy Saints, the favorers and Fathers of the Discipline, should be enlarged,
and delivered from persecution; and seeing no means of deliverance Ordinary,
were fain to persuade themselves that God must needs raise some Extraordinary
means; and being persuaded of none so well as of themselves, they forthwith
must needs be the instruments of this great work. Hereupon they framed unto
themselves and assured hope that upon their Preaching out of a Pease Cart, all
the multitude would have presently joined unto them, and in amazement of mind
have asked them, Viri fratres, quid agimus? whereunto it is likely they would
have returned an answer far unlike to that of St. Peter, Such and such are men
unworthy to govern, pluck them down; Such and such are the dear Children of
God, let them be advanced. Of two of these men it is meet to speak with all
Commiseration, yet so that others by their example may receive instruction, and
withal some light may appear, what stirring affections the Discipline is like
to inspire, if it light upon apt and prepared minds.

Now if any man doubt of what Society they were, or if the Reformers disclaim
them, pretending that by them they were condemned, let these points be
considered. 1. Whose associates were they before they entered into this
frantic Passion? whose Sermons did they frequent? whom did they admire? 2.
Even when they were entering into it, whose advise did they require? and when
they were in, whose approbation? whom advertised they of their purpose? whose
assistance by Prayers did they request? But we deal injuriously with them to
lay this to their charge; for they reproved and condemned it. How? did they
disclose it to the Magistrate, that it might be suppressed? or were they not
rather content to stand aloof of, and see the end of it, and loath to quench the
Spirit? No doubt these mad practitioners were of their society, with whom
before, and in the practice of their madness they had most affinity. Hereof,
read Doctor Bancrofts Book.

A third inducement may be to dislike of the Discipline, if we consider not
only how far the Reformers themselves have proceeded, but what others upon
their Foundations have built. Here come the Brownists in the first rank, their
lineal descendants, who have seized upon a number of strange opinions, whereof
although their Ancestors, the Reformers, were never actually possessed, yet by
right and interest from them derived, the Brownists and Barrowists have taken
possession of them; for if the positions of the Reformers be true, I cannot see
how the main and general Conclusions of Brownism should be false; for upon
these two points, as I conceive, they stand.

1. That because we have no Church, they are to sever themselves from us. 2.
That without Civil Authority they are to erect a Church of their own. And if
the former of these be true, the latter, I suppose, will follow; for if above
all things men be to regard their Salvation; and if out of the Church there be
no Salvation; it follows, that if we have no Church, we have no means of
Salvation; and therefore Separation from us, in that respect, is both lawful
and necessary; as also that men so separated from the false and counterfeit
Church, are to associate themselves unto some Church; not to ours; to the
Popish much less; therefore to one of their own making. Now the ground of all
these Inferences being this, [ That in our Church there is no means of
Salvation] is out of the Reformers Principles most clearly to be proved. For
wheresoever any matter of Faith unto Salvation necessary is denied, there can
be no means of Salvation: But in the Church of England, the Discipline, by them
accounted a matter of Faith, and necessary to Salvation, is not only denied,
but impugned, and the Professors thereof oppressed. Ergo.

Again, (but this reason perhaps is weak) Every true Church of Christ
acknowledges the whole Gospel of Christ: The Discipline, in their opinion, is
a part of the Gospel, and yet by our Church resisted. Ergo.

Again, The Discipline is essentially united to the Church: by which term
Essentially, they must mean either an essential part, or an essential property.
Both which ways it must needs be, that where that essential Discipline is not,
neither is there any Church. If therefore between them and the Brownists there
should be appointed a Solemn disputation, whereof with us they have been
oftentimes so earnest challengers: it does not yet appear what other answer
they could possibly frame to these and the like arguments, wherewith they might
be pressed, but fairly to deny the Conclusion (for all the Premises are their
own) or rather ingeniously to reverse their own Principles before laid, whereon
so foul absurdities have been so firmly built. What further proofs you can
bring out of their high words, magnifying the Discipline, I leave to your
better remembrance: but above all points, I am desirous this one should be
strongly enforced against them, because it wringeth them most of all, and is of
all others (for ought I see) the most unanswerable; you may notwithstanding say
that you would be heartily glad these their positions might so be salved as the
Brownists might not appear to have issued out of their Loins: but until that
be done, they must give us leave to think that they have cast the Seed whereout
these tares are grown.

Another sort of men there are, which have been content to run on with the
Reformers for a time, and to make them poor instruments of their own designs:
These are a sort of Godless Politics, who perceiving the Plot of Discipline to
consist of these two parts, the overthrow of Episcopal, and erections of
Presbyterial Authority, and that this latter can take no place till the former
be removed, are content to join with them in the Destructive part of
Discipline, bearing them in hand, that in the other also they shall find them
as ready. But when time shall come, it may be they would be as loath to be
yoaked with that kind of Regiment, as now they are willing to be released from
this; These men's ends in all their actions, is Distraction, their pretense and
color, Reformation. Those things which under this color they have effected to
their own good, are, 1. By maintaing a contrary faction, they have kept the
Clergy always in awe; and thereby made them more pliable and willing to buy
their peace. 2. By maintaining an Opinion of Equality among Ministers, they
have made way to their own purposes for devouring Cathedral Churches, and
Bishops livings. 3. By exclaiming against abuses in the Church, they have
carried their own corrupt dealings in the Civil State more covertly; for such
is the Nature of the Multitude, they are not able to apprehend many things at
once, so as being possessed with a dislike or liking of any one things, many
other in the mean time may escape them without being perceived. 4. They have
sought to disgrace the Clergy, in entertaining a conceit in men's minds, and
confirming it by continual practice, that men of Learning, and specially of the
Clergy, which are employed in the chiefest kind of Learning, are not to be
admitted, or sparingly admitted to matters of State; contrary to the practice
of all well-governed Commonwealths, and of our own till these late years.

A third sort of men there are, though not descended from the Reformers, yet in
part raised and greatly Strengthened by them, namely the cursed crew of
Atheists. This also is none of those points, which I am desirous you should
handle most effectually, and strain your self therein to all points of motion
and affection, as in that of the Brownists, to all strength and sinews of
reason. This is a sort most damnable, and yet by the general suspicion of the
world at this day most common. The causes of it, which are in the parties
themselves, although you handle in the beginning of the fifth Book, yet here
again they may be touched; but the occasions of help and furtherance, which by
the Reformers have been yielded unto them, are, as I conceive, two, senseless
Preaching, and disgracing of the Ministry; for how should not men dare to
impugn that, which neither by force of Reason, nor by Authority of Persons is
maintained? But in the parties themselves these two Causes I conceive of
Atheism, 1. more abundance of Wit then Judgment, and of Witty than Judicious
Learning, whereby they are more inclined to contradict any thing, than willing
to be informed of the truth. They are not therefore men of sound Learning for
the most part, but Smatterers; neither is their kind of Dispute so much by
force of Argument, as by Scoffing; which humor of scoffing, and turning
matters most serious into merriment, is now become so common, as we are not to
marvail what the Prophet means by the seat of Scorners, nor what the Apostles
by foretelling of Scorners to come, our own age has verified their speech unto
us; which also may be an Argument against these Scoffers and Atheists
themselves, seeing it has been so many ages ago foretold, that such men the
later days of the world should afford, which could not be done by any other
Spirit, save that whereunto things future and present are alike. And even for
the main question of the Resurrection, whereat they stick so mightily, was it
not plainly foretold, that men should in the latter times say, Where is the
promise of his coming? Against the Creation, the Ark, and diverse other points,
exceptions are said to be taken; the ground whereof is superfluity of Wit,
without ground of Learning and Judgment. A second cause of Atheism is
Sensuality, which makes men desirous to remove all stops and impediments of
their wicked life; among which because Religion is the chiefest, so as neither
in this life without shame they can persist therein, nor (if that be true)
without Torment in the life to come, they whet their wits to annihilate the
joys of Heaven, wherein they see (if any such be) they can have no part, and
likewise the pains of Hell, wherein their portion must needs be very great.
They labor therefore, not that they may not deserve those pains, but that
deserving them, there may be no such pains to seize upon them; But what conceit
can be imagined more base, than that man should strive to persuade himself even
against the secret Instinct (no doubt) of his own Mind, that his Soul is as the
Soul of a Beast, mortal and corruptible with the Body? Against which barbarous
Opinion their own Atheism is a very strong Argument. For were not the Soul a
Nature separable from the Body, how could it enter into discourse of things
merely Spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining to the Body? Surely the Soul
were not able to conceive any thing of Heaven, no not so much as to dispute
against Heaven and against God, if there were not in it somewhat Heavenly and
derived from God.

The last which have received strength and encouragement from the Reformers are
Papists; against whom although they are most bitter Enemies, yet unwittingly
they have given them great advantage. For what can any Enemy rather desire than
the Breach and Dissension of those which are Confederates against him? Wherein
they are to remember, that if our Communion with Papists in some few Ceremonies
do so much strengthen them as is pretended, how much more does this Division
and Rent among our selves, especially seeing it is maintained to be, not in
light matters only, but even in matter of Faith and Salvation? Which
overreaching Speech of theirs, because it is so open to advantage for the
Barrowist and the Papist, we are to wish and hope for, that they will
acknowledge it to have been spoken rather in heat of Affection, than with
soundness of Judgment, and through their exceeding love to that Creature of
Discipline which themselves have bred, nourished, and maintained, their mouth
in commendation of her did soon overflow.

From hence you may proceed (but the means of connection I leave to your self)
to another discourse, which I think very meet to be handled either here or
elsewhere at large, the parts whereof may be these. 1. That in this cause
between them and us, men are to sever the proper and essential points and
controversy, from those which are accidental. The most essential and proper are
these two, overthrow of Episcopal, erection of Presbyterial Authority. But in
these two points whosoever joyneth with them is accounted of their number;
whosoever in all other points agrees with them, yet thinks the Authority of
Bishops not unlawful, and of Elders not necessary, may justly be severed from
their retinue. Those things therefore which either in the Persons, or in the
Laws and Orders themselves are faulty, may be complained on, acknowledged and
amended; yet they no whit the nearer their main purpose; for what if all ertors
by them supposed in our Liturgy were amended, even according to their own
hearts desire? if Non-residence, Pluralities, and the like, were utterly taken
away? are their Lay Elders therefore presently Authorized, or their Sovereign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction established?

But even in their complaining against the outward and accidental matters in
Church Government, they are many ways faulty: 1. In their end which they
propose to themselves. For in Declaming against Abuses, their meaning is not to
have them redressed, but by disgracing the present State to make way for their
own Discipline. As therefore in Venice, if any Senator should discourse
against the Power of their Senate, as being either too Sovereign or too Weak in
Government, with purpose to draw their Authority to a Moderation, it might well
be suffered; but not so, if it should appear he spoke with purpose to induce
another State by depraving the present: So in all Causes belonging either to
Church or Commonwealth, we are to have regard what mind the Complaining part
does bear, whether of Amendment or Innovation, and accordingly either to suffer
or suppress it. Their Objection therefore is frivolous, Why may not men speak
against Abuses? Yes, but with desire to cure the Part affected, not to destroy
the Whole. 2. A second fault is in their Manner of Complaining, not only
because it is for the most part in bitter and reprochful Terms, but also it is
to the Common people, who are Judges incompetent and insufficient, both to
determine any thing amiss, and for want of Skill and Authority to amend it.
Which also discovers their Intent and Purpose to be rather Destructive han
Corrective. 3. Thirdly, those very Exceptions which they take are frivolous and
impertinent: Some things indeed they accuse as impious, which if they may
appear to be such, God forbid they should be maintained.

Against the rest it is only alleged, that they are Idle Ceremonies without
use, and that better and more profitable might be devised. Wherein they are
doubly deceived; for neither is it a sufficient Plea to say, This must give
place, because a Better may be devised; because in our Judgments of Better and
Worse, we oftentimes conceive amiss, when we compare those things which are in
Devise, with those which are in Practice; for the Imperfections of the one are
hid, till by Time and Trial they be discovered. The others are already manifest
and open to all. But last of all, (which is a Point in my Opinion of great
regard, and which I am desirous to have enlarged) they do not see that for the
most part when they strike at the State Ecclesiastical, they secretly wound the
Civil State: for Personal faults, What can be said against the Church, which
may not also agree to the Commonwealth? In both States Men have always been,
and will be always, Men, sometimes blinded with Error, most commonly perverted
by Passions: many Unworthy have been and are advanced in both, many Worthy not
regarded. And as for Abuses which they pretend to be in the Laws themselves,
when they inveigh against Non-residence, do they take it a matter lawful or
expedient in the Civil State for a man to have a great and gainful Office in
the North, himself continually remaining in the South? He that has an Office,
let him attend his Office. When they condemn Plurality of Livings Spiritual to
the pit of Hell, what think they of Infinite of Temporal Promotions? By the
great Philosopher Pol. lib. 2. c. 9. it is forbidden as a thing most dangerous
to Commonwealths, that by the same man many great Offices should be exercised.
When they deride our Ceremonies as vain and frivolous, were it hard to apply
their Exceptions even to those Civil Ceremonies, which at the Coronation, in
Parliament, and all Courts of Justice, are used? Were it hard to argue even
against Circumcision, the Ordinance of God, as being a cruel Ceremony? against
the Passover, as being ridiculous? should be girt, a Staff in their hand, to
eat a Lamb?

To conclude; you may exhort the Clergy, (or what if you direct your Conclusion
not to the Clergy in general, but only to the Learned in or of both
Universities?) you may exhort them to a due Consideration of all things, and to
a right Esteem and Valuing of each thing in that degree wherein it ought to
stand. For it oftentimes falls out, that what Men have either devised
themselves, or greatly delighted in, the Price and the Excellency thereof they
do admire above desert. The chiefest Labor of a Christian should be to know;
of a Minister, to preach Christ crufied: in regard whereof not only Worldly
things, but things otherwise precious, even the Discipline it self is vile and
base: Whereas now by the heat of Contention, and violence of Affection, the
Zele of men toward the one has greatly decayed their Love to the other.
Hereunto therefore they are to be exhorted, to Preach Christ crucified, the
Mortification of the Flesh, the Renewing of the Spirit; not those things which
in time of Strife seem precious, but (Passions being allayed) are vain and
childish.

FINIS.

