A Seventh LETTER, Concerning the Sacred Trinity; Occasioned by a Second Letter
From W. I.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D. Professor of Geometry, in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, 1691.

A Seventh LETTER Concerning the Sacred Trinity.
IN a Postscript to my Sixth Letter (which should have been Printed with it;
but came, it seems, too late, after all the Sheets were Printed off,) I gave
notice, That I had received from London the Night before (March 27.) another
Letter from W. I. of a like import with his former; but somewhat fuller.

That, what in it did directly concern me, was but Expressions of Thanks,
Respect, and Approbation. For which I knew not how otherwise (than by such a
way) to return him my acknowledgment: Because he did neither signify who he is
that writes; nor do I know any in London, to who is Name the Letters W. I. do
belong.

That, there were Reflections in it, on some Expressions of a Learned Author:
which Expressions I do not see that I am at all engaged to defend: And did
therefore wave them.

That, to say, The three Divine Persons, are Three Intelligent Beings (three
substantial Beings, three Spirits,) Really Distinct, (though mutually
conscious,) is more, he thinks, than that Learned Author needed to have said;
(And I think so too:) And that it is more Safe, to be less Positive and
Particular, as to what the Scripture leaves in the dark. And his Answer (I
think) would not have been less valid, (against those he undertakes to answer,)
though such Expressions were omitted.

That, I did forbear to publish that Letter without his Order; because I was
loath to engage the Learned Writer thereof in a Public Dispute against that
Learned Author, unless he please.

Since which time; considering, that the Postscript came too late to be Printed
with that Letter of mine; and, that the Letter of this Reverend Divine (for
such I take him to be by the contents of it,) seems to be penned with that care
and caution, as if he were willing to have it public; and without any
intimation of Dislike for my having published his former Letter in like
Circumstances: I have thought not amiss (nor unagreeable to his mind) to
publish this also. Which is as follows: (supplying the Date from the
Post-mark at London, denoting what day it was given-in to the Post Office
there.)

For the Reverend Dr. Wallis, Professor of Geometry, at Oxford.
London, March 24. 1690-91. SIR,
YOur Repeated Letters, give me a just occasion of Repeating my hearty Thanks
to you. And I hope you will give me leave to join both my good Wishes and
Endeavors to promote that Moderation which you seem to Aim at, in stating the
Mysterious Truths concerning the Trinity. Methinks we might be easily persuaded
to this; by the Difficulties which all men find in conceiving those Mysteries:
Especially the Consequences which some make from them; and impose upon us as
Certain and Sacred Truths.

Sir, Because I would have you lose as little of your Time as may be in reading
my Letters; I will enter immediately upon the Subject proposed; and consider,
not some lesser Niceties, but the Two Main Points in the Doctrine of the
Trinity; and the Difficulties which our Understandings represent to us in the
Conception of them.

The Two Main Points are these: The Unity of the Godhead, notwithstanding the
Distinction of Three Persons: And the Equality of those Three Persons,
notwithstanding their Derivation one from another.

Concerning the Divine Persons; The Hypothesis which we referred to formerly
(and shall still follow) asserts these Three Things. First, That they are Three
Beings (or Three Intelligent Beings) Really Distinct. Secondly, That they are
Three Substantial Beings, Really Distinct. Thirdly, That they are Three
Infinite Minds, or Three Holy Spirits, Really Distinct. And to these, I think,
we may of course add a Fourth Character, That they are Three Complete Beings,
really Distinct.

They are not Inadequate or Partial Beings. For a Spirit infinite in
Perfection, as each of these is represented, can want nothing to complete its
Being or Perfection.

Let us now, if you please, run over these Characters; and observe the most
obvious Difficulties, that occurr to our Minds in the Conception of them.

For the first, Three Beings really distinct. According to the plain Tract of
humane Reason, Every real Being has its Essence; (that is the Basis it stands
upon, as distinguished from Nonentity, or a Fictitious Being). And every
Distinct Being has its Distinct Essence: I mean, Numerically distinct. And
therefore, according to this Principle, there ought to be Three distinct
Essences in the Godhead, seeing there are Three Beings, there, really distinct.

Furthermore; If you give one single Essence to Three Beings really distinct,
you must either Divide it, or Multiply it. Either each of these Beings must
have a Piece of this Essence; and then you Divide it: or each must have the
Whole; and then, being but one Whole, you cannot give it to Three without
Multiplying of it.

This is still made more difficult to conceive, when the Author allows these
Three to be as Distinct as Peter, James, and John. For if they be as Distinct
as Peter, James and John; they are One but as Peter, James and John. For every
degree of Distinction takes away a degree of Unity: As every degree of Heat,
takes away a degree of Cold.

We proceed to the second Character. The Three Divine Persons, are Three
Substantial Beings, Really distinct. That is, in plain English, are Three
Substances Really distinct. As a Spiritual Being is a Spirit; a Corporeal
Being, a Body: so a Substantial Being is a Substance; (putting only Two Words
for One.) And the Author must understand it so; because he makes them Three
Spirits afterward: and therefore they must be Three Substances.

Besides, what are they, 'pray, if not Substances? they cannot be Modes, or
bare Relations. I know some Platonists call them Super-Substances. Or, if you
will think them lower, and call them Semi-Substances, (as some Philosophers do
their Substantial Forms:) All this is but playing with Words. For there is
nothing represented to our Faculties, but as Substances, Modes, or Relations;
excepting what is merely Notional.

And the Learned Author must not debar us the use of the Word Substance, under
pretense that it sounds Corporeally. For two Creeds make use of it: and the
Scripture it self, upon a fair interpretation, Heb. 1. 3.

To proceed therefore. Here are Three Substances Really Distinct, whereof each
is a God (page 47. l. 13. p. 98. l. 23.) and yet there is but One God. This is
very hard to conceive, as contrary to all our Idea's of Number and Numeration.

It Is true, we may conceive these Three Substances, in strict Union one with
another, notwithstanding their real Distinction. But Union is one thing, and
Unity is another. For Unity excludes all Plurality and Multiplicity; which
Union does not, but rather supposes it. Unity also, in simple Natures, excludes
all Compositions: which Union, on the contrary, always Implies, in one kind or
other.

Accordingly; Substances, upon Union, are not Confounded or Identified, or
brought to Unity of Substance: But, continuing numerically distinct Substances,
acquire some Community or Communication of Operations: namely, of such Actions
and Passions as they are respectively capable of.

Let us consider Instances of these things, in the chief unions that are known
to us. Our Soul and Body are two Substances really distinct, and in close Union
with one another: But, notwithstanding this, they continue distinct Substances
under that Union. In like manner, the Humane Soul of Christ is in Union with
the Logos, or second Person of the Trinity, which we call an Hypostatical
Union: But neither does this Union make any Unity of Substance; for the two
substances of the Divine and Humane Natures, continue Distinct under that
Union. Which must not be allowed in the Unity of the Godhead, where there can
be no Plurality or Multiplicity of Substances.

The Learned Author does acknowledge (p. 87, 97.) that these three Substances,
if they were separate, would be three Gods: but being Inseparate and
Inseparable, they make but One. This is again uneasy to conceive, that
Substances Really Distinct, should not be separable. For the notion of a
Substance, is, of that which may subsist by it self: And what mark have we of
separability but Real Distinction? Things that are only Modally or Notionally
distinct, we allow cannot subsist separate: But if they be Really distinct, as
Substances, why may they not be separated Really? When we have proved, the Real
Distinction of the Soul and the Body, as two Substances; we think we have
sufficient ground to assert the Separability of the Soul from the Body. And
from the same Reason, we assert the Parts of Matter to be Separable, as being
Really distinct Substances, let their Union be otherwise what it will. For, if
our Faculties be true, what things we clearly conceive Really distinct (ut res
and res) may (possibly) be separated. Clear and Distinct Conception being to us
the rule of Partibility.

But however! Suppose, if you please, this Union Indissoluble; this does not
change it into Unity. If the Soul of Man was made to be in Perpetual
Conjunction with Matter, as some Platonists affirm: that does not make Matter
and the Soul, One and the same substance; nor Matter cease to be Matter, or the
Soul a Spirit. So, if you suppose these three Divine Substances to be under an
Indissoluble Union; that does not make them cease to be three Substances, but,
it makes them, Three Substances in an Indissoluble Union.

What the learned Author says concerning Matter and Extension, may be returned
upon him in reference to the Godhead. (p. 80. l. 9, 10.) He supposes Extension
to consist of Parts, if they be only Assignable parts, whether they can be
divided or not: so, say we, (according to this opinion) The Godhead may consist
of several Substances, if they be only Assignable Substances, whether they can
be Divided or not: And you may as Distinctly Assign, by your Understanding,
Three Substances in the Godhead, that of the Father, that of the Son, and that
of the Holy Ghost; as you may Assign Three Parts in a Physical Atome, by A. B.
C.

Lastly, There is no Substance lost or destroyed in this or any other Union,
Dissoluble, or Indissoluble: Therefore, as to Substances, they are the same,
whether in Conjunction or Separation.

We come unto the Third Character. (page 50. 166. 258. see also p. 93.) The
Three Divine Persons are Three Infinite Minds, or Three Holy Spirits: And yet
but One God. This rises still higher than the former as to its
Vnconceivableness. It seems to say and unsay the same thing, with the same
breath. An Infinite Spirit is completely a God, as to Essence and Attributes:
Therefore three such are three Gods. Omnis men's infinite perfecta est Deus;
Tres sunt mentes infinite perfectae; Ergo Tres sunt Dii. Where is the fourth of
this Syllogism?

This Character seems to assert Three Infinites: Whereas the Athanasian Creed,
which stands at the highest pitch of any, is yet very tender and cautious in
giving the number Three to any thing but the Persons. It will not allow three
Eternals, nor three Incomprehensibles, nor three Almighties: But, three
Infinites include all these.

An Infinite Spirit (as I said before) is a God, (I mean, Infinite in
Perfection, as our Author does,) And three Spirits, whereof each is Infinite
in Perfection, are Three Gods: As, three Creatures, whereof each is a Rational
Animal, are three Men. Both these Propositions go upon the same ground, namely,
That the Definition, and the thing Defined, are reciprocal and of the same
extent. Now as we have no better Definition of a Man, than that he is a
Rational Animal; so neither have we a better Definition of a God, than that he
is a Spirit infinitely Perfect. And as so many Animals Rational, so many Men;
so likewise, so many Spirits infinitely perfect, so many Gods.

I speak this according to the use of our Faculties. For, what the true and
precise state of things is, in themselves, when the question is concerning
Infinite Natures, I do not presume to determine.

But thus much, I think, we may safely determine, That in such cases where our
Faculties are at a loss, the safest way is to keep close to Revelation and the
words of Scripture. And that is the Conclusion I drive at.

Lastly, To put a plain question, which will come into every one's mind: Here
are Three Spirits infinitely Perfect; either they are Gods, or they are
Creatures? They must be one of the Two. When we speak of a Spirit infinitely
perfect, we describe an absolute, complete, entire Being. Which must be of some
Denomination, either a God, or a Creature; for we know nothing of a middle
nature betwixt these.

Possibly they will Answer this by a Distinction; namely, that they are three
Gods considered Separately; but considered collectively and in Union, they are
but One God: And seeing they cannot be really separate, it would be improper to
call them Three Gods. But, pray, Why not as properly three Gods, as three
Infinite Spirits? seeing these terms, A Spirit infinitely perfect, and A God,
are terms equivalent or identical. What partiality is it then to allow the one,
and not the other? And if these Infinite Spirits be Inseparable, why do you
grant the number Three to that name, and not to the name of Gods? seeing they
are both the same Thing, and equally Inseparable.

We observed before, that this Learned Author is liberal in his Threes; three
Intelligent Beings, three Infinite Minds, three Holy Spirits, three Divine
Glories, three Majesty's; but not three Kings. It Is the Name, it seems, is
scrupled, rather than the Thing.

Sir, I will add no more upon these Heads. But will consider now the grand
Principle which is designed to take off all these Difficulties; And that is,
mutual Consciousness; whereby all these Threes are made One; and reduced to a
perfect Numerical Unity.

I need not spend time in telling you what the Author means by mutual
Consciousness, nor how he applies it to the present case: You know them both
sufficiently. But methinks this Vnitive Principle is defectively expressed, by
the word Consciousness. For bare Consciousness, without Consent, is no more
than bare Omnisciency. As God is Conscious of all our Thoughts, good or bad;
and of all the Devils thoughts; without Union, as without Consent. If a good
and bad Angel were made mutually Conscious of one another mind, they would not
thereupon become One, being still of different Wills and Inclinations.

It may be the Author will say, Consciousness involves Consent, as he says,
Knowledge involves Power, or is the same with it. But, besides, that I cannot
well reconcile the Author to himself in this point, (See P. 9. l. 3, 4.
compared with p. 72.) I have given you Instances in a former Letter to the
contrary. To which you may add, if you please, this further consideration: If
Knowledge be the same thing with Power, then actual Conception is the same
thing with actual Execution. And if so, then You and I may sit quietly in our
studies, and, with our Thought and Pen, build Palaces, and take Towns and
Cities. For we know the Methods of both, and can distinctly conceive them and
delineate them. And as these are not the same thing in us, so neither can we
conceive them, in all respects, the same in God. For, from all Eternity, God
had a clear Idea of the frame of the World, and of the manner of producing it:
therefore, if Gods Conception or Knowledge had been the same with his Power,
the World had been produced from Eternity.

But to proceed, Let us give this Principle its full strength, Consciousness
and Consent: they would not together make a perfect Unity of Operations in the
Deity, much less of Substance. We noted before, that Unity and Union are
different things. And this is more apparent now, when Three Spirits are to be
united into One. For how that can be done without some sort of Composition, is
an unconceivable Mystery. You may indeed conceive these Three Spirits, singly
and separately, as simple Beings: But if you conceive these three simple Beings
united into One (without Annihilation of any one) that One must be a Compound
Being, according to our Conceptions.

Then, as to Unity of Operations: Besides the Energies peculiar to the Father
and the Son, this Author allows ( p. 67.) that every one of these three Minds,
notwithstanding their Union, has some Distinct Consciousness, not common to
the other Two: therefore the Godhead, which consists of these Three Minds,
cannot be One as a single Mind is One; where there is an entire Community and
Sameness of Consciousness, in all Operations.

In my opinion, if this Hypothesis were pressed to speak out, the plain language
of it would be this; There are Three Divine Substances, three Holy Spirits,
infinitely Perfect, and, in truth and reality, three Gods: But, for some
Reasons, not fit to be called so. These three Beings, by Similitude of Nature,
mutual Consciousness, Consent, Cooperation, are under the greatest Union
possible; and, in that state of Union, do constitute the (...), the Entire All,
comprehensive Godhead. This, I confess, books something like a conceivable
thing: But the Christian Trinity does not use to be represented thus. For this
amounts to no more than a kind of Hypostatical Union of Three Divine Spirits.

Sir, I will trouble you no further upon the first general Head, The
Distinction of the Persons. I proceed now to consider the Equality of the
Persons. Which I will dispatch in a few Words.

The first Argument against their Equality may be this ( page 99. l. 29. etc.)
The Father is (...), self-existen^, self-originated: whereas the other Two are
(...), existent and originated from another. Now this cannot but make,
according to our Faculties, not only some Difference, but also some Inequality.
For it is a fundamental Perfection to be self-originated: and what is not so, is
not Equal to that which is so.

You will say possibly, Though the Son and Holy Ghost are produced of the
Father, yet it is not in such a way as Creatures are produced. That is, by a
voluntary External Act; but This, by an Internal, Necessary, and Emanative Act.

We will allow your Distinction; and admit that the Son and Holy Ghost have a
different Origin from that of common Creatures. But this does not remove the
Difficulty. It shows indeed a great Difference and Inequality betwixt any of
the Divine Persons, and bare Creatures: But it does not show any Equality
amongst the Divine Persons themselves. It Is true, the Dependence which a
Creature has upon the Creator for its Being, is of another kind and degree
from that of the Son or Holy Ghost. But however, they are Derivative Beings, in
some way or other, and dependent upon the Father. And we cannot but conceive
some Inequality betwixt an Original and a Derivative, a Dependent and
Independent Being.

Secondly, That Act whereby the Son is Generated by the Father, is some Energy
and Perfection: Nay, it is an Energy of the Highest Perfection; Because the
Result of it is the most Perfect Being that can any way be produced; or the
Noblest and Greatest Product in Things. Creation, or that Energy that produces
a Creature, has not a Term or Effect so Noble or so Great, as that Energy
whereby the Son is generated: And consequently it is not so great a Perfection
to Create a World, as to Generate the Divine Logos. This being so; there is,
you see, not only Self-Origination in the Father, which is not in the Son: but
also an Active Perfection of the highest Degree possible, in the One, which is
not in the other. And therefore we cannot in either respect, conceive these two
Beings equal.

Besides, if you make them all three Equal, and all Infinite; they will be
Coordinate, (I mean internally, and as to perfection of Nature: For, External
Subordination, as to Economy, signifies nothing in this case.) And are no more
One, than three Individuals of the same Species are One; that is, than Peter,
James and John are or may be One. And this, I think, was the Doctrine of the
Tritheites, or very near it.

Lastly, You may please to reflect upon the various Sentiments and Expressions
of the Ancients, concerning the Dignity and Pre-eminence of the Fathers, (which
you know are noted by Petavius (de Trin. lib. 2. c. 2. and l. 8. c. 9.. 15.)
and consider their Consistency or Inconsistency with perfect Equality.

Sir, As I do not write this with any Disrespect to that Treatise, (which
contains many Excellent things:) so neither to represent absolute Truth or
Untruth: But the Difficulty of our conceiving things of an Infinite Nature.
From which Consideration I would willingly infer Two Conclusions.

First, That we ought to keep close to Scripture in these Mysterious Doctrines.

Secondly, That we should not impose Consequences humanely made, with the same
Rigor as divinely revealed Truths.

The Anti-trinitarian System is not at all suited to my Genius. Yet I would not
stretch our Trinitarian Doctrine so far, as to set it at a distance from
Scripture as well as from Reason. Secret things belong unto the Lord: but those
things that are Revealed, belong to us and our Children. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. And the
Angels, it may be, think us as foolish and ridiculous, for pursuing these
Notions, as we think our selves wise and learned in such pursuits.

I am, Sir, with all Sincerity, Your most humble Servant, W. I.


To this Letter, I reply as follows.

To the Reverend W. J.
SIR,
I Am obliged to you for the Kind and Respectful Character, which you are
pleased to afford me in Both your Letters. I am not at all displeased (but
thank you for it) with a like Moderation in Yours (to what you commend in my
Letters) as to the Mysterious Truths concerning the Sacred Trinity: And do
fully close with what you say in the Conclusion, That the Angels may think us
as Foolish and Ridiculous, for pursuing these Notions further than they are
Revealed, as we think our selves Wise and Learned in such pursuits: Like as You
or I should Laugh at a Blind man (who had never seen) that should undertake to
Conceive in his Mind, and Express to us in word,) a Distinct and Perfect Notion
or Idea of Sight, Light, and Colors.

He may Hear the Noise or Sound of those three Words (supposing him, though
Blind, not to be Deaf also,) and may Believe that they signify Somewhat. But,
what that Somewhat is, he cannot Tell; having never had an Idea thereof in his
Mind, nor a Perception thereof by his Senses.

And if You or I (from that Notion which our selves have of it) would Explain
it to him: We could do it no otherwise than by the Use of such Words (in a
sense Analogical) as do properly belong to somewhat of which he has (from
Experience) some Idea.

Sight, we might say, is a certain kind of Sense or Feeling in our Eyes (which
we have not in our Hand, Feet, or other parts of our Body,) whereby we can (as
it were) Feel with our Eyes, the Shape, Figure, Bigness and Proportion of a
Body at a Distance; as we might, with our Hands if within our Reach. Whereby he
might Apprehend, that there is some kind of Resemblance between Seeing and
Feeling; but, what indeed it is to See, he cannot comprehend.

Light, we might tell him, is a Necessary Requisite to such a Feeling with our
Eyes, as that for want of it (which Want we call Darkness) we can no more so
Feel, or Discover, by our Eyes, such Shape, Figure, or Bigness; than we could,
with our Hands, that (suppose) of a Piece of Money locked up in a Box which we
could not open; but, by the Admission of such Requisite, we are enabled so to
Feel it with our Eyes, as we might with our Hands, if the Box were opened
whereby we might come to Handle it.

Color, we might tell him, is somewhat of such a Nature, as that, on a Plain
Board (or the like) on which by our Hand we can Feel nothing but Smooth and
Uniform; by it may be Represented (to be so Felt with our Eyes) as great
variety of Shapes and Figures, (suppose, of a Horse, a Bird, a Ship, a House,
or any Shape whatever) as by our Hand we might, if we had such Shapes formed in
Wood or Stone; and the different Motions of such.

But, after all this, it is not possible for this Blind man, to have that Idea
or Notion in his Fancy, of Sight, Light, and Color, which we have who See.

And it is much more Impossible for Us (who have no Notions in our Mind, other
than what we derive, Mediately or Immediately, from Sensible Impressions of
Finite Corporeal Beings) to have a Clear and Perfect Notion, of the Nature,
Unity, Distinctions or Attributes of an Infinite Spiritual Being; or otherwise
to express them than by some Imperfect Analogies or Resemblances with things we
are conversant with; and by words in a borrowed sense from such.

I do therefore fully agree with you in your Two Conclusions; namely, That it
is Safe and Prudent to keep close to Scripture in these Mysterious Doctrines;
(since we know nothing of them otherwise than as there Revealed:) And, not to
impose Consequences of Humane Deduction, with the like Rigor as
Divinely-revealed Truths. For, even in common affairs, when things are
represented only by the Analogy or Resemblance which they bear to some other
things; it is seldom that the Similitude is so Absolute between them, but that
there is some Dissimilitude likewise. Much more when the Distance is so great
as between Finite Corporeal Beings, and what is Infinite and Incorporeal. So
that we cannot always argue cogently from one to the other.

And therefore the words Nature, Essence, Unity, Distinction, Father, Son,
Person, Beget, Proceed, (and the like,) when applied to God in a borrowed sense
from what they properly signify as applied to Creatures, must not be supposed
to signify just the same, but somewhat Analogous to that of their Primary
signification; nor Consequences thence to be deduced with the same Rigor.

It would be mere Cavilling for any to argue, that, Because Knowledge and
Strength are separable in Man; Therefore, what in God we call by those names,
are so in God; and that, consequently, it may be Possible for the All-wise God,
not to be Almighty; or the Almighty God, not to be All-wise.

So, if we should argue from the manner of our Locality or Duration, to God's
Vbiquity without Extension, and his Eternity without Succession; the Inferences
must needs be Lame and Inconsequent. With other Inferences of like nature.

And, (even without proceeding to Infinites) if we suppose a Spirit, or the
Soul of Man, to be void of Parts and Local Extension, and therefore (as the
Phrase is) tota in toto and tota in qualibet part of that Space or Matter to
which it is compresent: And should yet argue (as you do in a like case) If one
single Spirit be compresent with three or more really-distinct Parts of Space
or Matter; we must Divide or Multiply it: Either each of these extensive Parts
must have a Piece of that Spirit; and then you Divide it: Or, each must have
the Whole, and (there being but one Whole) you cannot give it to each, without
Multiplying it: Such Inference upon such a Supposition (which Supposition I am
loath to think Impossible,) must needs be Lame.

Yet such are commonly the Cavils of those who study to pick Quarrels with the
Doctrine of the Trinity as delivered in Scripture. And (in particular) though,
amongst Men, Three Persons are sometimes (not always) so used as to import
three Men; we may not thence conclude, that the three Divine Persons, must
needs imply three Gods. Or, if the word Persons do not please, (though I think
it a fit word in the case; we can spare the word, without prejudice to the
Cause, (for it is the Notion, rather than the Name, that we contend for,) and
content our selves to say, They be three Somewhats which are but One God. Or,
we may so explain our selves, That, by three Persons we mean three such
Somewhats as are not inconsistent with being One God.

And hitherto, I suppose, that You and I do well enough agree.

Now, as to what you observe concerning the Learned Author (Dr. Sherlock;) I
shall begin where you end: And agree with you, that the Treatise (to which you
refer) contains many Excellent things. The Strength and Weight of his
Arguments, as to those to whom he undertakes Answer, does not depend upon those
Expressions against which you object: But his Arguments against those, are of
equal Force, though these Expressions were spared.

As to those Expressions of his, by you noted, That the three Divine Persons
are Three Beings (three Intelligent Beings, three Substantial Beings, three
Holy Spirits,) Really Distinct, even as distinct as Peter, James, and John; and
One God only as they are mutually Conscious: I was (I confess) Unsatisfied
therein (as You are) from the first; Looking upon them as Expressions too Hardy
for one to venture upon, (and so I find are most others with whom I have
discoursed about them:) and wish he had declined them.

Yet I did not think it necessary for me to write against them (though I did
not like them) but chose rather to wave them, and express my self otherwise.
(For it would be Endless if I should make it my business to write Books against
every one who has some Expressions which I cannot approve, amongst many others
wherein I think he does well.) Nor shall I Aggravate the Objections which you
have Urged against them; But leave them as they are.

I might perhaps mollify some of his Expressions, by putting a softer sense
upon them than at first view they seem to bear; (for I find some Men, in such
matters, do use words at a very different rate from what others do:) But I have
not (where now I am) the Book at hand; and have read it but once (a good while
since) when it first came out: and therefore am not willing to say much without
Book, least I should miss his sense, or not perform it to his mind.

That learned Author may, if he think fit, so Vindicate or Explain those
Expressions as he shall judge convenient: Or he may (which I had rather he
should) Decline them, without prejudice to his main Cause; (which, in my
opinion, he may as well defend without them:) and thereby less expose himself
to the Cavils of the Anti-trinitarians; who are catching at every colorable
pretense of Objecting, though not against the main Cause concerning the
Trinity, if but against some Expressions of those who maintain it.

Thus far, I think, He and both of Us do agree; namely, That there is a
Distinction between the Three, more than merely Notional, and even more than
that, between (what we commonly call) the Divine Attributes; yet not so as to
be Three Gods, or more Gods than One: (which is as much as we need maintain
against the Anti-Trinitarians:) And, that the word Person is no unfit Name to
denote that Distinction. And thus far we may close with him, notwithstanding
some other Inconvenient Expressions.

And if it be agreed that these Three (thus distinguished) are but One God
(each Communicating in one and the same Numerical Essence,) then they are all
Equal (as to that common Internal Essence, and the common Attributes thereof:)
and then an External Subordination, as to Economy (you grant) signifies
nothing in this case.

Now, Sir, if you look back upon your own Discourse: You will find, that the
whole Edge of your Arguments is directed against those Expressions, Three
Beings, Three Substances, Three Spirits; (and I do acknowledge, that, as to
these, the Arguments seem to me sharp enough, and to do their work.) But if,
instead of these, he say (as I think he should) that The Three Persons are One
Being, One Substance, One Spirit, (like as he says they are One God) that Edge
will be taken off Augustine. Epist. 174. Spiritus est Deus; and Pater Spiritus
est, and Filius, and ipse Spiritus Sanctus; nec tamen Tres Spiritus, sed Vnus
Spiritus; sicut non Tres Dii, sed Vnus Deus.
.

That (I conceive) which did impose upon him in this Point, is the forced
sense, which, in our Language, we sometimes put upon the word Person, for want
of another English Word (answering to Homo) which might indifferently respect
Man, Woman, and Child: and a like forced sense put by the Schoolmen upon the
word Persona, for want of a Latin word which might equally relate to Men and
Angels; as signifying an Intelligent Being. Whence he was induced to think,
that Three Persons must needs be Three Intelligent Beings. Whereas Persona, in
its true and ancient sense (before the Schoolmen put this forced sense upon
it) did not signify a Man simply; but, one under such, and such, and such
Circumstances, or Qualifications. So that the same Man (if capable of being
qualified thus, and thus, and thus,) might sustain three Persons, and these
three Persons, be the same Man.

Now if (as he says of himself elsewhere in a like case) he have not been taken
to be a Fool: Yet a wise Man may sometimes, upon second thoughts, see Reason to
change his Opinion (as in that case he did) or rectify his Expressions. And if
then he consider, how much easier it will be (and less obnoxious to Exceptions)
to maintain his Hypothesis thus Rectified: He may think I have done him no ill
Offices thus to suggest.

Having thus given you my thoughts of this Hypothesis: If you press me further
(as between our selves) to tell you, What Degree of Distinction (as in our
Metaphysics they are wont to be Reckoned up) I take this to be, between the
Three Divine Persons: I think we need not much trouble our selves with such
niceties. And if I do tell you; it is only ex abundanti, as what does not much
concern the main question in hand; (which is safe enough without it:) Nor that
I so prescribe therein, as to require others to express their Sentiments just
as I do.

The Degrees of Distinction commonly mentioned in our Metaphysics, are such as
these: Distinctio rationis ratiocinantis, (which is purely Notional, and
depends merely on our Imagination:) Destinatio rationis ratiocinatae (which is
otherwise said to be secundum inadaequatos conceptus ejusdem rei:) Distinctio
Modalis, (either ut res and modus, or ut modus and modus,) which is otherwise
said to be ex part rei sed non ut res and res: And Distinctio realis, or ut
res and res. Though, in the Names of these several Degrees, all Writers do not
always speak alike. One perhaps by a distinction ex part rei, may mean the
same which another means by Distinctio Realis: And so of the rest. And these
thus marshalled are but a contrivance of our own. They might, for ought I know,
have been made more or fewer if the Contriver had so thought fit.

But these Degrees of Distinction, I take to be primarily fitted to our Notions
of Created Beings. And are not intended as applicable to God, otherwise than by
Analogy; as other Words properly fitted to created Beings are wont to be so
applied. And therefore I should choose to say, that (in strictness of speech)
our Metaphysics have not yet given a Name to these Distinctions: Nor do I know
any need of it.

The Divine Attributes, we use to say, are distinguished ratione ratiocinata,
or as inadaequati conceptus ejusdem rei. And it is well enough so to say, to
those that have not a mind to be captious; but are willing to understand
Figurative Words in a Figurative sense. But, to those that have a mind to
Cavil, I would speak more cautiously, and say, It is, in God, somewhat
Analogous to what we so call in Created Beings. And, That of the Divine
Persons, somewhat Analogous, in the Deity, to what, in Created Beings, is
called Distinctio Modalis, or Distinctio a part rei, sed non ut res and res.

If it be asked, What that Distinction is which is thus Analogous: I say, that
I cannot tell. You must first tell me (and enable me to comprehend) what is the
full and adaequate import of the words Father, Son, Beget, Proceed, etc. when
applied to God, in a sense Analogous to what they signify as to Created Beings.
If you cannot tell me, precisely, what they are: How should I tell you, How
they Differ?

But what need we trouble our selves with these Niceties, or Names of these
Degrees of Distinction? (Which, when we have all done, will by diverse Men be
diversely expressed.) I think it is enough to say, The Distinction is Greater
than that of (what we call) the Divine Attributes; but not so as to make them
Three Gods. Or, That they be so Three, as yet to be but One God. And I am
content to rest there.

I am, Sir, Yours to serve you, I. Wallis.
Apr. 11. 1691.


