A PROSPECT OF The State of IRELAND, FROM The Year of the World 1756. TO The
Year of Christ 1652.

Written by P. W.

Printed for Johanna Broom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
I. Appear before Your Majesty with the ill grace of a Man who comes for a
Pardon, and confesses he did the fau^t in hopes of it. For it is undeniably a
guilty presumption in me to make bold with Your Royal Name, and that to a
slight Argument, or at least made so by ill handling; such as will give People
too much reason to say, Your Name is the only thing, which shows handsome in the
whole Prospect. Neither have I any, but the sorry excuse of defenseless guilt:
I was drawn in, though not by others, by Counselors as dangerous and deceitful
as my own thoughts. I considered that This, in the original design, was part of
a Book which has the honor to be made Yours, and thought my altering the
Method did not alter Your Majesty's Property; neither could I conceive, when
Your Name appeared on the one half, any but Yours could show well on the other.
I considered that it is an account of part of Your People, and contains an
account of part of Your Pedigree. To the King, and to the Head of the Family,
Justice I thought appropriated both, For it is the glory of the Irish Nation to
have contributed to Your Sacred Blood, as well as the rest under Your happy
Government: and when they shed their own in Your defense, to know they spend an
inconsiderable part for preservation of the most Noble and most Precious: a
sweeter and sometimes a stronger tie than the Duty of Subjects. As
reciprocally, Nature with its secret allurements of propension toward a
Country, from whence we are derived, and where our Ancestors have lived great
and glorious, joins with the common care of a King, and Father of all his
People, to move Your Majesty to cherish them with the rest. Thus much I beg
leave to say by the by in behalf of my Native Country, because every Writer
has not been either so curious to observe, or so kind to publish it. But
leaving that matter, these reasons persuaded me I might find at least
Companions in my fault, and where Your Sacred Name has been made bold with as
improperly. Yet what wrought most, was a strong temptation, and which I could
the less resist, because it came in the disguise of gratitude, to appear as
little unworthy, as I could, of many and signal effects of Your Goodness. Every
body knows I am deeply in Your Debt, and I thought it but just every body
should know I own it, with the ^ense which becomes me; though I have not
hitherto said so much as bare, I thank you, no not to Your Majesty Your self
sometimes. The thoughts of Death, which it concerns a man of my age to
entertain, would be too terrible to me, if it should carry me away with the
imputation of an insensible or ungrate^ul man. As I have always thought the
best return a Subject can make to the favors of his Prince, is by his service
to deserve them; I have indeed the comfort, that I cannot reproach my self with
not having done my best. But alas! I must say to You as to God, after all I
have, to my great grief, been but an unprofitable servant. That thought is a
misery, which I am ill able to support. Should Ungrateful be added to Useless,
it would certainly and soon sink my gray hairs to the Grave. Fear of this, as
fear sometimes produces boldness, has cast me into that, of which I am now
guilty, and in which my ill Fate still pursues me. For I am useless now too,
having with much pains got a Present to make You, for which neither Your
Majesty, nor any body else perhaps will be the better, and I know not whether
worth more, than just so much Paper. But yet it is all I can do. For we of the
Scribbling Trade are like Merchants who trade upon credit, and pay altogether in
Bills. Besides that in truth, there lives not perhaps the man, whose stock, or
luck in managing it is great enough to answer the mighty sum I owe You. These
were the thoughts which slatter'd my presumption with hopes of Pardon, to which
all even Your Mercy will yet be needful. For I am an unrepenting Sinner, and
who, far from sorrow, glory in the fault which gives me an occasion to tell all
the World, I have lived and mean to die,

Your Majesty's most Loyal, most obedient, and most humble Subject, Peter
Walsh.

THE PREFACE.
READER, You may well imagine by the Title and Method of this Treatise, the
Author was very far from intending, it should pass for a History of Ireland.
And for the Bulk I can assure you, that although, considering the extent of
Times, and variety of Matters treated of therein, it be but little; yet,
according to his first design, it should have been far less, at least by five
parts of six.

The truth is, I never had a thought of writing a word on this Subject, before
the Earl of Castlehaven desired, nor only desired but importuned me a twelve
month past, when his Lordship's Memoir's had been a working off the Press, that
I would draw an Appendix to be published with them, which might in short
represent the original Cause of the Rebellion broke out in Ireland on the 23d
of October, 1641. and consequently somewhat of the State of that Kingdom, and
Fatal Feud betwixt the two Nations there, since Henry II's time.

What little inclination I had to the Subject, it will be to no purpose I
should tell, being you see I was at last persuaded: though nevertheless I must
acknowledge, it was only the power this Nobleman has, and can justly challenge
over me, See Castle-Haven's Memoir's page 87.
wrought my acquiescence to his desires. But laying aside that matter, what I
would next inform you of are these particulars. 1. That although eight or nine
sheets in the Whole, was the most I had first designed to write (because a
larger Tract could not so well suit the Title of an Appendix to his Lordship's
Memoir's:) yet when I was once entered on the Subject, so great a variety of
matters offered themselves to consideration, as took up more time and paper
than I first intended. 2. That in the mean while some Copies of the said
Memoir's chancing (by some unexpected accident) to be given out by the
Bookseller: my Lord, considering he could not otherwise prevent a sinister
interpretation of his meaning by them in the main, as they were seen thus
imperfect, found himself necessitated not only not to stay my leisure; but
instead of such an Appendix as he expected from me, to change his former
Preface, and write and print another; with an Appendix also of his own, though
upon another Subject: and with such both amendments and accomplishments as he
thought necessary, to order the free exposing of his Book to public view. 3.
That notwithstanding I had on this emergent occasion thought my self eased of
any further study on a Subject I had no liking to, it proved much otherwise.
For his Lordship nevertheless continued his desires that I should prosecute and
finish what I had begun: and to oblige me to it, without hopes of any change in
him, gave notice in his Preface to the Reader of his Memoir's, how the Appendix
he had first intended and promised of the State of Ireland was grown to such a
Bulk as would require its coming out in a Book by its self. And therefore I
found my self more deeply engaged. 4. That, however, seeing I was now at more
liberty, as for Time, so for Matter and for Title both, I resolved to change my
first design of so few sheets, and write under the Title of a Prospect, etc.
about threescore sheets in all: but in the same method and Style I had already
begun with, as more agreeable to my purpose of giving (though not a strict much
less a full History, yet) the choicest Collections, and freest observations
too, I could derive from, or in my way, i. e. in several, easy, plain
Discourses make upon the History of Ireland; Thirty sheets representing in
short the state of that Kingdom from the first Plantation of it after the
Flood, till the English Conquest: and the other thirty what followed since for
the last five hundred years. 5. That because I considered the Form (as Printers
call it) which I had also begun with already, and therefore must have continued
the same, would be too narrow and little for a Volume of sixty sheets, not
rendered unproportinoably thick: I give them divided as in two Parts, which I
call the Former and Later, so in two Volums, each apart. So much for the
Occasion, Title, Method, Form, Division of this Treatise.

As for those matters of Irish Antiquity, so strangely far out of our ken,
discoursed in this Former Part, I doubt not, some at least, or peradventure
many of 'em will be excepted against by Critics in this censorious Age. And
that, where nothing else can be objected, Varro's Three Differences of Time
must serve the turn. We shall be told, How the First, having been That which
extended from the Creation to the Flood, is called Obscure and uncertain:
because we are wholly ignorant of all things happened in it. The Second, which
was That from the Flood to the first Olympiad, is termed Fabulous: by reason of
a world of Fables reported thereof. But the Third, extending frem the said
Olympiad to our days, is called Historical: because the Acts of it are
delivered in Histories that are true. And indeed, I must confess that so said
Varro (the most learned of the Romans 1700 years ago) following herein the
Greeks; and after him (of late) our English Cambden, who lays so much stress
upon this observation of Varro, that ( page 17. Hol. Translat.) he makes it his
only argument to ruin the credit of Geoffrey of Monmouth's new History of
Brute. But withal I do profess, that, for my own part, I see nothing in it that
stresses. My reasons are, 1. The sayings of Varro, how learned soever he was,
are no Oracles. 2. The Histories of the Jewish Nation, at least the Books of
Moses, and several more of the Old Testament Record a great variety of Matters
happened, some before the Flood, many more after it, both the one and the other
with all certainty and truth imaginable; and yet all of 'em before the First
Olympiad, which according to Cambden himself was no earlier than the year of
the World 3189. though others make it earlier by fifteen years. 3. And to wave
all kind of advantages from those holy Books which both Jews and Christians
repute infallible, as being the Oracles of God; Josephus in his first Book
against Appion, a Book written by him 1600. years ago, assures us, that even
the Histories of the Phenicians, Egyptians, and Chaldeans have recorded
likewise with great truth and certainty the Reigns of their own Kings, and
other memorable things happened in their Countries many hundred years before
the first Olympiad; yea not a few of them happened even long before either
Moses or Abraham himself was born. 4. There have been several Books written for
true History of matters that (as the Authors would make us believe) happened
since the first Olympiad, nay written partly of some things reported in them to
have happened fourteen hundred years after that Olympiad, which yet we know to
be most faculous. Witness, among so many other, the foresaid Geoffrey of
Monmouth's seven Books of History; to say nothing at all of Annius Viterbiensis.

But to return back to Josephus; it is also remarkable how (in the same Book
against Appion) he wonders not a little at those who as to matters of
Antiquity, suppose the truth ought only to be gathered from the Greeks. Whereas
indeed (says he) whatever is written by the Greeks, is new, and of late memory,
and has been done in the World in a manner but yesterday. And this he proves in
the same place at large. Besides he shows, that albeit their knowledge or
practice not only of other Arts and Sciences, but of any kind of Letters, had
been very late; yet the latest of all among 'em was that of History. That
herein, even after they had given themselves industriously to it, they were
notwithstanding very imperfect, uncertain, short: their chiefest Authors
contradicting one another in what they wrote: (as knowing there were no ancient
Records, not even in Athens it self, to check their falsity, nor Laws to curb
their Liberty of writing what they pleased at random) and what they wrote,
being so little as to other Countries of the World, that of Rome it self,
though very powerful within Italy in those times, and so near home, they seemed
for some Ages wholly ignorant. That even their most curious Writers, and among
'em Ephorus by name, were so ignorant of the Gauls and Spaniards, as to have
thought the later a People denominated of one only City, and related the
manners both of the one and the other to be such, as neither are nor at any
time were among either. Finally, that their knowledge of other Nations was a
long time so extreme little, as to have extended only to the bordering
Thracians, and the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts, lying Easterly, and Westerly,
not far from Greece; all other Inland or untraffiquing, nay and all trassiquing
too, so they were far remote Countries, being utterly unknown to them.

Moreover, and more nearly to our present purpose, it is observable how so
excellent, so unbiased a Writer, as Josephus undoubtedly is, not only has in
the same Book this very expression, That he presumes not for matter of
Antiquity to compare his own Jewish Nation with the Chaldeans, Egyptians, or
Phaenicians; but, for certainty and truth, highly celebrates in particular, the
Phenician Historian Dius, and the Chaldean Berosus. And yet we know from him,
that as well the one as the other of these two Writers has treated of the
Affairs of that second Difference of Time in Varro, especially Berosus. He
tells us that Berosus, both mentioned the Flood, and Ark, and resting of this
on the Mountains of Armenia, and continued the series of his Narration
downwards all along from the first of Kings after the Deluge, even from Noah
himself, that is, for the whole extent of that very Second period or Difference
of Time. Whence it must follow, that however this Time might well and justly be
reputed fabulous by the Greeks in relation to themselves and their own
Historians; yet their ignorance ought to be no rule to conclude other Nations
that, like to those ancient Egyptians, Phaenicians, and his Chaldeans in
Joseph, were from the beginning careful to preserve their Antiquities, i. e.
their Genealogies, Adventures, Changes, Kings, Wars, and other Memorable Deeds,
in public Registers on Record for Posterity. Such are at present the Chinese
in the utmost limit of the old World in Asia toward the Rising Sun: as the
History of Martinus a Martinis abundantly shows. And that such also in the
farthest Land of Europe, toward the Setting Sun, the ancient Irish have been
while their State continued till about five hundred years since, may be
sufficiently evinced by many arguments. Among which are those which you may
briefly read in this Prospect, Former Part, Sect. II. page 46, 47, and 48.
whereunto it will not be amiss to add what both Cambrensis and Neubrigensis do
confess, that even from the beginning the Irish Nation has ever continued free
from any foreign Yoke or Conquest till Henry the Second of England's time. That
is, according to Cambrensis, has continued so, even for so long an extent of
time as the successive Reigns of a hundred eighty one Monarchs of their own
Country and extraction from the same stock had certainly taken up. And
therefore it must be also confessed, That so long at least, they were in a
capacity to preserve their own Records. And so indeed they did preserve the
chiefest of 'em safe, even amidst the greatest fury of the two Danish Wars.
Neither of which, how destructive, calamitous and heavy soever, especially the
Former was, arrived to the nature of an absolute or total Conquest of the
Natives, not even for one week or day.

All which considered by indifferent men, I hope may be enough to remove out of
their way all prejudgment of Critics, from the foresaid observation of Varro,
against those remote Antiquities of the Irish Nation, which you shall meet with
in the Former Part of this Prospect.

What or who were the Authors I have followed, it will be but reasonable I
should inform you next. And I think it as reasonable to tell you, That although
I have read whatever Cambrensis, or Campion, or Hanmer, or Spencer wrote of
Ireland: yet in the whole Former Part of this Prospect, I have not borrowed
from any one or more of them above one Paragraph of a few lines: unless
peradventure you account those other to be such. ( i. e. borrowed from them)
which animadvert upon some few of their many Errors. Nor certainly would I
have ventured on writing so much as one Line of the State of that Kingdom
before the English Conquest, if I had not been acquainted with other kind of
Authors; yea Authors not only more knowing, but incomparably better qualified
to know the ancient Monuments of that Kingdom, than they or any other
Foreigners that hitherto have gathered, written, printed some hearsay scraps
of that Nation, could possibly be. In short, when I was a young man I had read
Geoffrey Keting's Irish Manuscript History of Ireland. And now when my Lord of
Castle-haven would needs engage me to write something, as you have seen before:
I remembered how about four or five years since, the R. H. Earl of Anglesey,
Lord Privy Seal, had been pleased to show me another Manuscript, being an
English Translation of that Irish History of Ketings. Besides I remembered to
have seen and read Gratianus Lucius, when he came out in print some twenty
years ago. And because I was s^re to meet in the Former, materials enough for
such Discourses upon the more Ancient Irish, or State of their Country before
the English Conquest, as were to my purpose: and that the Later too might be
very useful in some particulars: having borrowed Keting first, ( i. e. that
English Manuscript Translation of him, such as it is, from my Lord Privy Seal)
I ventured to begin somewh^^, in the method you have here, on so Noble and
Illustrious a Subject. Though, I must confess, I am still the more unsatisfied,
that while I was drawing these Papers you have now before you, I could by no
means procure the Reading either of Primat Usher's Primordia Ecclesiarum
Britannicarum, or Sir James Ware's Antiquities of Ireland. However, seeing I
have exposed my self to censure, as relying wholly on the ability and sincerity
of Keting and Lucius in the performance of their several undertakings: I have
the more reason to give here this following true account of them.

Geoffrey Keting was a Native of Ireland in the Province of Mounster, as were
his Ancestors before him for many Generations, though not of Irish but English
blood originally. He was by Education, Study, Gommencement abroad in France, a
Doctor of Divinity; in his Religion, a Romanist; by Ordination and Calling, a
secular Priest. He had by his former study at home in his younger days, under
the best Masters of the Irish Tongue and the most skilful in their Antiquities,
arrived to a high degree of knowledge in both. In his riper years, when returned
back from his other Studies and Travails in Foreign Parts, his curiosity and
genius led him to examine all Foreign Authors, both Ancient and Modern, who had
written of that Kingdom either purposely or occasionally, whether in Latin or
in English. And this diligent search made him observe two things chiefly. 1.
That every one, even the very best and most knowing of those Writers, were
either extremely out in many, if not most of their Relations concerning the
State of that Country before the English Conquest, or rather indeed wholly
ignorant of it. In so much, that like men groping in the dark, they related
scarce any thing at all, well or ill, of what had passed among the Inhabitants
of Ireland far above one and Thirty Hundred years. Except only what is by some
of them reported of the Learning and Sanctimony of their Monks, during the
first fervours of Christianity: and a very little more of their Wars at home in
Ireland with the Danes; and even this very little involved in a mixture of
Monstrous Fables, derived from such Romantic Stories, as were certainly
written at first for mere diversion and pastime only. 2. That the generality of
those British Authors, who have written of that Country since the English
Conquest, are against all Justice and Truth, and Law's of History, in the
highest degree injurious to the ancient Natives. These considerations improving
by a fervent zeal for truth, and generous love to his Country, made Father
Keting undergo the laborious task of writing the History of Ireland at large
from the very first Plantation of it after the Deluge to Hen. II's time and
17th year of his Reign, being the year of Christ 1152. And this History
(besides which there is no other full, complete or methodical one extant of all
the Ages, Invasions, Conquests, Changes, Monarchs, Wars, and other considerable
matters of that truly ancient Kingdom) be lived to finish in his old Age, that
is, a little after Charles I. of glorious memory had been proclaimed King. Nor
did he only finish it, but prefix unto it a very judicious, large and learned
Preface to the Reader. It is in this Preface he declares those two special
motives of his writing, which you have seen already. Where also he declares who
those Authors are that gave him the occasion, and refutes them one after
another at large: namely, Strabo, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, S. Hierom against
Jovinian, Cambrensis, Stanihurst, Campion, Hanmer, Cambden, Hector Boethius,
John Barclay, Morison, Davies, Buchanan. All these in particular, as to some
passages of theirs, he disputes against in the same Preface with the clearest
evidence of Authority, matter of Fact, and Reason grounded on both. As likewise
he does in the Body of his Work against other passages not only of some of
these same Authors, especially Cambrensis, Hector Boethius, and Buchanan, but
Nicholas Sanders too in his First Book de Schismate Anglicano. Besides in the
same Preface he discourses five or six other Particulars, which I think worth
the while not to pass over wholly in silence.

The first is, That although in his History he has not seldom made use of some
Collections out of Foreign Writers; yet the main Body of it all along is
composed out of the most undoubtedly ancient and authentic Monuments of
Ireland, viz. Psaltuir Ardemach, Psaltuir Cha^sil, Psaltuir na Rann (written by
Aonghuis Ceile De) and then Leabhar na Huacongmhala, Leabhar Chluaino
Huighnioch, Leabhar Fiontain in Leix, Leabhar Ghlinne Da-Loch, Leabhar B^idhe
Mholing, Leabhar Dubh Mholaige, Leabhar na Gceart (written by S. Benignus) and
Ubhdir Chiarrain, writ at Cluain-mhac-Noise: in all Thirteen Books. For you are
to understand here not only that Leabhar signifies a Book, and Psaltuir (we
call it Psaltor) a Book in Verse, but, as he says, That from the beginning it
was the custom of the Irish to have their Chief Antiquities done into the
choicest, severest, strictest Meeter, without any redundance or want as to
sense and point of truth: and this as well for the more safe preserving of them
from corruption, as the more easy getting them by heart. And consequently you
see the true reason why their chief Records of Tarach, Cashel, Ardmagh, etc.
are called Psalters. But if you would further know the heads of these thirteen
Books: he answers in the same place, They are these. 1. The several Invasions
and Conquests of Ireland. 2. The Division of its Provinces and lesser
Countries. 3. The Reigns of their Kings. 4. Their Annals. 5. Their Computations
and Concordances of Times. 6. The Genealogy of their Male Gentry. 7. The
Pedigree of their Females. 8. Their Vocabulary. Where also is a large account
of the great School in the Plain of Sennaar, and three first Teachers of it,
soon after the Confusion of Tongues at Nimrod's Tower. 9. The Visions of
Columb-Cille, with sundry other Antiquities of Ireland.

The Second Particular gives in effect four Reasons, or at least one composed
of so many Heads, to persuade the credibility and truth of these Irish Books.
It tells us of above two hundred chief Chronologers together, from very early
times, conttinuing a Succession in the same Families and all Ages in that
Nation while their Kingdom stood, whose peculiar and only Office it was to
record faithfully all memorable Concerns. It tells us how these Antiquaries had
sufficient Estates in Land entailed on themselves and Issue for ever on that
Condition. It tells us of the public Schools they had purposely and
continually kept for the Education of their Youth in the knowledge of their
Antiquities: and how these Schools were kept in the Country of Breifthne, as
they call in Irish That which now we call the County of Letrim. It tells us of
a Triennial search into and Revision of all their Records by a select Committee
in the Public Assembly of all the Estates of that Kingdom. And lastly, it
tells us of the Deposition of fair Copies of the same Records, in the hands of
the Bishops from time to time ever since the Nation believed in Christ 1200
years since. Whereof you may see more at large in my 46. page following in this
Former Part.

A third Particular answers the Objection of some discordance among the Irish
Books, concerning the number of years from the Creation of the World to the
Birth of our Savior. It desires the Objectors to consider the far greater
discordance Because I was not sure that my Copy of Keting was right in every of
the particulars or Discordances noted here, I consulted of purpose the most
learned Sixtus Senensis, l. 5. Bibl. S. (page 440. Imp. Colon. an 1626.)
whither I remit you to see many more discordances, that is, Six and Twenty in
all, in stead of these 15 here given by Keting, though most of these are among
'em.
bet^ixt as well the Hebrews as the Greek and Latin Chronologers, each apart,
on the same Subject. How, for Example, 1. among the Hebrews, Paul Sedecholim
counts 3518. years: the Talmudists, 3784. the New Rabbis, 3760. Rabbi Naasson,
3740. Rabbi Moses Germidisi, 4058. Josephus, 4192. Among the Greek Authors,
Metrodorus, 5000. Eusebius, 5199. Theophilus, 5476. And among the Latins, S.
Hierom, 3941. S. Augustine, 5351. Isidorus, 5270. Orolius, 5190. Beda, 3952.
Alphonsus, 5984. Now, says Keting, if so great a discordance on this very
Subject impair not in other matters the credit of either Greek, Hebrew, or
Latin Authors: why should it the Irish? Where also he acquaints his Reader,
that because himself is of opinion, that such Irish Antiquaries or Books as
count for this Period from the Creation to the Incarnation 4052. This is the
Computation followed by Augustinus Tornlellius in his Annals Sacri ab Orb
Condito ad Christum passum. Sext. M. Aetat. ad an. 4052. whether Keting had him
for his Master, though I know not; yet I know he might, because Torniellius
came out in Print at Francford, an* 1611.
come nearest the Truth, he follows them in his History, or computation of
times therein, either precedent or subsequent to the Birth of Christ. And
farther, in the some place, he acquaints us with his purpose to give at the end
of his History an Appendix, or a Table of Synchronism, showing what Monarchies,
Monarchs, Great Kings of the World in other parts, and since Christianity what
Popes and general Councils were contemporary with the various Revolutions and
Kings of Ireland.

Whether he lived to finish this Table, I know not. But I remember to have
seen, in stead thereof, two small Tracts of his in Irish, on another Subject,
annexed to an Irish Copy of his History: the one being a Defense of the Mass;
the other entitled in Irish, The Three Shafts of Death.

An other Particular is That which tells how, and why, he thought it fitting,
as to the number of years attributed to the several Reigns of some few of their
Pagan Monarchs, especially Siorna Saoghallach, and Cobhthach Caolbhreag, to
vary from their Book of Reigns where it is said, That the later reigned fifty
years; but the former a hundred and fifty, and that besides he was a hundred
years old when he attained the Sovereignty, nor died naturally, but was
murdered after he had lived two hundred and fifty years in all.

In the Fifth Particular, he speaks only to those who seem rather to admire
than believe how it can be at least probable, That other Pedegrees than those
in Holy Scripture should be truly and in a perpetual Line without any
interruption carried up along to Adam and Noah, as the Irish Genealogical and
Historical Books pretend to do for all their Kings, Princes, and great Nobles.
To such admiring incredulous men he answers, That the Irishry or Gathelian
Offspring, even all along from the time of Gathelus himself (whose name gave
these Descendants from hin^ the general appellation of Clanna Gaodhel) till
their arrival in Ireland, had with them a learned sort of men, called in their
Language Draoithe (in ours Druids and Magitians) whose peculiar Office it was
to write and preserve as well their Genealogies, as all other Memoirs
concerning them or their Travails and Adventures whatsoever, good or bad. That
the more famous Branch of those Gathelians, to wit the Clanna Mileadh or
Descendents from Milesius the Spaniard, after they had conquered Ireland from
the Nation called Tuatha-De-Danann thought fit to continue the same course, and
accordingly did continue for the 2500 years of their Government and Laws, an
uninterrupted numerous succession of Antiquaries for the same purpose, with
large allowance and strict orders to regulate them; us has been said before.
That besides, and particularly to show the like care among some other Nations
for preserving the Genealogies of their great Heroes; he instances in the
Pedigree of that excellent Saxon King Alfredus, and out of Asser Menevensis
inserts it carried up through all his Predecessors from Son to Father in a
perpetual direct Line to Adam. To which Instance, alleged by Keting, I could
my self most certainly, though without Book, add another. For about five or six
and forty years since, traveling in Brabant, and within a little English mile
to Lovain, entering the Choire of the Celestin's Abbey there, I saw and for a
pretty while did view a Table hung up on the Wall, which contained the
Genealogy of the Illustrious Founders the Dukes of Arscot, carried up in like
manner through a vast number of Generations to the First of all men. Which may
be enough to persuade us, that the old German Nation, how meanly soever for
matter of civility or Learning, described by Tacitus, have been very careful in
preserving at least their Genealogical Antiquities. And indeed, if my memory
fail me not, I remember to have read in Favins Theater of Honor, much to this
purpose; where he tells, It was from the Germans that all the rest of Europe
derived the custom of giving Goats of Arms to show the Noble Antiquity of their
Extraction. Though withal I must confess, that Keting in the Reign of the Irish
Monarch Domhnal mhac Aodh mhic Ainmhire, who died in the year of Christ 642.
not only demonstrates by a very special Instance, That custom of blazoning Arms
to have been among the Irish in this Monarchs Reign very common, but farther
says, It had been so in all Ages before, among their Ancestors, ever since the
days of Gathelus himself, who derived it from the Israelites at the time of
their passing the Red Sea, when each of the Tribes had its own peculiar Ensign
carried before. But to return to my purpose:

The Sixth and Last of those particulars (of Keting's Preface) I would acquaint
you with, is That, being his whole History for the matter, is only of the
Ancient Irish Nation, if any Reader shall perhaps apprehend his Relations, or
commendations or praises of them any where, or in any point, or as to any
matter or Times, excessive: he desires it be considered, That the Author is no
Irish man by blood, but English, though born in Ireland. And therefore cannot
rationally be supposed to magnify the Old Irish, or speak more excellent
things of 'em, than the very force of Truth and duty of a Historian exacts from
him. Besides he had immediately before, in the same Place, declared, That
neither love nor hatred of any People, nor hope of any kind of Reward on Earth,
made him either go through with, or indeed at first undergo any part of the
toil of so laborious a Work, but only those other considerations given before.
But what his reason was only to write it in Irish; I cannot tell. Unless it be,
That he would not swerve from the custom of that Nation, while they were a free
People before the English Conquest, of transmitting the Authentic Records or
public Acts and Monuments of their Kingdom to after Ages in their own Language
only. Which as I conceive, is the true reason why so little of them has ever
yet been known elsewhere in the World. However you have by this time a
sufficient account of Keting, the Author I am mostly guided by in the whole
Former Part of my Prospect, or (which is the same thing) in my Discourses of
the State of Ireland till the beginning of the English Conquest in the year of
Christ, 1172.

I had almost forgotten to prevent your prejudice against Keting's History,
from his relating about the beginning of it, those three unlikely Stories. 1.
How Seth the Son of Adam, and three daughters of Cain in a Company together
landed in, and viewed all Ireland over. 2. How last year before the Deluge
three Fishermen of South-Spain, by name Laigne, Capa, and Luasad, had been
Wind-driven thither, etc. 3. How Keasar, the daughter of Baioth son to Noah,
with three men, viz. Fionntuin, Lothra, and her said Father, and fifty Women,
to save themselves from the Flood, which from Noah they had heard of as
impending, after they had first by her advice renounced the God of Noah, taken
to themselves an Idol God, which the Irish in their Language call Laimbh Dhia,
and then wandered for seven years by Sea, at last arrived in Ireland, just forty
days before the Flood, and there nevertheless perished by it. And indeed I must
confess that Keting relates these Stories at large, with all their other
circumstances. But how or why does he relate'em? It is manifest he does it, of
set purpose to explode 'em every one as incredible, and mere Poetical Fictions.
For so himself expressly says. Adding withal* that such only and no other was
the repute they had in the very days of Yore among the best Irish Antiquaries.
And for this he brings sufficient proofs, by alleging their own words.

Gratianus Lucius is the next Author I make frequent use of to lead me in
several remote affairs of the more Ancient Irish. And he likewise an Irish man
by birth; but of the Province of Connaght, and (as himself professes) by name
and blood of English Extraction. His own proper name and surname, John Lynch:
his Function, Sacerdotal, and of the Secular Clergy too. His employ besides at
Galway, for some years in our own time, was Teaching a School of Humanity, (as
they call it) wherein he was excellent. In the differences between the Roman
Catholic Confederates in the late unhappy War of that Nation, he joined with
those of them that were against the Nuncio Rinuccini's Censures, for the
Cessation with Inchiquin, submission to the King, and the two Peaces. After the
surrender of Galway to the English Parliament Army he went to France. Where,
employing his time as became a good Patriot and Loyal Subject, he wrote,
printed and published two Latin Books in Quarto, with a Dedicatory Epistle to
the Congregation of Cardinals de Propaganda Fide, against a Factious disloyal
Manuscript which one Richard Ferral an Irish Capuccin* had some years before
written and presented to the same Congregation, as a Direction for them in
their government of the Church affairs of Ireland: the former entitled
Alithinologia; the Later, Supplementum Alithinologiae. Some years after, that
is an. 1662. he published under the name of Gratianus Lucius an other Latin
Work in Folio, entitled Cambrensis Eversus, as being a full confutation of the
Author that goes by the name of Cambrensis.

Who this Cambrensis, and what the Quarrel was, to let you know* if I digress a
little, it may peradventure be worth the while. His proper name and surname in
English being Gerald Barry, that Additional of Cambrensis he had from his
native Country, in Latin Cambria, in English Wales. His education of a
Scholar, profession of a Divine, Function of a Priest, and (as I must suppose)
merits in all brought him in time to be not only Archdeacon of S. David's, but
Tutor to the young Earl of Mortaign Fifth Son to Henry II. Under which
Qualifications, first his zeal for the old Archiepiscopal privileges of that
See engaged him in a long Contest with the Sea of Canterbury, and then his
Election to the same See of S. David's, involved him in another. In so much,
that however he came to be worsted in both (for so he was) yet his name has
ever since remained on Record in the Papal Canons. His extraction made him
Nephew to Robert fitz Stephens and Maurice fitz Gerald, Cousin to Meylerus, and
Brother to Philip Barry and Robert Barry, five of the first chief men that
adventured to Ireland of purpose to advance their own fortune by helping on the
Restoration of Diarmuid na Ngall King of Leinster. His own Genius once, and
once more his Place carried him to Ireland. For twice he was there: first to
see his kinsmen daily acquiring large possessions by their valor: and next to
wait on his young Prince Earl John, when created Lord of Ireland, and sent
thither by the King. And now, as himself confesses, being desirous of glory and
immortal fame by describing Ireland, and informing the World not only of what
he knew of the State of that Kingdom then under the English Conquerors, but of
all former Conquests, and State thereof from the beginning, he wrote to this
purpose five Books in Latin. The first three of 'em under the Title of The
Topography of Ireland, and the other two under that of The Conquest of Ireland
by Henry II. Indeed more specious Titles both, than his Relations under them do
so much as meanly answer. Besides, that the Title at least of Topography must
be very strangely applied to signify the Description of a whole Kingdom. And
yet notwitstanding, This, together with the History of all former Conquests and
other Antiquities of Ireland, is that which he promises to give under the same
Title* That he has very ill performed, that he has given his Reader's nothing
less than such a History or such a Description* we must not wonder. He neither
could understand the Language, nor so much as read the Books whether of History
or Chorography written at large by the Natives themselves in their own
Character. He saw not in any manner, nor traveled, nor viewed even at a
distance, above one Third of the Kingdom, nor dared for his Life venture into
either of the other two parts. His whole stay in Ireland, being the whole
extent of Yime employed by him in gathering materials for his intended Work*
was but a year and a half; besides an other half years task* which he had left
to his Companion Bertram Verdon, who therefore stayed so long behind him. His
Collections, at least for such part of 'em as any way pertinently related to
his foresaid promise, or Titles, were certainly extreme little; but the rest of
them, no less extreme bad, and commonly false to boot. They were so little,
that he describes not so much as one County, or Tract, or Town, no not of that
very third Part of the Kingdom which he might have seen. Unless peradventure
you take for a Description of all Ireland, his Fabulous Narrations of four
Wells, three Islands, three Lakes, the Fountain head of four great Rivers, and
the Fall of the greatest of them all, by name the River of Shannon, into the
Northern Sea. Tho it be well known, That as all these Narrations are such, i.
^. mere Fables: so the one moiety of these Lakes, Wells, Islands, besides the
Head-spring of Shannon, are within those other parts of Ireland, which he never
saw nor durst enter.

As for the History of the former Inhabitants, Conquests, and other Antiquities
of that Kingdom, promised by him, it is in like manner not only so imperfect,
but so little in all respects: That 1. he has not the least mention of
Tuatha-De-Danainn, though a powerful People that by a bloody War entirely won
it from Feara-Bolg, and were possessors of it for a hundred ninty seven Years
under the successive Reigns of seven (or rather indeed Nine) Kings of their
own: that is, until they also in their turn were conquered by the Clanna
Mileadh about Thirteen hundred years before the Birth of Christ. 2. Of those
Clanna Mileadh or Descendents from Milesius, though they were the People that
continued the Possession and Government of Ireland ever since, about 2500
years, to this very Authors days; yet all the account he gives is only in
short, that they had a hundred eighty one Monarchs, ruling successively over
that Kingdom; but not a word more of their History, Polity, Laws, Conquests
abroad, Militia, or Wars at home* may, not so much as a bare Catalogue of those
very Monarchs; for he names only the first and last of (...); being
Feidlimidius, whom he mistakes for one more, was not King of Ireland, but of
Mounster only. So little he has of the very Milesians, or their Antiquities or
Actions. Except only, 1. A few words of the six Sons of Muredus, Provincial
King of Ulster, entering Scotland. 2. A slender touch upon the Danish Invasions
of Ireland. In which notwithstanding, he is mightily out, both as to the Year
of Christ he fixes on for the first of those Invasions, viz. 838. and as to the
name, person, feats, yea and Nation too of Gurmundus, all being mere Fictions,
borrowed mostly from Galfridus Monumethensis. However, with such, and many more
idle stories in other matters not only impertinent to the Title of his Books,
or discharge of his Promise, nor only not had from any Records or Writings
whatsoever, as neither from the oral Testimony of men of knowledge or integrity;
but wholly derived from old Wive's Tales, and pastime of Ferry-men, and random
reports of Soldiers, and imposture of some Knaves who feigned things of purpose
to impose on his vain credulity: and besides, with most vile reflections,
Invectives, Satyrs almost every where against the Irish Nation of his own time,
their Princes, Priests and People generally, without sparing any degree, not
even the very Monks, nor even the very Bishops excepted, he patched up and
finished at last, after five years study, all his foresaid five Books of
Ireland: prefixing Dedicatories of some to the King, as of other of 'em to
Richard Earl of Poictou, who soon after was Richard I. of England

And now, putting an extraordinary value on these Works of his own, and no
longer able to conceal his ambitious design of glory by 'em, he goes to Oxford:
renews the ancient Roman Rehearsals there, in the most public Audience could
be had: continues 'em three days together, from morning till night; allowing a
day for each of his Topographical Books. And to make his Comedy the more
solemn, feasts all the meaner sort of that whole City, on the firstday: on the
second all the Doctors, Masters and chief Scholars of the University: on the
third day, the rest of the Scholars, the Soldiers too and all the Burgesses of
that Place. A sumptuous and noble act, says Gerald himself glorying of it,
whereby the ancient Custom of Poets was renewed, which neither the present Age,
nor any former could show in England. But after all, he came short of his
expectation of glory. His little performance, and great ignorance, his many
Fables and evil choice of other materials to^, yea and his mortal enmity,
hatred, malevolence to the Irish Nation were seen through, especially at Court;
where, as himself complains, he had too many back Friends to malign him. Above
all, his Satyrs and spleen against the very name of the Irish laid him open.
Nor were the true causes thereof unknown. Besides the common concern he had in
the destruction of that People for the sake of his Kinsmen, there was another
more peculiar to himself that continually egged him to the greatest violence
against them. He had even for his own sake very deeply engaged in a particular
controversy with Albinus O Molloy a Cistercian Irish Monk and Abbot of
Baltinglass, wherein he was worsted. Whether any other causes moved him, I do
not know. But this I know, that in his Second Book of the Conquest of Ireland,
he desired, that whole Nation might either be thoroughly weakened, or totally
destroyed; yea notwithstanding the Peace but lately concluded, and still
observed by them. And that besides, in the same Book cap. 36. he prescribed the
ways to do it. I see also that on every occasion as he is perpetually in the
greatest extremes even of Romantic praises of his own Relatives, Fitz Stephens,
Fitz Gerald, Meyler, the two Barrys, and all their British Soldiers too, his
own Contrymen: so, of the other side, upon the least pique he is no less
passionately excessive in charging with and exaggerating the vilest things
against the very Normans and English in Ireland, tho embarked in the save
public quarrel with them against the Irish Nation. Witness, among others,
Herveus de Monte Marisco, and William Fitz Adelm the King's Lieutenant, and
Progenitor of the noble Family of Bourks in that Kingdom. Nay witness the King
himself Henry II. Whom although, during his Life, this Author made the Occidental
Alexander, the Invincible, the Solomon of his own Time, the most Pious of
Princes, and his only Fame (tho far short of his Merits) to have repressed the
fury of all the very Gentiles of Europe, and Asia too beyond the Mediterranean
Sea: adding many more Hyperbolical expressions to magnify him above all truth
and reason; as for example, That his Victo^^^^ (...) with the Circumference of
the Earth* and That if you seek after the Limits of his Conquests you shall
sooner come to the end of the World than of them: yet after this Great Prince's
death (as David Powel very particularly observes) he, the same Author Gerald of
Wales, most bitterly invey'd against him, in his Book de Instructione
Principis; where he so bel^bed forth the venom of his malevolence, that he
manifestly discovered his old inveterate hatred of this King Henry. So says
Powell. Moreover, and in reference particularly to his stories of Ireland, you
may find in Primat Ushers Sylloge (page 155.) how the expostulations of other
men and evidence of Truth compelled him at last to several Retractations: among
which he confesses, that although he had some of his Relations from persons of
credit in that Country; yet for the rest he had only common report and fame.
Which if I be not mistaken is in effect to acknowledge, that he had common Lies,
and Forgeries to authorize them. Nay further, You may read Sir James Wares
Censure of them in his own Antiquities of Ireland cap. 23. where in express
terms he says in Latin. That Gerald of Wales in his Topography of Ireland has
heaped together so many Fabulous Relations, that to discuss them exactly would
require a just Treatise. And then adds, in the same place, his own wonder, How
it should come to pass, that some of this very Age, tho otherwise grave and
learned men, have again for Truths obtruded on the World those Fictions of
Girald* Besides, You are to know, that notwithstanding so many just exceptions
against those Books of Cambrensis: yea notwithstanding they had therefore lain
after his death 400 years neglected, obscure, unknown, till Cambden had them
printed at Francford an. 1602. yet ever since that year, they have proved the
only chief warrant to all such men of little reading as were delighted in
writing ill of the ancient Irish. To conclude; what I would say on the whole
is, That if hatred, enmity, open professed hostility, and special interest and
actual engagement too in the destruction of that ancient Irish Nation: if
ignorance of their Language, and wilful passing by their History, even the most
authentic of their Records: if no knowledge at least of two Thirds of their
Country: if hunting, collecting, and hudling together the vainest and falsest
and most ridiculous hearsay stories, and this forsooth of purpose to gain
immortal fame by telling stupendous things not heard before: if Satyrs of the
people in general, so virulent and frequent, that in very deed the publishing
of 'em may be justly suspected to have been at least a great part of the
Authors chief design: if a licentious humor and immoderate passion
transporting him to the strangest exorbitancy either of praises or dispraises,
or flatteries or injuries, as he stood affected, in writing even of his own
Party, and his own King for company among 'em: if his acknowledgment in Usher,
and the Censure of him by Sir James Ware: in a word, if so many excellent
Qualifications as are enumerated here, can render him an Author of Credit, or
to be followed or believed in any passage of his foresaid Books that is to any
degree of prejudice either against the Irish Nation, or contrary to their
Chronicles, or vain or exotic in it self, and not warranted by better
authority than his only word: I say, that if the matter be so indeed, then for
my own part I must be of opinion, that no Author at all, how idle, or vain, or
unwarrantable, or incredible, or false, or injurious, reproachful and satirical
soever his Relations of any People or Country are, is to be rejected. Tho in
all contingencies, it must be also confessed, that wherever Cambrensis has
delivered any thing to the advantage, renown, or credit of the Irish Nation,
his testimony is doubtless above all exception for so much. For the confession
of an Adversary is valid in all Tribunals: and both Bodin and Reason requires
it should be so in History.

Thus having sufficiently informed you both of Cambrensis and the true original
grounds of the Quarrel of Gratianus Lucius to him: I return to the finishing my
account of Lucius himself. And this I shall dispatch by a little farther
addition, first of those more special considerations that put him on writing
his Cambrensis Eversus, and then of his performance therein. Those himself
gives at large; but I shall contract 'em. 1. He had often considered, that
although soon after the coming out of Cambrensis in Germany from the Press, two
Learned Irish Gentlemen, Richard White a Jesuit, and Philip O Suillevan a
Soldier, to undeceive the World, and right their injured Nation, had most
exactly and convincingly written, each of them at large, against his
impostures; yet through ill fortune their several Books on that subject were
lost, and no body since had put Pen to paper to retrive this loss. 2. By daily
conversation among Foreigners, he had found, That because in so many years
since that Francford Edition of Cambrensis, nothing appeared against him in
Print, his very vilest Relations of Ireland were taken for confessedly true. 3.
Having read a great number of Books, and he thinks all whatsoever written of
that Kingdom by English and other British Authors; and observing how as many
of 'em at least as came out since the change of Religion, were so unjust to the
Irish Nation, that amongst all there was not so much as any one Individual, who
does not either report Fictions, or conceal Truths, or exaggerate the bad, or
extenuate the good Things of that People: he considered at last, that Giraldus
Cambrensis was their first pattern. 4. And which to him was more grievous yet,
he considered, that ever since the aforesaid German Edition, there was not a
Book written, nor a Cosmographical or Geographical Table drawn, there was not
(I mean) a Map, or a Card (as they are called) describing the customs or
manners of Nations come forth in any part of Europe, which was not replenished
with ugly base reflections on the Irish. In so much, that in all Countries and
Languages they were on all occasions become a Fable to the Vulgar, and object
of scorn to others.

These were the considerations that prevailed with Lucius to exert his zeal for
Truth and Love to his Country, in taking all the foresaid Books of Cambrensis
to pieces; laying open the most material of his Errors and Calumnies; (for it
had been endless to pursue him in the more immaterial) convincing him every
where; and therefore, when he had finished his Work, publishing it for the
satisfaction of Europe in Latin, under the Title of Cambrensis Eversus, which
may be Englished The Cambrian overthrown. How justly it deserves this name,
others may judge, seeing the Book is extant, and has been since the year 1622.
when it was printed. For my own part, I can do no less than acknowledge what I
think of it my self: which is, That the Author shows himself very conversant in
those Letters we call Polite. That above all, for knowledge in History both
Domestic and Foreign, Sacred and Profane, he appears excellently well qualified
to write on the Subject he undertook. That every where, and whatever matter is
treated, he is very exact in quoting his Authors: and where the allegation must
depend on Irish Books or Writers, he never omits to give 'em by name in the
Margin: among which are the Annals of Inis Fail, the Common Annals, the Annals
of Anonimus, the Annals of Tigernacus, the Continuer of Tigernacus, the Books
of Reigns, O Duuegan, O Donel, Colgan, Philip O Suillevan, Peter Lombard Archb.
of Ardmagh, Keting, Primat Usher, Sir James Ware. That in a word, his
performances in this Book against Cambrensis are accurate, absolute, full: and
therefore not unworthy the Dedication they bear prefixed to the Sacred Majesty
of Charles II. of Great Britain our gracious King. I say against Cambrensis.
Because I do abstract wholly from his occasional or incidental Reflections any
where on the State of Ireland since the Year 1640. To deliver my thoughts of
them, is no part of my business here. What more, concerning Lucius, must be
directly to the purpose of this place, is to let you understand, that although
Cambrensis Eversus be not a History of Ireland: yet because it is in many
places fraught with choice Collections out of the Irish Antiquities: and in the
VIII. Chapter occasionally gives, together with a Catalogue of all the Monarchs
of Ireland under the several Conquests, even from Slanius the first of them, a
brief account of their Reigns, and Years of the World, or Christ respectively,
when each King began and finished his Reign: therefore, next to Keting, I have
made the greatest use of him, in the Former Part; tho no where before, page
130. for till I came so far I had him not. And out of him particularly it is,
That in some places I add to such or such Monarchs the Year of the World, or of
our Savior Christ's Incarnation. Now what Computation is followed by him, in
giving the former Years, I mean those of the World, albeit he does not himself
expressly inform us, we may notwithstanding most certainly know by his fixing
the Birth of Christ in the Year of the World 5199. as he does in his Reign of
the Irish Monarch Criomthan Niadhnair (whom he calls in Latin Criomthanius
Niadhnarius.) Whereby it is evident, he follows the computation of Eusebius;
holding therein with the generality of the Irish Chronologers, and consequently
differing in so much from Keting: as he does also differ from him, and hold
with the same generality, as to the length of Reign or Life attributed to the
two Monarchs Cobhthach Caolbhreag, Siorna Saoghallach, and some others. In
other matters treated by him in his Cambrensis Eversus, he seldom varies from
Keting, otherwise than by addition of more particulars. So you have at last my
whole Account, and I hope a sufficient one of these two Authors, whom I must
acknowledge to have been my only chief Directors, for what concerns those Irish
Affairs, treated of in the Former Part of this Prospect. I say my only chief
Directors, etc. For,

I am to inform you now a little farther, That as to other matters, and some
Irish too, whether purposely or occasionally discoursed, I have not seldom in
the same Former Part, especially in the V. and VI. Section, made use of my own
reading and Collections out of other Authors, some Ancient, and some Modern. As
for example, out of Tacitus, and the Augustan History Writers, and Venerable Bede, and Cambrensis, and Polychronicon, I have borrowed some things: out of
Roderic of Toledo, and Polidore Virgil, Harpsfield, Bodin, William Camden, and
Buchanan, other: out of S. Bernard, the far greater part of my whole discourse
of Malachias: out of a French Anonimous Author in Messingham, and Sir James
Ware's Book de Praesulibus Hiberniae, what I write of Laurase O Tuathail,
otherwise called (in Latin) Laurentius Dubliniensis: out of Rabanus, Jonas
Abbas, Odericus Vitalis Angligena, Notkerus and Spondanus, those matters you
find related by me of Columbanus, Gallus; and their Associats: besides diverse
other things out of other Authors. And these and those are commonly quoted
where I make use of them: although sometimes they are not because both Margins
being so narrow, and Pages so little; as you see they are, I thought it
unfitting to crowd them with quotations.

From the Learned Cambden I seldom recede, tho almost as seldom made use of by
me in the same Former Part. But the acknowledged either purity, or elegancy of
Buchanan's style makes me no admirer of his skill in the Antiquities of that
Nation he writes of. Much less can I esteem Hector Boethius in his writing at
random of those matters what he had never had but from errant Impostors, or
certainly himself had forged. And this (without question) even contrary to what
he had found written by that Irish great Furtherer of his, whose name was
Cornelius Historicus, and his Work entitled Chronicon multarum rerum; I mean,
if this Cornelius was indeed no less by education in the Country, and knowledge
in the Language than by birth an Irish man, and withal so learned as D. Hanmer,
page 193. (out of Bale and Stanihurst) represents him to have been under Henry
III. of England, about the Year of Christ 1230. that is, about 200 years before
Boethius had written his History of Scotland.

Of Hanmer, or Campion either (though each of them entitles his own Work, The
History of Ireland: nay each of 'em ventures on deducing his Narration from
almost the very beginning of times after the Flood.) I scarce make mention,
but, once or twice where the Subject or leads or forces me to oppose their
great mistakes. Which certainly are very numerous in both, especially in
Hanmers Work, as this is by much the larger of the two; Campion's being only a
little extemporary Piece, written by him in ten Weeks time, as himself
confesses in his Dedication thereof 27 May 1571. To this year Camplon brought
his History. But Hanmer deduced his Chronicle (for so he calls it) no further
than to the year 1286. I suppose he intended to bring it to his own time, had
he not been prevented by death, which seized him at Dublin, where he died of
the Plague, Anno 1064.
to Robert Earl of Leicester. Nor must we much wonder, it should be either so
brief, or so faulty: seeing we have his own, farther acknowledgment in his
Preface to the Reader, That he had never so much as seen any of those Irish
Books that treat of matters that happened before the English Conquest, much
less could have any person to interpret them. A greater cause of admiration,
Doctor Meredith Hanmer has given us by making his Chronicle of Ireland so
large, and yet giving every whit as little of the true Antiquities of Ireland
for those times preceding the same English Conquest as Campion before him had,
even a few scraps out of Cambrensis; but many more additional mere stories from
himself, wherever he had 'em. Among which stories however, I do not rank his
pious Relations of several Irish Saints, which take up above 20 leaves of his
Chronicle. That is, from p. 33. to p. 104.

But for Edmund Spencer, in his Dialogue bebetween Irenaeus and Eudoxus (bound
up in the same Volume, as it was at first published in print together with the
two former Books of Campion and Hanmer at Dublin, an. 1635. by Sir James Ware,)
I had (...) little occasion to quote him* as I could have no other exception
against him, than what is common to Hanmer and Campion too. Save only those two
Particulars (in his 33 and 46 Page.) whereof Keting has taken special notice
before me, viz. 1. The two Saxon Kings, Egfrid the Northumbrian, and Edgar of
England, to have had the Kingdom of Ireland in subjection. (...). That the
large spread Irish Families or ^epts of the Birns, Tools, and Cauanaghs in the
Province of Leinster, were originally British; and those other of the Mac
Swines, Mac Mahoons, and Mac Shehies in the Province of Mounster no less
originally English. In both Particulars how mightily Spencer is out, and
without any support either from History or Criticism, Keting in his Preface,
has very sufficiently, if not abundantly shown. And therefore I will say no
more of Spencer, than that although in writing his Faerie Queen he had the
right of a Poet to fancy any thing; nevertheless, in the Historical part of his
Dialogue (written by him, anno 1599.) he should have followed other Rules. I
say Historical part, etc. For I am willing to acknowledge, that where he pursued
the Political main design of this Dialogue, which was to prescribe the ways and
means to reduce Ireland (a design well becoming him as being Secretary to
Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton and Deputy of Ireland under Q. Elizabeth) none could
surpass him: no man could except against him, save only those that would not be
reduced. But I digress again. For my purpose here in mentioning Spencer, should
only have been to tell you, that in all my Former Part I quote him but once.
Unto which if I add in the last place, what I had almost forgotten, That I have
more than once or twice either, quoted Geoffrey of Monmouth himself: I hope no
man will be scandalized that considers, besides the occasion, what use I make
of him. Nay I do persuade my self, That to see Former Part from page 3 5. to
page 347. And again p. 363, 364, 369.
in five or six leaves of this little Form, a pretty just Abridgment of his
famed Work, i. e. his Seven Books of the ancient History of Great Britain, or
supposed Posterity of Brutus, cannot be displeasing to those who never saw nor
knew where to find the Author himself, or his History at large, nor perhaps,
were it lying by them, and in their own Language too, would have the patience
to read it over.

And now, That I gave given what I would say (in this Place) concerning any of
those other Authors, whom besides Keting and Lucius, I either follow, or
examine, or even utterly reject in the Former Part of my Prospect: there
remains but little more to be Prefac'd to it. For to the Latter Part I shall
therefore prefix an other Preface; but one by so much the shorter, by how much
it must be proper to that Part alone. In which other Preface I mean to observe
the same Method I have in this; by giving an account of the Writers, who shall
direct me in that Later Part: and how, and the reasons why I must therein be
guided partly by some of those very men, whose testimonials in other matters, I
slight in the Former.

What more I would give for Preface here to the same Former Part only, are
these Particulars. 1. That wheresoever I annex to any of those Irish Monarchs,
treated of by me, Capital or other Letters or Figures of Numbers, whereby I
would signify what rank they held* in their Catalogue; for example, whether of
the Tenth, or Twentieth, or so forth: there I related only to the Catalogue of
Milesian Monarchs; not to any other containing both Milesian, and the other 18.
Monarchs of the several Conquests that preceded theirs. 2. That although I have
endeavored with all diligence to extract in order those Milesian Monarchs out
of Ketings voluminous History, which no where adds to any of 'em the number, i.
e. any such Letters, Figures, or Words importing it: after all I cannot be sure
I have not mistaken, and this perhaps more than once, in adding my numbers. But
the best on it is, that the error, if any such be, is not material. 3. That
where I speak of 2988 years, or sometimes of a year, or a few years more or
less from the first of the Milesian Conquest: in all such places I follow the
Account of Keting. Who to reduce the Irish Chronology to an agreement not only
with his own Computation of the years of the World, but with the Relation also
of Cambrensis and Polychronicon (where they tell us, of the Milesians having
conquered that Kingdom 1800 years before S. Patric's death) purposely cut off
of the Reigns of several of their Kings, so many years as make in all 491. But
elsewhere, that is, p. 496, etc. and in the Catalogue, I have strictly followed
Gratianus Lucius (and consequently the Irish Book of Reigns) as to the number
of years the Milesian Kings reigned, or Kingdom lasted. 4. That for want of
Irish Books or Antiquaries to consult with, I confess it remains a difficulty
with me still, How the six Sons of the Ulster K. Muredus, as Cambrensis calls
him in Latin, who in Irish is called Muiridhach by Keting, even those very six
famous Brothers that invaded T^ath-Chruthnigh (for so the Irish by a proper
name in their Language called the Country of the Picts, which now we call
Scotland.) How I say those very six Brothers go sometimes by the name of the
Six Sons of Muiridhach, and sometimes again by that of the Six Sons of Eirck.
Unless peradventure the same person had those two names of Muiridhach and
Eirck: or that Keting derived their being the Sons of Muredus from Girald of
Wales only. 5. That if any where in these Discourses of Ireland you meet with
some Relations either of Miracles above Nature, or Antiquities hard to believe:
I must beg that you will notwithstanding be so just as at least to believe, I
have no design to impose either upon your reason or upon your freedom. 6. That
besides, it will be no more than Justice requires of you, to persuade your
self, That no Relatour of matters so far beyond our ken is accountable for his
own belief or disbelief of them, much less for their objective truth or untruth
( being or not being) in themselves. Provided he relates no impossibilities,
nor absurdities, nor contradictions of all other Histories that are esteemed
true; nor any thing whatsoever out of other Records than Authentic, or other
Authors than Classick, or at least other than such as have been among their own
People reputed men of Probity and Reason, and acknowledged so in such matters
as they write of. 7. That I have commonly chosen to give the Irish proper Names
and Surnames, though not in Irish Characters, yet in such Italick Letters as
answer them: because by having them so, the Reader may be much better assured,
that he sees before him the true genuine names, whether he can pronounce them
rightly, or not, than he could be* if according to the custom of others, I had
transformed 'em into the English or Latin, either syllables or terminations.
And yet withal, my Copy of Keting being very bad in many places* and which I do
willingly acknowledge my own skill to correct the Irish Orthography of it very
small: I must in reason suspect my performance in this matter. But neither can
the Errors herein be either material or any way considerable. 8. That I
confess I have taken a quite contrary course to the late British Writers, in
magnifying, so far as good Authority did warrant me, the Ancient Irish Nation:
which they, a man would think, made it their business to lessen and vilify all
they could. But nevertheless, I doubt not, all judicious impartial men will
acknowledge; how much more it must redound to the honor of the English Nation,
to have conquered an ancient, civil, warlike, brave People in the days of Yore,
than such an obscure, barbarous, vile, hideous generation of men as partly the
Cambrian Author, partly others that followed the pattern left by him represent
those Old Inhabitants of Ireland in their time. Besides, if without any
relation to others, but on the naked sole contemplation of some excellencies in
that ancient People I have suffered some transport, who can blame me? None, I
believe, that considers attentively the import and consequence of this Saying
of the Roman Sage, though delivered by him on an other subject. Some acts of
Liberality, some of Humanity, some of Fortitude had astonished us: and we began
to admire them as perfect, Under 'em lay many vices, which the appearance and
splendour of some conspicuous Fact did conceal: and these we dissembled. Nature
bids us magnify deeds that are commendable. None but has extolled the glorious
beyond truth. So said Lucius Annaeus Seneca (in his one Hundred and Twentieth
Epistle) as rigid a Stoic as he was. And yet I can say for my self this much,
that I have been so far from dissembling in any such kind, where I had
unquestionable Authors to lead me, that I rather fear to have exceeded on this
side, than on that other. 9. That when I had almost finished this Former Part,
I was unexpectedly desired to print before it a Catalogue (tho containing only
the bare Names) of all the Kings that in the succession of so many Conquests,
and many more Ages, for even 3204 years reigned from Slanius the Son of Dela to
the sixth year of Rotheric O Connor the Last of the Irish Race, when Hen. II.
of England was received Lord of Ireland in the year of Christ 1172. And though
I had my self no inclination to it, as apprehending, that since I have not
given any kind of History, great or small, of all their Lives or Reigns, nor
indeed any particular account in any Method* Historical or not Historical, no
not scarce of the Tenth among 'em: it would seem a vanity in me to promise more
by the Frontispiece than the whole Structure is worth: yet after I was
persuaded. So prevalent with me was the esteem I had of his judgment that urged
it: although he gave me no other reason, than that certainly it would prove at
least some satisfaction to all curious Searchers into such remote patterns of
Antiquity. And truly had he or any other given me this occasion before I had
engaged too far in pursuance of the Method taken by me all along: I would have
given another kind of Catalogue. I mean such a one as, together with the Name
of each King, should have had annexed the years of his Reign, the means of his
attaining the Sovoreignty, the manner of his death, whether natural or violent,
some one at least of his most remarkable Kingly Actions, if any such were
recorded of him, the Year of the World or Christ respectively, answering both
the first and last of his Reign: and all this of each in a small number of
Lines: and the whole of all in seven or eight sheets, at most, or thereabouts.
I am sure I might with far less trouble have done it, than the collecting,
digesting, and discoursing on the matters handled in any one, at least in the
sixth Section of this Former Part, have given me. Gratianus Lucius, in his
Eighth Chapter, would have eased me of other care in doing it, than that of
rendering his Catalogue there into English, and in some few places abridging
him, by referring the Reader to those pages of my own where I treat the matter
at large; and in very few places more, by adding somewhat out of Keting, and
then animadverting on both Keting and him. But no easing me in that kind could
hinder the unproportionable swelling of this Former Part, if I should annex to
it such a Catalogue as this. And therefore in stead thereof I give that of bare
Names, which take up but little room. Perhaps hereafter I may give the other
too in a small Treatise bound together with the Later Part. I mean, if that
Later Part can better than this here admit of such a conjunction, without
rendering it self unproportionably thick. However that happen, there needs no
further Preface now.

A Catalogue of the Kings of Ireland; Who, (according to the Irish Book of
Reigns, and Computation particularly of Lucius) Reigned (in all) 3204 Years,
before Henry the II's landing there Anno Christi 1172.
Kings of the Fir-bholgian Conquest, Reigning (in all) 36 Years.
1 Slainghe. 2 Rughruigh. 3 Gann and Geannan, two Brothers. 4 Seanghann. 5
Fiacha Cinn Fionnain. 6 Rionnal. 7 Oidghen. 8 Eoch^dh.
Kings of the Tuatha-De-Danann Conquest, Reigning (in all) 197 Years.
1 Nuadhad Airgidlaimh. 2 Breas. 3 Lugha Lamhfhada. 4 Andaghdha. 5 Dealbbaoith.
6 Fiacha mhac Dealbhaoith. 7 Eachtur, Teachtur, and Ceachtur, surnamed Mac
Coill, Mac Ceacht, and Mac Greine, the three sons of Cearmada.
Kings of the Clanna Mileadh or Milesian Conq. Reigning (in all) 2971 Years.
1 Eibhir Fionn and Erimhon, two Sons of Mileadh, jointly reigning. 2 Erimhon,
singly. 3 Muininne, Luigne, and Laigne, three Sons of Erimhon. 4 Iriall Faidh.
5 Ear, Orba, Fearon and Feargna, Four Brothers, Sons to Eibhir Fionn. 6
Ethriall, mhac Iriall Faidh. 7 Conmh^^l. 8 Tighearnmhais. 9 Eochodh I.
Eadghathach. 10 Cearmna, and Sohairce, two Brothers. 11 Eochodh II.
Faobharghlas. 12 Fiacha I. Labhranna. 13 Eochodh III. Mumho. 14 Aonghus I.
Ollmhuicidh. 15 Eunna I. Airgtheach. 16 Roitheacthuigh I. mhac Maoin. 17
Seadhna I. mhac Artri. 18 Fiacha II. Fionscothach. 19 Muinemhon. 20 Allerghoid.
21 Ollamh Fodhla. 22 Fionshneachta I. 23 Slanoll. (ach. 24 Geithe Ollghoth- 25
Fiacha III. 26 Bearnghall. 27 Oillioll I. 28 Siorna Saoghalach. 29
Roitheach^huigh II. mhac Roin. 30 Elim I. Ollfionshneachta. 31 Giallchadh. 32
Art I. Imleach. 33 Nuadhad II. Fionnfail. 34 Breasrigh. 35 Eochodh IV. Apthach.
36 Fionn mhac Bratha. 37 Sedhna II. Innarrhuidh. 38 Siomon Breac. 39 Duacha I.
Fionn. 40 Muiriadhach Bolgrach. 41 Eunna II. Dearg. 42 Lughadh I. Jarann. 43
Siorlamha. 44 Eochodh V. Vaircheas. 45 Eochodh VI. Fiadhmhaine, and Conn
Begeaglach, 2 Bro. 46 Lughadh II. Lamhdhearg. 47 Conn Begeaglach, the second
time. 48 Art. II. mhac Lughaidh. 49 Fiacha IV. Tolgrach. 50 Oillioll II. Fionn.
51 Eochodh VII. mhac Oilliolla. 52 Airgiodmhair. 53 Duacha II. Ladhghrach. 54
Lughha III. Laidhe. 55 Aa^dh I. Ruadh. 56 Dithorba. 57 Ciombaoth. 58 Macha, the
Queen. 59 Reachta Rithdhearg. 60 Eoghan Mor. 61 Buchadh. 62 Laoghaire I. Lorc.
63 Cobhthach Caolbhreag. 64 Lauradh Loinnseach. 65 Meilge Molbhthach. 66
Modhehorh. 67 Aonghus II. Ollamh. 68 Jar Ainghleo. 69 Fearchorh. 70 Connla I.
Cruaidhcheallgach. 71 Oillioll III. Cass^hiaclach. 72 Adhamhair Foltchinn. 73
Eochodh VIII. Altleathan. 74 Ferghus I. Fortabhaile. 75 Aonghus III. Tuirmhidh
Teamhrach. 76 Conall I. Columhrach. 77 Niadh Seadhghamhaine. 78 Eunna II.
Aignioch. 79 Criomthann I. Cosgrach. 80 Rughruidh I. mhac Sithrigh. 81
Jodhnambar. 82 Breassal. 83 Lughadh IV. Luighnioch. 84 Conghall II.
Clarigneach. 85 Duach III. Dalltha Deaghniodh. 86 Fachna Fathach. 87 Eochodh
IX. Feidhlioch. 88 Eochodh X. Aimhremh. 89 Eidrisgceoil. 90 Nuadhad II. Neacht.
91 Conair I. Mor. Immediately after the murder of this Conair (surnamed the
Great) committed on him by some Irish Outlaws, but headed (as Keting says) by
Hainchill Keagh, Yon to the King of Britain, there followed, An Interregnum of
five Years: which being over, the Succession was re-assum'd and continued thus:
92 Lughadh V. Sriamhndearg. 93 Conchahhar I. Abhraruadh. 94 Criomthann II.
Niadhnair. 95 Fearadhach I. Fionnfachtuach. 96 Fiacha V. Fionn. 97 Fiacha VI.
Finnolaidh. 98 Cairbre I. Ceanncheit. 99 Feilim I. mhac Conruidh. 100 Tuathal
I. Teachtmhur. 101 Mal. 102 Feilim II. Rachtmhur. 103 Cathaoir Mor. 104 Conn
II. Ceadchathach. 105 Conair II. mhac Moghalaimhe. 106 Art III. Aoinfhir. 107
Lugha VI. alias Mac Con. 108 Fearghus II. Dubhdheadach. 109 Cormuc Ulfhada. 210
Eochodh XI. Gunnat. 111 Cairbre II. Lithfiochair. 112 Fothach I. Airgtheach,
and Fothach II. Cairb theach, two Brothers. 1^3 Fiacha VII. Sraibhtine. 114
Colla Vais. 115 Muireadhach Tireach. 116 Calbhach. 117 Eochodh XII.
Muighmheadhion. 118 Criomthann III. mhac Eochuigh. 119 Niall I. Naoighiallach.
120 Fearadhach II. alias Dathi. Hitherto the Pagan Kings. For, according to
Gratianus Lucius, all that follow were Christians. 121 Laoghaire II. mhac Neill
Naoighialluidh. 122 Oillioll IV. Molt. 123 Lughadh IV. mhac Laoghaire. 124
Muirchiortach I. mhac Ercha. 125 Tuathal II. Maolgharbh. 126 Diarmuidh I. mhac
Fearghussa Ceirbheoil. 127 Fearghus the III. and Domhnall the I* two Brothers.
128 Eochodh XIII. and Baothan I. the former being Nephew, and the later Uncle.
129 Ainmhire. 130 Baothan II. mhac Ninnede. 131 Aodh II. mhac Ainmhire. 132
Aodh III. Slain, and Colman Rimhigh, two Brothers. 133 Aodh IV. Vairidhneach.
134 Maolchoha. 135 Suibhne I. Meann. 136 Domhnall II. mhac Aodh. 137 Conall
III. Ceile, and Ceallach, two Brothers. 138 Blaithmbae, and Diarmuid. II.
Ruainnigh, two Brothers. 149 Seachnasach. 140 Ceannfodl^. 141 Fionneachta II.
Fleadhach. 142 Loinnsioch. 143 Conghall IV. Kinnmhaghair. 144 Fearghal I. mhac
Mhaoilduin. 145 Foghortach. 146 Kinaoth. 147 Flaithbhiortach. 148 Aodh V.
Ollan. 149 Domhnall 3. mhac Murchaidh. 150 Niall II. Frassach. 151 Donnchadh I.
mhac Domhnaill. 152 Aodh VI. Oirnigh. 153 Conchabhar II. mhac Donnchaidh. 154
Niall III. Caille. 155 Maolseachluinn I. mhac Mhaoilruanuidh. 156 Aodh VII.
Finnliath. 157 Flann mhac Sionna. 158 Niall IV. Glundubh. 159 Donnchadh II.
mhac Floinn. 160 Conghallach mhac Mhaoilmhidhe. 161 Dombnall IV. mhac
Muirchiortuidh. 162 Maolseachluinn II. mhac Domhnaill. 163 Brian Boraimh. 164
Maolseachluinn II. restored. 165 Donnchadh III. mhac Briain Bhora imh. 166
Diarmuid III. Mhaoil-na-mbho. 167 Toirrdhealbhach I. mhac Taidhg. 168
Muirchiortach II. mhac Toirrdhealbhuidh, and Domhnal V. mhac Ardghair. 169
Toirrdhealbhach II. Mor O Conchabhair. 170 Muirchiortach III. mhac Neill. 171
Ruairidh II. O Conchabhair.
In the sixth year of this Monarch's Reign, being the year of Christ, 1172.
Henry II. of England, with a Fleet of 400 Sail invaded and landed in Ireland at
Waterford:

Some Observations on, and Inferences from this Catalogue.
TO understand this Catalogue (which I have drawn with all the care and
exactness I could, out of Ketings History at large, and Gratianus Lucius's
VIII. Chapter of his Cambrensis Eversus) be pleased to observe,

1. That the Surnames of such Kings as had any, are given here, in a different
Character from that of their first and proper Names.

2. That to all Kings of the same Proper Name, who had no Surname (I mean any
other second Name, derived from some peculiar quality of Mind, or Body, or
Fortune, as all their Surnames were,) I have likewise for distinction's sake,
in a different Character (besides Figures signifying what place each of 'em
held among the rest, for Example, whither the First, or Second, or so forth
among those of the same Name) I have I say added their Fathers Name also, with
the word Mac (which im ports a Son) before 'em.

3. That the Marginal or First Figures in the head of the Lines, rather
signify the order of Succession, than the number of Kings: because many of the
Lines have two, one of 'em three, and an other four Kings, ruling together in a
joint Sovereignty, at least for some time.

4. That although both Keting and Lucius concur in telling us how the four
Brothers of the Milesian Conquest (numb. 5.) Ear, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna,
sons to Eibhir Fionn (we call him Heber) had in the Third year of the former
joint Sovereignty of the Three sons of Erimhon, (after the death of the First
of these Three) killed in Battle the two surviving Kings Luighne and Laighne;
yet Lucius only (not Keting) has ranked 'em in the Catalogue of Kings; who
notwithstanding confesses, their Reign was but Three months in all, when their
own Cousin German Iriall Faidh (the fourth and youngest son of Erimhon) gave
them Battle at Cuile-Mertha, vanquished and killed 'em all four in that Field.

5. That neither Buchadh (N. 62.) tho told us by Keting to have been the Man
that killed the Monarch Eoghun Mor, is counted by him among the Kings, as who
had had the Sovereign Power only 36 hours, or a day and a half in all. But
Lucius nevertheless inserts him as one of 'em: adding however to his memory
this Motto of the Poet, Vnusque Titan vidit, atque unus dies, stantem, and
cadentem.

6. That in the same manner Diarmuid-Mhaoil na-mo (N. 167.) is laid aside by
Keting; tho not only Lancarnaruensis and Gemiticensis call him King of Ireland;
but Sir James Ware places him in his Catalogue as such. And this very justly
too a man would think; as in the Prospect (Form. P. p. 180.) you may see at
large.

7. That Domhnal mhac Ardghair (N. 169.) is likewise passed over by Keting; yet
not so by Lucius, nor Colganus neither. See the Prospect, F. P. p. 178, etc.

8. That Erimhon, Conn-Begeaglach, and Maolseachluinn II. are each of 'em twice
inserted. The first, Number. 1 and. 2. the second, Number. 46 and 48. the last, N.
193, and 195. whereof the reasons are these. Erimhon had been first only joined
in the Sovereignty with his elder Brother Eibhir Fionn; but after Eibhir had
been killed by him in the Battle of Geassil, he was absolute, as ruling alone.
Conn B^geaglach, though when his Brother and Colleague in the Sovereign Power
was killed, he had been forced to ^ly, and leave the Kingdom to the Victor; yet
after some few years he recovered it again, by killing him. And Maolseachluinn
II. who had been deposed to give place to Briain Boraimh, came to be the second
time King of Ireland after Clantarff Field.

9. That the Irish Historians differ about giving the Title of King of Ireland
to Maolseachluinn II's Successors: some giving it to one; and others, to
another; and some (sometimes) to more than one: but all of 'em generally
calling those Kings that succeeded him, Gafra Sabhrach, as who had assumed the
said Title against the consent of some Provinces. For so Lucius (page 80.) has
observed.

And now that for your better and easier understanding of this Catalogue you
have the necessary Observations: I Will only add one more; which tho unn^cessary
for that end, may notwithstanding give you cause enough towonder, by
considering the general Fate of about Nine Parts of Ten of so many Sovereign
Princes as you see in this whole Catalogue, from Slainghe, the First of the
Fir-bholgian, to Ruaridh, the Last of the Milesian Conquest. For I can assure
you here, that after the greatest diligence I could use to satisfy my self by
taking Notes out of Keting and Lucius both, I find That of so vast a number of
Milesian Kings, not above six and twenty in all had other then violent ends.
Which is three less than what I have elsewhere insinuated the number of such of
them as had natural ends to have been. As for the Fir-bholgian and
Tuath-De-Danann Kings, tho proportionably fewer even of either died violent
deaths; yet of their 18. which was their whole number, fourteen lost their
Lives by the Sword.

But how many, or how few soever you please, of all these and those Kings of
all the Former Conquests ended their days either by the hands of other men, or
some prodigious judgment of Heaven, or means of other extrinsick secondary
Causes, in such manner as rendered their deaths properly violent: the Inferences
out of this Catalogue are plain.

1. That if we count severally each of those Milesian Princes, who jointly, or
in Association with any other, governed as Kings of Ireland: and withal not
count the same Person twice; nor count among 'em either Cairbre I. surnamed
Ccann-cheit, or Feilim I. mhac Conruidh (see Numb. 98. and 99.) as indeed we
ought not, being these Two are the only noted for mere Usurpers, because both
were chosen, one after another, by the Plebeians only, nay and only too to head
their most hideous bloody Rebellion of 25 years continuance, against all the
Royal Line (and as for the former of 'em, viz. Cairbre, he had not so much
pretense of right as to have been either of the Milesian or even Gathelian
Race, but originally a mere Dane:) I say that if we count so, we shall find the
whole number of those Milesian Kings, as it is in this Catalogue, to agree
exactly with that which Cambrensis himself, 500 years since, reported it to
have been. That is, just 181 in all.

2. That counting, together with these Milesians, those ^8. Fir-bholgian and
Tuatha-De-Donann Kings who preceded them: and withal admitting both Cairbre
Ceann-cheit and Feilim mhac Conruidh as Kings of Ireland (for so they really,
tho illegally were in their time; the Former 5 years, till he died a natural
death; and the Later 20. at the expiration of which he was killed in Battle by
Tuathal Teachtmhur:) it must follow that they make in all 201 Kings of Ireland,
while the Former Three Conquests held one after another.

3. That hereunto adding 22 more of the Fourth and Last ( i. e. our English)
Conquest; the whole Number of the Sovereign Princes of Ireland, from Slainghe
to Charles II. must be 223. whereof Three were Queens, Macha, Mary, and
Elizabeth.

A PROSPECT OF The State of Ireland, etc. The Former PART.
SECTION I.
First Planter of Ireland, Ciocal; First Invader, Partholan; then Neimh, and
his four Sons; then Fir-bholg; then Tuatha-De-Danann; and last of all the Eight
Sons of Mileadh. Fights of the former Invaders. Nine of Ferramh Bolg, and Nine
more of Tuatha-De-Danann, ruled as Kings of Ireland. Fir-Bholg divide it into
two parts. Three Septs of these remaining still. The adventures of Mileadh. His
eight Sons conquer Tuatha-De-Danann. How Erimhon came to be sole Monarch of
Ireland. He was the first of 181 Kings of the Milesian Conquest. Eoghun Mor,
620 years after Erimhon, set up the Provincial Kings. Picts first appearing.
They are the first time, and together with them all the Islands of Scotland,
Conquered by Aonghus Ollbuadhach. Many Plantations of the Irish in Scotland.
Niall Naoighiallach's Invasion of that Country: and an other by the six Sons
of Muireadhach. Fergus Mor mhac Ercha made the first-King of Scots; that is, of
the Irish in Scotland. Coilus, King of Great Britain destroyed by him. Three
Walls built by the Romans against the Irish. Kingdom of the Picts (...) by
these. Danish Wars in Ireland. Bad success of Roderic the King of Britain's
Son. The Danes various success. They are at the same time plagued, as by
others, so by Ceallaghane (King of Mounster) most singularly. The Monarch
Conghallach Mhac Mhaoil Mhithe routs 'em^ and kills 7000 of them in Battle.
What of his two next Successors in the Monarchy. Briain Boraimh, does Wonders
in 25 Battles, and last of all in that of Clantarff Field. Maolseachluin, that
succeeded him, and Hughaire mhac Tuathail King of Leinster, destroy the
Reliqnes of the Danes. The vain attempt of Magnus King of Norvegia to revenge
their Fate.

IReland, before that fatal War broke out in the year 1641. had two different
Nations, (like the Twins of Rebecca) struggling in its Womb perpetually, almost
five hundred years; the one called by themselves the Ancient Irish, the other
the Old English, or English Irish. And indeed the former may justly glory in
the Epithet of Ancient: since, as Cambden himself confesses, they fetch
Britannia, translated by Philemon Holland, Edit. Land. Tit. Ireland, page 64.
the beginning of their Histories from the most profound and remote Records of
Antiquity; so that in comparison of them, the Ancientness of all other Nations
is but Novelty, and as it were, a matter of yesterday. It is now at least 2988
years since their Forefathers, the Sons of Mileadh (alias Milesius the
Spaniard) in a Fleet of threescore Sail, arrived in Ireland from Gallicia in
Spain, conquered it, and left it to their Posterity. I say at least: Because,
although Polychronicon, and Cambrensis (Topog. Did. 3. c. 17.) by their
saying, That from the Arrival of those Milesians in Ireland, till the death of
S. Patrick their Apostle, were efflux'd 1800 years. (See Jocelin, Vit. Saucti
Patricii, c. 196.) agree exactly with Ketings Epoch here: yet the Irish Book
of Reigns, makes the Arrival of those Milesians much earlier; that is, (to this
present year of Christ 1680.) even as long since as 3480 years complete. But I
follow Keting's Reformation of that Book, and his Account (in his Mss. History,
l. 1.) whereby he places the Milesian Conquest in the year of the World, 2736.
after the Flood 1086, after Moses's passing the Red Sea, 192. and before the
Birth of Christ (...) 308.

Were it to my main purpose, which is, or only, or at least mostly concerned in
those Milesians, I could insert here, out of Keting, the several Plantations
and Conquests of that Country before they knew it.

How one Ciocal, about a hundred years after the Deluge, in a small Fleet of
Vessels, each Vessel having fifty Men, and fifty Women aboard, arriving there,
was the First that planted it.

How Bartholanus and his three Sons Languinus, Salanus, and Reterugus, with
their Wives; and as This Author lived (as himself writes) An 830. under
Anaraugh, King of Anglesey and Guinech, or North Wales.
Nennius writes, a thousand Fighting Men, about 300 years after the Flood, Anno
Mundi, 1956. before the Birth of Abraham 95 years, invaded it: had many doughty
Battles therein with those Aborigines the Issue of Ciocal, and Progeny of Cham,
who (come thither from Afric) were called Giants, because partly of their
stature or corpulency (which yet was no way exceeding the tallest growth of
other men) and partly of their wickedness, endeavoring to destroy every where
the Descendants or Progeny of Japhet. And how this Bartholanus, alias
Partholan, having Conquered at last those Aborigines, and Affricans, his Issue
after him were, at the end of three hundred years, consumed by a Pestilence;
not one remaining of them. A just judgment from Heaven (without peradventure)
on him, who had fled thither (as it were) from Heaven, for having in his own
Country, in Scythia, killed both his Father and Mother, to make way for a
Brother of his, and their Son, to come to the Royal Throne.

How, in the end of 30 years more, Nemedus, another Scythian (some of the Irish
Chronologists say he was a son to Bartholanus, left by him in Scythia when
himself had departed thence) with his four Sons, Starius, Gervale, Annin, and
Fergus, in a Fleet of 34 Ships, and 30 Mariners in each of them, arriving in
Ireland, overthrew in three Battles the remainder of those Affrican Giants, but
was overcome in the fourth. And how soon after this defeat Nemedus being dead,
his People rousing themselves, put it to the issue of one great Battle, sought
at the same time both by Sea and by Land, they having 30 thousand at Land, and
so many more at Sea: and the Fight proved so mortal, that albeit they had the
victory, yet they could reap no benefit by it; the very Air being so corrupted
by the stench of the Carcasses which lay unburied every where (for they killed
promiscuously in every place after that Victory, Man, Woman, and Child of their
Enemies) that all over the Land there was an universal Pestilence; which after
seven years more made 'em depart and quit the whole Country, leaving only ten
Captains to defend those of their People (that could not have Shipping) against
the remainder of the Gygantick Affricans.

How these Children or Posterity of Nemedus (Clanna Neimheadh, the Irish call
'em) to avoid that dreadful and continual Pestilence, departing in a thousand
Vessels, great and small, under the Conduct of three Chieftains, Simeon Breac,
Ibaath, and Briotan; the other two sailing to Greece, Briotan with his
adherents Landed in the North of that Country, which we now call Scotland:
and, with his and their Posterity remaining there, gave the denomination of
Britain to this whole Island, which is now called Great Britain; as holy
Cormac, the K. of Mounster, and Bishop of Cashel, in his Psalter of Cashel,
together with all the Chronologers of Ireland, affirm. Wherein surely they have
at least much more probability of their side, than any late Authors have, that
derive that name from Brutus, or his Romantic History either in Galfridus, or
in any other. For if from Brutus, besides other reasons, why not Brutannia
rather than Britannia?

How the five sons of Dela, viz. Gandius, Genandius, Segandius, Rutheragus, and
Slanius, being the 8th. Generation from Simeon Breac, and calied in Irish
Fir-bholg. after 217 years complete from the former arrival of Nemedus there,
invaded Ireland with 5000 men of all sorts in their company: and studing no
great resistance, won it entirely, routed utterly out of it the remainder of
that cursed Generation of Cham, the Affrican Giants, and divided it into five
Provinces or Portions; which Division continues till this day. How they, and
four of their Children after them, were in succession Monarchs of all Ireland,
after that Slanius, who was the youngest of them all, had by force and War upon
the rest erected it to a Monarchy; though he enjoyed it but one year, Death
having given him no longer joy of his Conquest over his Brethren. How none
before them, i. e. none of the former Invaders called themselves Kings: they
being the first Kings, and Slanius among them too, as I have now said, the
first Monarch that Ireland ever had. Yet the Reigns of all the nine made not
above 36 years in the whole.

How Eugenius, or Eoghun, as the Irish Books call him (and so they have quite
other terminations, both for all these and all other Names too expressed by us
with Latin terminations) being the last of them, and prosperously Reigning in
peace and plenty over Ireland, the Nation whom the Irish call Tuath-De-Danann,
under their King Nuathad Airgidlaimh, as descending from the foresaid Nemedus,
or Nemeus, or Neimh, (which you please to call him) and therefore claiming that
Kingdom, as their right, invaded it, fought a great Battle in Connaught, with
Feramh-Bolg (the Generation of Simeon Breac, and Neimheadh, or Nemedus) killed
a hundred thousand of them, and thereby, and without much loss to themselves,
conquered the whole kingdom; the Relics of Ferramh-Bolg retiring to the small
Islands of Arrain, I Will, Rachluinn, and many other about Ireland and Scotland,
where they continued till such time as Ireland came to be governed by
Provincial Kings under the Milesians.

How the Posterity of those Relics of Ferraimb Bolg being forced away by the
Picts, had their refuge back again to Ireland: and first to the King of
Leinster, turning Tenants to him for such Lands as he was pleased to let unto
them: and next from Leinster, because of the heavy rent there, to Connaught:
shifting so in the best manner they could for themselves, until by Co-Chulain
and Connall Cearnach, and the Inhabitants of Vlster, they were wholly driven
away the second time, and quite Banished for ever: only three Families,
Sur-names, or Septs of them excepted, which according to the judgment of some
Irish Antiqnaries, remain still in Connaght and Leinster; as Dr. Keting, who
also names these Septs, does write. Adding thereunto this further
animadversion, as a necessary consequence, that these three Families are not of
Clanna Gaoidhel, or Posterity of Gathelus, from whom all the Milesians
descended long before either Milesius himself, or his Predecessors came into
Spain.

Lastly, how according to the Book called Psaltuir Chassil, the aforesaid
Colony, or Nation of Tuatha-De-Danann, held the Sovereignty of Ireland for 197
years, under seven, or rather indeed nine Kings; for after Fiacha, who was the
6th of them, reigned the three Sons of Cearmada by turns, yearly.

But neither to prosecute, nor so much as to insert any of these Plantations or
Conquests of Ireland by Ciocal, or Partholan, or Neimhe, or Feara Bolg, or
Tuatha Dee Danann (as the Irish names of them are) can be much, if any thing at
all, to my main purpose here. And though perhaps it might be in some sort
material to tell you what a famous man in his Generation, nay in a great part
of the World, Milesius himself (otherwise called Galathus in Latin, but in
Irish Galamh) had been. Or to tell you. 1. Of his first adventuring from Spain
to Scythia, and serving there as General of the Army, under his Kinsman
Refloir, the great Monarch of that Country. 2. Of his marrying this Refloir's
Daughter, and Refloir's growing jealous of his greatness, and preparing
therefore to dispatch him, and his preventing the King by taking away his life:
and then his quitting Scythia, and passing to Egypt by Sea, with a Fleet of
sixty Sail, and his being there employed by Pharaoh as General against the King
of Ethiopia's Forces warring at that time on Egypt. 3. Of the many over-throws
given by him to them, and Pharaoh's so great favor to him thereupon, that
seeing him a Widower, (his former Wife, the Scythian Kings Daughter having died
before he came to Egypt) the gave him one of his own Daughters to Wife. 4. Of
his departure from Egypt by Sea, and various adventures for some years, roaming
about all the Northern Seas and Isles of Europe. 5. Of his return at last to
his own Country of Spain, and the five and forty Battles fought there
victoriously by him, and under his conduct by his near Cosins the Children of
Breoghuin (the Son of Bratha, who founded Braganza in Portugal) against the
foreign Enemies that invaded that Kingdom then. 6. Of the destruction and utter
extirpation, at least for a good while, of all those Foreiners out of Spain, by
his Valor and Wisdom: and (which was consequent) of his possessing, by himself
and his foresaid Kinsmen, the greater Part of this Kingdom. 7. Of his two and
thirty Sons, part Legitimat, but the most part Illegitimat. 8. Of the great
Dearth in his time all over Spain, continuing six and twenty years, through want
of Rain. 9. And lastly, how this Dearth, together with several other reasons,
but particularly that, of his minding now the Prophetical Prediction of him by
his own Magitian Cathoir some years before, That his Posterity should settle in
Ireland: made him, and (soon after his death) eight of his Sons think upon
invading Ireland. Tho, I say, these are matters not wholly foreign to my
purpose; yet because they are unnecessary, it suffices to have touched 'em
lightly.

And so I proceed to what I intended, as more material here to let you know.
Which is, 1. That of those 8. Sons of that Great Milesius (for no more of his
two and thirty Sons ventured to Ireland) who presently after their Fathers
death, setting forth from Breoghuin's Tower, a place in Gallicia, long after
called Notium, but of later years Compostella) and putting to Sea with the
first convenience, and landing in Ireland then when the three Sons of Cearmada,
ruled there by turns: and by their great Valor, destroying all three at last
in the Battle of Tailtinn: and thereby subduing thoroughly the whole Nation of
Tuatha-De-Danann: two only (I mean of those eight Brothers) survived to rejoice
in their Conquest finished by that Battle, Eibhir and Erimhon (alias Heber and
Herimon, as the Latins call them:) the other six being lost by various Chances.

2. That Eibhir and Erimhon assuming now the sovereign power of the whole
Island, and after partition made first to themselves, then to their Cousins
German, then to their other Captains, and last of all to the common Soldiers,
of convenient proportions of Land) ruling severally over all (that is, Eibhir
in the Southern, and Erimhon in the Northern Division) the first year in
perfect peace together: and then falling at odds, through the Pride and
instigation of Heber's Wife, that put her Husband upon having all in both
Divisions to himself alone; to the end forsooth, she might sit and strut upon
the three chief Ardes or Heights of Ireland, as the only Queen thereof: and
then coming to a pitched Battle, and Heber killed in it: and then Herimon
remaining the only King, without any Competitor until his death, which happened
fourteen years after: He was the first of a hundred fourscore and one, that as
Monarchs of all Ireland, successively governed it, and the Milesian or Irish
Nation the only possessors of it, for two thousand, four hundred, eighty eight
years, until the landing of Henry the second there in the year of Christ 1172.

3. Cambrensis himself (tho Giraldus Camb. Topog. Hiber. did. 3. c. xv. 17.
36, 37, and 44.
otherwise no great favourer of the Irish) does certify so much, by computing
from Herimon the first King, to Laogirius, (who was King when St. Patrick
landed there, An^ Christi 432. to preach the Gospel) a hundred, thirty and one:
from Laogirius to King Fedlimidius, which contained 400 years of the
flourishing state of Christianity among the Irish, three and thirty more: and
from that period to Ruaridh O Conchabhair, who was the Monarch when Henry II.
landed as before, the whole remainder of that number of a hundred fourscore and
one: who (besides a far greater number of the Provincial Kings under them)
governed, as Sovereign Monarchs* of all that Island for so many Ages, from the
year of the World, 2736. Argument enough I think for the Antiquity of the Irish
Nation, to be no where paralleled, if not peradventure by the Chinese only, in
the late History written of them by Martinus a Martin^s.

4. That for their bravery in Martial Exploits (to say nothing now of a
thousand bloody proofs thereof given by them at home for much above 2000 years,
fighting almost continually, either the Progeny of Heber in general against
Herimon's for the Sovereignty; or one Province, or greater Division, Leath
Cuinn, and Leath Mogh, invading the other, especially after the Provincial
Kings had set up by the Authority of Eoghun Mor or Eugenius Magnus the Monarch,
about 600 years after the death of Herimon: so that very few of their Monarchs
in so large an extent of time died other than violent deaths, and this in
Battle commonly; but to say nothing of these proofs given by them at home)
their manifest Invasions abroad, their Plantations, and at last even total
Conquest of the Kingdom of Albain, that part of Great Britain which in after
Ages came to be called Scotland, from their conquering and planting of it with
Colonies of their Children (for they themselves were in this part of the World,
the original Scots, as their Country now called Ireland, or in Latin Hibernia,
was then the only Country named Scotia) is an argument which cannot be refuted.

5. That the Nation which we call Picts, but the Irish, in their Language,
Cruinith, having in the reign of Herimon, the first Irish Monarch, roam'd about
by Sea from Scythia till they arrived at last in Ireland, and there desiring to
inhabit, and being denied this request, but however directed by Herimon to that
part of the now Great Britain, which lying Northeast of Ireland was called
Albain then, and is so still by the Irish; and here seated themselves, and then
multiplying exceedingly for two hundred and fifty years; at the expiration of
this time, upon some difference happened, Aonghus (or Aenaeas) Ollbhuadhach, the
VII. Monarch of Ireland, succeeding Herimon, made so sharp and long a War upon
them, and not on them only, but as well on the Northern Britains remaining
still their Neighbors, as upon the Inhabitants of the barren Orcades the Race
of Fir Bholg long before expelled Ireland, that in fifty fierce Battles given
them, he utterly broke their whole strength and made them Tributaries.

Nor was this the only Conquest made by the Milesian Irish either on the
Heathen or Christian Picts, and their Associats in Albain. For to pass over
those six or seven Invasions more of the Irish into Albain, under several of
their Monarchs from the Reign of the foresaid Aonghus, or Enaeas, to the Reign
of Niall the Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach. Likewise to say nothing how
this very Niall not only went himself in Person with a powerful Army thither,
partly to confirm, and partly to enlarge those ^^antations made there by his
Predecessors, but was himself the first of Mortals, that by his own Authority,
and at the instance of those Plantations gave the name of Scotia Minor, (or
Scotland the Lesser) to that Northern part of Great Britain, ordaining all his
Subjects to call it so. Besides, to pass by as well the Invasion, as the
extraordinary great and famous Plantation made therein by the six sons of that
Vlster King Muiredbach (whom Cambrensis calls in Latin Muredus) either in the
Time of Lapghaire the II's being Monarch of Ireland, when St. Patrick conquered
that Kingdom to Christian Religion, or at least somewhat later. To pass I say
all these matters in silence, though otherwise both great in themselves, and no
less attested by sufficient Authority: that I think is very great and very
true, which Cambden Title Scots. page 26. and before, page. 128.
in his Britannia writes, That the Scots come from Ireland, after a long War,
at last in the year of Christ 740. and in one great Battle destroyed the Picts
so, as there was scarce one of them left alive; whereby that whole Nation and
very name of the Picts was utterly extinguished.

6. That besides; the Irish Chronicles, without contradiction from any, tell
us, how the foresaid Niall the Great, surnamed Naoighellach from the nine
Hostages taken by him, five from the five Provinces of Ireland, and four from
the Picts and other Inhabitants of Scotland or Albuin, not only made the other
parts of Great Britain, even so far as the South of it, tributary, but with a
mighty Force of Irish, Scots, Picts, and Britons in one Army passed the Sea to
France, landed in Armorica, and marched so far as the River Loyre. Where, being
encamped, hewas treacherously killed by Eochae King of Leinster, whom he had
formerly so punished and plagued, that he forced him to fly even out of all
Ireland, and who therefore studying still revenge, followed him unknown to
France, and finding there an opportunity, took it. For standing one day by
chance on the bank of the foresaid River, and seeing Niall at the same time on
the other Bank, not far off, he bent his Bow presently, and with all his might
letting fly at him, shot him dead in the place by piercing his head through
both scull and brain.

7. That moreover, Fergus the Great, King of all Ireland, as Buchanan calls
him, entered Scotland with a puiffant Army, gave Battle to Coilus King of the
Britons, who invaded both the Picts and Irish Plantations together, fought him,
killed him, overthrew his whole Army, was thereupon himself both declared and
received the first King of the Scottish Nation inhabiting the North of Great
Britain; and after this being gone for Ireland, as he was returning back again
to Scotland, was drowned hard by the Rock, which from his fate before it, has
ever since been called by the Irish Carig-Fherus, now Knock-fergus by the
English: and that all this Rerum Scoticar. l. 1.
happened, says Buchanan, about the time that Alexander the Great entered
Babylon. For albeit the Irish Books agree not with Buchanans relation of this
Fergusius the Great; not either, I say, as to his quality of being King of
Ireland, or as to this time of his Adventure in Scotland, or elsewhere,
mentioning him only as a Brother to Mairchertach Mor mhac Ercha Monarch of
Ireland, and then fixing both his life and death immediately after Saint
Patricks death, that is about 530 years after the Incarnation of our Lord: yet
since they agree with Buchanan in all other material points related by him of
this famous Fergus; especially that of his entering Scotland with a great Army,
being the first King of Scots in Britain: I think the allegation of what they
so agree upon is mightily to purpose.

8. That therefore it is easy to be understood (whatever Cambden's admiration
be) how the Milesian Irish Race were those In his Britannia. Tit. Picts. p. 115.
daring men, that having the assistance of the Picts their Tributaries, and
some few Britons, withdrawn to them for protection from the Roman yoke, drew
forth at one time thirty thousand armed men against Agricola, and gave Severus
the Emperor so much trouble, that of Romans and Associats, he lost in one
expedition against them fifty thousand men. And were yet the men against Dio.
whose incursions into the Roman Province here; first the Fence was built by
Adrian from Edinborough Frith to Cluyd, fourscore miles Spartianus.
in length, the foundation of it being laid deep within the ground of huge
piles or stakes, fastened together like a strong hedge or mound: then the work of
Turff and Earth by Severus across the Island from one Sea to another; then
under Honorius, the Wall of stone running the same extent, eight foot broad,
and twelve foot high: and last of all, the Towers and Bulwarks all along the
Southern Coast of Britain, at convenient distances, raised against their
landing on that side out of their plundering Fleets.

6. That a further argument yet, and such as of all hands must be confessed to
show abundantly their Martial spirit and fortitude in those days of old, was
their brave defense of their own Country at home against the manifold powerful
and almost continual Invasions of it from abroad by the Heathen Danes,
Norvegians, and Easterlings, at least 200 years.

For I pass wholly over those little, short and inconsiderable Invasions of
them, either by Egfrid the Saxon King of Northumberland, in the year 640.
according to Cambden, Britannia Tit. Ireland.
or (rather indeed) by his General Berthus in the year 684. as Beda l. 4. c. 26.
has it; or by some other British Commanders joined with the Picts, at two or
three several times in the seventh Century after Christ. Of none of these do I
take notice, because they signify not much, save only the preying and burning
at two several times and places a part of the Country by the* Seaside, and
three inconsiderable Fights, as they are related in the Irish Books. The first
under the Sovereignty of Blathmhac and Diarmuid Ruannigh, two Brothers ruling
peaceably together as Kings of Ireland; wherein the Saxon King and thirty of
his Nobles were killed, say the Irish Chronicles, without mentioning other
loss, or any at all of the other side. The second under the Sovereignty of
Fionachta Fliadhach: whereof all the account they give is, that Comghusgach
King of the Picts, and a great many of the Irish were slain in it. The third,
after a few years more, under the Monarchy of Loionsiogch mhac Aonghussa,
fought against the men of Vlster by the Brittons, but to their own loss. And
this is all the Irish Chronicles (in Doctor Keting) have of these matters. So
that neither the loss nor Victory signifying much of either side, at least as
to Ireland in general, by any of these Invasions, there was nothing more heard
of them or of the Invaders.

Much less was there ever in any Chronicle or Book that I could see, either in
English, Irish, or Latin, before Cambden's Britannia came forth, any mention
made of Edgar King of England, how puissant soever he was, his having conquered
a great part of Ireland, and Dublin withal, or indeed so much as one foot of
Land there, nay or so much as his having attempted any such thing. And
therefore I take no notice of Cambden's old Charter of King Edgar, wherever he
found it.

And so I do as little of Buchanan's relation, where he writes, that Gregory
the Great, King of Scotland (who began his Reign Anno Christi 875. and ended it
with his life Anno 902.) invaded Ireland with a puissant Army, during the
minority of Donogh King of Ireland, and Tutorship of this young King by Brien
and Conchuair: beat these Tutors in two several great Fights: took Dondalk,
Droghedagh, and Dublin: visited here the young King, assumed his Tutorage to
himself: placed Governors in the strong Towns: received threescore Hostages
for their fidelity: and with them returned victorious to Scotland.

Certainly Ireland never had at any time, since the very beginning (not even
since the first Monarch Slanius, who reigned above three thousand years ago)
any King that was a Minor, as Doctor Keting well observes, and may be seen by
any that reads over in his Chronology and History all the Reigns of the several
Monarchs, who during that vast extent of time successively governed Ireland, or
had the Title to govern as Monarchs there, until it came under the English
Power in the year of Christ 1172. There was not one of them all that came to
the Sovereignty, but either by election of the people, or power of the Sword:
as there was not one in seven but came to it by this latter way, that is, by
killing of his Predecessor, Keting in the life of Brian Borumha.
and this commonly too in Battle. Besides their very fundamental Law of
Tanistry did exclude a Minor. What then must we think, where so many thousands
descended of Heber and Herimon were at hand to claim their Titles, rather than
a Minor should have it?

But to say no more to this feigned Invasion from Scotland, nor any thing,
other than what I have already, of those former true however inconsiderable
ones from elsewhere in Great Britain: and to return back where I was, to the
Invasions both true, and terrible and lasting indeed of the Danes: what I would
say is, that notwithstanding those cruel Heathens had from the year of Christ
820. (when they first invaded Ireland in the Reign of Hugh, in Irish Aodh,
surnamed Ordnighe Monarch of Ireland, and Airtre mhic Caithil Provincial King
of Mounster; and after that year, all along in the Reigns of both that Monarch
and his two Successors Conchauar mhac Donchadha and Niall Caille, as likewise
of Feilimidh mhic Griomthaine, the Latins call him Feidlimidius, successor to
Airtre in the Kingdom of Mounster) in several Fleets, the two first, one after
another, landing in Mounster, the third in the North, the fourth in vibh
Cinsallach in Leinster, fifth, in the Harbor of Limmerick, sixth, of 60 Sail
at the River Boyne, seventh, of forty Sail on the River Liffy, eighth and
ninth, extraordinary great mighty ones at Lough-Foyle in Vlster, poured in
continually from time to time for above forty years together, those almost
incredible Numbers of men, related by Hanmor: yet the Irish fought 'em still,
and foiled 'em too in eight or nine Battles.

And although, being too much overpowred by the continual supplies of new men
coming to their Enemies, who were absolute masters of the Seas; they, after a
tedious cruel and continual War, became at last for some little season
Tributary to their Captain General Turgheise (for so the Irish call him, by us
called Turgesius) who now styled himself King of Ireland; lived in the middle
thereof at Lough Ribh near the place where now Athlone is; had both there and
all over the whole Kingdom in every Province and Country, and almost nook of
it, his Dane-Raths and other Fortifications made, and strong Garrisons planted
in 'em: yet (very soon after the generality of their Princes and people (I say
the generality: for some of them held out still in some inaccessible places of
Rocks and Bogs' and Woods) had so yielded to him) their wisdom and valor
enfranchiz'd them most wonderfully in little above one Months time, by their
utter destruction of this Tyrant and all his Heathen Crew. For upon his lusting
after the beautiful Daughter of Maolsechluin King of Mead, and his desiring
her of her Father to be his Concubine, and the Fathers seeming of purpose to
consent, and then sending her privately at the Night appointed, but attended
with fifteen resolute Youths in Women's attire with short Swords under their
Gowns, and instructions what to do: and then when it was very late at Night,
and all the rest of the leacherous Tyrants great Commanders withdrawn each to
his own Apartment, their seizing him so soon as he began to be rude with her,
and the Armor too of all the rest laid together in one heap on a Table in the
Hall: and then her Fathers rushing in at the same time, and killing all those
Commanders every one when they expected other Company, each one of them one of
the young beautiful Damsels, as the Tyrant had promised them: hereupon, I say,
and upon the word given by Messengers, who were ready of purpose, flying into
all parts, the Irish to a man throughout the Kingdom are presently in Arms,
fall upon the asto^ish'd Danes, attack and carry their Forts, fight their
Troops wherever they embody, rout 'em, kill 'em, and pursue the remainders of
them to their very Ships, getting now away out of the Roads, as Wind and
Weather served 'em. As for Turgesius himself, Maolseachluin, reserved him in
Fetters for a time, and then drowned him at last in Lough-ainme.

So that, after much about forty years bloody, continual and general War at
home in all the Provinces, and several years most miserable and general
thraldom under the yoke of such powerful, barbarous and fell Tyrants, who left
not a Monastery or Church, or Chapel standing where ever they came; who placed
a Lay-heathen Abbot, in every Cloister, and endowed Church to gather the
Revenues; who laid so many times all their Country in Ashes; who no less than
four several times in one Month burnt Ardmagh, the most holy See and
Metropolitan City then of all Ireland; who slew indistinctly for so many years
both Priests and Clerks and Laics, and mean and great, and rich and poor
without mercy; and who at last having subdued the miserable remainder, imposed
those burdens of Bondage on them which were such, that if as to the particulars
they were not attested by all the Irish Chronicles in Dr. Keting, they would
surpass all belief: we see how at last, and for that present, the Irish Nation
were by the wisdom of this Maolseachluin King of Mead, and by the great Valor
and resolution of the rest of their Princes and People, delivered. I say for
that present. For pursuant to what has been said before, you are to understand
now,

10. That but a very few years after, because in the Keting. Polychronicon.
Reign of the same Maolseachluin mhic Mhaolruanuidh King of Mead, (who
deservedly upon the aforesaid expulsion of the Danes was by the Princes and
Nobility made King of all Ireland, and continued so until his death, i. e. full
sixteen years and no more) three Norvegian Brothers, Amelanus, Cytaracus, and
Ivorus, as Polychronicon calls 'em, with their Train, being come to Ireland in
a peaceable manner, and under pretense of Trafficking, got leave of the Princes
of the Land to build three Cities, paying Tribute for them, Dublin, Waterford,
and Limeric. Which they had no sooner finished, and strongly fortified, than
the Irish found Keting.
themselves engaged in as great a War as the former, by new and numerous Fleets
both of Norvegians, Danes, and Oostmans (as they called 'em then) arriving
continually from time to time in all the Quarters of the Kingdom. The
difference only was, that the former continued forty years, or thereabouts; but
this War now off and on a hundred and fifty years complete. And when the former
began, the Irish had no strangers in pay whose Revolt might endanger them: but
when this began they had a great number even of Danish, or other Easterling
Foreigners (whom immediately upon ending the former War, they entertained in
pay, and therefore called 'em Bownies) to guard their Coasts all round the
Kingdom, and these every one turned against them now. Besides in the former the
Irish were all of a mind against the common Enemy; but in this they were often
divided, some of them confederating openly and fighting in conjunction with
those foreign Enemies against their Native Soil, especially the little King of
Desies in Mounster, and the King of Leinster too not seldom. Moreover, to end
the former War, and redeem them from their bondage under Turgesius, the
stratagem of Maolseachluin was necessary; but in this later all along both in
the procedure, and final issue of it, they owed their great and frequent
Victories not to any stratagem, but under God to pure Valor and manly
Resolution.

But that I may at last come to an issue on this point, I will pass over all
those Victorious Battles fought by the Irish in the procedure of this second
Danish War made upon them. As first the Battle of Dromma Damhaigha, fought by
the foresaid King of Ireland, Maolseachluin himself. 2. The Battle of
Loughfoill by his Successor Aoth Finliath. 3. The many Battles in the Reign of
Donnchoe mhic Floinn, fought by Ceallaghane King of Mounster, whereby he not
only took Limmerick, Cashel, Cork, and Waterford from the Danes, but quite
extirpated them at least in his days out of that Province. His Sea Fight also
with their Fleet before Dundalk; which proved extremely fatal to them. Likewise
the great slaughter of their fellows in Connaught by the Conacians about the
same time. Moreover, and which was somewhat extraordinary, and before
Ceallaghane had taken Limmerick, the Battle of Roscrea, where the Merchants and
Townsmen at a great Fair held in that place on Saint Peter's day, understanding
of an Army of Danes coming on them from Connaught and Limmerick under a Danish
Earl called Oilsin, set forth against them in the best order they could, fought
them, defeated them, and killed three or four thousand of them in that Field.
Besides Muirchiortach mhac Neill King of Vlster, his killing 800 with their
chief Commanders, Abilaine, Aufer, and Roilt, and soon after Conuing mhac Neill
1200 more of their Heathen wicked Crew. And further yet, the Defeat given to
Rodoricus the King of Britains Son, who Anno Christi 966. as Hanmer says,
invaded Ireland with a puissant Army, but lost both Army and Life by those he
invaded. 4. The Battle of Muine Broghaine fought by the Monarch Conghallach
mhac Maoil Mhithe, with the slaughter of 7000 Danes on the spot, though with
great loss of his own side too. 5. and lastly, even all those four and twenty
bloody Battles fought against the Danes, and their Confederats before the
Battle of Cluain-Tairbh, and fought I say every one of them by that happy
victorious Prince until his death Brien mhac Kinedie, alias Boraimhe, who in
the fourth year of the foresaid Monarch Conghallach's Reign came to be King of
Mounster, and within eight years next following made all Leath Mogha, i. e. the
Southern half of Ireland acknowledge him their Sovereign: and ruled so for seven
and thirty years, until he was chosen at last Monarch of all Ireland: in which
last Supremacy he continued flourishing the remainder of his life, which after
twelve years more he ended victoriously at Cluain-tairf Field. And as I do pass
over so many former Battles wherein the Irish were victorious in this second
War: so I shall those many other too wherein they were to some purpose foiled
in the same War; tho Martial courage, tho true Valor may sometimes exert it
self no less in the Foil than in the Victory. I Will take no notice, neither of
the stoning to death Maolguala, King of Mounster, by those barbarous heathen
Foes, in the Reign of Aodh Finliath: nor of the mighty overthrow given the
Leinster men by Jomhar one of their Generals, in the reign of Niall Gluindubh:
nor of Sitric, another General of theirs, both defeating and killing, and that
in a more considerable fight also, the said Monarch Niall Gluindubb himself:
nor of the Battle of Biothlane against the Leinster men again, under the Reign
of Domhnal mhac Muirchirtae: nor finally of the Battle of Cille mhoane, fought
by the Danes and Lagenians both, joined together now against their Monarch
Domhnal mhac Muirchirtae; wherein the King of Vlster Ardgall, and Dombnal King
of Oirghiellae, and many others of great quality were killed of the Monarch's
side.

As well every one of these unsuccessful Battles, as all the former, ten times
both in number and weight, more successful to the Irish in the second War, I
willingly pass over, to come unto, and give you the famous Fight of
Cluain-Tairbh at last. It was the five and twentieth and last of all the
Battles fought so bravely by that victorious King of Ireland, Brian Boraimhe
himself. It was indeed the Battle that put an end to all the Danish, hopes in
that Kingdom. Besides, it was, if ever any was, by mutual consent of both
sides, a pitched Battle, and the Field, whereon it was fought, some weeks
before agreed upon between them. So that there was no place at all for
Ambuscadoes, Tricks, or stratagems in it; but pure Valor must decide the
quarrel and win the day.

The occasion, manner and issue of it, take thus in short. About the end of
Brian Boraimh's Reign, the Kingdom of Ireland being all over in peace and
flourishing with all earthly blessings under him, and no more Danes left in the
Land, but such a certain number of Artificers, Handy-craftsmen, and Merchants
in Dublin, Weixford, Waterford, Cork, and Limmerick, as he thought and knew
could be mastered at any time if they dared rebel: he sends to his
Brother-in-law Maolmoradh mhac Murchoe King of Leinster, desiring three special
Masts for shipping out of his Woods. Maoldmoradh consents, and goes himself to
see them drawn along by the streingth of men to Cean Choradh, the Monarch's
House in Tomond. A difference happening in the way between those men, and
thereupon Maolmoradh alighting, and helping them to draw one of the beams up a
high Mountain which they must have crossed, he toare off the clasp of his
outward Robe. Which, so soon as he came to the Monarchs Court, and visited the
Queen, his own Sister Garmlaigh, he desires her to fasten, telling her how it
was torn off. She takes the Robe, throws it into the fire, burns it before his
face, and then rebukes him smartly for his unworthy subjection of himself and
his people of Leinster to Briean, though her Husband. And the Monarch
Maolmoradh taking to heart her words, and turning aside to see Murchoe the
Prince, Brian's eldest Son, playing a game at Chess, advises against him on
some draught, whereby the Prince lost his game. Who thereupon fretting and
twitting his Uncle this Leinster King; told him, that his advice formerly given
to the Danes at the Battle of Gleann Mama lost them the Field. Maolmoradh
replies, that his next should prove otherwise. The Prince defies him.
Maolmoradh withdraws, goes to bed Supperless, and early in the morning unknown
posts away to Leinster. Where the very next day after his coming, he assembles
his chief Noblemen, represents to them what had past, sets them all on fire to
renounce their Allegiance to Briean, confederate with the Danes, and send the
Monarch defiance. Then he posts immediately to Dublin, engages the chief of the
Danes there to send forthwith to the King of Denmark for a strong supply to
help him against their mortal Enemy Brian Boraimhe, and promises them his
destruction. And then he prepares at home for War. And then within a little
more time having seen twelve thousand men under the command of two of the King
of Denmark's Sons, Carolus Knutus, and Andreas, landed safely at Dublin, and
both kindly received them, and refreshed them very well; he without longer
delay by a Herald bid defiance to Brian, and challenges him to fight on
Maghnealta a spacious Field at Cluain-Tairbh (otherwise Clantarf) within two
miles of Dublin. And Brian, with what speed he can, joining together all the
Forces of Mounster, Connaght, and Mead (for those of Vlster he neither sent
unto, nor would stay for, as confiding mightily in those he had already out of
the three other Divisions, and hastening to fight) marches directly to the place
appointed, Maghnealta, and sees the Enemy there, prepared to receive him, viz.
sixteen thousand Danes, twelve of the new, and four of the old ones, together
with all the power of Leinster, headed by their said King Maolmoradh the only
Author of this Battle. To be short, both Armies drawing near, and viewing fully
one another, the fatal sign is given at last, and Trumpets sound and skies
resound with the terrible shouts of both sides, as they closed. But
Maolseachluin the King of Mead, who had been Monarch before Brian Boraimhe,
and was deposed to give him place (the only Monarch of Ireland, that from the
beginning did survive his deposition) finding it now his time to be in some
sort revenged on Brian, stands off with his Forces of Mead so soon as the
signal was given, and continues a mere Spectator during the whole time of the
Battle, without joining with either side. And yet notwithstanding this
treacherous carriage of Maolseachluin, (for it can be termed no better, though
after this Fight was over, he recovered the Monarchy by it, and was the last
Monarch of the Milesian Race obeyed or acknowledged as such universally
throughout the Kingdom) yet I say, notwithstanding it, the valorous undaunted
Prince Murchoe, eldest Son of Brian Boraimhe, having persuaded his Father to
retire into his Tent by reason of his great age (for he was now fourscore and
eight years old) behaved himself with his Momonian and Conacian Forces so
bravely, and made such and so many furious impressions on every side into the
main Battalions of the Enemies, that although neither courage, nor dexterity,
nor ambition, nor glory, nor revenge, nor despair, proposed unto them
respectively, were wanting to make the Danish and Lagenian Forces withstand him
a very long time, and sell the Victory at a very dear rate; he won the Field at
last, or rather indeed his Father and his Army won it after his death. For this
renowned Prince was killed in the Battle. And, which is far more strange, the
Father himself Brian Boraimhe the Monarch, now after the Field had been clearly
gained, and the remainder of the Enemy scattered into the four Winds, was
killed in his own Tent by one Bruaodor a Dane, who in the general Rout leading
a party after him was forced to fly that way where the Monarch's Tent was
pitched. Whereinto, as he passed by, entering, and seeing the Monarch whom he
had formerly known, he slew him; though himself and his followers were
presently cut in pieces by those that pursued them.

Of the Monarchs side, besides himself and his Son the Prince, were killed in
this Battle, seven little Kings, most of the other Nobility both of Mounster
and Connaught, and 4000 of inferior degree. But of the other side were killed,
first the King of Leinster himself, Molmoradh mhac Murchoe (the Challenger of
Brian to this Battle) with his chief Nobles, and 3000 common Soldiers: then of
the Danes, the two Sons of the King of Denmark, all their great Nobility, 6700
of the Soldiers newly come with them, and of the old Danes, that were before
their coming to Ireland, 4000 more: in all of both sides, 17000 seven hundred,
besides Princes and other Noble men. It was fought in the year of Christ 1034.
Apr. 22. on good Friday.

After this Battle we hear but little of the Danes in Ireland. Only that the
foresaid Maolseachluin (who now the second time succeeded in the Monarchy for
nine years more until his death) took Dublin the next year, sacked it, burnt
it, and killed in it all those Danes that escaped from Clantarff. That soon
after this again, i. e. in the Sovereignty of this same Maolseachluin,
Huaghaire mhac Duinling mhac T^athil King of Leinster (a man of another mind,
race and interest than Molmoradh mhac Murchoe was) gave a mighty overthrow (and
it the very last given) to Siteric the Son of Aomlaibh, and the Danes of
Dublin: who, it seems, after the Battle of Clantarff, and the burning of Dublin
next year by Maolseachluin, had once more recruited from the Isle of Man, and
other Islands possessed as yet by the Danes; but were now finally destroyed in
Ireland by the said new King of Leinster. And lastly, as Hackluyt reports in
his Chronicle, and so does Hanmer too, that in the Reign of Muirchiortach mhac
Brien, who was the fourth after Brian Boraimhe, Magnus, then King of Denmark,
would needs venture the attempting Ireland once more, to recover what his
Predecessors held there; but that landing with part of his Fleet before the
greater part of them came up, he was set upon immediately by the Country
people and killed, and his Fleet understanding it returned presently from
whence they came.

SECT. II.
The Irish for 2600 years a free Nation. They were never subject to, nor so
much as invaded by the Romans. Their Political Government, or three Great
Councils, of Teamhvuir, (alias Tarach) Eumhna, and Cruachain. The first, a
Triennial Parliament. It Is Laws, Feastings, and other Ceremonies. The strict
examination therein of their public Acts and Monuments. What of that nature
done in the great Parliament under Laogirius; St. Patrick himself being one of
the Examiners. What matters debated in the Councils of Eumhna and Cruachain.
The Titles of Duke, Marquess, Earl, Baron, Knight, not in use with them: as
neither in Scotland till William the Conqueror's time. Their Leinster Militia,
called Fiona Eirlonn, commanded by Fionn mhac Cuuail as General of it. Hector
Boethius and Hanmer corrected. Their other Militia in Mounster, by name
Dal-Gheass. Their celebrated Learning, after their Conversion to Christianity.
Their four chief Universities: whereof Ardmagh had 7000 Scholars at one time.
Their wonderful Sanctity, i. e. the prodigious Numbers of their holy Monks and
Nuns, under S. Patrick first, and next under the great Abbot Conghall, alias
Congellus. This Abbot in person founded and governed the Monasteries both of
Beanchuir in Ulster, and Bangor in Wales near West-Chester: his Disciples,
those of Lindisfarn in England, Luxeu in Burgundy, Bobie in Italy, etc. They
converted several foreign Countries. But Scotland particularly was converted by
Columb Cille. A special privilege given him and his Successors the Abbots of
Hy.

AND so by this time I think enough is said of the Warlike Spirit and Valor of
the ancient Irish for so many Ages of the World, until that time which was near
the Eleventh Century of Christian Religion. For as yet the infinite goodness,
patience and mercy of God, expecting still their amendment, restrained his
Justice from bereaving them utterly of that Virtue, that masculine bold Heroic
Spirit I mean, which preserved them so long, even well nigh six and twenty
hundred years a free Nation, independent of any other: unsubdued, undisturbed,
uninvaded otherwise, and no longer, nor no oftener, nor with other success or
issue than we have seen. Not even the old Roman Empire it self, whose
conquering Eagles made all the rest, at least of the Western World, and among
them, all, even the very most unaccessible remote recesses of Great Britain, a
prey to their uncircumscribed ambition; having never at any time had either
footing, or command, or tribute, or acknowledgment in Ireland. Though we
knowwell enough out of History ( Tacitus in vit. Agric.
) what a longing they had to be doing there: at least to see that Country and
people, which dared receive continually so many fugitives ( Cum suum Romani
Imperium* undique propagassent, multi proculd^bio ex Hispania, Gallia, and
Britannia huc se receperunt, ut iniquissimo Romanorum jugo colla subducerent.
Camden, Hibern.
) from their power in Spain and France, and Great Britain and protect them to
their face. But I am not to dwell or dilate on this Subject, nor indeed on any
other concerning that Nation: the method I prescribed my self and bulk of this
Treatise not allowing it.

11. What I would in the next place reflect upon, and as briefly as I well can,
is somewhat of their Policy or Government, their standing Militia, their
Learning, and their Sanctity, when they were a happy flourishing people before
the first Invasion of the Danes. For their Government, besides a Monarch, five
Provincial Kings, and in process of time, especially since the first Danish
War, manyother much lesser Kings, they had anciently three great Councils held
in three several places: the Council of Taragh, the Council of Eumhna, and the
Council of Gruachain: all three called in their language Feis Teambrach, Feis
Eumhna, and Feis Gruachain. The first was a Triennial Parliament of all the
Estates assembled at Taragh in Mead, at the Monarch's pleasure, about that
time of year, which we call now All Saints. It was ordained first by Ollamh
Fodhla the Twentieth Monarch after Herimon, to be thenceforth from time to time
perpetually observed in after Ages. It was death, without mercy, without any
hopes of it, without any power in the Monarch himself to extend it to any
person whatsoever, either to ^ssault, or wound, or strike or draw upon any man
attending that great Assembly, or to be convicted either of robbery or stealth,
during the Session of it. It was called only for making Laws, reforming general
abuses, revising their Antiquities, Genealogies, Chronicles, and either
restoring or preserving peace and love among 'em by feasting together for seven
days in one great House. And therefore it is notable what Dr. Keting has in the
Reign of Tuathall Teachtvair the Monarch, of the manner of their meeting and
sitting at these Feasts. That the Room prepared to receive them all being made
of purpose, tho very longs yet narrow, with Tables set on both sides and both
ends, and all things ready for the Entertainment: and then the Room cleared of
all persons whatsoever, only the Marshal, the chief Herald or Chronicler, and
a Horn-winder excepted: and then at three convenient little distances of time,
this Horn-winder calling to Dinner by the winding of his Horn; at the first of
'em, all the Esquires or Shieldbearers to the Princes and Nobility came to the
door, and there delivered their Shields to the Marshal, who by the Heralds
direction hung them up in their due places over the Tables prepared of the
right hand-side for the Estates. At the second, in like manner all the
Taget-bearers to the Generals and other great Commanders of the Militia
delivered up theirs, and were on the other side of the House placed orderly as
the former. But at the third, all the Kings, Princes, Estates, Military men,
and other chief Gentry came in and fat down, each one under his own Goat of
Arms blazoned on his Shield, without any disorder about precedence, or of
places; no man sitting on the outside of the Table, nor any Woman at all
admitted: the Table in one end being for the Antiquaries, and in the other for
other Officers.

But to pass over this matter of Ceremony, Herauldry and Feasting, what I
chiefly note in their procedure, when they sat in Council or Parliament, is
their extraordinary care, diligence and exactness in providing, That all their
monuments of Antiquity, their Genealogies, Cronicles and Records should have
nothing foisted into them, nothing at all inserted, but what was true and
certain by the approbation of a special Committee of the most skilful in such
matters. That all such, and only such National Concerns, Annals, or other
matters, which they approved, after their diligent search and examination of
them, should be there in public written in the Kings or Monarchs book of Royal
Records called the Psalter of Taragh: and whatever was repugnant to that Book,
should have no credit. That, in prosecution of this great care of their
National Monuments, it was, that when they became Christians, a Parliament of
all their Estates both Temporal and Spiritual (held under the Monarch Laogirius
at the same Royal Habitation of the Monarchs, Taragh) deputed three Kings,
three Bishops, and three of their most singular Antiquaries (even Saint Patrick
himself there present being one of these Bishops, as the other two were Benuin
and Caraioch; and the three Kings, the foresaid Laogirius Monarch of Ireland,
tho never converted, Daire King of Vlster, and Cork mhac Luighioch King of
Mounster; the Antiquaries also being Dubthach, Fergus, and Rosse mhac Trichim)
to review and reduce into order all their National Chronicles. That this
Committee of Nine having done so with great pains and industry, they reduced
all into one Book fairly written. That the keeping of this original Book, was
entrusted after, by the Estates to the Prelates: and those Prelates, for its
perpetual preservation, caused several authentic Copies of it to be fairly
engrossed: whereof some are extant to this day, and several more faithfully
transcribed out of them; their Names (taken from the places where they were for
many Ages kept) being the Book of Ardmach, The Psalter of Casshell, The Book of
Gleann da Loch, etc.

Whereunto I may add, as not very impertinent in this place, That the Irish
Nation were all along from the beginning so addicted to, and had so great an
esteem of the knowledge of their own Genealogies and Histories, that Keting in
his Preface.
anciently there have been in Ireland above two hundred chief Annalists or
Historians, by place and office such, who had Estates in Land set apart and
assigned them and to their Issue after them in perpetuity for attending wholly
that Calling and study of it; every great Lord having a peculiar Sept of them
to record and transmit to Posterity what especially concerned him and those
deriving from him; besides what concerned the Nation in general; yet all
continually subject to the foresaid Triennial Scrutiny in Parliament. A care of
Antiquity and History, I think, not to be matched by any other Nation in
Europe. And as they took that care to provide for their Antiquaries, so they
did also, as Cambden Britannia, tit. Ireland. p. 140.
has observed, the like for their Poets, Physicians, and Harpers, by assigning
them Estates in Land to live independently of others, only the duty they owed
their great Lords excepted still.

In the two other Councils of Eumhna and Cruachain, the matters principally
debated by the Nobility, Gentry, and other members of them were the concerns of
all the Artificers, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts-men of Ireland, Smiths of all
sorts, Carpenters, Masons, etc. whereof a great number was summoned to be at
each Assembly. Out of which number these two Councils did cull out sixty the
most eminent in their professions, and gave them authority all over the
Kingdom, allowing them distinct jurisdictions, to reform all the abuses of
their several Callings, and suspend such as they thought fit from exercising
them. So that none could set up or continue any Mechanical occupation but with
their License, after they had examined and made trial of the sufficiency or
insufficiency of the party concerned. These Masters so authorized they called
in their Language Goldannuigh; which imports omniscient or skilful in all
Mechanics.

So much of their Councils and Government as to Civil Affairs in the more
ancient times both of Paganism and Christianity. Of their Judicatures, and
Judges, whom they call Brehons, he that please may see very singular and
wonderful things related of them in D. Keting, ( Reign of Laoghaire the Monarch
in St. Patricks days.
) even when they were Pagans,

But if you desire to know the several degrees of their Nobility, or the
different Titles of Honor among those Irish Noblemen who sat in their
Parliaments or Councils: I can only answer, besides what is said already, that
in Ireland until the English Conquest, they had none of our Titles, that is,
not those either of Duke, or Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, or Knight (only
such Knights as they called Niadha-Nask, and may be called by us in English
Knights of the Chain, or in Latin Milites Torquati, from a certain kind of
Chain put about their Necks): as no more in truth had Scotland any such Titles
before the year of Christ 1074. when Malcolm III. Reigned there, and William I.
surnamed the Bastard and Conqueror had subdued all entirely here in England.
Concerning which custom of not using any such Titles of Honor, in Scotland
particularly, as likewise concerning the other of the Language spoken till that
time in the very Court of Scotland, (though as well the one as the other may
seem foreign to this place:) this following Note, in Samuel Daniel's words, may
give you further satisfaction.

As in the Court of England, the French Tongue became more generally spoken,
(viz. in William the Conquerours Reign, for of that time this Author speaks
here) so in that of Scotland, did the English, by reason of the multitude of
this Nation, attending both the Queen and her Brother Edgar, and daily
repairing thither for their safety, and combination against the common Enemy.
Of whom diverse, abandoning their Native distressed Country, were by the bounty
of that King preferred: and there planted, spread their offspring into many
Noble Families, remaining to this day. The Titles for distinguishing degrees of
Honor, as of Duke, Earl, Baron, Rider, or Knight, were then (as is thought)
first introduced: and the nobler sort began to be called by the title of their
Seigneuries (according to the French manner) which before bare the name of
their Father, with the addition of Mac, after the fashion of Ireland. Sam. Dan.
in the Reign of William I. page 34. Where, in the Margin, he has this further
observation, that Scotland before this time generally spoke a kind of Irish.

12. As to their constant ordinary Militia, what it was in their times of peace
we find in the Reign of Cormock Vlfada (the Son of Airt) King of Ireland a
little after the Birth of Christ. For then it consisted of three Battalions or
Divisions, of equal number each, in all nine thousand men, under several
Commanders, and Fionn mhac Cuual their General; who was neither Giant, nor
Dane, nor other Foreigner, as no more were any of his Commanders, Captains or
Soldiers. He was himself but of the ordinary stature of other men; though
Hector Boethius makes him a Giant of 15 Cubits high: and he was an Irish man
both by birth and descent lineally come, of his Mothers side, in the fifth
Generation, from Nuatha Neacht King of Leinster, and so upward all along from
Herimon; whatever is reported by D. Hanmer Page 24.
to the contrary, in his History of Ireland. Hanmer might as well have made the
Cappadocian Knight a Saxon, as Fionn the son of Cuual, a Dane. And so might
Hector Boethius have as well turned Huon of Bordeaux, or Amadis de Gaul, or the
Knight of the Sun, or the Seven Champions of Christendom, and such like
Romances into the very truest Histories, as the Fables written of Fionn mhac
Cuual, and the Captains under him called Fiona Erionn, only to entertain
leasurable hours and Fancy. For the Irish had their Romances too for
divertisement. They had Bruoidhuin in Chaorhuinn, and the Battle of
Fionthraghadh (or Fentra, as Hanmer calls it) and the story of Gilladeackuir's
Jade, and many other such, and so among these, some also of Fionn mhac Cuual
and his Commanders. Which yet every one of common sense among the Irish could
distinguish from their Chronicles and other Monuments of real story. In short,
these Gentlemen Fionn mhac Cuaal and Fiona Erionn were the stoutest and bravest
fighting men of their time in Ireland. And they were kept in constant pay by
the Monarch, Princes and people of that Kingdom, to guard the Coasts from
abroad, and keep all at home quiet. With power nevertheless, that if the case
required it, either to suppress a Rebellion, or withstand an Invasion, or
succor Dal Riadac in Scotland, the said General Fionn mhac Cuual might make up
the standing Forces to seven Battalions, that is, one and twenty thousand men
in all. And this is the naked truth concerning these Fiona Erionn so famous in
their Generation. On which truth many fabulous stories have been superstructed.

To them may be added those other brave Warriors, whether of a later or earlier
Generation (but as to the reality of things for ought I know, of as much
bravery and Valor) called Dal-Gheasse. These were the standing Militia of
those fortunate successful Kings of Mounster, Ceallaghan, and Brian Boraimhe in
the second Danish War, and the only Gens d'Armes about their persons, and
continued to be so to the succeeding Kings of Mounster, and Leathe Mogh, who
were Monarchs of Ireland, at least bore that Title, three of them in
succession, after the death of that Maolseachluin, who immediately succeeded
Brian Boraimhe. What number these Valiant men Dal-Gheasse did make, I cannot
find. But see them all along represented for incomparable Warriors, till being
overpowered at last by the King of Connaght and Leathe Cuinn, and presumed
Monarch, Torlagh More O Connor, they were utterly destroyed a little before the
English Conquest, and with them the Kingdom of Mounster extinguished. For this
by that Monarch was divided in two, and continued so till the English abolished
them both.

13. Of their Learning, Historians make no mention till after their conversion
to Christianity. Which Conversion, if we speak of it as to the generality of
Ireland, was begun by Saint Patrick their Apostle, as we have seen before,
early in the fifth Century, that is in the year 431. upon his second landing in
that Country, and completed by him within threescore and one years more. For
so long he lived carrying on that holy Work, though he had been full threescore
and one aged upon this second landing of his when he began it.

About this time all the Western and Southern parts too of the Roman Empire
being overrun by the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, and other barbarous partly
German, partly Scythick Nations, and consequently all kind of Learning for the
matter destroyed by them where ever they set footing: and the little remainders
of the learned Contemplative men retiring still from the noise of Arms: and
finding themselves no where on the Continent, and as little in Great Britain at
rest or in safety: many of them at last passed over to Ireland. That is, to a
Country, where, as they were told for certain (and so it was indeed) the
Romans never challenged any right: and consequently neither could the
Barbarians on account of such right pretend any quarrel to it; and yet a
Country to admiration religious and holy. This of all likelihood was one of
the causes or means whereby Ireland began suddenly to flourish above any
Country of Europe at that time in Learning. Besides, and to speak without
likelihood, but by the authority of good Authors for matters of Fact, their
blessed Apostle St. Patrick himself at his coming thither to convert them in
the aforesaid year, brought with him, besides other Clerks, in his own Company
thirty Bishops whom himself had in his Journey through foreign parts gathered
together, and before his shipping for Ireland, and for that mission of purpose
consecrated: because he foresaw the Harvest would be very great, and therefore
he needed many Workmen. So affirms an ancient French Author of good repute
Henricus Altisiodorensis, ( Vitae S. Germani, cap. 168.
) who flourished in the Emperor Carolus Calvus's Reign. Moreover, the Irish
Chronicles tell us, that he also brought along with him all those of Ciniodb
Scuit, or Scottish (that is Irish) Nation, whom he met abroad any where that
were Christians. So here you may clearly see between these Bishops, Clerks, and
other Christians, the first Seminary of that great Learning in Ireland then,
when all the other Western Kingdoms and Provinces were grown illiterate,
barbarous, rude. However, or whatever the causes or the Teachers of that
Learning in Ireland were (besides these Bishops and Clerks, who no man will
doubt but they were at least the Chief Instructors in holy Scripture and all
matters of Divinity: as were also, next unto them, those other Bishops
consecrated by S. Patrick at home in Ireland, during the time of his
Apostleship, even 355. in number (says Nennius) that is, one for every two
Churches founded by him in that Country, and those 3000 Priests ( Jocelin says
5000) likewise that were not Bishops, all of them every one consecrated by
himself in this Kingdom:) it is confessed of all hands, and venerable Bede (
Histor. Anglic. l. 3. c. 4, 5. 19. and l. 4. c. 25.
) of old, and Cambden ( Britan. page 730. edit. London. in Fol. an. 1607.
) of late, are sufficient vouchers for it, That in those days the Saxons
flowed over into Ireland as to the Mart of good Literature. And that, when any
was wanting here from home, it came to be a Proverb, He is gone to Ireland to
be bred. Pursuant hereunto is that Distich in the life of Sulgenus (who
flourished about 700 years since)

Exemplo patrum commotus amore legendi,
Ivit ad Hibernos sopbia mirabile claros.
Besides all the Irish Chronicles tell us of the four great Universities in
Ireland, Ardmagh, Cashel, Dun-da-Leathghlass, and Lismore; not to mention many
other Colleges of lesser note elsewhere. And then I think seven thousand
Scholars at one time, in one of these Universities, to wit, Ardmagh, ( Manusc.
of Keting. Reign of Conchuuair Mhic Donochoe.
) is a considerable evidence how Learning did flourish at that time in Ireland.
To all which may be added, that they were the Irish of those days, who gave a
beginning abroad, if not to the Schools of Oxford, (for I have an Author by me
that says they did so even to these) yet certainly to those of Paris and Pavia
( Monach. Sangal. de Gest. Car. Mag. c. 1. apud Canis. Tom. 1. Antiq. Lect.
): yea and to many other great Colleges of Learning in foreign parts; or the
most famous Monasteries of Europe then, that is of France and Germany, and
Italy, have not been at any time reputed Colleges of Learning; which yet we
know, and shall presently see they have, and have indeed equally both of
Learning and Sanctity been reputed the chief Schools in those parts. Finally,
both Camhden ( Supra.
) and Spencer ( View of Ireland, or Dialogue between Irenaeus and Eudoxus, page
29.
) acknowledge that from Ireland our Forefathers in Great Britain, the Ancient
Saxons, or English, learned the very form and manner of framing their
characters for writing.

14. But if their Learning was great (as in those Ages) from the year of
Christ, 431. or soon after, to the year 820. when the Heathen Danes and
Norvegians first invaded them, it was esteemed to be: the sanctity of those
among them who gave themselves to a religious life, was yet much more
admirable, as their numbers were almost beyond belief in these our days. And
yet Cambden, that excellent Antiquary was convinced of both. Verily Hieric of
Auxer (otherwise in Latin Henricus Altisiodorensis, whom I mentioned before)
has 800 years since written, ( Vit. S. Germani, c. 174. Jocel. vi^. S. Pa^. c.
174.
) that S. Patrick having converted Ireland, did so prevail with the Princes and
People thereof, that he obtained a tenth of all the Lands, Goods, Cattle, and
Persons of the whole Kingdom to be dedicated by them to God; the Men to be
Monks, and the Women Nuns, forsaking all worldly joys most willingly for a
religious life: and that every where answerably to the Lands and other goods
devoted so to God, he built Monasteries apart, the one half for Men, and the
other for Women. From whence it came to pass within a very little time (says
another ancient Author of great credit, Jocelinus the Monk, in his life of S.
Patrick) (...). 174. that there was not a Wilderness, nor corner, nor place so
remote any where in the whole Island, but was replenished with perfect Monks
and Nuns; in so much that Ireland came to be called then by a special name, The
Island of Saints. For says he) all those religious persons lived according to
the rule given them by S. Patrick, in perfect contempt of all earthly things,
desire of celestial only, mortification of their flesh, and quitting of their
own proper will, equal to the Monks of Egypt, both in merit and number. Besides
these testimonies, tho very many more of the ancient Writers of all Nations in
Europe might be quoted; it will be sufficient to quote S. Bernard only, in the
life written by him of S. Malachias, cap. v. where he relates that Ireland sent
forth whole swarms of Saints into other parts of the world.

And therefore I need not add but little more upon this subject than the sense
of Cambden, and that in his own words, as Britannia. tit. Ireland. P. 67.
they are given by his Translator, Philemon Holland. The Irish Scholars of
Patrick (says he) profited so notably in Christianity, that in the Age next
ensuing, Ireland was termed Sanctorum Patria, The native Country of Saints; and
the Soottish See before, how at that time, by the name Scottish, were
understood only the Irish, because as yet Ireland was called Scotia Major.
Monks in Ireland and Britain highly excelled for their holiness and learning;
yea, and sent out whole flocks of most devout men into all parts of Europe, who
were the first Founders of Luxeu Abbey in Burgundy, of Bubie Abbey in Italy, of
Wirtzburg Abbey in Franckland, of S. Galius in Sweitzerland, of Malmesbury,
Lindisfern, and many other Monasteries in Britain: For out of Ireland came
Celius Sedulius a Priest, Columba, Columbane, Colman, Aidan, Gallus, ^ithan,
Maidulph, Brendan, and many other celebrated for their holy life and learning.
Of these Monks is Hieric of Auxerres to be understood, when he writes thus to
the Emperor Charles the Bald, What should I speak of Ireland, which setting
light by the dangers of the Sea, flitteth all of it well near with whole flocks
of Philosophers unto our shores? Of whom so many as are more skilful and
learned than the rest, do voluntarily banish themselves to attend dutifully on
the wise Solomon, and be at his command.

Then (says he, I mean Cambden, delivering his further judgment, and continuing
his relation) this Monastical profession, although but then newly come up, was
far different in those days from that of our time. They desired to be that
indeed which they were named to be: they were far from colorable dealing or
dissembling. Erred they in any thing? It was through simplicity, not through
lewdness, much less of wil^ul obstinacy. As for wealth, and these worldly
things, they so so highly contemned them, that they did not only not seek
after, but also refused the same, tho they were offered unto them descended by
inheritance. For a notable Apophthegm was that of Columbane (a Monk of Ireland)
who, as the Abbot Walafride writes, When Sigebert, King of the Frankners,
dealt very very earnestly with him, and that by way of many large and fair
promises, that he should not depart out of his Kingdom; answered him in the
same sort as Eusebius has reported of Thaddeus, namely, That it became not them
to embrace other men's riches, who for Christ's sake had forsaken their own.
Hitherto Cambden. who elsewhere p. 144.
tells us, that we must not wonder at the austerity of those ancient Irish
Monks in their generation, that is, during those primitive ages of Christianity
in Ireland, tho nothing indeed can be more wonderful than what is written of
them in that kind, For (says he) in very late times, Such as gave themselves to
Religion there, did mortify their flesh even to a miracle, by watching,
praying, and fasting.

And verily Cambdens relation both of the sanctity and prodigious numbers too
of the Irish Monks in those first ages of Christianity in Ireland, before the
Danish Invasion is abundantly confirmed by the Irish Chronicles in Dr. Keting (
Reign of Louis the Son of Laogirius, Son to Nial the Great. The Irish call him
Lugha, mhac Laoghaire, mhic Neill Naoighiallaoi.
) where he tells us that the holy Abbot Comghall (who about the end of the
first, and beginning of the second century of Christian Religion in Ireland,
built the famous Monastery of Beannchuir in Vlster) had 20000 Monks cloistered
in several Monasteries under his own government. Which is the more credible,
because S. Bernard, six hundred years ago, in his life of S. Malachias,
Archbishop of Ardmagh, and sometime Abbot and Restorer of Beannchuir, who died
with him at Clara Vallis in France, reports, Cap. 5.
that this Monastery, under the first Founder of it, the blessed Comghall (or,
as the Latins call him, Congellus) was the most noble head of many Monasteries,
and fruitful Mother of many thousands of holy Monks. That one by name Luanus, a
Son of that holy Congregation of Beannchuir, was himself alone Founder of a
hundred Monasteries in other places. That from thence flowed such a prodigious
inundation of Saints, all over Ireland, Scotland, and other foreign Nations in
those days, as we have spoken of before out of Cambden. That Columbanus, who
came to France, being another Son of that holy place, founded the Cloister of
Luxeu in Burgundy, in which the number of Religious men was so great, that both
day and night the Quire was replenished with Singers, praising God perpetually
by turns, even all the 24 hours throughout the whole year, without intermission
of one sole moment of time. That Beannchuir it self, the happy Mother of so
blessed an Issue, had likewise of her own peculiar Conventuals at home
constantly praising and serving God, such a number, that on a time some foreign
Pirates Landing there unexpectedly (for it was upon the Seaside) to spoil and
burn it, as they did both, found nine hundred Monks in the place: whom they
slew, and burnt altogether most inhumanely, as the Histories of that Country
tell. (Which Martyrdom, and first destruction of this Monastery happened, says
Keting, in the Reign of Ceanfolae, Monarch or King of Ireland. That is, as I
take it, about a hundred and fifty years before the the first Invasion of the
Danes.) Finally that Malachias, about 400 years after this first destruction of
Beannchuir, and a second too by the Danes, restored it once more to its ancient
religious dedication to God, tho not to the like number of Monks, and was
himself Abbot of it, before his being Bishop either of Connor, Ardmagh, or
Down. I add in the last place Down, because this wonderful Servant of God
Malachias, against the will of all others resigned Ardmagh, and chose the poor
Bishopric of Down to retire unto, of purpose to cultivate the Barbarous
Inhabitants hereof, as he had successively those of the two former. To
illustrate with a few more particulars this relation given of the memorable
Abbot Congellus, I Hanmer, p. 62. and 53.
can out of Hanmer's Chronicle, add (passing over his vain attempt to challenge
him for his own Countreyman, and make him at least of British blood and birth.
But he soon gives over his claim in the very next page, where on better grounds
he confesses) that Congellus, not far from Westchester, founded the Monastery
of Bangor, which then among the Brittons was called the College of Christian
Philosoph^rs, and was himself the first Abbot of it, in the days of King
Arthur, An. Christi 530. That he also founded the famous Monastery of Benchor,
as he calls it, but the Irish Beannchuir, in the Ardes (alias Altitudo Vltonum)
in Vlster, which had 3000 Monks, and bred and trained up many singular and
eminent men of Learning, not only Irish, but Brittons, Saxons, and Scots, who
dispersed themselves far and near into foreign Countries, and converted and
confirmed thousands in the true faith of Christ. That seven years after the
founding of this Abbey in Vlster, he founded the other near Chester; but then
returned again to his former in Vlster, where he rests in peace. And, besides
other particulars, to conclude all, and acknowledge indeed both the Native
Country of Congellus, and Country also of his breeding in holiness, that he
was born in Dal-Naraidh in Vlster of honorable Parents, bred under Abbot
Fiontan in Mounster, and then at last under Kieran at Cluain-mhac-Noise, etc.

15. I might here enlarge on the Conversion of many Infidel Nations, especially
in the North of Great Britain, and the Lower and Higher Germany, by the power
of the words and Example of the lives of those wonderful Irish Monks. But
having said enough already on this Head of their Sanctity, I will dilate no
further on it. I will not recount any thing, not so much as of St. Aidam that
holy Bishop of Lindisfarn, and great Instructor of King Oswald's Saxon Subjects
in Christianity: ( Beda Hist^r. Eccles. l. 3. c. v. and vi.
) nor much neither of Columb-Cille himself. Only of this later give me leave to
deliver a few things. As 1. That he was born in Vlster, and the Son of
Feilimidh, the Son of Fergus, the Son of Conal Gulbhann, the Son of Niall the
Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach, Monarch of Ireland. Which I note against
some Scottish Authors, that contrary to all known truth, would make him a
Scotchman. 2. That his proper name received in Baptism was Criomhthan: and the
name of Columb-Cille was given him by Children, his Play-fellows; who because
of his Dove-like simplicity, and because when he came to them upon a certain
day, once every week, where they with great longing expected him, he always
came to them immediately out of the Church or Monastery wherein he was educated
(at Dubghlaissa in Tirconel) therefore they, so soon as he appeared to them,
cried forth unanimously with one voice, Columb ne Cille. Whereof his
Instructors taking notice at last, thought it the will of God he should be so
called thence-forward by all others too, even as the innocent Children had
already and constantly once a week by their joyful acclamations begun to do:
those three distinct Irish words importing in English the Dove of the Church.
For in that Language Celumb is a Dove, and Ceall, or Cill is a Church,
Monastery, or Cell. And hence it was that Criomhthan came to be generally
called no more Criomhthan, but Columb-Cille; the middle word at first used by
the Children, being left out of the composition for brevities sake. 3. That
having in his youth dedicated himself to a Monastic life, and having by
stupendous mortification arrived to the highest pitch of holiness, he founded
the Monastery of Ardmagh, otherwise Dear-magh, in Latin Campus Roborum, as Beda
notes. He passed from thence over to Scotland in the 43 year of his age, but of
Christ 565. He Preached the Gospel Beda. l. 3. c. 4.
there with so great power, that he converted to Christianity all the Picts
then inhabiting the more Northern parts of Great Britain. He founded here
another no less famous Abbey in the Isle of Hy (in Latin Iona) on which Abbey
Connall mhac Conghvill, King of Dal-Rheuda, not a Pict, but an Irish Scot,
bestowed that Keting in the Reign of
whole Island, with the Sovereignty thereof to be transmitted to all future
Abbots of it for ever. He was held in such extraordinary great veneration, both
in his life and after his death, that as Venerable Bede records it, not only
all In quibus omnibus, scilicet Monasteriis, per Hiberniam and Britanniam
propagatis ex utroque Monasterio, idem Monasterium Insulanum, in quo ipse
requi^scit corpore, principatum tenat. Habere autem solet ipsa Irsula Rectorem
semper Abbatem presbyterum, cujus juri and omnis Provincia, and ipsi etiam
Episcopi ordine inusitato debeant esse subjecti, juxta exemplum primi Doctoris
illius, qui non Episcopus, sed presbyter extitit and Monachus. Beda, ibid.
the Monasteries propagated in Ireland or Britain, from either of those two
Abbeys founded by himself, were subordinate to this latter of Hy, wherein he
lived longest, and died at last, being 77 years aged: nor only all the whole
Province: but even the very Bishops themselves, contrary to the custom of the
Church in other Countries, were subject to the jurisdiction of all the
succeeding Abbots thereof, tho Presbyters only by ordination: to wit, according
to the primitive pattern of their first Doctor, who was himself no Bishop, but
only a Priest and Monk. In fine, he most justly deserved the title which
Posterity gave him of the first Converter of the North of Scotland, and great
Apostle of the Picts, as Cambden himself calls him. And so he might have called
him too, the great and chief (if not the first) Instructor in Christianity of
all the Irish Scots. 4. That although I cannot tell certainly what Venerable Bede means here (in the Marginal Note) by his ( omnis Provincia) whole
Province; that is, whether he mean all the Kingdom of Scotland, as it lies now
extended, and as then comprehending all the several petty Kingdoms, both of
Scots and Picts (for by the Battle fought in Scotland at Monadoire, in the
Reign of Diarmuid mhic Cearbheoil, King of Ireland, by the Family of the Neals,
against the Picts, we understand this Nation of Picts had several petty Kings
at that time: being they lost in this one Battle, together with the Victory,
seven of them killed in the place by those Irish, formerly planted there;) or
whether he mean the Kingdom of the Irish in Scotland, or (which is the same
thing) of the Scots or Dal-Rheudans only (all three signifying the same People)
or whether only the Dominions of those Northern Picts, converted by Columb; and
there can be no other to be meant by omnis provincia, since the Island it self,
wherein that Monastery was, exceeded not five English miles in length: yet thus
much I can certainly say, that Keting tells us in his Reign of Aodh (or Hugh
Ainmhirioch, Monarch of Ireland, that Columb-Cille, in his Voyages and Journey
to the Parliament, held by this Monarch at Drom-Ceath, in that Kingdom, was all
along out of Scotland, attended not only by 30 Subdeacons, 50 Deacons, and 40
Priests, but 20 Bishops also, to praise God continually, and officiate in
divine Offices in his company; whereby we may somewhat guess at the largeness
of that Province, whereof Venerable Bede does speak here.

SECT. III.
The Scene altered. Cause of admiration. Bloody horrible feuds begun,
increased, multiplied, continued 2600 years. No People on earth so implacably
set upon the destruction of one another as the Milesian Irish were. Above 600
Battles fought between themselves. A hundred and eighteen Monarchs slaughtered.
Fourscore and six of those very men that killed them, succeeded immediately in
their Thrones. Other strange deaths of several of them. Of the whole number of
181 Monarchs, not above 29 came to a natural end. The Author of this account.
Battles fought by the Monarchs Caomhaol, Tighearnmhuir, Tuathal Teachtvair
(where somewhat of the Plebeians 25 years War) Conn Ceadchathach, alias
Constantinus Centibellis, and Mogha Nuadhat, King of Mounster. What Leath
Cuinn, and Leatha Mogh import. The feuds rather inflamed than allaid under
Christianity. Number of main Battles fought, and Monarchs killed the first 400
years after their Conversion by S. Patrick. By two of them, the one betwixt the
Monarch Fearghall, and Murcho O Bruin King of Leinster; the other between the
Monarch Aodl^ Ollan, and Aodha mhac Colgan King also of Leinster, may be
guessed how bloody the rest were. Foreign Conquests, and Plantations neglected
all that while. Occasionally somewhat of the Heathen Monarch Dathi's Landing in
France with an Army to pursue Niall the Great's example: and of his being
killed by a Thunderbolt near the Alps: and of the ten several Invasions of
Scotland by the Irish Pagans, and but one (if one) by the Christian Irish. The
Families descended from those Irish, remaining to this day in that Country. A
word of those called English Scots. Columb-Cille himself Author of fighting
three of the foresaid Battles in Ireland. The heavy penance during life,
enjoined him therefore by S. Molaisse, and his humble performance of it, and
much greater wonders of him. Why the particular of those Battles of
Columb-Cille mentioned here. The Parliament of Dromceathe in his time.
Banishment of the Poets, one of the three ends it was called for. Great
Injustice, Cruelty, Pride, etc. instanced severally in their Monarchs Tuathal
Teuchtvar, etc. Nial Naoighiallach, Diarmuid mhac Ceirrbheoil, and Aodh mhac
Ainmhiriogh. Some of the Murders and Battles that happened about the end of
their fourth Century of Christian Religion particularized.

HItherto I have briefly run over the Antiquity, Martial Exploits, Political
Government, or Grand Councils, ordinary Militia, and (after their Conversion to
Christianity) the Learning also and Sanctity of the Ancient Irish. And so have,
I think, delivered in short all the most glorious Excellencies recorded of that
Nation, eitheir in their own Monuments, or any foreign Histories, that I have
seen.

16. What follows next, is on the other side of the Medal to represent unto you
not only a mixture of great imperfections with so many excellencies, nor only
the prevalency of downright evil men against so many good, against so
prodigiously numerous and great exemplars of virtue living among them, after
their being enlightened with the doctrine of salvation: but, according to the
vicissitude of all things on earth, the change, and wane, and strange decay,
and utter fall at last of that People in general from all the glory of their
Ancestors. And this, whether we regard the greatness of their former dominion
and power abroad, or the more ancient policy of their Government at home, or
the stupendous fame of their Letters and Holiness every where in those days of
old. Nay, and this alteration too, in every point, as happening to them even
before the English had set one foot in their Country under Henry II. All which
I am to represent unto you now, because the order of things, and both title and
nature of this Tract require I should. Though I shall nevertheless do it by so
much the more briefly, by how much I am less inclined to dwell on this subject.

However, I must confess that when I reflect on the most authentic Monuments
of that Nation, as written by their own most select Antiquaries, and believed
by themselves: I am absorpt in admiration, at the wonderful patience of God
with them in particular, above all other People that I have read of, expecting
their amendment so long, that is, well nigh 3000 years complete, before he
would quite destroy them. A period so large, that within a far less extent of
time, his wrath subverted utterly the Assyrian, Chaldean, Median, Persian,
Macedonian, Roman Empires, and all the Republics of Europe and Affric, and all
other Kingdoms or Dominions, how great or how little soever any where on earth;
whereof we have but the least competent knowledge out of ancient History, or
other authentic book. And yet he continued still the Irish Nation and Monarchy
beyond that extent of time. And yet it is no less apparent in their own
Chronicles, that according to the judgment of man, they had as little deserved
the mercy of God as any of their Neighbors, or other the destroyed Nations.

For to lay aside their Idolatry, and all the appendants of it, which yet among
them in their time of Paganism, were as great and horrible, and provoking of
Heaven as any where else in the world: and to pass over also those other
Immoralities of theirs, how enormous soever in the sight of God, which were
nevertheless but common to them with other Nations, reputed the most civil
among men: certainly (if not among Cannibals, or Lestrigons, or such other
Monsters, unworthy to be called men, or at least to be brought in comparison
with any People that make use of reason, live in society and approve
Government) never has any other Nation upon Earth anneer'd the Milesian race
(inhabiting Ireland) in the most unnatural, bloody, everlasting destructive
Feuds that have been heard, or can well be imagined. Feuds so prodigiously
bloody, that as they were first founded, so they still increased and continued
in blood, even along from the first foundation of the Irish Monarchy in the
blood of Heber, shed in Battle by his Brother Herimon, until the slaughter of
Muirchiortach mhac Neill (the last reputed Monarch saving one) by the hands of
Fearrnibh Fearrmhaighe, and O Brian, or even until the death of Diarmuid na
Ngall (the last King of Leinster) at his Town of Ferns. And yet such Feuds as
not only had for necessary concomitants the greatest pride, most hellish
ambition, and cruellest desires of revenge; but also had for no less necessary
consequents, the most horrible Injustices, Oppressions, Extortions, Rapins,
Desolations of the Country, Perfidiousnesses, Treasons, Rebellions,
Conspiracies, Treacheries, Murders: and all this from time to time, for six and
twenty hundred years, only a very few lucid intervals of the frenzy excepted.
These prodigious provocations of Heaven to that excessive degree wherein they
were National and peculiar to that People only, and the contemplation thereof,
is it that, upon return of it, suspends my soul in admiration at the patience
of God bearing so long with them, in particular, above all other Nations, far
less guilty for ought appears to us in History, and much sooner utterly
subverted by his revenging hand of justice.

Never have we read of any other People in the World so implacably, so
furiously, so eternally set upon the destruction of one another, as first, The
Progenies of Heber and Herimon: then those two or three other descended from
Ire and Ithe, and Breoghuin, all of the same Milesian stock or kindred: and then
again the two former: and then last of all, the descendents of each apart among
themselves, contending for the sovraignty of the whole Island, were. To say
nothing now of those no less bloody contentions of others of them very often
about Provincial, or even lesser Kingdoms and Rights, after that either these
or those petty Kingdoms came up. Never have we heard of any other Country on
Earth, so frequently, so miserably, beyond almost all belief afflicted,
harassed, wasted, turned into a Wilderness, by the accursed Pride of her
Nobles, Tyranny of her Princes, Rebellion of their Subjects, Fury of her Men at
arms, and other Soldiers, Preying, Sacking, Burning all that stood over ground
in the Provinces invaded by them. Never has either book or man told us of any
Region besides Ireland, that beheld so many of her beauteous Fields turned
ruddy, all covered with the bloody gore of above 600 Battles fought on 'em so
cruelly and unnaturally by her own Children of the same Language, Lineage,
Religious rites, tearing out the lives of one another partly for dominion, and
often for mere revenge. Never has the Sun bestowed his light on any other Land,
to behold a hundred and eighteen Monarchs slaughtered by the hands of their own
disloyal Native Subjects; four and twenty of them in Battle, and the rest by
downright Assassination and Murder. And which is yet more hideous, fourscore
and six of them succeeded immediately in their Regal Thrones by those very men
that so villanously had dispatched them. Nay, and a Brother, and a Son also to
be in this number: besides a wicked Sister too, that by the privilege of her
Sex more finely indeed, but I am sure no less impiously adding one more to the
former number of Royal Victims; and this of purpose to make way for her own Son
to mount the Throne, bereaved of life the Monarch Criomhthan mhac Fiodhuigh,
her own Brother, with a cup of Poison ministered by her own hand to him.

I say nothing of Lughac Riamh-Ndearg, murdered by himself: Nothing of Aodh
Ruadh, Diahorba, Niall Caille, those three destroyed by water: Nothing of
Roithsoigh mac Roain, Dathi, Laoghaire mhac Neill, or Lugha mhac Laoghaire, all
four struck dead by Thunderbolts: Nothing of Cormuck Vlsada, that was choak*d
by the evil spirits for not adoring them: Lastly, nothing of Tighernmbuir, long
before any of the former, by either good or evil Angels, on a sudden destroyed,
on Magh Sleachta in Letrim, and together with him three parts of the People of
Ireland on the same Field, and same night, (which was our All Souls Eve, and
the night of the day we name All Saints, or All-Hallows) for their adoring on
that very day and place, the devilish Idol set up by him there to be adored as
the only God. Of none of all these, however strangely killed, either by their
own hands, or by water or thunder, or invisible Demons, or other miraculous
means, do I take notice here, because none of them was taken away by any other
man.

Yet I cannot pass over without special note either Sedhna Jonnarruydgh, or
Simeon Brea^, two of the number dispatched by the hands of men, their own
Subjects: Whereof the former was in a most barbarous manner, even that of
straining his members asunder, tortured to death by the later, who nevertheless
did succeed him next: and this later again in the very same manner bereaved of
life by Duach Fionn, the formers Son, succeeding now by a cruel retaliation in
the Sovereignty, and so transmitting to others this particular feud, which tho
not by torture, yet by murder continued on still. For the same Duach Fionn lost
both his Sovereignty and Life by the hands of Muireadhach Bolgrach, Son to the
above Simeon Breac: and this Muireadhach also both his in like manner to Euno
Dearg, Son to that very Duach now mentioned. Which Euno having thus not only
satisfied his revenge by sacrificing to his Fathers Ghost, but his ambition too
by acquiring the Monarchy, and enjoying it twelve years, had the great luck to
die a natural death. I say great luck, etc. For in short, of so vast a number
of Irish Monarchs of the sole Milesian Race or Conquest, as we have seen in the
beginning of this Treatise, in all 181. not above nine and twenty (for ought we
know, or I can observe by reading over their Lives) came to a natural end. All
the rest of them (besides a few whose deaths, what they were, or how, are not
mentioned at all) perishing as you have seen, except only Nial Gluinndubh, and
Conghallach mhac Maoilmhithe, both in two several Battles killed by Foreign
Enemies, the Danes, in their second War on Ireland; unless peradventure you may
think it fit to except also Brian Boraimhe from that general rule, upon this
ground that he was killed by a Dane; tho the Battle against him was no less
composed of Irish than Danes.

Which account as well of those Irish Monarchs, as of all the foresaid
prodigious number of Battles fought between the several contending Parties of
that Nation, during their eternal bloody feuds in the long succession of so
many Ages, I have taken the pains by reading over attentively, at least twice
or thrice, Dr. Ketings History, and all the several Reigns of the said
Monarchs, and consequently all the memorable acts performed or happened in each
of them, to give here in brief: that is by summing up together what is so
dispersedly given by him in his far more Voluminous work. Which, whoever please
to consult, may find not only the names and acts, but even the genealogies of
all the said Monarchs carried up along to their several stocks, Heber, Herimon,
Ire, Ithe, and Breoghuin, the Son of Bratha, who dyed in Spain long before
Milesius himself was born. And he shall moreover find not only the principal
actors in and occasions of fighting every one of so vast a number of Battles,
and the time or Reign of the Monarch under whom each of them happened; but the
particular places or Fields, on which at least one half of them had been
fought, and from which each of them respectively has its particular
denomination.

I say at least one half, etc. because I find not in Keting the Fields or
places (by particular name set down) either of sixteen of those 25 Battles
fought by Caomhaol, youngest Son to Heber, against the Progeny of Herimon; or
of fourteen of those other 27 Battles, wherein Tighearnmhuir that killed
Caomhaol, and thereupon succeeding him in the Sovereignty, foiled both his and
all his Fathers Race; or of any, except the first of all those hundred and five
of Tuathal Teachtvair fought by him and the Nobility in five and twenty years,
against the Plebeians, and the two usurping Monarchs elected by them
successively one after another, Cairbre Caitcheann and Conrach mhac Rossae; or
even of any of those other, yet much more numerous of Con Ceadchathach, in all
260 (whence the Irish gave him in their own Language the furname of
Ceadchathach, Cead in Irish, imports an hundred; and Cath, a Battle.
and in Latin called him Constantinus Centibellis, which we may render in
English Con of the hundred Battles) which he had Victoriously fought to reduce
the Provinces of Ireland to his own terms: foiling the Province of Vlster in a
hundred of them, the Mounster men in a hundred more, and those of Leinsten in
sixty: though after all, he was himself in ten other Battles by Mogha Nuathat,
King of Mounster, so mightily beaten and worsted, that he was forced at last
even fairly to part stakes, and come to a new division of Ireland, in two equal
parts between 'em, by the Mere of Eisger-Riada, as it were a line drawn from
the Eastern Sea at Dubh-linn (now Dublin) to the Western at Galway: quitting so
the whole Southern side of the line for ever to Mogh, and contenting himself
with the North-side only. Which division, as it continued in after Ages (tho
not as to the first purpose of it, but seldom) and took its name from those two
Dividers, the Southern part of it being in Irish called Leath Mogh, and the
Northern Leath Cuinn; the former importing the half of Mogh, and the latter the
half of Con (for the word Leath signifies half): So it transmitted to their
several Posterities, and rest of the Princes and People inhabiting either of
these two halves, a strong addition to their former Feuds, and new general
occasion of many cruel Fights. Of all and every of which Fights, and all the
rest whatsoever, except only those but now excepted, the date, and place, and
persons principally concerned, and particular occasions too not seldom, may be
read in the foresaid History of Dr. Keting. And among them, seven of those ten
Battles fought by Mogha against Con Ceadchathach, particularly named from the
places where they were fought, viz. the Battles of Brosnuighe, and Sampaire,
and Greine, and Atha-Luaine, and Luighe Croich, and Asail, and Vsnach; the
names of the other three are lost.

17. But that which in this whole account of their Battles fought, and Monarchs
killed by their own Natives, must be not only strange, but astonishing, is,
that the fury extended even to many Ages of Christianity, or rather indeed in a
very great measure to the whole extent or duration of their being a free
People. In the very first four hundred years of Christian Religion flourishing
in Ireland so conspicuously, as we have seen before, with Myriads of holy
Professors, yet their Princes and Nobles, and other Martial men were as
furiously given to the destruction of one another, as their Ancestors had been
in the time of Paganism. In so much, that of 33 Monarchs, who (according even
to Polychronicon and Cambrensis) had Reigned successively in that Nation from
Laogirius (in whose Reign, and fourth year of it, S. Patrick entered upon the
work of their Conversion) to the Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, in which the first
Invasion and War of the Danes upon em began, four and twenty were by their own
Irish Christian Subjects most unchristianly murdered in the Island of Saints;
six of them in Battle, and eighteen without battle or other solemnity or
ceremony, than that of the vilest Assassination committed on great Princes. Nor
were the six Battles in which those six Monachs were killed the only Battles
fought in that space of time wherein the primitive fervor of Christianity most
flourished among other Professors of it in that Country. So far otherwise, that
of those 33 Monarchs who Reigned in that time before the first Landing of the
Danes, I find but three only, Aodh Slain, Colman Rimhigh, and Swine Mean that
were not in Arms against any at all, Subjects or Foreigners; who nevertheless
were all three murdered by some wicked Irish men, their own Subjects: and
besides them, Blaithmhac and Diarmuid Ruannigh, two Brothers in like manner
jointly enjoying the Sovereign Power, and then Seachnasach immediately
succeeding, in all three more, that although they were in Arms at home, it was
not against any of their own People, but the two former against the Saxons and
Brittons invading them under the leading of their General Brit (or Berthus) and
the third against the Picts Landing in Vlster, whom the Forces of that Province
overthrew presently; and yet he also was murdered by his own People. All the
rest of the three and thirty Monarchs had their Swords drawn (whether justly or
injustly I dispute not here) against their own Rebellious Subjects at home; and
these against them. So that besides infinite depredations, wastings, burnings
of the Country; besides the endless harrassing of the poor Peasants; and even
sometime the violating of Sanctuaries, and burning of Churches, and killing of
Clergy men, and Priests, and Bishops too for company; besides lesser Fights and
skirmishes without number: you may read in Manuscript. in the several Reigns of
those Kings.
Keting above 58 main Battles fought between their Princes, Kings, and
Monarchs, within that period of time: a period that wanted seven or eightyears
of 400.

18. And that you may understand how bloody, how destructive indeed those
greater Battles might have generally been: I will instance here in two of them.
First, in that which they call the Battle of Allmbain, wherein about the year
of Christ, 920. the Monarch Ferghall mhac Maolduin with an Army of one and
twenty thousand men invading and fighting Murchoe mhac Bruin King of Leinster,
who had but nine thousand one hundred and sixty men to oppose him, was himself
killed, and together with him seven thousand of his Army on the place; besides
269 persons more of them so strangely frighted, that they fell into that kind
or height of frenzy which the Irish call in their Language Dubhghealtacht,
flying over ground, like frighted Fowls from all People they met or saw. This
ill fortune of this Monarch Fearghall was thought to have happend him, because
a Party of his men in their march to this Field had spoild a Sanctuary called
Cillin, and the Anchoret there living had cursed the Monarch and his whole
Army. Secondly, in that which they call the Battle of Seanaigh and Vchaidh,
fought between the Monarch Aodh Ollan, and Aodh Colgan, King (also) of
Leinster, yea sought with that fury on both sides, that besides this Monarch
himself mortally wounded, and a very great slaughter of his Army; and besides
Aodh Colgan killed, together with Bran Beg, the petty King of half Leinster;
nine thousand more of the Leinster men alone remained dead on the Field; tho
the said Monarch died not of his wounds received here, but was killed sometimes
after in the Battle of Seir. But what I cannot here but particularly take
notice of, as worthy of special remark, are two things. The one, that this fury
of pursuing one another with Battles, and Slaughters, and Murders, even all
along from their conversion to Christianity, for the extent of 400 years, had
been so strangely violent, that it gave them no leisure at all to think of
preserving, much less enlarging their former Conquests.

In their time of Paganism how bloodily soever the several Factions had been
commonly bent to mutual destruction; yet the prevailing Parties now and then
had such generous public resolutions, as to give over at home, and employ
their Warlike spirits abroad to enlarge their Dominions. We have formerly seen
their brave exploits in subduing the Orcades, Hebrides, Isle of Man, and then
all Scotland; and then making the rest of Great Britain tributary, and last of
all enterprizing on France it self in the decay of the Roman Empire, till Niall
the Great was no less treacherously than revengfully murdered there amidst his
Army camping on the River of Loyrc, as has been said before. I might also have
added another adventure and enterprise of theirs on France, with a resolute
Army under the leading of their Monarch Dathi, alias Fearadhach, who as in the
Sovereignty of Ireland, so in his design on France succeeded immediately to the
foresaid Niall the Great: tho having Landed there, and marched through till he
came near the Alps, he was here struck dead by a Thunderbolt from Heaven: for
so the Irish Chronicles deliver his death. As they do also the cause of it
(according to the conjectures of men) to have been, that he suffered the Cell
of a Christian holy Anchorite, by name Parmenius, to be ransacked: who
thereupon cursing this Heathen Sacrilegious King, and calling to Heaven for
Vengeance, that exemplary punishment showed his prayer was heard by God. But
whatever the cause of it was, the place where it happened shows how vigorously
he pursued the brave adventures of so many other Pagan Kings and Princes of
Ireland to enlarge their Dominions abroad.

19. And because peradventure it may be worth the while, take here in short a
Catalogue of those Irish Monarchs, Princes, and other chief Nobles, who by
their first subduing, and then planting of Albain (as they call it) gave it the
name of Scotland. 1. Aongus Ollbhuathach, not the VII Monarch, nor Monarch of
any number at all, but Son to Fiachae Labhruinne the XIV. Monarch or King of
Ireland (for so you must correct what is said of him otherwise before page 17.)
I say this Aongus entered Albuin to recover of the Picts the chiefry due to the
King of Ireland his Father. Wherein finding them refractory, he gave them and
the Britains, or Aborigines, inhabiting at that time the Northern parts of
Great Britain so many overthrows, that he reduced them at last to his own
conditions, making them not only Tributarles but Subjects to the Kings of
Ireland: which happened about 250 years after the arrival of the Iberians there
from Spain, that is well nigh 2800 years since. 2. Aongus surnamed Ollmhucuidh
(from his extraordinary great Hogs: for Muc in their Language signifies a Hog
in English) the XVI. King of Ireland, of the Milesian Conquest, fought the
Picts and Firr Bholg inhabiting the Orcades, and other Islands of Scotland, and
utterly subdued them in 50 Battles. For it was he, and not the foresaid Aongus,
surnamed Ollbhuathach (or the Victorious) that fought them and subdued all
those Islanders. And therefore by this observation also, be pleased to correct
what you find otherwise in the foresaid 16 page. 3. Many centuries after, the
sixtieth Monarch of Ireland, Reachta Righdhearg crossing the narrow Seas, and
Landing in Albain (as the Irish call that Country still, which we call
Scotland) once more established on the Picts what those other Princes did
before him. This Reachta Righdhearg was the first of three Irish Monarchs born
in Mounster, that enjoyed the Sovereign Power of Albain. The other two were Mac
Con (otherwise called Lughae) and Criomthan mhac Fiodaigh. 4. There went also
thither (about the year of Christ, 150.) on his own account with considerable
Forces Cairbre Riadfadae (Son to the 106. Monarch of Ireland, by name Conaire
mhac Mogha Lauae) who Conquered large Dominions for himself in the more
Northern parts of that Kingdom, and left his Posterity after him there; who are
those, or at least a great and the more ancient part of those called by ^^da.
Nistor. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1.
Venerable Bede Dal-Rheudini, as being the Inhabitants and first Irish Planters
of Dal-Rheuda, or as the Irish call it, Dal-Riada, in Scotland. Whether it be
not called so from that Cairbre Riadbfadae, that is from this surname of his,
Riadfadae, being changed by V. Bid to Rheuda, as it might easily be, I know
not. But this I know that Dal, which is prepos'd in the composition, signifies
Part, or Lot. And so the whole word Dal-Rheuda, or Dal-Riada signifies the Part
of such a man who was the chief in Conquering it. 5. The foresaid Mac Con,
alias Lughae, within a few years more, at least within less than thirty,
purfuing the same examples, Landed in Scotland with a power of his Countrymen
Adventurers. For it was from thence he returned back into Ireland to fight the
Battle called Maigh Mhuchruimhe, wherein being Victorious, and killing the
Monarch Art Aoinfir, he made himself Sovereign in his place. 6. This Mac Con's
Grandson, Fiachae Ceanann entering likewise Scotland, not only gained large
possessions, but left his Posterity after him to give a beginning to Mac Allin
and his Family there, who are all descended from him. 7. Colla Vais, who had
been four years, tho by Usurpation, the 115. Monarch of Ireland, when he was by
the lawful Heir, his own Cousin German, Muireadhach Tiriogh, defeated in
Battle, and forced to fly, adventuring over to Scotland with the two other
Collaes, his Brethren, and rest of his adherents, and acquiring great scopes of
ground there, became the Grandsire of the Clan Ndomnaills both in Scotland and
Ireland. For all of this Surname, in either Kingdom, in their several
generations or branches derive their extraction in a direct line from this
Colla Vais: and consequently neither from Herimon or Heber, but from Ithe, a
Cousin of theirs, who was the Son of Breoghuin mhic Bratha, of the same stock
with Milesius. 8. Next after that Colla, did Criamhthan mhac Fioda, the 120.
King of Ireland, with a Royal Army invade Albain, I mean Scotland. He had in
his company another very powerful Noble man called Earc mhac Eocha Muingreahar,
mhic Aongussa. And from him the Septs, not only of Clann Eirc, and Cineall
Gabhrain, but those of Cineall Conghvill, Cineall Naonghussa, and Cineall
Conriche Anile, with their distinct propagations and Families in Scotland, ever
since to this present are descended. 9. Corck mhac Luighdhioch is the next in
order that deserves mention. Because that by the false and wicked surmises of
his Stepmother, upon his refusal to consent to her incestuous Lust (she was
Daughter to Fiachac mhac Reill, King of Ely) falling into his Fathers
displeasure; and thereupon forced to seek his fortune in Scotland, and arriving
there, accompanied with such armed Troops as he could raise; and then by his
own deserts coming into such extraordinary favor with the Scottish King
Fearradhach Fionn, otherwise called Fionn Chormac, that he obtained his
Daughter called Muingfionn to Wife; he had issue by her, besides other Sons,
Many Leambna, from whom the Sept of Leambnuidh in Scotland, and Cairbre
Cruithnioch, from whom the Families of Eoghanacht Muighe Geirghin, in the same
Kingdom were propagated. 10. Soon after him Niall Naoighiallach the 121. and
most powerful indeed of all the Irish Monarchs that were at any time before or
since, entered Scotland with so great a force that there was no resisting him.
But having said enough of him before, I need not add to it here. 11. In the
last place, and year of Christ 493. (much about ninety three years after the
said Warlike Prince Niall the Great, surnamed also Naoighiallach, had been
killed in France, and in the 20. year of Lugha the 125 Monarch (Son to
Laogirius) his Reign, the six Sons of Muireadhach So says Keting in the Reign
of Niall Naoighiallach. yet formerly in the Reign of Oilioll Mol^, he calls
them the six Sons of Eirc mhic Eachae Muinreamhair.
mhic Eoghuin, Mhic Neill, King of Vlster, being six Brothers of Mairchiartach
Mor, that soon after came to be Monarch of Ireland, namely to the two
Fergusses, the two Aongussaes, and the two Loarns, together with other Septs or
Families of Dal-Riada, in the same Province of Vlster, adventured for Albain:
and whether or no they gave the denomination of Dal-Rheuda, or Dal-Riada to the
Country there mostly possessed by them, tho at least for a great part of it
planted before (as we have seen) by the Progeny of Cairbre Rioghfadae; Eochae
Muinreamhar of the Progeny of Cairbre Ridhfadae, had two Sons, Earcha and
Elchon. From the former, the the Families of Dal-Riada in Scotland were
descended. From the later those of Dal-Riada in Ulster. So Keting soys in the
Reign of Art Aonsir. where he further says that the two Dal-Riades, or Families
of them have been distinguished by the surname or nickname of Russach, given
those of Dal Riada in Ulster.
the Irish Chronicles are plain and positive herein, that they gave to
themselves and all their Countrymen the Scots of Albion the first King that
ever they had of the name of Fergus, who was one of those six Brothers. And it
is he that both the Irish and English Scots have since, for his honor, surnamed
the Great; as likewise Fergus I. Not that he was indeed the first Irish (or
Scottish) King of Dal-Rheuda, (wherein Buchanan, and all the rest of his
Fellow-Historians that were English Scots, are extremely out: for long before
that very Fergus there have been many Scottish Kings of Irish descent in
Dal-Rheuda:) but that he was greater than any of the former, and the first of
his own name that ruled there. To conclude, so many were the Invasions, and so
great the Plantations made in that Country by the Irish Milesians, and other
Gathelians in their time of Paganism, that as they Conquered, so they planted
it thoroughly at last, having quite expelled the Picts. And so they kept it
possessed entirely by themselves, as Lords thereof, for some Ages: That is,
until after the Norman Conquest of England, very many of the Saxons retiring
thither under their protection, others invited in, and accompanying William the
Scottish King, and both of them multiplying mightily* they not only made the
other Nations which are now called English Scots, but by degrees gained from
them, as we see, even all other the better parts of that Kingdom besides the
Lowlands.

I say accompanying William the Scottish King. For Stow in his Chronicle tells,
That this King William of Scotland, Fol. 152.
after he had been taken Prisoner by Henry II. of England, carried over to
Normandy, confined at Roan, until he compounded for his Ransom; returned back
to England; set free at York upon his paying down 4000, etc. and now being on
his journey home, and seeing the Noblemen, his own Subjects, would come no
nearer than Pembels in Scotland, to receive him; therefore took with him many
younger Sons of such of the English Nobility as showed him most kindness in the
time of his Imprisonment. That he entertained them, and detained them, and
bestowed on them great Estates and Possessions in Scotland, which he took from
such as had rebelled against him there. That this of their waiting on him to
Scotland was in the year of Christ, 1174. And that their names were Bailliol,
Brewse, Soulley, Moubrey, St. Clare* Hay, Giff^rd, Ramsey, Lanudell, Biscy,
Berk, Ley, Willegen, B^ys, Montgomery, Valx, Colenuille, Friser, Gran^^,
G^^lay, and diverse others.

20. Yet my meaning is not to assert positively, that the foresaid last
Invasion or Plantation made by those Vlster Dal-Rheudans, and six Sons of
Muredus King of Vlster, had been made in the time of Irelands Paganism. I know
it happened in the 20th. year of the Sovereignty of Lugha (mhac Laoghaire)
Monarch of Ireland, which was of Christ, 493. and consequently the very next
year after Patricks death, according to Ketings computation; tho according to
Jocelinus, it must have been the next saving one. I know also, it is supposed
by the Writers of this holy man's life, especially Jocelinus, c. 191. that even
three and thirty years before his death, all Ireland, together with the Isle of
Man, and all other Islands then subject to the Irish, had been thoroughly and
wholly converted to Christian Religion by him. Which makes it indeed very
probable, that this last expedition of the Irish into Scotland was wholly
consisting of Christian Adventurers. And yet I am not certain of it for these
reasons. 1. Because Jocelinus (c. 49.) and others tell us that notwithstanding
all the prodigious wonders done by S. Patrick, and many of them in the very
presence of Laogirius the Monarch, (Father to this Lugha,) he was never
converted, but died in his Infidelity, being killed at Greallach (a Village
near the River Liffy in that Country, which we now call the County of Kildare)
by a Thunderbolt shot at him from Heaven. Tho Keting partly attributes this
Vengeance of God fallen on him, to his perfidious breach of solemn promise made
by him upon Oath, invoking the Sun, Moon, and all the Planets to attest it.
Which Oath he made to obtain his Liberty, when he was foiled and taken Prisoner
in the Battle of Ath-Dara, by the Lagenians and Criomthan mhac Euno: the
contents of it being, to remit for ever the heavy Bor^imh (as they call it) or
Fine, which he challenged from them as due to him and all other Monarchs after
him. 2. Because this very Monarch Luigha, in whose Reign that Expedition of the
Vlster Dal-Rheudans, and six Sons of Muredus happened, tho he lived and
continued his Sovereignty 15 years longer, was nevertheless at last struck
likewise dead by a Thunderbolt: and the Irish Antiquaries of those times have
interpreted this Judgment on him as a just punishment of the great disrespects
and dishonor done by him to the same extraordinary wonderful Servant of God.
And these are my reasons for doubting. For it seems not likely, that if Lugha
had been converted, he would after his Conversion have so behaved himself
toward that Saint, as to incense Heaven to punish him in so dreadful a manner.
And as unlikely it is, that in case he had so mis-behaved himself, during his
Infidelity, he would not after his Conversion have repented so heartily
thereof, as to merit the Saints prayers for him to God, at least for diverting
so terrible a judgment. And then we know how far the example of a wicked
Monarch might have prevailed with other wicked men to keep them still in their
Infidelity.

But be this conjecture true or false; nay, be it supposed for certain, that
Lugha and all Ireland every one, and consequently those six Sons of Muireadhach
King of Vlster, with their Dal-Rheudans were Christians then, when they entered
Scotland: it appears notwithstanding out of the Irish Chronicles, that as they
were the first, so they were the last and only Adventurers any where abroad out
of Ireland, since its Conversion to Christianity; the Warlike humor of its
Monarchs, Princes, and Nobles, being always after that, wholly employed at home
in destroying one another. Insomuch that they gave not themselves either
opportunity or leisure to look after not so much as the payment of Chiefries or
Tributes due to them from their Dominions abroad in the Islands or Terra Firma
it self of Scotland. Not one of all their Monarchs, for ought appears in their
History, having at any time since entertained no not a thought of employing
their Arms that way, save only Aodh mhac Aiumhiriogh the 10th. undoubted
Christian Monarch, who proposed it in his great Parliament at Drom Ceatha, and
was generously resolved upon it' until by the customary obstacle of a Civil War
at home, he was not only soon diverted from that resolution, but himself killed
in the Battle of Beluigh Duin Bholg, fought against him by Brandubh King of
Leinster; as this Brandubh also, not long after, was by his own Lagenian
Subjects in the Battle of Cam-Chluana.

By all which you may perceive that Christian Religion wrought so little on
that People toward the abatement of their mortal feuds, that under it, even in
its first four hundred years among them, their Princes were much more fatally
engaged in pursuing one another with fire and sword, and horrid slaughters, to
the utter undoing of themselves, and weakening of their Country, and making it
an easy prey to Foreiners after, than their very Pagan Predecessors had been,
whereof so many had extended their Dominions far and near, and still enlarged
and kept them for so many Ages abroad; whatever in the mean time their
dissentions were at home. And this is one of those two things I would
especially remark here.

12. The other is, That not even the greatest holiness of some of their very
greatest and most justly celebrated Saints has been exempt from the fatality of
this genius of putting their Controversies to the bloody decision of Battles;
tho they foresaw the death of so many thousands must needs have followed, or at
least be hazarded to follow. Even Columb-Cille himself, so religious a Monk,
Priest, Abbot, so much a man of God, was nevertheless the very Author, Adviser,
Procurer of fighting three several Battles, namely those of Cuile-Dreimbne,
Cuile-Rathan, and Cuile Feadha. The first on this occasion. At a Parliament
held at Taragh by the Monarch Diardmuid mhic Fergusse Ceirrbheoil, it happened
that contrary to the most sacred and severe Laws of that priviledg'd place, one
Cuornane mhac Aodh had killed a Gentleman: and that this Cuorn^ne flying away
presently to shelter himself under the wings of Domhnal and Ferghusse, the Sons
of Muirchiortach mhac Earcha, two powerful men in their own Territory: and
they, for his better assurance, recommending him to Columb-Cille's protection:
the Monarch nevertheless lighting on him, put him to death for his unpardonable
crime at Taragh. Which Columb-Cille resented so grievously, that he persuaded
such Families of the Neales as inhabited the North (who, by way of distinction
from those other Neales living in the South of Ireland, were called Clanna
Neill in Tuaisg^^art, as the said other were Clanna Neill in Disgc^art) to
fight the Monarch, while himself prayed to God for their good success. And it
seems God was pleased to hear his prayer for humbling the Monarch. For the
issue of the Battle fought so by those Neales at Cuile Druimhne was, that
Diarmuid not only saw himself routed, but almost his whole Army killed in that
very Field. The second on this occasion. Dal-Narruidh and other Vltonians had
in a difference twixt Columb-Cille and Comghall showed themselves unjustly
partial against Columb, as he thought. And therefore he had the Battle of Cuile
Rathan fought against them. Who this Comghall was, I cannot certainly tell* tho
I think he might be the great Comghall, alias Congellus, Founder and Abbot of
Beannchuir, of whom so much has been said before. I am sure he and Colum-Cille
were contemporaries, and of the same Province of Vlster. But for being Author
of the third Battle, Columb-Cille had a much more specious cause (it I may
presume to interpose my simple judgment) than either of the two former. Baodhan
mhac Niueadha, who had been Monarch but one whole year, being in some
extraordinary danger from his Enemies, Columb-Cille passed his word in the
nature of a Sanctuary to him, to keep him safe in that extremity. Which Colmane
mhac Colmain not regarding, he had him set upon and murdered by the two Cummins
(viz. Cummin mhac Colmain Bhig, and Cummin in hac Libhrein) at Carrig Leime in
Eich, or the Horse-leap in Jomairge. And this was the cause that moved
Columb-Cille to persuade and be Author of the Battle of Cuile Feadha, fought
against Colmane mhac Diarmuda.

It is true, That whatever, or how just soever the causes of each, or all those
three Battles had seemed to Columb-Cille; yet the holy Bishop Molaisse was so
far from approving any of them, that for engaging in them any way, he not only
most severely reproved Columb-Cille, but enjoined him the grievous penance of
departing presently out of Ireland, and never more during life to see it. It is
also true, that Columb-Cille with all humility and readiness obeying this
injunction departed forthwith to Scotland: where the power of God was with him
so eminently in converting such vast numbers of Infidels to Christ, as if God
himself from all eternity had preordained those three Battles to be the
occasion of saving the Picts. And no less true it is, That when the great
Parliament of Ireland was summoned by the Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhirogh to
assemble at Drom Ceatha, as they did, and sat there thirteen months, without
intermission or Prorogation, debating principally those three things which he
proposed to them. 1. That of Banishing for ever all the Poets out of the
Kingdom, by reason of their being an excessive, intolerable burden to the
People. Whereof you may see strange particulars, in the following account.

This was the fourth time the Poets (whom the Irish in their Language call
Ollamhs) were by a general Decree all of them condemned to Banishment into
Dal-Riada in Scotland, by reason of their insolency, excessive number, and
burden to the People. For 1. They begged all whatever seemed to be most valued
by the Noblemen; who out of a foolish custom that prevailed too long, could
deny them nothing. And therefore they had the impudence to beg of this very
Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhiriogh the richest and most precious Jewel in all his
Treasury, and had it. 2. Their number was near a third part of the People of
Ireland. So says Keting, if my Copy of his work be right. There was a thousand
of them that kept Trains of Underlings waiting on them continually wherever
they went. The chiefest of all had 30 men, for his own particular train. The
next to him 15. and so forth descending; every one of them had some number in
his own proper retinue, to the very last of 1000 leading Poets. 3. They were
all of 'em, with all their numerous trains, yearly cess'd on the other
Inhabitants of the Kingdom from Allhallows-day till May Day, even six entire
months of the year. And these I think were sufficient reasons to Banish them,
as I have said they were three several times before this Parliament of
Drom-Ceatha had been chiefly called for the same end. For you are to
understand, that after each of their former Banishments they were still
harbored in the North until they procured license to return to all the other
Provinces. The first time, being a thousand in number, at the intercession of
Columb-Cille, who went in behalf of Conchabhar King of Ulster, to meet and
invite them, they were staid, received and maintained by him and his Nobles of
that Province till seven years were over. The second time by Fiachna mhac
Baodhaine King of Ulster, but for one year only, their number being seven
hundred. The third time by Maobchoba King of Ulster; likewise one whole year,
when their number was full 1200. But this fourth time, at the Parliament at
Drom-Ceatha, tho Colum-Cille had interposed for them all he could, yet being
convinced by the Monarch's reasons he acquiesed at last in what was decreed
there, not only for the suppression of their multitudes, and reformation of
their abuses, and ease of the People; but even for preservation of their own
Language, Laws, Poetry, History, Genealogy, and Chronology, arts both useful
and delightful to all ingenious Men, and civil Nations. As 1. That the Monarch,
Provincial, and other lesser Kings, and every Lord of a Cantred (or Barony)
should each of them entertain a Poet of his own; bestow on him and his
Posterity for ever, a competent Estate in Lands, to live upon; and that both
his Person, Lands, and other Goods should be exempt from all public duties. 2.
That for preserving the sciences they professed, there should be some public
Free Schools both appointed and endowed with Lands by the Estates of the
Kingdom in general. And pursuant to this Decree those two in Breithfne, the one
at Rath-Ceanaidh, the oother at Magh-Sleacht, were established. 3. That the
Monarch's Poet or Ollamh, should be the Ard-Ollamh, that is Arch-Poet and
Arch-Professor of their knowledge: and that he should have the appointment of,
and a superintendency too over the rest. 4. And lastly none otherwise, or above
this number to be allowed.

2. That of deposing Scanlane Mor mhac Ceanfoaladh, King of Ossory, who was
then his Prisoner, and committed even by Authority of that Parliament, for his
refusing to pay the said Monarch a certain annual rent challenged as due from
him. 3. That of invading Scotland with a Royal Army to force the payment of
Chiefry, Tributes, and other Duties formerly paid thence to his Predecessors.
And when Columb-Cille was persuaded to go thither out of Scotland, of purpose
to intercede for the Poets, interpose for his devoted Friend the said Scanlane
Mor King of Ossory, and to divert the Monarch from his resolution of invading
Scotland: nevertheless he was so rigorously, and even so literally observant of
that penance enjoined him by Molaisse, that he had continually during the
whole time of going thither, staying there, and returning back, a Searcloath in
such manner hanging down before his eyes, that he never saw light all the
while, nor did at any time after during life, as neither before since the
command laid upon him by Molaisse, any part or foot of Irelands ground.

Which admirable instance of the most perfect resignation of his will,
judgment, soul, to the greatest exactness of Christian discipline, together
with the prodigious austerity of his life, and mortification of his body, by
watching and fasting to such a degree, that he seemed a very Skeleton alive:
even all his ribs, and other bones of that side whereon he lay on the sandy
ground, which was his ordinary bed in his little Cell, being perfectly
countable in the print of them remaining there, when he rose up from it I say
that all this together duly considered, besides his continual prayer and
contemplation, makes me not wonder at all that he should have both converted
Nations, and wrought so many stupendous miracles above all the power of Nature
by invoking God, as are reported of him in his life. Nor consequently that in
this very Parliament of Drom^eath, upon denial of his two last requests, the
one for setting at liberty the foresaid King of Ossory, the other for not
making War on Dal-Rheuda in Scotland, or requiring Chiefry or other duties of
them any more, he should, as he was departing and taking his leave of them, so
confidently have prayed to God, and withal prophetically told the Monarch there
in public. 1. That Scanlane Mor should be freed that very night by God
himself, and be with him wherever he should chance to be that same night before
he went to midnight Prayers. 2. That Scotland should never more pay tribute,
chief rent, or other duty of subjection to Ireland. Both which predictions were
to a tittle accomplished. But these matters, either of his austerity, or
sanctity, or miraculous power, and prophetical spirit are foreign to this place.

And therefore I return to tell you, that I had no other design in relating
those three Battles fought by his authority, than to let you see by such
convincing proofs the native genius of that People, even in those early days of
Ghristianity flourishing among them in all its glory. A fatal genius indeed, to
put their controversies to the decisive judgment of the God of Hosts in Battle,
without regard either of any other way of arbitration of man, or of so many
thousand of unfortunate men that perished still by this bloody Test, or even of
the consequential weakening of their Country by it; and this to such a degree as
must have exposed them all at last an easy prey to Foreigners. Yet such their
genius was, and so it continued still. Neither Monarchs, nor Provincial Kings,
nor other Princes or Leaders among them seemed to be at all moved by the holy
injunction of Molaisse, or penitential divine observation of it by Columb-Cille
all his life after, in expiating his former zeal. They, notwithstanding all
their Christianity, went on all of them generally in the old beaten road,
either of Battles, (or which was worse) of Murders, even from this very Monarch
Aodh Aimmhiriogh for 300 years more. That is, just as their Predecessors had
done before in the very first century of that holy religion among them. For it
was within this earliest and holiest Age of all, that we read of six of their
first Christian Sovereigns of Ireland downright murdered by their own Subjects
at home, besides one more killed in Battle by them: Baodhan mhac Nineadha, by
the two Cummins: Ainmhire mhac Seadna, by Ferghussa mhac Neill: Diarmuid mhac
Ferghussa Ceirbheoil by Aodh Dubh mhac Suibhne: the two Brothers who jointly
ruled, Eochae and Baodhan, by Cronan mhac Tighernaigh King of Cionachta Ghlinne
Geimhion: Tuathal Maolgharubh, by Maolmortha at a place called Grealla Eillte:
and Oilloll Molt the first of them all, in the Battle of Ocha, by Lugha mhac
Laoghaire, who thereupon immediately succeeded him in the Sovereignty: S.
Patrick himself their great Apostle being yet alive among them.

22. To this unhappy Unchristian genius of the Princes and Nobles among that
People for righting themselves, or deciding their quarrels whether right or
wrong, by their own swords either in Battle, or the baser way of surprizal and
murder, you may add, as no less worthy of special remark, the highest injustice
of too many of their Monarchs both Heathen and Christian, in punishing the
personal crime of one man by laying intolerable Fines on whole Provinces at
their pleasures, and exacting them by Military execution, if otherwise not
precisely paid. For example, Aongus Ainchille King of Leinster, having in the
time of Paganism Married Dairin one of the two only Daughters of Tuathal
Teachtuar the 101. Monarch of Ireland, and within a little time after visited
his Father in Law at Tarach, and made him believe that Dairin was dead, and
then prayed that for the greater strengthening of their Friendship he might have
his other Daughter and her Sister (by name Fithir) to Wife, and by earnest suit
obtained her: She was no sooner brought home by him to his own House, than
seeing her Sister alive, and thereby finding her self abused, not only she,
through extremity of shame seizing her, presently fell down dead in the place,
but Dairin likewise through excess of grief breathed out her last upon her
Sisters Corpse in the very same place, and almost same moment of time,
accompanying so her Ghost to the other life with her own. Which coming to the
Monarch, their Fathers knowledge, did so enrage him, that entering Leinster with
a mighty Force to destroy all the People of that whole Province indistinctly
with Fire and Sword, though they knew nothing at all of the crime; he could not
be otherwise appeased or withdrawn from this resolution, than by their
universal submission for themselves and Posterity after them to a Fine (Eirick
they call it) of 6000 Beeves, 6000 Muttons, 6000 fat Hogs, 6000 Mantles, 6000
Cauldrons or Pots of ^^ass, and 6000 ounces of Silver, to be every second year
paid by them to him, and all future Kings of Ireland for ever. A Fine indeed
both heavy, unjust, tyrannical, and which added so mightily to their former
feuds, that upon the sole account of it diverse Battles have been fought; and
much even Christian blood in after-Ages spilt. For one third of it was for the
Conacians, another to the Oirghillians or Methians, and another to the Clanna
Neills of the North: as who had all of 'em assisted that Monarch Tuathal
Teachtvar with their Forces to impose it. And forty Monarchs in a continual
succession after him, did even by Fire land word exact the payment of it when
refused, until at last Fionachtae Fleadhach the four or five and twentieth
Christian Monarch, did about the year of Christ 922. at the intercession of S.
Moling, set Leinster free by remitting and abolishing it for ever after.

Another example here of, might be the former Fine laid (about 160 years before
Tuathal Teachtuar* time) on the same Province of Leinster, by the Monarch
Conaire Mor Mhac Eidrisg^^oil, for the death of his said Father Eidrisg^^oil,
who was likewise Monarch of Ireland before him, but after six years Reign was
murdered in Leinster, at Allmhain, (we now call it Allon) by Nuadhath Neacht,
who thereupon succeeded him in the Sovereignty, though he held it only for half
a year. For at the expiration of so little a time of his Reign, he also was
killed by the foresaid Cona^re Mor. Now this C^naire having thus possessed
himself of the Sovereign power of all Ireland, and (whatever his end was at
last) reigned prosperously many years (some say 30. others 70*) did by his
absolute authority, which had no control* and for the said death of his Father
Eidrisg^^oile, lay upon Leinster a perpetual yearly Eiriook of 300 white Cows,
300 fat Hogs, 300 Vessels of Ale, and 300 Swords with golden handles. And
withal, as part of their Eiriock, forced them to quit the whole Dominion of
Ossory (which had a very large extent then, and they were three Countries of
that name joined together) from Gawran to Greine Airbe, near the Moore called
Main Eile, and give it up for ever to the Division or Province of Mounster;
yea, and to confirm this surrender by invoking all the Planets to witness that
they and as much as in them lay, their Posterity after them, should stand to it
irrevocably. All which taken together was peradventure a no less (if not much
more) oppressive Eiriock, than the latter imposed by Tuathal Teachtvar. Yet
because I find not how far the Leinster men were, or were not guilty of
Eidrisg^eoil* death, I say nothing positively of this matter* though Keting
relates that six Provincial Kings of Mounster, viz. Oilioll Olum, Enghan mhae
Oiliolla, Fiacha Muilleathan, Oilioll Flann, Beg, Lugha, his Son, and Gorck
mhac Luighiodh, in a succession Reigning there, had this Eiriock duly paid
them, or at least forced it by arms from the Lagenians. By what right, other
than that Conaire Mor, the foresaid Monarch that imposed it, was himself a
Mounster man born, and therefore perhaps assigned it to that Province, I know
not. But this I know, that Keting tells how by this time the Momonions, had got
such footing in Leinster, that they possessed all to Maisdion, a height now
better known by the Irish compound name of Mullach-Maisdon, in the County of
Kildare. And how notwithstanding they were much about the same time, that is,
above 200. years after the imposition of this Fine, beaten out of all, and
their Fine to boot, and Ossory recovered from them by three several Fights, as
they retired from Maisdion; the first at a place then called Truisdion, now by
us Athy, on the River Barrow; the second in Cadirthin Amhaigh Riada, which
after was called Laoighis by the Natives, and from thence Lease by the English;
the third at Slighe Dala, now the Beallach Mor in Ossory. And how this War and
three Battles against the Mounster men, were managed by Cu-Chorb, King of
Leinster, not only with the assistance of Eochae Fionn, second Son to the
Monarch Felim-Reachtvor, and consequently Brother to Conn Ceadchathach,
likewise Monarch in his time, but under the conduct of Laoighseach Ceannmhor
(or Lewis of the Gread Head, who was Son to the famous Warrior and Champion
Conall Cearnach) as General of the Field under Cu-Chorb. And finally how this
Leinster King rewarded the said Eochae Fionn by giving him for ever the
Countries then called the seven Focharties; and the King of Ossory in like
manner rewarded Laoighseach Ceannmhor with a grant of the seven Leases, besides
many other Privileges bestowed upon him by Cu-Chorb. All which may be read at
large in Keting. For I speak of this matter but occasionally.

23. After the great injustice and bloody cousequences of those Tyrannical
Eiriocks, what I purposed next to observe as most remarkable is the greatest
cruelty, the strangest insulting carriage, and the most inhuman rigor of some
other Monarchs, even toward the very Provincial Kings of their own Nation,
when their Captives or at their mercy. To conclude this point, I give three
instances; the first of a Pagan, and the other two of two Christian Monarchs.

First instance. Upon the death of the Monarch Criomthan mhac Fiodae, poyson*d
by his own Sister, and Niall Naoighiollach's succeeding him, but not yet
possessed of Taragh, the Royal Mansion of the Monarchs, Eochae King of
Leinster, pretending some title to the Monarchy, anticipates him, and possesses
that place. But Nialls Magitian or chief Druid, by name Laighichin mhac
Bairrchedha, dissuades him on the religious, or rather indeed superstitious
account, That none could succesfully possess Taragh, who had not been created a
Niadh-Naisk, that is a Knight of the celebrated Chain, called in their Language
Naisk. Which whoever receiv*d with due solemnity about their necks, were styled
Niadha-Naisk, importing in Irish the same with Milites Torquati in Latin. For
this of the Chain was an Order, and the only Order of Knighthood among 'em.
However Eochae who had never been received into that Order, nor had that Chain
about his neck, being thus dissuaded, and retiring presently into Leinster, but
in his way lodging unluckily a night in the said Magitians House, it happened
that on some provoking Language given him by his Son, he killed him presently
in the place. This with all vehemence is exaggerated to Niall by the old
Magician, Father to him that was killed. And Niall thereupon egged on partly by
Eochaes late attempt on Taragh, and partly by the extreme incessant opportunity
of Barrechedba to lay all Leinster in ashes for the death of his Son, enters
that Province with so vast an Army that no power of the Lagenians was able to
withstand him: and with such a revengeful bloody resolution too, that no
prayers, no tears, no offers of the Leinster Nobility, though meeting him of
purpose, and humbling themselves before him, could obtain any other answer from
him, than that he was resolved without delay to ruin their whole Province with
the utmost devastation imaginable, unless they did forth with deliver into his
hands their King. Eochae seeing this desperate condition of his people, like a
brave, just, and noble Prince, considering himself to be the only Criminal,
chooses rather to lose his own life, than they who were innocent, should
theirs: and therefore delivers himself freely up. But the merciless Monarch,
not moved either with his generosity or humility, commands him to be tied
presently and straightly about the middle with a strong iron Chain, to a huge
stone like a Rock, which to this day stands an end on a Field that is on the
West Side of the River Slain, between Kilbride and Tullo-O-Feilimm, in the
County of Catherlogh: both ends of the chain carried through a hole that ran
from one side to another in the Stone, and then fastened in the backside with an
Iron-bar put into both the extreme links: and then nine bloody Fellows well
arm*d to attack him, and mangle him in pieces, while he had nothing at all, no
kind of weapon to defend himself. Though God and Nature, and the horror of so
base a death did help him so strangely, or rather miraculously indeed, that
seeing himself in this case (for his back was to the Stone, and his face to the
People:) and hearing at last the word given to his Executioners, who were yet
at a little distance off: he thereupon roused up his spirits so wonderfully,
that by violent straining of himself, he tore in pieces the Chain before the
Executioners were come so near as to reach him: and with part of those very
pieces laid about him, so that some of the Villains lay dead at his feet, and
he escaped the rest by running away.

Whereby it seems that God himself in his secret Counsels had designed so
strange a preservation of Eochae at this time, that he might be at another time
in his own very person the punisher of that extraordinary cruel judgment given
by Niall against him. For so in truth it happened at last in this manner
following* Eochae, as now it has been related, having saved his life first by
his valor, and then by his heels, to shun Nialls further cruelty, gets himself
away, so soon as he could privately, over into Scotland, where he is incognito
received into the protection of Gabhran mhac Domhunghoirt, King of Dal-Riadd
there, and of all the Scots. And after some years more expired, when this
Scottish King had by commands received from that (now mighty) Monarch Niall,
with all the power he could make and spare out of Scotland, passed over to him
in France (or Gaul, as it then was called) Eochae accompanies him still
incognito: and so conceals himself, until at last he found his opportunity at
the River Loyre: where, as you have it before, he treacherously slew (by the
flight of an Arrow) in the very midst of his Royal conquering Army, this
otherwise invincible, though cruel Prince. But these later passages of Eochaes
preservation, and revenge (as neither indeed any other of the evil consequences
following, which were many and great) are to my purpose now. And therefore I
proceed to the

Second instance. Which though it have not so much either effectual or
intentional cruelty, yet peradventure it shows the strangest insulting carriage
of one Christian Prince a Conqueror toward another, not taken in Battle, or
otherwise, but freely coming in of himself, and submitting to his mercy, that
ever has been delivered in writing. Diarmuid mhac Ferghussa, mhic Ceirrbheoil,
of whom I have said before, that he was the Tenth Christian, and now say that
he was not only a Christian, but perhaps of the very best Christian Monarchs of
Ireland, being held for many respects a very good man, and very just King: so
just, if not rather over just he was, that he put his own Son Breassal to death
upon the complaint of an old Religious woman of Kill-Ealchruidh, That
notwithstanding the immunity of that Sacred place, and her own right, he had
forced from her a Cow, because it was extraordinary fat, or to his liking, for
a Feast, though indeed he had first offered her seven Cows, and a Bull too in
compensation: this very Diarmuid, I say, in the seventh year of his Reign, and
upon the like complaint of another Nun called Sinioch Chro, about one single
Cow taken from her, having made a sharp War on Guaire mhac Colmain, Provincial
King of Connaght, by overthrowing him in a great Battle: and thereupon this
Guaire, who was no less held as good a King as ever Connaght had, hospitable to
admiration, bountiful without compare, so liberal to the Poor, that he never
denied a considerable Alms to any such person craving it in the name of Christ;
insomuch, that when at any time he wanted money about him, he stripped himself,
and gave his very Clothes off his back to help them: I say this Guaire, so good
a man and King too, after his said defeat, rallying his Troops again the next
day, and then consulting the Chief among 'em, whether he should venture another
Fight, or go freely of himself and submit to Diarmuids mercy: and by their
advice choosing the latter, and therefore going presently to the Victors Camp,
entering his Tent, and laying himself in an humble posture on his knees before
him, begging pardon: Diarmuid nevertheless, without any regard either of the
inconstancy of Fortune, or of Guaire*s voluntary submission, or penitent
posture, or of his regal dignity, or of his renowned virtues, without other
ceremony or more ado, commands him to lie down on his back, while himself
standing up, held one foot on his breast, and the point of his Sword between
his fore-teeth. It Is true, that after this trial made, he did Guaire no further
hurt; yet that does not wipe off the excessive pride and barbarity of the
action or trial it self.

How ever, before I pass from this instance, it will not be amiss to let the
Reader know, that notwithstanding all the praises given by Keting to this
Connaught King Guaire, yet he was the very man (as even Keting himself
elsewhere relates it) who had the Bishop Ceallach, Disciple to St. Cieran of
Cluan mhac Noise, and eldest Son to Eoghan Bell, the former King of Connacht,
murdered by three of that Bishops own Servants: which happened in the Reign of
the former Monarch Tuathal Maolgharbh. These Villains Guaire suborned to commit
this horrid sacrilege: and this only on account or supposition of the said
Bishops endeavoring to make friends for his own younger Brother to recover
that Kingdom of Connaght, which his Father Eoghain Bell had some time before
enjoyed, and held all along till death.

Third instance, and it is an instance, I think, of very inhuman rigor. Aodh
Ainmhiriogh, another Christian Monarch of this time (for he came to the
Sovereignty within eight years after Diarmuids death; and we have spoken of him
before, as who held the great Parliament for 13 months at Dromceatha) was so
rigorous to Scanlane Mor mhac Cinfoale, King of Ossory being his Prisoner, that
he commanded him to be straightly bound in Prison with twelve chains of Iron
loading him; fed only with salt Beef; allowed not a drop of any kind of liquor,
no not so much as of water to drink; had all this rigor effectually put in
execution against him, and rejected even Columb-Cille's Petition for his
release, though come of purpose out of Scotland to obtain it.

And so I have done with my Instances, nor have I more to say in reference to
them. Only that although I cannot tell what reasons either of these two
Christian Monarchs had for such extreme rigor toward Christian Princes of
their own Nation, though their Prisoners, or at their mercy: nor can tell, as
to particulars, how considerably this cruel usage did add unto, or inflame the
former feuds: Yet this much I can tell, that neither of them had other than a
violent death: the former murdered by Aodh Dubh mhac Suibhne; the later killed
in Battle by Brandubh King of Leinster, as I have said before, upon another
occasion. And so by consequence I have likewise done with all my special
remarks on this large subject of the manifold bloody Feuds of that Nation, both
in the time of their Paganism, and in that of their being under the Gospel of
Christ: for I intended no more such here than I have given.

Which is the reason, that now returning once more thither, where I was before,
I conclude at last this long Section with one general remark on that People, as
they were under the Gospel in the more early Ages of it among them. viz. That
from the killing of their foresaid Christian Monarch Aodh mhac Ainmhiriogh (the
last we spoke of here) the Fate not only of the Milesians, but other Gathelians
whatsoever in Ireland, and the Genius of their Kings, Princes, Nobles, and
other Martial men, continuing for 300 years after him, the very same it had
been in the Age before him, carried them on perpetually, from time to time,
fighting, and slaying, and murdering one another at home, until the four and
twentieth of those Christian Monarchs of theirs, who died violent deaths by the
hands of their own Irish Subjects within the first 400 years of Christian
Religion generally planted among 'em, by name Aodh Ollann, had been slaughtered
in the Battle of Seir by Domhnal mhac Murchadha, that immediately succeeded him.
Nay until that in this Domhnals Reign, which continued 42 years, and the Reign
of his Successor Niall Frassach, which lasted but four, besides Colman, the
Bishop of Laosaine murdered by Vibh Tuirtre; the Battle of Beallach Cro,
between Criomthan mhac Euno and Fionn mhac Airb, the Battle of Beallach Gawran,
between Mac Conchearca King of Ossory, and Dunghall King of Vibh Cionsallach,
kill*d therein; the Battle of Leagea, betwixt Vibh Mbruine and Vibh Mainne; the
Battle of Corann betwixt Cinneal Gonnail and Cionneal Eoghuin; and finally the
killing of Combhasgach King of Ibh-Failghe by Maolduin mhac Aodha Beanainn King
of Mounster. (whether in Battle, or out of Battle, I know not) had filled up at
last brim full the measure of their domestic unnatural slaughters happening
within that term of time, their first four Centuries of Christianity.

SECT. IV.
National sins. Very slight causes of War. Cormock Ulfada's beard:
Muireadhagh's Tiriogh's revenge: and the three Colla's War on Ferghussa Fogha
King of Eumhna. Sundry warnings from God to the Irish Christians (but not like
the judgment at Magh-Sleachta, or the other by Loch Earne on their Pagan
Predecessors.) 1. The loss of all their Dominions abroad. 2. Those two
Epidemical Plagues at home, called the Crom-Chonnioll and Buy-Chonnioll. 3.
Mortality of Kine, and great Famil that followed. 4. Those three or four
Inroads made into their Country by the Saxons and Brittons. 5. Prodigies, with
another extraordinary Famine. Notwithstanding all, no amendment. This instanced
in the death of the Monarch's Loinnseach, Conghall Cinn, Fearrghall,
Foghartach, and Kionaoth. What of Flaithiortach? The floodgates of the North
set open at last to pour Vengeance on this contumacious people. Yet they amidst
all continue their intestine feuds. Witness the Monarchs Aodh Ordnigh,
Conchabhar mhac Donochadh, and Niall Caille. A sad Interregnum. The particulars
of their Bondage under Turgesius. The glory of their Learning and Sanctity now
gone for ever. Scarce delivered from that Bondage, when they relapsed again far
more enormously than before. This also instanced, 1. In eight of those eleven
Monarchs that Reigned in the second Danish War. 2. In the Reigns of those other
six following that assumed the title of Monarchs, though not allowed for such
by near at least one half of the Provinces. Maolseachluinn the Second by his
death put an end to the real Monarchy of Ireland, among the Irish; and Ruaruidh
O Conchabhair saw in his own days not only the pretense or shadow of it gone,
but the very Being of this Nation any more a free People on Earth.

24. SUch were the National provocations of Heaven, peculiar to that People
hitherto, i. e. for two and twenty hundred years (besides what we shall yet see
did happen after) above any other Nation of the whole Earth. Immortal Feuds of
death, tyrannical oppressions of the Subject, cruelty as well of justice as
revenge, Treason, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Murders even of their Sovereigns,
effusion of human blood like water. And this without pity, without remorse,
without any cause sometimes but very slight, and sometimes vain and ridiculous.
An arbitration between two religious Monks in a difference, deciding against
one of them, must engage Families and Countries in Arms, to fight it out in
Battle, and cut one another in pieces. A known Murderer proscribed as
unpardouable by their most sacred Laws, and therefore justly put to death by
the Monarch, must nevertheless, on pretense of his being seized upon after he
had been received into the protection of an Abbot, be a just cause of rebelling
and fighting that very Monarch, and killing his whole Army to boot. Nay, one
single Beast, a Cow, at most but very little worth, taken away I know not how
from the owner, was the only cause of a great Battle fought between the same
Monarch and the Provincial King of Connaught, and a Battle wherein most of the
Gentry of that Province and Mounster too were killed. As if neither the
Assailant nor Defendant, tho Christian Kings both, could find any other way to
satisfy the poor Woman that was robbed of that Cow: or rather indeed as if they
had sported so with the lives not only of their Subjects, but of their Friends.

I say nothing of the Candle-snuff, or of its firing the Monarch Cormack
Vlfada's beard at an entertainment given him in Maig-Breag by Giolla King of
Vlster, who shuffing a Candle, instead of throwing it aside, threw it (whether
by chance, or of purpose) into Cormack's long beard, which presently caught
and burned up to his tresses. Only I say, That however this ridiculous matter
happened or passed at that time, it cost Vlster dear, long after Cormack's
death. That Muireadhach Tiriogh, the great Grandchild of this Cormack; and
sixth King of Ireland after him, took it for a pretense to pour an Army of one
and twenty thousand men under the command of the three Collaes into Vlster, to
destroy it, and conquer as much Land for themselves in it as they could. That
in pursuance of this Order, they made so sharp War on Ferghus Fogha King of
Eumhna there, that in seven several Fights against him, fought seven days
consequently, without the interposition of one free day, they had the killing
and taking of all the Vlster Forces: having as they beat 'em, still pursued
them all along from Cearnagha to Gleann Ruigh. That being Masters of the Field,
they returned back to Eumhna, spoiled it, burned it, and destroyed it so, that
never after any King resided there. Finally, that by this expedition they
conquered for themselves the large Territories of Modharnaigh, Vibh
Criomthaine, and Vibh mhic Vaise, which their Posterities after them did hold,
while the Milesian Kingdom stood in Ireland.

But I pass over these matters depending on Cormack's beard: not because he and
the rest mentioned in this story were Pagans (for I shall have occasion yet to
speak somewhat, tho but little, of as great Pagans as they:) but because
peradventure the cause it self was not slight. Tho however I must acknowledge
the punishment was too severe and unjust: as neither inflicted on the
Criminals, nor on any that ought in such a distance of time to suffer for them;
much less after legal summons, or any respit given them, to make reparation
under peril of abiding the justice of Arms. But leaving this to the Readers
judgment,

I return back to the Christian Princes, where I was before animadverting the
sport they made, on the sligtest causes that well might be, of the lives of so
many thousands of other Christians, their own faithful Friends and Subjects.
Yet what I am to consider now, is another thing. It is, That all this while nor
they nor their Successors after 'em for 300 years more, seemed any way sensible
that the All-avenging God began already to warn them. For so in truth he did,
and that not once nor twice, but much oftener, within that very term of time,
even while they were in their full career persecuting one another at home, with
the greatest violence of deadly Foes. In which respect he dealt far otherwise,
that is much more kindly and mercifully with them, than he had done with their
Pagan Forefathers in that very Land; upon whom, about a hundred years after
their conquering it, without any such gracious Fatherly warnings given them
(for ought we find in History) he laid on a sudden the whole weight of his
heavy hand in a most prodigious manner, at two several times. For what could be
more dreadfully prodigious than that which I have related before, and you may
remember here, three parts of four of all the people of Ireland, together with
their Monarch Tighernmhuir (who was the tenth from Heber) slain in one only
night upon Maigh-Sleacht, by invisible Demons, the Executioners of Gods fury
enraged against them? Or what, next to that, could be more prodigiously
terrible than a rich Plain of forty miles long, and fourteen, fifteen, sixteen
miles broad, in most places, thoroughly planted, and thick of Inhabitants, in
Vlster, to be on a sudden over-flown, covered over with a deluge of waters,
burst out of its own intrels, and neither Man, nor Woman, nor Child, nor Beast,
nor other goods of so large a tract of ground to be saved, but all in one hour
perished under this Flood of God's avenging irresistible wrath?

How-ever, because their heinous Idolatry, i. e. their universal adoration and
prostration of themselves before their grand Idol Crom Chruoigh, which by all
circumstances, was the sin that brought upon 'em the former of those two
stupendous Judgments, though it was national, yet it was not peculiar to their
Nation only: and because the most beastly of sins (whence it has its proper
name of Bestiality) which brought the latter of the same Judgments on those
bestial Wretches that so astonishingly perished for it, was peculiar only to
that tract of ground, or rather indeed to them who were Inhabitants of it, and
no way National, or involving or affecting so much as any one other part of
Ireland: therefore I pass over these punishments, as not inflicted (either of
them) upon the Irish Nation, for those enormities which I have said before,
were both National and peculiar to Cambden's Ireland, in the County of
Fermanagh, page 106.
them. Besides Cambden himself declares in particular, as to the latter of the
said Judgments, how the Irish Annals deny those bestial Inhabitants of the
destroyed Valley to have been other than certain Islanders out of the Hebrides,
who being fled out of their own Country, lurked there, and consequently deny
them to have been at all of the Irish Nation, much more deny 'em to have been
either of the Milesian or Gathelian Race. Then Keting, tho he tells us
particularly Keting.
(in the Reign of the foresaid Tighernmhuir) of the breaking out of that
Inundation of Water, the great Lough Earn, which it presently made, and so
continues ever since; yet has not a word of the horrible sin of Bestiality, as
neither indeed of any other sin or cause whatsoever thereof on the part of the
Inhabitants. And lastly Cambrensis, who is the Girald. Cambr. Topog. Hib. did.
11. cap. 9.
first Author of this relalation, brings no other warrant for it but hearsay.

Yet be it, or be the original of Lough Earn (so famous ever since for Fishing)
what you please: what I would be at to tell you here, is, That after that
prodigious eruption of Water in the North, and the no less. (if not far more^)
prodigious slaughter on Maghsleacha (we may call it in English the Field of
Adoration) in Letrim; both which happened in the Reign of the self-same King,
and near the same time, about 2900 years ago: We do not find in the Irish
Chronicles, that God had once in any special or visible manner concerned
himself either in warning or punishing that People (at least otherwise than by
themselves) until they became Christians; but let them go on securely without
control from him in those National peculiar enormities of their own: I mean
their immortal Feuds, and prodigal effusion of human blood, even that of their
own Countrymen and Kinsmen, on every little occasion. That nevertheless he
continued still their Victories and Dominions abroad unto them, and gave them
the spoils of Foreign Kingdoms to enrich their own at home: and all this for
causes known to his unsearchable Wisdom, but wholly unknown to us: at least
otherwise than by conjecture, that he had peradventure so long contained hi^
Wrath in his mercy, for the sake of those vast numbers of holy Men and Women,
those great Saints who were in after Ages to issue from their Loins, and to
carry his glorious Name far and near by Preaching the Gospel, and converting so
many incredulous Nations to him, as they did. That after they were become
Christians, and yet nevertheless pursued the bloody courses of their Pagan
Ancestors, and not only pursued but exceeded them, as being wholly intent upon
destroying one another at home: he thought it now high time to warn them as his
Children. And that he did so both early and loudly, and often, by laying his
hand upon them with smart enough, though not to their extermination or
destruction as yet.

25. It was within the first Century of Christian Religion among them, he
warned 'em with the loss of all their Dominions abroad, The Orcades, and the
Hebrides, and all the Islands, not Mannuinn ^or Isle of Man) it self excepted;
nay, the Terra Firma of Scotland, and all their Conquests and Plantations
there, both ancient and late, those very Descendants of their own loins,
renounced utterly in that very Age any further payment of Tribute, or Chiefry,
or other duty of Allegiance or subjection to them. And I think any indifferent
looker on would esteem so great a loss then, both an early and loud warning
indeed given them to amend. But they did not regard it, as not touching them
yet in their sensible Being at home. And therefore God proceeds thenceforwards
by other ( i. e. by nearer and keener) methods, touching 'em to the quick,
where they should have more feeling. Such undoubtedly were those two dreadful
Plagues; the one in the Reign of Diarmuid mhic Ferghussa mhic Ceirrbheoil,
which they called Crom-Choinnioll (in English the Fading or Falling Candle,)
that swept away infinite numbers of them; yea, very many of their most admired
Saints, and among others Mac Dail the Patron of Kilcullin: the other called by
them an Bhuidh Choinnioll, or the Yellow Candle, no less contagiously mortal;
whereof, even their very Sovereigns, in whose Reigns it happened, the two
Brothers Blaithmhac and Diarmuid Ruannigh died. Such also were those three or
four several Invasions and inroads made into their Country by the Saxons and
Brittons, either in conjunction or apart, close one after another. The first of
them in the joint Sovereignty of the foresaid two Brothers: when the Irish, who
had so long and so unnaturally fought one another, were now constrained to
fight a foreign and common Enemy at their own doors at home, and give them
Battle at a place called Pancti. The second in the Reign of Fionachta
Fleadhach, when Egfrid King of Northumberland sent an Army under the conduct of
one Brit or Berthus, to Invade 'em. Who, as Venerable Beda Anno Dominicae
Incarnationis, 684. Egfridus Rex Northanhymbrorum misso in Hiberniam [Scotorum
Insulam] cum exercitu Duce Bertho, vastauit misere Gentem innoxiam, and Nationi
Anglorum semper amicissimam; ita ut nec Ecclesiis quidem aut Monasteriis manus
parceret hostilis. l. 4. c. 26.
relates it, in the year of Christ, 684. so miserably wasted the Irish Nation,
though a Nation most harmless to others, and always most friendly in particular
to the English, that he spared neither Church nor Chapel, nor Monastery. His
Army (says Ke^ing in the Reign of the foresaid Firnachta) spoiled and burned
all the Seacoasts of Leinster, without any difference put between sacred and
profane. And either a little before or after this devastation it was that in
the same Reign they, or some other Forces Landing out of Great Britain, fought
the Irish in the Battle named Cath Rath Moire in Moghlinne; where besides a
great many of the latter, Comhusgach a Pictish King was lost. Lastly, in the
Reign of Loinnsioch mhic Aonghussa, the Brittons preyed, harras'd, ransacked
the whole Country called Magh-Mhuir Theimhne, until the fortune of a Battle, I
mean that of Cullinn, or Muigh Cullinn, which the Vltonians were compelled to
at last, made them retire.

Besides these several Inroads touching them pretty near the quick at home, in
diverse parts of their Country, the mercy of God, seeing not their amendment
yet, was pleased in this very Loinnsioch's Reign to try other means more
general to the whole Nation of Ireland, by afflicting them all with such a
Mortality of their Kine, and Famine thence ensuing and continuing for three
years, in such extremity, that men ate one another, as Keting writes. But
neither was this kind of warning any whit more effectual to work a Reformation.
For Loinnsioch himself, their Monarch, was killed in Battle by Ceallach King of
Connaght. And, after his immediate Successor Conghall Kinn, who most
sacrilegiously robbed and burned as well all the Churches and Sanctuaries, as
all the rest of the Town of Kildare, before he was seized upon by a sudden
death; the just reward of his Sacrilege, as all men thought in those days: the
very next three Monarchs, Fearrghall, Foghartach, and Kionaoth, were all of
'em, one after another, killed in three Battles fought by their own Coutrey-men
and Subjects against them. And though Flaithiortoch, immediate Successor to the
last of these three, escaped violent death by making himself the only happy man
of all the Irish Monarchs (at least of all until his time, except Maolchoba) in
putting off voluntarily his Royal Robe, changing it for a Religious Weed, and
both living and dying in peace, a professed Monk in the Monastery of Ardmagh;
yet he that succeeded him next in the Sovereignty, Aodh Ollan was killed in
Battle by Domhnal mhac Murchadha, as we have seen before.

All which notwithstanding, the patience and goodness of God to them still was
such, that he would warn them yet, and warn 'em indeed now even by prodigies
and wonders, both in Heaven above, and in the Earth below. In the Reign of this
Domhnal mhac Marchadha, who both killed and succeeded Aodh Ollan, the form of a
hideous horrible Serpent appeared a long time, moving over their heads in the
Firmament. And in his next Successor, Niall Frassach's Reign, the Earth under
'em throughout Ireland shut up her fruitful Womb in such extraordinary manner,
that she deigned them no return at all of their Seed; but instead thereof,
brought upon them a second, and it a most cruel, most universal Famine through
all their Quarters. Then followed in the Monarch Aodh Ordnighe's Reign that
Prodigious Thunder and Lightning, which in one little nook of the Land, between
Corca Bhaisgin and the Sea, killed in a trice a thousand and seven persons
dead. What shall I say of that wonderful threefold, and peradventure greatest
prodigy of all, poured down from Heaven in a tripartite division, at the Birth
of the foresaid Niall Frassach? I mean those three stupendous showers fallen
at that time on three several Fields in Ireland: the one of Honey, on
Fothanbeg; the other of Silver, on Fothain mhor, and the third of blood, on
Maigh-Laightonn. Indeed according to Keting, they fell in the Reign of the
above Fearrghall, the seventh Monarch in order ascending up from this Niall,
surnamed Frassach in Irish, (in Latin Nimbosus or Imbricus) from those
wonderful showers happening at his Nativity. And though I am no Diviner to
interpret what they portended for certain; yet taking the shower of blood in
conjunction with those other Prodigies that one after another so closely
followed in so small a tract of time and circumstances of Ireland; I think he
would not judge amiss that took it for one of the very last warnings from
Heaven to this Nation, that the Anger of God was now on the point of overcoming
all his patience; and his rage and fury at hand, since nothing else would do
And indeed it ought the rather to be taken so, because that much contrary to
Ketings relation, so good an Author as Tigernacus many hundred years before his
time has told us, that the shower of Blood fell in the Reign of this Niall; and
that the three showers fallen at his Birth, were one of Honey, one of Silver,
and one of Wheat.
. Certainly the sequel did soon evince it to have been so.

26. For not long after that Prodigious Thunder and Lightning which happened in
the Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, the patience of God being wearied, and his justice
enraged by the unreclaimable contumacy of that People, he called out of their
Northern Enclosures his exterminating Angels, the Heathen Danes, Norvegians,
and other Easternlings, and in the same Reign of Aodh Ordnigh, poured them in
on Ireland, to execute on the Christian Irish those very heaviest of Judgments
that either such former Warnings would have prevented, or such later Prodigies
had predicted, or that any People in the World for so many years after did
suffer. Except only those, if any such have been whom God designed to
extinguish totally root and branch: or the incredulous Jews that must be still
preserved, though still dispersed among all Nations, to be a living Monument of
Gods Vengeance on the unpardonable sin of their Ancestors. But the sin of the
Irish, how heinous soever, was not of that kind: nor was it the design of God
to extinguish or extirpate them yet. And yet this first War of the Danes upon
them, besides its having fully paid all their old scores to God, that is,
abundantly punished them for above 40 years at least, in the very same methods
they had offended him, and therefore covered all their Provinces with blood and
ashes, and horrors of death, without any discrimination of People, or
Professions, or Parties, it reduced them at last to a bondage and slavery far
surpassing the Egyptian, Circassian, or any other I have read of any where on
earth.

For to pass over the life worse than death, that those of their Churchmen
that escaped the Sword were forced unto: and in particular how Foranan, with a
few more of the Clergy of Ardmagh Gracianus Lucius, p. 328. relates this matter
otherwise. He says, that Turgesius having taken the City of Ardmagh, in the
year 843. or 848. made Foranan, and all the Clergy and Religious men, and all
the rest of the Students too of that University, Prisoners, and Shipped them all
for Limmeric, which his People held in their possession at that time. What
became of them there, or any where else after that time, we have no account.
, having fled so far as Cashel first; and together with the Archbishop of that
See, and his Clergy too, thence again to the horrible habitation of Bogs,
Woods, Rocks, and Subterranean Caves about, or not far off Jomlaigh Jobhair,
must have been content to hide themselves there, and even to lu^k for several
years like wild Beasts: But, I say, to pass over this condition of their
Churchmen only, wherever any of them did escape the Sword; who cannot but be
astonished at the particulars of their bondage in general?

These particulars I have omitted before: and therefore give them now for
better satisfaction to the Reader. 1. Every Canthred, or Division of ground
containing one of our Baronies, had a Danish King: every Tuath, or Seigniory, a
Chieftain: every Church a Lay-Danish- Heathen Abbot: every Town a Sergeant:
every House a Soldier Cess'd (the Irish called him a Sairioch, or Buanna:) all
of 'em Danes; and each commanding absolutely within his own Precinct, only
subordinate respectively to the higher, till they came to the Supreme, who was
Turgesius himself. 2. The very Buanna did so command the House wherein he was
Cess'd, that not so much as an Egg, or cup of Milk could be disposed of till he
had been served; though in the mean time a Sucking Babe did perish for want of
it. And if his Host had but one Cow in the World, he must have killed her upon
demand to give him flesh. Or failing therein, or in any other thing demanded of
him, he was presently taken and lead away Prisoner to the next Danish Rath,
where he was sure to be detained in Fetters till he had fully satisfied all the
Buanna' s demands either of Victuals, Money, or any thing else whatever. 3.
Every Housekeeper must have yearly paid into the Treasury an ounce of Gold
(the Irish called it Vinghe Oir:) and failing, have his Nose cut off: which
made them call this kind of Tax Nose-rent. 4. Neither Lord nor Lady, much less
an inferior person suffered to wear new Clothes; but only the Cast-cloaths of
the Danes. 5. None to keep School, or be taught any kind of Learning, not even
in their own Houses. 6. None to enter any Monastery, Church, or Chapel: for
they were all possessed by the Danes. 7. None to have either Clergyman, or any
other Learned man, Philosopher, Poet, Lawyer, or other Artist, whom they call
Sruithe. 8. None suffered to have any kind of Book; but all Books the Danes
could light upon, either burned or taken away by them. 9. Neither Lords nor
Princes, nor even Kings Daughters permitted to embroider in Gold or Silver, or
so much as work in any kind of Silk. 10. Nor even Kings Sons to learn or use
any feats of activity. 11. None of what quality soever permitted to give or
take any kind of entertainment, not even from or with his private Familiars;
but all of 'em must e'^ have contented themselves with the Leavings of the
Danes.

I say nothing of that other barbarous Imposition forced on every Brid^; at her
first Marriage to lie the first night with the Danish Captain of the Precinct,
before she had Bedded her Husband, if the Captain desired it; but if he did
not, or disliked her, in either case to pay him a certain Tax in Money. How
much this Money was, I cannot say. Tho I have known a custom derived thence, to
have been continued in my own time by a Christian Landlord of English
extraction, one Mr. Scurlog (who was commonly called Scurlog the Poet) a
Gentleman of two or three hundred a year in the County of Wexford. To whom
every Maid living upon his Land, when she was Married, was bound to pay, and
accordingly did pay half a Crown English money, if he did not remit it.
However, I pass over that Heathen Danish Original of this Un-christian custom,
because I find nothing of it in Doctor Keting.

Those other manifold particulars of the Irish bondage undoubtedly true,
besides all their riches lost, and all their best blood spilled, and all their
Provinces and Countries laid in Ashes, during this first Danish War, before
they were totally subdued, give us to understand sufficiently, to what degree
their everlasting feuds and obstinacy had incensed Heaven. An obstinacy it was
indeed so strangely, so inveterately and unreclaimably fixed, that not even all
the present terrors of so many mighty Fleets of those Heathenish cruel
Barbarians, pouring in Armies and new Supplies continually for so many years
together from all the four winds, into all their Provinces, could remove it, or
make them relent.

For 1. Aodh Ordnighe himself, the Monarch in whose Reign the Danes begun their
first Invasion of Ireland, after he had twice in one month preyed and spoiled
Leinster, was by one Maolcannaid, in the Battle of Fearta, fighting against his
own Rebellious Irish Subjects, killed. 2. The next succeeding him, namely
Conchabhar mhac Donchadha, who Reigned 14. years, though he had the fortune to
die in his Bed, and (for ought I can find) never once in his life to have
fought the Danes, notwithstanding their sore incursions often made upon his
Subjects within that extent of time: yet he had the good leisure, and took the
opportunity of giving Battle to the Galleanguibh, his own Countrymen, at the
Fair of Tailtean. 3. Again, his immediate Successor Niall Caille (who was
sur-named Caille from his being drowned in the River of Callon; but drowned as
he was attempting to perform a very charitable deed. For being to pass this
River, and seeing it high, and therefore having commanded a young man to try
it: and then observing this youth presently in danger, and all others refusing
to hazard themselves to rescue him from the violence of the flood; he spurred on
his own Horse to do it himself. But it pleased God that the bank breaking under
the fore-feet of the Horse, he tumbled down, and so was lost.) This Niall
Caille, I say, Reigning likewise 14 years more, and consequently in the very
mightiest heat of this former Danish War: and therefore (a man would think)
having need enough to employ all his power that way; as he did indeed when he
gave the Danes Battle at Magh-Ith, and worsted 'em too: yet withal was so
unfortunate, as to have (whether justly or unjustly, I know not) at two several
times during his Reign, and the last of them but a little before that Battle,
made War on his own Countrymen: that is, with a great Army wasted Leath Cuinn,
first from Biorrha to Teambhuir, and then again Fercaill and Deallbhna Ethra.

So that, I think, by these Instances of the only three Monarchs that Reigned
while the first Danish War continued, it appears how little Reformation of
their bloody Feuds, all the terrors of so many mighty Fleets pouring in foreign
Enemies continually, had wrought in that People, at least in their Princes,
Nobles, and other Men of War. Which undoubtedly we may justly think to have
been it, or at least a most extremely provoking addition to it, that by this
time exasperated Heaven, and even forced the Almighty to pour without further
delay the very utmost of those evils designed either by his justice or mercy to
punish them. For now, that is, upon the death of Niall Caille, in the River of
Callainn, their Monarchy, Kingdom, Dominion ceased even as entirely at home, as
it had long before abroad. There was no more Monarch in Ireland now; but the
saddest Interregnum that ever Christian People had, or Heathen Enemies could
wish 'em: None, I am sure, either of the Milesian, or other Gathelian Race. No
more King henceforth over that People, but that barbarous Heathen Tungesius,
who assumed that title to himself till the days of their bondage which I have
before, tho only in part described. No more now the Island of Saints, nor the
Mart of Literature in Ireland. No more Beannchuir to be seen, but in Ashes now
a second time, and all the Learned holy Monks thereof Murdered by those cruel
Danes, and buried under its rubbish. No more the Monastery of Fionbhar at
Corck, which had 700 Conventual Monks, and together with them 17 Bishops at one
time wholly devoting themselves to a contemplative life. No more now the most
wonderful Cloister of all for Angelical Visions and Communications under S.
Mochada, at Ratha first, and then at Lismore, containing no fewer hundreds of
the most stupendous Monks for Sanctity that everhave been in any Age or
Nation. No more the celebrated Cells of Magh-Bile, or any at all of so many
other holy places ecchoing forth continually the praises of God. No more the
renowned Schools of Dun-da-Leathghlaiss, Ardmagh, Lismore, or Cashell. No more
University, nor Academy, nor College of Learning in all the Land: nor
Foregners coming to admire and study in them: nor so much as the Natives to
enter them, but only to stand aloof, and weep over their ruins, as the Jews did
over Jerusalem in the Emperor Adrians time.

This was the deplorable condition of the Gathelian offspring in Ireland,
which the heinous enormity of their no less National than peculiar sins, and
among the rest their strange contempt of so many fair warnings from God given
them continually from time to time above 300 years, brought them to at last,
and kept them in until his Justice was in some measure satisfied. For so long
he continued the Interregnum of their Monarchs, and slavery of all their People
under that Heathen Tyrant Turgesius.

And though I cannot exactly tell, at least be positive in it, how many years
in all this miserable condition of theirs lasted, I mean as to the general
Bondage of the whole Nation universally in every Province and Part: because we
do not certainly know in what year of Aodh Ordnighs Reign the Danes first
entr'd: yet I can say out of Keting, that under other Commanders they Warred 12
years on the Irish before Turghesius Landed in Ireland out of Norway with a
much mightier Fleet than any of the former. That he continued his joint
endeavors with the rest of the Heathen Invaders in carrying on, and
prosecuting the most cruel War could be against the Natives for 17 years more,
before he was chosen Captain General of all the Invaders, both White Danes and
Black Danes So the Irish distinguish 'em, calling the Norvegians the White
Danes, and those arrived from Denmark it self the Black Danes. though in their
own Language the general or common name they give them, and the Easterlings too
is Loghlonnuidh, which says Keting, imports Great Robustious Scourers of the
^ea. For Lon in old Irish is a strong man, and Loch the Seas
and Easterlings; which consequently he was in the 29th. year of this former
Danish War. That now he went on furiously, spoiling, ransacking, destroying all
before him every where; but particularly with several ^leets of small Vessels
and Boats all the Islands in Loch Neachach, Loch Erna, Loch Riogh, and other
great Lakes of Ireland. And that being at last wholly Master of the Field, and
taking advantage of the Interregnum after Nial Caille's death (for none of the
whole Irish Nation had the ambition, or lust, or heart, or valor now to
entitle himself to that Sovereignty which had cost their Forefathers so many
hundred Battles, and such Rivers of blood to conquer it from one another) he
now usurps the title, as he had before the power of King of Ireland; though not
acknowledged for such by the Irish, at least not otherwise than by the meerest
Galley-slaves their cruel unjust tormentors may be. In fine, that how long, or
how short soever it continued after this, although it was indeed unsupportable
to any human Creatures not wholly devoid of sense or feeling: nevertheless it
was no other than the most eminently prophetical Saints of that Nation,
Columb-Cille and Berchane, observing even in their own time the detestable
Pride, Ambition, Injustice, Violence, Licentiousness, Ave^sation from all good
Government, so common and so ingrafted in their great Lords and Chieftains, had
200 years before it happened, foretold should happen as a just judgment from
God upon so sinful a Generation of men. And, which is very remarkable, that
Columb-Cille particuly foretold how, in that very Monastery which in his time
had been founded at Ardmacha, such a Heathen powerful Stranger from beyond
Seas, and such in all respects as Turgheis was, should make himself Abbot of
it; as verily he did, upon his chasing away Foranan the Christian Abbot, long
before he had assumed the Title of King of Ireland. Yea, and (which I am sure
is no less, if not more remarkable yet) that Berchan in express terms
prophesied how under such a Foreign Tyrant every Church or Cili in Ireland
should be possessed by an Abbot of his Gang.

27. Besides, I can inform you, that although, in regard of the extraordinary
mortifications offered, and prayers incessantly poured out to God by the small
remainder of the Irish Clergy, who had hitherto saved themselves in uncouth
horrid Wildernesses, he was mercifully pleased, as Keting says, about this
time, i. e. after some few years of the universal Bondage, to inspire that
counsel to Maolseachluinn mhac Mhaolruanuidh, the Irish King of Mead, which as
we have related before, destroyed both the Tyrant himself, and all his Armies,
and Fortifications too on a sudden, and consequently set all the Irish Nation
free; being now restored every private person to his former possessions, as the
Lords and Princes, and Provincial Kings were each of them to his own respective
jurisdiction at large; and the said Maolseachluinn, by common consent made
Monarch; and so their Policy and power of Dominion at home fully recovered: Yet
so were not their Riches, their Treasures, their Gold, Silver, and Jewels,
those former spoils of so many foreign Provinces, and for so many hundred
years gathered home to Ireland by their Pagan Predecessors. During so many
strong impressions of the late conquering Heathen Foe into the very heart and
all the most secret recesses of Ireland, all were taken by them, and carried
away by their several Fleets, some to Norway, some to Denmark, and the rest to
other Eastern Borderers on the German or Baltic Sea. And which was a greater
loss to the Learned, their Libraries, their Books were never recovered. Only
the few Religious men that preserved themselves, preserved also a few of their
Books. But the greatest loss of all was not only of Learning in the Mart of
Litterature, but of Sanctity in the Island of Saints. Neither the one nor the
other was ever at any time after this restored in Ireland, at least not near
the former degree of eminence. The only thing, the only virtue indeed, that
after so many great losses, revived illustriously, and continued eminently
conspicuous in that People, was their Military prowess, their Valor, Bravery,
Fortitude in the second Danish War; to say nothing more of their destroying
Turgesius, and all his Forces, by help of that stratagem which ended the first.
And yet I must confess that all their Martial spirit in that very second War
did exert it self in, was only in defending themselves at home, without any
design or thought (for ought appears to us) of imitating those former Heroes
among their Ancestors, that carried the terror of their Arms both far and near
abroad.

The truth is, they were no sooner enfranchiz'd from the Tyranny of Turgesius,
than they resigned themselves wholly to ease and rest, and a life of extreme,
unworthy, unmasculin laziness. Insomuch that they not only neglected all kind
of Navigation, and provision for it: tho they might have considered that the
like neglect formerly since they became Christians, had been at least one of
their greatest banes, and that which gave their Invaders the opportunity of
attacking them without fear on every Quarter of their Island, whether with
great or small inconsiderable Fleets: but were so far besides blinded, that
having slighted all the Danish Fortificacations throughout the Land, they made
none at all in their stead, nor indeed in any place, not even on the Sea Ports,
for their own defense from abroad. And which was yet more strange, would not
themselves be at the trouble of guarding so much as any one of all those very
Ports, but entertained in pay some of those very Foreigners (their late
vanquished enemies) for that employment of greatest trust* whom therefore, that
is, from their being hired for pay, they called Buannacidhs. In a word, they
gave themselves over to Luxury and full enjoyment of the good things of the
Land; which naturally of it self, without much labor, was a Country flowing
with Milk and Honey, and all things else necessary both for life and pleasure.

But the greatest of Curses expecting them was, that by the time (and it was
but a very short time when) they had surfeired on plenty and wantonness, they
presently (says Keting) returned to their old vomit again. They renewed their
fatal Feuds, divided, were at cruel discord, fell a persecuting one another
like mad, as in former times, with all kind of hostility. This kindled anew the
wrath of God against the Nation in general to such an extreme, that
notwithstanding his mercy prevailed with him still so far as not to bereave
them of their Martial Fortitude, tho they had so long and so often, and so
freshly now again abused it so might^ly, but to expect for a much longer time,
even two or three Ages yet, their amendment and repentance before he would
utterly destroy them: nevertheless he did without delay permit his justice to
set open once more the Floodgates of the North, to pour in the second time
upon them those Ministers of his Vengeance, the Norvegians, Danes, and their
other barbarous Heathen Associats known to us only by the name of Oostmans, or
Easterlings; and to continue their ^^undations in Ireland, to Plague a
Rebellious ungrateful Generation of Christians, and plague 'em now for a
hundred and fifty years more complete. For, as I have already noted elsewhere,
so long at least did this second Danish War continue heavy upon 'em, only some
few lucid intervals it had excepted. And yet neither in the beginning, nor
progress, nor issue of it, did they amend. So that Almighty God, the great
Justicier, the great Striker of them from above, might justly say to them at
this time, what he had formerly said to the Jews by the mouth of his Prophet
Jeremy. In vain have Frustra percussi filios vestros; disciplina^ non
receperunt. Jerem. 2. 30.
I stricken your children they received no correction. And the pious Observer
of this continual recidivation, this fatal contumacy of theirs, Dr. Keting
might have no less truly either complained or acknowledged it of them to God,
than Jeremy did the like of his own People. Lord, thine Eyes Domine oculi tui
recipient fidem: Percussisti eos and non doluerunt: attrivisti eos, and
renuerunt accipere disciplinam: induraverunt facies suas supra petram* and
noluerunt reverti. 5. 3.
are upon the truth: Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou
have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have made
their faces harder than a Rock: they have refused to return.

To satisfy the Reader that I speak not hyperbolically, or at random in this
matter; I give here in short a sufficient number of instances that may serve
for proofs thereof, as I find them in Ketings History. Indeed they are there (I
confess as little intentionally for this purpose, as much more to his purpose)
dispersedly given as they happened. That is, the former part of them in the
several Reigns of eight of those eleven Monarchs, that by the unanimous consent
of the Irish Annals and Historians, were undoubtedly such over all Ireland,
from Maolseachluinn 1. in whose Reign the second Danish War begun, to
Maolseachluinn II. being the second time elected or submitted to as the
Monarch, some few years before this long War ended* and the latter part of them
likewise in the several Reigns of those other six that pretended to be such
after this Maolseachluinn II. whereof Ruaruidh O Conchabhar was the last, and
consequently of all the Irish that were any way such. But for saving you a
labor, I have collected all those instances together, and so give 'em now:
that if you please, you may read 'em over in a continual series, without
interposition of any thing else. Where, I doubt not, you will admire how
notwithstanding all the heavy pressures in every Province of Ireland, by so
many powerful foreign Enemies, and so many Battles fought, and so much blood
lost in the same War by the Irish defending their Country against those
Pagans, they could nevertheless have time, and men, and blood to spare for so
mischievous a work as the fighting and destroying one another so cruelly. And
yet it seems they wanted none of all, not even so early as the third Battle
fought by them against the Danes in this very second War.

For Maolseachluinn I. who had so Victoriously fought the first of these
Battles, being dead in the 16th. year of his Reign; and Aodh Fionnleath, who
had no less bravely fought the second of them, departing this life within or
immediately after the next 16 years: Flann mhac Sionnadh, who then succeeded in
the Monarchy, and Reigned 38 years, gave the fatal beginning to that new series
of intestine Broils, Depredations, Battles, Slaughters, Murders, among the
Natives themselves, that followed. Certainly the very first Act of this
Monarch, I mean the first recorded of him in his Reign by Keting, is that he
entered in hostile manner, Plundered, Ransacked, Preyd the whole Province of
Mounster, and brought away Captives and Pledges thence. And after this, though
I cannot say how long after, the great Battle of Beallach Muidh Mughna was
fought between him and holy Cormock, the good King of Mounster, and Archbishop
of Cashel. For this virtuous Prince, who was both King and Priest together,
though much contrary to his own judgment and inclination, yet by the great
importunity of his Mounster Noblemen, but chiefly by the advice of
Flaithbhiortach mhac Jo^^haincine, Abbot of Inche-Cathaigh, marched with an
Army toward Leinster, pretending that this Province owed him chiefry, as being
lawful King of Leath-Mogh. But in his entering it, he was met and fought, and
defeated, and killed, both himself and seven lesser Kings with him; besides
other Nobles, by the said Monarch, who had of the other side in his Army
Cearrbhall mhac Muirregin, King of Leinster, and ten petty Kings more. Besides,
in this Monarch's Reign Aidheith mhac Laighnigh, King of Vlster, was murdered
by his own Associates.

And tho in the Reign of Niall Gluindubh, who after the said Flann was the next
Monarch for three years only, there be nothing recorded of action among the
Irish themselves; but all against the Danes: and this Monarch Niall to have
bravely in his own person fought 'em twice; though he was killed in the second
Fight, and together with him Donchubhar mhac Maolseachluinn (called Riogh
Damhna, or Tanist to the Monarch of Ireland) Aodh mhac Eoghagain King of
Vlster, Maolmhithe mhac Flannegain King of Breag, and Maolchraoib^e O Duibh
seanaigh King of Oirghiall, besides others of chief note and estimation: we
shall find it otherwise in all and every one of the succeeding Reigns, at
least, until this Danish War is wholly over.

Donachadh mhac Floinn, immediate Successor to Niall, for twenty years more in
the Sovereignty, entered as an Enemy the Countries about Athlone, where many of
his Army were killed, and among others, the petty King of Ibh Failghe. In his
Reign Fearrghraidh, succeeding Ceallaghan for two years in the Kingdom of
Mounster, was treacherously murdered by his own followers. And in the same
Reign Mathgamhain mhac Kinedy, Successor to Fearghraidh, and a brave, constant,
successful Warrier against the Danes, was betrayed in his own House by one
Donomhan; thence conveyed to Mac Brain King of Eoghanach, a Confederate of the
Danes; shut up in Prison by him, and there soon after murdered by his People.

Conghallach mhac Mhaolmhithe, the next Monarch, notwithstanding his bravery
against the Danes, invaded Mounster with a main Army against his own
Contrymen; upon what quarrel I know not. Though I find special notice taken
of his killing in that expedition the two Sons of Kinede mhac Lorcaine. In his
Reign also Damhnal Claon King of Leinster, and Domhnal O Faolain King of the
Desies in Mounster, joynd with the Danes. From which conjunction followed not
only many bloody Battles between them and Brien mhac Kinede (after surnamed
Boraimh) younger Brother and Successor in the Kingdom of Mounster to the
foresaid Mathgamhain; but the destroying of this Monarch Conghallach himself in
the Town of Ardmagh; where he was by an Army composed partly of Danes, and
partly of Leinster-men, set upon, fought, defeated, killed; ending so his ten
years troublesome vexatious Reign.

Domhnal mhac Mairchiortae, succeeding him for ten years more in this fatal
Sovereignty, could be at leisure to make War on Fearrghallach O Ruairck King of
Connaght, prey all that Province, and bring away thence a great number of
Captives. And so could one Conghallach some time after this, but in the same
Monarch's Reign, make it either his interest or his revenge to murder that very
same Connaght King. Besides it was against this Monarch Domhnal mhac
Muirchiortac, that another Domhnal, the Son of Conghallach, had the prefidious,
hard, unnatural heart to join with the Danes of Dublin, and fight him in the
great Battle, which the Irish call in their Language Cath Chille Monae: wherein
Ardghall mhac Madagain, King of Oirghillac, and many other illustrious persons
of the Monarch*s side were lost; although himself after this, and many other
Battles fought in his Reign, had the good luck to die a natural death at
Ardmagh.

Maolseachluinn the II. who appears next, for 20 years, as Monarch on the stage
of Ireland, notwithstanding that he had known very well how one Gluneran had
lately assumed the Title of King of the Danes in Ireland: that he had fought
them victoriously in the Battle of Taragh: that he had from thence directly
marched to Dublin, forced it, entered it, enriched himself with all the spoils
of that City: and that he could not but see work enough remaining still among
so many several sorts of Enemies, Danes, Normans, Easterlings, and their Irish
Confederates: yet he found leisure and picked some quarrel to march his Army to
Mounster against Dal-Gheass and prey and spoil them too; albeit they were the
bravest Warriors there against the common Enemy. In his Reign the three sons
of Gearbheoill mhac Lorcain sacrilegiously spoiled the Sanctuary of
Glean-da-Logh. For which impiety they were all three killed the very next
following night. And in his Reign Muirchiortach va Conghalla, heading, or at
least assisting the Danes of Dublin, plundered the Sanctuary of
Domhnach-Padruig though to all their cost, for they all every one died within a
month after this wickedness committed by them.

Now Brien mhac Kinede, surnamed Boraimh, succeeding his murdered Brother in
the Kingdom of Mounster (which happened in the fourth year of the Monarch
Conghallach mhic Mhaolmhithe) after he had in the second year of his reign over
that Province only, and in revenge of his foresaid Brother's most barbarous
death, challenged Maolmodh mhac Brain King of Eonachta to a set Battle: sought
it accordingly at Bealach Leachta: killed the greater part of Mac Brains Army,
and taken all the rest prisoners; an Army consisting of a numerous Body of
Irish, and 1500 Danes that joined them: and when this Battle was over, upon
intelligence brought him that, during his diversion by it, Domhnal O Faolan
King of the Desies overran the greatest part of Mounster, preying and spoiling
all before him: after Brien hereupon had immediately marched toward him,
overtaken him, fought him at a place called Fane mhich Conrach, routed him,
pursued him, killed him in his flight, and together with him the most part of
the Danes of Waterford that joined with him; then forced that Town, plundered
it, burned it, and enriched his Army the brave Dal-Gheass with the spoils of
it, and preys of all the parts about it: after that within the 8th year of his
reign over Mounster, he had brought the whole Division of Leathmogh to
acknowledge his Sovereignty with perfect obedience: and that nevertheless upon
the death of Domhnal Claon King of Leinster, which soon followed, that Province
withdrawing their obedience, and joining anew with the Danes, he had with the
whole power of Mounster entered it, and given both the Leinster-men and their
Danish Confederats, joined together, the memorable overthrow at Gleannmhama,
killing 4000 of them in that place: I say that after all these, and many other
bloody Fights against the Danes only, fought by him during his Reign over the
Provinces of Mounster and Leath-Mogh, under the successive Reigns of three
Monarchs or Kings of Ireland, Conghallach mhac Mhaolmhthe, Domhnal mhac
Mairchiortae, and Maolseachluinn the Second: yet when he was chosen by the far
greater part of Ireland, in the 23d year of this Maolseachluinn, to be Monarch,
he was nevertheless necessitated to make that choice good, and establish
himself by fighting on still against some other Irish Lords that opposed him,
till he had subdued all at last by main force and dint of Sword. For to this
end it was, That with the flower of his Army he marched to Cineall Laigthagh,
preyed it, spoiled it, and brought thence 300 Hostages. That in like manner he
entered the Country called Magh Coruinn seized there Maolruanuidh King of
Cineal Gonuill, and brought him prisoner along with himself to Ceann Chorah in
Tuath Mhumhan. In fine, That Leinster was wholly overrun and burned by him,
even to the Valley of Gleann-da-Logh, and from thence again cross to
Cill-Mhuighnionn (we call it now Killmainam) within a small English mile of the
walls of Dublin, Westward. And yet that also may be true which Keting here
observes, viz. that Brien was mightily moved to this destruction of Leinster,
because they were Leinster-men that joined with the Danes in ^ansacking,
spoiling and leading away a great number of Cap tives from the Sanctuary of
Termon Feichin in Mead. I say nothing more of any part of those 21 Battles in
all, fought (as you have elsewhere seen) by this Brian Boraimh, a great part of
them while he was only King of Mounster, and the rest after he was Monarch:
only that in 'em all, taking one with another, especially counting among 'em,
as I should, the greatest and last Battle of them, which was that of Clantarff,
I doubt not, there was much more Irish blood spilt by the Irish themselves on
both sides, than there was of Danish or by the Danes on either.

Besides I observe it, as worthy of special remark here, That immediately after
this Battle of Clantarff had been over, and the Victorious Army of Brian
Boraimh had buried their dead (especially this Monarch himself and Murchoe the
Prince his oldest Son, with the rest of greatest quality of their side that
were lost in the Battle) and interred 'em all at Cill-mhuinionn: after those
funeral rites performed by the whole Army before they separated: after the
Conacians had then parted, and returned the shortest way home to their own
Country of Connaght; and the Momonians likewise in one body taking another as
the nearest way to Mounster: these being in all but 4000 men, and marching
through an Enemies Country, were no sooner come to Mullach Mastion, about some
20 miles from Dublin in their way to Mounster, than those of them who were of
West-Mounster, and they were three parts of the whole ( i. e. 3000 men)
withdrew themselves mutinously apart from the rest who were only a thousand
North Mounster men, but Dal-Gheass, the survivors of those other brave Dal
Gheass their Companions that with the loss of their own lives made all their
Army Victorious. That the Westmounster men being so withdrawn a little distance
of ground, immediatey sent defiance to Donochadh, the Leader till then of both
parties, as being one of the sons of Brien Boraimh, and heading still and
remaining with the Dal-Gheass; but a conditional defiance it was, requiring
Donochadh to send them Hostages for his acknowledging one of their own
West-Mounster Tribe as rightful King of all Mounster, by virtue of the ancient
disposition made (some 800 years before) by Oillioll Ollum the first Provincial
King of both Mounsters to his second Son Cormock Caisse, and his Grandchild or
his eldest Son Eoghun Mor's child (by name Fiochae Muilleathan.) That Donogh
relying on his valiant Dal-Gheass though but so few, and a great many of them
very grievously wounded, gave the Messenger nothing to hope, but returned him
with an answer of disdain and scorn; bidding him tell those who had sent him,
that his Father came to the Sovereignty of that Kingdom, not by virtue of any
such or other ancient disposition, but by his Sword: and that he would
endeavor to keep in the same manner what his descent from such a Father had
entitled him to. That pursuant to this answer, preparing to fight, when he had
put into the Danish Rath which remains to this day on that Height of Maistion
all his wounded men, and appointed a third part of the rest to defend them: not
only those very wounded men, understanding the cause, and thereupon seeing
their wounds to open and bleed afresh, filled them with green Moss, called for
their Arms, took 'em, marched forth, and embodied with their Companions,
resolved to live or die with them in fighting; but the Mutineers, observing
(for they saw all) their desperate resolutions, thought better of it; and
whether out of compassion, or cowardice, or some other motive, I know not,
marched off presently their own way home to West Mounster; leaving Donochadh
with his few Dal-Gheass to fight theirs out in passing on toward Tomond,
through a greater Army of professed enemies that expected to receive them near
Athy; where they were to pass the River Barrow, some four or five miles from
Maistion. That Donochadh mhac Brien Boraimh was no sooner come so far and
encamped close by that River, then Donochadh mhac Gilla-Phadruig King of
Ossory, that with an Army raised out of all parts of Leinster ten times the
number of Dal-Gheass, lay not far off on the other side of the same River, at a
place called Magh Cloinne Keallnigh, sent him a Herald requiring him forthwith
to deliver considerable Hostages, or fight his way: though Mac Gilla-Phadruig's
quarrel was no other, nor otherwise grounded than upon his Fathers imprisonment
for twelve months by Brian Boraimh some time past. That a much more scornful
answer than the former being made to his Messenger, and Donochadh mhac Brien
Boraimh, in the same manner he had so lately at Mastion, preparing now the
second time to fight: his wounded men would not be excused, but filling again
their wounds with green Moss, and taking to their Arms, they prevailed with the
Prince to have great Piles or Posts of wood fastened deep in the ground where
they were to stand, with two of their unwounded friends, one on each side of
each of them: and then themselves tied to those Piles at their backs to keep
them from falling while their hands were at work against their Assailants. That
the sight (for now the Enemy was so near that they had a full sight) of this
unusual preparation of men so strangely devoting themselves to death, did so
abate the courage of Mac Gille-Phadruig's Army, that notwithstanding all his
eagerness, and all his anger, and even his upbraiding them with the greatness
of their number of one side, and the paucity of Dal Gheass on the other, which,
says he, is such that if they were meat, you are enough to devour 'em up in one
meal, yet he could not prevail with them to make the Onset, or do other than
stand still. That Donogh O Brian seeing now at last there was no further hope
of Battle, broke up his little Camp, and marched on the best he could, very
slowly indeed (for how could it be otherwise?) being forced to skirmish almost
continually in the Rear, and sometimes in the Front and sides too, for several
days, and forty or fifty long miles, until at length, having lost in all a
hundred and fifty of his wearied men, he got clear of this hard hearted Foe and
his cowardly Forces that pursued him so far and in such manner attacking him.

28. Maolseachluin the II. that was formerly deposed to give place to Brian
Boraimh, is now again immediately after the Battle of Clantarff, the second
time Monarch of Ireland* In this second Reign of his, after he had, as you have
seen before, killed in Dublin the whole remainder of the Danes fled thither
from the Battle of Clantarff, then without delay he marched with all his Forces
against his own Countrymen. And first against those of Cionsallach (we call it
now the County of Wexford,) where he turned all into ashes, and slaughtered a
great many of the Inhabitants. N^xt in like Hostile manner against those of
Vlster; whence he returned with a great number of Hostages. About this time it
was that Donochadh mhac Gille Phadruig, in the head of his own Troops, in the
streets of Leith-Ghlinn (alias Laghlin) killed Donochan King of Leinster and
Teadhg O Ryan King of Idrona, with many more of their followers. Nor was it
long after, that Maolseachluin himself, the Monarch entered Ossory, killed
Dunchall mhac Donochadh, then (after his Fathers death) King of that Country,
slaughtered a great number of his adherents, and for the future fidelity of the
rest led away as many Hostages as he pleased. Lastly in this second Reign of
Maolseachluinn it was that Dunn Sleibhe mhac Mhaoilmhorda mhac Muirreigheine
burned the King of Leinster Vghaire mhac Tuathail mhac Duinlingine, mhac
Vghaire, mhac Oiliola mhac Duinling, in his dwelling house at Dubh-Loch
Easa-Chaille, even that brave Vghaire, that fought the very last Battle in
Ireland against the Danes, and defeated them so mightily that they never after
could any where make head against the Irish.

And now both the second War of the the Danes, and second reign of
Maolseachluinn the II. ending here; I also end the former part of my Instances.
In which, if I be not much deceived, you may observe a wilful, obstinate,
furious Nation, maugre all their Christianity, maugre the hand of God himself
so heavy on 'em, proceeding still from worse to worse. For in the former Danish
War, notwithstanding they had most enormously transgressed at several times, by
turning the edg of their Swords against one another; yet all that while none of
them arrived to the impiety of leaguing or joining with the common barbarous
Heathen Foe against any Soul whatsoever, or upon any terms at all. But in the
later we have seen a very great part of 'em do so, and do it even all along
from the very beginning to the end. At least I am sure they did so full 55
years complete from time to time, before the Battle of Clantarff had broke all
the hearts, and hopes, and Leagues together of those that did it. Though after
all, the goodness of God put off a little further still that heaviest of his
judgments on the Nation in general, which they (whether by relapsing again the
third time into their accursed Feuds, or whether by continuing in 'em at all
times, and particularly at this of their last delivery from all foreign Enemies)
brought on themselves not only at last, but ere very long. And yet I must
confess it was no sooner than 127 years more were over. For so long still, even
after the second Danish War of a hundred and fifty years continuance had been
wholly ended by the destruction of all their Northern and Eastern Invaders
whatsoever, did the wonderful mercy of God to them expect their amendment:
certainly a longer period of time than he expected the repentance of the old
World, when he had warned them to it by the building of the Ark. At present he
was content only to add to the former losses of this Nation that which really
was the last disposition to that heaviest doom expecting them: as it was indeed
the very last symptom of their dying Commonwealth. He removed their
Candlestick; that is, he subverted their ancient Monarchical Government. The
power and majesty of which, as it had been for so many long Ages their only
firm prop: so it was the only National glory they had left after the
destruction made (by 200 years continual War with Foreiners) of all whatsoever
else had been great or illustrious in their Nation. But this is now departed
like all the rest.

For, after this Maolseachluinn the II. had by death ended his second Reign of
nine years continuance, there was never more in Ireland any Monarch truly such;
never any at all (I mean) universally either obeyed, or acknowledged, or
accounted such by the Irish in general, at least till Henry the II. nay, I
might say, till James I. of glorious memory reigned over 'em. Yet because, I
must confess, there have been six more in Title and pretension such, that
succeeded this Maolseachluinn, in their several periods of time, for a hundred
and twenty seven years in all: and because the later part of my Instances are
delivered in their Reigns, I give them also now in ororder.

29. Donochadh mhac Brien Boraimh succeeded next to Malseachluinn II. for two
and fifty years, says Keting, and was acknowledged by Leath Mogh and the
greater part of Ireland. In his reign Art Cuilioch O Ruairck King of Breithfne,
violated, spoiled, plundered the Sanctuary of Cluain Fearta Breanuinn; but on
the same day, after he had committed this horrible sacrilegious villainy, was
met, and fought, and defeated by the Monarch. In his reign (besides the sacking
of Waterford by Diarmuid Mhaoil-na-mbho King of Leinster; which I pass over,
because they were, at least most of them were Danes that lived there at that
time) the other famed Sanctuary of Cluan mhic-Noise was in the like impious
manner spoiled by those Irish called the Comhacnuibh; though ere long severely
punished (says Keting) by a general mortality sweeping both themselves and
their Cattle away. In his reign Carthach mhae Saoirbhreathaigh, King of
Eoghanachta Casshell, and a great many other Gentlemen of Note were burned
together in a Thatchhouse by Mac Longhargain mhac Dunn Chuan. And after all,
this Monarch himself, Dononachadh mhac Brian Boraimh, was not only deprived of
his Kingdom, but glad to save his life by flying away, and going a poor Pilgrim
to Rome, where he died in St. Stephen's Abbey.

Which in short being the whole account, we find in Keting, of what happened,
to our purpose here, in the long reign of this Dononachadh: what follows now is
out of the Gratianus Lucius, p. 81.
Author of Cambrensis Euersus. For this accurate Writer, tho he delivers many
excellent things of this Donogh; yet he tells us, That he was an Usurper on the
rights of his elder Brother Teadhg (the undoubted Heir of the Crown, say the
Annals of Innis-Faile:) and put him into the hands of those Ely-O-Carrol-Men
who treacherously murdered him. That in the year 1027. which was the next after
Maolseachluinn's death, he preyed all Mead, Fingall, Leinster, Ossory: and
camp'd for two days near the Walls of Dublin, without any opposition. That An.
1036. with only one Vessel he fought, sunk and took 14 Breithfne Ships; and
sufficiently revenged on 'em their plundering of Cluan Feart. That in the year
1050, the Ossorians and Lagenians rebelling, he broke again their Stubbornness:
and in the year 1060. having enter ed Connaght with a good Army, he compelled
Ruadhruigh the King of that Proviuce to give him Hostages. So much indeed
Gratianus Lucius tells us consequently (in the first place) of this Donochadh
mhic Brien Boraimhe. But then going on he relates (in the next) of Diarmuid
mhic Donochadh, surnamed Maol-na-Moa, King of Leinster, Nephew to this very
Donochadh O Brian the Mounster King, by Dearbhrogil his Daughter, That, he
taking into his care and espousing against this Usurping Uncle the quarrel of
young Toirrghiallach, who was the Son and Heir of the murdered Teidhg, and
consequently his own Cousin German, to the end this injured youth might be
restored to his right, made sharp War on the said Uncle, Keting's pretended
Monarch of Ireland. That, to the end, he begun with Waterford in the year 1037.
took, sacked, and burnt it. In this year 1048. he set upon Glanuson, turned it
to ashes, killed a hundred of its defenders, and brought away 400 more
Captives. In the same year he wasted all the Desies, and returned with an
infinite number of their Cattle and very many Prisoners. In the year 1058. he
burnt Limmerick, plundered Inis-Ceath, fought Donochadh at the Mountain Croth,
and routed his whole Army. In the year 1061. he made a miserable slaughter of
the Momonians at Cuamchoill, wasted their Country, and put all both Houses,
Stacks, and standing Corn into a light flame of fire. Anno 1063. he burnt
Limmerick the second time, forced the Momonians to give him Hostages out of all
parts of their Country; nay soon after upon a new rebellion or insurrection of
theirs plagued them again and compelled 'em to new submissions and Hostages;
which Hostages he delivered all every one to the foresaid Toirrghiallach. The
next year, which was 1064. he beat Donochadh out of all his Kingdom, made him
fly beyond Seas, placed Tourrghiallach in his Throne, at least of Mounster: and
in the following 1065. upon intelligence of Donochadh's son Murchadh*s setting
up for himself, he marched the last time into Mounster, suppressed that
Insurrection, chased Murchadh into Connaght, received the third time Hostages
from all Mounster, and, as he had done before, put them into the hands of
Tourrghiallach now King after his Uncle. Moreover this Author writes of the
same Diarmuid King of Leinster; that, besides his pulling down and setting up
so whom he pleased in that Province of Mounster, he made Connaght also yield,
having marched into it with a smart Army, harrass'd it, and reduced Aodh O
Conchabhar, the King of it, to such streights, that in the year 1061. he was
even forced at last to buy his peace by coming to his House in Leinster and
submitting to his pleasure. That before this, in the year 1048. at three
several times he wasted Mead so cruelly, so without any discrimination or
distinction made 'twixt sacred and profane, that he destroyed with fire even
most of the very Churches there: and in the year 1053. entering it the fourth
time, he led away both a very great number of Captives, and innumerable preys.
That for the Danes or Easterlings of Dublin, who (it seems) stood upon terms of
Contest with him, he in the year 1052. plagued them so mightily by burning not
only Fingall, but all other Territories round about them on every side, and
then fighting and worsting and slaughtering a great number of them hard by
their own Walls, that they were glad at last to proclaim him their King also,
and wholly submit to his will. That notwithstanding all his former Victories,
he was in the year of Christ 1072, on the 17th of February, being Tuesday,
fought, defeated, killed in the Battle of Odhbhen by Conchabhar O
Maolseachluinn King of Mead. And lastly this Author tells us, That among all
the Irish Antiquaries only Keting places Donochadh O Brien, only Sir James
Ware, Diarmuid mhac Mhaoil-na-Moa in the Catalogue of Irish Monarchs. So that
all the rest of the Irish Writers, it seems, account neither of them, and
consequently none at all in their days to have been King of Ireland, but hold a
mere Interregnum then of the Monarchy. But be it so, or no, it matters not to
my purpose; being the Instances brought all along in that very long Reign of
Donochadh, at least over Mounster, are true; whether Donochadh or Diarmuid, or
any other Irish Prince in their time was more than a Provincial King, or less
than a Monarch of the whole Island.

Toirrghiallach mhae Teidhg, mhic Brien Boraimb (that is in our Language,
Terence, the Son of Teig, the Son of Brien Boraimh) is now Successor to
Donachadh, as in the Kingdom of Mounster and Leath mogh, so in the Title of
Monarch, says Keting. Nor do I find that any other opposed this Title of his.
But one reason hereof might be his ruling peaceably, troubling no man, nor
forcing any thing from either Province or man, And therefore they took no
exception against the Title whether assumed by himself or given him by others
during his short Reign, which was but of twelve years only, as most Antiquaries
say; though some extend it to 22 years: the occasion of their difference being,
that the former count the beginning of his Reign from the death of Diarmuid
Mhaoil-na-moa in the Battle of Odhbhen; the later take it from the death of
Donochadh O Brien at Rome, or at least from his deposition and flight. However,
this is unanimously confessed, that as he lived quietly for his own part during
his Reign, so he died naturally in the 77 year of his Age, being the year of
Christ 1086. But so did not under his Reign Conchabhor O Maolseachluinn King of
Mead For this but lately Victorious Prince was treacherously murdered by his
own Nephew Murcho' mhac Floinn: and his head, after burial of it at
Cluain-mhac-Noise, carried to the Monarch then residing at Coann-Chora. Who
desired to see it, because he bore this Methian King no good will, for having
killed (though in Battle) his dear Cousin, his Patron, his supporter and
Protector Diarmuid mhac Donochadh, surnamed Maol-na-moa, King of Leinster, as
we have seen before. But his curiosity cost him dear. For the head being
brought him on good Friday; as he was viewing it, a little Mouse slipped out of
it into his Bosom, which so affrighted him, especially when he understood how
next Sunday the same head was miraculously returned back to Cluain-mhac-Noise
with a gold Ring upon it, that he fell presently into a languishing Disease,
that held him after in cruel pain for several years, and never was perfectly
over till he died. So writes the Author of Cambrensis Euersus. And now

Muirchiortach mhac Toirrghialbhaigh mhac Teaidhg, the great Grandchild of
Brien Boraimh, and Son to the foresaid Toirrgheallach, succeeded his Father in
the Sovereignty at least of Mounster, Leath Mogh, and greater part of Ireland
for 20 years, says Keting. In which Reign, though he record nothing proper to
our purpose in this place (and somewhat extraordinary that very same is) yet
Gratianus Lucius has enough. This Author, page 82. and 84. gives a very
particular account of the great combustions in it. He tells us how upon the
death of Toirrghiallach O Brien the last Monarch, not only this Muirchiortach
his Son, but Domhnall, the Son of Ardghar, the Son of Lochlen, King of
Tir-Conel contended to some purpose for the Sovereignty of Ireland. How the
former by fight and spoil subdued the Lagenians, and the later in the same
manner the Methians. How Dombnal had in the year 1088. got the start of
Muirchiortach by forcing the King and Kingdom of Connaght to give him Hostages
for their future fidelity: and then immediately entered Mounster, burnt
Limmerick, demolished Ceann-Chora the chief Royal Seat ever since Brien
Boraimh's time, wasted the whole Country thereabouts with Fire and Sword, and
brought away thence besides an infinite number of Horses and all sorts of
Cattle, vast Treasures of Gold, Silver and Plate. How, on the other side,
Muirchiortach, besides forcing Dublin three several times, banishing Godred the
Danish King, being there himself proclaimed King at each time, marched into
Vlster with the Forces of Mounster, Connaght, Leinster and Mead: harrass'd it
most woefully: burnt the Royal Seat of Domhnall there: and was thus revenged not
once but often on that ^rovince; marching into it every time with main Forces,
and scouring all the Coasts of the whole Island with a very numerous well
provided Navy. How Domhnall had withal so many rebellions of his own Subjects
against himself in the very North, nay within Tirc^nnel it self, that, having
as often overcome them all, he put out the eyes of some of their petty Kings,
and others to death. How after all the foresaid Muirchiortach King of Cashel,
or (which is here the same thing) of Mounster, and together with him Flann O
Maolseachluinn King of Mead, and Ruidhruigh O Conchabhar King of Connaght
found themselves necessitated not only to give Domhnall a meeting, but even to
deliver him Hostages, in the year of Christ 1090. How in the year 1104. Domhnal
turned to ashes that Country in Mead called then Ibh Laoghaire: and in the
year 1112, broke into Fingall, preyed it, plundered it all over, and carried
away thence, besides their Cattle, a very great deal of costly Rayments; (
magnam boum pretiosissimarumque vestium vim illinc retulit, says my Author)
How, after so many devastations of the poor Country and much blood spilt
betwixt these two Contenders: and after frequent annual Cessations between 'em,
procured by the Primats of Ireland even then when both their Armies stood ready
in the Field to fall on: they came at last to the old Division of Leath Cuinn
and Leath Mogh: that is, Domhnall to govern absolutely in all the North side of
Eisker-Riada, and Muirchiortach in all the South of it; each stiling himself
King of Ireland. How, this agreement made, Muirchiortach falling into a heavy
Disease that continued five years, his own Brother Diarmuid O Brien seized the
Kingdom of Mounster: and both he and other Provincial Kings divided among them
all Muirchiortach's wealth and possessions while he was yet alive, tho
extremely sick: but he afterward unexpectedly recovering, made so sharp a War
on them all, that they were forced to quit and restore whatsoever they had so
unjustly got. In fine, how piously both Muirchiortach and Diarmuid ended their
days, notwithstanding their almost continual Wars during life and health: the
former at Lismore in the 20th year of his Reign, and of Christ 1119. but having
first divested himself of all worldly power and care by turning Clerk in that
holy place: and the later, being 73 years old, in the Menastery of Columb-cille
at Doire (now by us called Londonderry) 27 of his Reign, which was of Christ
1121. For so many years I find given him by Colganus in this Elogy of him:
Donaldus Loghleni ex Ardgaro filio nepos, Rex Hiberniae, Hibernorumque
excellentissimus formae praestantia, generis nobilitate, animi indole and in
rebus agendis prosperitate postquam multa munera egenis clementer, and
potentibus liberaliter elargitus fuerat, in Roboreto Divi Columbae (hoc est in
Dorensi Monasterio) decessit anno aetatis suae 73. and principatus in Hibernia
27. Christi nati 1121.

Where I must occasionally reflect on my own mistake, in the foregoing 75 page
of this little Book, and desire the Reader to account it such. Indeed there I
supposed that that Dearmach, where Beda says, Columbe-Cille had built his
famous Irish Monastery, was the same with Ardmach. But now I see by Colgan's
explication of Roboretum D. Columbae that without question that Dear-mach (in
Latin Roboretum or Campus Roborum, for Dair or Doir signifies an Oak in the
Irish, and Match or Magh a Field) which Beda meant, was at the place ever since
called by the Irish Doire Columb-Cille, as it is of late by the English
Londonderry, and by no means at Ardmagh. But to pass over as well that error
of my own, as the brief account, immediately before this reflection on it,
given of the pious end those two great Contenders made: for peradventure you
will say, and I confess it freely, that neither the one nor the other is to my
main purpose here: and therefore to return, and prosecute only that which is my
Province: I will now let you see all the glory of the Monarchical (or at least
pretended Monarchical) Power of Ireland (which never lasted long, not even from
Heber's days, in any one Family or Sept) removing from Mounster to Cannaght;
and from the O Brians there to the O Connors here. Yet leaving still, for my
part, the Question undetermined, whether the same Monarchy did not continue for
two years longer in Tirconel, after it had ended in Tomond, and so passed
immediately not from Muirchiortach O Brian, but from Dombnall mhac Ardghar mhac
Loghlin. However, that was,

Toirrghiallach mor mhac Ruidhruigh vibh Chonchabhair (i. e. Terence the Great,
Son of Roderick descended of Connor) King of Connaght, is now possessed of the
Sovereignty of Leath-Cuinn and greater part of Ireland, and thereby of the
Title of Monarch for 20 years more, says Keting. For so at least his his own
Subjects and followers called him. I am sure his Reign has furnished History
with Instances enough on the Subject I treat of. At three several times he
entered the Province (...) Mounster with a great and Hostile power of men:
though the first time having preyed and spoiled not only Ard-feanan but Cashel,
he was set upon in the Rear by part of the Mounster Army, and lost Aodh O
Heidin King of Biorradh, and Muirriadhach O Flacthiorta King of Lower Connaght,
with a great number of other prime Gentlemen. The second time he invaded it
both by Land and Sea: himself marching by Land in the head of a strong Army,
and laying all waste about him till he came to Cork; where a goodly Fleet (says
Keting) well provided of Seamen and Soldiers, which he had sent about to
destroy all the Coasts, having done their work, met him. And now this imperious
Monarch Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhair, glutted with revenge, divides
Mounster in two equal parts, the Southern and Northern Mounster, so called.
Whereof he commits the Southern to Donochadh mhac Cartha's government; the
Northern to Conchabbar O Brien: and so returns home triumphantly to Connaght,
with 30 Hostages of the best in Mounster. But soon after, Cormock mhac Cartha,
King of West-mounster, being treacherously killed by Toirrghiallach O Brien,
his own Sonin-law and Gossip: and the whole Province of Mounster, that is all
the parts and power and Title too of it, seized by him as the lawful King of
it: Toirrghiallach mor O Concbabhar the pretended Monarch draws together all
the Forces of Connaght, Breithfne, Mead and Leinster; puts himself in the head
of them: and marches now again the third time into Mounster. Where, being
advanced in so far as Gleann Mhachair, and to a place there called Moinmhoir
(in English the Great Moor) Toirrghiallach O Brien, the new Mounster King, in
the head of 9000 men, the flower of all that Province, meets him, and fights
him; but is so entirely and mightily defeated, that Dal-Gheass, the chief
strength of his Army, never before nor after had the like overthrow, as being
for the matter all destroyed therein. And the issue was, the banishment of this
new unfortunate King to Tir-Eoghuin in Vlster; and the division of Mounster the
second time, between Diarmuid mhac Cormuick mhic Cartha and Teadhg O Brien, by
the Monarch.

Such is the account of this Monarch, and no more, I mean, of his Warlike
Actions and Exploits, delivered by Keting, in his Reign. But Gratianus Lucius,
in his Cambrensis Euersus says further of him, that he preyed all the Provinces
of Ireland, every one. That he made his own Son Conchabhar actually and really
King of the Dublinians, Lagenians and Methians. That with his Land Army he
destroyed Tirconel, and with his Navy consisting of 190 Ships wasted Tir-Oen,
and with both reduced both these warlike Countries of the North. That
nevertheless, before the end of his Reign, his Glory was obscured and power
humbled by him who came next to succeed in the Monarchy, and who begun early
(it seems) to lay the foundation of his own future greatness by making War on
this very Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar himself, the Monarch, and forcing
Hostages from him in the year of Christ 1150. that is full six years before
this Monarch's death. And that, however, he continued in the whole his Reign
over Connaght 50 years, and according to all the Irish Annals and Historians,
over Ireland 20. Though (says Gratianus) according to a more exact severe
discussion of the truth, if the date of his Monarchy be taken from the death of
his Predecessor Mairchiortach O Brien to his own, he must have reigned over
Ireland 34 years in all: or at least 28, if it be continued only till the
foresaid Hostages were forced from him. But I range again. For as well this
calculation of his years or Reign, as his religious preparation for death, and
his burial, and rest, close by the high Altar of St. Cieran in the Cathedral
Church of Cluan-mhac-Noise is foreign to my purpose here. And therefore I return
again.

Muirchiortach, commonly called Mac Loghlenn, (but immediate Son to Niall, and
by him Nephew to that Domhnal whom we have so lately seen to have so long
contended for the Sovereignty of Ireland, and therefore stil^d by Colganus King
of Ireland) upon the death of Toirghiallach mor O Conchabhar assumes that Title
of the Irish Monarchy, which he had so venturously and early prepared for while
Toirrghiallach was yet alive, and in health. Of him, at least of any warlike
action either of his, or indeed of any others in his Reign, tho Keting has not
a word, save only those very few that on an other occasion I have given before,
page 73. viz. that Mairchiortach mhac Neill the Monarch (that succeeded
Toirghiallach mor O Conchabhar) was in the 18th year of his Reign, killed by
Fearnibh, Fearrmhaighe and O Brian: yet the diligence and accurateness of
Gratianus Lucius makes abundant compensation. For this Author p. 86. says of
the present Muirchiartach, first in general, That his humor having been wholly
Martial, and his fortune answerable, he overrun all the Provinces of Ireland
in a continual course of Victories, obtained partly by Battles, and partly by
the sole terror of his Name. That he subdued them all, and forced them every
one to give him Hostages. That therefore at least He, without any
contradiction, may be admitted next after Maolseachluinn II. for the undoubted
King of all Ireland. And then, after letting us know that this Prince's great
Virtues were much eclipsed by the Precipitancy of his anger: and that whom
prosperity had raised to such a height, adversity at last did throw down as
low even to the very earth: he particularly recounts how Eochadh King of
Vlster, not only refused to pay any more Tribute or other dues to him, but even
without any other provocation made War upon him. That he being thereupon
enraged enters the Territories of Eochadh, routs his Forces, burns his Lands,
takes his Vassals, and puts them in Fetters; Eochadh himself by good luck
escaping. That after this, yea notwithstanding a reconciliation made between
them by the intercession, and upon the Engagement of the Primat of Ardmagh and
Donochadh King of Oirghllae for performance of Covenants on both sides, and
Eochadh's consequential pardon and reception to grace; which to assure him
Muirchiortach took the most solemn Oath he could (for such it was accounted
then in that Kingdom) on the Staff of Jesus (what this was, S. Bernard tells in
the Life of Malachias:) yet ere long, whether out of the former cause, or any
other new one enraging him, he had Eochadh's eyes pulled out of his head: and
three of his Nobles ( duos Olingsios, and Cathasachi O Flahry nepotem) most
cruelly put to death; without any regard to the engagement of the Sureties.
And, to conclude, that Donochadh O Cearrbhaoil the foresaid King of Oirghillae,
one of the Sureties, taking to heart so heinous a breach of Faith, Oath,
Covenants, and assurance given by himself; and therefore resolving to be
revenged, draws to his association the People of Vibhruinne and Comhaicne;
marches with an Army of 9000 men into Cineal-Eoghain (otherwise called by them
Tir-Eoghain, but by us Tir-oen) where the Monarch then resided; surprises him
unprovided; fights the few tumultuary Forces led forth by him, routs them, and
kills him in that Field, a man ever before Victorious in all his Encounters
whatsoever. Yet such was his end in the 10th of his reign, Anno Christi 1166,
says Gratianus Lucius; though Keting says he was killed in the eighteenth of
his Reign, by Fearrnibh Fearrmhaighe and O Brien, as I have noted before. But
as their difference in computing the years of the Reign is not material; the
one beginning it when this Muirchiortach mhac Neill had forced his predecessor
Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar to give him Hostages, and the other when
Toirrghiallach died: so neither is it material to know whether any such persons
called Fearrnibh Fearrmhaighe and O Brien were, or were not in that Battle to
kill him. What is to our present purpose, you have it very particularly
delivered by the one, and not gainsaid by the other.

And yet upon reflection I must confess I find that I have not delivered all
the material things written by Gratianus Lucius in this Reign of Muirchiortach
mhac Neill. He further writes ( page 87.) that in the Year 1156. even the very
first year of it, presently after Toirrghiallach mor O Conchabhar's death, his
Son and Heir and King of Connaght Ruidhruigh O Conchabhar did receive twelve
Hostages from Muirchiortach O Brien; even that very Mounster King so lately
before deprived and banished to Tir-Eoghain by the said Toirrghiallach (Father
to this Ruidhruigh) as we have seen already. That in the Year 1157. he rushed
into Muirchiortach mhac Neill the Monarch's own peculiar Country Tir-Eoghain,
burnt the fruitful Peninsula there, called Inis-Eoghain, destroyed all the
delicate Gardens, Orchards, Plantations; wasted the whole Region to Cianachty.
That after this he turned his Arms on Mounster; Where having first settled the
foresaid Muirchiortach O Brien in possession of North- Mounster, he forced
Hostages from Diarmuid mhac Cormuic mhic Cartha King of South- Mounster, to
remain with him till Muirchiortach mhac Neill the Monarch did relieve the said
Diarmuid. That Anno 1158. he entered Leinster in like hostile manner with great
Force: marched through it to Leiglin: being encamped there had Hostages brought
him from Ossory and Luighis: and, in the close of all, loaded Mac Craih O
Morrdha the little King of Luighis with Irons. That in the next place he made
Inroads into Teabhan, driving away thence from the Kerins an exceeding great
prey of Cows: and with his Fleet afflicted all the Coasts of Tir-Eoghain
mightily. That in the Year 1161. falling violently on Mead, he both compelled
the Countries called Vibh Falain and Vibh Faoilghe to give him pledges, and
then placed Governors in them, viz. Faolan O Faoelain in the one, and Mlaghlin
O Conchabhair in the other. That after all, he made his Conditions of peace
with the Monarch, delivered him four Hostages; received from him in gift the
entire Province of Connaght, with the one half of Mead, and from Diarmuid O
Maolseachluinn a hundred ounces of Gold for that half. So that by this time, I
think the Reader has no reason to complain of want of Instances to purpose out
of this Reign of Muirchiortach mhac Neill: Who, as we have seen, was the
saddest of them all himself, as having by his own Vassals been set upon
unprovided, fought, overcome, and killed,.

In the last place Ruaruidh O Conchabhar King of Connaght, e'n that very same
Ruaruidh, who contended for so many years before with Muirchiortach mhac Neill,
and submitted to him at last, appears now his Successor on this long tottering
Theater of Irish Monarchs. Keting delivers a very imperfect account of him,
saying, That besides Cannaght he had only the Kings of Breithfne and Oirghillac
to acknowledge his Sovereignty; and giving scarce any thing else happened in his
Reign, but what relates to Diarmuid na Ngall the Leinster Kings Rape, and to
the Brittons invited in by this Diarmuid; nothing I am sure of those warlike
Actions and great Contests of this Monarch with other Irish Princes. But this
defect in Keting is elsewhere abundantly supplied, I mean by Gratianus Lucius
in his Cambrensis Eversus. In this Author, grounding himself on the Annals of
Inis Fail, you may read that this Ruaruidh not only bore the Title of King of
Ireland, but was so indeed. But, without any peradventure the Relation given by
him, shows this last Irish Monarch's fatal Reign to have been fruitful enough
of those (and they the very last of those) Instances I purposed to recount.

Immediately on the death of his Predecessor (killed by Eochadh) he marched his
Connaght Army to Assa Ruah, subdued all Tirconel, and received their Hostages.
From thence both with his own Connacians, and the Legions of Breithfne,
Teamhfna, and Mead, led on by Tighernan O Ruairk King of Breithfne and
Diarmuid O Maolseachluinn King of Mead, he marched to Dublin, entered it, was
entertained in it by the Danes, Easterlings, and other the Inhabitants of that
City and Territories belonging to it, with all demonstrations of honor: was
proclaimed their King: and they presented by him according to the custom then
with a royal Gift of 4000 Beeves. From hence, but joining first all the Militia
of those Citizens to his former Legions, he goes directly so accompanied to
Droghedagh (the Irish call it Droighid Ath) is received there by Donochad O
Cearbheoil King of Oirghiallae, has Hostages whom he pleased of that Country
put into his power, and then causes a present of 2000 Beeves more to be in his
name given that King. From thence returning back to Leinster, he advances to
Findorf, gives Battle there to Mac Murcho King of Leinster, defcats him,
pursues him, forces him at last to submit and give Hostages, then abridges him
of his jurisdiction, leaves him only Cionsallach, and bids him be content with
that, or he should lose that too. From thence he made his progress to Mac Gille
Phadruic, the King of Ossory; who delivering Pledges was royally treated and
presented by him. And now he enters Mounster; has the submissions of all the
Province: bestows North-Mounster on Muirchiortach O Brien, his own Brother by a
Mother: commands pledges from Diarmuid mhac Cartha King of South-mounster: and
so passes on in triumph to Connaght his own home, having well nigh surrounded
the whole Island in this very first year of his Reign. After which circuit (and
either in the same year of our Lord 1166, as Gratianus insinuates it to have
been: or, at furthest in the next, as the Annals of Ireland in Cambden expressly
say) it was, that Diamuid mhac Mhurrchadh, (alias Mhurchu, and Diarmuid na
Nghall) having committed the famous Rape (if it was a Rape) on Tighernan O
Roirk King of Breithfn's Wife, the same Tighernan to be revenged on Diarmuid,
by the Monarch's Authority heading both his own Breithne Forces with those of
Mead, and most of Leinster too, marched into Ibh-Cionsallach; made Diarmuid
fly beyond Seas; destroyed his Castle at Ferns; divided his said Country of
Cionsallach between Mac Gille Phadrick King of Ossory and one Murchadh the Son
of Murchadh; and then returned with seventeen Hostages for the Monarch. And now
this revenge or justice on Diarmuid being executed, the Monarch himself An.
1167. attended on by all the Kings and Nobles of Mounster, Leinster, Mead,
Breithsne, Comhaicne, Orghiall, and Vlidia, or Vlla (which I take to have been
then but a part of the now large Province of Vlster) with all their Troops,
consisting of Nine and thirty thousand Foot, and one and twenty thousand Horse,
marched to Ardmach. From thence, of one side with those great Land Forces, and
from Doire (now by us called Londonderry) on the other, where his Fleet of a
hundred and ninety Sail had landed, he attacks Tir-Eoghain so furiously on
every side, that after the stubborn Forces of that Country, being first
retired into their Woody Fastnesses, had not only in vain attempted to fall by
Night on his Royal Camp, but instead thereof by a great mistake had fallen
foully on one another in the dark, they found it necessary on the fourth day to
submit and deliver him Hostages. This Expedition being ended so, he breaks up
his Camp, dismisses his great Army, the several Troops and Legions to their
respective Countries, returns himself by the way of Assa Ruagh to Connaght with
the two Mounster Kings in his Company, entertains them nobly at his own Palace
there, and at their departure presents them richly. But he had not rested above
one week at home, when he had intelligence brought him of Diarmuid mhac
Mhurchadh the Leinster King's being landed in Cionnsallach with foreign
Auxiliarics, possessed already of Wexford, Master besides of a great part of
Leinster, and a terror to all the rest. Those called the Annals of Ireland, in
Cambden, which yet began no earlier than four years before this Monarch
Ruiruidgs O Cenchabhar's Reign, say these foreign Aaxiliaries landed An 1168.
But the right Irish Annals that record their landing in the former year 1167.
are sollowed by Gratianus Lucius, and him I follow. However presently on the
news, Ruaruidh O Conchabhar the Monarch heading his Conacian Troops, and
joining in his way the Militia of Mead and Dublin, marches to Findorch, finds
out, fights and defeats Diarmuid. An atonement between them follows; Diarmuid
giving the Monarch seven Hostages for his future fidelity, and paying a hundred
ounces in Gold to Tighernan O Ruairck for the injury done him by the Rape. And
yet Diarmuid by new Tumults the very next Year giving new jealousies, the
Monarch marches against him the second time, and fights and foils him again.
Though after all he was wrought upon to accept this second time of Diarmuid's
submission, promises, and base Son (for Diarmuid had none at this time
remaining that was Legitimat) as a new addition to the former Hostages. In the
same Year 1^68. Ludos Taltinos dedit, says Lucius. That is, he gave and held
with great solemnity the public famous ancient Games at Tailtean. What these
were, and who ordained them first, and upon what occasion you may peradventure
know in the next Section. At present it may suffice to know they were much like
the Olympic Games of Greece. But whatever this Aonach of Tailteann, as the
Irish call it, be thought to have been, Lucius proceeds and tells us, that in
the same Year also Muirchiortach O Brien King of North- mounster was murdered
by the South- mounster men. That the Monarch made his Brother Domhnal O Brien
King to succeed him: put him in full possession: fined the Desmonians in 3120
Beeves for killing his Brother: and made them effectually pay this Fine. The
same year likewise he fined the Methians in 800 Beeves, and the men of Dealfna
heavily, for the killing of O Finolan one of their Lords. In the Year 1169.
Domhnal Breagach, for being Author of Diarmuid the Prince of Meath's death, he
punished with the loss of that Estate which the said Domhnal by so wicked an
Act of murder aimed to inherit. But this Monarch did confiscate it so, as he
reserved West-meath to himself and the Conacians; bestowing at the same time
Eastmeath on the foresaid Tighernan O Ruairk and his people of Breithfne. Anno
1175. Domhnal O Brien King of North-mounster, pulled out the eyes both of
Diarmuid mhic Teaidhg, and Mahoom mhic Toirrgiallaidgh vihh Bhrian, yea and
murdered the Son of Conchabhar O Brien of Corcumruadh. To punish this Tyranny,
Rotherick or Roderick (for so the English Writers name this Ruadhruigh the
present Monarch) enters Tomond, makes Domhnal fly, and because he could not
find him, lays his whole Country waste. In the same Year 1175. he defeated in
Ormund (the Irish call it Ir-mhoun, that is, East Mounster) both the Welsh,
English, and Irish Troops led by Strougbow; killed 1700 of them in the place,
and forced that Earl (how valiant and fortunate soever till then) to give over
his present design, and retire in great disorder to Watenford.

After this, but yet in the same Year still, Ruadhruigh considering not only
the defection of many of the Princes from him, but their variance among
themselves, and (which was most dangerous of all) his own Sons turned unruly
and rebellious: and therefore considering also that himself alone was not able
any longer to bear up against so many Enemies both Domestic and Foreign, Irish
and British, well nigh already environing him round: he now at last descends
to Capitulations of Peaco with the King of England. The sum of them, says
Lucius, the Irish Annals deliver in words importing mostly this sense: that
Cathal (alias Catholicus) O Dubhay Archbishop of Tuam returned out of England
with the Peace concluded by him there with Henry II. on these conditions, viz.
That Rotherick should enjoy still the authority and Title of King over the
Irish; and the Provincial Kings their respective dignities and power, but with
their former dependence on and subjection to him the said Ruadruigh O.
Rotherick. But whatever those Capitulations were, which you may see more
particularly and fully in Roger Hoveden (ad An. 1175. page 312.) the troubles
of Ruadhruidh were but little abated by them. In the Year 1177. one of his own
Sons, by name Murchadh, out of some unreasonable pique turned most unnaturally
Traitor to him: sided with the common Enemy: and was the very Guide to Miles
Cogan and his English Troops in their entering Connaght, or at least from their
coming to Roscommon till they were soon after fought, and beat, and forced back
out of that whole Province by Ruaruidh himself. Who thereupon seized the said
Murchadh; and though his own Son put out his eyes for his rebellious unnatural
Treachery (and justly enough without any peradventure:) as at the same time,
for some other heinous transgression he confined prisoner to the small Island
in Loch-Cuam his own other (yea his eldest) Son Conchabhar; whom
notwithstanding O Flatherty and other Favorers of this young Prince, rescued
by plain force within a twelvemonth from that restraint, and set at liberty. To
conclude, partly the foreign Invaders, but chiefly his own Children brought this
last Irish Monarch's hoary hairs with grief to the Grave. Even his own eldest
Son, the foresaid Conchabhar in the year 1186. first deprived him of his very
Kingdom of Connaght: then by sundry other indignities forced him to fly away to
Mounster: and last of all, after he had been recalled by the Connaght Nobility,
compelled him again to seek refuge in Tir-Chonaill. And here it was that this
now afflicted man indeed, though in his youth and manly years too for some time
the Darling of Fortune, found his long wished for death among the Chanon
Regulars in the Year of Christ 1198. having first by habit and profession made
himself a member of that Religious Order. He continued seventeen years
possessed, at least in part and in Title, of his Monarchy over the Irish. For
so many years their Antiquaries allow his Reign over Ireland: though from the
beginning of it to his death, were efflux'd full two and forty years.

Thus you have in substance the account (and a very particular full one indeed
it is) given by Gratianus Lucius of this very last Milesian Monarch and his
Reign over Ireland. Wherein, if I be not extremely mistaken, you have withal
(though among other matters, which I have for some use that may be made of them
hereafter mentioned) Instances enough answerable both in quality and number to
those alleged before out of any of the former Reigns of Irish Monarchs since
Maolseachluinn II. for demonstrating what I intended by them all. Certainly
these and those jointly taken are sufficient demonstrations, that the Monarchs,
Princes and other great ones of that Nation received no correction from the
great Hand that from above scourged them so grievously, so often, and so long.
Nor can it be denied, that the later part of the same Instances, (I mean that
large part of them which happened between Maolseachluinn II. Reign, and
Ruadhruigh O Conchabhair's death) are most evident convictions of the little,
nay the evil use, in order to any reformation of their fatal Feuds, they made
of the hundred and thirty years freedom from foreign Enemies after the last
expulsion or subjection of the Danes; though a large term of time questionless
allowed them by the extraordinary mercy of God to consider, at least then, more
wisely of the matter, and not only relent from their former unnatural courses
of persecuting and spoiling, and killing, and murdering one another, but
heartily repent what themselves and their Parents and their Grandsires had done
in that kind, exasperating him continually to hasten on 'em that final doom of
theirs which he had so long suspended. Neither is it any further to be doubted,
that both the former and later part equally of the same Instances are
sufficient proofs that those passages of Jeremy the Prophet, which I have given
before, ( page 153.) however in his time, and as spoken by him, describing only
the stubbornness of his own Jewish Countrymen, might nevertheless be most
justly applied by Keting (the pious Reflecter on these matters) to the Milesian
race in Ireland at this time of theirs, after that nothing at all, neither
adversity nor prosperity, nor war nor peace, nor bondage nor liberty could
reclaim them. Verily to me those Instances are more than sufficient proofs,
That this wilful Generation of Christians did at this time in the language of
the holy Prophet, harden their faces harder than a Rock, and, even refuse to
return. Nay whatever any body else may think, certainly it seems further to me,
that such was the Judgment God himself gave of them. For (if I may be allowed
once more to speak my sense in a symbolical or Metaphorical Scripture phrase,
and apply to them what another Prophet said many Ages before on another Subject
and of another Kingdom, but is applicable enough to them) at this very time,
The Watchman and holy one from Heaven (Dan. 4.) pronounced the long suspended
Sentence, the fatal Decree, the final Doom, here on Earth, against this
lofty-headed large-spread Tree of the Milesian Stock in Ireland. At this time
he commanded this Eternal Decree to be forthwith put in execution. At this time
he called upon the new Ministers of his Wrath, and bid 'em to cut down this
Tree, chop off its boughs, shake off all its leaves, disperse its fruit, make
the beasts fly that were under it, and the birds of the air from perching any
more on its branches; though withal bidding them to leave the spring of the
roots thereof still in the ground. And I am sure, that to speak plain without
Similitude or Metaphor, what happened since the sixth year of Ruadhruigh O
Conchabhar's Monarchical Reign has manifestly shown that from thence, i. e.
from that year, which was of Christ's Incarnation 1172. We must date the last
and heaviest doom of Heaven declared against that People as to their Being in
this World; Never more to have a King or State of their own; Never more to be a
Free People on Earth, so as not to be under a foreign Yoke. And I believe you
will think the same when you consider that since that Epoch or Date they and
their posterity after them have already seen five hundred Years and Eight of
this their heavy Doom continued. Tho after all, upon after-thoughts, I think it
more wise to suspend than be positive in any judgment of the future; especially
considering the example of Spain, recovered after seven hundred years
subjection to the Moors.

SECT. V.
Five things considered: 1. Other Nations have at some times no less bloodily
engaged in mortal intestin Feuds, one against an other. Instances in the
Romans, Germans, Florentines, Italians at large, Spaniards, French, Saxons,
Normans. 2. Irish Princes renowned for other excellent Qualifications than
those only of Martial Courage and Conduct. For Example, under Paganism, the
Monarchs Ollamh Fodhla, Feilim Rachtmhor, Conair Mor mhac Eidrisgceoil, Conn
Ceadchathatch, and Cormac mhac Airt; (where also you will meet with a very
singular tho only incidental story of Connor the first Provincial King of the
North of Ireland.) Under Christianity, and for those Excellencies most peculiar
to Christianity, first the Monarchs Maolchoba, Flaithiortach, Niall Frassach,
etc. next, those Provincial Kings, Feilim mhac Criomthain, Aillill Anmhana,
Cormack the Bishop and King of Mounster, etc; and lastly the Lesser Kings,
Damhin mhac Damhinghoirt, Ferradhach mhac Duachadh, Maolbressel mhac Cearnaigh,
etc. 3. Several Princes, even after the Danish Wars, that, notwithstanding
whatever National Feuds, effectually proved themselves endued even with those
excellent political Virtues necessary for good Governors as such. The first
and great Instance Brian Boraimh; then Muirchiortach, etc. Ecclesiastical
Synods of the whole Nation held under the two or three last of these: and
Monasteries every where in all the Provinces, about the same time, erected
anew. 4. Some, however few, yet very eminent, yea wonder-working Saints among
their Churchmen, especially Maolmoadh and Laurase (in our Language, Malachi
and Laurence:) the one Archbishop of Ardmagh, the other of Dublin, succeeding
close one another in the very last Age of the Milesians Reign over Ireland. 5.
The Decree of the holy Watchman, is nevertheless immutable.

30. BUT before I enter on this great Conversion of the State of Ireland,
several matters yet remaining of another nature than those discoursed of lately
must interpose.

The first is, That by any thing said in either of the two last Sections, my
meaning was not to make those bloody Feuds, or consequents of them, so peculiar
to the Milesian Race or Irish Nation, as if no other People or Nation esteemed
either Christian or Civil had been at any time so guilty in that kind as they.
I was far from any such thought. And indeed how could I be otherwise? For,
without any stress laid upon the Poets Expression,

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges.

Nay without any assistance from either Pagan Thebe, or Christian Bizantium, or
any other Country so remote: the Histories of all Nations much nearer us,
particularly those of Rome, Germany, Italy, Florence, Spain, France, and very
singularly those of the Saxon Heptarchy and Barons Wars, and Lancaster and York
Divisions here at home in England, must evince the contrary. Even for that very
chief Mistress of Civility first, and then Chistianity, at least in most parts
of Europe, that seven hill'd Rome, that eternal City in Valentinian's language,
without any peradvenventure, the Foundation of Her cemented by Romulus with the
blood of his Brother Remus: the Rebellion against Tarquin: the Factions of the
Plebeians: the oppressions by and killing of the Decemviri: the Tyranny of
Tribuns: the Tables of Sylla and Marius: with the Rivers of blood flowing from
their Swords: the Conspiracy of Catilin: the Civil Wars of Caesar and Pompey
following: and then the total change of their Commonwealth into a Principacity,
compassed not only by plain lawless rebellious Force, but by destruction of so
many Myriads of men: and now thirty Emperors murdered at several times: and now
also at one time, that is under Gallienus, at least Nine and Twenty Tyrants in
several parts of the Empire set up for themselves, must evince the contrary.
And so for Germany in later times the bloody contentions there so long
continued, until at last they resolved into the prudent means of declaring an
Heir apparent Successor and Caesar in the Emperors Lifetime: and the violent
deaths of Rudolphus, Albertus, Henry VII. Frederick III. Lewis of Bavier,
Charles, Nephew to the said Henry, Gunther, every one of them dispatched, as
Bodin Method. Histor. page 450.
says) either by Conspiracy or Poison, must evince the contrary. So for Italy
the Guelphs and Gibellins, and (besides many other Instances) the prodigiously
bloody revolutions of the Florentin Republic for 331 years, till after the
slaughter, extermination and total extinction of one of the sides, it was in
the memory of our Fathers, at least of our Grandfathers, by the prudence of
Cosmus Medices reduced under the authority of a single Person, must evince the
same truth. So for Spain, Alphonsus III. by putting out the eyes of all his
Brethren, save one that was killed. Alfonsus IV. with the like cruelty used by
his own Brother ^aymirus: Peter the Legitimat Son of Alphonsus XI. deposed and
killed by his Bastard Brother Henry: Garzias by Sanctius: then Sanctius by
Vellidus: and, after so many retaliations, all Spain under King Roderic
betrayed to the Moors by a natural Spaniard, a Subject to that King, Count
Julian (Prince of Celtiberia, as Bodin calls him) yea seven hundred thousand
Spaniards killed in the short space of fourteen months next following that
hideous treachery, must evince mightily the self-same truth. So for France,
those horrible Feuds, Combustions, Devastations, cruelties, inhumanities,
barbarous sacriledges of the late Civil Wars there, continued 40 years against
four Kings (whereof you may read at large in D'Avila) and the Holy Ligue, and
both Henry III. and Henry IV. one after another, so vilely murdered by those
devoted Assassins of Hell, Jacques Clement and Ravilliac, evince it still.
Lastly, and to come nearer home, tho in an earlier time, even so for England,
1. Those eight and twenty Saxon Kings of the Heptarchy, part by one another
killed, part by their own Subjects murdered, besides many other deposed, and
forced to fly away for their lives. For, as Matthew of Westminster (l. 1. c.
3.) writes, of the very Northumbrian Kings alone, four were murdered, and three
more deposed, within the little time of one and forty years only. And therefore
it was, that Charles the Great of France, when the news of the last of them, by
name Ethelbert, being murdered, came to his hearing, not only resolved to stop
the presents he was before on sending to England, nor only to do the English in
lieu of sending them gifts all the mischiefs he could; but said to Alcuinus an
English man (his own Instructor in Rhetoric, Logic and Astronomy) that indeed
That was a perfidious and perverse Nation, a murderer of their Lords, and worse
than Pagans. Nay therefore also it was, that many of the Bishops and Nobles
fled out of this Northumbrian Kingdom, and no man dared for 30 years next
following venture on being their King; but all men declined it, and so left
them a prey to the Irish, Sc^ts and Danes, who by the just judgment of God
overrun them and destroyed them at last, on that very occasion principally. 2.
Since the Norman Conquest, besides the horrible rebellion of Henry the 2d's own
Children against him, and many other particulars which I pass over, not only
all the calamities, miseries, cruelties, unspeakable evils of the Barons Wars
on both sides, under King John, Henry III. and Edward II. nor only the
deposition and murder too of this poor Edward, even his own Wife Queen Eleanor,
and his own very So^th^e Prince of Wales having both of them concurred in the
deposing him and usurping his Crown: but the most prodigiously mortal
dissentions of Lancaster and York began with the rebellion against, deposition
and murder of Richard the II. and so bloodily prosecuted for thirty years under
Henry VI. and Edw. IV. that besides eleven main Battles fought with infinite
slaughter of English men on either side; nay even twenty thousand men killed
(besides the wounded) in one of them, which Polydore calls the Battle of
Touton, a Village of Yorkshire: the excellent Historian Philip Comines tells us
of 80 of the Blood Royal destroyed in them: and among this number Henry VI. a
most virtuous, innocent, holy King most barbarously murdered. To say nothing of
Richard the Third, that Usurping Tyrant, so justly dispatched in the Battle of
Bosworth, by the Earl of Richmond, who thereupon succeeded King, by the name of
Henry VII. and by marrying the Daughter of Edward IV. and thereby most happily
uniting in himself and his Queen and Issue the right of the two Houses, ended
those fatal dissentions of Lancaster and York. Dissentions indeed so fatal to
England, that besides all her best blood at home, as we have seen, by their
long continuance from the year of Christ 1393. to the year 1486. lost Her not
only the Kingdom of France, but even the more ancient Inheritance of our Kings
in the Dukedoms of Normandy, Aquitane, and whatever else belonged to the
English Crown on that side of the Sea; only the Town of Calais, with its little
Appendages excepted.

Were it necessary, Buchanan could furnish, out of the neighboring Kingdom of
Scotland, a very large addition of more examples to the purpose of this place.
But more than enough has been already said to conclude that notwithstanding any
thing or expression in either of the two former Sections, my meaning could not
be to make those bloody Feuds in Ireland, or consequents of them, so peculiar
to the Milesian Race or Irish Nation, as if no other People on Earth had been
at any time guilty of the like or as horrid. The truth is, I mean'd only to
say, That in respect of their long duration and perpetual return from time to
time for almost five and twenty hundred years complete, and their excessive
degree at very many times within that long Succession of Ages, especially
considering the small extent of Ireland, those cruel bloody Feuds were both
National and peculiar to that People only. Which, I think, is true,
notwithstanding that other Nations, either much greater, or much lesser, might
have been in some few Instances of time as high, nay peradventure much more
horrible transgressors in the very same kind than those ancient Milesians were
at any one time since their Conquest of Ireland from Tuath-Dee-Danan.

33. The second point is, to do those ancient Milesians the right, as to
acknowledge (what their Histories have at large) That amidst all the Feuds and
fury of their Arms, how bloody or how lasting soever, they had several both
Monarchs, and (after the Pentarchy was set up) lesser Kings, yea some of those
too in their time of Paganism, and many more as well of those as these after
Christianity established, that were of great renown among them for other
excellent Qualifications becoming their dignity, than those only of Martial
Virtue and Fortitude.

In time of Paganism, they had their (XXII) Monarch Ollamh Fodhla, so called
from his great Knowledge: that very name given him importing in Irish (as
Gratianus Lucius has observed) a great master in Sciences, and Teacher of all
Knowledge to his People. It was he that divided the Lands of Ireland into
Hundreds, called by them Triochae-chead; and placed a Lord over each Hundred,
and over each Town of the Hundred a Bailiff, an Applotter of Duties, and
receiver of Strangers, to provide Entertainment for them. They had their (XCI)
Monarch Conair mor mhac Eidirsgceoil, so great a Justiciar, so zealous a
Prosecutor of all Malefactors, that although with great pains, industry, hazard
to himself; yet he forced at last all kind of Robbers, Thieves, Vagabonds and
Idlers to fly the whole Kingdom: and after this, during his Reign, the Cattle
throughout all parts and Provinces wandered safely in the Fields without any
Keeper. Besides, the magnificent Hospitality of this Monarch is wonderfully
celebrated in that Nation. Add hereunto this farther happiness of his Reign,
That in it the weather was so mild from mid-harvest to midspring, that both
Kine and Sheep and other Beasts lay continually abroad in the open air without
feeling one sharp breath of wind; the Sea covered the very shores at
Imbhercholptha (then so called; after Droichid ath; by us now corruptly
Droghedae or Tredath) with a most prodigious ejection of all sorts of Fish: and
the fruit-bearing Trees were so laden that they hung down their branches to the
very earth.

They had their (CIV) Monarch Conn, surnamed Ceadchatach, whose Reign,
notwithstanding that prodigious number of Battles sought by him, as we have
seen before, was so wonderfully abounding in all earthly blessings throughout
Ireland, that when the Writers of after-Ages were minded to express any time of
extraordinary abundance or plenty, they said it was the Reign of Conn
Ceadchatach, or Conair Mor, returned again on Earth. Now doubtless, it could
not be otherwise than morally impossible, that, considering all his Battles,
there should be so much plenty in every part of the Kingdom, had not he, as
well as Conair Mor before him, been as good a Governor as he was a great
Warrior. And yet, on this occasion, let me tell you, that neither the one nor
other excellency could save him from being murdered. Whereof, because of the
extraordinary contrivance and manner of it, I take that notice here, which I
find in Gratianus Lucius; though otherwise it may seem foreign to this place;
and Keting has not a syllable how, or where, or whether at all this Monarch
died either of a natural or violent death, But thus in short it happened. In
the 35th year of his Reign, which was of Christ 157. being retired, without
Guards, or much attendance; at a place then called Tuaiham^rois, the King of
Vlster, by name Tibraid Tirigh, employed 50 young striplings, clad like Maiden
Ladies, to dispatch him: and they did it, says Lucius. For it is only to him we
are beholden as for many other particulars, so for this very singular one
indeed. And, if I may conjecture, it was, or at least might well be thought the
pattern, whence Maolseachluinn I. when he was yet but King of Mead, derived
his own stratagem whereby he destroyed the Danish Tyrant Turghesius.

They had their (IVC) Monarch Fearrhadhach Fachiuach, a Prince of so much Truth
in h^s words, and such integrity in his Life and Actions, that from thence he
was surnamed Fachtuach, signifying in Irish Truth and Integrit^, says the same
Author Lucius. And it is observable, what both he and Keting write of one
Moran, chief Justice under this King, that he had a ring or hoop of such
Virtue, that when it was put about the Neck of any Judge or any Witness
whatsoever, at the time the one was to give Sentence, or the other to depose
upon Oath, if either did swerve a title from the right, then presently it
clasped, and pinched and wrung them so close, that to avoid present death by
strangling, they retracted openly before all the Spectators what they had so
wickedly done amiss. Whence proceeded that Proverbial wish among the Irish, O
That he had Moran's Ring about his Neck! when they suspect the truth or
integrity of any person. But to proceed with their Kings.

They had their (CII) Monarch Felim surnamed Rachtmhor from his being a Great
Maker of excellent wholesome Laws, Among which he established with all firmness
that of Retaliation: kept to it most inviolably; and by that means preserved
the people in peace, quiet, plenty, and security during his Time.

They had their (CIX) Monarch Cormock mhac Airt, who (says Lucius) in making
good Laws for the Commonwealth, and observing them, exceeded by much all his
Predecessors. He wrote a Book of the Institution of a Prince to his Son
Cairbre. He had the Psalter of Taragh composed. In this he gives an account at
large, 1. of all the noble Irish Families, their propagation, and relation by
blood one to another. 2. Of the limits not only of every Province of Ireland,
but of every Country both great and small in each of them. 3. Of the Duties,
Rents, Tributes paid usually out of each Province to the Monarch or King of
Ireland. 4. Of the Duties paid unto the Provincial Kings by the Lords their
Vassals. 5. And finally of the Rents accrewing to every such Lord from his
Tenants any where in the Kingdom.

The Book also which they call in Irish Sanasan Chormaic (and we in English may
call the Etymological Dictionary of Cormock) is by most ascribed to him; though
by some to Cormock O Cuillenan the holy King and Archshop of Mounster. I pass
over his Martial Spirit, his Fortune and success in Arms. Tho it was he, that
when by the surprisal, force and rebellious usurpation of Ferghussa Dubhdeadach
King of Vlster, he had been first dispossessed of his Royal Mansion of Teamhuir
(alias Tarach) and then affronted with the burning of his Beard, as well by the
command or direction, as by the servant of the same Vlster King Fearghussa (for
so Gratianus Lucius calls this Northern King; tho Keting names him Giolla, as I
have done before:) and then after this affront, had been banished into
Connaght; yet within a twelve month, accompanied with 30 great Lords, 50 other
Chieftains, and fifty thousand men, gave Battle at Criombreag to this Usurper,
killed him, destroyed his Army, and for the rest of his Vlster adherents,
banished them for ever to the Isle of Man. Yea it was he, that after this
Field, was further yet Conqueror of all his other Enemies in 36 Battles more:
and thereby gave perfect peace to the whole Kingdom for the remainder of his
long reign, which lasted in the whole forty years. And further also, it was he
that with the Sword of Justice took revenge on the more than savage cruelty of
Dunling (the Son of Eudeus) that murdered those 30 celebrated Virgins living
collegially as in the Temple of Vesta at Cluain-fear^ in Teamhuir; all of them
of such Royal extraction and quality, that each had 30 Virgins more in retinue;
which made in all Nine Hundred. For that unparalled Savageness of Dunling,
this Monarch destroyed the twelve Tyrants of Leinster, who either by
approbation of it, or defense of him, were guilty of it. Lastly, It was he,
that (whether on this occasion or no, I know not. But this I know that Lucius
writes, how it was he, that) even to a farthing's worth made the Province of
Leinster pay the old Boarian Fine imposed upon them by Tuathal Teach^mhor.
Which this Author says consisted (not of 3000, but) of 15000 Cows, and so many
Hogs, Mantles, Silver Chains, Cauldrons of Brass, or Coppers, that is 15000 of
each, and each Cauldron as large as that in the Monarch's Kitchen at Tarach,
which boiled together at one boiling twelve Beeves and twelve Hogs. Add further
yet, as part of this heavy Leinster Fine, says Lucius, 30 either white or red
Cows, with their Calves of the same color; 30 brass Collars for those Cows to
keep them quiet in their stabling, and 30 other brazen ties for their feet also
to keep them gentle at their milking. Where nevertheless I must take notice,
that Lucius in this Account does much vary from Keting: and that, whatever may
be thought of all other particulars of it, surely the number of 15000 Cauldrons
(or Coppers, as we call them now) of that capacity, seems to me somewhat
incredible. But leaving this to the Readers indifferency: what is more proper
here may be read in the same Author Lucius, where he tells us next of this
Monarchs port and magnificence in Housekeeping: which, though very great
indeed, is however (I think) credible enough. He had eleven hundred and fifty
Waiters that served him ordinarily at Table in his great Hall at Tarach. And
this Hall was by himself built of purpose to answer in its capacity the
entertainment and attendance of a great King. It was 300 Foot long, 30 Cubits
high, and 50 Cubits broad, with fourteen Doors opening into it. And the daily
service of Plate, the Flagous and Cups of Gold, Silver, and precious stone, at
his Table there, consisted of a hundred and fifty pieces in all.

What is besides delivered of this Monarch is, That (which among the truly wise
must be more valuable than any worldly magnificence or secular glory
whatsoever.) He was to all mankind very just: and in his later days through the
mercy of God, very pious also and religious toward him. That so strangely
powerful on a sudden were his inward illuminations, That in plain terms he now
refused his Druids any more to worship their Idol Gods. That soon after he
openly professed he would no more worship any but the only true God of the
Universe, the Immortal and Invisible King of Ages, as the great Apostle calls
him. And finally that those Priests of the Devil, by their Necromantical
adjurations and ministry of damned Spirits raised from Hell, God permitting
it, wrought his destruction by choking him, as I have said before. For in such
manner and for such a cause died this great and happy King of Ireland, An.
Christi 266. But whether he may, or may not therefore, be ranked among the true
Christian Martyrs? I leave others to judge.

And the same question might peradventure be rationally put (though not, I
confess, with the same advantage of the circumstance of violence from an
external cause) concerning Connor the first Provincial King of Vlster, made by
the Monarch Eochuidh Feilioch himself the Author of the Pentarchy, about 400
years before the Birth of Christ. This Connor's Druyd, or Magitian, which you
please to call him, having it seems the spirit of Prophecy (as you see in the
Book of Judges that Baldam, though otherwise a Heathen wicked Idolater, had the
like) on a day speaking his Raptures to Connor, and among other things,
delivering much of the Son of God that was to come down from Heaven to save
mankind, and was nevertheless to suffer the most cruel death of the Cross, from
his own beloved Countrymen the Jews whom he came to save before any others:
Connor (says Keting) on the hearing of all became so affected first with the
stupendous mercy of God to Sinners: and then presently so transported against
the ungrateful Jews, that, being in a great Wood at the time of this Discourse,
he drew his Sword, fell a slashing and cutting the Trees about him on every
side with the greatest fury could be: imagining he had before him still those
cruel men that put our Savior to death: and continued so long in this
passionate action of transport, till by overheating himself and the opening
thereby of some old wounds he had in his shull, he died.

What the Reader may answer to the foresaid Quere in relation to either of
these two Kings, I know not. But think nevertheless what St. John Chrysostom
would have answered it very consequently, at least in reference to the former,
had the case been debated by him, when he wrote his Three Books de Providentia
Dei, to Stargirius, a holy Monk, that notwithstanding his holiness, was through
the permission of God, either possessed, or obsess'd, or both, by the power of
the Devil.

It was also in the time of Ireland's Paganism, that Niall the Great, surnamed
Naoighiollach (in Latin Noui-obses, in English Niall of the Nine Hostages,
because says Colgan, in his Trias Taumatorge, from Vlster, Connaght, Mounster,
Leinster, the Britons, Picts, Dal-Rheudans, and Morini a People of France, in
all nine Nations, he had Hostages) did reign the CXX. or CXIX. Monarch of the
Irish. Of whose great cruelty in his judgment given against Eochuidh King of
Leinster, because I have so particularly spoken before: I will not conceal now
what I have since observed in Gratianus Lucius of the extraordinary favor of
God unto him. For such we must undoubtedly acknowledge it to have been: seeing
it was no less than a heavenly illustration of his mind with the beams of
Christianity to that degree, as turned him wholly to a new man of perfect
holiness. Nor yet less than that above a hundred years after his death, his
Body on the opening of his Shrine, or Tomb (which I take to have been on Cruach
Phadruig in Connaght, whither the Army brought his Body from France) was found
entire without any corruption. Nay nor a jot less than that a Christian Bishop,
namely St. Cernachus, infected with the Leprosy was perfectly cured by
visiting and lying down in that very Shrine of this Great Niall Naoighiallach.
So writes Gratianus Lucius, quoting for his Author, Colgan. And so I have done
with those few of the Kings of Ireland in the time of Paganism, that besides
many more of that very time and their Catalogue, have been for several great
Excellencies, other than those of warlike bravery or success, renowned in that
Nation.

34. But after Christianity had been among the people of Ireland universally
preached and established, yea and all along from time to time in the succeeding
Ages, not even those very Ages following the horrible desolations by the Danish
Wars excepted, they had questionless (notwithstanding all their intestin Feuds)
many more both Monarchs, Provincial Kings, and other lesser Kings too, famous
in their generation as well for other great Virtues, especially those peculiar
to Religion, as for those of Martial fortitude and Valor. Yet because I
perceive this little Book to swell insensibly beyond my design: I pass over
much of that which otherwise I would have willingly mentioned in this place.
And therefore what I can briefly on the present Subject observe, is,

First in general, the wonderful Devotion, Zeal, Religious Liberality of the
first Christian Monarchs, Provincial Kings, and other great Lords of Ireland,
who upon their first conversion not only parted so readily with the whole
Tenths of their Estates real and personal, nay and of their Subjects also, both
men and women, by the dedication of all, in a peculiar way to God, as has been
said before, but were so fervently Zealous, even to a degree of excess, in this
kind, that (as both Keting and Lucius relate it) if St. Patrick would have
received what they offered more, their Successors should have scarce been left
the grazing of four Beasts to bestow on the Church.

Secondly in particular, the great number of those Princes, one after another
in the succession of so many Ages, that notwithstanding all the bloody Feuds
and warlike humor of their Nation, withdrew themselves in time from sin, yea
from all the pleasures, vanity, pomp, earthly glory of their condition, and by
contemning the world for the sake of God, made themselves greater than the
World. A large list of them you may find partly in Keting, but more amply and
exactly in Lucius. And they were those that stripping themselves naked to
follow Christ, and shutting themselves up in Cloisters made choice of the
better part with Mary at the feet of out Lord.

Such were the Monarchs, 1. Ma^^^hoba, who by the prayers of Columbe-Cille
recovering from death to life, thereupon without delay, Anno 610. renounced the
World, entered a Monastery, professed himself a Monk, and was after, in regard
of his holiness, made Bishop of Kildare. 2. Flaithiortach, who likewise (though
without any such inducement as Maolchoba had) in perfect health, vigor,
streingth, deliberately chose to dispoil himself of all earthly greatness,
Goods, Employments, and exchange them all for a poor monastic Weed in the
Monastery of Ardmagh, for a penitential course of life within the walls of that
enclosure; and for a Christian happy death, which he found in that same place,
after nine years more had been over in his holy exercises there. 3. Niall
Frassach, that not only quitted the Crown and Power, but the very, Soil of
Ireland, by retiring to the Scottish Isle of Hy; and there in Columb Cille's
Monastery, devoting himself wholly to works of Christian repentance, after
eight years continual preparation by them for his passage to immortality, had
it in the year 773. of our Savior's Incarnation. 4. Muirchiortach (great
Grandchild to Brion Buraimh, and one of Ketings Monarchs of Ireland) who,
having resigned his Royal Authority, and, together with it, whatever else he
possessed or loved on earth, put on the habit of a pooor religious man at
Lismore, where without looking back, he ended happily his days. 5. Domhnal mhac
^rdghair, who (according to Colgan, as we have seen before) was also King of
Ireland, though in his declining years, yet amidst his prosperity retiring to
the Abbey of Doire Cholumb-Cilie; employing the remainder of his life there in
exercises of piety; holiness, and mortification; and lamenting the sins of his
former days; prepared for, encountered, and received death with a serene
countenance, full of hopes of a glorious Immortality. But whether he took upon
him the outward profession of a Monk in those exercises there, or did not, I
can say nothing on either side. Nor is it very material to know: seeing the
inward habit of his Soul yielded fruits worthy of true repentance and the
severest outward profession of it. 6. Ruaruidh O Conchabhair, the very last
Irish Monarch, we have shown likewise before, to have made a religious life,
under the Habit and in a Cloister of Augustinian Chanon Regulars, his last
refuge in this World from so many vicissitudes of Fortune. There it was he
became so truly wise indeed as to prepare only for that other World; which,
being planted far above all the glory of the Sun, and all the Circles of time,
expects only Souls either never tainted with sin at any time, or by perfect
repentance, at least before death thoroughly purified from its deadly sting. And
such indeed, for making choice either sooner or later of the better part with
Mary, were those now enumerated Monarchs of Ireland. And yet I know not why I
might not add to their number Maolseachluinn I. and Brian Boraimh. For albeit
they never had been either professed Monks, Anchorites, or Clerks, nor divested
of their Authority Royal, nor at all outwardly retired from the cares of the
Public, or management of their own domestic affairs, or comfort of their
Wives and Children: yet their piety of life was such as purchased for them
after death the reputation of holy men. Yea S. Cairbre Bishop of
Cluanmhac-Noise, when the former died Anno 860. being in ecstasy, beheld his
Soul ascending to glory, says Lucius. And the later has been inserted not only
by John Wilson in his Martyrologe, but by Henry Fitz, Simons in his Catalogue
of the Saints of Ireland: both these Authors having in this particular followed
Marianus Scotus.

Of the Provincial Kings a far greater number, and some of them very early,
that is in their very youth, made the same prudential, wise, divine choice.
Aillill Anmbanna King of Connaght led so wonderfully strict a life, according
to the exactest Rules of Christianity, that upon his death it pleased God to
show his Soul to Columb-Cille ascending to Heaven, Anno 544. Cormac King of
South Leinster, about the Year of Christ 567. quitting voluntarily his Kingdom
went to Beannchuir, professed himself there a Monk, continued in the same place
leading a life truly answerable to his profession, till death translated him to
happiness Anno 567. which the Irish Church believing has placed him in her
Calendar of Saints. Aodh Dubh King of Leinster, forsaking in the same manner
both his Kingdom and whatever else he might enjoy on earth, took the Monastical
habit and Vows upon him; lived accordingly some years in the Monastery of
Kildare an underling; was after made Abbot, then Bishop of the same Cloister
and See; deceased Anno Christi 638. and in fine was recorded in the Register of
Saints. Ceallach mhac Reghal, King of Connaght, made the like exchange of a
Kingdom for a Cloister: died in the Year of our Lord 703. and is invoked
particularly at Lochkinne as their tutelary Patron. Ardghal mhac Cathail King
of Connaght, the very same; only that to be further off from all noise of the
World, he retired out of Ireland to the Monastery of Columb-Cille in the Island
of Hy: where, in the seventh year of his peregrination, which was of Christ
786, he ended his mortal course. Before him a little, that is Anno Christi 739.
flourished the good King of Vlster, Fiacha mhac Aodh Roin, surnamed In Droiched
from his continual care of building Bridges everywhere throughout his Kingdom
to make the ways more passable: for Droiched in their Tongue signities a
Bridge. He was even to admiration virtuously just and equitable to all persons
whatsoever Only one Cow taken away by stealth within his Dominion, and because
peradventure (says Gratianus Lucius) the Author of this stealth had not been
with due severity punished, he inflicted the remainder on his own person, by
going a Pilgrimage to Beannchuir. In his Reign and Year of Christ 743. (not as
Cambrensis has it, bi^nnio ante Topog. did. 2. c. 10.
adventum Anglorum, two Years only, but 424 Years before the first landing of
Fitz Stephens in Ireland. So far is Cambrensis out in his relation of the very
time of this matter) it happening that a prodigious Whale with three golden
Teeth stianded at Carlingford, within his jurisdiction; each Tooth weighing
fifty ounces of Gold: he gave one of them to the chief workman-builder of the
foresaid Bridges; the other two he dedicated to the making of Shrines in the
Monastery of Beannchuir for those holy relics there, on which the Country
people did use to take their most solemn Oaths for ending all Controversies
arisen. Felim mhac Criomthain, alias in Latin Feidlimidius, that most famous
King (though not of Ireland, wherein also Cambrensis, as in most his other
Relations concerning Ireland, has most grossly erred, but) of Mounster, having
prosperously reigned 27 years, and within that time what by harrassing, what by
fighting Leath-Cuinn, humbled them mightily, at last resigned his Crown:
retired from all secular Employments, all earthly joys, pleasures, vanities:
withdrew to a Wilderness: turned a poor Hermit there: continued so the rest of
his life, devoting himself wholly to God, till death called him away, under the
Monarchy of Niall Caille, in the Year of Christ 845. For then it was that he
departed hence, with the Opinion both of a great Saint, and of as excellent a
Writer too as that Age might have, says Lucius. The Irish Book, called an
Leabhar Irsi (or, as Keting expounds it, the Book of their Annals) has in short
this Elogy of him: Optimus, S^piens and Anachoreta Scotorum quievit.
Contemporary to him was Fionachta-Luibhne King of Connaght, who in the same
manner exchanged his Royal Robe for an Hermits Coat: and all the attendance,
wealth, delights, pomp, gayety of a Palace, for the laonliness, poverty,
silence, obscurity of an uncouth, naked solitude: to prepare himself for the
last day of his life; which he ended there Anno 846. Next to this Fionachta, in
order of time, the King of Leinster, Dunling mhac Muireadhach retired both from
his Kingdom and all worldly things else into the Monastery of Kildare,
professing Monk, and continuing there in the exercises first of an Underling,
then of an Abbot, till in the Year 867. he finished happily his course. And
after him, Domhnal, son to the Monarch of Ireland Aodh Fionnliach, devoted
himself to the service of God, in the habit and profession of a most godly
mortified Ecclesiastic. In which condition he received without any fear at all
the King of terrors, Death, in the Year of our Savior 911. Him, although at a
great distance of time, followed Ruaruidh O Conchabhair King of Connaght (I
mean the Father of Toirghialiach mor O Conchabhair Monarch of Ireland) who in
the 20th year after that O Flaith^^iortach had put out his eyes, entered the
Order of Canon-Regulars, and among them rendered his Soul to his Redeemer An.
1118. And so did the King of the Dublinian Danes, and Leinster Irish, Domhnal O
Brien, son to Muirchiortach O Brien King of Ireland, renounce his Kingdom,
profess Clerk at Lismore, and accordingly there continue a life of penance to
his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1135. Lastly, the religious Devotion of
Cathal Cruddhearg King of Connaght (Lucius calls him in Latin Cathaldus a rubro
Carpo) is very much celebrated amongst his Countrymen in all their Histories.
He, after the death of his Wife, gave up his Kingdom, professed Cistercian Monk
in the Monastery built by himself at a place in Connaght called the Hill of
Victory, and in the Year of Christ 1224. breathed out his last in the same
religious Cloister. The great liberality of this Provincial King to the Church,
and particularly the large extent of Lands bestowed for ever by him upon that
Cistercian Abbey de Colle Victoriae, when he built it, may perhaps be elsewhere
in this Treatise reflected on. At present, and because I have now done with all
the most singular patterns of Piety recorded among the Provincial Kings of that
Nation;

I proceed to those of the most celebrated memory, in that respect, among their
Lesser Kings. Such were Damhin mhac Dambinghoirt, King of Orghillae, departed
this life Anno Dom. 560. and Ferrhadhach mhac Duacha, parted in the Year 582.
whose Souls are said by the Irish Writers to have been showed to Columb-Cille
ascending to Heaven absque poenis purgatoriis. Such was Brian Boraimh's
Ancestor in the seventh degree of ascent, by name Toirrghiallach, by Title or
Dignity King of Dal-Gheass, or rather indeed (says Keting) of North-Mounster,
who in the Year 690. or thereabouts, after he had bestowed all the Islands in
his Kingdom on poor strangers, to be inhabit^d and cultivated by them, put on a
Monks Cowl at Lismore: and for his daily employment either polished stones for
the building of Churches there, or mended Highways. So that he was never idle,
but discharging continually with his own hands the part sometime of a
Stone-cutter: at other times that of a poor ordinary Mason, or meanest
Day-labourer. Such Maol-bressal mhac Cearnaigh King of Mogh dornuigh; who,
after quitting the World, professing Monk, and living in that profession many
years like a Saint, was killed at last by the Danes, Anno 847. Such Maolduin
King of Oiligh, son to Aodgh Ordnigh the Monarch, that forsook all whatever was
desirable on earth, took the same course of a professed religious Life in a
Monastery for many years, never looked back, never took his hand off the Plough
till death seized him in the Year of Christ 865. Such also were Maolbride King
of Cineal-Gonail, and Domhnal King of Cineal-Laoghaire, who trampling underfoot
all worldly temptations, assumed the Monastic habit, retired into Cloistered
Cells, and for the remainder of their lives, which was of many years, continued
their station there, practicing only the methods of dying to themselves and
living to Christ, till the blessed hour came when he called them to himself,
the former Anno 897. the later Anno 882.

And after them Donochadh (the son of Ceallach, and Son-in-law to Donochadh
mhac Floinn the Monarch) King of Ossory is next recorded as a man of exceeding
piety and godliness, though never so professed Monk, nor at all retired in
outward appearance from the duties of his secular Employment. His care of the
poor was such that in his time every house in Ossory had three several Bags for
daily Collections of Victuals to feed them. One that received the tenth part of
every persons meal: none at all of the Family, no not even of the servants,
excepted. Another designed for the portion of Saint Michael the Archangel, as
they called it. And a third was under the peculiar charge of the good Wife, to
see all the scraps gathered into it. Besides he was himself exceeding bountiful
to them. And then his devotion at Church, frequentation of the Sacrament, watch
over his own senses, delight in all divine things, continual exercise in all
good works, made his memory pleasant and fragrant, and sweet and precious after
his death. The debt of Nature, that opened for him the passage into a blessed
immortality, he paid in his Father-in-law's Reign over Ireland, that is,
between the Years 918. when this Monarch Donochadh mhac Floinn be gun his
reign, and the year 942. when he ended it.

I might on this occasion peradventure call to mind what Keting has of Scanlan
mor mhic Cinfoala, a former King of Ossory, his grateful devout liberality in
applotting and enjoining three pence a smoke throughout his Country, to be
paid yearly for ever to Columb-Cille's Abbey there at a place called Durramh.
And I might withal remember how great, how beneficial, yea how wonderful even
to this very Scanlan himself the inducement he had to this Devotion was. For it
was no less than his miraculous delivery from the very extremest rigours of a
most cruel imprisonment, and twelve chains of Iron loading him, and no drink at
all allowed him to quench his thirst, when at Colum-Cille's instance for him in
prayer to God, he was on a sudden by an Angel of glory from Heaven rescued, the
Prison at midnight enlightened, his chains unloosed, his Keepers thrown down,
the Gates opened, he led forth, and then presently as it were in another
instant of time, both conducted and presented to his Wonder-working Patron
Columb-Cille that expected him at that very hour. But as I have partly before
touched upon the extraordinary Obligation laid by this miraculous favor on
Scanlan: so let it suffice here to have only mentioned so much of his grateful
acknowledgment thereof.

And yet perhaps it may not be amiss to let the Reader know, what Lucius on the
foresaid occasion has observed of the Kings of Ossory in general, or indeed
rather of the Irish Historians in relation to them, viz. That these Writers do
seem all of them to have some peculiar esteem for the Kings of Ossory above any
other of the Lesser Kings of Ireland. For when they give a Catalogue of those
Provincial Kings of the Pentarchy, that is of those of South-Mounster,
North-Mounster, Connaght, Leinster, and Vlster, that were contemporary to the
Monarchs whose Reigns, Lives, Acts they principally write: it may be seen in
all their Books that then also they give a particular account of the Kings of
Ossory; though on that occasion they take no kind of notice of any other of all
the Lesser Kings of Ireland. What the reason hereof may be, I cannot divine* if
not that peradventure they valued (as Lucius says) these Ossory Kings not upon
the extent of their Dominion, which yet was not contemptible, but on their
bravery and Martial courage like that of Eumenes (in Plutarch) who when he had
but one Castle remaining in his possession, would not otherwise capitulate with
Antigonus but upon equal terms of honor: as not esteeming any man better than
himself whiles he had a Weapon in his hand. But be this conjecture as you
please,

I return back to the Subject I was on before. I now give the only two
remaining of those Lesser Kings, that are celebrated for their prudent piety in
their abandoning all they had on earth, taking up their Cross and following
Christ in the poverty, habit and mortifications of a religious Life. These were
Maolmordha Huadomhnail King of Cionsallach, who paid his tribute to Nature Anno
1022. and Vadah O Conchanain King of Huadiarmada, above a hundred years after;
for he ended his days Anno 1167.

Nor have I any other to add to them, but only Conchabhar O Cealla, surnamed of
the Battles, King of Mannech in Connaght: whose Christian virtues are
wonderfully admired by all the Irish Historians. Though he was a man that not
only till the last continued in his station of a Prince and Governor of his
People, but a very notable Warrior too, as you see that surname of his
imports, cui cognomento a Proeliis, says Lucius. In short, they write of him,
1. That he maintained in Clothes and Diet 3^0 Clerks, Monks, and poor Women:
founded twelve Churches in Moanmaigha, endowed them with Lands, rendered them
exempt from all public Duties: built the Cathedral Church of St. Brandan at
Cluainfert, and the other of St. Kieran at Cluain-mhac-Noise; gave these two
Cathedrals large possessions; furnished them with Ecclesiastical Books,
Chalices, costly Palls, Vestments, and all other necessaries for the holy
Ministry. 2. That he tyth'd his whole Estate three several times: bestowed the
Tenth of it on the Churches; the Ninth on the poor, and the Eighth part on the
Clerks and others that came for assistance and relief to his House. 3. That
after all being warred upon by Conchabhar Moinmhuigh (son to Ruaruidgh the last
Irish Monarch) by the Mac Teigs also, and other great Lords associated against
him: and an agreement made between both sides to put the quarrel to the issue
of a pitched Battle, with this caution and mutual promise, that neither should
come unto it nor fight in it with Armor, i. e. with breast, or back, or
Habergion, or any coat of Maile: and he for his part most religiously out of
mere conscience of his word, keeping to that caution; but they on the other
side, without any regard of theirs, having dealt perfidiously by covering
themselves with Armor under their Cassocks: the issue was the slaughtering of
a great number of his Army, the routing of the rest, and killing of him among
others in the Field; which they call the Field or Battle of Srugheal, fought in
the year of our Savior Christ, 1180. 4. That upon the news, thosE 360
Pensioners above mentioned of his, though not living together in one place, but
far and wide distant in their several Habitations, yet in all the have they
could, arriving all of them on the third day where his Body was; and there,
upon the sight of it, first giving way to Nature by venting their extreme grief
in abundance of tears, groans, and lamentations for him, but more especially
because he that maintained so many Ministers for God, had not so much as any
one of them, or any other such to assoil him or comfort him in the last hour:
then taking his head (for it was cut off) and sowing it to his body: and this
done, laying themselves on their knees, they prayed, etc. crying to God
mightily, and with wonderful Faith beseech'd him to return back the Soul of
their dear Benefactor into his Body, while he prepared himself by repentance
and reconciliation, and the Sacraments of Christ for a more quiet, and hopeful
departure. 5. Lastly, That their prayers were so efficacious, and the mercy of
God so extraordinarily propitious to Conchabhar, that he revived presently,
confessed his sins, received the holy Viaticum; but then, as he told them,
chose rather to die than live any longer. Adding withal, that the true cause
why God would have him defeated and killed in that Battle was, that he had not
incontinently punished some wickedness committed by his Brother. Which yet he
had not forgiven, but only delai'd to judge: as having never once heard of it
before that very morning when he was preparing for Battle, and consequently his
Soul taken up wholly with other cares. Whereby, says Gratianus Lucius, relating
this matter at large, and quoting O Duvegan for it, we may guess at the
condition of those Governors that wilfully and deliberately not only delay the
punishment of so many horrible crimes they see daily committed even against all
Justice and Religion; but resolve never to punish them. Ne^ enim injuria quis
dixerit eum saevire in bonos qui parcit-malis.

But if you be of an other judgment, as to this Maxim I mean, That he is cruel
to the good who spares the wicked: or if peradventure you boggle at the
miraculous part either of this Relation of Conchabhar O Cealla's death, or of
the former enumeration of such Irish Christian Monarchs, Provincial and other
Lesser Kings who have been famous in their time for piety: you may pass it
over, and leave it to the devotion and credulity of other men that have not the
same apprehensions, doubts or scruples, as they have not the same soul with
you. I am sure that laying all such matters aside, there is among those great
Examples of Virtue, enough still remaining to edify any good Christian, or any
sober man alive. Though I must tell you withal, that as no Writer holds himself
accountable either for the verity or falsity of any other matters of Fact
whatsoever written by him out of ancient History: so much less for those of
Miracles. And yet further I must acknowledge, that I know not whether any man
writing purposely of a Nation or People that both firmly do believe such
miraculous works to have been wrought by God among their Predecessors, and
would perhaps hold it a very invidious malevolent diminution of their glory for
such a man to pass them over wholly in silence, it were just or prudential in
him to do so. However I have avoided the two extremes. I have not been wholly
silent as to such matters: nor have I given but a very few of them. Besides, I
do not interpose a syllable of my own judgment. Though I would nevertheless be
as free either to assent or dissent, or even to suspend as any other upon
sufficient ground. But enough of this: and, together with it, of all I intended
to give in the second Point.

35. The third is an Appendix to what has been hitherto said of the personal
piety of those Princes. For I am now to give in order what was done partly by
some of the very same partly by other Irish Kings, Princes, Lords, as well to
reform the Commonwealth, regulate the Church, restore Learning to the Nation,
as to promote Christian religious piety among all their Subjects no less than
in themselves. And all this, I mean acted by them after the general calamity of
the Danish Wars: yea and acted by them notwithstanding their own so frequent
relapses at this very time into their old Feuds again.

Brian Boraimh, so often mentioned, but never enough praised, must be the first
Instance in this place. He set all men free from the exactions of the Danes.
All the spoils gained by him from the Danes, he bestowed on others. All the
Lands and Territories of the Kingdom he restored to the ancient Proprietors and
lawful Heirs; not retaining to himself or any Relations one foot of Land
belonging to others. He conferred on each Temporal Lord great Privileges and
Immunities, according to his degree. He restored to each Bishop his own
Diocese, to each Priest his Church throughout Ireland. He founded, built,
endowed many Churches, Schools, Colleges: and with Royal munificence, care,
solicitude gave a new beginning again to the destroyed Universities. He
bestowed on every person that would learn, money to bear his charges
competently. He built at his own proper cost the Cathedral of Cill-da-Luagh,
the Church of Inis Cealtrach, and re-edified the Steeple of Tuaim-Ghreine. He
built many Bridges, made many Causeys, mended many High ways before not
passable. He erected many new Forts, strengthened the old ones with new
Bulwarks, and in particular fortified Cashel the usual mansion of the Mounster
Kings. He re-edified all the Royal Houses or Palaces in Mounster, that before
his time had been either utterly ruined or wholly neglected, in particular
thirteen of them. His Government was so rigid that under it a young Woman
travailed all alone from Toruidh to Cliodhna, the length of Ireland, with a
gold Ring hanging on the top of a Wand in her hand, without meeting any that
attempted to rob or ravish her. Besides he entered not on the Sovereignty by
murdering or killing his Predecessor, as so many others did, who nevertheless
were not taxed with Usurpation, because of their descent from the Royal Line:
and yet Brian was undoubtedly of the Line from Heber. Moreover, he was
gloriously magnificent in his Port. No man could carry Arms in his Court, where
ever it chanced to be, except only Dal-Gheass that were his own peculiar
Guards. All the Provinces of Ireland every one, and some lesser Countries too,
besides the Danes inhabiting Dublin and Limmeric, lay under a considerable
Boraimh, or Tax which they paid yearly for the maintenance of his House at
Ceann-Chora, viz. Connaght 800 Beeves, and so many Hogs. Tirchonail 500 Mantles
and 500 Beeves. Tir-Eoghuin 600 Beeves, 600 Hogs, and 60 Tun of Iron. Clanna
Ruidhruidh in Vlster 150 Beeves, and so many Hogs. Oirghilluibh 800 Beeves.
Leinster 300 Beeves, 300 Hogs, and 300 Tuns of Iron. Ossory 60 Beeves, 60 Hogs,
and 60 Tuns of Iron. Danes of Dublin 300 Pipes or Buts of Wine. Danes of
Limmerick a Tun of Claret for every day in the Year, (what Mounster paid, I do
not find.) In short, his Hospitality at Ceann-Chora, in every degree was such,
that excepting the Monarchs Cormock mhac Airt, and Conair mor mhac
Eidrisgceoil, no other King of Ireland ever did an near it.

Maolseachluinn II. in his Second Reign, especially toward the middle of it,
when he gave himself to Devotion and thoughts of an other life, did as well in
good Government and care of the Public, as in Piety show himself both a great
and good King. He reedified many Schools, repaired many Churches, maintained
300 Scholars out of his own Revenue, laid the foundation of S. Mary Abbey in
Dublin, built and endowed it, An. 1039. Understand this according to Ketings
Computation, that gives Clantar Clantar^^ Battle, fought on the 16th of April
1036. but not according to Gratianus Lucius or others that deliver it fought
earlier by 20 years, viz. Anno. 1014.
the very first Abbey we read of built in Ireland since the universal
destruction by the Danes.

For the Monarch Toirghiallach mhac Teaidhg mhic Brian Boraimh, that he was not
only a good man, but excellent King you may read in Lucius very convincing
Arguments: 1. That during his twelve years Reign, there was none opposed his
person, nor any that called in question his Title, none drew Sword nor lift up
an armed Hand against him. 2. That he never enacted one farthing, never any
kind of Boraimh or Tax of the Provinces, yet was abundantly furnished by them
all along with all kind of necessaries to support his Regal dignity. 3. That he
made very good, wholesome convenieent Laws for his People. 4. That Lanfrancus,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, loved him entirely; remembered him still in his
Prayers: did all the good Offices he could to his Friends: calls him tacitly a
lover of Justice: and then expressly adds, Magnam misericordiam populis
Hiberniae tunc divinitus collatam, quando omnipotens Deus Terdelacho magnifico
Hiberniae Regi jus Regiae potestatis super illam terram concessit, That
Almighty God had then showed great mercy to the people of Ireland when he gave
the Royal power of that Land to the magnificent King Toirrghiallach. The
Letters of Lanfrancus, containing these Elogies of him are quoted by Lucius,
page 83.

Muirchiortach O Brien, son to the said Toirrgiallach, made a much further
progress in restoring the Commonwealth, and both endowing and reforming the
Church. In the first year of his Reign, which was the year of Christ 1106. he
alienated th City of Cashel from the Mounster Kings, and to the honor of God
and of St. Patrick bestowed it for ever ( in puram eleemosynam) by way of pure
Alms on the Bishops See there, says Keting. In his Reign also, not only a
Parliament of all the Estates in Ireland See Waraeus in his Commeut. de
Praesul. Heb. p. 12. in Celsus.
was held at Fiadh-mhac-Naoughussa, but (as Gratianus Lucius has it) even three
several Synods, representing the whole Clergy of that Nation were convened at
three diverse places. One of them at Vsneach in Mead, convened Anno 1106, as
Lucius expressly says; telling us withal, that in this Council Gillaspuic (whom
he calls in Latin Gilbertus*) Abbot of Beannchuir, Bishop of Limmeric, and
Legate for the Pope was President: and that in all, it consisted of fifty
Bishops; whereof the said President was the first, Celsus (in Irish Ceallach)
successor to St. Patrick at Ardmagh the second, and Maolmuire Huadanain
Archbishop of Mounster the third: besides three hundred Priests and three
thousand other Ecclesiastics present. Another of them was held at the foresaid
Fiadh-mhac Naonghussa, then (if I understand Keting aright) when all the
Estates were assembled there. And though I cannot say for certain what Year
that was, I may nevertheless Waraeus out of the Annals of Hister says it was
held, Anno 1111.
assure you that Keting says the Representatives or Members of this Synod were
only the successor of that Patrick at Ardmagh (for he does not otherwise name
him) and Maolmuire O Dunain the Archbishop of Mounster, and eight Bishops more;
besides 360 Priests, 140 Deacons, and other Ministers not numbered, that were
present. But for the Acts of this Council we need not be inquisitive, since the
same Keting has plainly told us they are lost. And so might Lucius, for ought I
can see, have told us of those made at Vsneach: for it is he, and not Keting,
that has observed that Synod. The third, which both of them equally mention,
has been a memorable one indeed, and the chief Acts of it, preserved to
Posterity, are at large in Keting. It was held at Rath Bressail, Anno 1110.
under the presidency of the foresaid Gillaspuic Bishop of Limmeric as the
Pope's Legate. The number of Bishops convened, I do not find. But I see clearly
enough, their main business was to reduce the number of Bishops in the whole
Island: and to assign to each Bishop his own peculiar Diocese, with the meers
and bounds thereof, partly (as I suppose) to prevent disputes about
Jurisdiction, and partly that the Flock might be the more carefully observed.
They did both successfully. And for the number they ordered it should be six
and twenty in all: twelve of them in Leath Cuinn, and twelve in Leath Mogh, and
two in Mead. Of the twelve in Leath-Cuinn, six, were in the Province of
Vlster, and Ardmagh one of the six, the rest in Connaght: of the other twelve
for Leath-Mogh, seven were appointed for the two divisions of Mounster, and
five for Leinster. He of Dublin was not mentioned amongst them, nor indeed at
all, as receiving then his consecration from Canterbury. But Gleann-da Loch,
now united to it, was one of the Five for Leinster. All the other Sees also
they named; whereof some are different from those we know at present. And so
did they name, in the very Acts of the same Council, the peculiar Meers of each
Bishopric, all round about every where throughout the whole Kingdom. The
Annals of Inis Fail, as Lucius quotes 'em say this Synod (or rather perhaps the
General Assembly consisting as well of the Lay Estates, as of Ecclesiastical
sitting in the same Place) made better Laws than Ireland ever had before at any
time. Among which Keting sets down one special Act for the plenary Exemption of
the Church for ever from all Taxes, Impositions, Burdens, Duties, etc. imposed
on 'em by the secular Power. Another also for every Bishop's consecrating at
Easter, the Oil of holy Unction. After which concluding his whole account, of
this National Synod, he adds how the Fathers assembled therein, had in the end
of all their Acts, blessed the Observers and cursed the Transgressors of them,
in this form: The blessing of God Almighty, and of S. Peter, and S. Patrick,
and of the Representer of S. Peter's Successor, the Legate Giolla-Aspuick Bishop
of Limmerick, and of Ceallach S. Patrick's successor, Primat of Ireland, and of
Maoil-Josa mhac Ainmhire Archbishop of Cashel, and of all the Bishops, Gentry
and Clergy in this holy Synod of Rath-Breassuill light and remain upon every
one that shall approve, ratify and observe these Ordinances. And, of the other
side, their Curses on the Infringers of 'em.

Gratianus Lucius (in his Cambr. Evers. page 83.) is of opinion, and his
reasons for it can hardly be gainsay'd, that these, which are called three
National Synods, were but one and the self-same Council, continued from time to
time, and finished in three several Sessions, and Places, viz. One Session at
Visneach, another at Fiadha-mhac-Naonghussa, and the Last of 'em at
Rath-Bressail. But if you enquire what should bring to this Council such a vast
conflux of Ecclesiastics, as (besides all the Bishops, whose duty it was to be
there) three hundred Priests and 3000 other Churchmen: I for my part, can guess
at no other cause than one of Three, or all Three together. 1. The Novelty, or
at least Rarity of a National Synod in that Kingdom. I am sure Keting in all
his History has not any Instance of a National Synod of the Irish Church not
even from the beginning of it; before that of Fiadh-mhac-Naonghussa. 2. The
Fame of so great a Reformation of the Sacerdotal Order and state
Ecclesiastical, intended by the reducing the number of Bishops, and bounding
their Diocesses, might have drawn many to come thither. 3. The Temporal Estates
of the whole Kingdom, sitting at the Place and Time, questionless occasioned
the coming of many more Ecclesiastics to that Council than perhaps otherwise
would have come.

What I would principally observe by occasion of that Synod at Rath-Bressail
is, first, how short this number of 26 Bishops in all Ireland comes of that
other of 350 Bishops related before page 56. out of Nennius and Jocelin to have
been consecrated by St. Patrick in his time for that Country. But it may be
said, that was a time of laboring in the conversion of every part of that
Kingdom, and its Dominions abroad in Scotland and other adjacent Islands. To
which purpose it was expedient there should be a very great number of Bishops,
according to the greatness of the Harvest, which was all (at least as to
Ireland at home) made up in 35 years. Besides, that in 61 or 62 years, the long
term of Saint Patrick's life after he had entered on that Harvest, even so many
hundred Bishops as are mentioned by the said Authors, might have died in
Ireland and the adjacent Islands, tho never the fifth or sixth part of them had
lived together in any one time. And yet I must confess, there was in later
times, and even but a little before this Council, a most corrupt custom in
Ireland, that multiplied Bishops pro libitu Metropolitani, at the sole
Metropolitans pleasure, as we shall see hereafter, and whence that corruption,
with many other, proceeded. However, to return to my main purpose.
Muirchiortach O Brien King of Ireland (whether alone, or in association with
Domhnal the son of Ardghal, enjoying that Title) was so happy as to have by his
Royal Authority concurr*d unto, compassed, and confirmed this material point of
Reformation and establishment of the State Ecclesiastical.

H^s next Successor, Toirrghiallach Mor O Connor, notwithstanding all his Wars
did manifest his care of the Public both in civil and Ecclesiastical affairs.
He built the three chief Bridges of Connaght; among which that of Athlone was.
He had the Cathedral of Tuam solemnly consecrated by a number of Bishops called
thither of purpose. He built a Hospital in the same Town, and endowed it with
Lands. He settled a yearly Pension for a Divinity Professor at Ardmagh. He was
so justly severe in punishing Criminals, that having imprisoned his own son for
some great Offense, and rejected for a long time the intercession of several
both Princes and Prelates, he could hardly at last be induced even by five
hundred Priests and eleven Bishops together with the Archbishops of Ardmagh and
Cashel appearing before him and interceding for the Prisoner, to set him at
liberty after a twelve months imprisonment. Of his piety, besides what I have
said already, these are further proofs given by Lucius I. That he caused the
Holy Cross to be carried about Ireland in great veneration. 2. That he bestowed
great scopes of Land on the Clergy of Tuam: on the Successor of Saint Coman a
Town: and on the Bishop of Cluainmhac-Noise a number of Silver Crosses,
Goblets, and Chalices. And 3. That by his last Will he bequeathed to several
Churches all the costly furniture of his Houses; all his Gold and silver Plate;
all his Jewels; all his Horses and Arms, even his very Bow and Quiver; besides
540 ounces of Gold, and 40 marks of Silver.

His immediate Follower in the Sovereignty Muirchiortach mhac Neill was pleased
himself in person, together with all the Kings and Nobles of the whole Kingdom
to be present in the National Synod of that Church held at Ceannannais (we call
it now Kells) in Mead, in the first year of his Reign, which was of Christ
1152. This Council begun the 7th of March, being Dominica Laetare Jerusalem,
had members of it present seven and twenty Bishops, and as many more Abbots and
Priors; the Archbishops of Ardmagh and Cashel, and the Bishop of Dublin,
besides sive elect, being of the number of those 27 Bishops. It was in this
Council that John Papiron, Cardinal of St. Laurence in Damasco, sent by Pope
Eugenius III. presided. In this Council that he by the Authority of the
Apostles Peter and Paul, and the Apostolical Lord Eugenius condemned Simony,
execrated Usury, enjoined the payment of Tithes. In this Council, besides that
he delivered the 4 Palls to the 4 Archbishops, Ardmagh, Cashel, Tuam, Dublin.
Moreover it was in this Council that he ordained, as it was fit, that Ardmagh
should be Primat over all. And these things being done by him, without further
delay he departed, and on the Ninth of the Calends of May the same Year shipped
for beyond Seas. So Keting writes of him and this Council, out of the Annals of
Cluain Eidhnioch Fiontain in Lease: where he transcribes the very Latin words
of those Annals. Tho according to an other account of his own, Giolla Criost
(or Christianus) O Conneric Bishop of Lismore Provincial of all the Monks in
Ireland, and Legate in ordinary from the Pope in that Kingdom presided in this
Council jointly with the said Cardinal. But what is more observable in those
Annals is, That as to the 4 Palls most of the Clergy in this Council, and
especially those of Dun-da-Leath-Ghlass and Ardmach were dissenting: because
they held it enough for Ireland to have two Archbishops, the one at Ardmach,
the other in Mounster, as formerly. The rest concerning this Council, and
particular names and surnames of those two and twenty Bishops that according to
his account composed it (for he leaves out the five Elect, and all the Abbots
and Priors) you may read in him. I think it needless to transcribe them here.

And yet I judge it not impertinent on this occasion to mind the Reader of
Meredith Hanmer's gross mistake; where, in his History of Ireland, he says 1.
That before this time or Council of Ceannannais, the Irish had never had any
Archbishops. 2. That ever since Austin the Monks time (or his mission to
England from Gregory the Great) the Irish Clergy till this time had been
subject to the Archbishops of Canterbury. Whereas in truth they had all along
from St. Patrick's time, and by his own special appointment too, even two
Archbishops: the one styled of Ardmach; the other of Mounster first, then of
Cashel, after he came to have his fixed See there: the one for Leath-Cuinn, and
the other of Leath-Mogha. Whereof you may see more at large in Keting; who in
his Reign of Laogirius tells the very motive and chief inducement St. Patrick
had for making the second chief Archiepiscopal See, and constituting it in
Mounster. Nay I have my self read in some of the Saints of Irelands Lives
(though I have not them by me now to quote them) mention made of the Archbishop
of the Lagenians, and his See being sometimes Kildare, sometimes Ferns: and so
I have of the Archbishop of the Conacians too, if my memory fail me not. But if
it do, Sir James Ware in his Commentary de Praesulibus Hiberniae supplies it
abundantly, page 174. concerning Mounster: and page 243. and 244. concerning
Connaght. What Authority or Jurisdiction these Archbishops had in those days of
old, is an other question: or whether they had any more than only to be
Episcopi primae sedis in their Province? or priority of place? I can say
nothing to it. But in this I can be on rational grounds positive, That none of
the Irish Clergy depended on the Archbishops of Canterbury, none of their
Bishops received consecration from any of them, until Lanfraneus in William the
Conquerors time, was the Archbishop of that See. Nor then, nor after neither,
but for some little time those only of Dublin, Wexford, Waterford and Limmeric.
And the reason why these in particular would or did so depend was, That their
Townsmen and subordinate peculiar Governors were Danes or Easterlings, now
turned Christians. And that they suspected the Irish Prelates would not
favorably judge or determine of their Elections in behalf of their own
Citizens, blood, or Countrymen to Ecclesiastical Offices; but by reason at
least of the former Feuds, if not those present and remaining still would
prefer Irish to them. And therefore, and further yet because they expected in
that behalf impartial dealing and justice, if not favor too, from the Sea of
Canterbury, as being of late brought under the Norman Conquerors, originally
their own Countrymen, they procured License from the Irish Kings to have their
Bishops consecrated by the Archbishops of that See. whereby it happened, that
so lately as the Reign of the Monarch Toirrghiallach, Grandchild to Brien
Boraimh, in the Year of Christ 1098. the first Bishop of Waterford was
consecrated by Anselmus of Canterbury. So says Keting; and much more Lucius;
and most of all on this Subject the most eminently famous Primat Usher, who was
both concerned for his own See of Ardmagh, and without question able enough to
search into these matters. To him may be added Sir James Ware, page 102. 103,
and 104. where he tells us of Patric, Donatus O Haingly, Samuel O Haingly and
Gregory, four Bishops elected successively by the Oostmans of Dublin, and and
consecrated for that See by the Archbishops of Canterbury, Lanfrancus,
Anselmus, and Rudolphus; but no more: for the next Bishop of Dublin was
consecrated by Ardmagh.

Having thus reflected on those Errors of Hanmer, I have no more to say in
relation to the Council of Ceannannais, but that all the advantage, benefit,
glory redounding from it to the Irish Church, ought questionless to be
attributed chiefly to the foresaid King and Monarch of Ireland Muirchiortach
mhac Neill, that rendered it both much more august by his own Royal presence,
and much more effectual by his perfect submission to all its Decrees.

A further strong argument of great resolutions taken by many of the Kings,
Princes, Nobles, Ecclesiastics of Ireland to restore civility, justice,
learning; and, above all, Piety and holiness of Life, once more among their
Countrymen, was the great number of Monasteries built and endowed by them
within the very last eighty years of their Milesian Government before the final
period of it. Yea and built by them, I mean, notwithstanding all the
disadvantages of that time, especially of that part of it which was taken up by
the extraordinary turbulencies happened in Ruaruidh O Connor's Reign. Who, as
we have seen before, succeeded this Muirchiortach mhac Neill, and was himself
never since by any of his Country or Nation succeeded.

In the Province of Vlster, Anno 1106 the Monastery of Lisgoual near Loch Erne,
and the Abbey of Carrig, whose first Abbot was St. Euodius, were founded by
Mac-Noellus Mackenlef King of Vlster. Anno 1138. an other for the Canons
Regular of St. Austin in Feramanach. The same Year, an other in Louth for the
same order by Donogh mhac Ceirrbheoil King of Orghillae. And by him, at the
request of St. Malachias, the noble Abbey of Mellifont for the Cistercians Anno
1142. The Abbey of Jonmhair Chinne Traigh, alias Newry, by Malachias himself;
besides the celebrated Beannchuir restored by him. About this time also, the
younger O Domlsn^l, as he is called, ^rince of Tirconnel, at the request of St.
Dominick by Letters to him, built for his Order a Monastery at Doire Cholum
Cille, which had usually a hundred and fifty religious men. In the Province of
Mounster, not only the Abb^y of O Dorne, in the County of Kierry, the Abbey of
Fermoigh in the County of Cork, Anno 1140. and the Abbey of Neny or Magio Anno
1148 or 1151, all three for the Cistercian Order; but eighteen Monasteries
founded by Domhnal O Brien the last King of North-Mounster. Among these were
the famous Abbey of Holy Cross at Tipperary, and St. Peter's at Limmeric for the
black Nuns of St. Austin, and the Monastery de Surio, and that called
Killoulense, or de Albo campo, and the other Kilmoniense, or de Furgio, and
lately the Cloister ^f Corcam^ua, or of the fruitful Rock. In the Province of
Leinster Diarmuid mhac Murcho, (surnamed Na Ngall) the last King of it, founded
six Monasteries: Two of them at Dublin; whereof one was for Nons of the Order
(or rather Reformation) of Aroasia; the other for Chanons of Aroasia in an
Abbey of Monks in Artois.
St. Austin: a third in the County of Kilkenny at Kilclehin, a fourth at Atoody
in the County of Catherlach: the fifth being a great noble Abbey for the
Cistercians (by them named de Valle Salutis) at Baltinglass in the County of
Wicklo: and the sixth at Ferns in the County of Wexford. But Monaster-Euin, or
de rubra Valle for the same Cistercian Order, was founded by Diarmuid O
Daoimuse, alias Dempsy, Lord (or at least one of the Lords) of Ibh Failghe,
Anno 1178. Jeripont Abbey in the County of Kilkenny, Anno 1181. by Donald Fitz
Patric King of Ossory. The Monastery of Lease, or de Lege Dei, An. 1183. by
Cuchogrius O Moadhirra. The Monastery of Dune in the County of Wexford, even
before the landing of Fitz Stephens there, by Diarmuid O Ryan by consent of the
Leinster King, founded for the Chanons of St. Austin. In the Province of
Connaght, before it was conquered by the English; Cathal O Conchabhair,
surnamed Crombhdhearg, founded the Monastery of Benedictin Nuns at
Killcreunath, the Monastery of Cnockmoigh, or de Colle Victoriae, for the
Cistercians; that of Ballin Tohair for the Chanons of St. Augustine: and not
only endowed but enriched them all with large possessions. Add the Monastery of
Boil, about the Year 1151, founded for the Cistercian Order. Lastly, in Mead,
the King or Prince of it, Murcho O Mleaghluinn founded the Monastery of Bectif
(alias de Beatitudine) either Anno 1148. or 1151. for the Cistercians: likewise
for the Votresses of Saint Augustine, or he or some other O Mlaghlin, King of
that Country built the Cloister at Clonard. But the Cloister of Shrouil, in
the County of Longford, ad Euium Fluvium, had its beginning, Anno 1152.

Such is the account I find mostly in Lucius, and for some part in Keting, of
the endeavors used in those later times by several Irish Princes and Prelates
to repair in some degree the general destruction brought upon their Schools of
Learning and Piety, and upon all that was excellent or civil in their Nation,
by the long Danish Wars, and their own intestin broils immediately following.
Questionless they reputed Monasteries as (and as indeed they were in that Age
among them in Ireland) the best Schools of Learning and Religion: so the best
means to civilize a Christian People much overrun with ignorance, barbarism,
and wildness, and fierceness too of Nature; which two or three hundred years
continual War in the very entra^ls of their Country, for the most part with
Heathen Foreigners, and for the rest with the Natives themselves, one against
another, must of necessity have brought with it.

The fourth Point is to let you know, that in this very decrepit Age and fin^l
wane of the Irish Monarchy, Heaven was yet so propitious to them, as to raise
among them in the Ecclesiastical State some, (however few) even as wonderfully
eminently Saints peradventure as were in the primitive Ages of Christianity in
that Kingdom. For to say nothing now of those other excellent Bishops of this
time, Ceallach or Celsus of Ardmagh, Gillaspuick, alias Gilbertus of Limm^rick
Mal^bus of Lismore, and Giolla-Criost (or Christianus) of Clocher, though St.
Bernard himself besides what he has of the rest, especially of Malchus, calls
this Christian, a good man, full of grace and virtue, inferior indeed to his
Brother (he means Malachias) in celebrity of Fame, but peradventure not so in
sanctity of Life and Zeal of Justice: however, to pass over I say, all these
four excellent Prelates of this time: those I mean at present were especially
two other holy Monks, and they extraordinary Bishops too, one after an other.

The former of them was Malachias (in Irish Maolmo, says Keting) or at least my
Copy of him, but Malmedoic O Morgain, says Waraeus) a burning and shining Light
indeed: as Saint Bernard applies to him what our Savior Christ did say of
Saint John Baptist. He was born an Vlster man of noble Parents, in the year of
our Lord 1094. died in the 54 of his own Age, being the year of our Lord 1148.
and therefore lived under some part of Donachadh mhac Brien Boraimh's reign,
and the whole Reigns of his three Successors, even till the beginning of
Muirchiortach mhac Neill's reign, the last Irish Monarch saving one. That is,
he lived in a great part of those very times when almost the whole face of the
Irish Church was most woefully deformed, ulcer'd, horrible to be seen. In most
places all kind of Ecclesiastical Discipline, all the Canons of the Church
trodden under foot: in many other all the very Sacraments of Christ not only
neglected, but of no use at all. Nor must we much wonder at it, if we consider
that the very Head of the Ecclesiastical Order in Ireland, the Sea of Ardmagb
had in those days been as a mere lay Fee or Temporal Inheritance possessed by
strong hand of one powerful Family, even for fifteen Generations successively,
i. e. ever since the expulsion of the Danes, almost two hundred years, out of
that Province. That besides, although sometimes there was not one Clerk in this
Family, yet they never wanted a Bishop. And thirdly, that before Ceallach (whom
we call Celsus, the immediate, but virtuous good Predecessor of Malachias) eight
married men, without any Orders, though not without Learning, had been the only
Bishops of that Metropolitan See. Hence throughout all Ireland, that
dissolution of the Churches discipline, enervation of her Censures, evacuation
of Religion, whereof we have spoken before, says the Mellifluous D. S. Bernard
in the Life of Malachias cap. vii. For what has never been elsewhere, not even
since the very beginning of Christianity heard, was now in Ireland to be seen.
Bishops without Ordination, without reason multiplied at the lust of the
Metropolitan. Insomuch that one Bishopric was not content with one Bishop; but
almost every Church in it had a peculiar Bishop. And indeed how was it likely
to be otherwise? or that under so diseased, so corrupt a Head, the Members
could be sound?

To reform these horrible corruptions of the Irish Church, God it seems had in
his secret counsels designed Malachias to be the man. First by his Birth of
noble Parents hard by Ardmagh, and his being the only beloved Son of such a
Family. Then by his contemning in his tender years, even from his childhood at
School in that City, whatever seemed worldly or vain: and his giving himself on
all occasions, especially in all secret recesses, to prayer. Then by his
accoasting, admiring, and delivering himself very early in his Youth to Imarius
the holy Anchori^e, who had by his own choice many long years before been shut
up perpetually, and as it were buried alive in a little Cell that joined to the
Wall of the Cathedral Church. Then by the multitude of other young delicate
striplings, that surmounting all considerations of flesh, and blood, and sense,
and what ever seemed gay or pleasant to the eye, soon after followed his
example. Then by the holy Spirit's moving not only the good Archbishop Celsus,
but Imarius also to force him in a manner to the Order of Deaconship before he
was 25 years old, and to that of Priesthood, so soon as he was 25 complete:
they (as they might well) supposing that the sanctity of his conversation did
abundantly supply the defect of his Canonical Age for these Orders. Then by the
further injunction laid upon him immediately by Celsus, making him
notwithstanding his Youth, Vicar General of the Diocese. Then by the tenor of
his Life and power of his Word piercing like a two edged Sword the very
entrails of all that heard him preach, and like a burning Torch enflaming them;
as the Son of Syrach speaks of Elias the Prophet's Word. Then by his departing,
but with the license of Celsus and Imarius, for some years to Lismore in
Mounster, and putting himself there in a Monastery under the discipline of
Malchus the holy miraculous Bishop of that See, who had been himself, though an
Irish man by birth, educated in the Abbey of Winchester in England. Then by
occasion of King Cormack's retirement from his Enemies to the said Monastery:
where this afflicted Prince making it his choice to live in a poor narrow cell,
feed on bread and a little salt, drink nothing but water, bath his body once
every day in cold water to extinguish the rebellion of his flesh; do all this
by the direction of Malachias, his only Instructor and comfort, yea and
continue it until at last he rather suffered than desired himself to be
restored, his Enemies flying away before his face every where: by this occasion
I say the hidden things of Malachias, came to be known, and his name celebrated
among all the Clergy and People and Princes of that Province too. Then by his
returning back to his own Province of Vlster, upon the commands of Celsus and
Imarius: and there presently repairing the old ruins of the famous Beannchuir;
which till this time lay in rubbish for so many years ever since the
destruction of it by the Danes, though not without a Titular Lay-Abbot (made
still by Election of the Lay-Natives) who possessed all the Revenues; nor at
this very time neither with-such an Incumbent, and he both a very powerful man,
and Uncle also to Malachias himself; but, on the return of Malachias from
Mounster, suddenly changed, and as it were by a powerful touch of the very
finger of God himself so mightily changed, that without delay he resigned both
the place and whole Estate belonging to it, yea and his own person also to this
holy Nephew's disposition. Then by his refusing the Estate, building
nevertheless the place, planting it with some of his own blessed condisciples
under Imarius, and in obedience to Celsus and Imarius both, taking upon him now
as well the true Office as the title of Abbot of Beannchuir; imitating so in
all respects the sanctity of his great Predecessor Congellus, though not
equalling his number of Monks. Then by the glory of Miracles, beginning first
to appear wrought by him, to the astonishment of the beholders, as he was at
work with his own hands among the Carpenters that were building this Monastery.
Then by the Election made of him in the thirtieth year of his Age for the Sea
of Conner, and his reluctance for a long time; and the perseverance of the
other side, and his submission at last to the positive commands of Celsus and
Imarius. Then by his entering upon his Episcopal Function there, but withal, his
finding presently, as St. Bernard expressly writes, He was not sent to men, but
Beasts. That he had never before, not even amongst the most barbarous any
where, observed the like. No where the People so stubborn as to Manners, so
bestial as to Rites, so impious as to Faith, so barbarous as to Laws, so
headstrong as to Discipline, so filthy as to Life; Christians by Name, but in
very deed Pagans: not paying Tithes, not offering First Fruits, not joining in
lawful Marriages, not confessing their sins. None among them found either to
receive or to enjoin penance. The Ministers of the Altar few; and yet no work
among the Laity for those same few: no opportunity given them to make use of
their Ministry among a wicked generation of people: nor they endeavoring it
much, if not rather scarce any way at all: for in their Churches the voice
neither of a Preacher nor Singer was heard.

Then by his Divine Sermons, Exhortations, Entreaties, Visits, Prayers, Tears,
Mortification, austerity of Life both in public and private, together with the
assistance of his 150 Monks that were never from his side; overcoming though*
with great labor, yet in a little time all opposition, and working so
wonderful either a conversion or Reformation (which you please to call it) of
all that Diocese, that they are all now become a new people, i. e. the People
of God now, who had been nothing less before: and every where now to be seen
the repairing of Churches, adorning of Altars; and Choires resounding now the
praises of God: and wicked Laws abolished, and Christian Institutions received
in their place: the Churches thronging from every side with people greedy of
hearing the Word: and Sacraments frequented, and confession of sins made, and
Concubinage yielding to lawful marriage.

Then by his necessary migration to Mounster, when the King of Vlster had on
some pretense destroyed the City of Conner: and by the reception he found there
from his former Disciple King Cormac, who came to meet him now, and withal to
entertain both him and his 150 Monks of Beannchuir, come along with him out of
the North. Then by his building here in Mounster the Abbey of Ibrac
(Monasterium Ibracense, St. Bernard calls it) King Cormac with Royal
munificence abundantly furnishing Gold and Silver, and all other necessaries
both to finish the building and maintain the Convent after. Then by his living
there so exemplarily, mortifiedly, humbly among them, as he had elsewhere
perpetually, even from the first day of his Episcopal Charge at Conner, done;
taking his turn like an other Monk both in reading and serving in the Refectory
at meals; yea in all the very meanest Offices of the Cloister; even that of
Cook, to dress their meat in the Kitchen, not excepted.

Then by the last sickness of Celsus (who had successively ordained him Deacon,
Priest, and Bishop) and by the choice made by him of Malachias for his
Successor; and his Letters to all the Princes of the Kingdom, especially the
two Mounster Kings, Cormack was one of them, his Kingdom South-Mounster, his
name and surname Cormack mhac Cartha; his end by a soul murder committed on
him by his own Son in Law. All which, and the revenge of this murder you may
see in the former ^ection, page 183.
to see after his death Malachias installed in the Metropolitical See of
Ardmagh. Which for the memory of their great Apostle St. Patrick, who living
governed it, and dying chose it for his place of rest, was held in such
veneration, that all the people of Ireland, Clergy and Laiety* Nobles, Bishops,
Princes and Kings were subject in all obedience to the Metropolitan thereof.
Then by the Vision about this time (but before any notice had of Ceallach's
being sick) the Vision I say of a Tall, ancient, venerable Woman appearing to
Malachias: and, upon his demand what she was, answering him, she was the Wife
of Celsus; but withal delivering him a Pastoral Staff. Then by a real Messenger
come from Celsus, as he was yet on his death bed alive, with his real Staff
indeed, and by the real delivery thereof by him, as he was commanded by Celsus
to this man of God. Then by the unanimous application of all the Kingdon, from
all parts, made unto him to accept of this Election: and by his declining it
nevertheless a very long time: alleging now his own unworthiness; now his
poverty and meanness, and inability to contend with the powerful Family that
hitherto well nigh two hundred years had possessed that See; besides, that not
even with the death of men their stubbornness could be overcome; moreover that
to see blood spilt in his behalf, or by his occasion did not become him, or his
calling; finally that he was already joined to an other Spouse, the Church of
Conner.

Then (after three years continual reluctance) by the National Synods meeting
on purpose, wherein the Pope's Legate Gillaspuic, alias Gilbertus, Bishop of
Limmeric, and Malchus Bishop of Lismore were the chief; and by their laying
their commands upon him, adding threats withal to excommunicate him, if he
resisted any longer; and his own reflecting at the same time on the Vision he
had formerly had (in Mounster) of the grave Matron, etc. which frighted him
above all other considerations: and by his yielding thereupon at last, but on
this condition, that if, and whenever by his means or Ministry, God were
pleased to restore peace to that Metropolitan See, it should be lawful for him
to ordain an other in it, and return to his former Spouse the poor Bishopric
of Conner.

Then by his not entering for the two next years either the Cathedral Church or
City it self of Ardmagh, and not meddling with the Revenue while the Usurper
Mauritius lived; but officiating abroad, and discharging so his duty to the
Diocese at large, without any bloodshed or quarrel. Then, upon the death of
Mauritius, when the King and Nobles of the Province came to introduce him, and
were to that purpose together with him assembled on a Hill near the City, but
without any armed Troops, and intelligence was brought him, that hard by there
lay in ambush a strong party of the malignant bloody Generation ready to fall
on and kill them all, not even him nor the King himself excepted: Then, I say,
by his withdrawing into a little Church hard by; putting himself to prayer, and
presently obtaining of Heaven such a formidable judgment as ended all the
danger and all the controversy too in a trice, ^ay all the hopes of that
perverse Generation for ever after. Even on a sudden such a prodigious tempest
of Rain, Wind, Lightning, Thunder, which as to the place and persons of the
Conspirators, turned the day to night, commix'd all the Elements, struck dead
their Captain with three other of his principal Associats, hung them up on the
boughs of Trees (for so they were found next morning half burnt and stinking)
dispersed all the rest, save only three more left grovelling on the ground, half
burnt likewise, but some life remaining in them still: and yet no harm done by
it, nor feeling of it by the King or of his company though they stood close by
that very place, and saw the storm falling on it.

Then by his entering now into the Metropolitan Church, taking the possession of
it delivered him by the King, Princes, and other Nobles of the Land: and after
their departure exposing himself to the continual danger both day and night
impending over his head from that bloody sacrilegious Progeny, that breathed no
more now any thing less than mortal revenge in behalf of their Cousin Nigellus,
that by usurpation and actual possession succeeded Mauritius, till he was now
compelled to fly, but retaining nevertheless in his own possession still, by
conveying them away in his flight, the chief holy Ensigns of that See, the
Staff of Jesus, and Gospel of St. Patrick; which the common people held in such
veneration, that the possessor of them, whoever he was, they esteemed the only
true Bishop of Ardmagh. Then by his overcoming with the Arms of Faith, and a
Christian resolution to suffer Martyrdom, the arms of Flesh and fury and rage
of a great man of the foresaid impious Tribe, who came of purpose to Ardmagh to
murder him. For though the King, before his departure, had made this very man
not only to give Hostages, but take his corporal Oath, that he would inviolably
be and keep at peace with Malachias; yet, without regard of either, he soon
after in a consult of his own People determines the place, and time and manner
to dispatch him: comes thereupon with his Assassines to Ardmagh: and after
Evensong had been ended in the Church sends to Malachius, as desiring on
pretense of peace and friendship to speak with him at his own Lodging. But the
whole Clergy and People at Church entreat Malaachias, beseech him, conjure him
with tears and lamentations not to go to his death. And yet Malachias, after
some other words of comfort and edification, telling them it became not the
Disciple of Christ to fear death, immediately departs, accompanied only with
three religious men resolved to die with him: enters the House: sees the
Assassins all together in the same Room with that great man their Leader; as
they were prepared to assassinate him: and yet coming up a little nearer finds
them all every one strangely seized as with some panick fear appalled,
astonished, mute, as if they had been Planet-struck, as if they were unable to
lift up an armed hand against him or any other. Nay their very Chieftain,
instead of giving them the word, submitting himself in all humility and
obedience: and promising to continue both (as he did sincerely) until his death.

Then by the submission likewise of Nigellus, the Pseudo-Bishop, and his
yielding up to Malachias the sacred Ensigns, which he had hitherto so
wrongfully detained; but now together with them delivering also himself in all
humility to the disposal of Malachias. Then by the sudden ceasing of a
pestilential Disease at Ardmagh, so soon as Malachias went about the Town in
Procession, and prayed God that in his mercy he would command his exterminating
Angel of Justice to put up his bloody Fauchion and spare the people thence
forward. Then by the dreadful Judgments fallen upon the two remaining chiefest,
boldest and most blasphemously virulent detractors of his Name, a Man and Woman
of the accursed Race: the man's tongue rotting in his mouth, spitting out Worms
almost continually for seven days, and together with them at last his miserable
Soul: the Woman turned frantic, crying out frequently that she was a
strangling by Malachias, and in that wretched condition yielding up her ghost.
Finally, by the universal terror fallen upon all his Enemies, considering now
at last so many Wonders wrought in his behalf; and therefore crying one to an
other now, as the Canaanites did of old concerning Israel, Let us fly from the
Face of Malachias, for God fights for him. Tho too late indeed for that
adulterous generation of Vipers, who by this time were all of them every one
perished: without leaving either Heir or other memory behind them, save only
that of their having continued the sacrilegious possession, violation,
pollution, destruction of the Sanctuary of God well nigh 200 years.

And such indeed were the means, and such the degrees and order of them, by
which the Almighty himself fitted, prepared, carried on, placed at last his
beloved Malachias in that full power, which he had from the beginning designed
for him; undoubtedly of purpose to repair those lamentable ruins, reform those
horible corruptions, enlighten that universal darkness, and breath new life
again into the whole Body of the Irish Church, that really for so many Ages
before did seem, at least for the greater part of it, utterly dead.

But that which appears to me most admirable in this holy man is, that having
within three years of his acceptance of the Metropolitical charge of Ardmagh,
and but a twelve month after his instalment in the Sea or the Cathedral it
self, humbled, nay brought to nothing all the proud Usurpers, restored the
Church, extinguished Barbarism, reform d every where throughout the Diocese all
degrees of People by Christian Discipline: seeing now all in peace, and
remembering his own former purpose, he ordained another, by name Gilla-Josa,
alias Gelasius, in his own stead Bishop of Ardmagh; gave him possession, and
notwithstanding the reluctance of others, without further delay retired to his
former Spouse the poor subordinat Church of Conner. That because he now
understood this Bishopric of Conner had, but in later times, an other
Bishopric, I mean that of Down, united to it; and because himself upon his
translation to Ardmagh had ordained a Bishop in Conner: he would neither
intrude upon him, nor yet suffer any longer that Union made by covetousness to
continue; but restoring the ancient division, assumed to himself, i. e. to his
own peculiar charge, the poorer and least reformed of the two the Bishopric of
Down. That here again calling to his assistance and erecting a new Convent of
Regulars, he devoted himself among them to his former course of Life, in all
poverty and humility, and rigours of cenobial Discipline, assiduity of Prayer
and raptures of Contemplation, spending all the time he could spare from his
Pastoral charge.

What follows next is to let you know, that he was not suffered long the
enjoyment of himself in those ascetick exercises. That ere long there was an
universal conflux of all sorts of people to him, even from the highest to the
very lowest of the Land. That therefore now he finds it necessary, like the
Husbandmen in the Gospel, to go forth and sow his seed: and now he disposes
with all Authority of all kind of Church affairs: and no man questions him, by
what power he did so: all being persuaded by the signs and prodigies wrought by
him every where, that as he had the power, so he had the Spirit of God to
direct all his actions. That nevertheless himself after some time thought it
^itting to take a journey to Rome and consult the Sea Apostolic, as Paul did
the Apostles at Jerusalem, after his three years preaching of Christ in
Arabia. Besides he considered that the Sea of Ardmagh had never at any time had
the Metropolitical Ornament, which they call Pallium; a word that in the
Ecclesiastical use of it imports the plenitude of honor, says Bernard; but not
the plenitude of power, as they speak at Rome in this Age. Moreover, that his
late Predecessor in the Metropolitan Church, I mean Celsus, had by his own
authority erected another Metropolitical See else where in Ireland, though with
dependence and subjection still to the Sea of Ardmagh as the only Primatial or
Patriarchical See of the Kingdom. That to obtain from the Sea Apostolic of
Rome, as well the honor of the Pall for each of those two Irish Metropolitan
Sees, as the confirmation of what Celsus had done in erecting the later of
them, was another chief motive of his undertaking such a Journey. That having
passed through Scotland and England, rested a few days with St. Bernard at
Claravallis in France, arrived at Rome, continued there for a month visiting
the holy places, and conferring much from time to time with his Holiness, who
was very inquisitive of all the concerns of Ireland, the nature of the people,
etc. and especially what Wonders God had lately done by his Ministry there: he
obtained indeed the confirmation of that new Metropolitical See erected by
Celsus; but was put off the present grant of those Palls desired by him. That
the Pope told him, that by reason Gillaspuic (or Gilbertus) being now grown old
and infirm, had signified so much, and his desire to he cased of the Legatin
care, it was necessary he should undertake it, and in that quality return back
and hold a general Synod of the whole Nation. Which when he had done, and by
general consent and fitting messengers desired the Pallia, they should be
granted. And therefore told him also in plain terms, he could by no means yield
to his first and most earnest petition of all, though by so many tears
solicited by him, viz. that it might be lawful for him to retire presently to
Claravallis, and live and die there with Bernard. That with this answer he is
now dismissed by the Pope, but as with all delegable power, so with all
imaginable kindness and respect, kissing him and putting his own Mitre on his
head, his own stole about his neck, and his own maniple on his arm: which
Malachias ever after used in officiating at the Altar. That having returned by
Claravallis, left there four of his own disciples to be educated in the
Monastic Life by Saint Bernard: from thence proceeded on in his Journey, and in
his way through Scotland, at the instance of the good King David, by praying
over the young Prince Robert his Son and Heir, recovered him instantly from the
jaws of death; for he was quite given over by the Physicians: landed soon after
at his beloved Beannchuir in the North of Ireland: he put himself immediately
on the work of a true Legate indeed. And this for many years, without any
intermission, going about all the Provinces, holding frequent Synods, in all
the quarters of the Land; restoring vigor to the old Canons of the Church:
adding new ones that were of use: reforming all the corruptions, both new and
old: preaching every where like an other Helias, or some Angel of Heaven come
down on Earth. No Age, no Sex, no condition, no profession could abscond from
his Beams, or hinder the operation of them. Whatever Decrees he made, whatever
Canons he published were presently accepted, submitted unto, obeyed, as Oracles
without any contradiction at all. Nor had any person, Man or Woman, Prince or
Prelat, or Peasant, or Monarch, the daring heart to resist him in any thing:
because they daily saw before their eyes the signs wrought by him. You may read
cap. 5. 8. 9. of his Life, written by St. Bernard, a good many of them; though
few in respect of those he passes over, as the same holy Author St. Bernard
says. And among them you may find the expulsion of Devils, and healing all
Diseases, and reviving the Dead to Life, and the striking also of some impious
wicked Blasphemers with an exemplary death to terrify others. And all these
miraculous works above Nature, done by the God of Nature, at the sole
invocation of his Name by Malachias, without any other application, without any
charm used by him, than that sometimes of lifting up his eyes to Heaven or a
short Prayer, sometimes of a longer continued with fasting and weeping on God
twenty four hours together. Unless peradventure his laying his hand on a
desperate man, brought to him bound in cords, by reason of a furious frenzy
that possessed him: or his touching with his finger the tongue of a Young Girl
that was mute: or his blessing a Cup of Drink, and sending it to a Woman so
long past her Reckoning, that all her Neighbors wondered she was not dead: or
his sprinkling of water, hallowed by himself, upon a wicked Nobleman that lay
long Bedrid: or his invoking the name of God on three Apples, and sending them
to a Lady in the last agonies of death: be reputed a Diabolical Charm.

And yet after all I am of Bernard's opinion, that the first and greatest
Miracle wrought by Malachias was himself. From the first day of his conversion
to the last of his Life, sine proprio vixit, he lived without property in any
kind of thing. Even when he was Bishop he had neither manservant nor
maidservant, nor Town, nor Village, nor Land nor one farthing either of
Ecclesiastical or Temporal Revenue, no not for allowance to his Episcopal
Table. He had not so much as a House of his own. He almost incessantly went
about the Parishes preaching the Gospel, and living on the Gospel as our Lord
had showed him the Example: save only that for most part he preached it without
putting his Auditory to the charge of entertaining him; but maintained himself,
and his Religious Train, by the labor of his own hands and theirs. When he
found it necessary to take a little rest, he took it in some of the holy places
founded by himself in all Countries of the Kingdom. (For it was he that was the
great Restorer of the Monastic Life and Cloisters in Ireland: where, for so
many Ages before, i. e. ever since the Universal desolation by the Danes, the
people generally, though they had heard of the name, yet they never saw any
such thing as a Monk, till he begun. A diebus antiquis Monachi quidem nomen
audierunt, monachum non viderunt: says Malachias himself. Vit. cap. xi. And
wheresoever he rested, how shor tor how long soever his abode was, he conformed
to all their observances, their Habit, their Table, their Diet. Insomuch, that
as to the exterior man, he could not be discovered from the meanest Brother of
the House. Lastly, in his going about the Parishes or Countries either to
preach or to visit, he never made use of Horse, or Coach or Wagon, he went a
foot constantly, as likewise did all his Train, though now both Bishop and
Legate. And was not all this, trow you, to be a true Heir indeed, a true
Successor to the Apostles? or was it not in Malachias, to be himself the first
and last and greatest of his Miracles? O virum Apostolicum, quem tot and talia
nobilitant signa Apostolatus sui! Quid ergo mirum, si mira operatus est sic
mirabilis ipso! Imo vero non ipse, sed Deus in ipso. Alioquin tu es Deus
(inquit) qui facis mirabilia, says Bernard, exclaiming here with admiration of
this wonderful man. However, this Life he led for about a dozen years,
perpetually going about all the Provinces, reforming all the abuses, doing good
to all mortals, and working those other prodigious signs every where that I
have touched upon before.

At last understanding that Innocent II. was dead: and after him within sixteen
months more Celestin II. and Luoius the second too: and that Eugenius III. a
Disciple of Saint Bernards, being chosen to succeed them, was come so near as
France: he calls a National Synod, holds it, dispatches in the three first days
of it what was thought expedient as to Reformation: on the fourth proposes that
of sending to the Sea Apostolic for the Archiepiscopal Ensigns called Pallia:
offers himself to be the Solicitor of it in person: and tho with great
difficulty to part with him at all for any time, yet obtains their consent, the
rather that the Pope was so near. And now he takes his Journey again through
Scotland: where being receiv*d with all veneration by King David, he founds the
last of his Monasteries, at a place called ( stagnum viride) the Green Lake;
haviug to that purpose brought with him out of Ireland a sufficient number of
Cistercian Monks. And then he goes forward the second time to Claravallis in
France; taking that in his way to Rome, whither the Pope before his arrival on
that side of the Sea was returned. And finally now, and from hence, i. e. from
Claravallis, but after a few days of sickness, and by a death answerable in all
respects to his life, he is called to glory on that very day which himself had
both desired and foretold, the day of the Commemoration of all faithful souls
departed; which, as I have noted before, was in the Year of Christ 1148.

More particulars, either of his life, or death, or miracles, whoever desires
may find them at large in the funeral Sermon preached, and Life also most
exactly and divinely written of him even by St. Bernard himself. Who, besides
many other Abbots, and the whole Cistercian Convent of Claravallis, was present
with him at his death; as they all ministered to him all along in his sickness.
And it is even this very Bernard, that with his own Eyes beheld the great
Miracle which he tells wrought on a Paralitick by touching the hand of
Malachias, while after his death he was yet exposed in public before Burial.

But it is not for the sake of this or any other Miracle wrought by him, that I
have dilated so much upon him; but to show the state of the Church of Ireland
in those days out of so good an Author as St. Bernard is. For in that Life of
Malachias written by him (besides many other points relating directly to the
most healthful use of Confession, saluberrimum usum confessionis are Bernards
own words, and the Sacrament of extreme Unction, and the real presence of
Christ in the consecrated Host, and Prayers for the Dead: all which I pass over
as not to the purpose of this Historical Discourse:) it is very observable,
That so blessed a Man as Ceallach was, even by the character of a Saint (
Sanctus Celsus) given him by Colganus, and so learned withal, as Sir James Ware
represents him to have been, did without consulting the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
and did I say by his own authority alone as Primat of Ardmagh, erect another
Metropolitical See in Ireland. That, not even at any time from the beginning,
the Irish Church, or Metropolitans thereof, until this time of Malachias either
had, or (for ought we know) ever desired the Pallium; but without it exercised
all plenitude of Archiepiscopal and Primatial jurisdiction all over Ireland.
Besides we may plainly see by whose solicitation at first the Court of Rome was
moved in the concern of Palls of Ireland. And that Cardinal John Papiron's
bringing them to Ireland, about four years after the death of Malachias, was
undoubtedly an effect of those two Journeys made by him out of Ireland to
obtain them. Albeit we know not certainly whether it was Malachias that desired
so many as were brought by Papiron. Or whether, after his death others did
suggest for the reasonableness and expediency of so many, that in Ireland were
chiefly four Parti^ions, Governments or Provincial Kingdoms, of very different
natures, manners, interests, Feuds, and Kings too, that would not yield any of
them to the other willingly: and by consequence would not be governed, not even
in Ecclesiastical affairs, but by some of their own, without dependence on any
other, except only the Prelat of that See which from the beginning of
Christianity had prescribed some right over them all.

But enough on this Subject relating to Malachias, the former of those two
extraordinary Saints raised by God in the decrepit Age of the Irish Monarchy.

The later of them was a Leinster man of Noble Descent: his Irish name and
surname Laurace O Tuathil (in English, Laurence Tool:) his Father Muirchiortach
O Tuathil, Lord of Imaile and peradventure some other small adjoining Tracts in
the County of Wickloe: his Mother, Inghin J. Bhrian, i. e. one of O Brian's
Daughters: and he the youngest of all their Children. But for the name of
Laurence (a name so unusual in that Country then) 'twas given him on this
occasion. Being born, his Father sent him to be Christened at Kildare by
Donachadh Lord of that Country, of purpose to let him know by this Gossipred
he was reconciled to him: for before they had been at some distance: and
therefore those that carried the Child were commanded by the Father to Christen
him Conchabhar; this being that Nobleman's surname who was to be Godfather. But
a person, reputed in that Country then, such an other as Merlin had been of
old among the Brittans, meeting them in the Highway, charged them to call him
Laurence: assuring them he would himself that night excuse them to their Lord;
and then adding prophetically in Irish Verse; This Child shall be great on
Earth and glorious in Heaven: he shall command over great multitudes both of
rich and poor, and Laurence shall be his name. When he was but ten years old,
his Father delivered him an Hostage to Diarmuid the King of Leinster. In which
condition, notwithstanding the innocence of his Age he suffered incredible
miseries, even to extreme want of Raiment and Food, in a desert place among
barbarous people, where he had been for two years confined. At the expiration
of which, being returned back in exchange of other Prisoners, though not
delivered to the Father himself, but to the Bishop of Gleann-da-Logh: and his
Father coming on the twelfth day, not only to see him, but to desire the Bishop
to learn of God by Lot which of his children he should dedicate to an
Ecclesiastic Life; and he taking this opportunity and telling his Father, That
with his leave he himself would be that Child: the Father surpised with joy,
takes him presently by the right hand; and offers him up perpetually to God in
that holy place dedicated to St. Keuin, both Cathedral Church and Abbey, the
one governed by a Bishop, the other by an Abbot. Where Laurence proves in a
little time so singular a proficient in all Virtue, that the Abbot dying, the
unanimous consent both of the Monks and Nobles of the Country Voted him Abbot,
and forced him to accept of it in the 25th year of his Age.

And now it begun to appear more eminently what spirit he was of. For the more
he was honored, the more he abased himself, the stricter guard he kept on all
his senses, and the more intent he was upon his holy ascetick Exercises. Above
all, that Virtue which is the bond of perfection; that Virtue which shall never
be evacuated, but after Faith and Hope are ended shall remain; that Virtue
which, by relieving the afflictions of other mortals, makes the Reliever a God
to them, as Pliny speaks in his Panegyric to Trajan; Charity, I mean, did at
this time show what power she had over the Soul of Laurence. He was no sooner
made Abbot, than a general Famine oppressing all that Country four years
continually, he no less continually employed himself in relieving all that were
in want, especially the poorer sort, with corn and cattle, and all the Revenues
of his Abbey: Revenues that were very great; yea far surpassing those of the
Bishopric. Nor must we admire they should be so. It was one of the most famous
ancient Monasteries of the Kingdom, founded at first by St. Keuin (as we call
him, but the Irish Ceaghin, the Latins Coenginus) a person though illustrious
for his Royal extraction, yet much more celebrated as well for the admirable
austerity of his Life, as for his manifold prodigious Miracles; which made him
after his death be assumed Patron both of the Town, Abbey, Cathedral Church and
whole Diocese of Gleann-da-Loch, where he lived and died. Besides none but
Noblemen's children were elected Abbots: and the Noblemen themselves of the
whole Diocese had by ancient custom their Voices in the election of them as
well as the Monks. However the large Revenues of the Abbey as they came short
of the necessities of the poor in that long and general Famine: so they did of
the charity of Laurence; as may be well concluded out of what follows hereafter.

Much about the time this Famine had ended; the Bishop of Gleann-da-Loch dying,
he was chosen to succeed. But notwithstanding all the importunity of the
Electors, he declined it, though pretending only his un-Canonical Age. Yet so
he could not soon after the Archbishopric of Dublin. For Gregory the First
Archbishop of this See being dead, Laurence by the unanimous consent of the
Clergy and People of Dublin, says Waraeus, was elected Commentar. de Praesul.
Hiber.
Archbishop: and, being at last by continual importunities drawn to yield, was
consecrated at Dublin by Gelasius Primat of Ardmagh and other Bishops, Anno
1162. just fourteen years after the death of Malachias in France. What more
Waraeus thought fit to record of him is, That presently after consecration he
changed the secular Canons of his Cathedral Church into Regular of the Order of
Aroasia, whose habit and rule of Life himself also took upon him now. That
about eleven years after he built the Choire and Steeple with an other addition
of three new Chapels to Trinity Church in that City. That in the Year 1179. he
went to the General Council held then at Rome under Alexander III. That
according to the Author of his Life, he was there made Legate of Ireland by that
Pope: soon after returned back, and exercised his Legatin Authority in Ireland.
That Gerald L. 2. expugn. Hib. c. 23.
Barry, commonly called Cambrensis, seems to intimate, he never had been
permitted to return to Ireland; (sed ob privilegia aliqua zelo suae Gentis
impetrata) but for some privileges obtained from the Pope in that Council for
his Country, prejudicial to the Royal power of Henry II. was detained a long
time partly in England, partly in France; until at last falling sick in his
Journey, he died at Auge in Normandy the 14th of November. 1180. or as others
have it 1181. Finally, that in the Year 1225. he was canonized by Pope Honorius
III. and his Relics translated to Trinity Church in Dublin. Which being the
brief account given by Waraeus of this great Servant of God; he leaves us for
the rest, that is, for the Virtues and Wonders of his Life to the Author of it,
published by Surius.

Out of this nameless Author chiefly, though for some part also out of the Bull
of his canonization, I have selected these few particulars following, that give
us a Scheme of the remainder of his Life after he was made Bishop. In which
remainder, I must confess I know not what to admire least. I am sure there is
enough that show 1 Cor. 9. 26.
him to have run his Race not as uncertainly; to have fought not as one that
beats the air; but like an other Paul, to have chastised his Body, and
brought it to subjection, lest preaching to others he should himself be a
Reprobat. Enough that evince him to Gal. ver. 24.
have crucified his flesh with all its vices and all its concupiscences. Enough
that prove him to have truly imitated the good Shepherd of Joan. X. 1^.
the Gospel, by employing all his care, and Power, and Wealth, and Zeal, and
Life also, to the very last, for preservation of the Sheep committed to his
keeping. In a word, enough that demonstrate him to have been a familiar of
Heaven while he was yet on Earth, and a most stupendous Saint of God both in
his life and death, and after his death.

He was no sooner outwardly clad at his consecration with the glory of an
Archbishops Vesture and the Pontifical habiliments, then he covered himself
inwardly next his skin with the severity of a rough cilicium (a course
Haircloth) reaching down from his neck to his heels, everywhere sowed close to
his Limbs, and never put off, never washed, never chang^d, never opened while
the pieces of it could hold together; only one certain piece that was turned
aside thrice a day while he received on his bare flesh the smarting strokes of
a knotty discipline. For so many times at least in twenty four hours, he was
constantly disciplined (as they call it) by the hands of a familiar Friend,
whom he trusted, after he had first enjoined him to secrecy all his life.

He as soon begun his abstinence from all sorts of flesh throughout the whole
Year; which he continued evermore to his death. On Fridays, when he ate, he ate
only bread and water: for very often he took neither: and when he did, he
commonly tempered his bread with lie and ashes. In the forty days of Lent he
tasted nothing at all but thrice a week the same hard fare of bread and water,
and now and then a few Herbs. And all that Quadragesimal season, at the return
of it every year, he retired into a most horrid, though holy, Wilderness, Saint
Kevin's Rock three miles from Gleann-da loch. A Rock environed on every side
with dark Woods, besides a deep Lake of one side, enclosing its perpendicular
precipice of sixty Cubits high, whence there is not so much as any looking down
without horror; and on the other side an other precipice too, though but of
thirty Cubits in height, and by a Ladder ascendable. Within it is a little
Plain, Verdure, Trees, and a Spring. In that side of it, which hangs over the
Lake; there is a hollow made by St. Keuin's own hands (for so the Tradition of
that Country says) that served him both for an Oratory to pray in, and
repository when he would sleep. However in this hollow and on this Rock did
Laurence all alone yearly spend those 40 days and 40 nights of Lent in
spiritual Exercises conversing only with God: seeing no creature but only
thrice a weck; and then only his own Nephew Thomas Abbot of Gleannda-loch, who
alone brought him a meals meat of bread each time he came; for the Rock of it
self afforded water, as we have seen already. By this Nephew also he both
received the complaints or whatever affairs of the Diocese that needed his
determination. And by him he answered all, unless the matter was so
extraordinary that it required his own presence out of hand: for then he
appeared; yet withal retiring presently when he had done, and so continuing
his former station and exercises till Easter.

As for the rest of the Year when he had any vacation from the public charge
of his own Diocese, or others under him as Metropolitan, he lived with his
Chanons in the same Cloister Albertus Myraeus in his Fasti Belg. and Eurgund.
says this ^l^ister was called the Monastery of St. Patrick.
built by himself, and annexed to his Cathedral Church: ate as they did, and in
the same Refectory and time with them: kept silence in the same places and
hours they did: went to the same Choire with them at midnight, and sung Mattins
as they did there; With this only difference, that after all was over, and the
Canons returned to repose in their Chambers, he singing to himself the whole
Psalter of David, always continued alone in the Church at his private Devotions
till break of day: sometime standing, sometime kneeling; but in either posture
before the holy Rood, and not seldom breaking out into Raptures and Divine
Colloquies with him that was crucified upon it, our Lord and Savior Christ.
For so it was observed very often by some of the Canons, that unknown to him
remained likewise in private prayer for some time after the Community was gone.
But so soon as it was clear day, he went constantly forth to the Churchyard;
where walking a good while* he sung to God the commendation of all faithful
Souls departed.

And such indeed were the divine Exercises of Laurence, 1st, in his
Anachoretical Solitude in the Rock of St. Keuin. 2dly, in his ordinary
retirement to his own Aroasian Cloister of Dublin: in both as a private man,
but familiar of God, cultivating his own Soul, and soaring to Heaven with many
wings like a Cherub; especially those of prayer and contemplation, that seemed
to suspend him already far above all sublunary things.

But as a Bishop, the Virtues peculiarly belonging to the discharge of his
Pastoral Duty could not be so easily concealed. They were a great many of them
too illustrious and conspicuous to the eyes of all men. As a Bishop he observed
in a very excellent manner the Rule of the Apostle both to rich and poor. And
first toward the Rich. For though he continued still so abstemious himself,
though perpetually so severe a punisher of his own body with fasting and other
mortifications too; yet as he was notwithstanding of a most comely personage
and noble presence, so his reception of all persons of Quality and Gentlemen
that came to his Episcopal Table was answerably graceful, liberal, splendid in
all respects according to their degrees: variety of the best dishes, and choice
withal of the most delicate Wines. Besides he sat down himself sometimes to
entertain them; though feeding but very little, and that on some grosser Dish;
or rather indeed commonly seeming only to feed, that nothing singular might
appear in him. Which was the reason too, that although in very deed his drink
at these entertainments was no other in substance than water; yet his Cupbearer
had orders to dash it lightly with red, that he might seem to drink Wine.
Secondly toward the poor. He never missed a day without seeing now Threescore,
now Forty, and never less than Thirty of them fed in his own presence; Besides
far greater numbers of them maintained out of his Revenue constantly for a long
time, as we shall presently see.

As a Bishop he preached Repentance continually to the people of that opulent
City, who were prodigiously immersed in drunkenness, lust, contentions, rapin,
bloodshed, and all kind of wickedness. Yea, and as a Prophet too he cea^^d not
with Tears to warn 'em of their general destruction at hand, if they did not
speedily appease Heaven with unseign^d Repentance. As a Bishop, when this
general calamity like the breaking in of the Sea came upon them suddenly in one
day, in one hour; when the City was taken and sacked and burned by Diarmuid na
Ngall their incensed King and his foreign Auxiliaries; when their str^^ts were
all covered with the bodies of the slaughtered Citizens, and the Gutters ran
with blood; when the very Clergy were plundered and Churches ri^led of all that
was precious in them: as a good Bishop, I say, it was that Laurence at this
time, first beholding with floods of Tears like an other Jeremy the slaughter
of his people before his eyes; then taking courage like the good Pastor in the
Gospel, thrnst himself upon the bloody swords of the Conquerors, holding their
Arms, praying their mercy, entreating them for some, snatching others from
their fury to Christian burial who had their Souls yet panting in their Bodies:
and when no more could be done by him in any other kind, giving himself wholly
now to that generous imitation of Tobias.

As a Bishop it was that although with great hazard still unto himself, yet he
used that Episcopal freedom with the King and his insulting Commanders, that
the Clergy were at last permitted their own Habitations, and the Churches
restored their Books and Ornaments. As a Bishop, he employed in the next place
all his compassion and all his Revenue (I mean what was left thereof unseized
by the Military men, or undestroy'd by fire) yea and all whatever he could
procure from others to relieve the few Survivors of the slaughtered Citizens.
His very Bowels did yearn over them; especially those whom he had so lately
seen to flourish in all kind of Earthly happiness; and now saw without House to
lie in, without Clothes to cover their nakedness, without meat or drink to
preserve life, without other comfort than that of miserable Captives under a
most deadly Foe.

As a Bishop, when an other general Famine had in his days lien heavy on all the
Land, he not only gave daily sustenance for three whole years to five hundred
persons, reduced before to the worst of conditions, plain starving; but in
several parts of his Diocese provided meat, and drink and clothes, and all
other necessaries for three hundred more. And in the same cruel season of
scarcity it was that, Mothers reduced to extreme want, laying their chrisom
Babes in the night at his door, and in the day also where ever they saw he was
to pass, he took care of them all, providing Nurses from them; and, though two
hundred in number at one time, sent them to his own Stewards and Baylis^s to be
kept on his own Land; and, when they were come to years of discretion and some
abilities of Body, recommended them about all the Province with the badg of a
wooden Cross in their hands.

As a Bishop, and a Legate too says the Author of his Life, he connived at no
disorder in the Clergy, no vice, no sin, and least of all at the scandalous one
of Incontinency whether in Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon. Which fleshly Vice he
did so much abominate, especially in them, and found it so necessary to be
proceeded against with vigor: that even so great a number as a hundred and
forty Priests convict thereof he sent together at one time for Penance and
Absolution to Rome; though he might otherwise have given them both at home by
his own Authority.

As a Bishop, yea as a Father of his Country in general, he spent the little
remainder as well of his Revenue as of his health and Life in crossing the Seas
now again from Ireland to England, from England to France, in both Countries,
following and soliciting peace from Henry II. to ease the common calamities of
his Nation at this time.

And now the dissolution of his earthly Tabernacle being at hand, how hecoming
a most Christian Bishop, and a most holy Apostolical Legate indeed, not only his
very last exemplary Ecclesiastical preparation for it, but his very last answer
to the Abbot of Auge on that occasion was? For in his way through France to
Normandy, having fallen sick of a Fever at Abbevil Cambreusis. Vit. apud Sur.
: gone forward nevertheless to Auge on the borders of Normandy: when at a
distance he saw the Church of our Lady there, prophetically foretold his own
departure in that place: then entered that Church: prayed in it a little while:
thence gone to his Lodging and Bed: sent for Osbert the religious Abbot of that
Monastery: confessed his sins to him, and received the holy Viaticum from him:
then for prosecuting his business to Henry II. dispatched his Chaplain David,
together with his own Nephew, to that King: on their return the fourth day with
the joyful news of their success ( i. e. of the Peace granted by the same Henry
II. to Roderick the Irish King) seemed transported with it for the sake of his
Country, how low soever he knew himself brought by his sickness: upon the
third day following desired of the said Abbot and his whole Monastery to be as
a Member incorporated among them: and this accordingly done, then presently
desired further and (pursuant to his desire) in all their presence received the
last Sacrament, which they call Extreme Unction: having I say passed through
all these steps, and very last Ecclesiastical preparatories for death: when the
good Abbot Osbertus, considering him an Archbishop, had according to custom,
minded him of making his last Will and Testament: his Answer was in th^se few
words [ Novit Dominus mihi ne nummum quidem sub sole relictum esse] The Lord
knows that I have not a penny left me under the Sun.

Besides, how like the great Bishop of our Souls weeping over Jerusalem, this
Bishop of Ireland remembering and lamenting (once more for all) the condition of
his own Country, brake forth into these Expressions in his own mother
Language? Ah foolish and sottish People! what will you do now? who will bring
you back from your strayings? who will apply Balm to your wounds? who will cure
you, or take care of you at all? And this Lamentation which Nature expressed
from him, ended, how then at last like an other Austin, he behaved himself in
the last moments of his Life. For then converting himself wholly and for
himself only to God, he ceased not with tears, and sighs, and sobs too,
repeating continually while he could open his lips, that Verse of the Psalmist,
Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me, because my soul confideth in thee:
until about midnight on the 13th of November, Anno 1181. he breathed out his
last to his Redeemer.

Now that such a life, and such a death of a man so virtuous all along from his
very Youth, whether he be considered either as a Clerk, or Monk, or Abbot of
Gleann-da-Loch, or as Archbishop of Dublin, and Chanon of the Aroasian
Institute, or as Legate of Ireland, or as a prosperous or afflicted man, should
be attested as pleasing to God by prodigious Miracles both in his life and
after his death, seems nothing strange to me. The Author of his Life recounts a
good many of them wrought in the time of his Life. And the Bull of his
canonization (dated at Reate III. Ides December. by Honorius III. Ninth year of
his Pontificat, which was of Christ 1225.) gives a brief sum of all (that had
been wrought either in his Life or after his death) by telling us, That besides
the Dumb, and Lame, and Lepers, and many others afflicted with sundry other
maladies, cured of all their evils at the sole invocation of God by him, or in
his name, and at his Tomb by others: he was, by the power of God, the wonderful
raiser even from death to life of seven persons in particular, and among 'em of
one who had been full three days dead. Nor can I well deny that this Bull ought
to have by much the more credit with many who are not in other matters
over-credulous, and ought so to have for these reasons: 1. Because it was
procured and the whole ceremony and process of this canonization solicited,
not only by the Letters of the Archbishop and Chapter of Roan, and of the Abbot
and Convent of the foresaid Auge, where the body then rested within the Diocese
of Roan, but by those also of many other Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and
religious men: all attesting the sanctity of his Life and glory of Miracles
continually wrought after his death at his Tomb. 2. Because the Inquisition was
made partly in France by the Archbishop, Dean and Treasurer of Roan, and for
the rest in Ireland by the Bishop of Kildare and Prior of Trinity Church in
Dublin. 3. Because within 45 years after his death all was finished, and this
very Bull issued, and his Festivity with an Octave kept in the most solemn
manner could be, both at Auge in France, and at Dublin and elsewhere in
Ireland, while the people were yet alive, nay by a world of those very people
of all degrees that knew and conversed with him familiarly, and yet invoked him
now most devoutly and religiously as Coheir of Christ in glory, and their
tutelary Patron under Christ with God the Father.

The fifth and last Point is, That notwithstanding all the sanctity and merits
either of those two extraordinary Wonder-working Saints of God, Malachy and
Laurence, or of any other holy men whatsoever, that in secret mourned for the
iniquities of their People; that cried to God incessantly to spare them; and
that in the Language of Ezechiel interposed themselves Ezech. XXII. 30.
a hedge between the wrath of Heaven and their Land, by fasting and praying, and
afflicting their own Bodies for the sins of others, yet all would not do. It
was now come to that pass with the People of Ireland in general, which had been
with the People of Judaea, when God spoke to Hieremy the Prophet, (c. XV. v.
1.) first assuring him, that although Samuel and Moses stood before his face to
intercede for them, yet he would not listen to their prayer; because his soul
was against that People: and then commanding him to pronounce ejection from
before his face, ex^crmination and flitting out of their Land against them. It
was come to that very pass with the Irish now, in which it had been again with
the same stubborn stiffnecked Israelites, when he declared to the Prophet
Ezechiel and swear unto him even by his own Life, That if those very three
(most perfect servants of his in their generation) Moses, Daniel and Job lived
among them: yet by their righteousness they should only save themselves; not
any other, no not so much as either Son or Daughter. For such indeed was the
deplorable case of the ancient Milesians of Ireland at this time, the very last
period of their Monarchy. And such it was notwithstanding so many just men, as
in particular the Bishops Malchus, and Gilbertus, and Celsus, and Christianus
and Gelasius, and Malachi and Laurence, that lived among them and interceded
for them continually to God. Yea, such it was notwithstanding all the
Reformation so lately wrought by any of these holy men, among either
Ecclesiastics or Laics any where in the Nation, and all the Councils held, and
all the Monasteries built, and Schools erected, and Churches endowed, and
whatever else at this time was practiced to restore both civility and piety to
some degree of the ancient Luster. Nothing at all could any longer slow the
execution of the final doom pronounced by the Watcher and holy one of Heaven
against the lofty proud Milesian Tree. Nor must we wonder at it, if we reflect
upon what is discoursed at large in the former Section. The Kings, and Princes,
and Nobles, and Men at Arms of Ireland, either all this while were not at all
themselves reformed: or certainly, and that most frequently too, were again
relapsed into their old accursed Feuds, their concussions, violences, rapin,
oppression, revenge, their spilling of one another blood to death: and this
even all along, from time to time, until the Executioners of their final
Sentence came to part them, and make them for ever slaves on every side to a
foreign People.

What other sins of the Irish Nation might (according to the judgment of man)
have incensed God, after so long forbearance, to pour upon 'em so dreadful a
judgment, I cannot say. And the reason is, because I find no specification of
any other in those Histories of theirs which I have read. Yet, I will not pass
over in silence, what I find to this purpose in Girald of Wales (I mean
Cambrensis.) This Author says, that upon the taking of Dublin, and harrasing of
Mead by Diarmuid na-Ngall King of Leinster and his foreign Auxiliaries: the
Clergy of Ireland assembled in a National Synod at Ardmach, having debated the
causes of this Invasion: and after full debate, resolved first in general, that
the sins of their Nation had brought this calamity on them: Secondly, in
particular, That their evil custom of buying Christian English Youths, as well
from Merchants as Pirates, and making them slaves for ever, had been a special
Cause of it: Thirdly, That God was just in subjecting their People to the same
condition of slavery under that very Nation which they had so unchristianly
used: it was therefore in the last place unanimously decreed, That immediately
all English slaves wheresoever throughout the whole Kingdom should be
manumised, and set at full Liberty. So says Cambrensis, in his First Book de
Expug. Hibern. c. 28. Where he further says, That the People of England, i. e.
the Saxons, while their Kingdom flourished before the Norman Conquest, had this
vicious custom among them generally, That rather than suffer any the least
want, they set their children to public sale, and sent both children and
Cousins too over Seas to be sold in Ireland. And then he gives his own judgment
on the whole, concluding, It may be probably believed, That as God in his
Justice had already punished with servitude under a foreign Yoke the Saxon
Sellers, so the Irish Buyers were justly fallen at this time into the like
severity of Gods avenging wrath.

But whether also that horrible violation of the Sanctuary of God for fifteen
Generations: and the most hideous corruption of Manners flowing thence, and
overflowing well nigh the whole Kingdom: whereof we have seen before so much
out of St. Bernard, might not be another special and peradventure more
exasp^rating cause? Or whether the exemplary punishment fallen so suddenly
under Malachias upon the whole Race of those nesarious men, that for so long
were the chief Authors of that sacriledg and corruption, did, or did not
satisfy the Justice of God as to that matter? And whether the Reformation
wrought by Malachias in his own days, continued any while after his death? Nay
whether so great a number of incontinent Priests, within so little a time of
his death, and under the superintendency of so blessed a man as St. Laurence
was, might not argue a third or fourth special motive? Or whether at least, it
might not evince a very just ground to suspect even a very great Apostasy among
the Clergy themselves in some places, and by consequence a much greater a-mong
thepeople in the same places, from that holy Reform of them by Malachias? I
must confess, I know not what to answer these Queres; as being for one part of
them enveloped in the darkness of God's secret determinations: and for the
rest, or matter of Fact, observable by man, past over without any mention of it
in History. Only this I can with much probability aver, That they are much out,
who, grounding themselves on that number of Priests convict of Incontinency by
St. Laurence, would thence conclude, this of Incontinency to have been a
general Vice infecting the Irish Clergy and People of Ireland at this time, and
consequently one of the special causes that brought the heaviest of their
judgments, The English Conquest, upon them. 1. Gratianus Lucius (p. 319.) tells
us, That Albinus O Moliny, Abbot first of Baltinglass, then Bishop of Ferns
(under Henry II. when Laurence was Archbishop of Dublin, and those Priests
convict) in a Midlent Sermon of his, treating at large of the continency of
Clerks, and inveighing bitterly as to that point, against the wicked Example
given by those Welsh and English Ecclesiastics come to Ireland with
Fitz-Steven, Strongbow, etc. declared in very ample manner how extraordinary
pure the Chastity of the Irish Clergy had been before they mixed with those
Foreiners, and were corrupted by their Example. 2. Cambrensis himself, how
unfavourable soever he be in other matters to that Nation, is (in his
Topography, did. 3. c. xxvii.) a witness beyond exception, as of other great
Virtues, so in particular of the Chastity of their Ecclesiastics. Est autem
terrae istius Clerus satis Religione commendabilis: and inter varias quibus
pollet virtutes, castitatis praerogativa praeeminet atque praecellit. The
Clergy of that Land, says he, as to Religion are commendable enough: and among
their many Virtues, Chastity has in an excellent degree the prerogative of all.
And then he goes on telling their assiduity in reading and praying, and singing
Psalms, and keeping within the precincts of their Churches and Abbeys, and
never tasting any thing all day until they had ended Completorium, or Complin,
as they call it, the very last of the canonical Hours, in the dusk of the
Evening. It Is true, he censures their indulging themselves at night more freely
both in meat and drink. But it is withal no less true, That therefore he
wonders at their Chastity: holding it for a Miracle that Wine and Venus should
not meet.

And yet after all, I know not what to think of his charging them so grievously
in these two particulars. 1. That ( inter tot millia vix unum invenies, etc.)
among so many Thousands, scarce one might be found that notwithstanding their
continual instance in praying and fasting all day, did not at night enormously
exceed in Wine and other drinks. 2d. That albeit their Bishops, as having been
generally assumed out of Monasteries, performed most diligently all the duties
of Religious Monks: for according to the ancient custom they even after their
assumption to the Episcopal Order, continued still their abode within the
precincts of their Abbeys, wholly given to Prayer and contemplation: yet withal
they no less wholly neglected preaching to their people, or inveighing against
their wickedness, or using the severity of Episcopal discipline to extirpate
their Vices, and plant those Virtues in their stead which became Christian
Professors. And indeed, if Cambrensis, as he is often in other matters of
Ireland, be not extremely out, or extremely biased, in these particulars,
especially the second of them: we may peradventure justly conceive, that here
is an other special cause of that very heaviest of Gods judgments impending at
this time over the Irish Nation.

But whatever may be thought to have either been or not been any of the special
causes: and although, as I ought so I do acknowledge, that not even my own
supposition all along hitherto, viz. of their mortal Feuds and bloodshed among
themselves to have been their greatest, most special and most peculiar
provocation of Heaven, must be obtruded on the Reader as a certainty; but only
represented to him as the most probable and pious conjecture that may be
grounded as well on the Prophetical predictions of the Irish Saints, as upon
the nature and merit of things in themselves, taken as they are recorded so
fully and particularly in Doctor Ketings History: yet I may confidently affirm,
they were in general very great and very grievous and enormous sins, without
question, either of the Clergy, or People, or their Bishops, or of their Kings,
Princes, Nobles and other men of War, or of all together, that brought so
heavy, so everlasting a judgment on that Nation as to their Being in this
World. For although particular persons have been sometimes grievously afflicted
only for the trial of their Virtue; as Job and Tobias: sometimes only for the
manifestation of the Power and Works of God, without any demerit of theirs, or
their Parents either; as the Blind Man in the Gospel: never has a whole Nation
or Kingdom been destroyed but for the enormity of their sins. Whereof whoever
pleases may see proofs at large in Fitz-Herberts Policy and Religion, Part 1.
chap. 21. 22. 23, etc. yea Jesus, the son of Syrach, for he may be more easily
consulted in every Bible at hand, may give to a sober man assurance enough,
where he says, First ( cap. 10. 8.) that the Kingdom is translated from Nation
to Nation, because of unjust dealings, injuries, calumnies, and various
deceits. Secondly, ( c. 40. 10.) that death and bloodshed, strife, and the
sword, oppression, famine, contrition and scourges, were all of them created
for the wicked, and for them the deluge was made. Nay, if we consult the Books
of Kings, read the Prophets, run over the Books of Josuah, Judges, Deuteronomy,
Chronicles, and the rest of the old Testament, examine all the Histories of
Christendom: we shall not find any whole Kingdom or Nation destroyed but for
grievous and horrible sins either of the Rulers, or People, or Priests, or all
together. Yea, we shall commonly find the very quality and species of those
transgressions mentioned that brought the vengeance on them. However, and
notwithstanding that further yet we know, that bloodshed is one of those four
sins that cry to Heaven Genesis X. 11.
for vengeance: the Voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the earth,
said God himself to Cain: and that the very second of the Genesis IX. 6.
Laws he gave to Noe was, that whosoever did shed the blood of man, his also
should be shed: after all, I dare not affirm positively that either those very
Feuds of the Irish, how unparalled soever in blood, or those other
transgressions in specie, be they what you please, were the sins that moved God
to pronounce this final doom against them; but only in general, That their
great sins compelled him to it. And how should I indeed? For, who was the
Counselor Esaias XL. 13. Romans XI. 39.
of God? or who knows any thing of the secrets of his Providence, except only
those to whom himself was pleased to reveal them.

Nevertheless I dare acquaint the Reader, that although I give but little
credit generally, and sometimes none at all, to the Relations of Cambrensis,
where he seems rather to vent his passion and write a Satyr against that
People, than regard either Modesty or Truth; yet I will not call in question
what he relates ( l. 2. de Expug. Hib. c. 33.) of the Prophetical predictions,
made so many Ages before, by the four Prophetical Saints of that Nation,
Moling, Brachan, Patrick and Columb-Cille, and written by themselves (says he)
in their own Irish Books extant yet in Ireland, concerning the final Fate of
their Countrymen the old Milesian Race. viz. That the people of Great Britain
shall not only invade them, but for many Ages continue a sharp, cruel, and yet
doubtful War upon them at home in Ireland: sometimes the one, and sometimes the
other side prevailing. That although those Invaders shall be often disturbed,
worsted, weakened, especially (and according to the prophecy of Brachan) by a
certain King that shall come from the desert Mountains of Patrick, and on a
Sunday-night seize a Castle in the Woody parts of Ibh Faohlain, and besides
force them almost all away out of Ireland: yet they shall continually maintain
the Eastern Seacoast in their possession. That, in fine, it will be no sooner
than a little before the day of judgment, and then it will be, when they shall
be thoroughly and universally victorious over all Ireland; erect Castles every
where among the Irish; and reduce the whole Island from Sea to Sea under the
English Yoke.

And verily those Prophetical predictions, five hundred years since delivered
us by Cambrensis as he received 'em from the Irish themselves, are the more
observable, That by consulting the History of after-Ages from Henry II. of
England to the last of Queen Elizabeth, and first of King James, we may see
them to a tittle accomplished. Unless peradventure some will unreasonably
boggle at the circumstance of time expressed in these words ( Paulo ante diem
Judicii) a little before the day of Judgment. Which yet no man has reason to
do. Because we know not how near this great day, which shall end the World, may
be to us at this very present. As for that King foretold as coming from the
des^rt Mountains of Patric: there may be occasion and place enough to speak of
him again, that is, hereafter, in the Second Part of this Treatise.

But whether from this Irish Prophecy, either had, as for the substance, not
the exact words of it from Cambrensis, for he pretends not to give to us the
exact words: or had perhaps, at least for some part of it, from the Irish
themselves resorting to Rome in those days: the famous Italian Prophet of
Calabria, Joachimus Abbot of Flore, did foretell in his time the utter
destruction, and eternal desolation that Joachimus Ab. post Tract. super cap.
X. Isaiae. Part 1. de Oneribus sexti Temporis.
was to come upon the Irish Nation, I cannot say. This I know 1. That in all
his predictions, all along in his several Commentaries on Jeremy, Esaias, the
Apocalypse, etc. he pretends to divine Revelation. 2. That he lived several
years after the Writings of Cambrensis on Ireland had been public. For
Cambrensis dedicated one part of them to Henry II. himself, who died in the
Year of Christ 1189. and the rest to his Son Richard when yet but Earl of
Poicton. And Joachim was in Sicily with Richard now King of England, and Philip
Polydore Virgil. in Ricardo primo.
King of France, both wintring there with their Fleets, An. 1190. in their way
to the Invasion of the holy Land. Nay, I have my self read his submission of
his Works to the Sea Apostolic, dated by himself ten years after; which was
the Year 1200. of our Saviors Incarnation. 3. That being asked, what the
success of this great expedition to the holy Land against Saladine should be?
his Answer was, it should prove unsuccessful, and that the time of recovering
Jerusalem was not yet come. 4. That this prediction of his was punctually
true: as appeared ere long. 5. That his Prophecy of the old Irish Nation is in
these genuin words you read in the Margin. Ex rigoribus horribilis hyemis, and
glacialis flatibus Aquilonis, parit Hibernia Incolas furibundos. Sed si
sequentium temporum terrores praenoscerent, and internos impetus cogitarene: a
facie spiritus Domini ferreum pectus averterent, and se a sempiternis
opprobriis liberarent. Sed ex quo invicem vertitur furor aspideus, and involvit
tam Clerum quam populum par insultus: non video quod superna Clementia ulterius
differat, quin in ^os exactissimum judicium acuat, and in stuporem perpetuae
desolationis impellat. -- Omnes istos populos Cathedra Dubliniensis astringit.
Sed Darensium enormis iniquit as totum defaedat ordinem charitatis. Et ideo a
planta inquit pedis usque ad verticem capitis non est in eis sanitas ( Isaiae
1.) temporalibus molestiis repercussis. Joachimus Ab. supra.
which I English thus, as well I can, or can guess at their sense. Of the colds
of horrible Winter, and winds of the icy North, Ireland brings forth outrageous
Inhabitants. But if they had foreknown the terrors of following times, and
thought of their intest in rage; they would turn away their iron breast from
the face of Gods anger, and free themselves from everlasting reproaches. But
since their fury of Asps is turned against one another, and the same violence
involves as well the Clergy as the People: I do not see that the Clemency of
Heaven may (or will) delay to sharpen the most rigorous judgment against them,
and force them on to the astonishment of perpetual desolation. And this is all
that Abbot Joachim prophesied of that People. Which indeed I had the curiosity
to see in his own Works and words: because I heard it by chance some twenty
years ago much spoken of by a Gentleman that read it. Nor has this Prophet a
word more of Ireland, but only those other few that in the same place
immediately follow; which yet, I must confess, I do not understand; though
perhaps I might afar off guess at their meaning, did not the Latin word
defaedat, or English of it, make no reasonable construction at all where it is
placed. All these People (says he, speaking of Episcopal Diocesses) the Sea of
Dublin joins fast together. But the iniquity of the Kildarians ( defaedat)
makes clean the whole order of Charity. And therefore (says Esaias) from the sole
of the foot to the top of the head, there is no health in them, being struck
anew with their temporal evils. 6. That albeit his Book asserting a Quaternity
(against Petrus Lombardus the Master of the Sentences and Bishop of Paris, who
taught the undivided Unity of one Thing or Essence in the Trinity of Persons)
was condemned in the Council of Lateran under Innocent III. yet so was neither
himself (as who had submitted all his Doctrine to the Apostolic See) nor any
part of his prophetical Books, wherein this Prophecy of Ireland is. 7. And
lastly, That notwithstanding he be not so particular in many circumstances; as
for Example in those either of the Nation of the Invaders, or of the Defense
made by the Invaded, or of that King foreseen coming from the Desert Mountains
of Patrick, or of the time when the English should be thoroughly victorious, [
Paulo ante diem Judicii] A little before the day of Judgment: yet, as to the
main he is no less positive than the Irish prophetical Saints themselves were,
by foretelling the eternal desolation of that People: and that with as much
assurance as any could who by special Revelation had been made privy to the
immutable Decree of the Watcher and Holy one of Heaven pronounced against them.
Which Decree of Heaven (for such it was undoubtedly) on what occasion, by what
means, degrees, methods, and for how many Ages it was a putting in execution
before the final accomplishment or final effect of it had been achieved, will
be the subject of the Second Part of this little Treatise; but after I have
given here one Section more that relates wholly to that ancient People alone,
as they were yet a free Nation.

SECT. VI.
Gathelus. Milesius. Briotan of the posterity of Nemedus. New History of
Galfridus considered. Ithius employed, etc. Irish Language common, etc.
Milesians in their Antiquity yield somewhat to the Israelites. Scotia, lately
so called. Errors in page 18. and 19. Battle 'twixt Coilus and Fergus a mere
story. Again Geoffrey of Monmouth. The late Histories of Scotland examined. A
true account of Reuds, and the Dal-Reudini. Descent of Charles II. of Great
Britain from 81. Irish Monarchs. Joannes Scotus Erigena. The Southern Towers,
and Wall, etc. First Invasion of the Danes on Ireland, as recorded by the
French. Hanmer's History of Ireland in very many points reproved. Battle of
Degsestan. Both Cambrensis and Cambden out. Again Cambrensis refuted. Aonach
Tailtionn. Unparalleled Hospitality of the Ancient Irish. Beginning and
Appropriation of Mead by Tuathal Teachtmhor, and his four Palaces. Idolatrous
Fires at Tleaghtghae and Visneach. Error in the 229 page. Costly Progress of
the Kings of Cashel. Antiquity and Kings of Dublin. Of Clanna Ruaruidh. Golden
Mines and abundance of Treasure in Ireland. The Irish Cloister at Reinsburg in
Germany. Marianus Scotus. Saxon Abbey at Maio in Connaght. Last Parliament held
by the Milesian Race. Prophecy of Malachias. History of the Staff of Jesus.
Monastery of Beannchuir. Gallus and Columbanus. Whether an Interregnum? Of
Ainmhire and Do^^hnall two Irish Monarchs, and Gildas Badonicus? Reynerus the
Lvi. King of Denmark dying prisoner in Ireland. Kings of the Heruli, and
Princes of Biscay descended of the Irish.

FOR although, according to my first design, and order of these Discourses, and
sequel of things in them all along hitherto, I might now conveniently enough
enter upon that Second Part: yet, upon afterthoughts, I judged it not amiss to
interpose here this one Section more, though it be no other than a Miscellany,
partly of Reflections on some things touched before, and partly of Additions to
them.

42. Wherefore to begin; and because I have in my very first entry on these
Historical Discourses of Ireland, (page 5.) alleged Cambden, acknowledging
that the Irish fetch the beginning of their Histories from the most profound
and remote Records of Antiquity; so that in comparison of them, the Ancientness
of all other Nations is but Novelty, and as it were a matter of yesterday: and
also because in mentioning (page 11) Clanna Gaodhel, or posterity of Gathelus,
I have said that from him all the Clanna Mileadh, or children and posterity of
Milesius descended long before either Milesius himself or his predecessors came
into Spain: and further, because it may be of some use elsewhere in this very
Section: take here in short out of D. Keting, an account as well of some
memorable passages of those most profound remote Records of Antiquity
concerning both Gathelus himself and his Father Niull, and the travels of their
posterity for some Ages before any of them arrived in Spain: as of the descent
of Milesius through twenty Generations from Gathelus, and 25 in all from Noe.

Viz. That Niull, a younger son to Feanusa Farsa King of Scythia, and a most
learned man, especially in all or most of the Languages that not very many Ages
before confounded the Builders on the Plain of Sennaar, having travailed into
Egypt, had for his admired Excellencies not only a large Country there, by
name Capacyront bestowed on him for ever by the Pharaoh that governed Egypt
then ( viz. Pharaoh surnamed Cingeris, from whose name all the following Kings
of Egypt were called Pharaoh's, as the Emperors of Rome from Julius Caesar were
called Cesars) but also one of this Pharaohs own Daughters to Wife, by name or
rather surname Scota, because married to Niull a Scythian. That of this young
Princess he begot a Son whom he named Gaodhel (the Latins call him Gathelus)
and orhers surnamed Glass. That by that time Gaodhel Glass had come to be a man,
the children* of Israel who had lived some Ages before in Egypt were grievously
oppressed by the Egyptians, and therefore Moses the great Captain of the
Isaelites led them to the Banks of the red Sea to shun the power of Pharaoh
surnamed Intius that pursued them. That their Camp in this place being near
Capacyront, the Scythian Prince Niull thought himself concerned to accoast
Moses, and learn of him the whole story of their Nation and cause of their
Flight, and whither they tended, and what they expected, etc. That having
received of Moses very ample satisfaction to all his demands, he offered this
great Captain of Gods Army whatever was in his power to serve him, but
particularly great store of Provisions, Corn, Cattle, etc: and Moses took this
offer so well, that although he made no use of it, yet he invited Niull to go
along with him to the Wilderness, promising him a plentiful share in the
favors of God to his people, when they came to their journeys end. That upon
Niulls demurr to this invitation, and going home to his own House, he found his
Son Gathelus mortally stung in the Neck by a Serpent: and this made him return
presently back with him to Moses; who laying his Wonder working Rod upon the
wounded place cured him instantly, without any sign remaining but only a little
greeness on the skin where the Serpent stung, etc. That as some of the Irish
Chronicles tell, Geodhell had his surname of Glass from this green scar on his
Neck, which perpetually remained of the same color; Glass in Irish, according
to one meaning of the word, importing green; tho, as others hold, he had it
from the Chain of Honor bestowed upon him, and clasped and locked upon his Arm
by Moses at the same time; for by an other signification of that word Glass, it
imports the very same with Flease, i. e. Chain, from which in that Language
they call a Noble Chain-bearer Fleascgach Voas^l: or yet as some do say, he had
it from his Har^oss and Armor that were all of greenish color. That however
or whatever the cause of this surname was, there is no debate, nor doubt nor
question among the Irish Historians about the extraordinary blessing of Moses
given at the same time by him to Gathelus, viz. That where ever any of his
posterity should settle, the Country should be free from all venomous
creatures. Which says Keting is the reason that not only Ireland, but Creet
also where some of his posterity did settle, is free from such creatures, and
that the Relations in St. Patric's Life, of his banishing away out of Ireland
all Serpents and other poisonous Animals, must be understood not of those that
were really but metaphorically such. He means evil Spirits, or Devils that till
St. Patric's time had in a special extraordinary manner poisoned and possefs;d
that whole Country with Magic, Sorcery, Witchcraft, and all kind of
Diabolical illusions,

But be this Opinion or metaphorical interpretation of Keting as he please,
what I am to pursue here is matter of Fact and History out of him without any
interpretation. And therefore I am to tell you now, that besides this
extraordinary blessing to Gaodhel, Moses had so much regard of Niull, that he
sent a thousand men with him to seize Pharaohs Fleet, put him in possession
thereof, and bid him stay a shipboard till he had seen what God would do
suddenly to Pharaoh who pursued them. That after Niul had the very next day
seen both Pharaoh and all his Egyptian Host of Horse and Foot covered under
those Waves that immediately before afforded the Israelites a dry passage, his
fear was over, and therefore he returned home to his former dwelling in the
same Country of Egypt: where he remained in peace till he died, and his
posterity after him till the fourth Generation, i. e. till the days of Sruth
his great Grandchild. For Sruth was the son of Easruth, and Easruth of Gaodhel,
and Gaodhel of Niull; which in all make four Generations. That in this fourth
Generation the Egyptians picking several quarrels with them, forced them away
out of Egypt. Which banishment of them, Walsingham in his Ypodigma Neustriae ad
an. 1185. -- page 452. in giving an account of John, Third Son to Henry II.
being sent by him to Ireland, describes occasionally as you see in this
passage. Joannes si^ius Regis, a Patre militaribus armis accinctus in Hiberniam
est transmissus. Hibernia post Brittanniam omnium Insularum est optima. Quae
quamvis Britanniae dviitiis cedat; latitudine, salubritate, serenitate
praestat. Quae sicut versus Aquilonem brevior est, it a versus meridiem trans
illius fines protenditur. Haec autem proprie patria Scotorum est. Nam sicut
legitur, Aegyptiis in mori Rub^o submersis, illi qui superfuerunt, expul^runt a
se que^dam Nobilem Sciticum, qui degebat apud eos, ne dominium super eos
invaderet. Expulsus ille cum familia pervenit ad Hispaniam, ubi and habitavit
per annos multos, and progenies ipsius fameliae suae multiplicata est nimis.
Inde venerunt Hiberniam post annos mill, duobus additis, a transitu filiorum
Israel per mar^ Rubrum. Et de Hibernia pars eorum egressa, tertiam in Britannia
Brittonibus and Pictis gentem addiderunt. Pars eorum quae remansit in Hibernia
Hiberni vocabantur, and adbuc eadem utuntur lingua.


That Sruth, the foresaid great Grandchild of Gaodhel, being their Leader,
arrived with his banished Company in Creet, where he paid his last tribute to
Nature, and some of his Company took up for themselves and Issue their
Habitation. That Eibhir Scot, his eldest Son, leading the rest of them out of
Creet, arrived ere long in Scythia, though not very welcome to the posterity of
Neanuill son to Feanusa Farsa. That in the fifth Generation of Eibher Scot, one
of his descendants, Taith mhic Daghnon killed his own kinsman the King of that
Country, by name Refloir, the son of Rifill, of the progeny of Neanuill: and
thereupon he and the whole Race of Gaodhel Glass, as many as had come thither,
or been born there, were forced to fly under the leading of Adhnon and Eibher
the two sons of Adhnamhuin mhic Bedhanmhuin, mhic Eibher Scuit, mhic Sruth,
m^ic Easruth, mhic Gaoidhel. That being come to the Caspian Sea, they shipped,
but soon after landed in an Island there, tarried in it a whole year to refresh
themselves, and in the mean time buried Adhnon one of their Leaders: and his
Funeral being over and a twelvemonth of their abode in this place expired, they
put again to Sea in three ships, each freighted with sixty persons, and a Woman
for every third man (or rather perhaps for every three men.) That after some
time being weary of their Habitation a ship board, they landed again, and
quitting their ships crossed many Countries by Land from this Caspian Sea to
the Pontic. That here they shipped the third time, but ere long meeting with an
Island by name Caronia, they put in and remained in it fifteen months; where
Eibher mhac Taith, and Lamghlas mhac Adhnoin died. That from hence departing
under the Conduct of four Chief^^ins, whereof Caichair the Magician or Druyd
was one, they arrived at the North end of the Riphean Mountains: where the same
Caichear prophetically told them Hereby you are to correct what is otherwise
said by a mistak^ page 13. l. (...). and 8. as if this prediction had been made
by Caicheir to Milesius himself and but some years before; whereas indeed it
was made to his Predecessors many Ag^s before he was born.
, that neither that place nor any other was designed for their lasting abode or
Habitation till they came to the Western Island which we now call Ireland: and
that not themselves, but their posterity after them should come to it. That
hence again, but under the Command of Eibher Gluinfhiann they removed to
Gothia, where they contitinued a hundred and fifty years, even to the eighth
Generation from Eibher, to Bratha, For Bratha, who led them hence first of all
to Spain, was the son of Deaghatha, son of Earchadha, son of Elloit, son of
Nuadhath, son of Neinuill, son of Eibhric, son of Eibher Gluinfhionn, and
consequently was the eighth Generation from this Eibher Gluinfhionn.

That all the Travels of the Progeny of Gaodhel were first from Egypt to Creet:
from thence to Scythia: from thence to Gothia: from thence to South-Spain,
whether the foresaid Bratha led them: and back again, in the person of Galamh
(alias Mileadh Espain, or Milesius the Spaniard) great Grandchild of this
Bratha, to Scythia (as before we have seen page 12.) and thence also again to
Egypt, and so to Thracia, and once more to Gothia, and thence to Spain, till at
last the sons of this Galamh or Mileadh ventured for Ireland, where they set up
their prophesied Rest and long abode ever since to this present day.

Finally, that Galamh, alias ^ileadh, in Latin Milesius (who married the
Daughter of Pharaoh Nectonibus king of Egypt, and her name also or at least
surname Scota, for the same or like reason to that which gave so long before to
their great Ancestor Niull's Wife Daughter to Pharaoh Cingeris the selfsame
denomination:) That I say this Galamh, was the nineteenth Generation from
Gaodhel Glass, and the four and Twentieth from Noah the Builder of the Ark: as
appears by his Pedigree thus: Mileadh son of Bile, son to Breoghuin, son to
Bratha, son to Deagatha, son to Earchadha, son to Alloid, son to Nuadhadh, son
to Neanuill, son to Eibhric or Eibherglas, son to Eibher Gluinfhionn, son to
Laimhfhionn, son to Adhnoin son to Taidh, son to Ogamhuin, son to Beaomhuinn,
son to Eibher Scot, son to Sruth, son to Easruth, son to Gaodhel Glass, son to
Niull, son to Feianusa Farsa, son to Baath, son to Magog, son to Japhet, son to
Noah, or (as the Irish call him) Naoih.

43. And this, in substance, is the account which Keting has of these matters.
Though I confess there may be read in him a great deal more of that Scythian
King Feinusa Farsa (Father of Niull and Grandfather of Gaodhel Glass,)
particularly of his great Learning: and the most celebrated School kept in
those days on the Plain of Sennaar: and of his having studied the Sciences and
Languages full twenty years in that place: and of his having then employed
another most skilful man by name Gaodhel, (but his surname was Ethoir) to
compose, or at least to refine, adorn, and render copious that Language which
ever since from his name is called Gaodhelc, or Gaodhlec, I mean the Irish
Language. And so likewise it may be found in D. Keting, how it was in
remembrance and honor of this Gathelus or Gaothel Ethoir, the Author, or at
least Refiner of the Irish Tongue; that Feinusa Farsa's foresaid Brother Niull
in Egypt gave his firstborn Child the self-same denomination or name of
Gaodhel (alias Gathelus) tho sufficiently distinguished after by the addition
of his surname Glass. But enough of these profound remote Antiquities, as
Cambden calls 'em. And yet I am confident they may be far more easily believed
by some and passed over by others, than opposed, at least disproved by any; yea
notwithstanding the names of Capacyront in Egypt, and Caronia in the Pontick
Sea, and the Fleet of Pharaoh, in the red Sea, seized by a thousand of the
unarmed Israelits, See Josephus 3. Book of Antiqu. c. 6. Where he tells us
expressly, that all the Israelites were disarmed when Pharaoh pursued them;
though after that his six hundred Chariots and fifty thousand Horse and two
hundred thousand armed Faotmen were drowned in the Red Sea, and the Tide had
thrown up their Arms on the other Bank where the Israelites were sa^ely
arrived, they armed themselves sufficiently.
and put under the Command of Niull. That I may say nothing at all, or scruple
or boggle either at the two Scotas, Daughters to those two Kings of Egypt, as
already you have seen, or at the two Scythian Kings of the same name Refloir,
and both killed by the Progeny of Gaodhel Glass; the first of them by Taith mhac
Daghnon; and the second, at least two hundred years after by Milesius himself,
as may be remembered out of the 12th page before. But leaving the judgment
hereof to the Reader:

44. I proceed to my next Reflection, which must be on page 8 and 9. There you
are told, How the children or posterity of Nemedus, (the Irish call'em Clanna
Neimheadh) to avoid a dreadful and continual pestilence of many years,
departing in a thousand Vessels, great and small, under the Conduct of three
Chieftains, Simeon Breac, Ibaath, and Briotan, the other two sailing to Greece,
Briotan with his adherents landed in the North of that Country, which we now
call Scotland, and with his and their posterity remaining there, gave the
denomination of Britain to this whole Island (which is now called Great
Britain) as holy Cormac, the King of Mounster and Bishop of Cashel, in his
Psalter of Cashael, together with all the Chronologers of Ireland affirm. You
are also told that surely in this particular these Irish Chronologers have at
least much more probability of their side, than any late Authors have, that
derive that name (of Britain) from Brutus, or his Romantic History in
Galfridus, or in any other. Lastly, you find this Question immediately follows,
For if from Brutus, besides other reasons, why not Brutannia rather than
Britannia.

Though in this whole passage I followed my Author Keting; and particularly for
this Question put in the last place, or at least for the reason involved
therein, I might also have alleged Polydor. Histor. Ang. l. 1.
Polydore Virgil, who makes use of the same reason against the derivation of
Britannia from Brutus: yet having since consulted the learned Cambden's most
accurat search into these matters; though he has not a word of the Irish
History of Briotan, nor seems ever to have heard thereof: I find nevertheless
there may be very probable answers given out of him to that question put by me
after Polydore and Keting. And therefore I now decline it, tho not the History
it self of that Scythic Briotan's giving the denomination of Britain to this
whole Island, otherwise (and whether before or after his time first of all, it
matters not) called Albion. As for Abraham Wheloc's Saxon Annotations on Bedes
Ecclesiastical History ( l. (...). c. 1. page 25.) where it is observed that
this Island was called Brutaine and Brutannia from the name of Brutus: I am not
moved thereby, because the Saxons had that name from the Britons themselves,
and the Britons though they write it Brutaine, with u, yet pronounce it
Britain with an i. as I am told, by men skilful in their Tongue, they commonly
do in other words written with u. pronounce i. However I am content to
acknowledge here, that in putting the foresaid question, I supposed more than I
ought, and that I passed over in silence for a worse, the far better and more
probable reasons, nay the convincing reasons indeed. What these are, you may
see at large in Buchanan, and before him, sufficiently enough, for some part of
them, in Polydore: who, both the one and the other, demonstrate the whole story
of Brutus to be a mere Fiction; though Henry of Huntingdon, and the Author of
Polychronicon (otherwise reputed good Historians) thought fit to recommend to
all posterity the Fable, out of G^ffrey of Monmouth, as an undoubted Truth.
However we are told (I am sure by Geffrey, for I have him by me) That rutus was
son to Silvius, the son of Ascanius, whom undoubted Monuments of Antiquity
assure us to have been son to Aeneas, and Founder of Alba on Tiber, and Third
King of the Latius. That this very Brutus at the Age of sixteen having by
chance in hunting the Deer, killed his said Father King Ascanius, and being
therefore banished Italy went to Greece. That here assembling together seven
thousand Trojans descended from those who had been brought prisoners thither
when Troy was burned, and heading them, he made War on Pandrasus, the King of
Greece, defeated his Armies, forced his Towns and took himself Prisoner, and
kept him so till by mutual agreement Ignoge the Princess, Daughter to this
King, was given him to Wife, and for a Portion with her besides a great mass of
Gold and Silver, a strong Fleet of three hundred and four and twenty sail, well
provided of all kind of necessaries. That now putting to Sea with his Trojans
and so great a Fleet, to seek his Fortune elsewhere, and coming to a desert
Island by name Largecia, the Oracle of Diana there admonished him to steer his
course for Albion. That in his way thither besides destroying a Fleet of Pirates
that set on him at Sea, and spoiling all Mauritania in Afric from end to end,
landing in France, he first overthrew in Battle Groffarius the Pictish King of
Aquitain, plundered his Towns, overrun his whole Country: and the^ again in a
second mighty Battle defeated both the same Groffarius and all the other eleven
Kings of France with their Forces. That having performed these Wonders there,
he set sail for Albion, which was inhabited then by Giants. [These were a
prodigious Race of See Buchanan l. 2. page 43. ( Impres. Amsterd, anno 1643.)
where he gives an account of this, no less ill-contrived than Monstrous Fable,
added by some later Author than Geoffrey of Monmouth, as if Geoffrey himself
had not store enough of indeed very stupendous Lies.
Monsters, some of them twelve Cubits high, and all of them, or at least their
Predecessors before 'em, begot by Incubi, i. e. Fayery Devils, on the thirty
Daughters of Dioclesian King of Syria and his Wife Labana, who the first night
of their marriage killed their thirty Husbands: and for that cause being forced
to Sea by their said Father, in a ship without Mariners or Pilot, after long
wandering and hovering, arrived at last in Albion, a mere Desert then. Where it
seems notwithstanding they were provided for by those wicked Aerie Demons that
lay with them and procreated of them this horrible Race of Giants.] That upon
his landing here, at a place called Totnes, where all the Giants were in a body
to hinder his descent, he fought them, overthrew them, pursued 'em all over the
Island, destroyed them utterly every where. That having done so, he divided the
whole Country among his Followers; gave them the name of Britons, and to it
that of Britain, from his own name both: then begot Children, especially
three, by name Locrinus, Albanactus, and Camber: then built the famous City of
new Troy (since called London by corruption of the word Luds Town, because one
of his posterity, King Lud not only repaired it but strengthened it with a Wall
and Towers and Bulwarks:) and then, last of all, before his death, making three
Royal Divisions of Britain, and erecting each into a Kingdom, bestowed the
first of them, together with the supreme sovereignty of the other two in some
cases, on his eldest son Locrinus, called then from his name Loegria (by us now
England:) the second on his second son Albanactus, from whose name 'twas called
Albania, though Scotland after: and on his third son Camber the third of those
Divisions, termed likewise from his name Cambria, comprehending at that time
not only the Country now called Wales, but whatever is on that side of the
Severn. That by these brave Princes and their issue after 'em the Noble Cities
of York, Edenburg, Carlisle, Canterbury, Winchester, Shaftsbury, Bath,
Leicester, the Tower of London, Westchester, and Caer-Leon upon Vsk, were from
the foundations built and finished, and the British Nation and Kingdom most
gloriously maintained at home and enlarged abroad even in the very Continent,
well-nigh all over Europe. That not only Ebrancus (the V. King of Great
Britain after Brutus, and Builder of York) with a numerous Fleet invaded
France, ransacked it all over, and returned home triumphantly with the richest
spoils thereof: nor only his twenty sons (which he had by twenty several Wives)
conquered all Germany under the command of one of themselves called Assaracus,
and possessed it a long time after: but Belinus and Brennus, sons to Dunvallo
Mulmutius (the Nineteenth King, as Belinus himself was the XX.) made an
absolute Conquest, first of all the Kingdom of Gaul, now called France, and
soon after of all Italy; not Rome it self excepted, which they took and burnt
to ashes. That Cassibellanus (the Lxv. of the British Monarchs,) when Julius
Caesar invaded them, at two several times, fought him, defeated him both times,
and the second time made him fly to France in such despair that he never more
returned. That in like manner Claudius the Roman Emperor, though come in
person with a mighty power of Legions and Auxiliaries into Britain, found it
his safest way to run away in two great Battles, from the victorious Army of
Guiderius and Arviragus (the Lxvii. and Lxviii. British Monarchs one after
another): in so much that Claudius was content at last 'een fairly to
capitulate for Peace with Arviragus, by sending to Rome for his own Daughter
Gennissa, and giving her in marriage to him, nay and leaving him too the
Government wholly of all these Provincial Islands; for so Geoffrey calls them
in this place. That Severus, how great soever both a Soldier and Emperor he
was, found it a desperate business to fight in Great Britain against the
Brittons, when he saw himself receiving his death's wound from Fulgenius in
that Battle, whence he was carried dead and buried in York. That under
Vortigern their Lxxxvi. Monarch, Hengistus the Saxon, invited in by him, landed
the second time in Great Britain, with an Army of three hundred thousand
Heathen Foreigners: and yet Aurelius Ambrosius (the next British King after
Vortigern) fought him in the head of all his formidable Forces, and in a plain
Field overthrew both him and them all, nay pursued them in their Flight till he
reduced them to nothing, and the whole Island of Britain to its native liberty
from any Foreign Yoke. Nor had his Victories a period here, but overrun
Ireland also; where he took Prisoner, in a great Battle, the Monarch of that
Country, Gillomar; and then brought away Choream Gigantum, the Giants Monument
of stones, from the Plains of Kildare in that Kingdom, which he set up on
Salisbury Plains in England. That Arthur, who was likewise, save one, the next
King of Great Britain (for he was son to Vter Pendragon that Reigned
immediately before him) subdued all England, Scotland, Ireland* the Isles of
Orkney, Denmark, Norway, Gothland, along to Livonia, France, and as many
Kingdoms in all as made up XXX. Yea moreover, i. e. after so many great and
mighty. Conquests, and besides the killing too of Monsters and Giants, fought
even Flollo and Lucius the two Lieutenant Generals of the Roman Emperor Leo,
killed them both in France, and the later of them (I mean Lucius) in the head
of a dreadful Army consisting of four hundred thousand men; all which he
overthrew and ruined. That although by occasion of some unhappy quarrels among
the Britons themselves under Catericus their Lxxxxvi. King, a bad man, the
Saxons to be revenged on them* wrought King Gurmundus the late African
Conqueror of Ireland, to come from thence into Great Britain with an Army of a
hundred sixty six thousand Heathen Africans, and burn, spoil and destroy the
better parts thereof, and after put and leave the Saxons in possession of all
he could; which was that whole Country then called Loegria, now England, as
distinguished both from Scotland and Wales: meaning by Wales the ancient
Kingdom of Cambria which comprehended all beyond the Savern: and that
notwithstanding the Saxons had by such means got possession of all Loegria, and
held it for several years, they were beat out again so soon as the Britons
agreed amongst themselves, meeting at Westchester and choosing there Caduallo
for their King; who bravely recovered the whole Island every way round even to
the four Seas, and kept both Picts and Scots, and such of the Saxons as were
left alive or permitted to stay in perfect obedience to the British Crown
during his own Reign, which lasted forty years in all: and that so did
Cadwallador after him during his. In short, that as the progeny of Fruit
continued free, independent, successful, glorious in the first period of their
Monarchy under sixty six Kings of their own, during at least a thousand years
and forty, from the landing of Brute till the Invasion of Julius Caesar: and as
for the next period, which took up five hundred and nine years more, till the
landing of Hengistus the Saxon, albeit the Roman power and glory did sometimes
lessen, sometime eclipse theirs: yet they preserved still their freedom, and
Laws, and Government under twenty other Kings of their British Nation,
successively reigning over them, and paying only a slight acknowledgment of
some little tribute to the Roman Emperors; nay and this same but now and then,
very seldom: so in the third or last period of it; containing somewhat above
two hundred and fifty years, from the said landing of Hengistus to the twelfth
year of Cadwallador, they upon the Romans quitting them, not only restored
themselves, under Aurelius and Arthur, by their own sole valor, to the ancient
glory of their Dominion; but, maugre all the opposition of the Confederated
Saxons, Picts and Scots, now and then rebelling against them, enjoyed it under
the succession of seven British Kings more, from Arthur to Cadwallador; yea
Malgo* the fourth of this very last number, when the six foreign Provincial
Countries (as Geoffrey calls them) viz. Ireland, Island, the Orcades, Norway,
Denmark, and Gothia, had rebelled anew, was so fortunately brave, as by dint of
Sword to have reduced them all again to their old subjection under Great
Britains Empire.

Add moreover, that Cadwallador himself, albeit the last of this Trojan Race
wielding the S^^pter of Great Brutus, enjoyed the same Glorious Power that his
Predecessors had before him over the whole extent of this Noble Island. That
the total change and utter downfall of the British Government, happening after
in his days, proceeded only from an absolute Decree of Heaven and mighty Anger
of God incensed against the Brittons for their sins; but neither in the whole
nor in part, from any Power of the Saxons or other Enemies or men upon Earth.

That the immediate visible means, which God made use of to destroy them
irrecoverably were 1. A most bloody fatal Division (after some years of this
Cadwallador's reign) happening among them, yea continuing so long and to such a
degree, that between both sides all the fruitful Fields were laid waste; no man
caring to till the ground. 2. The consequence of this waste, a cruel Famine
over all the Land. 3. A Plague so prodigiously raging, that the number of the
Living was not sufficient to bury the Dead.

That the Almighty's hand lying so heavy on them by so dreadful a Pestilence,
was it alone that forced Cadwallador in the twelfth year of his Reign to retire
for some time into Little Britanny in France. That after ten years more when
this Epidemical Plague had been wholly over, and Cadwallador prepared to ship
his Army and return, a voice of Thunder by Angelical Ministry spoke to him
from Heaven, commanding him aloud to desist from his Enterprise, and telling
him in plain terms, it was decreed above unalterably, The Race of Brutus should
bear no more sway in Great Britain till the time were come which Merlin had
prophesied of to King Arthur. And, to conclude all, That in pure obedience to
this Voice of God, it was that Cadwallador, giving over his designed return,
and instead thereof going to Rome, and soon after dying there (upon the 12th of
the Calends of May, in the Year of our Lord 689) left his Country a prey to
the Saxons, who till then could never subdue it, nor prevail against the
Brittons; but were themselves always overthrown, and forced all along e'n by so
many British Kings in succession from Aurelius and Arthur to Caduallo, either
to fly the Land, or submit to their mercy.

All which in substance, and much more at large we are told by Geoffrey
Galfridus Monumetensis in his Latin History de Origin and Gestis Britannorum,
printed at Paris by Ascensius Badius, Anno 1517.

But the fourth Book of this Romantic story i^ wholly taken up with the
deceitful Prop^ecies of Merlin, though Prophecles much augmented (says
Neubrigensis) by additions of Geoffrey's own inventive Brain, which he foisted
in as Merlin's. Nor has been ashamed to endeavor to make us believe that
Merlin was a great and wonderful and true Prophet indeed; yea notwithstanding
that Merlin's own Mother confessed him to be the Son of an Incubus Devil. See
Galfridus himself, l. 3. c. 3.


of Monmouth in his seven Books of History, and out of him by others. Only
(besides my summing up the number of Kings, and fixing the period of times, and
contracting the whole story, and digesting it into this order and Method) give
me leave to except the particular of Dioclesian the Syrian King's thirty
Daughters, and the Incubi Devils, with their Gigantic procreation. For this I
had from Buchanan's relation of it ( l. 2. Rer. Scot.) as added by some others
to supply a defect of so much in the new History of Galfridus.

45. But as William of Newbery (commonly called in Latin, Neubrigensis) this
Geoffrey's own Contemporary in England, has (in Proemio Histor.) five hundred
years since reflected with much freedom and tartness on the Vanity,
incredibility, and falsity of his History in general, and more particularly on
that part of it which represents King Arthur such a wonderful Hero: so has in
later times Polydore Virgil first, and after him George Buchanan ruined the
very foundation of the whole Fabric; I mean, the very Being or Existence of
Brute himself at any time on Earth. And certainly, in my opinion, the reasons
of Polydore seem convincing enough to any unbiased man. For, says he l. 2.
Histor. Anglic.) neither Titus Livius, nor Dionysius Halicarnasseus, nor any of
those other Authors that most diligently write of Roman Antiquities have one
syllable of this Brutus. Nor could any thing concerning so much as either his
Name or Existence be fetched from the ancient Annals of Great Britain: seeing
that five hundred years, or thereabouts, before this new History of Galfridus
had been contrived, Gildas (I mean the true, and not the supposititious one)
complained, that if ever the ancient Britons his Contrymen, had any such or
other Annals at all, they were undoubtedly either perished in the War at home,
or carried away so far abroad as no news could be had of them. Besides, the
particular of the taking of Rome by Belinus and Brennus quite over-throws all
both Fabric and foundation of this New History, if we compute the times set
down in it, and compare them with those in the Greek and Roman Chronicles. For
in this New History not only Brute is said to have conquered Albion about the
tenth year after his Father Silvius had been killed, which was the year of the
World 4100; but the two Brothers Belinus and Brennus (sons to Molmutius the XX.
King, and they the XXI. Generation from Brute) are said to have taken Rome
about four hundred years after the same Brute had conquered this Island. And
yet according to the Epitome or account of times both in Eusebius and all other
as well Greek as Latin Histories, Rome was taken by Brennus and his Gauls even
after full seven hundred years and ten had been over from the foresaid year
wherein Brute is said by the new History to have entered Albion. So that by
this new History Brennus must have taken Rome three hundred and ten years
before it was really taken at all. Then which, I think, nothing can be desired
more convincing to ruin both the Fabric and foundation of this Romance of
Brute. And so in effect has Polydors thought before me.

But if you would have more, yea many more unanswerable arguments on this
Subject: you may consult George Buchanan where he has them at large, L. 2.
Histor. Scot. For, as it ought to be no part of my purpose here to compare or
confront so many, or indeed any of those vain particulars in the new History of
Brute, either with the Commentaries of Caesar, or Annals and History of
Tacitus, or his Life of Agricola, or Venerable Bedes Ecclesiastical History of
the English, or the Saxon Chronology published by Wheloc, or the most ancient
Monuments of the Irish, or any other sacred or profane of so many other
Kingdoms of Europe, or with Reason it self: so it is neither any part of it, to
dilate or give those manifold arguments of Buchanan, though they be directly
home against the very foundation of the same new History, or the Being or
Existence at any time of Brute.

It suffices me in this place to have given the reasons of Polydore against
it. My purpose here being no other, than (in relation to the above passage in
my eighth and ninth page) to conclude out of all, That the Irish Cronologers
and Historians have at least much more probability on their side in asserting
unanimously that their true Briotan who descended of Nemedus, and planted a
Colony in the North part of this great Island so early, was he that gave the
whole Island the denomination of Britain from his own name, than they on the
other side have, who, if the arguments hitherto be conclusive, tell us in
effect, that a false and forged Brutus, one that never was in Being should have
given it.

And indeed, the Authority of the Irish Monuments in the Psalter of Cashel, an
authentic Book of Irish Histories, written above eight hundred years since by
so great and knowing and holy a man as Cormack; who was at the same time both
King and Bishop of Mounster: and the further derivation of the more remote
Antiquities inserted in it from that other Book much more ancient yet, which
above one thousand two hundred years since, in the composing or collecting of
it out of all the former Chronicles of that Nation, from the very first
Plantations of it, had been, in the Parliament or National Assembly of all the
Estates at Tarach under Laogirius the Monarch, supervised and agreed upon by
the choicest Committee they could appoint of three Antiquaries, three Kings and
three Bishops, whereof S. Patrick himself was one; over-ballances by much the
credit of Geoffrey of Menmouth in his new History of Brutus, written by him no
earlier than Henry II. Reign, and opposed, nay quite run down by his own
Contemporaries so soon as it came out.

Which notwithstanding, and whatever else I have given any where in this
Reflection, on my own foresaid eighth and ninth page, I desire may be
understood by the Reader, as I intended it, i. e. without any prejudice or
diminution of the great and known both Antiquity and bravery of the British
Nation, whencesoever they have truly derived the name of Brittons for
themselves, or that of Britain for their Country. Of the former, I mean their
Antiquity, Julius Caesar is a witness beyond exception, where he speaks in his
Commentaries (L. v.) of the inland people of Britain, as if they had been
Aborigenes, without any derivation from elsewhere abroad; quos natos in Insula,
memoria proditum dicunt, says he. Of the later, both Tacitus and Beda, Writers
no less unexceptionable, have recorded to Posterity very considerable
Instances. The one, in his Annals and History, and Agricola's Life, telling
their fierce Fights, and sometimes their successes too against the Roman
Generals, in their own Country Great Britain. The other, in his
Ecclesiastical History of England, acknowledging several great Victories had by
them both in the same Island their own Country over his Countrymen the Saxons
that invaded them; nay, particularly telling us (in the 16th chap. of his First
Book) of two very special Victories, the first under the leading of Aurelius
Ambrosius, the second in Black more about that place, where Scarborough Castle
is now, called by Polidore in his History Mons Badonicus: adding withal, that
after the first overthrow given by them, although sometimes worsted, yet they
continued the War with great resolution, worsting also not seldom their Foes,
until at last they hemmed them in about the said Hill or Mountain Badonicus, and
made a mighty slaughter of them there. Which happened, says Bid in the forty
fourth year after the first landing of the Saxons. Above all, the Defense made
by the Relics of them in Wales, after their Kingdom had been utterly
destroyed upon Cadwallador's withdrawing to France, yea made and continued by
them for seven hundred years, and their fighting so long for their Liberty,
against the Saxons first, and Normans after, till they obtained honorable
Conditions at last from Edward I. are sufficient arguments of their Martial
Spirit and brave Souls, however Fortune frowned upon them.

And as I ought to be so ingenuous in acknowledging what I have now done
concerning that Nation in general: so likewise, in reference to Jeffry himself,
I will be so just as to acknowledge what he says of the hand of God that lay so
heavy upon them at last, even to their utter destruction, by the mortal Feuds
and cruel Famine, and most destructive of all the Pestilence that followed. For
besides this one particular of those three heavy scourges from God, which I
must confess are attested by V. Bid himself ( l. 1. cap. 12, and 14.) there is
little else of truth to be acknowledged in the whole Summary given before, of
that Romantic History of Galfridus. Tho Richard White of Basingstoke has in
our days written and printed a Latin History of his own, pursuing in most
particulars the good Example given by him: and to make it the more known, has
prefixed unto it an Epistle Dedicatory to Albertus Archduke of Austria, etc.

45. In my 13. page I spoke somewhat of the causes moving the eight sons of
Milesius, after his death, to think seriously of invading Ireland. But I might
have added, How their consultation about this matter was held in Breoghuin's
Tower in Gallicia. How it was from thence they employed Ith (or Ithius) their
Uncle on the Father's side (as being son to Breoghuin their great Grandfather)
in a ship well provided, and manned with a hundred and fifty stout Soldiers, to
discover the state of Ireland. How Ith having landed in Mounster, and there
understood that Cearmada's three sons, who as three Kings ruled Ireland
alternatively, were together at Oileach Neidh in the North, but at some
difference among themselves about the Jewels of their Ancestors, went thither
by Land, accompanied with a hundred of his men; the ship failing about with the
rest to meet him there. How being come to Oileach, and honorably received by
the sons of Cearmada, and, because he was a stranger and consequently
indifferent in their dispute, being chosen Arbitrator of it, he decided their
quarrel to all their satisfaction: first by dividing the Jewels equally betwixt
them: and then exhorting them to mutual love and peace: adding withal very much
in praise of their delightsom plentiful Country. How when he had taken leave
of them to return to his ship for Spain, the eldest of the Three reflecting on
the high praises he gave the Land, and fearing his design should be to bring
others to invade them, breaks his jealousy to the other two, and with their
consent and some armed Troops pursues Ith, overtakes him, fights him, routs his
men, wounds himself deadly, and leaves him in that condition of a dead man
grovelling on the Earth at a place called from that Fight and his Name Magh Ith.
How the few survivers of his men headed by his own son carried away his body a
shipboard, where he died of his wounds; but they nevertheless arrived in Spain,
and coming to their Cousins the eighth Brothers, exposed it before them all, of
purpose to excite and hasten their revenge. And in the last place, how that
although as well these as those, i. e. all the Milesians in general, and their
Cousins and adherents made this killing, or this murder, (which you please to
call it) committed on the said Ithius and his men, the pretense of their
Invasion and War, and consequently of the justice of their quarrel, and
following Conquest of that Country by them: yet the whole History makes it
plain, That 'twas no other indeed but a mere pretense: being Ithius went
thither as a mere Spy to discover the Country: and that they were resolved to
invade it upon their return, whet^er he had or had not met with any injury or
pretense of injury there. All which I note of purpose here: because it may be
usefully in the second Part of this Treatise, on another occasion, related to
again.

46. In the mean while, and in this very place, the Reader will give me leave
to observe a thing that may prevent some question or some admiration about the
sons of Cearmada choosing Ithius their Arbitrator. For it may be peradventure
asked, how they understood one another? or what Language did he or they speak
their s^ntiments in? or was it by Interpreters they Discoursed? etc. But the
Irish Historians prevent such demands by telling us, that all the several
Invasions of Ireland (only the first plantation of it by Ciocal, which properly
was no Invasion, excepted) whether by Partholan, or Neimhedh, or Fea^a-bolg, or
Tuath-D^-Danan, were by Scythians, descended from Japhet, who for their
Language had the Irish Tongue ( Gaodhlec, as it is called originally by it self)
common to them all, no less than the Milesians themselves and all other
Gathelians whatsoever had the same very speech their Mother Tongue though with
some difference in the Dialect. So that only those I called once the Aborigenes
of Ireland, I mean the progeny of Ciocal and his followers descended from the
accursed Cham, and come out of Africa, had another peculiar Language of their
own.

57. Though I have page 15. said, the Antiquity of the Milesian Irish to be
nowhere paralleled, if not peradventure among the Chinese only, etc. I hope
no man will understand me so, as to think I would not have still excepted the
Children of Israel, had I feared that any would entertain such a thought of my
meaning as would need the exception. I am sure none could justly do so, that
pleased to consider what I said before, page 5. viz. That the Milesians had not
before two hundred eighty three years after Moses's passing the Red Sea landed
in Ireland. For until then, whatever they were called, it is plain they could
not be called Irish, because this name they derived from that Island where they
never lived before this time. And it is no less plain that before this time the
Children of Israel had, as a free and brave and conquering Nation, inhabited
Palestin, at least two hundred and forty years: had also lived forty years in
the Wilderness: and before that too, had been a great numerous people in Egypt,
where they lived in all, from the descent of Jacob out of Canaan thither, till
their departure under Moses, through the Red Sea, two hundred and fifteen
years, (as Josephus expressly tells in his Antiq. L. iii. c. vi.) though under
great bondage for some part thereof. And therefore to them or their ancientness
I could not intend to compare that of the Milesians, nor as now become Irish,
no nor as Gathelians neither. For Gathelus himself the original stock of all
the Gathelians, and consequently of the Milestans, being these were only a
branch of those, was but a youth in Egypt with his Father Niull when Moses
crossed the Red Sea, as we have lately seen at large.

48. Yet in the 18th Page, I must confess there is an Error committed, by
saying that the six sons of Muredus (alias, in Irish, Muiriach) King of Vlster
went to Scotland under the Monarchy of Laogirius (or Laoghaire) King of
Ireland. But I have corrected it, page 93. where you read, it was in the
Twentieth year of this Monarch's Successor and son Lugha, they invaded Scotland.

49. Whether Niall Naoihghiallach did, or did not order Albania to be called
Scotia, as Keting says he did (whereof see the same 18th page:) you are
nevertheless to know, that the most eminent Antiquary Prim^t. Usher has
sufficiently evinced ( de Primord. page 784.) That as neither Dalrieda nor
Argathelia (alias Argyle) though the proper Seat of the Scots inhabiting
Britain until the year 840. so neither the whole Country of Albania, even
after that year, had ever been called Scotia by any Writer, until about the
year of Christ 1100. when both Nations, I mean the Picts and Scots, were come
by degrees to make one people. And that Marianus Scotus, who flourished at that
time was one of the very first Authors that called it by this name of Scotia.
Where you are further to observe, that according to this most learned Primat's
account of the confinement of the foresaid Scots to their ancient Dominions of
Dalriada and Argyle, it was the year of Christ 840. before they had enlarged
themselves by overthrowing and subduing the whole Kingdom of the Picts. Which
is a hundred years later than my account of this matter out of Cambden, in my
said 18. Page.

50. Page 19. where I supposed, that the Nine several Countries or Nations
forced to deliver every one of them Hostages to Niall the Great (otherwise, and
from the nine several sorts of Hostages, surnamed in Irish Naoighiallach, in
Latin Noui-Obses) were only the five Provinces of Ireland, and the distinct
Dominions of the Dal-Rheudans, Picts, and other Inhabitants of that Country we
now call Scotland: there I followed Keting. But after having lighted on the
Author of Cambrensis Eversus, and found in him That the great Irish Antiquary
Joannes Colganus in his Trias Taumaturga, Gratianus Lucius, page 299.
page 447. number 56.
had otherwise counted those nine Countries and Nations: I thought fit, as
occasion was offered page 221. to count or give them as he did, viz. Mounster,
Leinster, Connaght, Vlster, the Brittons, Picts, Dal-Rheudans, Saxons, and
Morini (a People of France toward Calice and Picardy.) For the word Saxons is
in the said later page omitted through the Printers fault. And yet I cannot but
acknowledge, that if Niall the Great had any Hostages from the Saxons, he must
either have taken 'em at Sea, or from the Coasts of Germany, the Higher or
Lower, but by no means from Great Britain. Because Niall was killed in France,
anno Dom. 405. as the foresaid Author of Cambr. Euers. Gratianus Lucius himself
does write in the short Account he gives of this Monarchs Reign: and the Saxons
were not come into Great Britain before the year of Christ 440. (as Polydore
Virgil, in his Reign of Vortigern says) that is forty four years after the said
Niall the Great Naoighiallach had left behind him all his Hostages, and ended
all his Greatness in this World.

51. With the Battle, or loss, or name of Coilus, as King of Great Britain,
mentioned by me page 19. though I took it from Keting, and quoted Buchanan, as
he does, and find by reading Buchanan himself, that Keting has rightly quoted
him; yet now I am not my self otherwise affected with it than to reject it
utterly. And my reason is, not only Buchanans fixing the time of that Battle,
fought, as he says, between Coilus King of the Brittons and Fergus I. King of
the Scots, eight or nine hundred years before this very Fergus came from
Ireland: nor only Buchanan's borrowing this whole story out of Hector Boethius,
whom Humphry Lloyd calls hominem impurissimum, a most impure Author, and
Lucius, Scriptorem corruptissimum, a most corrupt Writer, nay one who in the
far greater part of his History scarce delivers any truth at all: but the very
name of Coilus here, deriving its original from the fertile invention of
Geoffrey of Monmouth's new History of Brutus. For it is only in this Romance we
find the first mention of any Coilus among the Kings of Great Britain. And
there indeed, I must confess, we have not only one, but three Monarchs of this
Island bearing that name. The first of them being the fortieth King, in order
of time; the second, being the seventieth second King; and the last, whom he
names Coel. being the seventy ninth, according to Geoffrey's disposition of
them and my account out of him. But I must withal acknowledge, that he has not a
word nor a syllable either of the first or last of these Three, save only the
bare names of Coilus and Coel, hudled in among so many other mostly too bare
names of other pretended British Kings. Neither has he any more of the very
Second Coilus than that he was the son of King Marius, and the Father of King
Lucius the First Christian King of Great Britain: and that having in his youth
been bred at Rome, he continued after, even all along his Reign, both devoted
to the Roman State, and in Peace with all his Neighbors. And therefore the
rest of the story in Buchanan, either of this or any other Coilus, must be a
later additional Invention: and, in reference to the real true Records of
Antiquity, as ill contrived as might be; though answerably enough to the
foundation laid for such a superstructure of the new History of Brute and his
Descendants.

But since we are occasionally returned again to this famed Work of Galfridus
Monumetensis, whereof you have elsewhere so lately had from my own reading it
over a pretty just Summary; give me leave here to let you see out of others as
just a censure of it. Give me leave to tell you, that Alanus Copus has compared
it with Ovids Metamorphosis and Lucians Tales. That William Neubrigensis has
spent even three whole Leaves (in Prooem. Hist.) to demonstrate by instance of
particulars, how it is wholly composed of the most improbable, incredible, and
ungrounded Lies that ever were invented. That Cambden also in his Britannia
relates to others, who stick not to say, it is all patched up of untunable
discords and jarring absurdities; yea, composed of such Milesian Fables, such
intolerable mere inventions of the Authors own brain, that the Roman Church at
last thought fit to enroll it in the Index of Prohibited Books. Yea that
Cambrensis himself, though a Britton by birth and blood, and as desirous of the
glory of his Contrymen as any could be, gives it nevertheless the Character
of a fabulous History; as you may see in his Description of Wales, cap. 7. Nay
that in his Itinerary of Wales, l. 1. c. 5. he tells us that, and the occasion
and manner how, the Devils were seen leaping and skipping and dancing on it.

However, and though it be manifest, that as well these Censures, as the
Summary aforesaid, are sufficient, even each of them apart, to ruin the story
of Coilus and Fergus in Buchanan, which derives originally from Galfridus, and
ultimately relies on his invention: I shall nevertheless give now another
Argument, showing more peculiarly, how little Faith ought to be given him in
his Catalogue of British Kings, and consequently none at all to his naming of
Coilus among them. In his Seventh Book, Chap. V. where he so confidently
relates the mighty Battle fought and overthrow given by King Arthur in France
to those four hundred thousand Romans, and their Auxiliaries, mentioned before,
part Europeans, part Asians, and the rest Affricans, under many Kings come to
assist the Roman Emperor against Arthur: he has also the brazen brow to invent
not only those three names of the Emperor himself and his two Lieutenant
Generals, which we have seen before; but many more of the Auxiliary Kings: viz.
Epistrephus King of Greece, Mustemphar King of Parthia, Aliafatina King of
Spain, Hirtacus King of Affric, Boetus King of the Medes, Sextorius King of
Libya, Teucer King of Phrygia, Xerxes King of the Itureans, Pandrasus King of
Egypt, Misipsa King of Babylon, Politetes Duke of Bithynia, Teucer Duke of
Phrygia, Evander of Syria, Ethion of Boetia, (sure it should be Beotia)
Hippolitus of Creet, etc. whereas indeed there were no such names or men, and
most of these Countries named by him in the last place, were but Provinces then
under the Roman or Constantinopolitan Empire, and no Kings nor Dukes, but only
Presidents ruling them under the Emperor. Wherefore, if he could so boldly
invent such a list of Kings abroad in the World, for the sixth Age of
Christianity, wherein he could be so easily disproved by a thousand arguments:
we have no reason to think that for home and those early Ages of the World,
wherein he could not be disproved by any Records, he did otherwise than merely
forge his Catalogue of British Kings. And these are the Reasons that moved me
to this Reflection upon that story of Coilus and Fergus in Buchanan, as related
out of him in my foresaid 19th page. And the same reasons, or at least a
sufficient part of them, makes me likewise not insist now upon the name of
Notium, which you have seen before ( page 13.) given to Breoghuin's Tower in
Gallicia. It was (I doubt not) borrowed by Keting from Hector Boethius, who
says in express terms, that place was called first Brigantia, but after Notium,
and last of all Compostella. I know there is a Promontory in D^smond the South
of Mounster, which is by Cambden in his Map of Ireland, called Notium; but
whether from any of that name in North Spain, or elsewhere I know not.

54. But what is more material to be noted occasioually in this place, is
Buchanans account of Fergus: and the rather because he seems to give it from
the Scottish Historians in general. He says, that this very Fergus (pretended
by him to have been the over-thrower of Coilus, and by Hector Boethius to have
also been the son of Ferchardus King of Ireland) was the Founder of the
Scottish Kingdom in Albania, and first of all the Kings of the Scots inhabiting
Great Britain. That he came to Albania (or Scotland) about the time of
Alexander the Great's taking Babylon, almost 331. years before the Birth of
Christ. And that within twenty four years more, having reigned in all so long,
in his return from Ireland (whither he had gone back from Scotland to quiet
some disturbances there) he perished at Sea in a Tempest, near that Rock in the
North of Ireland, which, from his wrack hard by, is ever since called in Latin
Rupes Fergusii, (in Irish Carrig-Fhearuis, by us Knock-Fergus.) So says
Buchanan: and so said before him Hector Boethius and some others of his
Countrymen Historians: both he and they either seeming to know nothing at all
of those Annals and Books whence only the real true History of their
Antiquities could be known: or else wittingly and willingly to have taken up a
fabulous story, of purpose to establish a glorious succession of a hundred and
seven Kings of the same Nation reigning one after another from that Fergus I.
to James VI. even for above 1900 years. Whatever the cause might be, the one or
the other, or perhaps (which is likely enough) both together: it is plain out
of the ancient Annals and other Histories of Ireland (which are indeed the only
Fountain of all such truly real Scottish Antiquities, as concern at least the
Irish Invaders and time of their Invasion of any part of Great Britain) that
Buchanan, and those followed by him have created the said Fergus I. King of the
Scots in Albania, even 819 years before he landed from Ireland in Britain. For
those Irish Monuments fix on the year of Christ 498. the time of Fergus Mor (as
they call him, son to Ercho, Nephew to Eochadh Muinreamhar) and of his five
Brothers with him invading the North of Britain. And Tigernacus, who commonly
delivers in Latin what was done abroad, as what was done at home in Irish, has
of the present subject this following passage: Fergus Mor mhac Ercha, id est
Fergusius Magnus Erci filius, cum Gente Dalrieta partem Britanniae tenuit, and
ibi mortu^s est, etc. That is, Fergus Mor the son of Erch with his people of
Dal-Riada, possessed himself of part of Britain, and died there about the
first year of the Popedom of Symmachus. Which was the year of Christ 498. as
Primat Usher has rightly observed. Besides, the old Irish Book containing the
Synchronism, or (if I may so speak) the contemporariness, not only of the
Monarchs and Provincial Kings of Ireland, but of the Kings in Albania too,
expressly relates how it was in the twentieth year after the Bat^^l of Ocha,
that the six sons of Ercho, viz. the two Enguses, the two Loarns, (some Copies
have Coarns) and the two Ferguses (whereof one was this Fergus the Great)
passed over into Albania.

I say nothing how Nennius translated into Irish among O Duncgans Miscellanies,
says, it was in the sixth Age of the World (...) ^ (...) the Dal-Riadans had
conquered part of the Country of the Picts, and the Saxons entered on other
parts of Great Britain. Nor do I insist on O Duucgan himself, though he most
minutely prosecutes this Adventure of Ercho's Children, telling the Families
issued from them in Scotland (which he calls Albain) what Lordships or Lands
each of them was possessed of there, and what Forces by Land or Sea they
usually raised.

But what I am particularly to observe is, that of all hands among the Irish
Annalists and Historians it is without any contradiction admitted, That this
Fergus the Great, son to Ercho, is the same with Fergusius I. King of the
Scots, though in Boethius, Major, Buchanan, etc. called in Latin the son of
Ferchardus. That the foresaid Battle of Ocha, wherein the Irish Monarch
Oillioll Molt perished, was fought in the year of Christ 478. And that from
this year to the year 498. there is no man but sees the just interval must be
those twenty years on expiration whereof the foresaid Book of Sync^ronisin
relates the passing of Fergus Mor to Britain. And the issue of all must be,
that certainly as to this particular, either all the ancient Irish Annals and
Monuments, besides the late Histories of Keting and Lucius are extraordinary
false: or Buchanan and Hector Boethius, and all other Scottish Authors followed
by them are extremely out. Even so far out as to have at least inverted the
whole succ^ssion, descent, line and genealogy of their Kings, by giving us a
Catalogue with the Lives and Reigns of two or three and forty Kings as
descended Lineally from Fergusius I. before he had been existent on Earth. For
Congallus is the Xliiii. King in Buchanan, etc. and yet the eighteenth year of
this very Congallus, according to Buchanans computation, must have been the
year of our Lord 498. in which all the Irish Records place the landing of
Fergus Mor in Scotland, tho the very first of the Catalogue in him and other
Historians followed by him. Moreover, and which yet is no less considerable
than any of the former Arguments, we may take notice that Buchanan and his
Authors make Reuda the sixth King of those in his Catalogue, descended from
Fergus. Then which nothing can be more plain against all the Irish Antiquities.
To say nothing of V. Bid in his Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 1. whom you may
consult at leisure. But for the Irish Chronicles, I am sure they tell us
particularly, that the Monarch of Ireland Conaire mhac Mogha Lauae had three
sons, called the Three Carbry's viz. Cairbre Muisck, from whom the Tract of
Musckry, and Cairbre Baisckin, from whom the Land of Corca bhaiskin, both in
Mounster, has denomination, and Cairbre Riada, alias Riadhfada. That this last
of the Three was the first Irish Conqueror of the Country in Albania, which
bore his name, being called in Irish Dal-Riada (in English the Part of Riada)
and by Latin Writers Dal-rieta, Dal-Reuda; and the Inhabitants Dal-Reudini, as Bede calls 'em. And that his foresaid Father, the Irish Monarch Conaire mhac
Mogha Lauae, having reigned in Ireland eight years, was killed in the year of
the World 5364. being the year of Christ 165. Whence it must follow that his
said son Cairbre, surnamed Riada in Irish, though by V. Bid and others called
Reuda, must have invaded the Picts, and possessed himself of that part of their
Country named from him, at least three hundred years before the time of Pergus
the Great, who, as we have seen before, invaded not Albania till the year of
Christ 498. So wide, in this very particular of Reuda, is the Irish account and
History from the Scottish in Buchanan.

How to reconcile the difference in either particular, being it is so great,
and concerns so great a succession of Kings, and Ages too for at least 819
years, I leave to such as shall please to concern themselves in it, more than
my purpose in this place requires I should my self. But let them withal take
these further Animadversions to thought. 1. That the Father of this Fergusius
the Great, however you call him, Erck, Ercho, Ercha, or either (as Buchanan has
it) Ferchardus, or any other name whatsoever, was never King of Ireland; as no
more was Fergus M^^ himself, notwithstanding Buchanan's intimation to the
contrary, but only a Brother to Muirchiortach the Irish Monarch that reigned
over all Ireland from the year of Christ 503, to the year 527. wherein he was
murdered. 2. That Joannes Major himself, though a Scotchman, has, (in his
little History of Great Britain, cap. X.) reflected on that Vulgar Error in
the Annals of Scotland, where they place Fergusius I. before Reuda's time, 3.
That Hollingshed (in his English Translation of Hector Boethius) professes
himself to be of Opinion, That very many of those Kings, related by the
Scottish Histories to have reigned successively one after another in Scotland,
were such as neither successively, nor in Scotland, but together at the same
time reigned part of them in Ireland, and part in other adjacent lesser
Islands. 4. That Gratianus Lucius (in his Camb. Evers. page 93.) adds moreover,
Himself to think not improbably, that the Scottish Authors borrowed a great
number of their Kings, from those indeed that were Pictish Kings. Where, to
ground this Opinion of his, he produces an old Irish Translation of Ninnius; I
mean as to the Catalogue of Pictish Kings in that ancient Author: and fixes in
particular on eighteen of them by name, among which is one Gregory, albeit
Gregory be the Lxxiii. King of Scots in Buchanan's Catalogue, and that King too
in whom Buchanan glories so much as to record him to posterity by the Title of
Gregory the Great, which he says was deservedly given him by his own People. 5.
That although, in Buchanan's account, this very Gregory began his Regn an.
Christi 870. and finished it by his death anno 892. and consequently was not
only King of Scots, but of Scotland, being the Pictish Kingdom there (at least
as it is commonly supposed) had been utterly destroyed, full thirty years before
the very first of his Reign: yet if his being either King of Scotland or King
of Scots be no truer than Buchanan's Relation of his invading Ireland, fighting
a great Battle victoriously there against the two Protectors or Tutors of the
young King Duncanus a Minor, and then visiting this young King at Dublin where
he resided, and then appointing new Tutors for him, and last of all taking with
him to Scotland threescore Irish Hostages out of the several Provinces of
Ireland: I dare say there was never any such thing, or Person or Prince as
Gregory King of Scots. For besides what I have given before ( page 23 and 24.)
to disprove this great fiction of Gregory the Great, either conquering or at
all invading Ireland: it is clear out of all the Irish Antiquities recording the
Danish Wars, that not the Irish, nor any Irish King, Minor or not Minor, did
possess Dublin at that time, but the Danes. And indeed, to confirm this truth,
the Annals of Vlster tell us, that in the year of our Lord 871. two great
Danish Captains, viz. Ainlaph and Juor came from Albania to Ath-Cliath (alias
Dublin) with two hundred sail, and an exceeding great Prey of English, and
Brittons, and Picts. whom they brought Captives to Ireland. So that Dublin most
certainly was, in the Reign of that Gregory of Scotland, not under any Monarch
or other Irish King, as no more was it in a hundred and fifty years following,
but in the power of the Danes, who were at least the first Re-builders of it
much about the same time that Buchanan supposes it to have been the
Metropolitan City of Ireland; tho it came not to be so till Henry the Second's
Reign. For he indeed was the first King or Lord of Ireland that ever kept his
Court there, and by appointing it the Residence of his Viceroys gave it in a
little time so great splendour, that the Forger seeing it so in his own time,
thought fit in much earlier times to place his forged Irish Monarch (of Gregory
of Scotlands story) Duncanus in it as in the Royal Mansion of the Kings of
Ireland. Whereas to the contrary, nothing is more known in the Irish Histories,
than that the City of Tarach full twenty miles from Dublin, was the Royal Seat
of the Kings of Ireland, till its destruction by the first Danish War, and in
the same days Dublin at best but a very mean place respectively. 6. That
nevertheless, as I am apt enough to believe, that, allowing Cambden the liberty
of an hyperbolical expression, he has upon sufficient grounds told us, that the
Earls of Argile derive their Race from the ancient Princes and Potentates of
Argile, by an infinite descent of Ancestors: so I am verily persuaded that by
how much the Genealogy of Kings must be more narrowly sifted than that of any
Subjects, by so much Gratianus Lucius has upon surer grounds exactly derived in
a direct Line the descent of James the sixth of Scotland, and first of Great
Britain, not only through so many Kings his Predecessors of Scotland from the
ancient Kings of Argile, up along to Fergus I. nor only from those before that
very Fergus, through fourteen Generations up to Reuda: but even before this
Reuda, through fifty three Generations, whereof Twenty four were Monarchs of
Ireland, up along to Herimon, the first sole absolute Monarch of the Milesian
blood in that Kingdom, even so long since as Three thousand years, wanting only
seven. Nay, I am likewise persuaded, that he has also very exactly in two other
Lines, carried up the descent of the same King James, through thirty one other
Monarchs of Ireland to the said Herimon: as also in a fourth and fifth Line
through four and twenty more of the Irish Monarchs (and here I mean twenty four
more wholly different from all those fifty six already given of Herimons Race.)
up along to Heber; who being the stock in these two last Lines, makes the 25th
King of Ireland in this number ascending upwards: for so he was (during his
short life) in a joint Sovereignty, with his foresaid Brother Herimon. 7. That
undoubtedly this derivation of King James through so many Lines for three
thousand years, and from the Loins of eighty one Irish Monarchs, besides all
the truly real both Kings of Scotland, and Kings of Scots or Dal-Riada and
Argathelia in Scotland, given us at large by Gratianus Lucius (in his Camb.
Evers. page 242. 243, and 244.) as it is by many degrees a much more ancient,
so it is a much more glorious derivation of the Royal Pedigree, than either
Buchanan, or Boethius, or Major, or indeed any other Scottish Historian, nay or
even any Scottish Herald whatsoever among those called English Scots, was
capable to make even so much as in any manner, well or ill, as being wholly
ignorant of the Irish Antiquities, which they could neither understand nor
read, if they had had 'em.

And these are the Animadversions I desire them take to thought who shall
either persuade themselves they can reconcile the difference 'twixt the
Scottish and Irish Histories concerning Fergus, or except against me for laying
it open, how justly soever the story of Him and Coilus, given by me ( page 20)
out of Buchanan, has put a necessity on me to do so here.

There is a passage in my 21 page, that says, The Romans built Towers and
Bulwarks all along the Southern Coast of Britain, at convenient distances,
against the landing of the Irish on that side out of their plundering Fleets.
Herein also I followed my Author Keting, if I understand him rightly. But
having since consulted Cambden, I found that either Keting had mistaken the
matter, or I him. For the truth is, that albeit in relation to the Caledonians,
or Picts, and Scots inhabiting, or those driven at that time to the Countries
lying North of Grahams Dyke, the foresaid Towers or Castles, must be
acknowledged built in the South; yet in relation to the whole Island of Great
Britain, or to us now in England, they were not so. Which, and whatever else
concerning either that Dyke or Wall of the Romans, that you may the more fully
understand, take this following Extract out of Cambden, according to Hollands
translation of him. Camden in his Scotia. and Sterling Sheriffdom.
Julius Agricola observing the narrow land or Straight by which Dunbritton
Frith and Edenborough Frith are held from commixing, fortined this space
between with Garrisons. So as all the part this side was then in possession of
the Romans; the Enemies removed, and as it were driven into another Island. In
so much as Tacitus judged right truly, there was no other limit of Britain to
be sought for. Neither verily in the time ensuing did either the valor of
Armies, or Glory of the Roman name, which scarcely could be stayed, set out the
Marches of the Empire, in this part of the World, further: although with
inroads they otherwhiles molested and endammaged them. But after this glorious
Expedition of Agricola, when himself was called back, Britain (as says
Tacitus) became For* let: neither was the possession kept still this far. For
the Caledonian ^rittons drove the Romans back as far as to the River Tine. In
so much as Hadrian, who came into Britain in person, and reformed many things
in it, went no farther forward; but gave Commandment, that the God Terminus,
who was wont to give ground to none, should retire backwards out of this place
like as in the East, on this side Euphrates he did. Hence it is that St.
Augustine (de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 29.) wrote in this wise: God Terminus, who gave
not place to Jupiter, yielded to the will of Hadrianus, yielded to the rashness
of Julian, yielded to the necessity of Jovian. In so much as Hadrian had enough
to do to make a Wall of Turf between the River of Tine and Esk, well near an
hundred miles Southward on this side Edenborough Frith. But his adopted son
Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus Pius, under the conduct of Lollius Vrbicus,
whom he had sent hither his Lieutenant, repelled the Northern Enemies back
again beyond Bodotria, or Edenborough Forth; and that by raising another Wall
of Turf, namely besides that of Hadrianus, as Capitolinus writes. [Which other
Wall that it was reared in this very place, whereof I now speak, and not by
Severus, as it is commonly thought, Cambden produces no other argument than
twoancient Inscriptions dug up therein.] But when the Northern Nations, (
viz. Picts and Scots) in the Reign of Commodus, having passed over this other
Wall, made much waste and great spoil in the Country, Severus the Emperor
repaired the Wall of Hadrian. Howbeit, afterward the Romans brought eftsoons
the Country lying between under their subjection. For Nemus has recorded,
that Carausius under Dioclesian strengthened the Wall of Edenborough Frith an
other time, and fortified it with seven Castles. Lastly, the Romans, when
Theodosius the younger was Emperor, fensed this Wall under the conduct of
Gallio of Ravenna. Now (says Bid) they made a Turf Wall, rearing it not so
much with stone as with Turfs (as having no cunning Artificer for so great a
piece of Work) and the same to no use, between two Friths or arms of the Sea,
for many miles in length: that where the fence of Water was wanting, there by
the help of a Wall they might defend their borders from the invasion of
Enemies. Of which work, that is to say, a very broad and high Wall, a man may
see to this day most certain and and evident remains. This Wall began, as the
Scots now say, at the River Aven, which goes into Edenborough Frith, and ended
at Dunbritton. But Bid says. it begins at a place called Pen-wael (in the
British Tongue Pengual, in English Penwalton, in Scottish Ceual, but all
deriving no doubt from the Latin word Vallum, and all importing the Head of the
Wall) two miles from Abercurving; and ends, as the common sort think, at
Kirk-Patrick (the native soil, as some write, of St. Patrick the Apostle of
Ireland) near unto Cluyd; according to Bid, Alcluid, after Nennius,
Pen-alcloyt, which do seem all one. Now this Wall is commonly called Grahams
Dyke, either of Graham a warlike Scot, whose Valor was especially seen when
the breach was made through it, or else of the Hill Grampie, at the foot
whereof it stood. The Author of Rota Temporum calls it the Wall of Abercorneth,
that is of the mouth of the River Where in Bede's time there was a famous
Monastery standing as he has recorded.
Corneth, on English ground, but near unto that Frith or Arm of the Sea, which
in those days severed the Lands of the English and Picts. Hitherto Cambden.

But I must confess Venerable Bede is in some things or some part more
particular on this Subject. For he tells us ( l. 1. c. 5. Eccl. Histor.
Anglor.) That Severus having come to the Empire, anno Christi 189. the Xiiii.
Emperor after Augustus, and entered Great Britain himself in person; thought
fit, in prosecution of the War, and for defense of the Roman Province there
from the Caledonian Enemies, to make a great strong Wall of Soads and Stakes,
or piles of Timber with frequent Towers upon it and a broad Ditch by it all
along from Sea to Sea (where nevertheless observe Paulus Orosius says this Wall
was carried cross the Land for one hundred and thirty miles. And the same has
Ado Viennensis. But George Buchanan, l. 3. says, it is an error in the number,
and that instead of a hundred thirty two, it should be only thirty two.
that Bid determines nothing of the place.) And in the xii. Chapter of that
same first Book, he tells us at large of two other Walls, even long after that
time of Severus, built from Sea to Sea. The one, which is that here described
by Cambden, built of Soads and Stakes by the Brittons themselves, when the
first supply of Romans, come to beat back those Northern Foes, having done so,
were upon their return home. The other, some time after, of stone, eight foot
broad and twelve foot high, built at both the public and private charge, by
the joint concurrence of the Brittons and last Roman Legion come to defend
them. Besides in the same Chapter he tells us of the Towers built on the South
of the Western Sea (or that of Dun-Britton) at convenient distances, to defend
the Brittons from the plundering Fleets of the Barbarians. But for any Wall or
Fence either of stone or Earth made under Theodosius the Younger, Bid has not
a word; but rather plainly shows the contrary Chap. 13, where he tells in plain
terms, that Aelius to whom the Britons made their application for new supplies
again, refused to send them any: and that as for that later Wall and those
Castles of stone, how strongly soever built, they were soon scaled, and forced
by the Irish and Picts, and the miserable Britons quite overrun by both a new,
even from all quarters of these very Fortifications of Lime and Stone.

46. You find in the 25th Page, that I make the first Danish Invasion of
Ireland to have been anno Christi 820. For so Keting has it in the Reign of
Aodh Ordnighe; and him I followed there. But here I must fix it earlier by
eight years. My warrant is from the Annals of France contracted by Eginhardus,
wherein you may read, that, in the Year of our Lord 812. [ Classis Danorum
Hiberniam aggressa, a Scotis praelio superatur] the Danish Fleet invading
Ireland, was by the Scots (for so they called the Irish then) defeated in a
Battle. And Aymoinus, where he relates, in the Reign of Charles the Great, that
then [ Classis Normannorum Hiberniam, Scotorum Insulam aggressa, commisso
praelio cum Scotis, innumerabilis multitudo Normannorum extincta est, and
turpiter fugiendo domum reversa est.] the Norman Fleet having attacked Ireland,
the Island of the Scots, and given them Battle, and an innumerable multitude of
the Normans being killed in that Fight, was forced at last to run away
shamefully, and return home. See Gratianus Lucius in his Cambrens. Evers. page
13.

47. I have insinuated page 57. that they were the Irish who gave a beginning
abroad even to the Schools at Oxford. And now I add, that as Polidore Virgil
says, King Alfred, having in the year of Christ 895. by his Royal Authority
approved of Oxford for a place of general studies, sent Joannes Scotus Erigena
thither, ut omnium primus ibi bonas literas doceret, the very first public
Professor and Teacher of good Letters there, says Pitsius page 162, who further
gives this Encomium to Erigena, that in Learning or knowledge of the Learned
Arts, he had scarce his match throughout the World in that Age, [ qui in omni
meliori doctrina vix sui similem quenquam in illa Aetate per terrarum orbem
habuerit.] Now it is clearly demonstrable both out of History, and the surname
Erigena, that this very Joannes Scotus Erigena was an Irish man, and that not
only by Education and breeding, as Harpsfield grants he was, but by extraction
and birth. The proofs at large may be seen in Lucius, page 148. where he quotes
Nicolaus I. the Pope, Anastasius, Malmsbury, Hoveden, Westmonasteriensis,
Usher, and last of all Edward Matthews (de Scriptor. Angl. Bened. page 166.)
who particularly notes, That this Joannes Scotus, was in Latin surnamed
Erigena, because of his birth in Eri^; For so Ireland has been always called by
the Natives to this very day, and was then by others too. Erigena therefore
being the same with Hibernigena, you may conclude that if Angligena, and
Francigena, import the one an English man, the other a French man born: so must
Erigena an Irish man by birth. Nor is any thing said here of Erigena in any
wise inconsistent with Cambden's relation out of the old Annals of the Abbey of
Winchester. Wherein, after telling how King Alfred had recalled the Muses to
Oxford, and built three Colleges there, one for Grammarians, another for
Philosophers, and a third for Divines; it is further said, that in the year of
Christ's Incarnation 806, being the second year of St. Grimbald' s coming into
England, the first Regents and Professors in the Divinity College were St.
Naoth an Abbot, and holy Cambden translated by Hol. page 378.
Grimald a right excellent Professor of the most sweet written Word of holy
Scripture. All this might be true, and yet Erigena be and continue still the
first Professor of the Learned Arts and good Letters at Oxford.

Where I relate ( page 34.) the famous Battle fought at Clantarff by the brave
Brian Boraimh, I Hanmer, page 91.
pass by Hanmers relation of it. Even as I have all along passed by many there
of his stories concerning Ireland. As for Example, 1. That of Gurguntius, the
son of Belinus, King of Great Britain, to have met at Sea about the Isle of
Orkney, as he returned from the Conquest of Denmark, a Fleet of sixty Sail of
Spaniards, with Men and Women, commanded by the Governor of Baiona, seeking
some Country to inhabit, or live in, and to have assigned them Ireland, etc.
2. That other yet more ridiculous one out of Harding (and Mewinus a British
Chronieler quoted by Harding) Harding lived in the Reigns of Henry V. Henry VI.
and Edward IV.
How Gathelus and Scota came to these Northern parts, anno Christi 75. 3. That
of Fredelenus King of Denmark, in the Reign of Augustus Caesar, to have invaded
Ireland, and taken Dublin, though not by force, but by the help of Swallows
firing the City with fire tied to their wings: though himself was presently
forced by the King of Leinster to depart and run away to his Fleet. 4. That of
Frotho III. King of Denmark when our Savior was born, to have made all Ireland
tributary, and been Monarch thereof. As also that other in him (out of Saxo
Grammaticus and Albertus Krantzius) concerning Frotho IV. (thirty years after
the former) his having sent the Giants, and the huge Monster Startucerus to
invade the same Kingdom. 5. That, of King Arthur of Great Britain, and
Gillomar King Hanmer, page 50, 51, and 52.
of Ireland, Mark King of Cornwall, Sir Tristram, and La Bell Isod, etc. though,
besides the Books of Houth, he quotes also Florilegus, and Fabian, Caxton,
Holinghed, Flemming, and Harding for'em. 6. That of his genealogy of Fionn mhac
Cuuail, and his making this Fionn, and his Associats both, to have been Giants
and of Danish birth: whereof I have spoken before, page and therefore need not
say any more in this place. 7. That of his three vast Armies of Foreigners
invading Ireland by combination in several Provinces at one time: and this to
have been the time of Constantine the Great's Empire at Rome. The first, of
thirty thousand, landed at Derry in Vlster, and their Navy fired, and
themselves too in one Battle slain by Conn Ceadchathach, one of the Princes of
that Province, as he calls him. The second, of a greater number, landed at
Skerries not far from Dublin; but destroyed in one other Battle by Diarmuid
Lambdhearg King of Leinster, who (says he) killed six and thirty thousand of
them on the spot. The third, and it much more numerous yet, landed in Mounster,
and utterly destroyed at Fentra: when the Forces of all Ireland encountering
them, slew seven score thousand of them in that one Field. 8. That (where ever
he had it; for he tells not where) of the Battle of Garistown and Arcath (or,
as the Irish call it, Ardchath) fought, as he says, in the reign of Cairbre
Liffor, Monarch of Ireland, by the seven Kings of that Nation and their Army
65000 Horse and Foot, against the Danish Bownies (who had been formerly
entertained by those Princes to defend their Coasts, but now rebelled) being
28700, hardy resolute Warriors: and fought well-nigh a whole day with equal
Fortune so mortally, that Horses were up to their bellies in blood: until at
last Fortune favoring the righteous Cause of the Princes, they put these
rebellious foreign Bownies to a total rout, and edg of the Sword all of them,
although it cost their side also very dear, even the lives of four of their
Kings, and nineteen thousand seven hundred and sixty others.

All these Relations, though given as true ones by Hanmer at large, I have
passed by. First, because of their manifest repugnancy to all the Irish
Chronicles. Nay, because there is not one word or syllable of any of them in
Doctor Ketings Irish Chronicle, which yet is an ample Summary of all the
Authentic or esteemed Chronicles and Histories of that Nation, at least of
such as relate to their Monarchs. And because all reason tells us, that the
Irish Antiquaries, who give in a manner the most minute particulars of all the
Invasions and Fights in that Country, either amongst their own Princes, or
against Foreiners and Battles lost, and Victories obtained at any time under
any of the several Monarchs of Ireland for much above two thousand years until
the English Conquest, an. 1152. would never have omitted at least these mighty
Victories told us by Hanmer, which, if true, would much more have made for the
glory of their Nation, than many or most (or perhaps any) of those other so
exactly, and minutely too not a few of them, related in their Chronicles.
Secondly, because of all these following particulars, than which nothing is
more clear and uncontested in all the Irish Chronicles or Histories, that are
not known Romances.

49. For they particularly and unanimously tell us in the first place, what in
effect I have said before, viz. that Gathelus himself (otherwise by them, and
in their Languages named Gacidheal, and surnamed Glass, from whom originally the
whole both Milesian and other Gathelian Irish descended, and are therefore
jointly called in Irish Clanna Gaoidheal, i. e. the children of Gathelus) not
only never came to Ireland, nay nor into Spain neither, but was no where on
Earth living some hundreds of years before Mileadh (or Milesius) was born. That
under Pharaoh Cingeris he was born in Egypt, though begotten by Niall Brother
to the King of Scythia. That his Father Niull was both contemporary and
acquainted with Moses, and offered to do him service and kindness too when the
Children of Israel were upon the banks of the Red Sea to cross it over: Niull
being then by Pharaoh's gift possessor and Lord of a large Country near that
place where the Israelites encamped at that time. That as the Father Niull, so
the Son Gaodheal (or Gathelus) and children after him, continued in Egypt until
Pharaoh Intius banished the whole Race of them away, and forced them to seek
their Adventures elsewhere under the conduct of Sruth the son of Easruth, son
to the said Gathelus, or Gaodheal Glass. That Mileadh (or Milesius) whose
posterity long after invaded, conquered and possessed Ireland, was the
nineteenh Generation from the said Gathelus: and Pharaoh Nectanibus, being the
XVth Pharaoh after Cingeris who had been drowned in the Red Sea, was the King
of Egypt, who gave his Daughter to Milesius in marriage. That although it be
from the said Gaodheal Glass, the Milesian Race in Ireland, and Race also of
their Cosins that came with them out of Spain, and those and these only of all
the Irish, be properly called Gaoidhil or Clanna Gaoidheal, i. e. the children
or descendants of Gathelus; yet tste Irish Language is not from him called
Gaodhealc; but from an other Gathelus or Gaodheal former to him: another I
mean, who either composed, or at least refined and distinguished it into those
five several different idioms, or dialects for Poetry, Law, Genealogy, etc. so
hard to be understood all of them by any one man, that they would require the
whole Age of a man to attain unto them. Lastly, that the posterity of the later
Gaodheal, I mean Gaodheal Glass, and of his Wife Scota, (at least so called)
viz. the Milesian Race and their Cosins, had been possessors of Ireland near
1320 years before the birth Christ. In which account, or period of time, even
Cambrensis himself and Polichronicon agree, as we have seen before page 6. And
therefore that story of Hanmer, derived from Harding and Meuin, telling us of
Gathelus and Scotas coming to these Northern parts, or landing in Ireland anno
Christi 75. must be one of the most ridiculous stories in the world. They were
dead well nigh two thousand years before: and in their lifetime never left
Egypt, for ought that may be known of them.

In the next place they tell us, that Bartolanus, whom they call Partholan,
entered, planted, and possessed Ireland, anno Mundi 1956. that is, about 300
years after the Flood. Argument enough, that Hanmer knew nothing of the Irish
History, when he joined together Bartolanus and the Milesian off spring, as
being of a company, and entering Ireland at the same time: for this also he
does. And yet we have seen before, that the Milesians came not to Ireland
before the year of the World 2736. that is 731 years after Bartolanus had
settled there.

50. Besides, they tell us particularly and unanimously that as we have often
seen already in that year of the World 2736. and before Christ 1308 years,
those Iherians the sons of Milesius landed and conquered Ireland. How then
could they be conducted thither, and assigned that Country for their
Habitation by Gurguntius King of Great Britain. He was not in being then, nor
in many Ages after. I am sure he was not King of Great Britain, by Hanmer's
own relation, until the year of the World 3580. Nor was he Conductor of those
Iberians to Ireland, nor did they swear allegiance to him until the year of the
World 3592, and before the birth of Christ 376, according to Campions account.
That is full 858 years after they had conquered that Kingdom. And therefore I
need not quarrel either Campion or Hanmer, about their relating those Iberians
or Spaniards, before their passing to Ireland to have dwell'd in Gascoign or
toward Baiona, or within the jurisdiction of that so great and Capital a City
then, though it be not true. Nor need I expostulate with them about their
affirming that Gurguntius had the Sovereign Rule of that Country and City, and
consequently of these very Milesians when they dwelt thereabouts, before their
adventuring to Ireland. Enough is said already to ruin this whole story: And by
consequence, enough to overthrow all the supports of that pretended subjection
of Ireland to Gurguntius. But if I mind you once more that Polichronicon, nay
Cambrensis himself (who is the Ringleader as in many other, so particularly in
this matter to Campion, Hanmer, and other late Authors) confesses the landing
of those Iberians in Ireland, full 1800 years before the mission of St. Patrick
to Ireland by Celestinus in the year of Christ 431. then I doubt whether I have
not said more than enough on the Subject. I am sure that by this very
computation or confession of Cambrensis, and their own account of the year
before Christ, wherein Hanmer and Campion say, Gurguntius met those Iberians at
Sea: this year before Christ, and this meeting of Gurguntius at Sea must be
later by a whole thousand years of the World, than that assigned by Cambrensis
for the conquest made on Ireland by the same Iberians,

Moreover, the Irish Antiquaries no less particularly tell us, that Criossan
Niad Nar was Monarch of Ireland Keting.
when our Savior was born, That this divine Generation happened in the 12th
year of his Reign, and his Reign lasted in all but four years more. That
Conchabhar Abhraruadh was King before him for one year only: but before him,
Lughadh Sriabhndearg had continued Monarch six and twenty years complete. That
this same Lughadh married the King of Denmarks Daughter: and before his Reign
immediately an Interregnum of five years had been, which followed upon the
murder of Conair Mor mhic Eidirsceoil: and before this Interregnum, the same
Conair Mor had reigned full seventy years in great prosperity. That, after the
foresaid* Crioffan Niadnair, those who immediately succeeded in the Sovereign
power of Ireland were Fearrhadlach for twenty years; then Fiacha Fionn for
three; and after him Fiocha Fionnolladh for twenty seven years more. That these
and those, in all seven Monarchs, were every one of them killed in such and
such manner, and by such and such men of their own very Nation. That after the
seventh of them had been slaughtered by the Athaghtuachi, or Country Boors and
Plebeians, in their General conspiracy against all the Royal and noble Blood;
the same Athatchtuachi set up for King of Ireland one Cairbre, surnamed
Ceannchait, or Caitcheann from his Cats face, an Irish man indeed by birth, but
by descent originally, that is in the Ninth generation before, come out of
Denmark, as one of the King of Denmark's sons, who had accompanied Lauradh
Loinnsioch returning with Anxiliaries from France to recover his inheritance
the Monarchy of Ireland; which Lauradh did, Anno 3727. according to the
computation followed by Gratianus Lucius. Lastly, that this Usurper Cairbre
Caitcheann was at the end of five years killed, and all his rebellious rout of
Peasants, and their partakers, overthrown by the Nobles, headed then by the
rightful Heir of the Monarchy Tuathal Teachtmhor, who thereupon was received as
such, being now the C. Monarch of the Milesian Race. And all these matters,
together with so many other particular appendants on them, within the Reigns of
those eight or nine Monarchs: which Reigns comprised the whole Reign and Life
too, nay much more time before and after than the whole Reign, or Life either,
of Augustus in the Roman Empire: the Irish Antiquaries give us most exactly at
large. And yet not a syllable of Fredelenus, nor of either of the Frotho's; no
nor indeed of any other foreign King, or Prince, or Adventurer, so much as
invading Ireland, within or near that time, though they wanted not occasion in
Lughad's Reign, and in Caibre Ceannchaits (as we have seen) to reflect on such
matters, if any such had really been.

The same, or like argument, though but a Negative one, yet founded on the
general silence of all the Irish Annals, Chronicles, Histories, in the greatest
concern of their Nation, must be to every indifferent person a clear proof and
conviction enough against the vain relations of Hanmer and Campion, etc.
borrowed by them out of Cambrensis, as by him from Geffrey of Monmouth. I mean
at present only those Fables of their great British Hero King Arthur's
forcing the Irish Kings to pay him Tribute: and their appearing at his great
Court and City of Caer Leon upon Vsk: and the Irish Monarch that (as they idly
fain) was contemporary and tributary to him, to have been called Gillemer. In
any of the Irish Annals, Chronicles, Histories, there is not a syllable of any
part of these matters; no not so much as of Arthur's attempting once at any
time on Ireland, or picking or having any quarrel with any of the Kings or
Lords there. Nay Keting does quote Speed himself, though a late English Auhor,
asserting in effect the whole to be a mere fiction, and that Ireland was
neither subject nor tributary to Arthur. And the Keting in his Preface.
same Keting is positive herein, that there was never any King of Ireland by
name Gillemer. Besides, that Muirchiortach Mor mhac Ercha was not only Monarch
of Ireland when Arthur was King of Great Britain, but in peace and amity all
his life with him. Where it may be added, that if Arthur was created King of
Great ^rittain in the 18th year of his age, and was killed Anno 542. as
Buchanan says he was: then Buchanan, l. 5. Rer. Scot. in Goran. Rege XLV.
certainly the said Muirchiortarch Mor, and his two next Successors,
immediately following one another, Tuathal Maolgharbh and Diarmuid mhac
Cearbheoil, were those three Kings or Monarchs of Ireland that by succession
were contemporary to the whole Reign of Arthur, which if Buchanan be judge,
consisted of 24 years. And yet there was no quarrel at all by any of them with
Arthur, much less subjection to him. Also it may be added, That as Keting says,
Fergusius the First of Scotland was Brother to the foresaid Muirchiortach King
of Ireland. And consequently, that the Subjects of Muirchiortach were great
Conquerors in the Northern parts of Great Britain at that very time. Yea that,
as Buchanan himself, in the Reign of Goranus (the XLV. King of Scotland in his
Computation and History) relates it, The great Battle of Humber, wherein Arthur
was not only defeated but mortally wounded; nay in effect lost both Kingdom and
life, was fought against him by an Army of Irish Scots, however in confederacy
and conjunction with the Picts and some Brittons led in the same Field by
Modrocdus against him.

Out of all which may be seen how unlikely the stories of King Arthur in
Polychronicon, Hanmer, Campion, etc. which relate to Ireland, are. How
improbable that must be of Westmonasteriensis, in his years of Christ 497. and
592. which attributing the Monarchical power of Ireland to one Gillamurius
(alias Gillimer) one that was never heard of in Ireland, represents him
notwithstanding as taken there by King Arthur: and thereupon the rest of the
Irish Princes even plainly forced to yield themselves all and do homage to
Arthur. How vain also is that of Cambrensis, to the same purpose written
before, telling us, It is read, that the famous King of the Brittons Arthur had
the Kings of Ireland his Tributaries, and that some of them waited on him in
his great Court of Caer Leon. But above all the candor and ingenuity of honest
Galfridus, the first forger of these among so many other Fables, appears in
grain; however Cambrensis had not the confidence either to quote him for it, or
to mention at all Gillamurius, though a part of it.

And yet notwithstanding any thing hitherto either in this place, or elsewhere
said, I doubt not the posterity of the ancient Brittons have just reason if not
to glory of King Arthurs Trophies, at least to be sorry for his untimely Death,
and heartily wish, their Ancestors had not deserved to see their blooming
hopes in him, so suddenly vanish. Though at the same time, I must ingenuously
confess, there are but too too many reasons able to suspend any judicious
knowing man's belief of what even Buchanan himself has in our own days
transmitted to Posterity, for authentic Truths of this famous Kings renowned,
glorious performances, viz. That he had continually been for many years, but
most particularly and gloriously in twelve great Battles, victorious over the
Saxons. That he took at last even York and London from them: and, after this
again overthrew them in very Essex and Kent, where they were strongest and
placed their last reserve. That he forced the remainders of them either to fly
the Kingdom, or submit to his pleasure. In a word, That he restored his whole
Country, and perfect peace unto it. And that this happy effect of his pious
and victorious Arms continued until the ambition, anger, and, which you please
to call it, either treacherous rebellion, or just indignation and resentment of
his Nephew Modroedus for being put by the right of Succession, gave too great a
turn to his fortunate successes; chiefly by the Scottish, i. e. Irish Army's
falling from him, and their conjunction with Modroedus against him. For this
also I must here particularly note, that during their confederacy and sideing
with him, which had early begun and always continued from the very beginning of
his Wars until this unlucky difference about the succession, and second unlucky
Battle of Humber that followed thereupon, he also continued perpetually
successful. But so soon as they joined against him, fortune deserted him, and,
together with him, his Country. But whether so, or no? or whether indeed any
of those other particulars related of K. Arthur by Buchanan himself as true
History, be or be not such as he would have us believe: I think enough returned
in answer to Hanmer and Campion's making the Kings of Ireland Tributary to King
Arthur of Great Britain

However, because I believe it not very foreign nor much beside the matter, I
do on this occasion add, That Polidore Virgil found so little satisfaction to
his mind, nay so great certainty of untruth in the relations written of this so
much celebrated King Arthur, that although in his History ( l. 3) he sums up in
brief (that is in seven or eight lines) all the Wonders of them: yet as he
calls them, so he reputes them, no other than Vulgar stories Which to have been
his inward sentiment of those relations, may be further seen by his telling us,
That although King Arthur died in the very flower of his youth; yet because of
his exceeding great strength of body, and no less vigorous heroic bravery of
Soul, Posterity has reported almost the very same Wonders of him, which in our
own time are among the Italians Romantickly sung of Rowland Nephew to Charles
the Great. And this, without so much as mentioning any years at all of his
Reign, is all that Polidore has of this great British Hero. Save only that he
was the son of King Vter-pendragon. That if he had lived a while ( i. e. his
just age) longer, he had at last restored his perishing Country. And, that but
a few years before the Reign of Henry VIII. there was in Glastenbury Cloister a
very magnificent Tomb, erected to his memory: of purpose that after Ages might
be thereby persuaded, he had been a Prince adorned with all whatever ought be
reputed most excellently great and stupendous: and that this Tomb, as if it
had been erected soon after his death, had certainly been designed a memorial
of his glory; whereas indeed the Cloister it self, wherein it stood, was not in
being then. So this Author Polydore Virgil.

And yet after all, I cannot but acknowledge. that so great a concurrence of
other Authors, together with the general vogue of King Arthur, even all along
to our time in these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, especially
considering that all sides are agreed about his having existed or been, and
been also about the year of Christ five hundred King of Great Britain, must
argue of necessity some great extraordinary exploits of his against the Saxons.
Nor truly do I see, how otherwise Polydore himself could say, That if he had
lived longer a while, he had enfranchiz'd his Country. Neither is it a
valuable argument to the contrary, at least if we believe the judicious
impartial Cambden, That the Saxon Chronology or other Saxon Authors have
nothing of him and his brave achievements against them. I am sure I have my
self read in Cambden this very day to this purpose, That he has observed, the
Saxon Writers defective in this particular, viz. That they pass over in silence
what was bravely done against their own Nation, and only care the recording
what redounded to their glory, or concerned their own People. The conclusion of
all is, That the Romantic stories made of King Arthur, by idle Wits in part,
and part by others, who as they were equally ambitious to magnify their
Nation, and ignorant or heedless, how easily they might be disproved out of the
known undoubted Histories of the times, brought his true deeds into question so
far, that no man knows which, or what to believe of them.

51. To ruin the Romantic Fable indeed of Hanmer's three incredible Armies In
my 26 page my memory failed me, when relying upon it, as having not had the
Hi^^ory of Hanmer by me then, or at hand, I supposed those truly incredible and
false numbers of men, related by him, to have been really poured into Ireland
by the Danes in the first true War made by them on that Country. Whereas
indeed, upon review of Hanmer himself, I found he related those very incredible
Numbers, as landed there long before, that is, when truly there was neither
Invasion, nor any kind of Number, either of Danes or any other foreign Enemies
troubling that Kingdom.
invading Ireland by combination at the same time, and this the very time when
Constantine the Great was Emperor of Rome, Cairbre Laoffachair Monarch of
Ireland, and Conn Ceadchathach, one of the Princes of Vlster, etc, the Irish
Analists are unanimous in furnishing us abundantly with particulars. Out of
them it is clear and manifest, that Conn Ceadehathach was not one of the
Princes of Vlster, as Hanmer says he was, but Monarch of Ireland. That he came
to the Monarchy in the year of the World 5324. of Christ 122, and continued
Monarch thirty five years, till he was murdered by Assassines, employed on
that Errand by Tibraid Tiriogh King of Vlster; which happened at least a
hundred and twenty years before Constantine the Great was Emperor of Rome.
That as he was called or surnamed in Irish Ceadchatach, in Latin Centimachus,
from the hundred Battles which he had fought: so he fought not any of them, or
other soever against any Foreiner, but all against his own Contrymen the
native Irish: nor in all his Reign, as neither indeed for some Ages before and
after it, did any Foreigners invade the Irish. That although Cairbre
Lissechaire was Monarch of that Kingdom; begun his Reign Anno Mundi 5456,
Christi 267. and continued it twenty seven years; and so perhaps might have
been contemporary, for some part of his Reign, with Constantine the Great of
Rome: yet during his Reign there was no other Battle fought in Ireland but the
Battle of Gowra. I am sure none at all mentioned by Keting; who yet makes it
the chief business of his History to mention the Battles fought in the Reign of
every Monarch. That the Battle of Gowra was occasioned by a difference
happening and continuing some years betwixt the family or Sept of Baoiskin,
whereof Fionn mhac Cuuail was one, and the Sept of Morna, mere Irish of the
Milesian Conquest both; and both contending for the command of the standing
Militia of the Country: and Caibre Lioffechair the Monarch favoring one side,
and others of great power the other; the contention at last came to a Battle,
called from the place where it was fought the Battle of Gowra, where this
Monarch was killed by one Kirbe. Which is all the account Keting has of it; but
without mention of any other Fight, in this Monarchs Reign. Though by his
telling us the quarrel, and the Parties that fought, you see they were no
Danes, nor Danish Bowny's, but mere Irish Bowny's: and these neither of one
side; but some of one and some of the other, the quarrel requiring it should be
so.

These are the particulars (and many more I might add) which together with the
general reason before them given moved me to pass by so many ill-contrived
stories as I have mentioned here, besides many other out of Hanmer. But for his
relation of the Battle of Clantarff: being it is not only almost in every
particular so contrary to all the Irish Chronicles, but indeed as to the White
Danish Knight, and his injured Bed, and Sword and Scabbard, and thirty thousand
Danes landed with him, etc. a mere Romantic story: there needs no more be said
of it. Nor am I moved at all by Hanmers quoting the Book of Houth for himself
both in this Relation and several other. 1. Because (for many reasons needless
to be given here) I take not the Book of Houth, as neither indeed any English
or other Foreign Author, to be of any credit in such matters of Irish Antiquity
as preceded the English Conquest in Ireland, if otherwise in themselves either
improbable, or contradicting the whole current of the genuine Monuments of that
Nation, extant still, and written in their own Language. That is to say, in a
Language, which neither the Authors of the Book of Houth, nor other English
Writers, nor any Foreiner whatsoever could understand without the help of a
very skilful perfect Scholar in it, even such a one, as among ten thousand
Irish Natives cannot be found at present, nor could for many Ages past. 2.
Because, having never seen that Book of Houth, I cannot rely on Hanmers
quotation of it; as whom I have manifestly found in several places to make too
bold with several other Authors. For having these Authors at hand, perused and
compared them with his quotations of them, I have reason to persuade my self,
that either he never read 'em, or (which must be worse) wilfully imposed upon
them against his own knowledge.

53. Where I distinguish ( page 95.) the present Scottish Nation into Irish and
English Scots: you are to suppose that very many among these must of necessity
be Descendants partly of the more ancient Britons, who sometimes inhabited the
Northern Parts of Great Britain, and partly too of the Pictish Nation. For the
Irish that conquered both' were not so numerous then as to plant the one half,
nay nor a third part of all those Countries now comprehended under the name of
Scotland; though they became Lords of all by that Battle wherein they destroyed
utterly the Pictish Kingdom. So that you may conclude, the present English
Scots (as they are commonly called, but not those other who go by the name of
Scoti Albini George Bu-l. 2. Rer. Scotic. page 54. tells us, That in the
beginning, as well the colonies sent by the Irish to the North of Great
Britain, as those that sent them, went by the common name of all their Nation,
to wit that of Scoti, or Scots. But soon after, to distinguish the one from the
other, those in Ireland were called Scoti Jerni, that is Irish Scots, and these
in Britain, Scoti Albini, i. e. Albanian Scots. So says he. And the
distinction is proper and significant enough. But that other, which the Irish
make, even to this day in their own Language, 'twixt an Irish and an English
Scot, is no less observable. For the former they call Albanach Gaodhleach,
denoting both the Country of his Birth Albania, and the Stock of his
Extrnction Gathelus; but the latter they call Albanach Gallda, i. e. a Saxon or
English Albanian.
) are a mixed People, descended part from Britons and Picts, and part from
Saxons and Normans, whether any be remaining still of Danish posterity there, I
cannot tell, nor is it necessary in this place I should. What may be of more
advantage for understanding somewhat better those affairs of Scotland is, I
doubt not, this following passage out of Cambden, After that the Scots were
come into Britain, and had joined themselves unto the Picts, albeit they never
ceased to vex the Brittons with skirmishes and inroads, yet grew they not
presently into any great State, but kept a long time in that corner where they
first arrived, not daring, as Beda writes, for the space of 127 years to come
forth into the Field against the Princes of Northumberland. Until at one and
the same time they had made such a slaughter of the Picts, that few or none of
them were left alive: and withal the Kingdom of Northumberland, what with civil
Dissentions, what with Invasions of the Danes, sore shaken and weakened, fell at
once to the ground. For then all the Northern Tract of Britain became subject
to them, and took their name, together with that hithermore Country on this
side Cluyd and Edenborough Frith. For that it also was a parcel of the Kingdom
of Northumberland, and possessed by the English Saxons, no man gainsayeth. And
hereof it is that all they which inhabit the East part of Scotland, and be
called Lowland-men, as one would say of the Lower-Country, are the very
off-sping of the English Saxons, and do speak English. But they that dwell in
the West Coast, named Highland-men, as it were of the upper Country, be mere
Scots, and speak Irish, as I have said before; and none are so deadly Enemies,
as they be unto the Lowland men, which use the English Tongue as we do.
Hitherto Cambden, (in his Britannia, Tit. Scots. page 126. Holl. Translat.)

But as well to give the true reason why, as to particularize more exactly that
period of time during which the genuine Scots had ceased from acts of hostility
against the Saxons, I add out of V. Bid (in his Eccles. Histor. of England. l.
2. c. ult.) That Anno Dom. 603. Edan, King of those Scots that inhabited
Britain at that time, moved by the success of the Northumbrian King Ethelfrid
against the Britons, drew to the Field [ cum immenso exercitu] with an
exceeding great Army against him, but was overcome, and fled with a few. That
in the most famous place, called Degsestan, i. e. the stone of Degsa, almost
his whole Army was slain. That nevertheless, in the same Fight, Theobaldus,
Brother to this Ethelfride, with all the Force headed by him, was in like
manner killed. And that from that time forward to this very day (says Bid,
meaning the day when he writ this) none of all the Scottish Kings had been so
daring, as to give Battle to the English Nation. Which being the words of Bid
truly rendered in English: and the years of his Age being 59. when he ended all
his Works (and consequently this History) as himself says: and seeing also that
he was born Anno Dom. 677. it follows, That so long at least as 136 years after
Degsestan Fight, the Scots engaged not against the English. But whether after
this term expired, they attacked them again before they had ruined the Pictish
Kingdom, and at the same time seized so great a part of the Northumbrian, I
know not.

54. What you might have perused already page 129* as derived either from
Cambrensis, or Cambden, or both, viz. of the original eruption of the great
Vlster Lake, called in Irish Loch Erne, and cause thereof, is abundantly
refuted by Gratianus Lucius, in his Book entitled Cambrensis Eversus, page 132,
and 133. Which having not seen before my own foresaid 127* page had been
wrought off the Press, makes me give now this other, which as it is much
fuller, so I doubt not a much better and truer account, in every respect of
that matter. The Relation of Cambrensis (Topograp. Hib. d. 2* c. 9.) may be
rendered thus in English. There is in Vlster a Lake of vast extension, thirty
miles long, and fifteen broad; unto which, as they say, a wonderful chance gave
beginning. In that Country, which is now the Lake, there was in very ancient
times a most vicious Nation, but chiefly and incorrigibly above all other
People of Ireland, given over to that sin we call Bestiality. And there was
amongst them a Prophetical saying, That so soon as a certain Well of that
Country were at any time left uncovered (for out of reverence to it,
proceeding from barbarous superstition, it had both a covering and signature,
or lock) it should presently overflow so prodigiously as to drown the whole
Country thereabouts. Which accordingly happened on this occasion. One of the
Country Women having opened it to bring Water home, it chanced that before she
had thoroughly done, she heard her Child a little distance off crying: and going
in haste to still him, she forgot to cover the Well. Whereupon it overflowed on
a sudden so strangely, that not only the Woman her self and her Child with her,
but all the People universally and all the very Cattle too of the whole
Country for very many miles, were, as by a particular and Provincial Deluge,
covered, overwhelmed, perished utterly in the Waters. As if the Author of
Nature had judged that Land unworthy of Inhabitants, which had been conscious
of such enormous turpitude against Nature. And indeed that such had been the
original of this Lake, it is no improbable argument, that the Fishermen upon it
do manifestly in fair serene weather see, under them in the Water, Church
Turrets, which according to the fashion of those in that Land are not only
narrow and high, but round withal; and that they often show them to passengers
wasted over this Lake, who are strangely astonished at the sight and cause. You
are also to note, That the River which abundantly flows out of the same Lake,
being one of the nine Principal Rivers of Ireland, namely the Ban, did even
from the beginning (that is, ever since the time of Bartholanus) though in a
much smaller stream, flow from the foresaid Well all along that Country, other
Waters falling into it still as it went farther off. Hitherto Gerald of Wales.
But to this Relation of his, it will not be amiss to add what Cambden says
applying it, and interpreting and making this nameless Pool to be the famous
Loch Erne of so many miles in length and breadth, and the People destroyed to
have been some Hebridians got thither. Beyond Cavan (says he) Cambden's Ireland
in Hollands Translation of it, page 106.
West and North, Fermanach presents it self, where sometimes the Erdini
dwelt* a Country full of Woods, and very boggish. In the midst whereof is that
famous and greatest Mere of all Ireland, Loch Erne, stretching out forty
miles, bordered about with shady Woods, and passing full of inhabited Islands,
whereof some contain a hundred, two hundred, three hundred acres of ground:
having besides such store of Pikes, Truots, and Salmons, that the Fishermen
complain oftener of too great plenty of Fishes, and of the breaking of their
Nets, than they do for want of draught. This Lake spreads not from East to
West (as it is described in the common Maps) but, as I have heard those say who
have taken a long and good survey thereof, first at Bell Tarbet, which is a
little Town farthest North of any in this County of Cavan, it stretches from
South to North fourteen miles in length, and four in breadth. Anon it draws
in narrow, to the bigness of a good River, for six miles,, in the Channel
whereof stands Iniskellin, the principal Calste in this Tract, which in the
year 1593. was defended by the Rebels, and by Dowdal a most valiant Captain
won. Then, coming Westward, it enlarges it self most of all, twenty miles
long, and ten broad, as far as to Belek: near unto which is a great downfall of
Water, and as they term it, that most renowned Salmon's Leapue. A common speech
among the Inhabitants thereby, is That this Lake was once firm ground, passing
well husbanded with Tillage, and replenished with Inhabitants; but suddenly for
their abominable buggery committed with Beasts, overflown with Waters, and
turned to a Lake. Though Almighty God (says Giraldus) Creator of Nature, judged
this Land, privy to so filthy Acts against Nature, unworthy to hold not only
the first Inhabitants, but any other for the time to come. Howbeit this
wickedness the Irish Annals lay upon certain Islanders out of the Hebrides, who
being fled out of their own Country, lurked there. So he.

Against these Relations, the one of Giraldus Cambrensis, and the other of
Cambden; though the later, as to the original of this Lake, is wholly grounded
on the former, Gratianus Lucius opposes many Reasons. 1. That all the Irish
Annals and Histories, who treat of Loch Ern, attribute the original of it, not
to the overflowing of any Well or River, but to a mere eruption of Waters out
of the very entrails of the Earth, without any kind of mention of Bestiality or
other sin of the Inhabitants which might at all any way deserve it. 2. That
this Eruption happened in the Reign of Fiacha Lauranne But Keting says it
happened under the Reign of Tighermhais (alias Tightermhuir) forty six years
before Fiacha Labhraina came to be King.
King of Ireland, immediately after the great Victory got by Him over the
remainders of the Nation called Fir-bholg, who till then had kept and inhabited
that Tract of ground where this Lake did so burst forth on a sudden: and
consequently, That it happened before the year of the World 3751. because,
according to to the Irish Chronology, Fiacha Laurainne came to the Crown of
Ireland by killing his Predecessor Eochuidh Fuibherghlas, in the year of the
World 3727. and held it twenty years more, or rather to the year of the World
3751. when himself was likewise killed by Eochuidh Mumho that succeeded him in
the Sovereignty. 3. That such, and so early to have been the original of this
Lake, without either bestiality, or Well, or other enormous or miraculous cause
mentioned by any Irish Records or Books, Amhirgin the son of Amhalgadh mhic
Mholruana had delivered in the Etymological Book which he not only composed of
all the chief places, Countries, Tracts of Ireland, but rehearsed before
Diarmuid O Cearbheoil the Monarch, and other Princes and Peers of the Nation
assembled together at Tarach, about the year of Christ 500: adding withal in
the same Book, that some former Historians were of opinion, This Lake had a
long time, yea many Ages after the beginning, taken its denomination of Erne a
Maid servant to the famous Meabh Chruachain, Queen of Connaght, drowned
therein. Which Meabh Chruachain was Daughter to Eochuidh Feilioch the Monarch,
Author of the Pentarchy, who ended both his Reign and life in the year of the
World 5069. that is, according to the account followed by Lucius, a hundred and
thirty one years before the Incarnation of our Lord. 4. That hence appears not
only the falsity of the Relation it self, but the Ignorance of the Relatour
Cambrensis (in the History of Ireland) where he says, That Church-Towers were
seen in that Lake he describes to have had so prodigious an original:
insinuating hereby, as if Loch Ern had its beginning after the plantation of
Christianity in that Kingdom. Whereas we have now seen it was broke out even
1427. before the very birth of Christ, which was in the year of the World 5199.
Besides, it is most certain, that those high, round, narrow Towers of stone,
built cylinder-wise, whereof Cambrensis speaks, were never known or built in
Ireland (as indeed no more were any Castles, Houses, or even Churches of stone,
at least in the North of Ireland) before the year of Christ 838. when the
Heathen Danes possessing a great part of that Country, built them in several
places, to serve themselves as Watch-Towers against the Natives. Though ere
long, the Danes being expuls'd, the Christian Irish turned. them to another and
much better (because a holy) use, that is to Steeple Houses or Bell-Fries, to
hang Bells in for calling the People to Church. From which later use made of
them, it is, that ever since to this present, they are called in Irish
Cloctheachs, that is Bell-Fries, or Bell-Houses; Cloc or Clog, signifying a
Bell, and Teach a House in that Language. And further yet, my Author Gratianus
Lucius adds out of the undoubted Monuments or Lives both of Columb Cille and S.
Patrick, that even as early as either of those holy men's time, Loch Erne was
the same it is now. For O Donel writes in his Life of Columb Cill l. 1. c. 88.
That S. Columb by his special blessing and Prayer to God, obtained not only
that fecundity of Fish to the Lake, which ever since it has been blessed with,
but that the cataract or Fall of it should be lower than it was before, whereby
the leap of the Salmon became easier. And S. Ewin writes, part 2. c. 110. of S.
Patric's Life, that this great Apostle of Ireland, to punish the frowardness of
the Lord of the Country next adjoining to the Northern side of this Lake,
cursed the same side of it, and so bereaved it of its former fruitfulness, Out
of which Narrations or Lives (whatsoever may be said or thought of the
Miracles) it is plain enough, that so long before these narrow, high, round
Turrets built by the Danes, Loch Erne was the same it is at present. 5. That
Ptolomee, who flourished about the year of Christ 153. describes Loch Erne in
the same manner, and place the modern Geographers do, calling also the
Inhabitants of that Tract Erdini. 6. That nothing can be more clear and
manifest than Girald and Cambden's contradicting one another, or certainly both
truth and experience each of them. For Cambrensis plainly says, that the River
of Ban flows out of the Lake, he reports to have had the foresaid prodigious
original; and Cambden no less plainly and positively averrs that Lake which had
so strange a beginning to be the Lake Erne: and yet all Ireland knows, and
Cambden himself in several places, though more perceptibly to the eye in his
Map of Ireland, shows that the said River Ban flows, not out of Loch Ern, but
out of another, by name Loch Neauch, which is at least threescore miles from
the Lake Ern. 7. And lastly, that there are no such Irish Annals known or heard
of in Ireland, which impute either that cause or effect of it, whereof Cambden
speaks, to those Hebridians mentioned by him, or to any other People or Nation
whatsoever. So that, out of all we may safely conclude, the whole Relation of
the foresaid infamous Original of Loch Erne to be no better than an old Wives
Tale. Which after I had lighted by chance on Gratianus, I thought my self the
rather obliged to observe here, because I had formerly in writing and printing
what you have in my 59 page, either seemed to be somewhat persuaded by the
Authority of Cambden (though only taking up the relation from Cambrensis, and
withal telling us, I know not from whom, of Irish Annals in the case) or
because at least I had not sufficienly cleared so injurious a Report.

55. And now let me tell you on this occasion, that e'n such another if not yet
more injurious, ill grounded, false Report is that which the same Cambrensis is
the only first Original Author of, in his Topography of Ireland (did. 3. cap.
25.) where he tells us, That the People of Tirconel, a Country in the North of
Vlster, created their King in this barbarous abominable manner. That all being
assembled together in one place, a white Beast was brought before them. Unto
which he that was chosen to be made King approaching, declared himself
publicly before them all to be such another, that is, a mere Beast. Whereupon
the white Beast was cut in pieces, boiled in Water; and, that done, a bath
prepared for him of the Broth. Into which entering, and bathing, and then
feeding, and all the People too about him feeding in the same manner on the
flesh boiled in it; at last he drinks of that very broth wherein he had already
bathed; and this also not by reaching or taking it out of any Cup or other
Vessel, nay not so much as out of the palm of his hand, but by stooping and
putting down his mouth like a Beast on all sides of the very bathing Cistern or
Cauldron at large, wherein he had washed. Which being over, the whole Rite and
Solemnity of his inauguration was ended, and he completely installed in his
Kingship of Tirconel. So says Cambrensis, intimating hereby, as if this filthy
custom held in that Country even in his own time.

But Keting has abundantly refuted this no less filthy abominable Fiction;
where he shows at large, in the Reign of Brian Boraimh, the known, solemn,
decent and significant Rites, yea and places too of Inaugurating every King and
Prince in all the Provinces of Ireland: and who were the Lords, or which were
the Families that bore the chief Offices at the respective Inaugurations.
Particularly as to the Prince of Tirconel, namely O Donel, of whose creation
this Fable of Cambrensis must be understood, the same Keting shows that the
place both of his Election or Inauguration or Investiture was
Cill-mhic-Creunain; and the chief Officers at it were O Fiorghaill, who carried
before him and solemnly put into his hand the White Rod, which was his Scepter,
and O Gallechuir, who was his Marshal. But Gratianus Lucius (page 316 of his
Cambrensis Eversus) takes a little more pains in this particular. He tells in
the first place, how, when any was to be created O Donel, all the Estates of
the Country met together upon a certain Hill. And how, the Assembly being
full, one of the greatest Peers amongst them, rising up and standing in the
middle of the multitude with a pure white, straight, unknotty Rod in his hand,
addressed himself to the new Elect in this manner and words, Receive Sir the
auspicious Ensign of your Dignity, and remember to imitate in your Life and
Government the whiteness, and streightness, and unknottiness of this Rod: to
the end no evil Tongue may find cause to asperse the candor of your Actions
with blackness, nor any kind of corruption or tie of friendship be able to
pervert your Justice. Take therefore upon you in a lucky hour the Government of
this People, and exercise the Power given you hereby with all freedom and
security. And how, these words spoken, he delivered the Rod into the Prince's
Hand: and so the whole Solemnity was perclosed. In the next place Lucius
desires it may be considered, that the whole controversy in this matter with
Cambrensis may be in short reduced to these Queries, Whether we ought to
believe one Hear-say-mans denial before the affirmation of very many both ear
and eyewitnesses? Whether Domestic Writers, especially those whose peculiar
employment, calling, charge it is are not more likely to deliver the truth of
matters to Posterity, than a mere Foreigner that not only never was in the
Country he speaks of (as Cambrensis was never in Tirconel) but shows himself
in too too many Instances a perfect Enemy even to all that wish it well? And
whether we owe belief rather to public National Records and Monuments, than to
the Narration of a private man, which was not more purposely invented by some
Bard or Ballad-monger, than desirously taken up by an invidious Writer? Thirdly
to these and after these Questions Lucius in effect answers and reasons thus:
That without question the Irish Chroniclers wrote of these matters to discharge
the duty of their place; but Girald both in his Topographical and Historical
Books of Ireland (such as they be) yielded so far to passion, even that of
extreme hatred, as made him not only obscure the Truth, but suppress it even
with manifest Lies and Fictions. That no indifferent considering Person can
believe, that St. Patrick, who accurately surveying this Country of Tirconel,
converted all the People of it, and together with them instructed so their
Prince Conall Gubhan in the austerest principles of Christianity, that in a
secular habit he lived an Hermits Life, would have permitted such filthy dregs
of Pagan superstition to remain, Jocelin, c. 138.
had there been any such: and this not only among the baser obscure sort of
Plebeians, but among the very most illustrious, the very Princes themselves of
the People. That if such obvious and conspicuous turpitude had (which is not
credible) escaped the knowledge of St. Patrick, who lived among 'em threescore
years: assuredly it could by no means have escaped either the notice or
reprehension of those many other Saints, who in the succession of so many
after-Ages of Christian Religion lived in that very Country of Tirconel. That
above fifty eminent Saints are upon Record of those descended from the Loins of
that Conall Gubhan alone, whereof the greatest part fixed their dwelling there,
and built also there above twenty Monasteries. That the two Episcopal Sees of
Doire and Rapoth were constituted in those early days in the same most Northern
Tract of Vlster: wherein as many Bishops and Abbots succeeded one another, so
many religious Watchmen must be acknowledged to have been viewing far and near
about them in such manner, as it was morally impossible so hideous, and withal
so public notorious a blemish, could all along, even for six hundred years
complete, till the time of Cambrensis, escape their animadversion. That betwixt
many of the Bishops and Abbots of those two Dioceses, and the Lords (or Princes
or Kings, which you please to call 'em) of Tirconel, there was often both very
great familiar friendship and near kindred too. That if the reverence of the
Princes did awe other Prelates from reprehending this nasty bestial ceremony of
their creation: undoubtedly, at least among their kinsmen Prelates, some would
have been found that out of Nature and for the sake of consanguinity would have
admonished them, and procured the reformation of it. That no man can believe,
that the Saints Columb-Cille, Bathenus, Lasrenus, Fergnaus, Suibhneus,
Adamnanus, and other most holy men, who had both their extraction and birth,
and their Education too in all Piety in Tirconel, and been such fearless
undaunted tramplers under foot of all Vice and superstition, would not have cut
off by the root so hideous, loathsome, brutish a custom, if any such in their
days had been. That in case these great servants of God had wanted power enough
to do so: yet surely the more powerful Saints Moelbridius and Malachias,
Primats of all Ireland, who derived their extraction from that Country of
Tirconel; would not have suffered the example to continue. That hesides, it is
beyond belief, That the very Princes themselves of Tirconel, whereof so many
were famous for Humanity, Liberality, Piety, Religion, would have entered on
their Princedom by so inauspicious and execrable a Rite. Lastly, that without
any peradventure, if they, or their People, had proved herein pertinacious, yet
so many pious excellent Monarchs of Ireland, as we have before seen, who had
supreme Authority over them, would not have connived at it. So, in effect,
Lucius, against this equally injurious, vain, ridiculous, filthy Fiction,
vented first of any Mortal, as the former of Loch Ern, by Girald of Wales.

56. Of Aonach Tailltinn the most celebrated Irish Fair, both for Antiquity and
resemblance of the Olympic Games of Greece, exhibited therein (which I only
mentioned in my foresaid 95 page) the Author was Lugha Lambfhada the Twelfth
King of Ireland after Slanius, but Third of the Nation called Fir-bholg, even
so long since as betwixt two and three hundred years before the Milesians
conquered that Kingdom. The occasion this: When the Ninth and last Fir-bholgian
King of the Posterity of Dela, by name Eoghan, was killed in Battle, and the
Kingdom seized by new Invaders, the Nation of Tuadedainin, it happened that
Tailtinn Daughter to Madhmor King of South-Spain, but Widow and Queen to the
said Eoghan, having married Eochadh Garbb a Nobleman of the new Conquerors,
bred the foresaid Lugha with great care and kindness in his youth. Wherefore
he, when he came to the Crown, retaining thereof a most grateful remembrance,
and holding himself bound to requite her love in the best manner he could,
thought fit to ordain, as accordingly he did, for a perpetual memory of her,
one and thirty days in all, viz. the fifteen immediately preceding our first
day of August, and the other fifteen next following it, to be solemnly kept in
all Ages both by a general concourse of the bravest men out of all parts of the
Kingdom, at a place in Mead called Tailtinn from her name, and by all sorts of
manly Games and Exercises there, as those of Running, Hunting, Wrestling,
Leaping, Vaulting, Tilting, etc. and by prizes also given to the Victors. That
so lately before the English Conquest, as the year 1168. Ruaruidh O Conchavair
the last Irish Monarch held this great Fair of Tailtinn and exhibited those
Olympic Games with much solemnity. For so Gratianus Lucius has told us in his
Roman phrase, Ludos Taltinos dedit, as we have seen elsewhere. And the same
Author adds, That the Calends or first day of August, though in aftertimes
among Christians, at least those of the Roman Church, dedicated to the Chains
of St. Peter, and therefore, in the Roman Calendar, called Petri ad Vincula,
has nevertheless in all Ages been, as it is at present, in memory of the
foresaid King, by all the Irish Nation called in their Language Lugh-Nasa,
which imports in English the Remembrance of Lewis; for Nasa is remembrance, and
Lugh, the same with Lewis or Luis. But Keting says that Queen Tailtinn, whom he
honored so much, had been his own Wife; though whether in a third Venture, or
no, he does not say.

57. There is mention made ( page 122 and 213) of the Monarch Ollamh Fodhlas's
having ordained in every Town a Receiver and Entertainer of Strangers. But the
particulars of that Ordinance and practice of it as I find them in Keting and
Lucius being very singular, I thought fit to give here, the rather because the
Character of Gens inhospita, (that is, an inhospitable Nation) is given the
Irish by Gerald of Wales (Top. did. 3. cap. 10.) so much against Truth. And
certainly, for what concerns the more ancient times, it will appear out of what
here follows of their extraordinary care to provide entertainment for all
Comers, that their Hospitality in those days of yore was unmatchable in Europe.
I am sure it was so in any place or Country that ever I have read of. The
dignity of an Entertainer, says Lucius, no where else used, was among the Irish
bestowed only on those descended of Noble Families. Nor was any capable of it,
that was not Lord Proprietary of seven Towns, I mean Feeding Towns, (as Keting
says, the Irish call in their Language all towns whatsoever properly such;
Bailte Biatha;) each Town consisting of twelve Plow-lands of Irish Measure,
which is three or four times twelve of English. He must besides have had seven
Ploughs continually going, and withal been Master of seven Herds of Cows, each
Herd consisting of a hundred and twenty full. His Mansion House so seated, as
to have been accessible by four several ways. A Hog, a Sheep, a Beef, always
ready in the Pot, or on the Spit, to the end that every hour without delay,
whoever came might be instantly fed. The like number of Beasts ready killed and
fley'd, to be put to the fire as the former was taken up. Every order and
degree of men, according to their quality, had their Entertainment, both meat
and drink, assigned by Rule, so as the Entertainer, if he defrauded any was
certain to be fined for it, by the proportionable lessening of his immunities
and other Privileges. Sundry sorts of drinks, were served in sundry sorts of
Cups. In Glass, Wine: in Brass, Water: in Silver, Whey: in white Cups of Ash,
Beer: and in brown ones made of Fig Tree, Milk. Hitherto Lucius (in his Camb.
Evers. page 130.) Who yet farther adds in the same place, out of Keting, what
you will peradventure no less, if not much more wonder at, the exceeding great
number of those Free-cost entertaining Towns, or Houses deputed in such Towns
by the public, throughout Ireland. In Connaght 900. in Vlster the like number:
in Leinster, 930. in Mounster a 1030.

58. In my 217 page, there is likewise upon a far other occasion some little
mention made of the victorious Monarch Tuathal Teatchtmhor, though much more
elsewhere before in one or two places. However this place is that which as I
was reviewing it, has brought to my remembrance what follows here out of
Keting. As 1. That before his time, Ireland was equally divided into Mounster,
Leinster, Connaght, and Vlster; each of these Divisions meeting at a place, and
of the sides of a great stone fixed in that place, called Visneach, which is in
the Country that goes now by the name of West Mead. 2. That when he had after
twenty five years war totally subdued the Plebeian Rebels, and restored both
the Gentry to their Estates, and the true Royal Blood and Heirs to their
respective Provincial Kingdoms, he thought fit to take, as he accordingly did,
with their consent, from each of those Divisions a considerable Tract of
ground, which was the next adjoining to Visneach: one East, an other West, a
third South and the fourth on the North of it: and appointed all four, under
the name of Mead (but as comprehending our Counties now of East and West-
Mead) to belong for evermore to the Monarchs own peculiar Demain, for the
maintenance of his Table. 3. That on those four several portions, he built four
several Kingly Palaces, for himself and his Heirs, viz. Tleaghtghae on that of
Mounster side; Tailltin House, on Vlster's; an other at Tarach, on Leinster's
portion; and the fourth on the West of Visneach, taken from Connaght: ordaining
withal great Solemnities at each of them to be kept on certain days yearly for
ever. At Tlaghtghae the sacred but Idolatrous Fire to be kindled on our All
Hallows Eve. All Magitians of the Kingdom to come thither that night, and
sacrifice to their Deities in that Fire. All the other Fires throughout the
Kingdom to be put out then, and under great penalties not kindled again, but
from or out of this holy Fire of Tlaghtghae. And every house in the Kingdom, as
receiving from this new consecrated Fire, and because the ground of Tleaghthae
had been formerly the Mounster King's Dominion, to pay him yearly three pence
for ever. At Visneach House, or that which he had built hard by and West of it
on the ground taken from the Connaght King; he ordained, That each May day for
ever, a general Meeting of all the Nobility should be held, (which Meeting they
called in their Language Morhail Visneach; and it may be Englished, the
Magnificence of Visneach.) That two great Fires should be made at this Meeting,
and betwixt them both all beasts sacrificed to their great God Beile (which
Keting conceives to have been the same with Belus) for expiating their sins,
appeasing his wrath, and obtaining from him favor for the following year. That
the same day and hour, in every District or Territory of the whole Kingdom, two
such other Fires should be made for the like purpose, that is for all the
respective Inhabitants to resort unto them with their Heathen Priests and
sacrifices. In fine, that every Chieftain and person of Quality come to the
said great Meeting at Visneach, should present the Connaght King with a Horse
and complete harness for a Horseman, as a Chiefry reserved to him for that
ground. Where Keting adds, that from these yearly Paganical Fires at Visneach,
and elsewhere, made in those days of Idolatry, to honor Beall, it is that ever
since, even along to this very day, the Irish call the first of May Lae
Beall-tine, which imports in English Beali's Fire day: for in their Tongue Lae
is day, and Tine is Fire. At, or near the Palace of Tailltionn, he by a new
Ordinance of his own commanded the ancient Fair, called Aonach Tailltinn
(whereof we have spoke before) to be kept yearly on Lammas day with much more
solemnity and a far greater conflux of people than ever. And there it was that
Wedding-matches were usually treated, agreed upon, concluded betwixt the
Parents of young Folks. And by this Monarchs new Law, every couple, marrying
there, paid six shillings eight pence (which the Irish then did call Vinghe
Airgiod, an ounce of Silver) to the King of Vlster, as an acknowledgment of his
having formerly been Lord of that portion. But for Tarach (alias Teambhuir)
where he had built his fourth Royal Palace, I find nothing ordained by him
concerning any solemnity or Assembly there. And the reason (I suppose) might
be, that even the very greatest and most solemn Assembly of all the Estates in
Parliament, either to make new Laws, and repeal the old, or to exercise any
other Acts of Supreme Jurisdiction, had been already both by Law and Custom
fixed in that place, ever since Ollamh Fodhlas's Reign, that is full 1200.
years, wanting only seventeen, before Tuathal Teachtmhor came to be King. No
more do I find any duty or Chiefry payable to the K. of Leinster. Whereof I
conceive also the reason might have been, That indeed (as Keting elsewhere, and
upon an other occasion than this here, observes) Cairbre Niafearr the very
first King of Leinster, had full two hundred and six years before Tuathal
Teachtmor's time, passed away both his own right, and that of his Successors
after him, in the foresaid portion of Land wherein Tarach was built, and for
ever made it over by way of sale and bargain, to Connor the first King of
Vlster and his Successors after him, in lieu of his beloved Daughter by name
Feilim Nua Chrothach, or Felicia the Beautiful, whom Cairbre had bought so dear
to be his Wife. So dear I say, because that fourth portion from Visneach to the
Eastern Sea, being in his time, and until this bargain made, part of Leinster,
contained three Cantreds of Land of the very best in Ireland, even all the Land
which now goes under the name of the County of Mead (I mean East-Meath) along
to Droghedagh, besides Fingale, and all the other Lands too on that side of the
River Liffy to Dublin. But if you desire to know what, or how much Land a
Cantred means, being I have told but now of three Cantreds in this Fourth
portion: Cambrensis, in his Hiber expug. l. 2. c. 18. answers, that as well in
the Irish as British Tongue, by a Cantred is meant that proportion or quantity
of Land which usually contains a hundred Villages. And whether Keting disagree
in this signification of that word, I know not certainly, because I know not
how much Land Cambrensis would assign to a Village, or Villa his Latin term. Of
this I am certain, that Keting assigns (according to the Irish account) but
thirty Feeding Towns, or Bailite ^iath as he calls '^m, to a Cantred, every one
of them containing twelve Plowlands, and every Plowland a hundred and twenty
acres of Irish measure, which is commonly three or four times greater than the
English. And this is both reflection and digression enough occasioned by the
mention made of Tuathal Teachtmhor the Irish Monarch in my foresaid 217. page.

59. My next Reflection is to correct an Error, which I observe in my 229.
page. For there, (and whether through my own mistake or the Printers, I know
not) it is said, That Connor, the first Provincial King of Vlster, was made so
by Eochuidh Feileach the Monarch and Author of the Pentarchy, about 400 years
before the Birth of Christ: whereas indeed it could not be so much, by at least
two hundred and eighteen years. Because this Monarch Eochadh Feileach, who made
that Connor King of Vlster, could not make him King before himself was Monarch;
and this he was not before the year of the World 5057. in which he killed his
Predecessor and possessed his Throne. Now, according to the Chronology of
Lucius, that year of the World was just one hundred forty two years before the
Birth of our Lord; because (says he) this Birth happened in the year of the World
5199. after the deluge 2957. and in the 8th year, as some say, or (as others)
in the 12th year of the Monarch of Ireland Criomthain Niadnairs Reign. Now it is
plain, that from the year 5057, to the year 5099. no more efflux'd but 142
years.

60. The review of my 229. page, and what is given there, of that happy King of
Mounster Feilim mhac Criomthain, brings to my thoughts here, a passage in
Keting that is very lingular, both for the Author and matter of it. The Author
is holy Bennin as the Irish call him in their Language, whom the Latins call
St. Benignus, even that very beloved Disciple of St. Patrick their great
Apostle, who was consecrated and installed by him in his own days and in his
own stead, Archbishop of Ardmagh. And the matter is the magnificent and costly
progress of the Kings of Cashel in former times about Leath Cuinn and Leath
Mogh throughout all Ireland. And, says Keting, it is in the Irish Book called
Leabhar na Geart (i. e. the Book of Rights or Dues, a Book beginning with these
words, Dligh gach Riogh O Riogh Cassil, and a Book written wholly by S.
Benignus himself 1200 years since) that the particulars of that stately
Progress are set down, as here they follow. Bestowed by him (that is, by the
King of Cashel, when he went that Progress) on the King of Cruachain a hundred
Swords, a hundred Cups of Plate, a hundred Horses, and a hundred Mantles.
Received from this Cruachain or Connaght King half a years entertainment, and
the Rising out (as they call it) of all the Country, waiting on him to
Tirconail. Bestowed by him on the King of Cineal Gonuill, twenty Rings, twenty
pair of Tables (which they called Fithchioll) and twenty Horses. Received a
months entertainment, and the rising out of that Country, along with him to
Tir-oghain. Bestowed by him on the King of Oileach, fifty Silver Cups, and
fifty Swords. Received a months entertainment, and the waiting of the Country
on him to Tullenoge. Bestowed by him on the Lord or Chieftain of Tullenoge
thirty Silver Bowls, and thirty Swords or Lances. Received twelve days
entertainment, and waiting on (as elsewhere) to Oirgialluibh. Bestowed by him
on this King (I mean of Oirghialluibh) eight shirts of Mayle, sixty Coats, and
sixty Horses. Received a months entertainment at Eambaine, with the rising out
into Vlster against Clanna Ruidhruidh. Bestowed by him on the King of Tarach 30
shirts of Mayle, thirty Rings, a hundred Horse, and thirty Harpers. Received
there a months entertainment, and the four chief. Families accompanying him
thence to Dublin. Bestowed by him on the King of Dublin ten Women, ten Ships,
and ten Horses. Received a months entertainment, and this Kings Company into
Leinster. Bestowed by him on the Leinster King thirty Cows, thirty Ships,
thirty Horses, and thirty young Maids which they termed Cumbhall. Received two
months entertainment, i. e. one months from Upper Leinster, and another from
the Lower, which they call Jachter Laighion. Finally, to the Tanist of the same
Low-Leinster, thirty Horses, thirty shirts of Mayle, and 30 Swords. And this
was the costly splendor of that general Progress of the Mounster Kings over
Ireland in former Ages, when they thought fit to make or undertake it. Which
Feidlimidius (alias Felim mhac Criomthain) King of that Province did in his
Reign; and this no longer since then the 845 year of Christ, for he entered
upon that Kingdom An. Dom. 818. and retired from it to lead an Eremitical Life
in the 27th yearafter. What the Original or Rise of it was, or what right a
Provincial King of Mounster could pretend to such a Progress, I do not find.
Nor do I know what moved Keting to desire the Reader not to account him the
Author of the Relation. Or why so contrary to his custom elsewhere generally
throughout his whole Chronicle, he quotes here the Author. It had been indeed
very well, and much to be wished, that he had done so all along for his other
Relations. But here perhaps he* thought fit to do it of purpose to decline the
invidious Censure of those of other Provinces, for magnifying so much his own
Province of Mounster without so good a warrant as Benuin's Book. Whatever his
motive was, the Relation it self puts me upon some occasional observations
here; which shall be in all three.

First Observation; That Dublin must have been a considerable place in the days
of Benuinn, seeing it had then, or at least before his time a King, and was a
Kingdom of it self, different from that of Leinster. And therefore that
however, or whenever it was first after that time destroyed; yet surely none of
those three Norvegian Brethren, Amelacus, Sitaracus, and Juor, was the first
Founder, but only the Repairer and Fortifyer of it a little before the second
Danish War. In which persuasion I Am fixed by considering that in the
Chorographical Tables of Ptolomy, who flourished under the Emperor T. Aurelius
Hadrianus Antoninus Pius, in the year of Christ 153. the People Eblani, and the
City Eblana is placed where Dublin has always been. And therefore Eblana in
Ptolomy is the very self-same Town we now call Dublin; the Latin Writers,
Dublinium, and Dublinia; the Welsh Britons, Dinas Dulin; the English Saxons in
times past, Duplin: and all from one of the two original Irish names of it. The
first of them was Dubhlinn, which imports a black Depth of Water that was
there. And the second not only was, but is still among all sorts of Irish, not
as Cambden has it, Bala-Cleigh but Bala-Ath-Cliath, importing not the Town upon
Hurdles, but the Town of the Ford of Hurdles. Which nevertheless is consistent
enough with the Tradition that when Dublin was first built, the foundation was
laid upon Hurdles, by reason the place had been deeply moorish. I could here
add out of Cambden, not only that Saxo Grammaticus writes, how it was pitifully
rent and dismembered in the Danish Wars, but also that in the Life of Griffith
ap Synan Prince of Wales, it is read that Harald of Norway, when he had subdued
the greatest part of Ireland, built Deuelin. I could likewise add my own
animadversions on both the one and other passage. viz. That the Irish
Chronicles make no mention of any Harald, either conquering any part of
Ireland, or building, or so much as repairing Dublin. That neither does the
Author of Polichronicon agree in the one or other point derived from that Life.
Nay, that according to him Sitaracus or Sitric was the Noruegian Builder of
Dublin. And yet I could further add that what Cambden has next out of the
foresaid Life may be very true. For after telling us, his own opinion of the
above Harald to be, That he was Harald surnamed Harfager, i. e. of the Fair
Locks or Tresses, who was the first King of Norway, he adds, that his Lineal
descent goes thus in that Life. Harald begat a Son named Auloed (alias
Abloicus, Aulafus, and Olauus) Auloed begat another Auloed: this had a Son by
name Sitric King of Dublin. Sitric begat Auloed, whose Daughter Racuella was
Mother to Griffith ap Synan born at Dublin, whilst Tirlough reigned in
Ireland* And all these matters, and much more relating to them, I could dilate
upon, were they to my purpose here. But they are not: because my purpose here
is only to trace up the antiquity of Dublin as far as I can. And this I have
done before out of Ptolomy, by showing that City to have been famous in his
time, which was above 1510 years since* But how long before, is a thing wholly
buried in oblivion for want of Records. And therefore I pass to my

Second Observation: Which is, to give the original of those Clanna Ruidhruidgh
against whom the King of Oirghillaedh (alias Vriel) with his People was bound
to wait on the Mounster Kings in their Progress. And this I do because their
name is very frequent both in the Irish Histories, and in all the Provinces of
Ireland, among the ancient Irish Septs, even at this very time. In short, as
their name, turned English, must be the Children or descendents of Roderick
(for thus we render the Irish name Ruadruidh:) so they had that name, as they
lineally derive their descent, not from either of the two Irish Monarchs called
by that name (though, to pass by the later, who was the very last of all the
Milesian Kings of Ireland, yet the former of them was so long before as the
LXX. Monarch in order of the same Milesian Race, who came to the Sovereignty of
Ireland in the year of the World 4907, that is before the birth of Christ 392
years) but much earlier, from Ruadhruidh mhac Sithghe that descended from Ir
one of the eight Sons of Milesius. Which Ir being dead before, or at least upon
the first partition of Ireland betwixt the two surviving Brothers, Heber and
Herimon, and their Cosins: and the foresaid Ruidhruidh mhac Sitghe succeeding
in the Lot. of Ir, which was in the North, he established both himself and his
posterity there: and in process of time became the great stock of a most
numerous warlike stubborn People (and among 'em, Lords, and Princes and Kings
too) whereof such as continued still within that portion of Ir and Northern
Division, are by the rest of the Irish called Na Faoir Vlltaigh, which words
import in our Language the right Vlster men. And not only they that so remained
within that Vlster Lot, but those that issued from them into the other
Provinces of Ireland, where many of 'em acquired large Territories, have always
gone under the name of Clanna Ruidhruidh, and by it are distinguished still
from all other Families descended either from Herimon, or Heber, or Ith, or any
else whatsoever of those very first Milesian Conquerours. Of those of them who
had so issued forth into other Provinces, are the progeny of Connall Cearnach
in Lease, a Territory of Leinster, and those Septs in Connaght, which go by the
peculiar name of Comhaicne Chonnacht, besides other Families in Corcaigh
Moruadh and Kiarruigh; parts of Mounster.

Third Observation is, That so many rich Presents made in one Progress by a
Provincial King, must argue Ireland to have been at least in those days of
Paganism whereof Benuinn writes (for he himself flourished about 1200 years
since) a Country fraught with exceeding great Riches. And verily there are
several other strong arguments to persuade us, it was so. 1. The golden Mines
discovered there, under the X. Monarch of the Milesian Conquest, by name
Tighernmhais, and a long time after made use of. In so much, that the Country
abounding with gold, the next Monarch after him, viz. Munemhon, who died in the
year of the World 3872. ordained, that all the Gentry should wear golden chains
about their Necks. And his next Successor Allerghoid's reign is noted in the
Irish Chronicles, for golden Rings therein first used in that Nation. 2. The
great number of Silver shields made by the command of Euno Airgtheach, the
Xvii. Monarch of the Milesian Conquest, and together with Caroches and Horses
bestowed by him on persons of Worth. He reigned seven years, and in the year of
the world 3882. was killed in Battle by his successor, having first derived
from those Silver Targets the surname of Airgtheach, which imports Silvered. 3.
The numerous company of Goldsmiths every where in that Kingdom. I am sure that
as Keting, (in Tighernmhais's reign) takes special notice of his name who was
the very first Master Goldsmith in those days: so does Gratianus Lucius enough
of latter days, I mean as to that matter of the great number of Goldsmiths in
'em among the Irish. For in his 118. p. he observes out of O Duuegan that even
S. Patric had in his own private Family of them at work three, namely Essuus,
Bidus and Tassachus. He further adds, that scarce in the Irish Histories may be
found an instance of any Chalices, Vials, or Utensils whatsoever dedicated to
holy uses at the Altar or in the Church, other than of pure Gold or Silver.
Besides, that the very coverings not only of Relics but of Books, all of
Silver and Gold, were so many throughout that Kingdom since it became
Christian, as might easily persuade any indifferent man, that of necessity
their number of Goldsmiths must have been very great. 5. The spoils of foreign
Countries, which for so many long Ages the Irish gathered home to Ireland, as
elsewhere in this Treatise has been said. 5. Their being so excellently seated
for Trading, that in those days of old they were mightily frequented by
Merchants out of Spain, France, Great Britain, etc. but without question much
more than Great Britain was. For proof we have the testimony of so knowing and
sure a Writer as Cornelius Tacitus in his Life of Agricola: where speaking of
Ireland in reference to Britain, he has these words, Melius aditus portusque
per commercia and negotiatores cogniti, signifying, That the Havens and Ports
of Ireland were better known by Commerce and Merchants than those of Britain.
6. The ounce of Gold yearly paid for every Nose in Ireland to the Danish
Victors whilst their Dominion lasted there: which also we have seen before out
of Keting. 7. The acknowledgment of Gerald of Wales himself, even for his own
time, that is, for the time following the horrible desolation of that Country
by the long and cruel Danish Wars, and the frequent continual plundering of it
by the Norvegians and other Easterlings for about a hundred and fifty years at
least. Yet Gerald, who in the second or third Age after so much Riches had been
carried away thence by those plundering Heathens, was an Eyewitness himself of
what remained still even in King Hen. II. reign, professes that Ireland at this
very time abounded with Gold. For Aurum quoque quo abundat Insula are his own
words, Expug. Hib. l. 2. c. 15. where, if you join with it his seventeenth
Chapter, you may observe him not only in three several places referring to and
exaggerating this very subject of the Irish Gold, but withal supposing in the
last of them, that without Irish Commodities and Commerce our Island of Great
Britain could not subsist.

Besides, I might peradventure to the same purpose of showing the plenty of
Treasure among the Irish, and that even but a very little time before the days
of Cambrensis (I am sure I might pertinently enough for showing their
liberality and Piety both, extended even to Foreign Parts) alleadg out of the
Chronicle of St. James's Benedictin Cloister seated at the West-gate of
Reinsburg (alias Ratisbona) in Germany, those vast sums of Gold and Silver,
besides the great proportion of other rich Donaries bestowed by the Mounster
King Conchabhar O Brien surnamed Slapparsalach and other Irish Princes upon
Dionysius, Christianus and Gregorius, three successive Irish Abbots of that
Cloister, and sent unto them by their own Irish Messengers come of purpose out
of Germany, at three several times, and with the Emperor Conrad's Letters
commending them that came last. Unto those and these Messengers was delivered
so great and Royal a sum by the foresaid King of Mounster, that thereby this
Cloister was from the very foundations not only rebuilt in a little time so
magnificently, that for the stateliness of the Work, it surpassed all other to
be seen in those days any where; but moreover, to maintain it and the Monks
therein for ever, purchased both within that very City of Reinsburg, and abroad
in the Country, in Houses, Lands, Villages, Towns, a mighty great Revenue and
perpetual Estate. And yet after all [ supererat ingens copia pecuniae Regis
Hiberniae] there was remaining still an exceeding great quantity of the King of
Ireland's money, says the said Chronicle. For so that Author calls the above
Conchabhar O Brien, though only King of Mounster: the time of whose Reign was
from the year of Christ 1127. when it began, to the year 1142. when he ended
both it and together with it his Life in a Pilgrimage at Kildare. I say nothing
of the mighty rich Presents, which he sent, and were carried from him, and
presented in his name to the Emperor Lotharius the II. by some of the noblest
Peers of Ireland who had received the Cross for going to the holy War at that
time in Palestine.

But there are two particulars, which on this occasion coming to remembrance, I
cannot pass over in silence. The one is concerning Marianus Scotus, a famous
man among the Learned, specially Chronologers. For in that Reinsburg Chronicle,
which speaks of Gregory, the third of those Irish Abbots now mentioned, we have
this account of him. 1. That after the same Gregory, upon the death of his
predecessor Christianus, was chosen Abbot to succeed him in the foresaid
Cloister of Reinsburg, and therefore gone to Rome to be consecrated by the
Pope, who then was Adrian IV. an English man, at that very time turned Monk in
this Cloister egregius Clericus Hiberniensis nomine Marianus, etc. an excellent
Irish Clerk by name Marianus a most learned man, who a long time at Paris had
publicly taught the seven Liberal Arts and other Sciences; and was there
Master to this very Adrian who now presided in the Apostolical Chair at Rome
when the foresaid Gregory was admitted by him to Audience. 2. That among other
questions Adrian enquiring of Gregory concerning Marianus, his old Praeceptor
at Paris, Gregory answered him thus, Master Marianus is well, and having
forsaken the World lives with us a Monk at Reinsburg. 3. That hereupon the Pope
delivered himself in these words: God be thanked, says he, For throughout the
Catholic Church, we do not know, under an Abbot, such an other man, so
excelling in Wisdom, Prudence, Wit, Eloquence, good manners, humanity,
dexterity, and other divine gifts, as my Master Marianus, etc. Hitherto the
very words of that Reinsburg Chronicle, done only into English. Which I have
therefore given here (out of Camb. Evers. page 164.) because I would restore
that famous man to his own native Country Ireland, notwithstanding his surname
of Scotus. What time he flourished we may gather hence: being we know that Pope
Adrian IV. whose Instructor in the Sciences he was, died in the year of Christ
1159. the fourth year and tenth month of his Pontificate.

The other particular shows how the Irish had been five hundred years before
piously munificent to Foreiners come to lead religious lives with them at home
in Ireland: as we have but lately seen they were five hundred years after to
those of their own Natives that devoted themselves wholly to the same Life
among Foreiners abroad. I must confess there are many more Instances in History
to show the same thing; but this one extracted by Cambden Cambden in his
country of Maio.
out of V. Bid, (l. 1. Eccles. Histor. cap. 4.) may be sufficient in this
place. Colman, an Irish Bishop, found a place in Ireland meet for building a
Monastery, named in the Scottish (that is Irish) Tongue Mageo. And he bought a
part of it, which was not much, of the Earl whose possession it was, to found a
Monastery therein: but with this condition annexed to the sale, that the Monks
residing there, should pray for the Soul of him that permitted them to have the
place. Now when he had in a very little time, with the help of the said Earl
and all the Neighbor Inhabitants built this Cloister, he placed the English
men there (who were thirty in number) leaving the Scots behind him in the
Monastery which he had before built in a small Isle on the West of Ireland by
name Inis-Bofindhe, that is, the Island of the white Cow. And that Cloister
which he had built within the Land, is inhabited even at this day by English
men. For it is the same which of a small one is grown great, and usually called
Mageo. And now, having this good while turned all to better orders, it contains
a notable Covent of Monks, who being assembled there out of the Province of
England, according to the Example of the reverend Fathers, under regular
discipline, and a Canonical Abbot, live in great continency and sincerity by the
labor of their own hands. Hitherto Bid. And Cambden, where he treats of the
County of Maio in Connaght, adds, that if he deceive not himself, that place
named Mageo in Bid, is the very same that now we call the Town of Maio, the
Head of that Shire. Which to be true, not only the neerness of Inis-Bofindhe,
where Colman left the Irish Monks, whom, together with those English, he took
along with him from Lindisfearn in Great Britain Ann 664. according to the
Saxon Chronology, printed with Bid by Wheloc.
, but the right Irish name of Maio confirms. For in that Language it is called
Magheo even at this day. But it is high time now to end a digression, which
though at first occasioned by my reflecting on Felim mhac Criomthain's costly
Progress about Ireland, has after by degrees, of it self insensibly spun out to
this length.

61. Although you may see for above four leaves together (that is from page
190, to page 199.) very much as well of the great Actions and fortunate
successes of the last Irish Monarch, Ruaruidh O Conchabhair, in his youth, as
of the total Eclipse of his glory, yea and pitiable change of his Royal State
in his old days, to the miserable condition of a poor, private, flitting,
forlorn Exile, and all proceeding from the unnatural cruelty of his own very
Son: nevertheless, amongst those former smiles of Fortune favoring him, had it
occurred, I had surely mentioned the General Assembly or Parliament of all the
Estates of Ireland, which he held with great solemnity in the first year of his
Reign, being the year of Christ 1166. at a place which Gratianus Lucius (in his
Camb, Evers. page 161.) calls in Latin Athboylochia; perhaps that Town which
now we call Athboy in Mead, and the Irish in their Language Bale-Ath-Buoy. But
which foever, or where soever that Athboylochia was, the Meeting there was so
numerous, that, besides the several peculiar Trains of the Provincial Kings and
other Princes and great Nobles of Lay-degree, and of three Archbishops too of
the four, thirteen thousand Horse at one time were counted at it. Nor was this
great, and for ought I have read, very last Parliament of the Milesians in
Ireland, more numerous than it was careful to provide for the Commonwealth, by
ordaining, That the former ancient good Laws, which length of time and
corruption of men had brought to disuse, should receive new vigor by a severe
observance and execution of them: but especially, that none should dare
infringe the sacred Immunities of the Church. So in effect says my foresaid
Author Gratianus. But all would not do. No ordinances of men could prevent the
Fate impending from Heaven over their Heads at that very time. For what is
decreed by God to fall, must fall some time. And the time of their Fall had its
visible beginning the very next year, which was 1167. as I have hinted before,
page 194. and you thall see at large in the following Second Part of his little
Work.

62. Reflecting upon my account of Malachias (given from page 262 to page 287
inclusively) and considering that I have therein said nothing at all of the
famous Prophecy, which goes in his name, of all the Popes of Rome who were to
succeed one another from his time forward either to the day of general
Judgment, or at least to the final desolation of that seven-Hill'd City:
therefore to satisfy in some degree such as have the curiosity and leisure to
read predictions of this kind, I thought it no great enlargement or
extravagance, to let them know of that Prophecy what follows here. 1. That all
the best account I have found of it hitherto, is from Thomas Messingham's Book
entitled Florilegium Insulae SS. printed at Paris an. 1624. who extracted it,
as he says, out of Arnoldus Wion l. 2. Ligni Vitae c. 40. page 307. 2. That
(under this Title, Prophetia S. Malachiae Archiepiscopi Ardmachani, totiusque
Hiberniae Primatis, ac Sedis Apostolicae Legati, de Summis Pontificibus) it
begins with a short line of three words only, and so proceeds on in a hundred
and eleven short lines more, one after another, which like the first, contain
but three words or four at most, commonly but two, and all in Latin. 3. That by
so many lines are signified so many Popes, and consequently a hundred and
twelve Popes in all that were to succeed in S. Peter's Chair, from the time (as
it is pretended) of that Prophetie's date, until the consummation. 4. That it
names none of them, save only the Last: and for the rest, it leaves us wholly
to divine of 'em, and of each a part by the character given of him in the short
line answerable only to him by the order of times and succession in the Holy
See. 5. That one Alphonsus Giacconius of the Dominican Order, has paraphrased
on the first threescore and sixteen of those prophetical Lines, in a Writing
distinguished into two Columns. Wherein the short Lines of the Prophecy it
self, placed in order, take up the first Column: the names of the Popes
prophesied of, the Second; each Pope directly placed against the Prophecy that
foretells him: and the Paraphrases or Expositions, that interpret the
predictions and apply them, take up the last, in the same order and opposition.
6. That as this Interpreter begins with Celestin the II. of that name,
expounding the first Line of him: so he ends with Urban the VII. of whom all
the Prophecy is only this, De rore caeli, which rendered in English is, Of the
Dew of Heaven, and interpreted almost in as few words by Ciacconius, viz. [ Qui
fuit Archiepiscopus Rossanensis in Calabria, ubi manna colligitur.] Who was
Archbishop in Rosanna in Calabria where Manna is gathered. 7. That by this one
Example we may both partly guess at the nature of the Prophesies, and plainly
see what kind of interpretations of them those of Ciacconius are. Whereof every
one runs in the same or like manner, endeavoring to verisie the prediction
either in the Country, or Institution, or Family, or Gentilitial Ensigns, or
some accident happened to the Pope foretold by it. 8. That as no man has yet
ventured on the interpretation of the next eleven prophetical Lines; which must
be answerable to the next eleven Popes, that before the now reigning Pope
Innocent XI. have since Urban VII. succeeded in the Pontifical Chair: so we can
hardly in our days expect any public interpretation or application of Bellua
insatiabilis to the same present Pope Innocent; tho it be what is answerable to
him in those foresaid Lines and Columns, if we take exact notice of the
Succession. 9. That, (which is more my design to give here) all the remaining
number of those prophetical short Lines, and consequently of Popes to succeed
the present, is only twenty six in the whole: a number of Popes not so very
great, but that much less than the ordinary age of a man may see it over, if
they should prove no longer lived than many of their Predecessors have;
whereof no fewer than eight in a succession took up in all but twelve years
time. 10. That for the better satisfaction of those who may be affected with
this kind of reading; and because it will not take up much room, nor require
any further dilatation, I give here those very six and twenty genuin Lines,
which however briefly (and obscurely too all of 'em, except the last) yet in
some prophetical manner tell us of those six and twenty Popes to come in
succession after his Holiness that now steers in a great Tempest the old
Fisher-Boat of Peter.

1. Poenitentia gloriosa. 2. Rastrum in Porta. 3. Flores circumdati. 4. De bona
religione. 5. Miles in bello. 6. Columna excelsa. 7. Animal rurale. 8. Rosa
Umbriae. 9. Ursus Velox. 10. Peregrinus Apostolicus. 11. Aquila rapax. 12.
Canis and Coluber. 13. Vir religiosus. 14. De balneis Etruriae. 15. Crux de
Cruce. 16. Lumen in caelo. 17. Ignis ardens. 18. Religio depopulata. 19. Fides
intrepida. 20. Pastor Angelicus. 21. Pastor and Nauta. 22. Flos Florum. 23. De
medietate Lunae. 24. De labor solis. 25. Gloria Olivae. 26. In persecutione
extrema S. R. E. sedebit Petrus Romanus, qui pascet oves in multis
tribulationibas: quibus transactis Civitas sepcollis diruetur, and Judex
tremendus judicabit populum suum. Finis.
11. That albeit these Predictions cannot be interpreted before the Popes whom
they signify are chosen: yet the last of them is very singular, being it names
the Pope, and is withal both long, and plain and terrible. For thus it runs in
English: In the last persecution of the Holy Roman Church, Peter a Roman shall
sit, who shall feed the sheep in many tribulations: which being over, the
seven-Hill'd City shall be destroyed, and the dreadful Judge shall judge his
People. Though whether we must understand here the final persecution of
Antichrist, and the end of the World, and general Judgment of all Nations in
the Valley of Josaphat: or whether only the last particular desolation,
judgment and ruin of Rome, and of the Papacy it self, never to recover more in
this World, or at least in that place: I can say nothing to it of either side.
But no more of this Prophetical Subject.

What remains, either of Reflection or Addition, are the few points that
follow. I forgot to give them in their due places, according to the order of
pages hitherto observed: and therefore I give them here.

63. The first relates to that famous Beannchuir Abbey in the North of Ireland;
whereof I have treated before page 62, etc. For concerning the greatness of it,
you have here an illustrious testimony out of a foreign Writer, Antony Yepez, in
his general Chronicle of the Benedictin Order, ad ann. Christi 565. cap. 2.
where speaking of that Irish Monastery, he says in express words, It was one of
the greatest our sacred Religion (he means the Benedictin Order) had in all
Europe, nay the very greatest of all that were built in the whole Occident, and
that no other was comparable to it. But for the austerity of their lives, the
sanctity of their conversation, the power of their doctrine and example, their
supernatural gifts; and in a word the extraordinary stupendous hand of God
with them in all their undertakings who were professed Votaries in that
illustrious Cloister, we have no less foreign, and much more ancient Writers
than Yepez to inform us. And certainly, if we may judge of this matter, by what
such credible Authors have written, some eight hundred, and some a thousand
years since of the Missionaries of that Abbey, the disciples of St. Congellus
(Founder and first Abbot thereof) sent abroad into other parts of Europe by
him, for the conversion of Infidels, and reformation of evil Christians: there
needs no more to convince us, that Beannchuir was a most perfect Seminary of
the most truly virtuous and wonderful Monks on Earth. For Example; of St.
Gallus (the Irish call him in their Language Gall) who was one of the twelve,
that in one Mission, at one and the same time went thence with Columbanus, who
was the thirteenth of them and Prefect of this Mission, thus writes St.
Notkerus Balbulus (in his Martyrologe 17 Call. Nov.) that he converted the
people of Switzerland and Suevia from Idolatry: confirmed his preaching to them
with the power of Miracles: and that him the divine goodness made Apostle of
the Allemaigns: as by whom that Nation which he had found enveloped in Paganism
was enlightened with true Religion, and brought from the darkness of ignorance
to the Sun of Justice who is Christ. So, and much more in short, writes the
said holy Notherus of this great Apostle of the Allemaigus St. Gallus, from
whom or whose Monastery, the Town of St. Gall, so famous even at this day, has
been called. As for the particulars as well of his stupendous austerity, as
Miracles above Nature, they may be seen at large in his Life extant in
Messingham and Surius, written originally by Walafridus Strabo. But for
Columbanus himself (a Leinster man born, and but twenty years old when he went
to Sea from Beannchuir, Head of that Mission) whoever please to read over
seriously his Acts, written about a thousand years since by one of his own
well-nigh Contemporaries, Abbot Jonas, must needs, I think, be suspended in
admiration of a man so prodigious in all respects. I cannot be otherwise my
self, when I observe the whole course of his Life in Ireland, France, Burgundy,
Allmaign, and last of all in Italy where he died. Nor verily does e'^n Caesar
Baroniug himself, after so many other both ancient and modern Authors, seem
less affected with admiration, where he speaks thus of him (ad an. Christi
612.) It appears (says he) to have proceeded from an extraordinary favor of
God, that so great a man, come from Ireland to France, should in the most
profligate times illustrate the Church. A man of such transcendent merits, that
if any would in some things equal him to Elias, I should not think he erred.
Whereas in this most holy man, living with his disciples in the Wilderness,
besides wonderful abstinence, and the most exact observance of all Monastic
Rules, and other his eminent Virtues, may be observed so great a zeal of the
honor of God, and fortitude of Soul to reprove evil Princes. Who also herein
was the more like to Elias, that he wanted not P^rsecutors: not even a new
Achab, and another Jezabel, as you your self may find by reading his Life. But
truly his banishment out of Burgundy by King Theodorick, at the instigation of
the wicked Queen Brumchildis (that bane, that Murdress of ten Kings, for she
destroyed so many, some by poison and some by other damnable ways) and his
Journey thereupon to Italy, appeared to be no other than a long continued
Triumph for his victory over Kings and their detestable cruelty; yea and a
wonderful Triumph indeed, because accompanied with so many prodigious signs and
Wonders wrought by him every where as he went along. So says Baronius, in the
foresaid place, wholly without doubt suspended in admiration of what himself
does so relate of this stupendous man of God. Whose prophetical Spirit also in
foretelling King Lotharius so positively and precisely, that within three years
the two other Kings Theodorick and Theodobertus should be destroyed, and he (
Lotharius) succeed them by that time, and be Monarch of all France: the same
Baronius (ad eund. an.) particularly relates. As also he does, the quarrel of
Bruinchildis to Columbanus, and only cause of his banishment, to have been, His
exhorting the said King of Austrasia Theodorick to marry a Wife, and turn away
his Concubines. For she apprehended, that a regnant Queen or (which is the same
thing) a lawful Wife would surely at long running turn her out from the
management of State Affairs, which Whores could no^. And then again our great
Annalist the same Baronius (ad an. 615.) returning once more to that heavenly
Man, and telling us of his death in Italy (after he had founded there the most
renowned Cloister of Bobium, as he had formerly done before his banishment,
that of Luxovium in Burgundy) he delivers it with this Elogium of him. This
year (says he) that Wonder-working Adorer of God, Columbanus, the terror and
scourge of evil Kings, departed this Life. Which Elogium given by so eminent a
Cardinal, Historian, because there Ordericus Vitalis Angligena, in his Book of
Ecclesiastical History.
needs no more be said of Columbanus, I will only add the testimony of an
ancient English Author, whom I suppose to have lived and died in foreign parts a
Monk of Vtica many hundred years since, though lately printed in the History of
the Normans, published by Andreas du Chesne Anno 1619. They cannot be ignorant
(says he) how the blessed Father Columbanus, born in Ireland, contemporary to
St. Benedict, having left both his Fathers House and Country, and together
with other most excellent Monks arrived in France and received by Childebert
King of the French, built in Burgundy the Cloister of Luxovium. Nor how being
banished thence by the most impious Queen Brunichild and gone to Italy, and
received there by Agilulphus King of Longobards, he founded the Cloister of
Bobie. Nor how this wonderful man, laboring amongst the Chief in the Vineyard
of Christ, shone most gloriously on Earth with Signs and Prodigies. Nor how, as
he was taught by the Holy Ghost, he endited and prescribed a Rule of Life for
the Monachical Order, and was the first Author of it in France. Nor how from
his School issued those renowned Monks, that, like stars in the Firmament,
appeared in the Church, all resplendent with holiness and Miracles. Nor finally
can they be ignorant how in particular, Eustasius Luxoviensis; Agitus
Resbacensis, Faro Meldensis, Audomarus Bononiensis, Philipertus Gemeticensis,
with many other most excellently religious both Abbots and Bishops, whose
sanctity on Earth not only has been confirmed by most evident signs from
Heaven, but has even mightily propagated the Church of God amongst the Children
of men, were all of them Scholars of that very same wonderful Columbanus. And
this is the testimony in short given of him by Ordericus Vitalis Angligena.
Which together with what you have seen before, though very briefly and almost
in general of that singular Mission from the Abbey of Beannchuir, may be
sufficient to show the extraordinary holiness of that place, if we judge of the
Tree by the fruit it bears. And the conclusion of all must be, that we have
reason to think, that how great soever this Irish Cloister was either for the
dimension of its buildings and ground whereon it stood, or for the number of
Monks residing therein, which elsewhere we have seen amounted to three
thousand: yet undoubtedly it was far more illustrious for their sanctity and
perfection of Life.

64. But before I pass to a new Subject, the Reader will give me leave to
observe here, that Antony Yepez, notwithstanding his testimony for the
greatness of Beannchuir, has been very much out in accounting it one of his own
Benedictin Order. It was the year of our Lord 494. that St. Benedict himself,
in the fourteenth year of his age, retired from being at School in Rome to
dedicate himself to God in a contemplative Life, as Baronius writes in the same
year. But above a hundred years before that time, Ireland was replenished with
perfect Monks, and Monasteries of St. Patrick's own Institution: being, as we
have seen elsewhere out of Henricus Altisiodorensis, it was so before St.
Patrick's death, and his death happened in the year 493, as Jocelin says. And,
if neither by one of those Irish Monks at home who had their immediate
institution from St. Patric himself, nor by one of their immediate disciples,
yet certainly and at farthest very early after St. Patrick's death, it was that
that so much celebrated Irish Abbey of Beannchuir was founded by St. Congellus;
and consequently no later than the Monastery of Columb-Cille at Dear-magh,
being the same Congellus and he were contemporaries. Whence a further
consecution is, that Beannchuir must have been founded at least some years
before Columb-Cille's departing from his Monastery at Dearmach in Ireland, on
this Mission to convert the Picts in the North of Great Britain; which
departure of his, according to Venerable Bede, was precisely in the year of
Christ 565. Now it is plain, that before the year of Christ 561. there is not
in Baronius no not so much as any mention made of Benedicts sending any of his
disciples to the West, no not into France to propagate his Order. Nay before
the year 595. his Order had received no public approbation from the Church,
not even within Italy it self. As for Great Britain, it is no less clear, that
the Benedictin Order was not heard of there till after Austin the Monk's coming
thither from Gregory the Great to convert the Saxons. And yet we know that long
before his time the famous Abbey of Monks at Bangor, near Westchester, had been
founded even by the foresaid self same Irish Abbot St. Congellus, come thither
of purpose from his own former Abbey, the so much admired Beannchuir in the
North of Ireland, to build an other in Britain by the pattern of it. But as
for Ireland, certainly not before all their own rigid austere Monks of St.
Patrick's Rule, and Congheall's and Collumb Cille's institution had been
utterly destroyed by the long Danish Wars, nor after neither till about the
time of Malachias, that is even five hundred years at least after the
foundation of Beannchuir, was any Benedictin Abbey there. So far is Yepez from
any just pretense to Beannchuir, or just challenge to it in behalf of his
Benedictin Order. Besides, I think nothing can be plainer, than that St.
Columbanus, and Gallus with those other eleven holy Fellow missioners, sent out
of the same Beannchuir-Abbey into foreign parts to preach the Gospel (as has
been said before) were of the same Order that was professed in that Cloister,
being they were themselves professed sons and members of it under the same
blessed Abbot Congellus, with whose leave and benediction they departed from it
on their miraculous fruitful Mission beyond Seas. And sure I am that Ordericus
Vitalis Angligena, in his eighth Book of Ecclesiastical History, near the end,
as Messingham quotes him, denies they were of the Benedictin or any other
Institution than that was peculiar to themselves and those of their own
Followers in France, Burgundy, etc. Moreover, I think it no less manifest that
if the said illustrious Abbey of Beannchuir in Ireland had been of the
Benedictin Order, so must also Bangor in Wales have been: seeing they had both
the same Founder, to wit the Blessed Congheall, or (as they call him in Latin)
Congellus. And yet to assert this of Bangor in Wales, must be against all
reason. Because we know Bangor has been so far from any Roman or Italian Order,
that Dinooth the Abbot and other Learned men thereof, were the grand sticklers
against submitting to the Roman Pontiff himself, though so good a man and
Pontiff both, as Gregory the Great was known to be. For they were the men
pitched and relied upon by the Britons to be, and accordingly were, as to
matter of Learning, the chiefest opposers of Austin the First Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Conferences he had with the British Bishops, to bring them
to some acknowledgment of and submission to the Pope. And it is no way
probable, that Dinooth or his Monks, if they had been of the Benedictin Order,
would have so fiercely opposed his Legate, especially in point of Canonical
submission to the Delegant himself, whose only authority was it which gave
being and credit to the same Order, by confirming it so lately before in a
Roman Council. Much less would their fierceness and resolution in that matter
have been so unalterable as to occasion the slaughter of eleven hundred and
fifty of their Brethren Monks of the very same Bangor Abbey at one time and
place. Whereof you may see the particulars in Venerable Bede, l. 2. Eccl.
Histor. c. 2. and in Whelock's Notes upon this Chapter. So that Yepez in making
Beannchuir a Benedictin Abbey, knew not what he said, or at least what could be
objected against him.

65. Why the Staff of Jesus, mentioned in my 273. page, was so called, you may
read in Jocelinus, an English Monk that five hundred years since, at the
instance of two Irish Bishops, and Sir John Curcy (whom he calls Prince of
Vlster, because (as I suppose) he was the first Conqueror of it under the
English Crown) digested the Life of St. Patrick out of many former Lives
written of Him by several Authors, but written by them in such manner and style
as did not invite Readers. It is therefore this Jocelinus, that in his Life of
St. Patrick, cap. 24. gives a pretty large account of that Staff of Jesus.
Which is, in substance. That when St. Patrick, after a long abode of many years
with St. German Bishop of Altissiodorum in France, had with his leave at last
departed toward Rome, in his journey thither he, either by divine instinct or
Angelical instruction, diverted to a certain Island in the Tirrhene Sea, of
purpose to visit a certain holy Anchoret of great same living there, whose name
was Justus. 2. That upon his arrival, after holy salutes and spiritual
conference, Justus gave him a Staff, saying, he had received it from the very
hand of our Lord Jesus Christ himself; but to be given him. 3. That after this,
St. Patrick discoursing with other men, who lived in the same Island at some
little distance from the Cell of Justus, whereof some appeared brisk and young,
others old even to decrepit age: and understanding that those extreme old men
he saw were the very genuin sons of those other that appeared young: and
enquiring how that could be? One of the same young men, both to remove his
admiration which was great, and to satisfy his demand, gave him this answer.
We (says he) from our childhood, through the mercy of God, have been always
given to works of mercy: and our door was open to every Traveller, that for
Christ's sake desired either Victuals or Lodging. On a certain Night we
received a stranger with a Staff in his hand, and according to our best ability
treated him with all necessaries and kindness. Next Morning, upon his departure
he blessed us; nor only blessed us, but moreover spoke these words unto us,
viz. I am Jesus Christ, whom in person you have this Night received into your
House, who so often before have received me in my servants. And then he
delivered the Staff he had in his hand, to the man of God our spiritual Father:
commanding him to keep it for a certain Pilgrim, by name Patrick, who after
many days should arrive here, and upon him to bestow it. Which command given,
he presently ascended into Heaven: and we have ever since remained in the same
state of youthful countenance, briskness and vigor of body we were in at that
time. But our sons that were but little children then, are now according to
their age come to be decrepit, as you see them. 4. That when St. Patrick had
heard all, he gave God thanks: and after a few days longer conversation with
Justus, proceeded on his Journey, carrying in his hand that holy Staff
appointed by God himself to be an instrument for his servant Patrick to work
therewith prodigious things in Ireland, as the Rod of Moses had formerly been
for effecting the famed Wonders in Egypt: the greatest difference betwixt them
being, that this of Jesus brought health and life to the Irish Nation, but that
of Moses, death upon the Egyptian. So in effect Jocelinus, mostly concerning
the original of that Staff. Unto which he adds ( cap. 170.) concerning also
the powerful Virtue of it, That by lifting it up on high, and threatening with
it, St. Patrick, after a long Fast of forty days and forty nights, joined with
continual fervent Prayer, forced together out of all parts of Ireland, all
venomous Animals whatsoever, to the Mountain called in Irish Cruachain Ailge,
in the West of Conaght, and from thence precipitated them into the Western
Ocean, lying under this Mountain: and this with such a blessed riddance to the
whole Island, as to have left or have rendered it ever since incapable of
harboring any creature alive that were Poisonous, though brought into it from
other Countries.

How Keting understands this later point. we have seen before.* And for Gerald
of Wales, though he acknowledge both the Virtue and name of that Staff, calling
it Virtuosissimum baculum Jesu, the most powerful Staff of Jesus; yet he says
withal, that the Origin of it is as uncertain as the Virtue is most certain.
Adding immediately in the same place, That in his own time, and by his own
Country men the British Conquerours, that noble Treasure (for so he calls it)
was translated from Ardmagh to Dublin.

What became of it since, I cannot tell. But this I find in St. Bernards Life
of Malachias, that this Staff of Jesus, and the Text of the Gospel that was St.
Patrick's own Book, or that used by himself, were the two most precious Jewels
not only of the Church of Ardmagh, but of any in the whole Kingdom of Ireland.
That they were held by all the Irish in the greatest veneration above all other
holy Relics whatsoever; but more especially the Staff, as being that which
our Savior Christ himself had both carried in his own divine hand, framed by
his own peculiar workmanship, and recommended in such a special manner to be
given to his Apostolical servant Patrick. I find moreover in David Rooth, the
late Roman Catholic Bishop of Ossory's Elucidations upon Jocelin, whatever may
be objected by Critics against this History of the Staff of Jesus answered.
For if their Exception be against our Savior's appearing on Earth after his
Ascension to Heaven from Mount Olivet: he remits then to St. Ambrose, where he
tells, in his Oration against Auxentius, how, very long after that time our
Lord appeared to S. Peter at a Gate in Rome, entering that City. And if it be
against any such Wonder-working power in the Staff it self, though by divine
Ordinance or consecration of it for such uses: he desires them to consider not
only the Rod of Moses in Egypt, and brazen Serpent in the Desert, nor only the
brazen Statue of our Savior erected at Caesarea Eusebius l. 7. Hist. c. 18.
and Sozomen, l. 5. c. 21.
Philippi (otherwise called Paneas) by the Woman in the Gospel, cured by our
Savior of an Issue of blood; but also the torn Cloak and poor Staff of the
Egyptian Anchoret Senuphius, wherewith Theodosius the Great arming himself, and
marching confidently in the head of his Troops against an infinite number of
Enemies, who in one terrible Host came to fight him, obtained that miraculous
Victory over them, which is recorded by Metaphrastes, and Glycas (Annal. Part.
4.) and Baronius too ( ad an. 388.) Even that very same wonderful Victory,
which, the Winds and Tempests, fighting for him, and (...) their own Darts upon
his Enemies, he obtained against Maximus the Tyrant: and which Claudian the
Christian Poet has so divinely celebrated in heroic Verse; part whereof speaks
thus to Theodosius himself: O nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus atratas hyemes, cui militat Ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
Besides, that pious learned Bishop of Ossory desires it be considered, that
the former History of the Staff of Jesus has no less illustrious, famous,
approved Authors, than those of the later History of the Staff of Senuphius
are. But whether it be, or be not so, my design here is not concerned. For I
have already let the Reader know what is written of, and has been delivered all
along, and what is believed at present among the Roman Catholic Irish of that
religious Relic the Staff of Jesus.

What remains either of Reflection or Addition, are these few Notes that
follow. I have indeed forgot to give them in their due place, according to the
order of pages observed hitherto in this Section. But that will not hinder the
understanding them, where they are given here.

66. The first is a^ very material Animadversion upon my 146 page. Where,
because following the authority of D. Geoffrey Keting, I supposed, and
accordingly told of an Interregnum in Ireland, that by reason of the
overruling power of the Danes, and their great Commander Turgesius, had
succeeded immediately upon the drowning of the Monarch Niall Caille: I must
here let the Reader know, that Gratianus Lucius (page 297 and 298.) brings
several arguments to evince not only, That there had never been any Interregnum
at all of the Irish Monarchy at any time during either of the two Danish Wars;
nor consequently Turgesius the Dane had ever succeeded, not even by usurpation,
any of the Irish Monarchs; but that Keting was led into Error in this
particular by Gerald of Wales. Among which arguments are these two: 1. That Sir
James Ware in his Catalogue of the Kings of Ireland lately published, makes no
mention at all of Turgesius. 2. That the Annals of Ireland place both the end
of Niall Caille's Reign, and the beginning of Maolseachluinn I. in the year of
our Lord 844. But, as to the Interregnum, neither of these arguments, nor any
other which I have yet seen, evince more than that the Interregnum was very
short, and concluded with one year.

67. The second Note must refer to p. 222, etc. where the Subject treated is
the true Christian religious great Virtues indeed of as many Irish Monarchs, or
Kings of all Ireland, as I have remembered there. but the addition to them here
is only of two more, viz. Ainmirus the son of Sedna, and Donnaldus the son of
Aidus. For so they are called in Latin by Gratianus Lucius: though in Irish
their names and surnames are Ainmhire mhac Seadhna, who was the XI. and
Domhnall mhac Aodh Slain, who was the Xviii. Christian King of all Ireland.

The former, com to the Sovereignty in the year of Christ 563. but parted from
it, and his life too, by a horrible murder committed on him in the fourth year
of his Reign, was so Christianly zealous for the purity of Religion, Rites,
Discipline, Church, that he could not abide the least blemish, spot or wrinkle
in any of them. In so much, that in the Irish Histories it is specially
recorded of him to his great honor, how, when he had observed some things
amiss in the Rituals, i. e. some Errors crept in, or some deviation from the
Rules prescribed them, though but so lately before, by their great Apostle St.
Patrick: and when about the same time he had heard by fame of the excellent
knowledge, integrity, sanctity, wisdom of Gildas in Great Britain; he sent his
own Letters to invite him to Ireland, toward the reforming there whatever had
been so amiss. But why Gratianus Lucius here, gives the surname of Badonicus to
Gildas (for he calls him Gildas Badonicus) I confess I do not know, nor can
conjecture, unless perhaps that Northern Mountainous Country (in Yorkshire)
now called Blackemere in English, but formerly in Latin Mons Badonicus has
been the native Country of this ancient Father. This I know, that in
Bibliotheca Patrum he is surnamed Sapiens, or Gildas the Wise. And moreover,
that Polydore Virgil (l. 3. Hist. Angl.) writes how Gildas himself has told us
his little Book ( de excidio Brittannico) that himself was born that very year
wherein the Britons had obtained against the Saxons the famous Victory at Mons
Badonicus, which was the forty fourth year after the first landing of Hengistus
and Horsus, being the year of Christ 492. Unto which if we join what the same
Polydore had said before ( l. 1. Hist. Angl.) of Gildas, viz. That he
flourished about the year of Christ 580. we may conclude, that certainly the
time set down in the Irish Books for his going to Ireland, as invited thither
by the foresaid Monarch Ainmhire mhac Sedhna, agrees full well with this time
and age of Gildas then.

The later of these two Monarchs, namely Domhnal, son to Aodh Slain, who not
only came with pure hands without blood to the Crown, but after fourteen year's
glorious Reign first, and then eighteen months sickness, parted with Crown and
life together peaceably on his Bed (which was in that Nation a very singular
blessing of God.) This Domhnal I say, besides his other great Virtues, is most
deservedly celebrated for a very great Exemplar of Christian humility and
contempt of himself. He had through human frailty committed some fault; which,
though I do not find expressed or specified what it was; I find notwithstanding
the rarest instance of Repentance, submission and humiliation of a King in him,
that could be, to procure the forgiveness of it from his own Subject, tho a
holy man of that Nation, called St. Fechinus. For, after earnest humble
entreaties to this man of God for pardon, when he had found him backward still,
and hard to relent, he prostrated himself on the ground at his feet, and
suffered him to tread on his bare neck.

67. My next additional Note although of another Subject, tends nevertheless
very much to the magnifying of the Ancient Irish, as to that natural heroic
Virtue which next to the favor of Heaven preserved them for so many Ages a
Free Nation; Martial courage and Valor I mean. And therefore this Addition
must relate to those pages, where (from 25 to 40.) I treated before, of the
Danish Wars in Ireland. However, it is such an addition to the brave
performances of the Irish in those Wars, that I know not whether it be not the
greatest of them all. I am sure that as it was very great indeed: so the Irish
Nation is beholden to a Foreiner, namely Adolphus Cypreus, for transmitting the
remembrance of it to Posterity, in his Annals of the Bishops of Sleswick, a
City in Denmark. For these are his own Latin words in the sixth page of that
Work: Reynerus Rex Danorum LVI. potentissimus, qui tamen ab excitata fortuna,
quae ipsi in subjugandis Regnis Sueciae, Russiae, Angliae, Scotiae, Norvegiae,
and Hiberniae plurimum favit, ad inclinatam and pene jacentem descivit. Namque
ab Hella Hiberniae Rege captus, in carcere expiravit, sub an. 841. In English
these: Reyner the LVI. most powerful King of the Danes, who nevertheless from
the height of Fortune that favored him so mightily in subduing the Kingdoms of
Swedland, Russia, England, Scotland, Norway, Ireland, was thrown down as low.
For being taken by Hella King of Ireland, he died there in prison about the
year 841. And yet I must observe here with Gratianus Lucius, 1. That Cypreus
mistook both the name and quality of him that took Prisoner this great Danish
King. 2. That no King of Ireland nor Provincial, nor even other lesser King in
Ireland was ever called by the name of Hella: nor was that name of any body at
all known among the Irish. 3. That the right Irish name in all likelihood was
Oillioll, which because hard of pronuntiation, Foreiners mistook or changed it
to Hella. 4. That since Christianity planted in that Country, not even any
Oillioll was King among 'em, save only the Monarch Oillioll (surnamed) Molt,
who was next successor to Laoghaire mhac Neill in the year 458. and was killed
in Battle An. 478. And lastly therefore, that he must have been some great
General of an Army, and his name Oillioll, that took this great Reynerus, and
kept him in Prison till he died.

68. Another is of the Fatal Stone, as they call it, and refers to page 378.
where I ended my Animadversions on the Scottish Histories concerning Fergus I.
Of that famed Stone, Keting, in his Relations of the People called Tuath De
Dainainn, gives this account. 1. That this Nation, who were the last possessors
of Ireland immediately before the Milesian Race, had on their arrival there
from Norway brought with them four special Jewels of extraordinary use: namely,
a Sword, Lance, Pot, and the Enchanted Stone, which in Irish they call by one
name Liath Fail; by an other, Cloch na Cineamhna, this later importing in
English, the Stone of Destiny, or Fortune. 2. That after the Milesiaus had
conquered those Tuath-Da-Danan, and consequently got possession of this Stone,
and after they had not only placed it at Teambhuir (our Tarach) where all their
Nobles and people did usually meet to choose the King of Ireland, but ordained
that the new Elect should sit thereon: as son as he did so, the Stone under
him, by virtue of some Magical or Diabolical Charm, gave such a mighty loud
ecchoing, astonishing sound, that presently the Election was known thereby far
and near. 3. That this Oraculous Virtue of it ceased, as some say, when the
Pentarchy was set up in that Kingdom by the Monarch Eochadh Feilioch; or, as
others say, about the time of our Saviors birth, when throughout the World all
the sallacious Oracles of the Gentiles became mute. 4. That for its name of
Cloch na Cineamhne, or Stone of Destiny, or Fatal Stone, the reason was an old
Prophecy, deliliver'd of it by Tradition, which Hector Boethius rendered thus
in Latin Verse:

Ni fallat Fatum, Scoti hunc quocumque locatum
invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
But in Irish Meeter, it is in Keting thus: Ciniodh Sco^t saor an Fine, man
ba^breag an Faisdine,
mar a bhfulghid an Liath Fail, dlighid flaitheas do ghabhail
Importing in both, that wherever the Seottish Nation did find that Stone,
they should have Dominion, Power, and Regal Majesty. 5. That because of this
prophetical Prediction, and reputation of it, when Fergus that famous Invader
of the Picts (I mean Fergus Mor mhac Ercho, mhic Eochadh muin reamhair, as the
Irish call and genealogize him, from his Father and Grandfather, whom the
Scottish Historians call Fergus I.) would be created K. over hisown conquering
Nation, the Scots of Pictavia or Albania in Great Britain, he sent to his
Brother Mairchiortach Mor mhac Ercha, (then Monarch of Ireland) for this fatal
Stone, and had it over into Scotland, of purpose that by sitting on it when he
was created King, he might assure the establishment of his Crown, and power of
his own People, in his new conquered Kingdom. 6. That for many ensuing Ages it
remained there for a monument (either of Religion or Superstition) being in the
same manner, and to the same purpose sat upon by the succeeding Kings of
Scotland till Edward I. of England in the current of his Victories had it
brought away out of the Abbey of Scone to the Abbey of Westminster. Where, ever
since, it has been kept, placed under the Royal Chair which the Kings of
England usually sit in at their Coronation. 7. That in the memory of our
Fathers, that prophetical Prediction of it and the ancient Scots, which you
have but now seen, was fulfilled in England too, when James VI. of Scotland was
crowned King of England at Westminster, and has ever since continued to be more
and more verified in the succession of Charles I. of glorious memory, and
Charles II. our present most gracious King. For by the line of Maine mhic
Cuirek, mhic Luighc, they are descended through a World of Generations of
ancient Scots the Milesian Irish, from Heber, who (as has been already noted
elsewhere) being the son of Milesius, and in a joint Sovereignty ruling with
his Brother Herimon, was three thousand years since King of all Ireland. And
this is the account which Keting (where he treats of Tuath-De-Danainn) gives of
that fatal Stone. Save only that he makes no express mention of Charles II. nor
could indeed, as who died himself in the Reign of Charles I. But nevertheless
he expressed his mind sufficiently, as to the purpose of that Fatal Prediction,
by naming his Father and Grandfather both. I am sure his expression of joy in
the same place, for their having successively come to be Kings of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, must have involved the concomitant wishes of his
heart for their posterity after them to attain and continue the same glory
while time shall be. And therein he has me to join, with all my very Soul.

69. The Fifth may be referred to page 155. where I treated briefly somewhat of
Cormock O Cuillenain that excellent, pious, holy man, who was at the same time
both Archbishop and King of Mounster, and continued so for seven years
together, that is, even all along till he lost his life in the Battle of
Mughna. For to this rare Example of the same man's being both King and Priest,
may be added one more of the same Nature; and in the very same Kingdom of
Mounster too. Where, as Keting acquaints us, upon the Death of Duibh Lachne
next Successor in that Provincial Kingdom to Cormock O Cuilleinan for seven
years more, the Princes and Gentry meeting chose another Priest, nay a Monk to
be their King, even the Abbot of Inis Catha, by name Flaithhiortach mhac
Jonm^uinein: who reigned thirteen years over them. And they chose him,
notwithstanding he had been the chief Adviser of Cormock O Cuillenain so
lately, that is but seven years before, to venture that Battle against Flann
mhac Sionnadh the Monarch, and the Leinster King Cearbhall mhac Muaregein,
which proved so fatal to that good King, and his whole Kingdom of Mounster, and
to this very Abbot himself troublesome. For he was taken Prisoner in it, and as
such detained some time at Kildare by that Leinster King, until at the
intercession of the Abbess of Saint Bridgets Monastery in that Town, he was
released and returned to his own Abbey of Inis-Catha in Mounster. Whence after
some few years, wholly employed there in rigid ascetical exercises, he was
called upon and even compelled to take the Royal State of a King. So says
Keting in his Reign of the said Monarch Flann. Where also he notes occasionally
an other great Error of Hanmer in his Chronicle. For Hanmer (page 88.) says,
that both the foresaid Cormock O Cuillenain King of Mounster, (but he makes him
King of Ireland) and Cearbhall O Muirreigein King of Leinster were killed by
the Danes in the year of our Lord 905. Whereas on the contrary, neither was
Cearbhall killed in that year, nor that Battle fought of either side by the
Danes, but of one side by the Monarch, and of the other by Cormock who perished
therein. All which is abundantly testified by the Authentic Irish Book of that
very Battle, which Book has for Title, Catha Bheala Mughna. Besides, as Keting
observes in the same place, the Danes attempted nothing at all, no not once
against the Irish, during the seven years Reign of Cormock O Cuillenain over
Mounster. Nay, there was so general a peace over all Ireland for this time, so
great plenty of all earthly blessings, so universal a Reformation of manners,
and so much devotion and zeal in all sorts of people for restoring what had
been destroyed by the first Danish Wars and other attempts following it, that
nothing was to be seen more frequent now than every where repairing the old,
and building new Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, Monasteries. Yea, the numbers
of men dedicated only to a religious life was such at this time, that Cormock O
Cuillenainn tells in his Psalter of Cashel, that in Muingharid (formerly called
the City of Deochaine-assain) there was a Monastery with six Churches belonging
to it in the same Town, wherein the number of Conventual Monks was 1500.
whereof five hundred were learnned Preachers, five hundred Psalmists to serve
constantly in the Choire, and four hundred old Fathers applied wholly to
Contemplation. Such was the happy state of Ireland in the short Reign of the
same Cormock over Mounster; which must have been at or a little before the year
of Christ 914. because this year ended the thirty eight years long Reign of the
Monarch Flann mhac Sionna, who killed in Battle that good King Cormock, as we
have seen before.

70. The Sixth being an addition to what has been said before against Hanmer,
page 403. gives you to understand, How Dionbhuillach, son to the King of
Denmark, invading Ireland with a mighty Force, landed in the North and marched
his Army so far as Ardmach. How Conchabhar the first Provincial King of Vlster,
with his own people the Sept of Clanna Ruadhruidh (i. e. the Children or
Descendants from one Ruadhruidh, whom they call Ruadhruidh Mor) and with them
alone, nay with tumultuary small Forces raised out of them, found himself
necessitated to attack these Danes. How, by the advice of one Geanann
Gruadhollas, lest the Irish Youth should be contemned by the Danish old
experienced Soldiers, Conchabhar used the stratagem of tying Locks of gray wool
in form of beards to their cheeks and chins, whereby having made 'em seem the
more considerable to the Enemy, as if they also had been Veterans; and then
giving a furious charge on Dionbhuillach, he defeated utterly all his Danes.
How these ascititious woollen beards were called in their Language Vlladh, and
from them it was that ever since the Northern Province of Ireland has been
called (in the same Irish Language) Vlladh, which we in ours call Vlster. How
that, which we have here observed, having been the issue of Dionbhuillach's
Invasion, and the time when it happened, as Keting writes, having also been the
Reign of Eochadh Feilioch the Irish Monarch, and Author of the Pentarchy, who
died in the year of the World 5069. that is just a hundred and forty years
before the birth of Christ, according to the computation followed by Lucius:
nothing can be desired clearer to evict Hanmer's little skill in the Irish
History, and his manifold Errors in delivering (as you have seen before page
386.) so many other Invasions of the Danes on Ireland and Conquests therein,
long before the year of Christ 800.

71. My seventh Note, being likewise an addition, is to supply what I purposely
omitted in my 17th Page. There I mentioned occasionally the Picts arriving in
Ireland out of Scythia, so long since as the Reign of Herimon, the first
Milesian Monarch of that Kingdom; but little more of 'em, save only their being
made Tributary some Ages after in Scotland by the Irish. Indeed when I writ and
printed that Page, I did not think of enlarging as I have done since. And
therefore partly for haste, and partly for compendiousness, I passed then over
several particulars, which I had before me that very time in Keting, and he has
at large in the foresaid Reign, concerning those Picts. But seeing I have
since, though contrary to my first design, dilated on other matters: I think it
not amiss to add somewhat more of that Pictish Nation. And this for two
reasons. The first is, because it is not only of all hands confessed, the Picts
had been a warlike ancient People; but Venerable Bede represents them as most
powerful too in the year of Christ 569. In which year, speaking of Columb
Cille's landing in their Country from Ireland to convert 'em, he has these very
words, Regnante Pictis Bridio, filio Meilochon, Rege potentissimo, etc. The
second: Because both the time of their first appearing in these parts, and
their very Original, i. e. what Countrymen they were, or whence they came,
have continued for many Ages hitherto, at least of late they are vexatious
Questions. As may be seen in Cambden's Britannia; where he has given a Title of
the Picts and four pages (in Holland's Translation of him) to resolvethese
Questions. Though, after all, he seems to me no nearer the Truth in his
conjectural decision of either the one or the other, then Buchanan has before
him; nay wider from it as to the later Question, than either Campion or Hanmer,
or any other followed by them. These, for so much, had the good luck to yield
to the Authority of V. Bid. in his Eccles. Histor. l. 1. c. 1. where he
expressly tells us to this purpose, 1. That when the ancient Britons had
possessed themselves of the Southern Parts of this Noble Island, which derives
its name from them, it happened that the Nation of Picts departing from
Scythia, entering the Ocean, wind-driven to Ireland, landing there, desiring the
Inhabitants the Scots to afford 'em Elbow-room for Cohabitation; and being
denied this, but nevertheless directed by 'em to the Northern Tract of Great
Britain, and withal promised their assistance (if need should be) to conquer
it by force: they by this direction and promise encouraged, put to Sea
presently for that same Northern Tract; and landing therein, made it their
habitation. 2. That wanting Women, and desiring Wives of the Scots, they had
'em on this condition, That whenever the succession to the Crown amongst their
People should chance to be controverted, the Female's line Royal should
prevail, and the King be chosen thence. Which is even to this day observed
among the Picts, says Bid, speaking of his own time. 3. That they had a
peculiar Language of their own. For (in the same Chapter) he notes
particularly, how according to the number of the Five Books (of Moses) wherein
the Divine Law had been written, Britain in his time praised God in five
diverse Languages; viz. those of the English, Britons, Scots, Picts, and Latins;
this last made common to them all by their studying the Holy Scriptures.

Yet notwithstanding this plain account of the Picts, given by V. Bid, as to
their great Antiquity or Time of their first appearance in these Western
Islands, and the Country, whence they came to them, being that of Scythia: not
only Buchanan, but Cambden by little Criticisms and other weak conjectures
would fain persuade us they had only been a part of the ancient Britons retired
from the South and power of the Roman Legions in the same Island of Great
Britain, etc. into the more uncouth inaccessible Northern parts thereof. That
they were no earlier known by the name of Picts, than the Reign of the Roman
Emperors Diocletian and Maximian Herculeus. And that their Language differed
not in substance but only in a certain kind of Dialect from the British Tongue
spoken by the rest of their Contrymen the other Brittons. But the words of
Bid are clearer, and his authority greater than the arguments they bring are
able to elude or impeach. Nor indeed can any thing more be desired to end these
two vexatious Questions concerning that Pictish Nation, save only the
particulars given by Keting out of the most ancient authentic Records of
Ireland. These are of such irrefragable authority, that I am persuaded, were
they known to Cambden, he had never disputed the matter. At least I believe he
should not, if he had well considered of it. The Irish were the Nation, that,
by the confession of all sides, from the beginning pressed longest and hardest
of any upon that Northern Country inhabited by the Picts in Great Britain.
They were the Nation that by degrees conquered so many of their Provinces,
planted so many Colonies in 'em, established a King of their own over the same
Provinces long before the Romans attacked either. Yea, they were the Nation
that utterly subdued at last the whole Pictish Kingdom and extinguished in it
the very name of Picts. Wherefore it is plain, that as the Irish were most
concerned, so they had the best means of any to know both the time of their
first appearance, and Country too from whence they came: as the Picts
themselves were pleased to tell 'em. And seeing it is no less plain, out of
what has been said elsewhere in these Discourses, that the Irish Nation in all
times had their public Registers, wherein with the greatest care and certainty
could be, all the Concerns of their People both at home and abroad, together
with all other matters they thought fit, were recorded: it must follow, that
their account of the Pictish Nation, as to those two controverted points, ought
in reason to silence any other fancied by men of later days. Now in that Irish
account, besides what you have seen already out of Venerable Bede, there are
many more particulars, given at large by Keting out of the Psalter of Cashel,
whereof the chief heads are these: 1. That in Thracia this People we call Picts
serving Policornus, the King of that Country, in his Wars, for pay, but under
a General and other Commanders of their own: it happened that their General,
whose name was Good, understanding for certain how the King had designed to
ravish his beautiful Daughter, if he could not otherwise make her his Whore,
prevented him by taking away his Life. 2. That thereupon this Good, flying
immediately with those of his Soldiery who were resolved to run his fortune,
put to Sea where he found convenience, and roam'd up and down till he arrived
in Gaul: where being well entertained by the King of that Kingdom, his
Daughter's beauty proved the second time his bane, after he had built, or at
least began the building of Pictavis, from his People so called; (we call it
now Poictiers.) For then observing that this Gaulish King also had the same
design upon her that the Thracian had, he saw there was no abiding there
without sacrificing her honor to his Lust. And therefore in all haste, but as
privately as he could, he put to Sea again with his own People, where he was
tossed so long till the occasion of all his woe his beautiful Daughter died;
and soon after he and his People arrived safe in Ireland, at a place called in
the Irish Tongue Inbher Slain, or the Mouth of the River Slane in Leinster,
which now we call the Haven of Weixford. 3. That one by name Criomthann
Sciatbheal, being then Commander of Leinster under Herimon the First Milesian
Monarch of Ireland, hearing of their landing, came to them: and seeing them
brave men, entertained 'em willingly of purpose to assist him in fighting some
British Troops, whom the Irish Books call Tuath Fiodhgha, whose Lances and
Arrows were poisoned to such degree that whoever was wounded by 'em could have
no cure but Death. 4. That after this League of Friendship made, one of the
Picts, called Trosdan, a great Magitian, understanding of the common danger
from those poisoned Weapons, advised the said Leinster Commander to provide
against the day of Battle a 150 white, milch, crumple-horn'd Cows, to be milk'd
all together when the Fight began; the Milk put into a Hole prepared of purpose
hard by, and the wounded men to run presently and bath therein: which being
observed, the effect proved answerable to expectation, and the Britains were
quite overthrown, with the loss of most of their Lives upon the spot. 5. That
upon this success, at least not long after it, the Picts looking big, growing
unruly, and even aspiring to the Command of that whole Province of Leinster;
but the Monarch Herimon, made acquainted with it, drawing together a greater
Power then they dared fight, they were compelled to accept of his Terms, and
hye them away out of hand with his directions and assistance for the Northern
parts of Great Britain. 6. That nevertheless before their departure they
obtained of Herimon three Irish Ladies, by name Beanbhreasi, Beanbhuais, and
Beanbhuaisdhne, who had been the Widows of three of Herimons Commanders, and
taken these names from 'em, killed in the late War with Tuath-De-Danann: and
these were all the Women they could obtain (at least then) though upon that
very condition told us by Bid. The first of 'em married to Cathluan the chief
Commander now of the Picts: for it seems his Father Good was before this time
departed the World: the other two married to two more of their Nobles. Nor
could any of them obtain leave to stay in Ireland, but only six, viz. Trosdan
the foresaid Magitian, Soilean, Vlpre, Neachtan Nar, Aongus, and Leatan: who
had possessions given them for ever by Herimon in the Country of Breagh
Mhoigh, now called by us East and West Mead. 6. That the foresaid Cathluan was
the first King of the Picts in Cruithin-Tuath, or Tuath Chruinigh (for by both
these compound names indifferently the Irish Books call that Country in the
North of Britain which the Picts erected to a Kingdom, and call it so properly
enough, as importing in English the Lordship Lordship or Dominion of the Picts;
the simple word Tuath signifying in Irish a Lordship, and Cruinigh the Picts
themselves. 7. That after him in a succession reigned in the same Country (at
least in some part of it) and of the same Pictish Nation, Threescore and Ten
Kings more, to Constantine the last of 'em.

And these being the Heads of those particulars that concern them in the
Psalter of Cashel, written by the Holy Cormock O Cuilenain Arch Bishop and King
of Mounster eight hundred years since, and by consequence written either
immediately before or immediately after, (I am sure much about) the time of
their last fatal overthrow by his Country men the Irish and their Issue in
Scotland; we need no longer question either the time of that Pictish Nation's
first appearance, or the Country they came from to the Western parts of
Europe. As neither indeed whence they derived the custom of painting
themselves. They might have learned this from the Agathyrsi in Thracia, if
themselves had it not before: yea, they might be the first that used it in
Great Britain; and the Brittons might have only had it from them, for any
thing said to the contrary. And they came as early to Ireland and Scotland both
as the Reign of Herinton the first Milesian Monarch of Ireland, after he had
killed his elder Brother Heber, to whom he was but joined in Sovereignty while
Heber lived. Nay, we need not question how long this Pictish Kingdom lasted.
For seeing it began at least as early as Herimon's death, I mean by this
account in the Psalter of Cashel; and that, by Primat Vshers account, it
continued to the year of Christ 840. then we must conclude, that according to
Gratianus Lucius's computation of the years of the World, and years also of all
the several Irish Monarchs Reigns, the Pictish Kingdom lasted 2623 years in
all. For this Author fixes the death of Herimon in the year of the World 3516.
and the Birth of Christ in the year 5199. as Eusebius Caesariensis, one of the
Fathers of the first General Council of Nice, did long before him.

What more I have to say in reference to the Picts, their Kingdom, or Kings,
is, That as I was writing this Reflection, Mr. Langhorn's Introduction to the
History of England being brought me by chance, and looking it over, I observed,
That although the ingenious Author gives no more light therein concerning the
Country whence those Picts came first to Ireland, and thence to Scotland, nor
of their Leaders name, nor of the time of their arrival amongst us, than other
late Writers, especially Campion and Hanmer did before him, who call that
Leader King Roderick, and say this Roderick came to Ireland from Scandia (alias
Scandinavia) which goes under the name of Scythia Germanica, or the German
Scythia: yet he gives therein ( page 197) a Catalogue of the British Kings,
and years of their several Reigns, partly out of John Fordon's M. S.
Scoto-Chronicon; and partly out of Hector Boethius, who adds to the 76 Kings in
Fordon, five more. So that both numbers, put together, make just the very same
number of Pictish Kings, which the Psalter of Cashel has. Though I must confess
there is no other agreement in any point between that Psalter and these
Authors, either as to the names of those Kings, or years of their Reigns, or
total sum of these years. Neither is there in that whole Catalogue any Roderick
either as first or last, or any at all of them, nor any thing near his name.
The very same you may assure your self of Cathluan: whom nevertheless you have
seen before, out of the Psalter of Cashel, to have been the first Pictish King.
As for the total sum of the years of their Reign, which by casting it up out of
the several Reigns every body may see is 1165. it plainly comes short, by 1452
years, of the former account derivable from the Psalter of Cashel, and Usher
and Lucius. Besides it necessarily must suppose the Pictish Kingdom began in
Scotland even four hundred years full before any Picts landed in Scotland or
came from Scandinavia to Scotland, or Ireland; which does not stand with the
time of their coming set down by our new Historians, and last of all by
Langhorn himself. As for the names expressed in that Catalogue, all I can say
is, that if we give credit to Nennius, a British Author that lived (as himself
writes) an. Christi 830. under Anaraugh King of Anglesey and Guinech: if
besides we suppose his Book rightly translated into Irish in O Duvegans
Miscellanies: and if withal we believe, that Gratianus Lucius, quoting both,
would not impose upon us, nor I on you or my self: what follows must be, That
we give no kind of credit to the foresaid Catalogue drawn out of Fordon and
Boethius, not even (I mean) as to those names of the Pictish Kings contained
therein. For the same Gratianus Lucius, after letting us know (in his Cambr.
Evers. page 93.) That himself had a Copy of those Miscellanies, and among 'em
the Catalogue of all the Pictish Kings, written by the said Nennius, then
presently, though upon another occasion, names five and forty of 'em: and I am
sure that of this very number (tho only a part of Nennius's Catalogue) there
are at least six and twenty names that have no affinity with, no resemblance at
all nor imitation of any in the whole Bed^oll of Boethius and Fordon, as I find
this given by Langhorn. So much of the Picts. And therefore now to my

Eighth Note. Which, as it refers to several places of this Book, particularly
to page 5. and all other pages indeed where I suppose the Milesians either to
have possessed themselves of Ireland as early as the year of the World 2736. or
not to have continued longer a free People under their own Laws and Kings then
about 2500 years: so it is merely occasioned by what I said but now in my
Seventh Note concerning the extent of time, which the Pictish Kings must have
lasted according to the Chronology of Lucius and Usher. In short, I must on
this occasion tell you here, That as to the Milesian Kingdom's answerable
extent of Time, Keting and Lucius agree. Save only, That Keting (as himself
professes in his Preface) following that computation of the years of the World,
which allows only 4052 years from the Creation to the Incarnation, and
consequently in this, coming short 1138 years, of the computation of Eusebius,
would needs reform the Irish Regnal (for so they call the Book of their Reigns)
by shortning the Reigns of several of their Monarchs, by so many years in all
as amount to above four hundred, that is, 491 years, and this of purpose to
make the whole extent of Time and the several Periods from the first Plantation
of Ireland by Partholan to the Reign of Ruaruidh O Conchabhar the Last Irish
Monarch of the Milesian Race, agree the better with his own foresaid
Computation of the years of the World. And Lucius, on the other side, as he
followed Eusebius's Computation of the same years of the World, (which is that
commonly followed by both Greeks and Latins, says Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. S.
l. 2. page 46. verb. Adae Genealogia.
:) so he held stiffly and thoroughly to the Irish Regnal as to the years of each
Milesian Monarch's Reign. And therefore the difference 'twixt these two
Writers, in relation to Ireland, or to any period or extent of the periods of
Time since its first Plantation, is only that of near five hundred years during
the Milesian Monarchy. In all other points, concerning this matter, they both
agree. As for Example, That Ireland was first planted by Partholan, about three
hundred years after the Deluge: that his Posterity continued there three
hundred years: and the next Invaders Clanna Neimheadh 217 more: and after them,
the Nation called Fir-bholg, thirty six: and after these, another Nation, by
name Tuath-De-Danann, for 197 years: and then immediately the Milesians coming
in, continued since to the year of Christ 1172. So that Keting and Lucius being
thoroughly agreed in all these points: their difference about the whole extent
(of their several periods) mentioned before, can be no other than that of
Keting's voluntary cutting off from the Milesian Reigns about five hundred
years. Or rather indeed, especially if we consider how Keting himself confesses
he did so, and for what end he did it, even contrary to the Irish Regnall, we
may conclude there is no difference at all as to the undoubted extent of all
those several Periods of Time; though Keting place the Milesian Epoch in his
year of the World 2736. and Lucius the very same Epoch in his year of the
World, 3500. For albeit this diversity of placing it argues 1172. years
difference between 'em in stating the years of the World: and that Keting chose
rather to follow the far more likely computation of Augustinus Torniellius (in
his Annals Sacri and Profani Torniel. Sext. M. aetat. ad an. 4052.
, ab Orb condito ad eundem Christi passione redemptum, come out a little
before Keting's time, (though he makes no mention of them or him) than be led
by that of Eusebius who was himself most probably misled by the grand Error of
the Septuagint Version See Sixtus Senen. Biblioth. S. ^. 2. page 45. but more
at large l. 5. page 440. where he shows that the computation of Eusebius, as to
the years only from the Creation to the birth of Abraham, exceeds the Hebrew
true computation in One thousand two hundred thirty six years. Nay, in the
former Place, he shows that whereas from the Creaation to the Flood Moses
counts only 1656 years, the Septuagint Interpr. exceed him in 786 years. So
that by their supputation to the Flood only, the number of years is 2242. From
which diversity, the great contention arose betwixt the Hebrews and the Greeks
in computing the years of the World. So says he, l. 2. page 45. verb. Adae
Genealogia.
: yet no difference at all, as to stating strictly the extent of Time or number
of years which the Milesian or other former Conquests or Plantations of Ireland
had continued, can be deduced thence. Only it argues, that either the one or
other was mistaken in the number of the years of the World, or in fixing 'em.
Which is enough to be said on this Subject occasionally. And therefore I will
only add here what as occasionally comes now to mind. That whether (in my
Title Page) by the year of the World, 2736, you understand the year accounted
such according to the computation of Torniellius and Keting, or the other
accounted such by Eusebius and Lucius: I am neither way my self, nor any thing
in this Book concerned. Though otherwise I would, as to this point, much rather
hold with those, than these: retaining nevertheless all due veneration to the
name of Eusebius, as who had been not only one of the Three hundred and
eighteen Nicene Fathers, and Bishop of Caesarea in Palestin, but worthy (as
Constantine the Great said of him) to be Bishop of the whole Earth.

The Ninth and last Additional Note has no reference (that I can remember) to
any thing said before in any of my pages. However I give it, because I see
Gratianus Lucius thought it not unconducing to the honor of the Ancient Irish.
For it is in short: That the Warlike Nation of the Heruli who inhabited some
Northern Islands and other Tracts near Germany, a Nation too well sometimes
known to the Roman Provinces harrass'd by them, did glory in their two Kings
Dathen and Aordon, as descended from the Irish: and that Suria, born of an
Irish Lady descended from the Kings of Ireland, had the supreain Power of
Biscay an. 870, as absolute Princess thereof, which she transmitted to a long
succession of Descendants from her. Whereof you may see Gratianus Lucius (page
299.) where he quotes Wolfgangus Lassin. de Migrat. Gent. l. 13.

And so (Reader) you have at last an end of all my additional Notes, and
consequently of all whatever I thought necessary to say (according to the
design and method of this little Tract) of the Ancient Irish, as they were a
free Nation about 2500 years under their own Laws and Government. For indeed my
design hitherto, as you may easily perceive, was either only, or at least
chiefly to represent them as they appeared in the World before the loss of
their freedom, or their subjection to a foreign Power. Nor had I any farther (if
it be a farther) end in the matter, then That of your understanding thoroughly,
at least sufficiently, who, or what kind of People were the former of those two
Nations, whose Posterities I have before ( i. e. in the very beginning of the
first Section, page 5.) observed like the Twins of Rebecca, contending these
last five hundred years in the bowels of Ireland. But who the later Nation
were: and how, and by what degrees, and means, they not only for many Ages got
the better of the former, but subdued them utterly at last in the memory of our
Fathers: and what besides happened in our own days to the Issue as well of
these Conquerours, as of those conquered by 'em in that Country, will be the
subject of the Second Part.

FINIS.
Additions.
1. AFTER the Fourth Observation on the Catalogue of Kings, add what follows
here, viz. That although it be no part of my business in this Place, to speak
in particular of any of those Kings, other than what I have already of a few of
'em, and that only for thy better understanding the said Catalogue: yet because
I considered that peradventure the Relation of Siorna Saoghall-ach's (See the
Catalogue, Numb. 27.) long extent of Life and Beign, is the only extraordinary
of all whatsoever delivered anywhere in the whole Irish History, concerning any
of so great a number of Monarchs, or Kings, and Sovereign Princes of Ireland,
some Readers will boggle at or scruple the truth thereof, by objecting, How it
seems at least improbable that he should be a hundred years old when he came to
be Monarch; or should reign a hundred and fifty years after; or should be in
all two hundred and fifty years of Age when he was killed by Roitheachtsigh
(alias Roithsigh) mhac Roain: therefore to show that this Relation of him is
not improbable, I give here those arguments that convince my self. And to say
nothing of his Surname Saoghalach, which attributed to him alone among all
other Irish Kings (whereof notwithstanding some had reigned 60. others 70
years) must import him to have been of extraordinary Long Life, and even a man
of Ages: what convinces me, is, 1. That not only the Irish Book of Reigns,
besides many other ancient Monuments and Historians of that Nation who speak of
this Subject (and after them Gratianus Lucius in our own time) have delivered
it so; but Keting himself (though he be the chiefest of all the Historians of
later days, that to reduce the Irish Chronology to an agreement with his own
Computation of the years of the World, would consequently needs reduce those
hundred and fifty years of Siorna's Reign to 21.) confesses they did so. 2.
That very good Historians both ancient and modern of other Countries tell us,
how in later Times then Siorna Saoghallach's Reign, there have been many that
lived as long, and some longer then he. And yet I Will lay no stress on
Xenophon's writing, That a certain Maritim King lived 800. and his son 600
years. Nor on Ravisius giving the very same, or at least the like Relation of
one Impetris King of the Plutinian Islanders, and his Son. Nor on Pliny
recording the five hundred years life of Dondonius, a Sclavonian. Nor on Homer
or his Followers, speaking Nestors age to have been 300 years. Neither on
Hellanicus, a most ancient Writer, saying, That in the Province of Aetholia,
some lived 200. others 300 years. Nor on Onesicritus neither, though attesting
the same age of two and three hundred years even as very ordinary in the Island
of Pandora. All these I pass over, because I am not certain of the Age of the
World they lived in: that is, whether it was not of earlier Date than Siorna
Saoghalach's reign, who was killed An. M. 4^ 69. according to Lucius. My
instances are in Servatius Bishop of Tongres, and Joannes de Temporibus, and
Xequipir an Ethiopian, and the Nameless Indian, living in the same Time and
Kingdom of Bengala with Xequipir. The first of these four died in the year of
Christ 403. after he had lived 300 years, as Sigebert in his Chronicle, and
others write. The second took his denomination or surname de Temporibus from
those 336 years he had lived under many Emperors, whereof one was Charles the
Great of whose Lifeguard he had sometimes been; and another was Conrad III. in
whose Reign he died in France, An. D. 1139. as not only Petrus Messiah in the
said Conrad's Life; but the Author of Fasciculus Temporum and many more Writers
affirm. The third, I mean Xequipir, was yet alive so near our own time as the
year of Christ 1536. after having lived till then 300 years. For so Hernandus
Lopez a Castagneda (^.8. Chronici) has written of him. The Last, or the
Nameless Indian, had in the foresaid year of Christ (1536) come to the year of
his own age 335. says Joannes Petrus Maffeius ^. XI. Histor. Indic. and before
him the above Lopez: both the one and the other telling us many more
particulars of Xequipir; and Lopez some of this Anonimus Indian; but neither
being able to recount, or give us any light to see how many years more either
of 'em lived, nor when they died. Of all which you may read more at large in
Augustinus Torniellius's Annals Sacri, etc. ad an. M. 1556. n. 4. and. 5. And
so I have given the two arguments which convince my self, that from the
Relation of Siorna Saoghalach's Life of 250 years, etc. nothing can be derived
to make any Reader at all scruple the truth of the Irish History of that
Kingdoms Monarchs or Kings. Nor by consequence any thing against the Catalogue
of them (which you have in the beginning of this Book) or the long extent of
Time which (in all) they reigned, according to the Title of that Catalogue.

2. After the Last Inference from the same Catalogue; add this here as an
other, viz. That notwithstanding any thing said hitherto, as it is confessed,
that the former sixteen of those 23 of the English, or Fourth and Last Conquest
of Ireland, never assumed the Style or Title of Kings of Ireland (for Henry
VIII. was the First of this Conquest that assumed it; although nevertheless all
the same former sixteen Kings of England were Sovereign Lords of Ireland too,
at least by Title, every one in his turn, since the 17th year of Henry the II's
reign over England) so it must be confessed, That properly speaking, none of
those Irish Kings who ruled in Association, with any other, could be called
Monarchs, while their Association lasted. And we see by this Catalogue, that
such were in all (at least for some time) 29 among those of the former Three
Conquests; whereof One and Twenty were Milesians. Which is the reason that
Cambrensis, where he tells us of 181 Monarchs of the Milesians, must be
corrected as to that appellation or Title of Monarch, attributed so
indistinctly by him to them all: and so must I, wheresoever, in this Former
Part of my Prospect, I have in this particular followed him. The Irish
Historians, in their own Language, speak more properly, giving 'em all the
Title of Kings of Ireland.

Errors in the Matter, where, and where they are corrected.
THE First, in Page 4. and 16. concerning Eoghun Mor and Aonghus Ollbhuodhach,
but corrected p. 89. and 435. The second p. 67. about Dearmach; corrected p.
181. Third, in p. 18. concerning Mu^rieadhach's Six sons, etc. and corrected p.
93. Fourth, p. 19. about the nine Hostages; corrected p. 359.

Errors in Words and Letters, to be corrected by this following Table, wherein
the first Number signifies the Page, the second the Line; a, add; d, dele; and
r, read.

First in the Dedicatory, 2. 7. d. as. Secondly, in the Preface, 7. 18. d. his.
35. 16. r. 1662. p. 39. 31. r. 1604. Thirdly, in the Former Part, 35. 5. d. the
Monarch. 71. r. Tighernmhais. 99. 16. d. to. 107. 29. d. of. 137. 6. r. the^
and again 8. r. the. 180. 14. for Diarmuid r. Dombnall. 221. 7. Taumaturga.
272. 5. for him r. b^, and 24. r. or any. 317. 13. d. to. 319. ^. a. as. 351.
14. r. Monmouth. 354. 13. r. understood. 382. 21. r. Aetius. 385. 26. r. other.
387. 8. r. 51. 389. 19. r. Language, and 29. r. Niull. 395. 7. d. was, and for
killed, r. died. 413. 9. r. Trouts. 414. 1. r. Leap, and 8. for though r. the.
434. ^. 26. r. 219. 459. 2. r. Notkerus. 461. 26. r. To, and in the Note ^.
penv^t r. Books. Lastly, observe that the Orthography of all the proper Irish
Names and Surnames of the Kings throughout this whole Book, must be corrected
by that in the Catalogue, where any variation appears.


