SOME FEVV QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, Proposed by a Catholic
Gentleman In a LETTER to a Person of Learning and Honor.

MATH. VII. VII.Quaerite and Invenietis. Printed in the Year, 1661.

To the Reader.
A Thousand to one now you will be inquiring, who is the Author? Pardon me, if I
frankly answer, what need you care? Judge of the Venison, and never trouble
your self with asking whence it comes. It Is a short Book, though a long Letter;
and when you have perused a period or two, if you like it, you may read on; if
not, lay it down, and betake your self to some better business: only oblige me
with this favor, if you allow not what I have done; teach me what I should
have done. This is my case.

Me thought I saw the truth hang clearly on my side, while I considered only
the weights which each hand laid in the balance; but the Number of those who
strove by plain force to pull down the Other, a little moved, I confess, and
shak'd my Scale: yet I easily recovered my former steadiness, when I reflected
on the Moment one solid Reason has, compared to a multitude even of the gravest
Opiners: But then they shrewdly heaved at me again; Why should not the Many be
presumed to have Reason, as well as the Few? against which, thus much, at
least, I had to say, and perhaps somewhat more to think; That since either too
strong an Interest, or too weak a Courage, or too slight an Examination, may
justly be suspected as the general cause of spreading that Opinion, I hoped my
inferiournesse in number would not be able to work me any great prejudice with
those who fairly compared my advantages in other respects; especially if we
remember the diligences perpetually used for improvement of Ecclesiastical
Prerogatives; by advancing still favorable Tenets, and prohibiting the
contrary; while the good Lay-Princes seldom provide so carefully for
themselves; and where they do, such tender Doctrines grow very slowly, and if
they chan^e to take a little, yet, for want of depth, soon wither away.

Nor is my Party so few as not to be considerable: If three or four Doctors,
nay perhaps One, who has well studied the Point, can make an Opinion safe; What
may we say where a greater number of whole Universities engage their
Judgments? Universities equal to the best in Europe, who on purpose studied
and disputed the Question, and having seriously pondered both what Popes had
done, and Councils had defined, and all kind of Authors had written, at last
unanimously concluded and decreed what this following Letter intends to
represent.

When I was thus by Reason and Authority satisfied in my own mind, still there
remained a Scruple to publish it; for though I suppose my self secure of a
Truth, what have I to do, being a private Man, to tell it to others; especially
Those who are infinitely more competent Judges than I? But as again I beg your
Counsel, let me again tell you my condition; I observed, that most of the
Persons, from whom we might expect such discourses, were either diverted by
other employments, or for particular considerations unwilling to meddle with
This: On the other side I considered how excellent a Charity it were to be the
occasion of settling clearly so important a Doctrine, that we might hang no
longer between Heaven and Earth, God and Caesar, sustained only by the slippery
running-knot of Probability, which will be fast or loose, as the Casuist
pleases, especially if the Writers endeavors should be blessed with so happy
success, as to give the least contribution toward the attainment of a more
condescending Form of Oath; wherein, the manner of expression being a little
changed, every syllable of the Substance might entirely be retained; many of
the better-temper'd Refusers being observed to scruple more at some Phrase,
than at any Thing in the Oath.

This strongly carried me to wish the Work done; but my own unqualifiednesse
extremely discouraged me from doing it: At last, seeing my Independence on any
(as to particular expectations) was a Circumstance very suitable to such an
undertaking, and in very few to be found, my thoughts weary of struggling one
with another, sat down and rested, upon this Conclusion, That to propose my
Sense by way of Quaeres could not be esteemed presumptuous, since every fool
has wit enough to ask Questions, and I have left for others, the Wise man's
part, to answer them.

THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely Acknowledge, Profess, Testify, and Declare in
my Conscience, before God, and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his* Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects,
within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do Swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the Pope, or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the said King, his
Heirs, or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their
Obedience, I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his* Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power,
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
his, or their Persons, their Crown, and Dignity, by reason or color of any
such Sentence, or Declaration, or otherwise; And will do my best endeavor to
disclose, and make known unto his Majesty; his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
Impious and Haeretical, this damnable Doctrine, and Position; That Princes
which be* Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered
by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in my Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely Acknowledge and
Swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain, and common Sense, and understanding of the same words, without any
Equivocation, or Mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever.

And I do make this Recognition, and Acknowledgment, heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

THE LETTER.
SIR,
AS your Civility has taught me, I may have any thing of you for asking, so my
own Experience teaches me, nothing is more easy than to ask; Unless it be, to
doubt, or to be ignorant; two qualities so common, and so little implying any
conceit of sufficiency in their Owner, that I hope you will neither accuse me
of Presumption, while I only seek what I profess not to know; nor of
Imprudence, while I seek where I know I am most like to find. Your peircing Eye
has both read what others say, and penetrated what they maintain; Your generous
mind neither hopes nor fears can corrupt; and, if they could, your happy
Condition secures you from both: To you therefore I confidently come, and
without any farther Compliments, which you are too wise to expect, and I too
uncourtly to give, I humbly desire your free and speedy judgment, in these few
Seasonable and Important Questions.

Some say the Pope, by direct and immediate sentence, can depose Princes;
Others, he can only Excommunicate directly, and depose by Consequence. Some
say, he can depose only Princes Subject to the Church; Others, Infidels too.
Some say, he has power to do this only in order to Spirituals; Others,
absolutely without that Restriction. Some say, the Crime must be Heresy, or
Apostasy; Others extend his Jurisdiction to more, and even all Cases. And there
are who say, He cannot depose at all, neither any of these ways, nor for any of
these Persons, nor for any of these Causes.

In favor of which last Position (not to speak of particular Authors) 'twas my
fortune lately to meet with a Censure of the Faculty of Paris, and some public
and solemn Decrees made by that, and diverse other Universities of France; Of
which, the better to entitle my self to beg your Judgment, I here send you a
shot Extract; On purpose omitting the French King and Parliaments Prohibition
and Arrests, as Lay-arguments, of little, and perhaps too little weight, with
some that dispute this point.

A Decree of the University of Paris, made by the Rector, Deans, Proctors, and
Batchelers of the said University, in a General Assembly had on the 20th. of
April 1626. at the Matutin^.
IT having been represented by the Rector, that the sacred Faculty of Theology,
moved as well by their ardent zeal and fidelity toward the Church, his most
Christian Majesty, and his Kingdoms; as also by the true and perfect love
which they bear to Right and Justice, and following therein the illustrious
Examples left by their Predecessors in like Cases, upon mature Examination of a
certain Latin book, entitled, A Treatise of Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, etc.
and of the Popes power in order to the punishment of those Crimes, Printed at
Rome, 1625. had in the 30. and 31. Chapters of Heresy, found these
Propositions; That the Pope may with temporal punishments chastize Kings and
Princes, despose, and deprive them of their Estates and Kingdoms, for the
Crime of Heresy, and exempt their Subjects from the obedience due to them; and
that this custom has been always practiced in the Church, etc. and thereupon
had by a public, just, and legal Sentence, on the 4th. of April, Censured
these Propositions of that pernicious book, and condemned the Doctrine therein
contained, as New, False, Erroneous, contrary to the Law of God, rendering
odious the Papal Dignity, opening a gap to Schism, derogative to the Sovereign
Authority of Kings, which depends on God alone, retarding the Conversion of
Infidels, and heretical Princes, disturbing the public Peace, tending to the
ruin of Kingdoms, and Republics, diverting Subjects from the obedience due
to their Sovereigns, and precipitating them into Faction, Rebellion, Sedition,
and even to commit Paricides on the sacred Persons of their Princes.

The Rector, Deans, Proctors, Batchelers, and whole University have made this
Decree; That the sacred Faculty of Theology ought highly to be commended, for
having given a judgment so Pious, so Religious, so Wholesome, against so wicked
and dangerous a Doctrine; For having so opportunely held forth to the whole
Church, but especially to all France, the clear light of Ancient and Orthodox
Doctrine; For having so gloriously followed the Illustrious generosity of their
Predecessors, and performed a task, not only becoming their particular
Profession to defend the truth, but deserving the Imitation even of the whole
University it self.

And to obstruct altogether the very entrance of this new and pernicious
Doctrine, and cause all those who now are, or hereafter shall be Members of
this University, or merit promotion to any Degree therein, to remember for ever
to form and regulate their Opinions according to the judgment pronounced by
that sacred Faculty, and keep at utmost distance from the Doctrine so justly
proscribed, and that every one in particular may fly, detest, and abhor it, and
as well in public, as private, Combat, Confute, and Convince its falsity:
They do decree, that in the next solemn Procession, as also annually in the
Assembly for the Procession general, immediately after opening the Schools in
the month of October, this Censure shall publicly be read by the Proctor of
the University (the first business, nothing to intervene) and recorded in the
Registers of each Faculty, and Nation; and that two Copies hereof, written and
signed by the hand of the Clerk of the sacred Faculty of Theology, shall be
kept in the Common Records of the University, and the like number be sent as
soon as may be to all Superiors of Colleges, and Houses, to the end all
possible care and diligence be used to secure all those who frequent, or reside
in the said Colleges, from the corruption and poison of this pernicious
Doctrine; and that they never give way that any Person whatsoever presume to
say or do any thing contrary to what has so wisely been determined and ordained
by that sacred Faculty.

If any Doctor, Professor, Master of Arts or Scholar resist and disobey, or go
about in any sort by word or writing, on any cause or pretense whatsoever, to
offer at the least attempt, or make the least opposition against this so
laudable and legal a Censure, let him for a note of Infamy and Ignominy be
expelled and deprived of his Degree, Faculty, and Rank, by a sentence that may
for ever cut off all hope of admittance.

Quintaine, Scribe of the University.

The Censure of the Faculty of Sorbonne, dated 4th. April 1626. I omit, because
recited at large in this of the University.

The like Decrees on the same occasion, and against the same Doctrine (That the
Pope can punish Kings with temporal punishments, depose them and deprive them
of their Kingdoms and Estates, etc.) were made by these several Universities
following; All which have lately been printed at Paris in a Collection of
diverse Acts, Censures, and Decrees as well of the University, as of the Faculty
of Theology of Paris.

By the University of Caen, assembled in the Convent of S. Francis, 7. May 1626.

By the University of Rheims, the four Facultyes being assembled in the Chapel
of S. Patrice, 18. May 1626.

By the University of Tholouze, the Rector and Professors of all the Facultyes
being assembled in S. Thoma's School at the Dominicans, 23. May 1626.

By the University of Poitiers, assembled at the Dominicans, 26. June 1626.

By the University of Valence, assembled in the great Hall, 14. July 1626.

By the University of Bourdeaux, assembled at the Carms, 16. July 1626.

By the University of Bourges, all the Deans and Doctors Regent of all the
Faculties assembled by the Rector, 25. Nov. 1626.

By all which the said Doctrine was Condemned as False, Erroneous, Contrary to
the Word of God, Pernicious, Seditious, and Detestable.

AND now, since so many, so famous Universities have unanimously, and solemnly,
and deeply condemned this Position (That Popes can punish Princes temporally)
and all this without constraint, voluntarily delivering their free judgments,
unmenaced by their King, unconcerned in self-preservation: The first Question
wherein I entreat your assistance, is

I. Why we, when our Laws so threatningly command, and our All is so nearly
concerned, may not safely and uncensurably profess as much as They?
AND I beg of you a more satisfactory answer, than, that the Pope in prudence
forbears the French, because their party is numerous, and learned, and united,
and Persons of heart and courage; for (omitting to observe the advantage this
very Objection offers, by confessing so great Authority against that pretended
Power) I should easily secure my self with this reply, that were not their
Case, in it self, at least tolerable, all those fair qualities could never
justify the Popes suspending to condemn them. Their Tenets then clearly are in
themselves consistent with Faith and Catholic Communion; and it is a
Consideration merely prudential, whether such proceedings ought to be Censured
or no; which naturally leads me to my second Question.

II. If there be reasons enough to turn the Eye of Authority quite away from
seeing what whole Universities so openly avow in the face of the world: are
there not enough to Connive at us, who are but a few, and act privately, and not
without the excusing plea of extreme necessity?
HEre, Your first thoughts perhaps may offer you this distinction, That in
England it is required to renounce the Doctrine as Impious and Heritical, while
the French condemn it only as False, Erroneous, Contrary to the Word of God,
Pernicious, Seditious, and Detestable. But I appeal to your second thoughts,
and ask,

III. Are those two words, Impious and Heretical, so vastly different in their
true and natural sense, from the other half dozen, False, Erroneous Contrary to
the word of God, Pernicious, Seditious, Detestable, that all these six may
voluntarily be affirmed; and both those, or at least, one of them, whatever
ruin attends, must necessarily be denied?
IF we be obliged, as sure we are, to answer in the sense of our Proposers, and
they mean no more by Heretical (as the very Principles of their Religion,
besides other Arguments, sufficiently assure us) than Erroneous, and Contrary
to the word of God; I hope this third Question will prove no invincible
difficulty; For, is not what is Contrary to the word of God, Contrary to Faith;
and what is Contrary to Faith, Heretical? Especially since among our selves we
must find a larger sense for Heretical, than that which severely measures its
conceived strictest notion; We must find a sense wherein the Opinion of
Antipodes was anciently Heretical, and the Turning of the Earth, or at least
the Standing of the Sun is so now; one of which the Qualificatori at Rome, in
order to Galileo's Condemnation, Censured as Absurd, False, etc. the Other, as
formally Heretical; We must* find a sense that may justify not only our
disputing Schoolmen, who often on slighter grounds, cry out Heresy one against
another; but the public Censors of Books, and Qualifiers of Opinions, who
every day reject many Doctrines as Heretical, without intending to divide
Communion from the M^inteiners; Nay, we must find a sense that may agree with
the words of the Pope himself, in his Prohibitive Brief of this very Oath,
which, he says, contains many things contrary to Faith and Salvation; and what
can we imagine should be those Many, if the denial of his Prince-deposing power
be not counted for One? yet possibly neither It, nor any of these I have
mentioned are, in precise scholastic rigor, Heretical: But Use and Custom
being the Rule of Speech, I cannot see it reasonable, why we alone in so
Important an Occasion, should be denied that latitude of sense, which we know
is so frequently, and so justifiably allowed to all the world.

To reconcile more clearly this difference, I conceive the common Distinction
of Material and Formal Heresy very useful: According to the first sense,
whatever is now Heretical, always was so in its inward nature; the Decision of
the Church operating only by way of Declaration of the formerly believed Truth,
and Extension of the Obligation to new Subjects, adding perhaps express Menaces
of Anathema, etc. to obstinate Dissenters, which every one is justly presumed
to be, that submits not to the known determination of the Universal Church.

In the second sense many Tenets are not yet Heretical, which may in time
become so: Even ^his intollerably false and flattering Position, That the Pope
is direct Universal King over all the World, is not yet (the Church not using
to interpose Her Authority, till the Decision be necessary) condemned as
Heretical; though certainly, none that pretend to the least degree of true
Loyalty, but are ready to abjure so damnable a Doctrine, as worse than Impious,
worse than Heretical. It Is evidently therefore enough to verify my forswearing
such an error as Heretical, if in it self it be notably mischievous, without
expecting till the Church can meet, and solemnly pa^^e Her Canonical Sentence
upon it.

Though this Example of so many Universities be sufficient to decide the
Question, in that they renounced this pretended Power; and more than
sufficient, to justify us, in that they did it freely: Yet to propose an
Instance agreeing, even in the point of fear too, with ours; I shall not
forbear to say there was a numerous and considerable Party in France (no less
than the whole Body of the Jesuits) whose Judgment was known to differ from
That of the Universities as much as Any, and more than most of Ours here, yet
rather than expose themselves to Inconveniences, and their Interests to Danger;
they publicly subscribed the Sorbonne Censures; publicly condemned this
King-dethroning Power, as False, Erroneous, contrary to the Word of God,
Pernicious, Seditious, and Detestable.

How this so solemn Subscription, against what themselves had formerly held
either as altogether, or at least as almost an Article of Faith, was understood
at Rome, I know not: that it was actually done in France, I am confident will
not be denied: that it was commanded, we need no other Evidence than the Arrest
it self of the Parliament of Paris, dated 17. Mar. 1626. wherein it is Ordered
That the Priests and Scholars of Clermont, and of the other two Houses which
the Jesuits have in Paris, should within three days subscribe the Censure made
by the Faculty of Sorbonne: and within two months procure Testimonials of the
like Subscription from every Provincial, and Rector, and from six of the
Ancients of every College of their Society in France.

Nor can it be said, this Subscription relates only in general to Sautarellus's
Book, since it particularly approves the whole Censure of Sorbonne; whereof one
and the first branch is directly, and in most express terms, against the Popes
Power to punish Kings Temporally, to Depose, etc. If this be true, of which I
know not the least reason to doubt,

IV. Why is it not Lawful for English Catholics to be Loyal to their Prince,
as far as the French to Theirs? Why is it not tolerable in Laymen here to
disavow, what the strictest Religious there openly condemn? Strictest, I mean,
in maintaining, and extending the Popes Prerogatives, and so most pertinent to
our Question: Shall Humane Motives be allowed their place with Them who
renounce the World, and not with those who live in it?
IF any shall here pretend to distinguish between a simple ^ubscription, which
only was required of the French Jesuits, and a down right Oath, which is
exacted of us; I cannot think but they proceed with too much scruple; since
certainly no sincere and generous honesty will solemnly and deliberately attest
under his hand, what he will not in due circumstances swear to be true: and
indeed, for Religious Persons, who actually still reflect on the presence of
God, what difference can there be, between calling Him in a form of words to
witness what they say, especially with such Solemnity and Deliberation; and
believing him continually in their hearts to witness not only what they say,
but what they think?

And now were I demanded a reason, why so circumspect and wise a Body should
act so differently in the same cause but different Countries; I could only
return this conjectural Answer; that being wary and prudent persons, they could
not but see the Concerns they hazarded in France by refusing to Subscribe, far
more important, than what they ventured at Rome by Subscribing: whereas in
England, all they can forfeit by declining the Oath of Allegiance (being
themselves but few, and without the Engagements of Colleges and Foundations) is
perhaps of less esteem with them, than the interest of their Universal Body at
Rome, whence so many advantages are continually derived to the rest of their
Society.

When I have taken leave to suppose for True, That a certain general Rule, is
to be observed, notwithstanding an Exception that is uncertain; I may easily
hope your leave to ask this fifth Question;

V. If the Precept of Obedience to Kings in Temporals be a certain Catholic
Doctrine, and the Exception (unless the Pope depose) be uncertain; whether the
Precept does not still Oblige notwithstanding that Exception?
ANd however such a power may by some be held speculatively probable, yet, as
to any Execution, it is practically no Power at all, against one in possession;
and consequently may be ab ur'd as such: he that has only a speculatively
probable Commission to take away my life, has none at all actually to do it:
and every one will surely agree that to dispossess a King is of infinitely
more mischievous Consequence than to kill a private Person; Witness the horrid
miseries that followed the Deposition of Henry the fourth, by Gregory the
seventh; the first Pope, and first Emperor that ever engaged so far in that
kind of quarrel; a quarrel wherein both sides endured for a long time
unspeakable Calamities, both sides striving with all extremity of passion and
fury to ruin one another.

Our Allegiance to Kings, and Their Title to our Allegiance being both, in
their natures, antecedent to Baptism; For the relation of King and Subject is
by Birth, and the quality of Christian by Adoption;

VI. How can the Superinduced spiritual Obligation diminish the Civil, when no
such Condition is contained either in Baptism, Catechism, or Articles of Faith;
Especially since we are baptized into the Communion of Believers, not of
Opiners?
IT IS true, both Prince and people, do by their Godfathers in Baptism renounce
the world, the flesh, and the devil: but neither of them make any promise to
forfeit their Crowns or Estates to the Pope, if they break their word. Nay,
even Popes themselves, in the primitive times, were temporally Subject to the
Heathen Emperors both before and after their Conversion: And indeed, since the
Christian Law, by the Judgment of all, deprives none of their Right, if they
were Subject before the Princes Conversion, they must needs continue so after.

Nor can I see (and in this every Reader is concerned) why the Pope if once
admitted to dispense with Subjects Allegiance to their Prince, may not
discharge the Tenants too from paying Rents to their Landlords, and Debtors
from their Obligations to their Creditors, as often as He shall Judge the
Interest of Religion to require it. Nay, by the same reason, driven a step or
two farther; why may not every Bishop in his Diocese, and every Curate in his
Parish pretend a Right, radically inherent in his Dignity, to dispose of all
our Estates in Order to the good of our Souls; and that it is only either the
hard-heartedness of Lay-Magistrates to hinder it from shooting forth into
branches; or the Wisdom of the Supreme Spiritual Magistrate to reserve the
whole fruit to Himself?

Already by my own reflections I am fully satisfied that a Dispensation (should
any such be pretended) with the Oath of Allegiance, would be no Dispensation
with the Duty of Allegiance: The Duty being Antecedent to the Oath, and
Independent of it, and only Confirmed, not Created by it: and therefore as to
this point, I find no necessity of giving you any trouble.

But in the next Question I must humbly bespeak your pardon, because I fear my
boldness may need it: It Is a Case I never have yet seen well examined, and
therefore more doubtingly propose it.

The Gravest Assertors of the Popes indirect power to depose Princes, warily
confine Him to two Cases; which they call Heresy and Apostasy: And, as by
Apostate they must necessarily mean One that has been a Catholic, and is quite
fallen away from Christianity; So surely by Heretic they should proportionably
understand One that has been a Catholic, and is in part fallen away from the
Faith: This Consideration, I confess, bred in me a scruple, I am not able,
without your help to satisfy: How a Protestant Baptized into the Church of
England, should be held obliged to the positive Laws of another Church; to
which, neither himself, nor his Godfathers, promised any Obedience: his
Baptism indeed confers Grace, and adopts him into the State of Salvation; but
why should he be counted subject to the Government of a Communion quite
opposite to That into which he is Baptized? does a Protestant commit a Mortal
Sin every time he eats Flesh on a Fasting day, or omits to hear Mass on a
Holyday, when neither Mass, nor perhaps that Holyday is allowed by his Church?

We know, whoever loves God above all things, is in the State of Salvation, but
not of External Communion, till he actually submit to it; and me thinks it
seems obscure, that I should be interpreted to submit to the Government of a
Church of such a Discipline, by my very being Baptized into a Church of a
contrary one.

Besides, Followers of those who began the Division are not in the same form of
Church-Condemnation with those who began it; much less when they are born of
such Parents, and bred up in a Country where such Tenets have so long and
uncontrolledly been established, that many perhaps may hold them, without being
guilty of holding them; Wherefore I humbly entreat your Learning to instruct me,

VII. Whether You have read any Authors that expressly say, a Magistrate so
Circumstantiated may be Deposed by the Pope, especially since I remember not
one Instance, Ancient or Modern, of any such Prince so treated?
THE Examples of deposing Princes being without any certain Rule, sometimes by
the Pope, sometimes by the Nobility, sometimes by the People, sometimes by an
Eminent Subject, sometimes by a powerful Stranger; And the ground pretended,
being sometimes Religion, sometimes some other Cause* give me leave to consult
your judgment,

VIII. Whether those Examples may not all be resolved, Either by the General
Answer, that Fact makes no Right; Or, that they were practiced without any
ordinary and acknowledged Jurisdiction; but only by way of common Reason and
natural Prudence, which teaches us in extremities to cast about and relieve our
selves, in the best and hopefullest way we can, according to our Circumstances?
FOr though by this Almighty Maxim of Extreme and Lawless necessity, even
Popes themselves, as well as other Governors, have sometimes been deposed; yet
I clearly believe neither Popes, nor Councils, nor Kings, nor Nobles, nor
People, nor Strangers, have any Dormant Commission from Heaven, that
constitutes in any of them a Formal and Authorotative Tribunal to decide
Jurisdictionally who shall be Pope or King.

To make this distinction (on which the whole controversy chiefly depends)
unmistakably plain and evident; let me parallel the grand Instances of Popes
and Kings, with the little ones of private persons: when we say, as I think
every Christian does, that it is Impious and Heretical to hold, One Neighbor
can take away the life of another, though he never so much deserve it; in
Reference to what power do we speak? is it not to that kind of power which is
ordinarily Created by Commission? can we be fairly interpreted to mean some odd
extravagant case of absolute necessity to defend our own lives against his
otherwise unavoidable Assaults? So when we speak of a Power and Authority to
depose Kings, we are plainly to understand a Power and Authority vested in St.
Peter and his Successors by Commission from Christ: This and this only, I
conceive, is the Authority we are commanded to abjure; and unless such a
Divine Commission be shown, I cannot see why to assert such a power in the Pope
is not Impious and Heretical, as much and far more than the instance of private
Murder: Especially the Oath so particularly expressing its chief intent to be
the exclusion of the Popes pretenses, and prevention of the mischiefs naturally
apprehended from the Supreme and all-Commanding Jurisdiction of a Foreiner.

Having perused some Authors who confidently say, never any Orthodox Divine
maintained this transcendent power in the Pope, nor ever any such practices
appeared for above a thousand years after Christ; though the Christians long
before that time had both strength enough to do it, if they had had a Will; and
Zeal enough to have willed it, if they had thought it lawful: I cannot but
suspect this Doctrine of Novelty, till you be pleased to inform me,

IX. What Eminent Writers there are, in the first thousand years after Christ,
who expressly hold this Tenet of the Popes Authority to Depose Princes?
THis I am apt to conceive so much the more improbable to be found; because
neither S. Tho. nor Card* Bellarmine cite any Antienter Authors than Gregory
the seventh, whose Papacy is of a younger date than that we speak of: Much
younger yet is the Council of Lateran; nor can it with the least color of
truth be alleged for any more than a Canonical Constitution; and perhaps not so
much, till the difficulties concerning it be cleared, which I leave to the
Doctors, and only contend, it is at best no more; else the Defenders of Papal
Deposition were bound to believe its Decree in this point as an Article of
Faith, and condemn the French Universities as Heretical, and separate from
their Communion: if then it be only an Ecclesiastical Canon, it is well enough
known such Laws are not Obliging, but where they are received, and where they
are received, may on just grounds be again rejected. However, even where that
Canon is admitted (if any where it be) no fair Interpreter can extend it to
reach so high as Sovereign Princes, to whom this respect is generally by the
Canonists esteemed due, that unless They be expressly named, they are not by
implication understood to be comprehended in any penal or restrictive clause, a
Civility allowed even to Cardinals, whom I cannot think any disinteressed
Considerer will prefer before Kings.

As for reason, which I confess, where it is evident, needs no Antiquity to gain
my assent; I have not met with any that bids so fair toward satisfaction, as
this argument.

If the Ends be subordinate to one another, the Facultyes are.

But the End of Civil Power (temporal happiness) is subordinate to the End of
Spiritual Power (eternal happiness.)

Therefore the Civil Power is subordinate to the Spiritual.

Let all this be supposed as true (though there want not distinctions, by which
some endeavor to relieve themselves in this point too) I only enquire how this
Spiritual Superior must proceed, when the Temporal Magistrate intolerably
misdemeans himself; and I think He is confined, as his very Name imports, to
Spiritual punishments, as suspension from Sacraments, Excommunication, etc.

But that, they will say is not sufficient, nor the Church completely furnished
with means proportionate to its end, unless it can depose a Prince that
deserves it. To which, I answer,

First. The argument is of so wild unlimited a Consequence, that should they
instead of Depose, say Kill, or whatever other mischief they please to invent,
they might in Rigor with the same Reason defend it.

Secondly. Though in some sense it be true, the Spiritual Power is furnished
with all means necessary to its End; yet are we not obliged to say, it can
remove all impediments, and that in what method it pleases; Is not the Sun
completely endued with power to shine, unless it can level mountains, and
overturn for rests that intercept its light? or, which is nearer our Case, has
not a King sufficient power to govern, unless he can punish his neighbor King,
nay even the Pope himself, and that with spiritual penalties? In regular and
ordinary Occurrences, the regular and ordinary power both of Pope and Prince is
sufficient: in irregular and extraordinary, the very word signifies, they are
out of Rule, and must be governed by occasional reason, which allows both to
Pope and Prince a just and equal title to provide, that Neither prejudice the
Other; and this, without the Popes being Superior to the Prince in Temporals,
any more than the Prince is to the Pope in Spirituals; But, as absolute
Sovereigns, when there is no other remedy, may lawfully make war; so I conceive
may these (each managing his proper weapon) and pretend only Reason, not
Jurisdiction to justify their proceedings.

Thirdly, I suspect, this plausible argument (the spiritual power is furnished
with all means necessary to its end) may so largely be understood, that it will
flatly be denied; for, is not Execution of the Magistrates Commands, necessary
to the end of Government? and is not a competent Force necessary to that
Execution? why then did our all-foreseeing Savior not provide for this? why
did he not furnish his Supreme Lieutenant with twelve Legions of Angels, to
overcome the Princes of the Earth, that will not obey his Decrees? As to this,
I know no better reason, than that the Churches Hymn is true,

Non eripit Mortalia,
Qui Regna dat Caelestia.
He does not Earthly Kings deprive,
Who came the Crown of Heaven to give.
Besides, may we not as well say, the Church is furnished by Christ with all
Offices (at least all considerable Ones) as with all Power necessary to its
Government? yet every one knows neither Patriarks, Primates, nor Archbishops
are of divine Institution, however their very being so canonically established
in the Church, sufficiently declares their usefulness and necessity; and their
being no otherwise established, sufficiently convinces the weakness of the
argument I am endeavoring to disable.

If my expectations happen to fail in all these Questions, permit me yet to
offer this short Consideration. The Position we are commanded to renounce as
Impious, and Heretical, is this,

Princes, who are Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Since it is clear, that
where the Subject of a Proposition is in the disjunctive, unless the Predicate
be verefiable of both Members, the whole Proposition may absolutely be denied;
it plainly follows, if to say a Prince Excommunicated only (not deprived) may
be deposed by his Subjects, be Impious and Heretical, at least in the large and
usual sense of that word, that the whole Proposition is safely abjurable, as
Impious and Heretical. In which discourse, this only seems to need proof, that
it is Heretical to say, a Prince Excommunicated may be deposed by his Subjects.
And first, I hope, it will quickly appear to be False, by the very definition
of Excommunication; Excommunication being a Church-Censure, that separates from
the Ecclesiastical Communion of the Faithful. And though by a general rule we
are commanded to avoid all Heretics, and Excommunicated Persons, yet (besides
that, of it self it reaches only to spiritual things, unless the Civil Law
extend it farther) the Canonists give many exceptions, one is (which nearliest
concerns our Case) that of Relation; shall Husbands and Wives, Parents and
Children, Masters and Servants, be bound in case of Excommunication to abandon
one another? what Confusion would so rash a Doctrine bring into the world? and
is it not far worse, if Subjects shall think it lawful to forsake their King,
nay unlawful not to forsake him?

Thus I conceive it is evidently False; and if once admitted for such, its own
weight will soon sink it down into Impious. And what is Impious, especially
drawing after it such mischievous effects, will easily be proved against the
very Essence of the Christian Law, and by Consequence intrinsecally Heretical.
If yet you think, this opinion not so highly censurable, I beseech you inform
me,

X. Whether any of these Positions deserve the Condemnation of Heretical? That
the Pope has a direct Dominion, both in Spirituals and Temporals, over all the
World: Or that He can deprive Kings of their lives, and pass sentence of death
against them: Or against the lives or goods of any other Person? that is,
whether He can make it lawful to do those Acts, which, were they not Authorized
by him, would be plain Murder, Theft, or Rebellion?
ALL these, every one I meet is ready to cry out on, as Impious, Hereticial,
and what you will; And is the Deposing a King a slighter work, than the
Sequestring a private Gentleman? Or has he a weaker Title to his Crown, than a
Merchant to his Shop? Either I am deceived by some Equivocation, which I
entreat you to discover, or else the Question I propose is as clear as the Sun
at Noon.

It Is true some Cases are mixed, but then me thinks it is not so hard a task to
give each Authority its due; Can we not easily discern, what belongs to
Marriage as a Sacrament, from what belongs to it, as a Civil Contract? Or
distinguish between the Churches power to make a Bastard incapable of Orders,
and that of the Commonwealth, to make him incapable of Inheriting? Nor has the
Question any greater difficulty, when the Tribunals Successively assist one
another, as when the Ecclesiastics, having proceeded to the utmost of their
Jurisdiction, deliver the Criminal to the Lay Court, there to receive such
further punishment, as his Crime deserves, which they could not have needed,
had their own power reached so far, not would they have practiced, had they not
needed it.

To conclude this point, with some Authority as well as Reason; I have read,
that not only the Position of killing Kings was condemned as Impious,
Heretical, and Damnable, by 141. Divines of the Faculty of Paris, in the year
1413. But since, in the year 1610. the same Faculty Decreed, That it was
Seditious, Impious, and Heretical, for any Subject, Vassal, or Stranger, on
what occasion or pretense soever, Sacris Regum personis vim infer, to offer
violence to the sacred persons of Kings. Behold the very word Heretical,
directly and formally applied to a Position that in substance exceeds not Ours,
unless we imagine a King so tame, that we may Depose him without offering him
any Violence: or find some witty Casuist, who has invented a new way of
creeping out of the words (no matter for the plain and honest sense) and by his
grave Opinion, secure our Consciences, that though it be Impious indeed and
Heretical, to offer any force to the sacred Persons of Kings, yet to intercept
their meat till they be starved to death (as it is said of one of the Kings of
Denmark) is absolutely lawful, as being an omitted Case, and so not at all
forbidden.

Observing that in this whole Controversy, the main Bulwark wherein the
Defenders of the Popes Prerogative in Temporals, fortify themselves, and think
to pacify the Civil Powers, is a certain famous Distinction, whose plain and
literal sense I understand well enough, but cannot find in it, if impartially
examined, a title to make so great an Impression as is pretended; I humbly
entreat your quick and strong Eye, to look a little seriously into the
Question, and teach me,

XI. What difference there is, as to any real effect in Government, between
acknowledging a direct immediate Power in the Pope to Depose Princes, or only
an indirect and mediate One?
IS it not almost all one in it self, and altogether all one in mischief,
whether my eyes be beaten out with a direct stroke of a Tennis-Ball, or by
Bricol? Are not our Laws still equally Penal both to direct and indirect
Offenders? will any of us allow a slandering tongue (than which nothing is more
frequent, or more intolerable) to Caluminate freely, on condition his poisonous
darts come only glancing, and not be levelled point blank against us?

Here they perhaps will say, I mistake the Case; For, were only the Exercise of
this Power mediate and indirect, they would confess my similitudes had
something of Argument, but the very Power it self say they, is in its
Intrinsic nature no more than mediate and indirect, which widens much the
sides of the distinction, nor do any of my Interrogations offer to confute it.

When I have first declared, I intend not to meddle with such slender Entityes
as Relations metaphysically considered; I shall betake my thoughts to what I
conceive more pertinent to our purpose, the Moral Notion; and enquire what
influence on humane actions a direct Power gives its Posse^or, more than an
indirect? If they answer, by the one He can punish his Inferiors, as he
pleases, by the other not: I reply, That is the notion of an absolute and
perfectly arbitrary Government, not precisely of a direct Power, which not only
may sometimes be limited, but almost always is; has not the Emperor a direct
Authority over the German Electors? Is not the Pope direct Superior of the
Christian Bishops? yet which of them can, either One or the Other, deprive or
punish at his mere pleasure? I they say, it is a Power as strongly Commanding as
the direct, but is not in the same line, the ^piritual being of a quite
different Order from the Temporal; I confess these are pretty terms to
entertain subtle heads, and amuze simple ones; but to a downright prudent
Examiner, I believe they will prove of very little serious Signification, nay
though the Causes be contrary to one another, if they produce the same effect,
they make with me the same argument. Naturalists say, that Cold immediately
condenses by directly crushing the Body it incloses: whereas Heat first
extenuates, and then draws away the subtiliz'd parts, and after the grosser
shrink together of themselves, and so condenses too, but mediately and
indirectly; and these are words that sound well enough; but when we come to
practical application, and find that too much Sun, as well as Frost, so dryes
and hardens the Earth, that it choaks our seed, and kills our flowers, what
good does our fine distinction? what does our Mediately and Indirectly avail us?

Nor is the Effect only the same, whether the Popes power be called direct or
indirect, since each way he really dethrones the Prince; but the end to both of
his direct-Spiri^ual, and indirect-Temporal Authority is the same since He is
bound to manage the last only, in ordine ad Spiritualia, and the first, ad
Edificationem; which two phrases seem to me no ill Synonimas one of another.
These are some of the reflections that have made me doubt, though there may be
(and I think I see it) some Speculative difference between the two manners of
Title, yet in practice very little, if any at all.

When all this is said, and far more, (which I think not uneasy to do) still
there remain two grand Objections: The Supreme Pastor has engaged his
Authority; and our duty obliges us to obey His Commands: Our Predecessors have
refused the Oath, and suffered for refusing; and our honor is concerned to
follow their steps. To which, with your permission, I offer this answer,

Since by the Popes forbearing the French, we evidently see such Prohibitions
depend on particular and occasional Considerations, not only liable to be
misapprehended by others, but to be altered in themselves; certainly it very
ill becomes our Reverence to the Authority of the Pope, or respect to the
Memory of our Ancestors, to fear they would wilfully persist in a discovered
Error, and not change their proceedings, when they should see the grounds on
which they proceeded were changed.

Nor even then when the Pope's Brief forbad the Oath, did there want a just
number of Catholics, if my books say true, who humbly represented their
Motives to his Holiness, why they doubted his Prohibition was not obliging, as
being grounded on mistaken and uncertain Suppositions: A privilege permitted to
all, and most of all to Ecclesiastical Subjects (who are not Governed by the
Sword, but the Pastoral Staff) either to obey or give good reason why they do
not: and this, without the least suspicion of boldly examining their Superiors
Commands with the Judgment of Authority, but exercising only, what the meanest
Vassal may Loyally practice toward the greatest Prince, their natural Reason
and Judgment of Discretion.

And here I must confess my self inclined to think it very probable, that the
whole business was untruly represented to the Pope: for, can we doubt but
Card. Bellarmine was acquainted with the Informations given to his Holiness?
or, that they Both agreed not in their sense concerning our Case? let us then
see what his Eminence says in his Letter to Mr. Blackwell, Archpriest of the
English Clergy; where, having alleged that Ancient Instance of mingling
together the Images of the Emperors, and of the false Gods, to entangle the
Christians with this Dilemma, that either they must bow to Jupiter, and Commit
Idolatry; or not bow to Caesar, and be guilty of high Treason, He ads, Tale
aliquid in juramento* etc. Some such thing me thinks I see in this Oath they
offer you, which is so fraudulently contrived, that none can profess their
Civil Subjection to the King and Detest all Treason against Him, but he must
needs perfidiously Renounce the Supremacy* of the Sea Apostolic. And again,
Nam si rem totam, etc. If you will diligently examine the whole matter, you will
see it is no small thing which by that Oath is brought into danger, but one of
the Capital and Fundamental Points of our Faith and Catholic Religion; And
quite throughout the whole Letter He still supposes the Design of the Framers
of this Oath, how covertly soever they express themselves to be; That the
Authority of Head of the Church be transferred (as to England) from the
Successor of St. Peter, to the Successor of Henry the 8. Which still so much
the more evidently appears, both by his Quoting Fathers upon the general head
of obeying the Pope, and acknowledging his Supremacy, as also by his comparing
Mr. Blackwells Sin in taking the Oath, to Peter's denying Christ, and
Marcellinus's Sacrificing to Idols; whom at least in some part, He says, the
Archpriest imitated. Does this Pen run as if it were guided by a Hand well
informed? Is it not highly probable that such Informations were the grounds of
the Prohibition? Is it not absolutely certain, that such grounds, being
palpable mistakes, are no way sufficient to oblige our Obedience.

Not that we have cause so much to complain of the Brief, as of them whose
Passionate, and perhaps Factious Zeal procured it: for how can the Pope be
informed what we Tramontani do, but by others? and how can He Judge, but as he
is informed? since surely we are not to expect such an extraordinary assistance
from Heaven to guide his Hand in writing a Letter, though in Form of Brief, as
some pretend for his defining ex Cathedra. Read but the Bulla Coenae, and you will
find it no impossible thing for the Pope to claim more, than a good Subject,
much less a wise King will give him: there he solemnly excommunicates all
Princes, who impose on their Subjects new Gabels without leave of the Sea
Apostolic: with many other unallow'd pretenses. From all which we infer these
two plain truths, That the Pope may miscommand; and when he does so, be
lawfully disobeyed.

But to proceed ingenuously with you, as I hope and beg you will do with me;
let us fortify this Objection with the utmost skill and strength we can: This
Act of Deposing Kings has not only been done by Popes, but approved by
Councils; to whose jo^nt-Authority I confess a great Reverence is due, and
therefore beseech you deal heartily with me, (for I have no^ any convenience to
examine the circumstances of these Histories) did they only approve the Fact;
or declare the Right? if the first, I shall without staying to dispute it,
suppose the thing, for that time, well done; and only enquire, in reference to
what Authority 'twas done: our Henry the 7. we know did many Acts without
declaring the Title by which he did them; and the Parliaments approbation still
confirmed them: if then they, proceeded as by a Commission claimed from Christ,
and allowed in a General Council, would not that make the Tenet an Article of
Faith, and so prove too much, since among the Temperate it generally* pretends
no higher than an Opinion? but if they acted only by a Commission derived from
Necessity, which having no Law, is a Law to it self* the Consequence little
concerns our Dispute; who know the Pope Himself has been deposed; yet neither
will He admit, nor need his Deposers pretend any Jurisdiction or Superiority
over Him; it is enough where Necessity overrules the Law, that Necessity Govern
in its stead; which if true and real, may perhaps do much harm, but can do no
injury.

As to the other Branch; if the Council interposed in declaring the Right,
either they intended it as a Definition, and then you must say it is of Faith,
which almost every one denies: or as an Ecclesiastical Canon, and then I must
say, it binds only where received, and may be altered or repealed like other
Laws, as is already discoursed, when we cited the Council of Lateran.

However, in our particular Case, nothing is more easy than to Conquer the
Objectors of the Popes Briefs with their own weapons; for let them tell me, are
they not ready to swear they will faithfully serve their King while they live,
and that notwithstanding any Papal Dispensation, or whatever other Proceeding
to the contrary? what signifies this, but an express renouncing all obedience
to the Pope in these ^^^^ts? True say they, we renounce obedience, but not the
acknowledgment of his Power; we will adhere to the King, though the Pope should
Depose him; but will not say, he cannot Depose him. What wise and real
difference (as to Government, and the practical part of humane life) can we
imagine between these two; I Will swear never to obey my Commander, and I Will
swear he has no power to command me? Speak plain and honestly, and either deny
his Authority, or obey it; this motley Hypocrisy will, I fear, offend both Pope
and King, and while you disclaim your obedience to the One, and the Authority
of the Other, Neither will confide in you; Change but the Person, and think,
what a holy religious man he would be, that should solemnly vow never to obey
his Superior, how loud soever he preached his Authority; think what a flat
contradiction it is, of two Relatives, to kill one, and keep the other alive;
think what an uncharitable madness it is, that the whole body of Chatholicks be
exposed to ruin, and the whole Credit of their Religion be buried in that
ruin, rather than disavow an Authority, which we are ready to swear we will
never obey.

But to dispatch this chief Objection with a shorter word, and that still taken
out of their own mouths; The Pope they say has commanded we should refuse this
Oath, but do they not too, with the same breath say, they will absolutely
forswear obeying his Commands, if they be not pressed to renounce his Power? and
what do we more than disobey him, if notwithstanding his Prohibition we accept
of the Oath? we meddle not with his Authority, we only (as they profess
themselves ready to do) deny our Obedience; is it not as lawful for us, when
the King commands, to admit this Oath against the Popes will, as for them to
swear they will obey the King, let the Pope command what he will?

As for our Ancestors, had they seen the Unanimous Judgment of so many
Universities, and the public Subscriptions of so many eminent Regulars,
particularly noted for great enlargers of the Pope^ power; had they examined
the sense of Antiquity toward Sovereign Princes, which acknowledges them
Supreme in Temporals, and accountable to none but God; had they read the
learned Treatises composed by Catholic writers, both of our own and other
Nations, where this King-dethroning power is absolutely disavow'd; had they
perused the Declarations of the Kings in France, and Arrests of Parliaments
there, by which the Authors who dared to assert that Opinion were Condemned,
and their Books burnt by the hand of the Hangman; had they done all, or any
notable part of this, they could not certainly but have changed their
Judgments, and no longer, both against Reason, Authority, and their own
Interest, have wilfully adhered to a Tenet so ill grounded, and a practice so
ruinous.

Little of all this I fear did many of our Ancestors reflect on, but guiding
their Consciences by their Ghostly Fathers, and their practice by their
Consciences, chose that side of the Opinion, which any one might then have
refused without Heresy, and any one may now without scandal, without scandal I
mean as to the bare Opinion considered in its naked self, not as it unhappily
is dressed up in the Oath, where some expressions, at first sight, show so odly,
that a little prejudice or unacquaintedness makes many a well meaner boggle at
them; And here again I heartily renew the wish I have already made, that a
general form of Oath, were so Charitably and Condescendingly framed, as might
fully secure to our most gracious Sovereign the Allegiance of All, and not
trouble with scruples the less instructed Conscience of any.

But to dispatch this Objection: If to take the Oath we discourse of be truly
justifiable, why may not we do what we think lawful now, because our
Predecessors did not what they thought unlawful heretofore? their Refusal was
Innocent and Laudable, since they followed sincerely the dictates of their
Consciences; yet Ours will be neither, unless we do so too; nay the very
reason that made them decline the Oath, their being so persuaded, engages us to
take it, if we be otherwise persuaded; for, as in this all the world agrees,
that an erroneous Conscience, till the mistake be removed, undoubtedly obliges;
so none will deny, but, the Truth once cleared, the Obligation ceases: if such
then be the case between our Predecessors and Us, we may fairly be absolved
from following them, or rather truly be said to follow them, while we all aim
at the same end (the Conscionable performance of what we believe our Duty)
though we seem to go thither by different ways: None but eternal truths can
exact an unchangeable adherence; none but they can deserve it.

And now I have only one Question more to propose,

XII. How do the Clergy, the Religious, and the Wiser sort of the Laity in
other Countries behave themselves, when the Pope makes War, or any other way
Contends with their Sovereign Princes or States?
FOr even in Italy, I see most of them generally, and all of them sometimes,
disobey the Pope, and cleave to their Country; nay those very Religious who
have formerly ventured All by a particular Obedience to his Holiness, are
noted of late to be grown more temperate: I have read, if I misremember not, in
an It lian Author this Story, That the Pope making War some few years since,
with the Duke of Parma, and proceeding against him to the extremity of
Ecclesiastical Censures, occasioned the Duke to advise with his Council, how he
should bear himself toward the Churchmen that lived in his Subjection; where
after some debate, 'twas at length concluded, that fit persons should
immediately be deputed to demand of every Order both Secular and Regular, which
party they intended to follow? only to one sort of Regulars it 'twas expressly
forbidden to make any such Address, lest their extraordinary obsequiousness
to the Pope might engage them otherwise than the Duke desired, and the example
of their Nonconformity breed a prejudice to his affairs: But they, wisely
examining the Consequences of so new a Distinction, and the Necessity of
preventing so dangerous a jealousy, did of themselves, without expecting any
Summons, wait upon their Prince, and voluntarily presented Him their Humble
Protestations of Fidelity and Obedience: an action, which, I am apt to believe
was not a little contributive to their late Restitution in the wary State of
Venice. In fine, every sort of Ecclesiastics, as well the uninvited, as the
invited came in, and professed their firm and positive resolution to obey the
Commands of his Highness, not withstanding the Interdict of his Holiness.

And yet (to abstract from the Justice of the Quarrel, which was perhaps on the
Popes side) the Duke is not only a Feudatary of the Church, but his Estate was
at first derived to him from the Pope, and is to return again in default of
Issue male, which makes a fair difference betwixt Him and the Case of an
Absolute King.

But to look nearer home; what did we our selves not many years since in our
own Country? did not almost* all the Ecclesiastics, and a number of the
Nobility and Gentry, sufficient to represent the whole little Body of
Catholics here, after full deliberation unanimously subscribe their Negative
to these three Articles?

I. That the Pope or Church has power to absolve any person or persons from
their Obedience to the Civil and* Political Government established* or to be
established in this Nation, in Civil and Political affairs.

II. That by the Command or Dispensation of the Pope or Church, it is lawful to
kill, destroy* or do any injury to any Person or Persons living within the
Kings Dominions, because that such a Person or Persons are Accused, Condemned,
Censured, or Excommunicated for Error, Schism, or Heresy.

III. That it is lawful in it self* or by Dispensation from the Pope, to break
Promise or Oath, made to any of the foresaid Persons, under pretense that they
are Heretics.

These, I am sorry I must confess were Censured at Rome, privately indeed and
without solemnity, as being perhaps either unwilling to come to the light, or
unable to bear it; whatever was the motive, I cannot omit to make this
Reflection upon so unequal a proceeding toward the prosperous French, and the
afflicted English; what either of injurious or untrue, do any of these three
Propositions contain, that is not both more largly, and more smartly expressed in
the Decrees of Sorbonne, and the rest of the Universities cited at the
beginning of this Letter? if they be free, why are not we? if we be condemned,
why are not they?

At least, this Roman Censure of the English Subscription, wants not some good
effect, since it has absolutely cleared the chief remaining Objection; which
else, if captiously managed, might perhaps have given us some trouble to
maintain our parallel with the French, for, till then, it had been no great
piece of invention, to pretend that the Popes prohibitive Brief was applyable
only to the whole Oath in gross, and so might consist well enough with the
disclaim of His indirect Authority over Kings; But now I see, it is not the
Form, it is not an inconvenient Phrase or two (the greatest scruple of some
serious Persons among us here) but the very Substance of the Oath, the growing
denial of the Popes power to Depose Princes, is the chief, if not the only
Scandal that is offensive there.

Nor is this kind of disobedience to the Popes Commands only in some Cases
practiced, but by the Common Maxim of the Canonists, and of Reason too,
constantly maintained, both which step in to our relief in such extremities,
and say, where any notable mischief is like to follow, we are not obliged to
obey the Pope, though he command under pain of Excommunication, ipso facto.
This is the common Opinion of the Learned; but, because it is too the common
scruple of the unlearned, I shall cite some few Authorities transcribed out of
books where I find them collected, having my self neither skill nor delight in
such kind of Studies; Of these I conceive two or three, in a point so evident,
abundantly sufficient; One is of Pope Innocent 3. thus cited by Franc. Zabarel
de schismat. Papae non est obediendum, etc. We are not to obey the Pope when
there is a vehement presumption that the state of the Church may be disturbed,
or other mischiefs like to follow; Nay it were a sin to obey, because every one
is bound to prevent future evils. Conformable to this, Sylvester alleging
Panormitan, says, Verb. obedientia Number. 5. Nec est ei obedientium, etc. We are
not to obey the Pope; if our obedience may be presumed will trouble the state
of the Church, or be cause of any future Evil or Scandal, though the Precept
were under pain of Excommunication, Latae sententiae. And Cardinal Tolet citing
the same Authors, pronounces the same truth in far more ample terms.

Do not these Authors (and none I suppose, for I have not much acquaintance
with that sort of Learning, can differ from them in proper Cases) give us
indeed more than we have need of? Are not the Consequences of our obeying the
Pope's Letters, ruinous to our Fortunes; and which is worse, Scandalous to our
Religion? shall we not strengthen the suspicion of our Factiousnesse, and
Inconsistency with Civil Government? and can a little Credit of a few at Rome,
counterpoise a burden that lies so heavy on us all, in our own Country.

The Circumstances we are in, I confess, are very unhappy, when the wisest of
those who should advise us, are not fully free to speak their thoughts? but by
particular Concernments so tempted to comply, that nothing but a rare Sincerity
and Courage can enable them to resist; a Case that needs indeed some pity, but
deserves no praise: and therefore as we shall be to blame, if we Censure too
readily the Effects of Frailty in Them, so will they be less Innocent, if they
Condemn too severely the Use of Liberty in Us. For my part, I have this to say,
in proof of my own Indifferency, I am not Ambitious for preferment from Any,
but humbly and heartily acknowledge my submission to every one above me;
especially to the two Supreme, whom with all fidelity I am ready to obey, as my
Soveragin Governors, though They never should be my particular Benefactors.

A Duty we owe to the Pope, a Duty to the King; both commanded by God, both
obliging under Sin; yet both confined to their proper limits; Too much of the
Temporal may be ascribed to Popes; too much of the Spiritual to Kings: too much
may be challenged by Both: the difficulty is, when either exceeds, who must be
Judge: if the cause be clearly Temporal, it is clearly the King (speaking of
Common Right, not their particular Agreements) if Spiritual, the Pope: but
where the Quality of the cause is invincibly doubted, (which can seldom be
without a strange passion at least on one side,) I know no Judge expressly
empowered to decide so extraordinary a Question, nor can imagine any other
remedy, than what true Reason, pressed with necessity, will extemporally
dictate in such an occasion. However, thus far I plainly see, that, as
sometimes a mischance may happen by the Competition of these two Authorities,
so often very many and great advantages may accrue to Both, by their good
correspondence, and mutual assistance.

But by no means can I see, were the Extent of the Popes power in Spirituals,
and the Denial of his power in Temporals well understood, what disturbance He
could possibly make in this Kingdom? if he excommunicate the Protestants, they
little regard it: if the Catholics, such as are rightly instructed know their
Civil Obligations both to their King and Fellow Subjects* remain entirely the
same after Excommunication as they were before. No Ecclesiastical Censures
against a Catholic here altering in the least tittle his Circumstances to
Protestants; since of its own nature, it only concerns Communication in
Spirituals, wherein, before any Censure they no more Communicate together, than
after: indeed among the Catholics such Censure has some effect; yet of it
self, only thus far can it work with them, to suspend or deprive their
Communion in Holy Offices; to which, if any Temporal prejudices be annexed (as
that an Excommunicate cannot bring an Action, etc.) they wholly are derived from
the Civil Power, and when it sees convenient may wholly be revoked.

As for the particular Laws of our Country, long before the unhappy dividing
times of H. 8. our Wise, yet Pious Ancestors failed not to provide for the
public peace against all Foreign encroachments; prohibiting the importation of
any Bull from Rome without his Majesty's allowance, and imposing penalties on
any that presumed without His Royal Assent to publish them. And were things so
disposed that the little correspondence which is necessary for Catholics here
with Rome were regulated, and not by severities endeavored to be extinguished,
(which cannot be effected without extinguishing the Religion it self) I am
confident no one sort of people in the whole Nation would be either more
faithfully serviceable to their King, or more securely incapable of disserving
their Country. Nor would this design require any more consideration than only
to resolve that their Ecclesiastical Government should be no other than such as
had known Rules and Limits, not Arbitrarily depending on Rome; And their
Ecclesiastical Governors no other than such as were of known Loyalty to their
King, and Piety to their Country.

Thus Sir I have finished these few Questions; and hope by Your instruction to
settle my mind: professing heartily my absolute readiness (with the Grace of
God) to govern my Understanding by Reason, and my Actions by my Understanding:
only this short Petition I Humbly add, That as your Nature is Frank and
Generous, your Answer may be Manly and Candid, not in the way miscalled Pious,
but with a strict Conformity to what is true and solid; and however your
Opinion may possibly in some things differ from mine, yet still continue in all
things to Command

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant A. G.
St. Georges Day, 1661
FINIS,
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 27. Dele. for. Page 4. Line 17. read Depose. And Line 25. read
Word of God.


