PEACE and REST FOR The Upright. BEING A SERMON PREACHED At the FUNERAL of the
REVEREND Dr. John Bryan, sometime Minister of Trinity in Coventry,

By that Worthy Preacher of Gods Word, Mr. NATH. WANLEY, Master of Arts,
Deceased, and Successor to the said Doctor in the aforesaid Parish.

LONDON, Printed for John Smith, Bookseller in Coventry, 1681.

Peace and Rest for the Upright.
Esaiah 57. Verse 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds,
each one walking in his uprightness.
THE Life of Man is compared in Scripture unto sundry things upon different and
various accounts in respect of the brevity and shortness of it. St. James tells
us it is a vapor that appears for a little while and soon vanishes away. And
in this respect it may be said of every one of us as Virgil once did of his
Marcellus, God shows him to the World only, and so recalls him. God presents us
here a while upon the Theater of the World for to act our parts, and then sends
us into the retiring Room the Grave, the place appointed for all that are
living. So short is Man's stay in the World, that Job allows him none at all,
Naked came I into the World, and naked shall I return, says he. Here is coming
and returning out, but not a word of tarrying here. The time of life is so
inconsiderable, that Solomon the wisest of men would grant him none at all.
There is a time, says he, for every thing under the Sun, a time to be born,
and a time to dye. As if he would have us to understand, that the middle time
betwixt our birth and our death (that is the time of life) was not to be
reckoned upon at all. So that you see not only every man's life is a Vapor,
but less in respect of its shortness. But the good and holy man has his Life
compared to other things upon other Considerations. Upon the account of his
hardship and perpetual fighting and watching; his frequent encounter with
enemies, and his continual obligation to duty. A good man's life is called a
warfare, 2 Cor. 10. 4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. And upon the account of
his toil and trouble, weariness and continual travel; upon the account of his
absence from the Lord, and his daily tendency to Heaven, which is his proper
home. So the Life of a good man is called a Pilgrimage, says the Patriarch
Jacob, Few and evil have been the days of the years of the life of my
pilgrimage. But as the Warrior fights not without a prospect of Peace, Pax
quaeritur bello, Peace is the end of War. And as the weary Pilgrim does not
Travel but in hopes of an after-rest, So God almighty for the encouragement of
his Soldiers in the Fight, and his Pilgrim in the Journey, he has set before
him (as in the glass of the Promse) these two most suitable things for him,
Peace, and Rest, for so says the Text, He shall enter into peace, etc.

Where we have, 1. A Promise or Priuiledg, they shall enter into peace, they
shall rest in their beds, like Issachar the Son of Jacob here they do couch
under the double burdens of War and Weariness, of Want and Weakness; but peace
and rest, these will ease them of all they suffer, supply all they want,
recruit them with new additions of strengths, They shall enter into peace, etc.
And now I have but named that word Peace, methinks I may say as Leah concerning
her Son Gad, Behold a Troop comes. For under this name are couched all those
Favors and Blessings of God, which have the Sweetest Significations. All the
Joys and Beatitudes that are so numerous and full bloomed here, but ripe in
Heaven. They shall enter into peace, Some read it, and so your margin, Go in
peace, depart the World with Serenity and Satisfaction, with inward Quiet and
Repose. But, 2. Others read it, He shall go into peace, (that is) shall be
received into Heaven where the God of Peace is, the righteous man shall be
there; he shall enter into peace, that is to note, it is the privilege of the
Soul (especially)


First, for this is the man, the He; the Soul is the Jewel, the Body is but the
Caskinet; the Soul the principal, the other bnt the appurtenance: and they
shall rest in their beds, that is the privilege of the Body, (not Soul) it
shall be laid down to repose it self in the Grave which Jesus Christ has
perfumed as in a bed, till such time the Morning of the Resurrection begin to
dawn, and the Trump of the Archangel to sound, then it shall rise from thence
and enter into the Souls Peace.

2. Here is a description of the Persons to whom these privileges appertain;
We need not say as the Eunuch of Queen Candace, when he read a passage out of
this Prophet, Of whom spoke the Prophet this, of himself, or some other man?
For the Prophet has told us, Each one walking in his uprightness. Whosoever he
is that does deal justly with Man, and walks equally, that is, Conscientiously,
with God, he shall have this privilege of Rest and Peace, He shall enter into
peace, and rest in his bed.

3. When this Privilege and Promise shall be imparted to them; When shall they
be instated and put into the actual possession, and enjoyment of this
privilege. It is true, that this is not expressed in the Text, but strongly
employed, and is fairly to be taken notice of as the words of the Text have
relation to the words going before, The righteous perishing, (that is, dying)
and merciful men taken away, that is by death out of the World.

Then it is told what Death takes them from, They are taken from the Evil to
come. And here follows in the Text what death brings them to, They shall enter
into peace. So the intent is this, That as death comes to a good man with a
Dart in one hand to kill him, and a Spade in the other to bury him; So he
brings him Flowers that shall be able to keep him sweet, Peace for his Soul,
and Rest for his Body; and this is the time he shall be put in enjoyment of it.

From all the Point is this,

That when a Righteous man dies, he enters upon the estate of Peace and Rest.

I will only give you two Scriptures for this, which two Scriptures may be
instead of a Thousand, Psalm 37. Verse 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright; for the end of that man is peace. His end is as his death is, at that
time he has peace. It may be not at the beginning, not in the middle of his
life, but at the end. It Is possible that his morning may be cloudy and
over-cast; his Sun may suffer an Eclipse at Noonday, a darkness may come upon
his Meridian glory; but his Night, his End, this shall be Clear and Fair, Still
and Quiet, Pleasant and Delightful, that is the first place.

The other is in Revelat. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto
me, Write, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them. They have at death both Peace and Rest.

And now this Point will require these things to be spoken to.

1. Who or what the Righteous is. 2. What Peace they shall have and be
privileged with at the time of their death.
First, Who is the Righteous man? The Text says, he that walks in uprightness.
Alas, where is he to be found? A man must have very good Eyes to find him out.
Especially if we consider what is said Psalm. 53. 1, 2. There is none that does
good. God looked down from Heaven upon the Children of men, and saw none
righteous, no not one. Then farewell Privilege, for where is the Person?

To answer this. There is indeed none that are strictly legally Righteous, but
there is in a larger Evangelical sense. None that are righteous in themselves,
but in another. We have the Righteousness of Justification from Christ, and of
Sanctification from Christ; And they are the men that shall enter into peace
and rest. Those men, I say, that are men of Sincerity, though not in
Perfection. Those men that are righteous in the aim and desire of their hearts;
And in comparison of others, Righteous by Gods acceptance, and by imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ; These are the Persons that shall partake of
this privilege, He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their beds, etc.
But then,

2. What Peace and Rest shall these men be privileged with at the time of
their death?

There are Singular Properties of this Peace. For, 1. It Is a Peace that is
unconceiveable. Man's Eye has bored the Spears, and has penetrated into the
very depth of the Ocean; it has searched into the very Bowels of the Earth,
and into the wild Bellies of the Clouds above; it has traveled through all
the expanded Firmament in all places of the World, and has rifled the Cabinet
of Nature below, but it could never grasp the nature of this true Peace and
Rest here spoken of: for as to this, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has
it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive the Peace of God. The Apostle tells
us, it passes knowledge. The Beatitudes of Heaven are only known to us as
Solomon's Wisdom was to the Queen of Sheba, of which she said, Behold, I have
not heard the tenth part. The glorious Inhabitants of Heaven, the Angels and
Souls of Just Men made perfect, these indeed understand more the nature of it
than we, because they live in it: Yet so, as the Apostle discoursing of Gods
Counsel was forced to cry out, Romans 11. 33. Oh the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his
ways past finding out! So do these bright Spirits ravish and loose themselves
in the depth of Contemplation; The Provision he has made for them in Heaven,
does excel even their own admiration. 2. It is a most Perfect and a most
Complete Peace; Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them, says David. And says the Prophet Esaias, Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, whose Mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Both
these are in this Life, that which the Psalmist and Prophet spoke of. Oh that
great Peace, and perfect Peace! And if the gleanings of Abiezer be such, what
will be the Vintage of Ephraim? If this is the Righteous man's Privilege here
upon Earth, much more in Heaven; For it must needs be a perfect Peace there,
seeing no enemy shall appear in the face of them, all shall be conquered and
subdued, overcome, escaped from, for there, there will be a Peace from Sin.
Whilst we are alive, the best of men are pulled and pained by Sin; they are
under the continual Solicitations of the corruption of their own Nature. There
is a body of death, that by the noisome stench of it we are miserably molested
and disquieted, and to that height, that each of them is ready to cry out, Oh
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? While
they are here, there is a Law in the members rebels against the Law of the
mind. What willingness soever there is in the spirit, they find the flesh is
weak. A treacherous Party dwells in their very bowels, and is continually
undermining those Fortifications they vour to raise, and set open and to widen
the Portals, and to let in our worst enemies; These Sons of Zerviah are too
hard for us: but when once a holy man comes to dye, no more shall Corruption
solicit, no more have they depraved Natures to struggle with; No weights of
Sin to weigh us down, no more shall they complain of the hardness of their
hearts, their indisposition to holy duties, of the weakness of the flesh, the
power of Corruption; No more complaining of the usurping power of sin upon the
Soul. Then, 3. It is a peace and rest from the Temptations of Satan. Here it
is that we are in Arena, We wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places. Here it
is that Satan does desire to have us that he may sift us as Wheat, as it was
said of the Apostle Peter. It is not David alone that Satan stands up to
provoke to that that is evil, but his fiery darts fly fast and thick, his
messengers are not only sent to buffet Paul, but all the rest of Gods People;
but being once in this rest, they are out of the reach of the roaring Lion. And
they may say of Heaven as Lamech of his Son Noah, Genesis 5. 29. This same shall
comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the Lord has Cursed. So this Peace shall save us and keep us in freedom
from the Temptations of Satan. 4. Death gives them peace and rest from the
violence of men. Read that of Heb. 11. 36, 37. And others had trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment; they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, and what not. Here you find the footsteps of
the world's usage of the Saints. But as when Jonah was asleep and at rest in
the bottom of the Ship, the blustering storms and death-threatning Tempests were
as nothing to him. So it is with these, Job 3. 17. That holy man speaking of
the Grave, There the wicked (says he) cease from troubling, and there the
weary be at rest. In this Life it is as Solomon observes, Eccles. 4. 1, 2. So
I returned and considered all the oppressions under the Sun, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no Comforter, and on the side of
their oppressors there was power, and they had no Comforter; Wherefore I
praised the dead which are already dead, more than the living which are yet
alive. As much as to say, These have escaped, these are sensible of no such
matter, but are Quiet; they are at Peace and Rest. 5. At peace and rest from
inward Troubles, which a man is liable unto upon sundry occasions in this Life;
such as the death and departure of ones best Friends, chiefest Relations. Here
you see a great King in the bitterness of his grief crying out, O Absolon, my
Son, my Son, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon my Son, my Son. In Ramah
you hear a lamentation and voice of weeping, Rachel weeping for her Children
and would not be comforted, because they are not. Here you have Mary bewailing
Lazarus her Brother; And the Sons of Jacob mourning over their Father. But in
Heaven there is Peace and Rest; once there, we shall lose them no more: For
then, says the Apostle, we shall ever be with the Lord. Earth only and Hell is
the Territory of death; but Heaven is the Land of the Living, and there we
shall find them again. And this is something of the nature of that Peace which
Righteous men shall by death be instated in, and made Possessors of.


I hasten to the improvement of this Point, wherein I shall be short.

Use. If Peace and Rest is to be our Privilege hereafter, Then, 1. It should be
our desire here; So the Apostle commands, Follow peace with all men. Such
Salamanders as delight to live in the fire of Contention, these of all other
men are most unfit for Heaven, for that is a Place of Peace. 2. Let the
Priviiedges of good men allure us to a resemblance of their Persons, and their
Graces. All men like Balaam are ready to cry out, Let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let my latter end be like his. Would fain dye like them, with
the same Hope, Peace, Serenity, and Quiet of Conscience. Let my latter end be
like his, as Balaam said. But such as will dye as they, must also live as they.
3. If death is the time of Peace and Rest with Righteous men, then it is to be
understood that the time of Life is to be a time of Labor and Warfare. If so
be Death is our Night to repose in, then sure Life should be our Day to work
in. The best of men have business enough to do before them; headstrong
Passions to quell, Corruptions to mortify, grace to grow, a race to run, a
battle to fight, therefore let us up and be doing, and set about that that is
our work; and that the rather, because, 1. They rest best that have labored
most. When a man has ordered his business, and disposed of his affairs as he
intended, then he has charmed and subdued his Care, and has no disquieting
thoughts to disturb his repose. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, says
Solomon: So he that busied himself in the Work and Service of God while he was
alive, goes to his rest with the greatest calmness and serenity of Soul that
may be. 2. We know not how soon we may be called off the Stage. For Man knows
not his time, Eccles. 9. 12. I am old, says Isaac, and know not the day of my
death. And as he said when he was old, so may every one say that is youngest,
Though I am younger, or middle-aged, yet I know not the day of my death. The
reason is, because it is Gods peculiar reservation; My times, says David, are
in thy hand. Then, 3. Our Natures are brittle, exceeding brittle, the Word of
God tells us we are shadows, vapors and flowers, that wither of a sudden. Then
considering the variety of accidents we are subject to, Joseph had his Tomb in
his Garden, to mind him, that Death might possibly meet him in that place of
Pleasure. A Tile from the house, a Worm, a Hair, a little Spittle has been as
fatal to some persons, as if so be a Mountain had fallen on their heads.
Therefore considering these things, it is but reason we set our selves to work,
to labor in the time of health, in the time of life. 4. If Rest and Peace be
the Privilege of a Righteous man at his death, It shows us, That the death of
Righteous men they are not to be lamented by us upon their own account. They
may seem to call to us from Heaven, as Christ Jesus once did to the Women of
Judea upon the Cross, Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for
your selves. They are not to be lamented upon their own accounts. They are gone
to Salem, the City of Peace, and why should we mourn for them as they without
hope: Death is no Enemy of theirs, but as Noah's Dove returned with an Olive
branch, the Emblem of Peace, so Death brings a good man (not an Olive branch)
but the reality it self, which is far more desirable. As the Ark carried the
whole Church of God to the Mountain Ararat, (the name of which signifies, Take
away fear) so Death shall waft us to Heaven, there where no fear is. It is
true, in respect of our selves we ought to follow them with tears, and to have
our hearts deeply affected with their removal from us; and God himself does
blame the stupidity of our hearts, and insensibleness of this People, and such
men that can part with such Jewels as these with indifferency, without Concern,
in the Verse before the Text, The righteous man perishes, and no man lays it
to heart. This is the great fault. As if he had said,



For as to us they are dear losses. For, 1. We loose the benefit of their
Example for our Guide. When a good man is gone, one of the Lights of Israel is
Quenched. As David's Soldiers reckoned of him, Thou shall go no more with us to
Battle, lest thou quench the Light of Israel. Of these the Apostle says,
Amongst whom you shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. 2. We loose the benefit of their good Works for our Comfort. A good
man is a useful man where he lives. The Poor have the benefit of his Alms, and
all that converse with him have the benefit of his Counsel. For he of all
others will not suffer Sin to rest upon the Soul of his Brother (if he know
it): so that we loose the benefit of their good works for our Comfort. 3. And
we loose the benefit of their presence too for our Safety, which is not a thing
inconsiderable neither. When Elijab was ascended into Heaven in a Chariot of
fire, the Prophet below cried, My Father the Chariots of Israel and the
horsemen thereof; As much as to say, His Presence was as great a Security as an
Army of Chariots and Horsemen.


These are they that stand in the breach when the Judgments of God like a
mighty Torrent are ready to rush upon us.

These are they that like so many Aarons hasten with their Incense, when any
Plague is begun with a People; And that stand betwixt the living and the dead.

I have read of Philo Iudeus, and St. Ambrose, that coming to any Place and
Town, if they heard of the death of any able Minister or godly Person, they
would burst out into tears, as considering that place to have lost a
considerable part of its defense.

You know Sodom could not burn as long as Lot was in it; nor Hippo be taken as
long as St. Austin was in it: But still they were a defense to the place where
they were.

In all these respects we have a considerable Loss in the death of this great
and good man, whose Funeral we now Celebrate; Of whom I will say this in short:

He was a Person of such Real Worth, as is as hard almost to express as
imitate. Most of you knew him well, but perhaps few of you better than my self.

And in Reverence to his Memory, To provoke my self and you to an imitation of
his Exemplary Virtue and Grace, I shall give you this short account of it.

He was a man of uncessant Labors, and indefatigable pains; as God had lent
him a strong and able body for many years, So he spared it not at all, but made
it serve him in that insatiable thirst and desire he had after Humane and
Divine Knowledge. And this Diligence of his was Crowned with an answerable
Blessing from above, being arrived in point of Ability as another Saul higher
than his Brethren by the head and shoulders; Especially in Political and
Polemical Divinity.

He was like Nehemiah upon the Wall, a Sword to defend, as well as a Trowel to
build up. So to this Eminency of Parts he adjoined an equal Humility, which set
a luster upon the former; upon all occasions he would own what the Hand of
Providence had raised him up unto.

This Humility made him even as a weaned Child; a high valuer and applauder of
the least good that was in others, when he would own little that was worthy
commendation in himself. This Humility made him mindless of the place where he
sat, and made him willingly condescend to the meanest, when they stood in need
of his help.

And his Charity was such, he denied that help to none that sought it; a
liberal hand he had, and yet a more liberal heart.

The Tenth part of his Estate for many years he gave to the Poor; and had
himself had more, they had not wanted their share.

He was the Censurer, the Condemner of no man. If he saw a naked place, there
was no man more ready with the Skirt of his Garment to cast upon it.

He was a Censurer of no man for doing what he could not do; but wherein he
differed in Circumstantials; in this his difference, it was his manner and
custom still to bewail his own want of light.

He was very circumspect and careful in the course of his life to manage it
like a true Christian. Therefore he was constant in Christian Duties; For which
he usually had his stated times, and then he would admit (by his good will) of
no interruption. His discourse was a kind of continual Preaching; neither was
he less careful of his Thoughts than Words. His manner was every day to run
over a Catechism in Greek, Mr. Herbert's Poems, or some other of the Liberal
Sciences: And the reason I remember why he did this, was to keep his Thoughts
from roving and straggling to worse matters.

His Patience was remarkable during the time of his Affliction, no repining, no
murmuring words under his bodily pain, or the restraint he was under.

He observed a particular hand of God in his Distemper, which (as he said)
mocked the Skill of the Physician, and he cheerfully submitted to it, desiring
Patience might have its perfect work.

He was of a grateful spirit for the least office of Love or Kindness showed to
him, whether in Health or Sickness; So that few that came to visit him, parted
from him without a thankful acknowledgment of his Love to them, and Prayers
that God would reward them with Blessings upon their Bodies and Souls; and not
only so, but the greatest and worst of his Enemies had a share in his Prayers.

As he was thus Eminent for Grace, so as the Crown of all he wanted not his
share of Peace. His Conscience was Quiet, and his Evidences for a better Life
undisturbed. He had that Hope which was as an Anchor of the Soul, Sure and
steadfast, and enters within the vail. And he doubted not but as he was in a
state of Grace, so he was within a step of Glory. And that when Death had done
his work, he should yet for all that live for ever.

He said of Death, That as to him the Sting of it was taken away. And truly as
it seems so were the Terrors of it too. For Death came to him not as an armed
man, with Convulsions, and bitter pangs, as upon many; but he parted from this
World without a Sigh or Groan, And as one that was falling into a long but
sweet sleep.

This was the Comfortable End of this Reverend Person; According to that of the
Psalmist, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man
is Peace. Peace in death, yea and Peace after death too, for so says my Text,

He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his Uprightness.

FINIS.

