P. W's REPLY, TO THE Person of Quality's ANSWER: Dedicated to His GRACE, THE
Duke of Ormond.

Infat^^ quae, o Domine Consilium Achitophel. 2 R^g. 15. 31. (...) Prin^^^ in
the (...)

To His Grace THE DVKE of ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant General, and General
Governor of IRELAND.
My Lord,
IF the valorous Champions, who contended in the Olympic Games, the Spectacle
heretofore of all Greece, in that proportion they selt their skin to smart,
their blood to drop, their bones crack, were comforted to see, upon one side,
the Judges of their Combats sitting to consider their Merit; and on the other,
Crowns placed aloft before them, to charm their Pains with hopes of Glory: I
must acknowledge it an unspeakable comfort to my self, that, being
necessitated, for maintaining a very just and pious, very great and noble
Cause, to enter the Lists of Reason, and abide all Comers, even at all sorts
of Weapons proper to the Fight, and all the sharpest Encounters of the choicest
Wits, and most accurate Pens among all the Adversaries of that Quarrel, I
behold the Duke of Ormond, by his Majesty's most unpartial, and most approved
choice, already seated the great Judge of the several Combats, and the great
Prize, no less than all that is most valuable in Ireland, to be adjudged by him
to the victorious and fortunate side.

The consideration hereof, and that besides of my first Letter, in behalf of my
Countrymen* the ^^tholicks of Ireland, and of the first Answer to that Letter,
by the Man in the dark in England, and of the Reply to him again by me, all
directly speaking all along to your Grace, is the reason I found my self
obliged even to a formal Dedicatory, to your Grace also, of this other Reply,
which is to a second Answer, but which a Person of Quality in Ireland had the
good leisure to give that very Letter.

For having thought it but reasonable to lay aside all ceremony, while this
Gentleman laid so heavy load upon me (specially when himself chalked the way,
by his own example, in his Answer) and speak in this my Book, as he does in
that of his, not to your Grace, but to the Reader, and thereby take the more
liberty to defend my sel^: I thought nevertheless it could likewise be but
answerable to the expectation of all judicious men, that, the heat of
Disputation being once over, the Person you bear, and the Nature of the
Controversy in it self, or even as relating to my self, should make me at last
remember it is your Graces judgment alone I must regard, next his Majesty's,
above that of any, or even of all others. And make me further acknowledge, it
is but my duty to submit thereto; and acquiesce therein, and even to desire it,
with no less humble Resignation of my Thoughts, than reverential Dedication of
my Book expressing both; although a Book certainly intended both first and
last, as my very last Appeal to your Grace, for a sinal Decision, as well of
the main Debate, as of all Appendages of it.

And yet I acknowledge withal, that hitherto I have not seen any sufficient
Motive, to persuade me, that the Person of Quality had not a far other design,
in altering or declining, in his Answer, the Title of my Letter, and that of
the other two Piece^ after written on the same subject, or (which is the same
thing) in framing his own Answer to the popular judgment of those, whom he did
know, or certainly would have to be, either too much prepossessed, or too much
interess'd, or both, against Equity, and against Justice, and against Reason,
and against Truth it self. But however this be, I can boldly averr, not to your
Grace only, but to all the World, that my own design in taking notice of this
Gentleman's Book against me (though not so much against me, as against the
whole Body, and even every Individual apart, of Irish Catholics) is no other,
than to justify (as well as I may) that which I pursued all along in my former
Writings to your Grace, My most humble request of your just and merciful regard
of the poor distressed Catholic People of Ireland: Without intending any kind
of injustice, much less rigor, or unmercifulness to their Adversaries, not
even to this Person of Quality himself; but remembering still to check, as much
as in me lies, and not in my self alone, but in others, all temptations to the
contrary, and as well in relation to him, and his People, or Party, as to the
Irish, with that most Christian advice (whereof, as Romans 12. 21.
being the great Apostles, I humbly minded your Grace before now, in my Irish
Colors Folded) Vince in bono malum.

As for any thing else, I have not much to say here. For albeit the Title of a
Dedicatory, and the Duke of Ormond's Name prefixed, might invite a more
sprightly Genius than mine, to make use of all the Flourishes of Oratory, and
Embellishments of Eloquence, and of all its Metaphors, and other Gayeties, and
those finer Words, and quainter Expressions, and of even all the most ravishing
and suspending Digressions answerable; yet considering the Duke of Ormond's
Name is more famed already than my weak Essays can make it, and his Merits
greater than so mean a Panegyrist is able to set forth, I will not bring upon
my self Imprecations, by attempting to obscure the Meridian Glory of the Sun by
over-casting it.

And therefore, my Lord, I will only add what is more suitable to my own
Genius, and more proper to the subject of this Book, which I most humbly
present, and what I believe also will be more acceptable to your Grace, than a
speech of your own praise, though penned by any the most eloquent Pliny or
Cicero of any Age.

It is, my Lord, that I plead for a People, of whom King James's Attorney
General in Ireland, nine and forty years ago, in that excellent Piece of his,
entitled by himself, A Discovery of the State of Ireland, and by himself
Dedicated to his Majesty, has given this general Character, according to his
own very able judgment, much knowledge in their History, and long abode in
their Country; and given it in the very last Page, and very last words of that
Page of his Book; after he had immediately before said, that the whole Island,
from Sea to Sea, had been reduced to his Majesty's peaceable possession, and
under his immediate protection. The Author of the Book, styled, A Discovery of
the State of Ireland, etc. Page 286, and Page 287.
In which condition of Subjects (says he) they will gladly continue, without
defection, or adhering to any other Lord or King, as long as they may be
protected, and justly governed, without oppression on the one side, or impunity
on the other. For there is no Nation of People under the Sun, that does love
equal and indifferent Justice better than the Irish, or will rest better
satisfied with the execution thereof, although it be against themselves, so as
they may have the protection and benefit of the Law, when upon just cause they
do desire it.

And it is further (my Lord) that I plead yet more particularly for a People,
who are sufficiently known to have preserved, and our of their natural
affection to the true English Interest, and self-preservation by that Interest,
and out of a Conscience too of their obligation, by all the Laws of God and
Man, to be loyal Sbjects to his most sacred Majesty, who only is the supreme
and most proper Judge of that Interest, to have so preserved the Kingdom of
Ireland, in the late Wars, from being alienated from the Crown of England, and
from his Majesty, to a powerful Foreiner, and whose Ancestors, in Tirones
Rebellion against Queen Elizabeth, and in so many preceding Revolutions, during
the fatal Divisions of Lancaster and York, under Henry the 6. and in the Barons
Wars, in King John's Reign, as likewise in all other occasions (which have been
but too frequent since the first Conquest by Henry the Second) are famous in
Chronicles for having mantain'd, and commonly at their own private charges, and
their own private hazard alone, the very same true English Interest in that
Nation. But if notwithstanding two such weighty considerations (besides those
many other given your Grace, not in this Work only, but also in my two former
Addresses) the Catholics of Ireland must be eternally miserable; and if it be
so decreed, that these poor People must be utterly destroyed, and at this time
too, and by the very impression of King Charles's the no less Just than
Merciful's Royal Hand and Seal, and by the very concurrence of the Duke of
Ormond, and as well by occasion of their most loyal endeavors, or of having
fought constantly for so many years, while any fighting was in any of the three
Kingdoms, for his Majesty, as upon account of those other, which they have long
since re^entantly acknowledged to have been illegal, in the beginning, or
prosecution of the Irish War, by any of them, until his Majesty had, by
Articles of Peace, graciously owned them all for dutiful Subjects: Or if it be
so decreed, that the poor Catholic Party of Ireland must be the Scapegoat of
Leviticus, devoted to all the Vengeance Levit. 16.
both of Heaven and Earth, and that upon the unlucky head of this caytiff
beast, and even by the imposition of Aarons's hands, at the door of the
Tabernacle, before, and in the name of the whole Congregation of God's chosen
People of the British Empire, all their own sins, and all their own
transgressions, must be laid, and all the maledictions and imprecations of
punishment, which their own iniquities, or those of any of them, at any time
deserved to bring upon themselves; if (I say) this devoted sin-offering must be
laden so, and with so much ceremony sent away, and by a man of opportunity led
along to the Wilderness, to a Land not inhabited; and if all this appear just
and fit in your eyes to be accomplished in his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of
Ireland, may the good pleasure of God, and will of the King be done! And may
the rest of his People, of so many different Nations, Religions, and Interests,
enjoy all the blessings of a prosperous Peace, under the shadow of his Wings,
and protection of his Laws and Arms!

Which, my Lord, and that your Grace may, however, determine of this great
Affair, by those Rules of heavenly Knowledge which cannot err, and which God
alone can sufficiently instruct you with, shall be the continual Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Graces most humble, most obsequious, and most faithful Servant,

THE PUBLISHER's BRIEF Advertisement To the READER.
HAving read, above two years and a half since, a Book, first Printed in
Dublin, without the Author's Name, otherwise expressed than by that of a Person
of Quality, and the same Piece after, of another Edition, at London, with the
Frontispiece, or Title Page, twice changed, but into far worse every time,
with that Person of Quality's Titles prefixed, and the Gentleman's Name
likewise against whose Letter he writ; and by perusal of it, having sadly
considered the eternal Infamy this Person of Quality would have left to after
Ages affixed to the memory of the Catholic Confederates, and People of
Ireland, who profess the Roman Faith, and no less the general destruction of
all those poor unfortunate Confederates and People, designed by him, if his
advice prevail: I could not, after some months more had passed, but admire the
supine carelessness of all my Countrymen at home, that none of them would
undertake the pains of replying to him, and speak in Print those known clear
Truths, both against his manifest falsities, and manifold fallacies, which I
have so often heard by word of mouth from very knowing and sincere Gentlemen of
that Country, who were privy to all the Transactions there since 41. Which was
the reason, together with that resentment every good Patriot should have, I
writ to my Friends in Ireland, and such as were likelyest to know, whether any
one had thought of a Reply, or whether they all did give the Person of
Quality's Answer for un-answerable. At last, after much enquiry, and pains
taken in this Business, and some Charges too, it pleased God I should receive a
Manuscript Copy of this you have here. And though I know not the Author, but by
report, nor understand the reason why he would not do his Country right, in
appeasing this strom; which had been raised to so great a height, by occasion
partly of his own former Writings, in behalf of his distressed Countrymen;
albeit that could be no just occasion, either for this Person of Quality, or
the Man in the Dark in England (who writ formerly against him, The Irish
Colors displayed, and whom P. W. did soon after, and ever since put to
silence, by his former Reply, entitled, The Irish Colors solded) nor even for
any other to write against P. W's Countrymen, or himself; yet I found my self
obliged, to do both the Author, and his Country the kindness, to publish to the
World, in Print, and with all sincerity, without any corruption, or the least
alteration, that very Manuscript, as it came to my hands: boping the Author
will take this my kindness in good part; for I am sure my Country will; since
it does all Irish Catholics that right, than which scarce ought any thing be
more desirable to men, that regard their honor and reputation. Besides, the
Demonstrations are so clear in point of Conscience, Equity, Honor, and even
Interest of His Majesty, and the English Nation, which P. W. gives all along in
this Piece, where occasion requires it, against our Person of Quality's
inhumane Counsels, given throughout his Answer to the Duke of Ormond, and even
to His Majesty: that Providence, I hope, will make some use of this Reply, by
some means or other, to let His Grace the Duke of Ormond, and, by His Grace,
our most gracious King, see through this cruel Design of our Person of
Quality's advice, for destroying the Irish Nation generally, what he would be
finally at.

I have no more to advertise thee, Reader, but, that if there be any Mistakes
or Errors in some few Words, peradventure, they are mine, though not willful,
or they are the Printer's Errata. And that you are to observe all along, the
Author cites the first Edition of the Person of Quality's Book at Dublin, not
any of the after Impressions at London, which vary in the number of Pages from
that.

P. W's. REPLY TO THE PERSON of QVALITY's ANSWER.
1. IT is not that I contend, or that I can raonally hope to be allowed to
speak last (when the Pens of obscure men in Engand, and of men Quality in
Ireland, are set on work to persecute my Letter to the Duke of Ormnod) I now
appear in Print. But having already, by a former Reply, endeavored to
vindicate oppressed Innocence, and a most just Cause, from the malevolent
Invectives of the Man in the dark, I thought it concerned me to take the same
care they should not suffer under that title alone, That they were impugned by
a Person of Quality. For laying that name aside, I find very little alleged
which presses for an Answer, or is not already refuted. Yet I confess it is an
elaborate Piece, that with all Art imaginable strives to endear the Writer to a
prevailing Party. And in truth the late evil times have been guilty of so many
changes, and men have been so dexterous, and so supple in their natures, to
make application to the thriving side, that we may not wonder to see both the
Art it self, and the Oratory that best suits with it, in so long a tract of
time, and so many Vicissitudes, brought to perfection.

2. And now, like a purified Muselman, he enters the Temple, and would persuade
us, that he leaves all malice, all self interest at the Gate, because he
declares, that he means not all Irish Papists, although he has occasion Page 2.
to mention them frequently: And excepts those worthy Persons of that Nation
and Religion, that faithfully adhered to the King; or having rebelled, have
been truly sorrowful for it, and in the constancy of their subsequent services,
have washed themselves clean. Yet he forbears not to call the Nation a Beast,
their Country a very Pesthouse, their Religion P. 82. P. 2. P. 47.
something that pins them upon the sleeve of the Pope. But how this Writer, by
his Sophistry, and Logical Quiddities, wherein he would seem to be abundantly
versed, can find a way to exempt those his worthy Persons from having their
share in those attributes, unless they disclaim in their Nation, their Country,
and Religion, is more than I can understand. This is a mere Hocus Pocus; He has
dexterously conveyed the Balls, which we conceived to be in this Cup, under the
other. But I am confident, he can hardly meet with any Irish Papist, that will
think it a favonr, to be fed with Applause, sauced after his manner.

3. And even those chosen men whom he has laid apart, must not pass without
some stain: For they have, Page 2.
every one of them, so much endangered their being polluted again, as
interceding for their guilty Countrymen does amount unto. This (however, in a
strict and rigorous construction of the words, barely taken, or in a benign
interpretation of them, as such, it might pass; yet in that of our Person of
Quality's meaning, and to his purpose) is the first of the many Calumnies
(wherewith the generality of those worthy Persons, and those others truly
sorrowful, etc. are aspersed) we shall hereafter meet with in the progress of a
Discourse fraught with Principles that derive their being from the Writers
imagination. But however the Batteries planted against them suppose somewhat
solid to beat upon, and discharge whole Volleys of Dilemmaes, Enthimemaes,
Inductions, and Inferences against them; I shall only desire the favor, to
know from this Writer, what Irish Papist that is, who intercedes, or pleads
either innocence, or justice, or humanity, or necessity, or other excuse
whatsoever, for even any of all those of his Countrymen appearing in his own
particular, or that may be found guilty of the foul Crimes which the rude
multitude perpetrated in the beginning of the late Rebellion? Or who is he that
mediates either unchristianly, or unreasonably for those, that by spurning at
his Majesty's mercy, denied themselves the benefit of his gracious Concessions
in the Articles of Peace? And if this mediation, that intercession or plea, be
forborne, not only as to the generality, but even in the case of any particular
Person (otherwise, at least, than by laying them all prostrate at the feet of
the most merciful of Princes, and by acknowledging, with all hearty repentance,
the horror of their enormities, and by minding King Charles the Pious of his
Royal unparalled Clemency extended to so many other thousands in the three
Nations, reputed, and really being no less criminal, yea more, many of them,
than those unfortunate Irish) what generous breast can entertain so ignoble a
thought, as to condemn a Patriot to silence, if by speaking he may assist his
Country and Nation, specially in such a way as is suitable to the Divine Genius
of our good King, and to the public exigence, where millions of all sides must
be destroyed, if mercy does not intercede?

4. Although I have a perfect aversion from the manner of writing which this
Author observes, and that the School Dialect seldom meets with those that
approve it, when it passes the Verge of the University; yet being forced for a
while to follow him in his ways, I must raise a triple Bullwark against his
tripartite Battery; not giving the Reader at present any Reflections on his
Charge against my self, and his Dilemma in pursuance thereof, in the first (and
beginning of the second) Page of his Book: but remitting the considerations
hereof to the end of this Paper, where you may form a more certain judgment of
them.

5. My Preface (says he) consists of fears and Page 3.
jealousies, and those in reason must be expected from the generality of the
Irish Papists. For the conscience of their own guilt, although the King should
make their condition safe, will never suffer them be secure. I appeal to the
Writer himself, whether there can be any assertion more temerarious? Can he
forget that others are as Criminal? That some have been instrumental in that
unparalled execrable Murder of Charles the First of ever glorious memory?
That other have by reiterated Oaths disavowed a Monarchical Government, and
excluded our sacred Sovereign, and all the Race of the Stuarts, from any right
to the Crown? That some have in favor of the principal Regicide, sworn, and
sworn again, yea freely, voluntarily, without force (I mean) without compulsion
or violence used to necessitate them, if not that of great rewards? Nay, that
some have with all industry imaginable, sought to enthrone and make him King in
fact? (as, besides other invincible Arguments, the several Speeches of some of
them, in a select Committee waiting on Cromwell, by Order of their
mock-Parliament, Anno 1657. and specially that Speech made the 11th. of April,
and another of the 16th. of the same Month, which you may read in the Book
entitled Monarchy asserted (Printed at London by John Redmayne, Anno 1660.)
Page 25. and 67. do evidently demonstrate) And that all of them have fought
against those that would assert his Majesty's Rights; and all have besieged his
Cities, and taken his Forts? And will this Writer averr, That after the
goodness and indulgence of the best of Kings has made their condition Page 3.
safe, the conscience of their own guilt will never suffer them be secure?
Observes he not what a Nest of Hornets he has disclosed? To what distrust he
subjects the inviolable word of his Majesty? And how vain and frivolous he
renders Acts of Oblivion and Indemnity all the World over? Had he said, That
the Conscience of great Guilts, though forgiven, would exact Repentance,
nothing had been more consonant to Justice; but that the Royal word of a Prince
cannot secure the fears of an Offender, must be the dictate of the Writers
private Conscience. For the experience of all Ages, and the practice of all
Countries, confirm the unquestionableness of the Tenet.

6. Fear is founded on, at least attended with hatred. Page 3.
This is a Principle whereof he may well assume the honor to have been the
first Author; For no man who has ever writ of the passions of the mind, will
contend for that priority, or this consecution, as necessary to that fear of
mine, considered as it is expressed. I said, The generality of the Catholics
of Ireland, the Nobility and Gentry, even the Duke of Ormond 's fast Friends
heretofore, were at that present (when I writ that my first Letter) seized with
a fear, and a darkness or dimness of judgment, losing their faith of his
future appearance for them, or hopes of their delivery by him. Now by what
Privilege in Logic he can infer thereupon, That therefore they hate the Duke
of Ormond, is a thing, wherein I believe the Reader, notwithstanding the
circumstances of universally and intensly, would desire to be satisfied. Page 3.


7. What humane society could subsist, if this ratiocination might be received
as a convincing argument? Would not the Creditor hate the Debtor, because he
feared he might demand his money? Would not the Client hate his Council at Law,
because he feared he might be remiss in studying his Case? Would not a Suter
hate his Judge, because he feared he might give Judgment against him? Would
not one Friend hate another, because he feared he might not be sufficiently
careful of his interests? Would not the Wife her Husband, and the Husband his
Wife; and Children their Parents, and these again those; and the King even the
best of his Subjects, and they likewise him? I am sure any of those things may
be said as justisiably, as that the generality of the Irish Papists, because
they were seized with fear, etc. and were losing, then when I wrote that
Letter, their faith of his future appearance for them, and hopes of their
delivery by him, do hate the Duke of Ormond. But alas! our Person of Quality
is not sollicitous of their personal hatred to the Duke of Ormond: A second,
and a more venomous inference depends on this. Which (says he) in plain
English Page 5.
is this, That although his Majesty should from time to time nominate for Lord
Lieutenant of this Kingdom, the wisest, and the faithfullest of his Subjects;
yet because the King Commissionates them, or because they are such, or both,
many (I wish I could not say most) of the Irish Papists will be jealous and
fearfu^ of them.

8. Now the Reader may find wherefore he erected that Pr^nciple of fear and
hatred; and will hereafter observe into how many shapes our Person of Quality
turns himself, to do the Nation the like good Offices. For my part, lest his
Dilemma should pass unanswerable, I avow what I said to be true, That the
generality of the Irish Catholics were then seized with jealousies and fears,
losing their faith at that present of the Duke of Ormond's future appearance
for them, and hopes of their delivery by him. And this, methinks, should rather
be alleged by the Writer, as a testimony of their excess of confidence in him,
than as a mark of the hatred imposed upon them. Yet he must still descant on
his own song: And those fears and jealousies, being no other than what I have
described them, he averrs, that they are become nationally violent. This is a
bitter, but groundless Invective, as is evident by what I have said: And the
Deductions Page 4.
from it, are the Effects of such a kind of wittiness, as being framed to the
elevation of the multitude, concludes nothing solidly.

9. These fears and jealousies are not of the same kind those were of, that
hurried on to that horrid Insurrection Page 4.
in 41. the first Actors: Nor were they fears and jealousies alone of what kind
soever, which have been the only Passions that so irrationally, so inhumanely
transported some of them. As for the generality of Irish Catholics, specially
of the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens, whereof some within three, others four,
some five, and many at six months end, after the first flame of the Rebellion,
took Arms in their own very natural defense, whether they have not, not only
pretended, but very truly and faithfully alleged, First, By their Commissioners
to his late Majesty at Oxford, and since upon several occasions, even
publicly, and in their Printed Remonstrances, and other Papers for themselves,
as necessitating Causes of their conjunction with the first Insurrectors (yet
not of their conjunction in the Grounds, Motives, and other Designs, charged
upon those first Contrivers, as peculiar to themselves alone, but in that of a
social, and very natural defense, and in that of those other indeed specious
pretenses, which their Oath of Association contained) whether I say they
alleged not other kind of jealousies and fears (than those expressed in my
Letter) to excuse their own actings, or conjunction, against the Laws of the
Land? Whether they alleged not, and very truly alleged a far other kind of
jealousies and fears, that is, even those which all, both Civilians and
Canonists allow as very probable and excusable, if Metus cadens in virum
constantem be such? Whether they pleaded not the very Law of Nature (though I
do not for them this or any other to justify their actions, but to lessen the
guilt of their taking Arms) even that Law (I say) which moves the hand by
interposing it self to bear off a stroke aimed at the head? Let the Brief
Narrative, Printed and published at London in the Year 1660. resolve our Person
of Quality. Wherein, as I am sure, he may find other jealousies and fears, than
such as possess now the Catholics of Ireland: so he shall read far other
Causes of them. Which is the reason I give out of that little and accurate
Piece the following Passages (and even in the Authors words) which relate to
our present purpose.

THey therefore (he means the English Nation) and the The Brief Narrative, Page
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
whole World may be pleased to know, that we (to wit the Irish) are so far
from justifying any horrid actions perpetrated at that time, when but a few of
any quality raised a Rebellion in the North, as we have, and still make it our
request, that those Crimes, and all Massacres and Murders then, or after
committed, whoever shall be found guilty of them, be punished. Yet we may not
omit (although no Motive whatsoever could justify their Undertakings) to
represent, that before they f^ll from their Obedience to the Government, Sir
William Parsons, one of the Lords Justices, that supplied the Deputies place,
at a public Entertainment, before many witnesses, did positiv^ly declare, that
within a twelvemonth no Catholic should be seen in Ireland; Many hands were
sought, and thousands were found to subscribe a Petition tending to the
introducing of a severe Persecution against Catholics, who were the far
greater number of the Inhabitants of Ireland; And that the menace of an
Invasion of a Scottish Army, of which men at that time did frequently discourse,
bred frightful apprehensions. So as these and other grounds of suspicion, being
improved by such among them, whose particular Interests could be most favored,
and better advanced in unquiet times, laid the foundation of that Rebellion.
But even these men, and at that time when the Lords Justices did not appear to
be prepared for resistance, by their R^monstrance humbly begged their
Grievances might be redressed, by the advice of the two Houses of Parliament,
then met at Dublin. But the Lords Justices (who by their words and actions, not
only expressed their unwillingness to stop the farther growth of these
Distempers, but meant to increase them, and were often heard to wish, that the
number were greater of such as became Criminal) by proroguing the Parliament,
made them desperate. However the Nation by their Representatives, in the two
days which were only allowed them to sit, husbanded their time so, as to leave
to posterity a monument of their aversion to such attempts, by declaring, that
those men had traeiterously and rebelliously taken Arms; and offering to
employ their Lives and Fortunes in reducing them to their Obedience, if they
might be permitted then to sit. But this was denied them; and by a strange
change from the ancient form of Government, a Parliament then sitting was
prorogued; whereas our Ancestors, upon a far less occasion than quieting of so
high Distempers, were usually called upon to assist the King with their Advice.
To this may be added, that the Marquess of Ormond proposed at the
Council Board, the raising of five thousand men in the space of three weeks, if
he might be authorized so to do; with which strength he undertook to dissipate
those then weak beginnings of the ensuing mischiefs, and to prevent their
farther growth; but was refused it. So as thus far we may observe who they
were that widened the wound instead of stanching the blood.

This foundation being thus laid, that which at first was but a spark, and
might be easily quenched, began to flame: And freedom of Rapine having suddenly
drawn numbers together, the unreprest Conspiratours became a formidable Arm,
and besieged Tredah, passing the River of Boyne, which was ^^e Rubicon of the
Pale, and had in all former Rbeellions been maintained with their blood, by
those ancient English Colonies planted there. Now it was that the times began
to favor the design of the Lords Justices, and their Party in the Council,
which was as forward as they to foment the Distractions. For the Ulster Army
lying in the bowels of the Country, the Forces being not yet come out of
England, and the Natives themselves both unarmed and distrusted by the State,
they were forced at first, by their regular contribution, to prevent the
desolation which would have followed their refusal to supply them. Hereupon
such Contributors began to be looked upon, and characted as men fallen from the
Government. And a Party that was sent from Dublin, having killed at Santry (but
three miles distant from thence) some innocent Husbandmen (among whom there was
two Protestants) and carried their heads as in triumph to the City, the
neighbor Inhabitants alarmed thereat, had recourse to such Weapons as first
came to hand, and gathered in a Body. Whereupon the Lords Justices set forth a
Proclamation in nature of a safe Conduct, by which these so in Arms, and Mr.
King of Clontarffe by special name, had five days respite to come in and
present their Grievances. But before three nights of the time prefixed were
expired, Mr. King 's house was pillaged, and burnt by direction of the Lords
Justices. Not long after supplies being arrived out of England, and the siege
of Tredah raised, and consequently the force removed, which necessitated the
Inhabitants to comply with the Ulster Army, the Nobility and Gentry of the Pale
prevailed with Sir John Read, his Majesty's sworn Servant (a Stranger to the
Country, un e^gaged, and an eye witness of their proceedings, then upon his
journey to England) to take the pains to present their Remonstrance to the late
King of ever blessed memory, and to beg pardon for what they were thus
compelled to act. But he, poor Gentleman, coming to Dublin, was apprehended,
and not concealing the Message entrusted with him, was put to the Rack; The
most part of the questions which were then asked him in that torment, being no
other, than such as might lead him to accuse the King and Queen to be Authors
and Fomenters of that Rebellion. Moreover, the two Houses of Parliament in
England, for the better induci^g the Rebels to repent of their wicked
Attempts, commended to the Lords Justices, according to the power granted them
in that behalf, to bestow his Majesty's gracious pardon to all such as within a
convenient time, etc. should return to their Obedience. The Lords Justices
(notwithstanding such Order, and his Majesty's gracious pleasure signified to
that effect) by their Proclamation dated in November 1641. limited such his
Majesty's, and the Parliaments of England, their favorable and general
Intentions, to the Inhabitants of a few Counties, provided always, they were
no Freeholders; and afforded them no longer time than ten days after the
Proclamation to receive benefit thereby. But notwithstanding these
restrictions, the Lord of Dansany, Sir John Nettervill, Patrick Barnewall of
Kiibrue, and many others who had notice of his Majesty's gracious Inclination
toward the Nation, and the Parliament of Englands Order in favor of them,
submitted to the Lord Marquess of Ormond, then Licutenant General of his
Majesty's Army, who recommended them to the Lords Justices, intimating, that
the good usage to be extended to them, would have an influence on many others,
and be a great motive to quiet the Distempers which then began to spread. But
the Lords Justices, whose Design was not to be carried on with Mercy and
Indulgence, to prevent submissions, Imprisoned and Indicted by a Jury, which
did not consist of Freeholders, those so submitting, and put the said Mr.
Barnewall (of the age of sixty six years) to the torture of the Rack. This
notwithstanding, the Noblemen and Gentry inhabiting the Country next to Dublin,
applied themselves humbly by their Letter to the Lords Justices. Which when the
Earl of Castle-haven, a Nobleman of English Birth, who freely, before that
time, had access to Dublin, came to present, he was made Prisoner. Wherefore,
when the Nation observed, That their Advice in Parliament was not only thought
unnecessary, but themselves involved in a general distrust;

That neither the Parliaments, nor the Marquess of Ormonds offer to suppress
the Rebellion, would be accepted;

That the enforced complying of the Nobility and Gentry of the Pale with a
powerful Army, which was Master of their Lives and Fortunes, was imputed to
them as a malicious aversion from the English Government;

That the blood of innocent Husbandmen was drawn, and the heads of men were
grown an acceptable spectacle in Dublin;

That the public Faith was broken, and men's Houses (particularly enabled to
claim benefit by it) pillaged and burnt;

That all ways were obstructed by which they might implore his Majesty's
mercy, and represent their Conditions;

That the favorable Intentions of the Parliament of England, and his Majesty's
Gracious Pardon, which was meant should extend to all, save such as were guilty
of blood, was so limited by them, as no Estated man could receive benefit by it;

That those, who, notwithstanding their restrictions, cast themselves freely
upon his Majesty's mercy, were Imprisoned, Indicted, and some of them Rackt;

That the Earl of Castle-haven might have found it a Capital Crime to mediate
in their behalf, if he had not made his escape after twenty weeks Imprisonment;

That the King's sworn Servant was Rackt, and his Ministers, whose duty it was
to have been zealous of the honor of their Master, endeavored to asperse it,
and to render him, and his Royal Consort, odious to his People, by striving to
extort from a tortured man, some testimony by which they might be accused of
raising and somenting that Rebellion. When these, and many other Arguments of
this kind, which (lest we should be too prolix) we omit, had convinced the
Catholics of Ireland, that the Lords Justices, and that part of the Council
which adhered to them, became unfaithful to his Majesty, and had designed the
ruin of that Nation, and the extirpation of their Religion;

That Law which moves the hand by interposing it self to bear off a stroke
aimed at the head, convened an Assembly of these, who were exposed to those so
eminent dangers, in which they modelled a Government, in order to their natural
defense, obliging themselves by such an Oath to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, as well showed their affection to the Crown, and their unalterable
resolutions to maintain his Majesty's Rights, and to follow his fortune.
Between these divided Governments, there have been Battles fought, Cities and
Forts besieged, and much Christian blood spilt, which will one day lie at some
men's doors: And who these are, the Eternal Wisdom best knows, and the Reader is
left free to determine.

10. All which, and all whatsoever else I Print, I am very well content may
fall or stand, as that is true which P. W. averrs in this passage of the Duke
of Ormond's Countrymen; Page 3.
(if indeed he averrs the Supposition at all, or the Irish to be such, that is,
of the same Country with his Grace, whether they be really so or no) And I no
less desire, that all our Person of Quality writes on this subject, may stand
or fall, as that Proof he brings in his Parenthesis, to ground his own wish for
me, is true or false. For his Grace (says he) is neither his (he should have
more properly said their) Countryman by Birth, Religion, or any other Page 3.
relation to which that name is applyable. Certainly the name of Roman was
appliable to Constantine the Great, even then when first he was Christian, that
is, of a different Religion from the State, Senate, People, and Army of Rome,
though he was born at York in Great Britain: To Theodosius, and Seneca, though
born in Spain: As likewise to so many thousands more, wherever begotten, or
born, or of what Religion soever, who enjoyed the Rights, Privileges, and Title
of Roman Citizens. Nor can he deny the name of an Englishman to that Prince was
of purpose brought in his Mothers belly to Carnarvan, to appease the warlike
humor of the Welshmen, by giving them a Prince of their own Country.
Extraction, and the Communion of Blood and Laws, and Titles of Honor, and the
Freedom of Citizens, gave these the name of Roman, though they ceased not
therefore to be Britains, Spaniards, Welsh, etc. by their birthright. And shall
not the Duke of Ormonds Blood, extracted from the Loins of the most Noble Irish
Catholic Families, during the succession of so many Ages, these four or five
hundred years, his Predecessors born there, his great Demains and Estate
there, his Titles of Honor, and those of his Forefathers too, of Baron,
Viscount, Earl; and lastly, his own of Marquess, and Duke, all there: shall not
so many other Barons, Viscounts, and Earls, descended from the House of Ormond,
all Buttlers, and Irish, and Catholics too; so many Baronets, and Knights; so
vast a number of Squires, and other Gentlemen, all of that Nation and
Communion; besides all the almost numberless number of his Allies in all the
four Provinces of Ireland, of all the most ancient and most illustrious
Families of that Kingdom and Religion: Shall not (I say) all these
Considerations, besides the Community of the same Laws, Rights, and Privileges
(not to regard that of Education, or Language) entitle the Duke of Ormond to
the name of Irish, or their ^ountryman, or to any Relation to which that name
is appliable? Doubtless the Topic a majori ad minus, will conclude here our
Person of Quality in the affirmative, notwithstanding all his Logic. And his
own Claim besides to Ireland, or England, or both, will conclude him. And all
Historians that distinguish the People of Ireland into ancient Irish, and
ancient English, evict this Confession from him, being these do never the more
cease to be Irish. Finally, The Opinion of the World, and Custom of England in
particular, reputing and calling those Irish, who have in many regards less
right to the name than the Duke of Ormond has, force this acknowlegdement from
any Contradictor; albeit England, with much reason, challenge him as English
withal, by his more ancient Extraction from, and his own Birth among them, and
by so many other Titles which makes their Claim very just, while they bereave
not others of their own; as none does, that I know, but my two Antagonists, the
Man in the dark, and this Person of Quality.

11. But however this be (which indeed is no more material than it is to show
our Person of Quality's vain confidence, erecting imaginary Trophies on the
most immaterial passages of my Letter) I will now proceed without leaping Page
4.
backwards to the year 41. reserving my answer to what he farther a^leges ^ere,
until I come to that part of his discourse where he vents himself more fully,
and with no less acrimony upon that Subject.

12. Concerning P. w. his affection to and confidence in his Grace the Duke of
Ormond, since this is alleged by the Writer Page 5.
ter for an end of mischief, I may be allowed to say this confidence took root,
and grew up in difficult times, and upon such occasions, in order to his
Majesty's service, as perhaps the Writer might heretofore have construed to
have been high Treason against Cromwell.

And as we ought not to wonder that the hazardous employments I underwent,
obtained for me at that time free and frequent access (though my Letter speaks
nothing at all of such freedom or frequency) to a Minister of State that
cherished all instruments who might in any measure promote his Majesty's
affairs: So it is not strange that in so noble a nature as is the Duke of
Ormond's, there might remain some such memory of my fidelity, as I should, even
in these better times, be frequently admitted to his presence, and allowed to
speak my thoughts with accustomed freedom. Upon this occasion the Writer raises
such a storm against me, as plainly discovers, that though Malice be a sullen,
yet it is a very Airy passion, which rather than it should not blow, will
create it self wind of any thing. I beseech the Reader to observe what use this
Gentleman makes of mine, and the relyance of others upon the word of the Duke
of Ormond mentioned in Page 5.
that Letter, and how he casts the phrase in a new mould, and then interprets
it to such a sense, as no Sophistry can force the expression to bear, nor any
but a malevolent spirit, give it. My words are, Who have so many years relied
on your Word and Virtue: and within a few lines after, to clear these clouds of
darkness, and to clear them in this present conjuncture, by an effectual
demonstration of that Justice and favor you intended the Catholics of Ireland
in your Articles of Peace. I appeal to the most interested Adventurer, or
Soldier, whether he conceives this word in the same sense it was written, and
is obvious to all eyes, could be applied to any other thing, than that word
which the Duke of Ormond passed to the Catholics of Ireland under his Seal and
Signature in the Articles of Peace? And to confirm this, do I not, in speaking
of the Articles of Peace to the Duke himself, call them your Articles of Peace?
as if I should say, these are your word, these are your promise. And yet this
Gentleman has the confidence to say, that P. W. would make us believe, as if
some word in secret had past by his Grace Page 5.
to the Irish Papists, which they dare thus mention to himself, and publish to
the World.

13. This Gentleman says moreover, that I speak of my Page 5.
daily care and trouble to support his esteem, and of blaming distrusters as
ignorant of State affairs, and the intrigues obstructing as yet, or of
inconsideration of those wiser ways, though slower than folly or rashness could
chaulk out, or of prejudices and an evil passion. I confess this charge, only
the first branch excepted, at least as to the words (or even sense) and manner
of expression; my Letter having no where our Person of Quality's phrase of my
daily care to support the Duke of Ormond 's esteem; but another very different,
and no less true than modest: my words being these, My Lord, these are thoughts
which more and more trouble me daily; because I have daily new occasions to
reflect on them. Ergo I said, my daily care and trouble was to support his
esteem? A strange inference, as if the final motives of my trouble must of
necessity have been, my desire to support my Lords esteem; or as if his Grace
did need my support; or that if I knew my self valuable for any such thing, I
would be so immodest in my expressions. But allowing this unhandsom advantage,
what then will all his Charge here signify? Nothing less than his purpose. Can
any one imagine, that other use might be made of these words, than as of
arguments formed by my self, to support the esteem of the Duke of Ormond,
(since this Person of Quality will have it so) and to appease the distrust of
some of my Countrymen? Yet this Gentleman would fix upon me, that I would
insinuate, as if those reasons were conveyed unto me by the Duke of Ormond;
and therefore gives me the name of his Graces intimate Confident. Which if all
that have free and frequent access to his Grace (and that is all the ground I
give (if I give even this) for being so called) may be privileged to assume,
his intimate Confidents will become unreasonable numerous. And with how little
reason this Gentleman exaggerate, the matter, by terming me a perfect Enemy to
the English Interest, and Protestant Religion, is evident, since neither my
Page 5
(...) any of my name in Ireland, can pretend to any Estate in that Kingdom,
but by an English Interest; and that I daily pray for the long and happy Reign
of our Sovereign Charles the Second, who is the Chief of that Religion.
Besides, that I am sufficiently known, even to very many Protestants, and to
some of the chiefest and best of them, to be in my Capacity, and to my utmost
power, so far a professed Friend to their Religion, as not only to wish from my
very Soul, but to endeavor too in the best way I can, that all Differences
'twixt it and the Roman be composed, not by the Rebellion of Subjects, or any
force of Arms, but by such means as those were the blessed Apostles took for
appeasing the Controversies of the primitive Christians, and by such others as
are suitable to the Gospel of Christ.

14. Now the Reader perhaps may wonder, wherefore this Gentleman made so
perverse a Comment upon so innocent a Text. And I can imagine no other reason
for it, but that being himself desirous to expose the Duke of Ormond to the
obloquy and distrust of the English, and not daring to appear barefaced in so
foul a practice, he vented his own Conceptions by fathering them upon another,
and was willing to give his Grace the blow, although he looked asquint on me.
If this be to betray with a kiss, and by undermining, Page 6.
the guilt must lie at the Gentleman's own door: For he must excuse me, if I do
not lend him my Paw, to rake the Chestnuts out of the Embers.

15. As for my affection to the Duke of Ormond, whereat, in the next place,
this Gentleman has a fling, though he Page 6.
confess (but either forgetfully or wilfully) I said no more in my Letter, for
that in particular, than I said in general, for my Countrymens having a right
to the Peace made in 1648. I am content his Grace takes his measure of it by
his knowledge of my endeavors that all my Countrymen should observe that Peace
with the greatest Punctuality, Religion, and Sincerity imaginable. And so the
Gentleman has his belief herein confirmed by my consent. But in as much as he
seems to take it ill, that in my Letter I gave him no more ground than he will
understand I have, to vent his passion against my affection, I profess to him
now, and to all the World, that my affection has been as great, as good, as
constant, as passionate, as truly loyal, and as religiously Christian, in all
respects, to his Grace, since ever I had the first honor of his acquaintance,
as my Letter expressed it to be unalterable. That I have given since that time,
and before that time, invincible arguments thereof; and those too known to
thousands, Friends and Foes (amongst whom I could number some, peradventure of
this Person of Quality's Friends heretofore, Ludlow, and Jones, and Corbet,
sometimes Commissioners in Ireland, under the Usurpers; besides others of
greatest rank in England, in the days of Anarchy, under the young Protector
Cromwell, and the Committee of Safety: And I could call even Spaniards, and as
far as Madrid, and the greatest Ministers of State to the Catholic King, to
witness. And yet have given such invincible arguments hereof, as the Duke of
Ormond himself will (I doubt not) if occasion require, acknowledge to have been
such, and own both them and me as such.

16. The next Battery is raised against that part of my Letter which this
Gentleman calls my Petition, and immediately a loose shot is made to show that
I am struck with the jealousies and fears of my Countrymen, limiting the Duke
of Ormond's Page 6.
assistance to the present Conjuncture. Certainly no indifferent Person will
think this to be precipitation or distrust in me, when he understands that the
Bill of Settlement was then transmitted hither to his Majesty, and that an Act
of Parliament once past concludes all Interests.

17. Here I shall beg this favor of the Reader, that he may not judge it
essential for his Satisfaction, that I should pursue every flash of wit, that,
like sparkles in a new kindled Char-coal fire, breaks from this Gentleman: And
that he deferr giving this of Articling first, and breaking of Articles, Page 7.
any great applause, until he shall have understood, in the due place, how
those Articles were made, and how they were broken.

18. Now laying aside, as to the punctual formality of the Order, that division
of Justice into Distributive Page 7.
and Commutative, and the branches that spring from it, I shall endeavor to
se^e^t faithfully the substance of the Gentleman's discourse, and reply as
truth shall enable me.

19. He will not allow of what I say of the Catholics putting themselves
freely into his Graces hands. He will have the word freely restrained here,
without any reason, Page 7.
to his own meaning, and only to signify gratis, against all the Rules of
Divinity, Philosophy, Oratory, History, Grammar; against the nature or imposed
signification of the word in it self; against the acception of men, even of the
vulgar; against that which the Antecedents, and Consequents, and middle, and
all parts of my Letter, duly pondered, can make it import; and no less against
my intention, abundantly and rationally expressed, not by this word alone, but
in the whole contexture of that innocent Piece of mine. For all understanding
men know, that the word freely cannot of it self, or without some restriction
or limitation by the matter treated of, or by other adjuncts, be more, if not
rather much less, restrained to signify either merit, or equivalency, or other
answerable thing by pact, than to express a mere spontaneous inclination, and
election, at least without force imposed on the party so determining. And the
whole discourse, argument, and final scope of that Letter, show evidently that
my intention there by the word freely, was no other than to express a strong
inclination, or desire, and a freedom of will, and voluntary action of the
Roman Catholic Confederates, for as much as related to them, in concluding
that Peace: Or (at most) to express that freedom which is not lessened by
external force, coaction, or violence. For could it have been rationally
imagined, that I, who in every other line do mention the Articles of Peace,
should be so foolishly impudent, as to averr, that the King granted nothing?
What is more frequent than, if you delay to perform your promise given upon
pact, to allege, that I did freely put my self into your hands?

20. But to do this Person of Quality right, I must confess, he does not
absolutely averr the word freely in that instance of mine to sign fie gr^tis,
but with reservation says, If in this insta^ce it signifies ought
meritoriously, it signifies Page 7.
the same as gratis. And upon this improbable, ridiculous, impertinent
supposition he must spend a whole Page disputing against his own imaginary
signification, a Chimera, a mere nothing, as being ^nconceivable by any else
but himself. Which is the cause I will now begin to make use of his own so
frequent manner of arguing. Our Person of Quality either understood the word
freely was not in that instance determined to merit, or he understood it was.
If that, wherefore so many arguments to overthrow a sense he knew my Letter did
not bear? If this, does not he betray his want of judgment and knowledge?

21. Yet in the next Page he must prosecute an error by adding to it an
imposture. That (says he) which his Majesty Page 8.
calls forced, compelled, and necessitated, P. W. calls freely putting
themselves into his Graces hands. Is it possible that so much ignorance (that I
may speak modesty) should drop from the Pen of a Person of Quality? I grant his
Majesty in his gracious Declaration of the 30th. of Novem. 1660. Page 3. has
these words, We well remember the Cessation of the Peace; which our Royal
Father of blessed memory had been forced, during the late troubles, to make
with his Irish Subjects of that our Kingdom, and by which he was compelled to
give them a full pardon for what they had before done amiss, upon their return
to their duty, and their promise to give his Majesty a vigorus assistance. And
soon after in the same Page these other words, We could not forget the Peace
which Our selves was after necessitated to make with our said Subjects, in the
time when they who wickedly usurped the Authority, had erected that odious
Court for the taking away the life of Our dear Father, etc. And I further grant
all the advantages he can derive from that passage of mine, But withal, my
Lord, I shall give your Excellence my most earnest and most humble desires,
that you delay no longer, than shall be necessary, to clear those clouds of
darkness, and clear them in this present conjuncture, by an effectual
demonstration of that justice and favor you intended the Catholics of Ireland
in your Articles of 48. when they so freely put themselves and their power into
your hands. And what then? must it follow, that That which his Majesty calls
forced, compelled, and necessitated, P. W. calls freely putting themselves into
his Graces hands? By what Rule of Logic I wonder? I am sure not by those of
Opposition, either of Contraries, or Contradictories, or by any other than that
of this Gentleman's Disparaeta, even that by which he might as well argue and
conclude Deus est in Coelo, ergo baculus est in angulo. His Majesty says, that
both his Father of blessed memory, and himself have been forced: And I say the
Confederate Catholics have been free, and those and these are not the Same,
but very Different things: And Opposition must be in the very selfsame thing.
Must it not follow therefore, that our Person of Quality's Conclusion is from
the Staff to the Corner (as they say)?

22. But to let the Reader see this Gentleman's Ethics are no better than his
Logic (his blind Zeal, or a worse Passion, equally confounding his Judgment
here and there) let us grant him what he cannot prove, nor has any kind of
color to allege, that I had said his Majesty was free in concluding that
Peace, must it therefore have followed, that I contradict or oppose his most
sacred Majesty's expressions above related? Or that I said his Father of
blessed memory was not forced to the Cessation, or himself to that Peace?
Surely this Gentlemah has forgot his Morals, if he think so; or if he think
not so, he must speak against his Conscience, by fixing that on me, whereof he
knows me unguilty. But however this be, can he deny there are four kinds of
Freedom diversely imported by the word freely; one from intrinsic necessity, or
natural undeliberation, otherwise called Freedom of election or indifferency;
another from extrinsick (that is from coaction, violence, force, or compulsion,
derived from external causes, whether natural or free;) a third from both; and
a fourth yet from the more violent kinds of outward force, necessity, or
coaction, imposed or used by men, though not from those other kinds that are
not so pressing? Or can he deny the first to be essentially and simply such,
specially in relation to the second? Or this to be accidental only, and
secundum quid, or in a certain diminutive sense in respect of that, and in
relation to internal, deliberate, or voluntary consent, or dissent, or even to
external operations proceeding from them? Can he maintain the word Freedom to
be solely appropriated to that which is from both internal and external
necessity or coaction, in the whole latitude of this word Coaction, or in the
sense of it, imports that which is by and from another man, and which moreover
amounts to the actual restraint of ones person, or danger of his life? Or will
he maintain the Merchant, who in a storm casts overboard his goods to save his
life, does not act with that freedom and voluntariness, that is primarily,
essentially and simply such, or such as may denominate him in that case freely
acting, as to this ejection of his goods, though he act withal secundum quid,
or in some degree, or some sense unfreely, or unvoluntarily? Or likewise
maintain, that his Majesty's meaning was by the words forced, compelled,
necessitated, to signify that he had not, in concluding with the Irish, that
essential or inward freedom, which is called freedom, or liberty of election,
or indifferency, and which only excludes inward necessity, or natural
undeliberation? Or even to signify that he had not, moreover that kind also of
outward freedom, which is only from the more violent sorts of external
Coaction, viz. from corporal restraint, or danger of death, or any other such
violent compulsion (if any such other be) that invalidates Agreements made
betwixt a Sovereign Prince, and his Subjects in Arms against him? If our
Person of Quality cannot maintain these, or deny those as is evident to all
judicious knowing men, he cannot; then must it be no less evident, that even,
in case I had said in my Letter, that his Majesty had (on the other side)
freely Commissioned my Lord Duke of Ormond for transacting that Peace, and
freely consented to, and freely approved of, and ratified the whole
transaction, when concluded (as without any peradventure his Majesty has) I had
spoken as truly, significantly, and properly, and without any contradiction or
opposition to his Majesty's related expressious, as I did in saying the Roman
Catholics of Ireland had freely put themselves into my Lord of Ormond 's
hands. Yea, and without any such comparison (lest this Person of Quality
suspect what I intend not) had spoken a very known truth, and a truth no way
contradicting or opposing those passages of his most sacred Majesty's
Declaration. For who is so blind, as not to see, that with this kind of
accidental unfreedom (imported by the words forced, compelled, necessitated)
that liberty or freedom which is primarily, essentially, and simply such; That
which renders our actions moral, humane, obliging in Conscience, virtuous or
vicious before God; That which gives force to contracts and agreements before
men, does consist? Or who understands not that this kind of liberty which
denominates actions (proceeding thence) simpliciter liberas voluntarias (albeit
they may be at the same time secundum quid involuntariae) has no opposite, but
intrinsic necessity, undeliberation, or natural inconsiderancy? Or that the
liberty and freedom I would have had in our supposition, asserted to have been
in his Majesty, could have no other opposite, but either that intrinsic
necessity alone, or with it, or without it, that more violent kind of
extrinsick force, to wit, personal restraint, or danger of ones life? And
consequently, that as there is no opposition 'twixt external force, und
intrinsic liberty, or 'twixt any other lesser, or milder kind of external
necessity, force, compulsion, and being free from bodily restraint, or danger
of death only: So there must be none 'twixt his Majesty's being forced,
compelled, or necessitated, as above, and his being simply free (nevertheless)
in giving the Commission-Royal to conclude that Peace, and in ratifying after
what was concluded.

23. I confess notwithstanding, that if the coaction from External Causes (I
mean from other men) be such as to deprive one of his Corporal liberty, or to
endanger inevitably, or notoriously, the life of another, whom they would force
by such means to condescend to some Pacts or Concordatums; in this case, the
Laws and the consent of Nations, and natural reason dictate the rescission of
them. Whence it is that the consent of his late Majesty in the Isle of Wight,
had he given any, as he did not to the then Parliament, might and ought to be
rescinded. But withal I affirm, that Princes are not by any other obvious
necessity imposed upon them by disobedient or disloyal Subjects, excused from
performing agreements, howsoever otherwise forced, compelled, or necessitated
they be; provided the Covenants be not against the Laws of God and Nature. For
this being denied, what should the Plea of Magna Charta, or Charta de Foresta,
avail the Barons, that forced both from King John? What so many pacifications
throughout the World? So many Acts of Indemnity, Modern or Ancient, Foreign or
Domestic, which Princes would not (at least in the Latitude they were in) have
assented to, had not the Rebellious Contumacy of their Subjects forced,
compelled, and necessitated them?

24. It were in truth to be wished that the corrupt Nature of Man did at no
time fly out to Crimes so fatal and so destructive as Rebellion; which neither
the menaces of having the Nation and their Religion extirpated, nor the
Petition, See the Author's m^re ample Account, from Page 64. to the Page 104.
where he demonstrates the unlawfulness to take A^ms against the Mag^st^^te in
any case imiginable. Grotius de Jure Bell. and Pac. c 19. n. 6. Quid dicemus de
Subditorum ^ellis adversus Reges aliasque summas Potestates? His etiamsi causam
per se non in justam h^beant, jus tamen per vi^ ag^ndi d^^sse ostendimus alibi
(l. 1. c. 4) P^test interdum and tanta esse aut causae injustitia, aut
resistendi improbites, ut puniri gravi er possit. Tamen si quasi cum dese
toribus aut rebellibus actum sit, poe^a p^omisso opponi non potest, secundum ea
quae modo dix^mus. Nam and servis fid^m se^vand^m Ve^erum pietas existimavit;
cred to L^ced em^nios iram divinam expertos, quod T^narenses servos contra
pact^ occi^^ssent. Ae^. 6, 7 E Diodoru^ S^culus l. 11. Notat fidem servis datam
in fa^o Palicorum nunquam a quoquam Domino fuisse viol^tem* Metus autem illa^i
exceptio, and hic poterit elidi interposito jurejurando: sicut Marcus
Pampon^us, Tribu^us plebis, jurejurando obstrictas servavit quod L Ma^^^c^actus
prom serat.
to that effect, with some thousand of hands to it, nor the Lords Justices
favoring the party that opposed the King, nor any other kind of argument,
could justify in the Irish. But being Rebellion is a mischief that in all ages
extended it self to all the parts of the Earth; to prevent perpetual slaughter,
and the entire desolation of Mankind, agreements were admitted 'twixt Kings and
their Rebellious Subjects, and allowed to be binding by the Law of Nations.
Whereof our Person of Quality may read the most Learned Hugo Grotius (one of
the reformed Church) in his Work de jure Belli and Pacis. And thus I hope I
have demonstrated that, That which his Majesty calls forced, compelled, and
necessitated, may stand with that which P. W. calls freely putting themselves
into his Graces hands.

25. And suppose I had not, but, on the contrary, had granted the Gentleman all
the advantages his own heart could desire from my allowing a truth in that his
charge, or allowing it in the whole Latitude of his meaning, that I had even
granted the force had been such on his Majesty, and put on him by the Irish
Confederates only, that he had had no internal, no moral freedom left, (at
least freedom from those more violent kinds of coaction) and therefore no
obligation on him to perform the Articles (which must be the final scope (as it
was the great argument at first, of some of this Person of Qualities Partners
at London against that Peace) of his repeating so many times, and in so many
passages of his book that circumstance of compelled, forced, and necessitated:)
will, I say, all this granted, prove those Articles were such as forced from
his Majesty all the Regalia both Ecclesiastical and Page 7.
Temporal? (which this Gentleman says.) Not to give for answer that certainly
this is both a bold Assertion, (which the printed Articles will convince of
untruth) and a very unworthy Calumny with which the Duke of Ormond is aspersed
(who far from betraying his Master to that degree, or in any wise indeed,
expressed abundantly his prudent care of his Majestyes Honor and Interests in
all his Transactions.) I will only demand of this Gentleman, whether the
Guisian League in France forced from Henry the Third, all the Regalia both
Ecclesiastical and Temperal? Or the Hugonots from Henry ^e Grand? Or the Barons
of England in Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, from King John and his
Successors, all the said Royalties? If not, (as he must grant they did not) let
him acknowledge the falsity of his Assertion, since it is apparent that the
Articles of the Irish come short of these Agreements, in lessening or imposing
on the Prerogative Royal: and that the French Kings, and English Monarchs
after, notwithstanding a most Religious observance of the Articles of these
Pacifications, have been very absolute, and never thought to have been deprived
of either Ecclesiastical or Temporal Regalia.

26. What this Gentleman alleges next, wants but truth to make it a convincing
Argument. For if we should ^^low that the Irish Catholics by contempt,
disobedience, and opposition, broke those Articles, what benefit could they
claim by them? But nothing can clear this so satisfactorily, as a faithful
relation of what passed at that time upon that occasion.

27. The Prelates, and others of the Clergy, that met at James-town, by their
Letters of the 20th. of August (and not in April, as is alleged) deputed the
Bishop of Dromore, Page 9.
and Doctor Charles K^lly, to bring a Message from them to his Excellency the
Lord Lieutenant, the substance of which Message was reduced to writing by his
Lordships command, and subsigned by those that brought it; and was in effect
under pretense of procuring aid from his Majesty for his distressed Subjects,
to invite him to depart the Kingdom, and to leave the Kings Authority in the
hands of some Person or Persons faithful to his Majesty, and trusty to the
Nation, etc. In the neck of this, and without taking notice of the Answer the
Lord Lieutenant sent them, that fatal Declaration Page 9, 10.
and Excommunication issued, in which, besides those set forth by this
Gentleman, there are many strange Expressions, which if they could be proved to
have proceeded from the Irish Catholics, or their free Representatives whose
public acts Page 13.
(says this Gentleman) in all societies virtually, and interpretatively
include all who declaratively oppose not, they might be justly charged with
contempt, disobedience, and opposition to the King's Authority.

But I shall appeal to the Duke of Ormond, whom, without doubt, my Adversary
will allow to be Judge without all exception in this case, who can inform
(those that being pre-possessed with this Gentleman of Quality's so positive
assertion, That the Irish Papists did sign^lly declare their contemp^ of him,
disobedience to him, and opposition against him, Page 9.
will certainly have a curiosity to enquire) That in the general Assembly which
concluded the Peace of 48. a select number of the Irish Nobility and Gentry
were, by the common Vote of the Nation, appointed to be their Representatives,
in relation principally to those things that concerned the Peace; That those
Representatives were authorized by his Grace to exercise this trust; That they
by themselves, or a Committee of them, did attend upon his Person in the Camp,
and in the several places where he did reside, to execute his Commands in order
to that trust; That those Representatives were not only dissatisfied with such
the proceedings of the Clergy met at James-town, but expressed their
resentments of them in their Letter of the 24th. of October 1650. to his
Excellency, in these words, We know that by those Censures of the Bishops met
at Jame^-^own, his Majesty's Authority was invaded, and an unwarranted
Government set up, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and we are assured,
that no Subject could be justly warranted by that Exc^mmunication to deny
Obedience to his Majesty's Authority in your Excellency. So as what I have
alleged, being found true by so unquestionable testimony, certainly the Reader
will have reason to wonder that this Gentleman of Quality would impose that
upon them for a general silence and s^bmission of the body of the Irish
Pap^sts, which was a disclaimer, and opposition of the Nation in general, if
his own Maxim Page 11.
may take place, Fol. 13. That in all Societies the public act of free
Representatives virtually and interpretativ^ly includes all who declaratively
oppose it not. Page 13.


29. Now let us consider with what Arguments he fortifies this ignorant, or
voluntary mistake. The Declaration (says he) runs in the name of the
Catholics of Ireland. Page 10, 11.
Which ought not to be any convincing evidence of their general consent in an
Age when public use was made of the Kings name to engage his Subjects to fight
against his Person. For an argument. ex post facto, ^e asks, Why did not the
gen^rality punish the transgressors? This indeed had been a very compendious
way to assist the Gentleman, and to assure Page 11.
us that the Irish Catholics had broken the Articles. For how could they
punish the transgressors, without rev^^ing their Confederacy, and reassuming
that Authority which they newly abdicated? And his Excellency the Lord
Lieutenant, in whom that power was invested by his Majesty's Commission, was
himself content to sacrifice the bitter affronts he had received, to the
advancement of his Majesty's service, which he knew would suffer in that
conjuncture by distraction and disunion. Thus we see the great Battery this
Gentleman raised, and the Excursions and sharp closes he makes, fallen to the
ground, like some magnificent Palace of Cards, which some Child takes the pains
to build, that is destroyed with the first puff of wind.

30. By this time, I hope the Reader is acquainted with this Gentleman's
dexterity in commenting to the advantage of his own conceptions without regard
to the sense of the Text, or the intention of the Writer.

31. I said that many thousand Protestants in the three Kingdoms Page 11*
have been far more hainously Criminal both against his Majesty, and his
Father of ever blessed memory, and have contributed or intended as little for
bringing home his Majesty, as the most wickedly principled of the Roman
Catholic Confederates of Ireland; and yet that all these Protestants are not
only pardoned (except a few of the most immediate Regicides) but equaled in
all Capacities with his Majesty's most faithful and approved Subjects. The
fallacy, which this Gentleman makes use of to render this Comparison horridly
odious, lies in the name Protestant, which he would have should extend no
farther than those who have adhered to the Liturgy of the Page 12.
Church of England. But because I find that the long and short Parliaments,
that Cromwell and his brief Successors, that the Rump, the restored Members,
and the Counsel of Safety in all their public Transactions both at home and
abroad, involve under that name all those that oppose the Catholic Roman
Church, I give the name the same latitude; Otherwise I should have been most
unjust to the Royal Party that upheld the Tenets of the Church of England, in
the exercise, though clandestinely, and of the Rites of it, and conserved the
Principles of that Loyalty which seemed to be a stranger in Israel. And if this
Gentleman, following the Method of those that write solidly, had looked
narrowly into my words, and oppugned the most favorable interpretation that
might be given them, he would have acknowledged that my intention was to set
those Protestants apart, as the words themselves do demonstrate, and then have
argued against me. For when I say that all the Protestants were not only
pardoned, except a very few of the most immediate Regicides, but equaled in
all Capacities to the most faithful and approved Subjects, and since those
that pass under the title (...) faithful and approved Subjects, can in no
constru^^ (...) taken for other than the Royalists, why Page 12.
would ^e con^^^e my intentions to those Protestants whom I mean to exclude,
and free those that were evinently the object of my discourse? It is true that
P. W. cannot prove any of these many thousands thus wickedly principled to be a
Protestant: and it is as true that this Gentleman cannot deny but they passed
under that notion, and that even the Saints ^t Edgehi^l and Worcester* gave
themselves that name, and were esteemed to be such in common acceptance.

32. The Parliament of England has gloriously vindicated the English Nation
from the Crime of that execrable Parr^cide, with which it was aspersed; and
that which was omitted by the new Inhabitants of the Corporations in Ireland,
has, in testimony of their joy for the same, been solemnly performed by all
the Cities, and most of the Towns in England. Cromwell has in a thousand
opprobrious forms been executed in Effigy, and his name rendered as odious as
the prime part he acted in that horrid Tragedy, could make it. Yet no man will
say but many thousands did partake of the guilt, not as immediate Regicides,
but as those that assisted, supported, and countenanced the Actors in it. And
what vizard soever this Gentleman puts on the Crimes of the Irish, unless he
proves them to have concurred to this, he will, I hope allow me this guilt is
not to be paralleled.

33. The Parliament in Scotland has in a noble manner done right to that
Nation, and freed them from that base imputation of having ^old their King. Yet
it will not be denied that many thousands of them were Criminal upon that
account, not as the immediate Merchants, but as the Assisters, Supporters, and
Countenancers of them. And this is a guilt, for which this Gentleman will not
find a Parallel among the Irish: as he will not for those horrid Oaths to
maintain a new erected Government written in the blood of our late Sovereign of
ever happy memory, and to deba^ our new King and his Posterity from any access
to the Crown; so solemnly and so frequently sworn by many an^ many thousands in
the three Dominions.

34. Must it be said then that P. W's eye is evil, or does ^e Page 12.
^epine at any grace conferred upon others, because he pretends a share in the
Kings Mercy, and as an inducement thereunto, alleges that his Majesty has
already conferred it on those who were more faulty?

35. I believe this Gentleman is as ignorant of the Popish Tenet of Merit, as
he is sollicito^s to invent slaws in the Page 13.
proceedings of the Irish, and then to comment upon them. Our Savior engages
himself by promise, to bring us to his Kingdom, if we perform the will of his
Father: and he gives us way to claim it, by virtue of that Promise, as our own
right, although it be himself that gives us vell^ and agere.

36. Here I must entreat the Reader, that in all passages where he finds
mention of the English Protestants, he do remember with what fallacy my
Adversary would circumvent him, and elude my intentions under the notion of
that name. And in confidence that he will not forget how I disclaim in having
spoken, or intending to speak hereafter any thing of the English Protestant
Royalists, but with honor and applause of their resolute Loyalty, I proceed to
those which this Gentleman calls rational Inducements for his Majesty in the
degrees Page 13.
of his Grace to discriminate between the Irish Papists and English Protestants.

1. I am most certain^, that those who could best represent the hearty
affections of the English Nation, would never The Person of Quality's
Inducemen^s for his Majesty to discriminate, retorted.
consent to cast off his Majesty's Authority; and that as soon as the People in
general, that for a long time stood amazed, and were astonished at these
strange things which they saw acted, had recovered their Senses, and were free
from the Fright which seized on them, they brought home his Majesty. For let me
speak it to their honor, that although many were instrumental, and the Duke of
Albemarle eminently in performing that duty* yet it was the People of England
in general that did the work. The Banks of Power that were raised against the
Sea of their affections began to shrink: And, as is said of Bees, it was known
they were prepared to fight by their unusual humming; King Charles began to be
spoken of with reverence in the Marketplace. They drank his Health in Taverns.
No reproach from the Magistrate, no fear of the Laws of the Times could silence
the Multitude. King Charles was prayed for in some Churches, and his Picture
was sought for by all men.

When this was observed, that which must have been done, was done in the most
convenient manner. What is alleged Page 13.
against the Irish in the Comparison, is already abundantly refelled, where we
demonstrate, that the Representatives of that Nation opposed the proceedings of
the Clergy at Jame-stown. And therefore this Gentleman might well have spared
the rest of that Paragraph, with that quaint expression of their banishing, and
their Excom^unicating his Majesty Page 13.
(in effigy) in his Viceroy.

37. 2ly. If those English Protestants submitted absolutely and freely to his
Majesty, they cannot deny that they deferred Page 13.
so doing too long, and did but their duty when they submitted. And if to
obtain a promise from the King by Articles be so heinous a Crime in the Irish
Catholics, what share must they have, that forced, that compelled, that
necessitated his Majesty to do so? Who were the Contrivers, the Fomenters, and
Maintainers of the late troubles spoken of in the Kings Dcelaration? Who were
those that erected that odious Court for taking away the life of his dear
Father? Let those English Protestants claim his Majesty's Grace: Page 13.
because, says he, they submitted to his Majesty freely and absolutely: And
let this Gentleman be contented the Irish Catholics claim the Grace of his
Majesty's promise in the Articles of Peace, until he brings more pregnant
arguments to persuade the Reader that the foundation of them is dissolved on
Page 14.
all parts. Those Articles are printed, and such as will read them, may find
that they merit not the Character they receive from this Gentleman, as if by
them the King had transferred all the Regalia both Ecclesiastical and Temporal,
which is an Hyperbole of the first Magnitude. Yet if a nice judgment should
find any thing less moderate in those concessions, who are most to be blamed,
either those that necessitated the King to grant them, or those that accepted
them? And sure I am, it sufficiently appears out of his Majesty's own words, in
his forementioned Declaration for the settlement of Ireland, that the force,
compulsion, and necessity was put on him by those that erected that odious
Court for taking away his Fathers life.

38. ^ ly. The Irish repine not, that those English have been remitted their
Forfeitures, and are in possession of their Estates; nor do they oppose the
satisfaction set forth Page 14.
by the Act of Parliament for the Adventurer, according to the intention of it.

39. 4ly If the over pouring of a People that fought by the Kings Commission
against the Men, the Purse, and the Fleet of England, strengthened with the
revolted Party that betrayed Cork, and the rest of his Majesty's Towns and
Forts in Munster, and assisted by Owen o Neill, and his Army, shall be called a
Conquest: those English Protestants can only be said to have been Conquerours
in their turn. For the English Catholics more than four hundred years before
had planted the English Interest in all the parts of it, under a much more
lawful Authority, than that under which those English Protestants prevailed.
And this Person of Quality in Ireland having made use of those Arguments which
the Man in the dark in England gave in against me, concerning the
incompatibility of these two Parties living together, and P. W. having
disproved that Position by a long discourse in his former Reply, he will not
trouble the Reader with Repetitions. This only I will add, that it is Page 14.
more probable those English Protestants that once held Anti-Monarchical
Principles, should again assume them, than that the Irish Catholics, who at
all times expressed an aversion from them, should embrace them. And since both
Parties sought at several times by his Majesty's Commission, it is more
probable that the Irish Papists, who fought longest in the days of His
adversity, and against all extremities for his Interest at home, and stuck to
him in his Banishment abroad, should have more hearty affection for his Person,
and Royal Authority, than those Protestants so principled, that for a short
time, and in the beginning of a War in a plentiful Country served his Father of
ever blessed memory, and after deserted him; and still fought in favor of
those that would exclude our sacred Sovereign, and his Posterity from all right
to the Crown. But is it not strange, men should conceive, that an Act of
Indemnity did warrant them to upbraid others for Crimes for which themselves
were guilty in a higher nature? He should consider, that although the wounds be
healed, the scarrs remain; which should at least silence his Invectives, when
the Party he pleads for is not so generous as to say with Dido,

Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. Virgil.


40. 5ly. It is true that Rebellions of particular men have Page 14.
been freq^ent in Ireland, and it is as true that the Catholic Natives have
been very instrumental, not only in suppressing them, but in repelling foreign
Invasion. Now with what justice that can be imputed to a Nation as a mark of
Infamy, which is the Crime of a few, is a thing which the men of England (where
there have been heretofore many such defections) will be curious to enquire.

41. Here again this Gentleman mentions the year 1641. but I shall again deferr
giving him any answer upon that subject, until I come to that place where he
discourses more amply of the beginning of the Rebellion.

42. 6ly. Whenever this Gentleman discourses of the Principles of Catholic
Religion, he shows or makes himself Page 15.
ignorant of them, and he so confounds the Papal and Royal Authority in this
Paragraph, as if we knew not which are the Ke^es, and which is the Sword. We
give the Pope no Supremacy but in Spiritual affairs, and this Supremacy is of
that nature, as it cannot dis-engage our Consciences from the Loyalty we owe to
our Sovereign. And although our Remonstrance, Declaration, and Protestation
upon this subject, printed not long since, has left no room for such Cavills,
yet we despair to stop the mo^ths of those that would e^^ablish this ^alumny
for a truth; For some men are so strangely bent against Catholics, as they
would entertain the Multitude in this Error, and are much afflicted it should
be known that Catholics profess, and are directed by Loyal Principles.

43. Now a^ to the Transplantation to Connaght and Clare, Page 16.
laying asi^e the bitterness of the language in that Paragraph, and even tired
with following this Gentleman in the way of his Methodical and Collegial
discourse, I will only say, that all the Arguments with which he enforces P. W
's Conclusion maintained, or* which is the same thing, the Person of Quality's
Arguments for continuing the T^ansplantation rendered insignificant.
it, cannot persuade the Reader, that men do that willingly, which if they omit
to do, they must starve, or hang, or be sold as slaves (for willingness to do a
thing, implies it to be done, not however freely, but without such extreme
violence.) Instances of these have been so frequent, and so often alleged, that
this Gentleman is compelled to change the Battery, and to say, That although
the force of the late horrid Usurpers constrained them to go thither Page 18.
in person; yet no force lay upon them to sue out Decrees, and obtain
Possessions of Lands there, in lie^ of their former forfei^ed Estates in the
other Provinces.

44. It might perhaps be thought a full and satisfactory Answer to this
Objection, that men in whose power it is to redeem their Wives and Children by
suing out Decrees (there being no mean but that under Heaven for their relief)
might be judged Murderers of them, if they omitted so to do. But besides
starving, if hanging be a sufficient excuse in this case, take the proof of
this from the Law of the Times, the Proclamation of Cromwell, and his Council,
Printed at Dublin by William Bladen, in the Year 1654. by their Order (in
pursuance of an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for the settlement of
Ireland) by which it is declared, that they do transplant themselves before the
first day of March next ensuing, into the Province of Connaght, and County of
Clare, according to former Declarations, and address themselves to those that
are there impow'red for that purpose, to take out their respective assig^ments
for Lands, and proceed to build, and settle themselves there, and make
provision for their Families; and this upon the highest penalty.

45. I now demand of our Person of Quality, whether this Proclamation in
Ireland, and at that time it was p^bl^shed, should not rationally produce, as
really it did, that kind of fear in the miserable Irish, which is called m^^ us
cadens in virum constantem? Whether t^ere was any such in England, to force the
Caval^e^s to a Composition? Whether bargains forced by such fear, or ex metu
cadente in virum constantem, are not void in Law, or at least to be rescinded?
And if our Person of Quality must answer the first and last of these Queries in
the affirmative, and the second in the negative, as without any question he
must; then must it follow, that although the Cavaliers in England are not
relieved from their own Act of Composition, the Innocent Irish, and others that
articled, and had not after forfeited those Articles, might in justice desire,
and petition to be relieved. And it must further follow, that his Majesty's
words, alleged by this Gentleman (out of his Majesty's foresaid Declaration of
the 30th. of November) did not suppose, because his Majesty was not
sufficiently informed of the highest penalties to be inflicted on those would
not address themselves to take out their respective assignments of Lands in
Connaght, according to that Proclamation I have related, nor consequently that
kind of force which must have rendered those acts of the Irish to be not their
own, but the Forcer's, I mean as to a conclusion of the enforced from seeking
any redress from the equity of the Laws, and from the justice of the Prince
restored to perfect liberty, and informed thoroughly of the case. And therefore
it must be likewise consequent, that P. W. cannot in reason be taxed with
insolency, for having spoken his judgment hereof in his Letter, Page 17.
or having said therein, That the Transplantation cannot be continued on
account of Crimes since 48. nor stand with the Articles, or with the Equity of
the Laws, much less with the Justice of a Prince whom God has restored to
redeem the oppressed from the yoke of Tyranny, to lead Captivity captive, and
give gifts to men. P. W. writ that Letter before his Majesty's Declaration was
concluded. The Letter having been delivered to the Duke about the end of
October 1660. a whole month before the date of the Declaration. And I am sure
it would not then, at least have seemed insolent to say, The Transplantation of
such of the Irish, as are either Innocents, or Articlers, and such Articlers
too, as never since the date of those Articles, disobeyed, or declined his
Majesty's Authority, could not be continued on account of Crimes since 48. nor
stand with the Articles, nor with the Equity of the Laws, much less with the
Justice of a Prince, etc.

46. Besides, P. W. can tell this Gentleman, that before the Declaration was
made a Law, by the assent Royal given in Parliament, it could be no insolency
to measure the Justice of our Person of Quality's Interpretation of it, by the
ancient, known, Fundamental Laws of the Land, by those of Nations, and by the
Dictates of Reason. And further, that as P. W. is not ignorant, how Laws are
the sources of Right, and squares of Justice, and that new Laws may change the
old, and render that sometimes very Just, which was very Unjust before, I mean,
when the scope of the Law is the public good, as it ought to be always; so he
never intended, as he could not, other in that passage of his Letter, where he
says, The Transplantation cannot stand with the Justice of a Prince, etc. but
only to deliver his own judgment (concurring with all dis-interested persons)
of that matter, as it was then whole and entire, or as the Prince was not then
bound by any Declaration or Law to the contrary: And that if his Majesty has
otherwise declared since that time, and that his Royal intent, meaning, or
purpose appear sufficiently by his Majesty's own explanation of such passages
of his Declaration, as are subject to diverse constructions, or by that of those
dis-interested Judges, whom his Majesty has or shall appoint (not by this
Person of Quality's too much biased Exposition) P. W. shall with perfect
resignation acquiesce, knowing that his Majesty rightly informed, and finally
determining, is the Fountain of Justice to his Subjects; that he obliges all
(even in Conscience) to a submission; and that as he has no other Judge but
God alone, so they cannot, without offending God, appeal from his Majesty's
ultimate sentence, if not to himself again, or by his permission, to his great
Court of Judicature, a Parliament.

47. He adds the presenting of two Petitions (whereof Page 19, 20, 21.
one was printed) to the Rump, by their public Agents, Sir Robert Talbot
Baronet, and Gerott Moore Esquire, to confirm their being satisfied with such
Transplantation, and comments upon them, and the Titles, and addresses of them,
after such a manner, as if at the end of every period, the Reader should have
no more to do, but to cry out, There needs no more to be said. Yet for my part,
I believe the Reader, were he to present a Petition to that Judicatory in those
times, and in the distresses to which the Irish Catholics were reduced, would
have wanted words, rather than a will, to show the lowness of his submission,
and to magnify the Grandeur of their Honors Piety, Justice, and all the
Virtues they had not, in those Expressions with which their Votaries were wont
to court the Pagan Gods. At what rate of good language, think you, would the
People of Israel have bought from their Overseers the Straw which was denied
them, to make up their task of Bricks? But in all this airy traffic, does any
syllable fall from them to sooth those Hogen Mogens with Curses against the
Tyranny of Charles the First, and against the Family of the Stuarts? Do those
Petitions contain any Protestation, that the Government which those men did
manage, was established upon grounds of Righteousness? As for the Printing of
one of the Petitions, and the Elogies, I stood in the Crowd, when a smart
Answer was given by Mr. Gerott Moore, at the Council Board, to a Nobleman, that
belike has printed somewhat of a higher nature than this concerning Cromwell,
yet insisted very much upon the Title given the Rump in that printed Petition.

48. Now having allowed this Gentleman all the words himself could imagine to
be in a Pet^tion that was to be presented in the behalf of such Suitors, to such
a power (profane and disloyal expressions, whereof those Petitions are not
guilty, always excepted) because I conceived the times and the parties might
justify them, I thought I might have entirely freed my self from being engaged
to return a particular answer to his excursions and repetitions, in order to
that Subject; But who is it that can pass over these words of his? Those which
now pretend to such Loyalty to his Majesty, Page 25.
voluntarily confess, that no execution was legal that was not derived from the
Rump. Is not this implicitly, if not explicitly an owning in the Irish
Papists a legality of the Rumps power, even in the bloody murder of his Sacred
Majesty, that being derived from those the Irish Papists call their Honors? To
give this inference any foundation, we must derive it from such a sort of
malice as blinds the judgment of the writer: The words in the Petition are
these, they do willingly Page 20.
acquiesce in the Transplantation, albeit it was not executed by any legal
power, as not being derived from your Ho^ours Can the sense of this be other,
than that the execution of the Transplantation was illegal, because the power
was not derived from their Honors? And perhaps they mean to claw them in that
particular, because the Rump was (...) Rump of that Parliament to which the
King had recommended the prosecution of the War in Ireland. Now to in^er from
this, as if they should have said, that no execution was legal that was not
derived from the Rump, is certainly a consequence of too vast extent to be
derived from so limited an antecedent. But who could imagine that any man in
his right senses would have concluded thereupon, that this was implicitly, if
not explicitly an owning in the Irish Papists the legality of the Rumps power,
even in the bloody murder of his Sacred Majesty, that being derived from them
the Irish Papists call their Honors?

49. Here is first to be observed, that the Petition says, Page 20.
they do willingly acquiesce in the Transplantation, albeit it was not executed
by any legal power. This which of its own Nature is an execution in a Civil
matter, is converted to an execution upon a Scaffold. Moreover admitting his
own words, that no execution was legal, that was not derived from the Rump,
even this cannot prove his inference: For although we grant that no execution
was legal that was not derived from the Rump; yet this concludes not, that all
executions were legal that were derived from their Power. However, rather than
fail, he would compel the Irish Catholics to invest in the Rump a greater
infallibility than they give the Pope.

50. But to say the truth, I think he believed the general negative, and the
general affirmative were of equal extension. However, to underceive him for the
future, he may be pleased to read his Error in these Propositions and
Inferences. No Executions are legal that do not issue out of the Kings Courts;
therefore all Executions are legal that issue out of the Kings Courts. No man
is a perfect Statesman that has not seen foreign Countries, and known foreign
Aff^irs; therefore all men are perfect Statesmen that have seen foreign
Countries, and known foreign Affairs. No man goes to Heaven, but he that is
baptized; therefore all men go to Heaven that are baptized. The Man in the
dark in England was pleased to entertain me with much bitterness: and this
Gentleman of Quality in Ireland gives me this Logic to boot.

51. If all this do not satisfy this Person of Quality's very scrupulous
Conscience against these Petitions, he is briefly answered, That the
Transplanted Persons, and generality of Irish Catholics, openly disown those
Petitions, or any Commission from themselves, impowering, in that particular,
those Gentlemen; albeit, without any question, they being employed to petition
against the Oath of Abjuration, and other Oppressions of their Countrymen (not
to establish that of Transplantation) their endeavors even in this particular,
as matters were then, proceeded from their desires to serve them. Neither does
the continuance of these two Gentlemen, since that time, in their publik
employment for the Irish Catholics, prove what this Person of Quality labors
in the 22th. Page of his Book, or that all they did or do is by allowance or
command from their Countrymen. It is well known the Irish Catholics never gave
them any such general power, much less a particular allowance or command for
this, which indeed few or none of them either knew, heard, or thought of,
until some few did of late, by reading this Gentleman's Book.

52. As for other arguments made use of to answer my assertion concerning the
Transplanted persons, they signify nothing: Our Person of Quality has not yet
proved the foundation of those Articles, and consequently the Articles
themselves Page 16.
are thrown down by the Irish Papists. Nor has he told us yet, what those many
other Countries and Ages are that have formerly on less grounds used
tra^splantation, and been justified therein as just and equal by Lawyers and
Casuists. Page 16.
And no more has he told us, what these Lawyers and Casuists are, and whether,
according to the Law of God, they could on less grounds justify the like
Transplantation.

53. What this Person of Quality further says, or indeed objects in the first
place, that my Conclu^^on (on this Page 16.
subject) without any proof, with the same facility as it is said may be
gainsaid, is answered, That my Letter in general being written to the Duke of
Ormond, who concluded, and well remembered the Conditions of the Peace, and the
observance of it with much affection by some hundreds, at least if not
thousands of the Transplanted persons, my assertion in particular, that such
could not be deprived of the benefit of the Articles, or their Transplantation
continued upon account of Crimes after 48. needed no proof to him, or indeed to
any other that knew the affairs of Ireland.

54. Concerning Corpo^ations, my request discriminates the Innocent from the
Nocent. Although that in a time Page 28.
when his Majesty, out of the abundance of his goodness, makes it his glory to
out-goe all his Predecessors in a profusion The Person of Quality's Answer to
P. W 's Determination in the Case of Corporate places, considered.
of Mercy, I seek a share for them likewise in the general dole. And then I
descend to those persons that have been Innocent in the most guilty of them.
For those I claim as of justice his M^jesties Grace, and the benefit of the
Articles, as I do for the generality of those other Corporate places which
offended not against the Peace of 48. And I am still of opinion, if I may be
again permitted to speak out of my element, that no reason of State could
exclude them, even, although there were no matter of Conscience in the Case.
For if the Kingdom be to be enriched with traffic, and that increasing of the
public wealth be a principal point of State Policy, it is evident that most of
the Corporations of Ireland are grown despicably poor by excluding the Natives
from free commerce and traffic, and that the little life which is yet
preserved in negotiation, is maintained by the trade they drive a Factors to
those that live in those Corporations. Other arguments I omit at this present,
being ready nevertheless to give them, when it shall be thought necessary; with
answers to all objections, which this person shall or can make, even, on this
subject.

55. Had I stood up to justify Limerick, Waterford, or Galway in their
affronts done to his Majesty's Lieutenant of Ireland, I could not be upbraided
with a more severe expostulation than this is, What falsehood will P. W. be
afraid to suggest Page 30.
to strangers; and what wickedness will he be afraid to patronize at home, when
he shall dare thus to assert to the Lord Lieutenant himself, and publish it in
print to the world, that no reason of State can accord with the dictates of a
good Conscience to exclude these Corporations? But when I avow them Criminal,
and beg mercy for them, not by extenuating their guilt, but by alleging the
examples of his Majesty's unbounded goodness, why will this Writer vent his
malice to the Nation, by railing at me in terms unworthy a Person of Quality?
Nay wherefore does he charge me with asserting or publishing that which I never
did? with that which the clear text or discourse on this subject in my Letter,
convinces manifestly I did not? And that you Reader may be Judge between me and
this Person of Quality, without any further trouble to your self than to read
here a few Lines, I give the whole Paragraph, well nigh, wherein I treated of
this matter. But withal (my Lord) I will give your Excellence my most earnest
and humble desires, that you delay no longer than shall be necessary, to clear
these clouds of darkness, and clear them in this present conjuncture by an
effectual demonstration of that justice and favor you intended the Catholics
of Ireland in your Articles of 48. when they so freely put themselves, and
their power, into your hands. I am not ignorant that some have after
transgressed in a high nature: But you know, my Lord, there are many thousands
of Protestants in the three Kingdoms, who have been far more hainously
criminal, both against his Majesty, and against his Father of blessed memory,
and who have contributed, or intended as little for bringing home his Majesty,
as the most wickedly principled of the Roman Confederates of Ireland. And we
all know, my Lord, that all the Protestants are not only pardoned (except a
very few of the most immediate Regicides) but equaled in all capacities with
his Maj^sties most faithful and most approved Subjects. Yet if these
unfortunate Catholic transgressors must be alone in this general Jubilee of
the three Nations, held unworthy to rejoice at ^he Kings restoration; if they
alone, besides their most grievous and unparalled sufferings under Tyranny
these eight or nine years past, must a new suffer, and yet a more heavy
judgment, under the most Clement Prince on Earth; if they alone must
experience all the rigor of his Laws and Judicatures for their Offenses after
the Peace of 48. (which Offenses, however criminal, were not bloody) your
Excellence may be nevertheless pleased to consider the Transplantation cannot
be continued on any such account, nor on any other, which may stand, either
with those Articles, or with the Equity of the Laws, and much less with the
Justice of a Prince whom God has restored to redeem the oppressed from the
yoke of Tyranny, to lead Captivity captive, and give gifts to men. And your
Excellence may be further pleased to consider, that the Corporations generally,
cannot be excluded on this account, nor on any other may stand with his
Majesty's gracious Concessions in those Articles. Neither do I think there can
be any Reasons of State may accord with the Dictates of a good Conscience to
exclude them.

56. I now demand of any that understands English or Sense, whether Limerick,
Waterford, and Galway, all three, or even any of these three, must be
understood there where I say, That the Corporations generally cannot be
excluded on this account (that is, on account of Crimes against the Articles of
48.) or on any other may stand with his Majesty's gracious Co^cessions in those
Articles? Or when I say, that I do not think there can be any Reasons of State
may accord with a good Conscience to exclude them? And whether this word, them,
demonstrates not, and relates not here to the Generality of Corporations, but
by no means to the particulars of Limerick, Waterford, and Galway? Or indeed to
any other Criminal Town whatsoever, if any other such be? And without question,
there are a hundred Iri^h Corporations, which are not to this day charged with
any such guilt, and which I then did th^nk (when I writ that Letter) as I do
still, cannot be charged on that account: And therefore on that account not to
be excluded: and consequently, and for many other obviou^ reasons, are such, as
I must then have thought, no Reasons of State could accord with a righteous
Conscience to exclude them. But what has all this to do with Gal^ay, Limer^ck,
and Waterford? Is it not a manifest a^use of the Reader to leave out the word
Generally, where he should not, if he had sincerely quoted my words in the 28.
Page of his Book? where he treats of the guilt of Page 8.
Corporations, and charges P. W. with saying indefinitely the Corporations
cannot be excluded on that account; whereas P. W. says no such thing, but
another very different, in these terms, The Corporations generally cannot be
excluded, etc. And I am sure this is a true Proposition, yea notwithstanding
the inexcusable transgressions of Galway, Limerick, and Waterford, or any
other; and even as true as it is, that the People of England generally desired
the Kings Restoration, when this Person of Quality, and his Consorts, did not.
But our cunning Sophister did foresee, that the word, generally, added by me,
would, if rehearsed by him, render three whole Pages of his Book impertinent.
For admit all his charge against those three Cities, were true in the whole
latitude of it, and in every particular, as I fear it is in too much; could he
therefore conclude, that the Irish Corporations generally had been Criminal
against the Peace of 48? Surely three, and three, and three more added to help
him, do not argue the generality of more than a hundred, or do not falsify my
Proposition, that, notwithstanding the Crime of so few particulars, exempts the
generality of so great a number from that Crime. Yet he must proceed with his
malicious impertinent Narrative, and having vented all his Choler against the
miserable Survivers and Heirs of the dead in these three Towns, ^e must demand,
as in triumph, What falsehood will P. W. be afraid to suggest to strangers, and
what wickedness will he be afraid to patronize at home, when he dares thus to
assert to the Lord Lieutenant himself, and publish it in print to the World,
that no Reasons of State can accord with the Dictates of a good Conscience to
exclude these Corporations from the future capacity of repeating such signal
Acts of Rebellion? If this be other than a mere Leger-demain of words, and an
illusion of eyes, and a plain imposture of sense, and words, and even of
intention too, may all Strangers and Patriots believe him against me! But if it
be, may the suggestion of falsehood, and patronage of wickedness be his reward,
and a reproach returned upon him by all men, both at home and abroad! And be
thou, Reader, here likewise, as above, an impartial Judge. Does not he change
the sentence, alter the sense, foist in these instead of them, add to, and
impose on me all that follows in that period, quite contrary to my words, to
the obvious meaning of them, and to the very thoughts of my soul, abundantly
there, and soon after expressed, where I speak thus, Nevertheless (my Lord)
far be it from my thoughts to desire the obstruction of any lawful and honest
course, can be justly taken to secure the Peace of that Country from rational
dangers, if any such can be in our days from the Catholic Natives? And is it
not therefore as manifest, that he charges me without any ground, but his own
groundless perverse construction, with exclaiming insolently against his
Ma^esties Royal proceedings, in the particular of these Page 32.
Towns, as unjust, unequal, and such as cannot accord with the dictates of a
good Conscience? The word unjust, or even his sense of it, cannot be found in
all my Letter. And for that of unequal, it is so used by P. W. and only in
relation to an equal distribution, not of Justice, but of Mercy, becoming the
most merciful of Princes, that it is manifest, this Gentleman of Quality abuses
not P. W. alone, but himself too, and the Reader. Whereof I give here the full
evidence. For after I had, from the special regard of God, to save one just man
that was found in Sodom, and from his readiness to forgive the whole
Pentapolitan Region for ten such men of justice, nay for one alone to pardon
Jerusalem, when most Criminal, and by his revenging justice designed to a
general desolation; and after I had from these arguments of Gods mercy
proceeded to his Majesty's imitation of Him in pardoning all the Protestant
Criminal Cities in his Dominions, and then demanded, whether so Merciful a
Prince would not pardon the miserable remainders of one poor Catholic Town, or
two, or three at most, if perhaps there have been so many that have any way
offended; and after I had further adjoined, that whatever the Crime of these
Towns have been, it had been, these many years past, sufficiently punished, and
had been, even of the most Criminal of them, incomparably less, than what may
be charged on most of his Majesty's Protestant Cities; and that I was sure,
there had been in the very worst of them, and in the most disobedient, more
than fifty (the greatest number Abraham proposed for obtaining mercy to Sodom)
just men (said I) to his Majesty, and his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant: And
after I had, in prosecution of my discourse, asked, what besides could render
these Towns unfit objects of his Majesty's Mercy, if not, perhaps, their
Religion; which yet, being so Christian, and allowed by Articles, could be no
exception: After all this (I say) this other passage immediately follows,
whence our Person of Quality takes his ground, to lay to my charge, that I task
his Majesty with unequal proceedings, Yet if notwithstanding all this, the few
and miserable Survivers and Heirs of the dead in the general desolation, must
suffer again, under his Royal Justice, I beseech you, my Lord, let not the
Tables of Sylla and Marius, let not their general Proscriptions, or
Confiscations be renewed on this occasion, or affixed in the Courts and
Judicatures of the British Monarchy. Let not these bright days of universal
joy, be rendered to the Irish Catholics alone, dark, sad, and dismal; Nor let
these days be infamously memorable to posterity for a distinction so unequal.
Behold Reader, whence this Person of Quality takes his arguments, to charge me
with exclaiming insolently, against his Majesty's Royal proceedings, as unjust
and unequal. Can indeed a prayer, and such a prayer, and in such a mood (if I
may so speak with Grammarians) and to the then Marquess of Ormond, and a prayer
made before the King had determined any thing concerning these Corporations, or
settlement of Ireland, be an insolent exclumation against his Majesty's
proceedings, which then had no being at all?

57 As for the remainder of this charge, that I should have no less insolently
exclaimed against his Majesty's Royal proceedings, in relation to these guilty
Corporations: Or that I should have said, His Majesty's proceedings against
them to be such, as cannot accord with a good Conscience, I have already
answered, that he finds no such thing in my Letter, since my words and sense of
t^em relate only to the obedient Corporations, and such as had no way
transgressed the Articles of 48. And now further add, as to that expression of
my judgment then concerning these, that whatever his Majesty has since
determined, it can argue no exclaiming insolency in a Letter which preceded the
knowledge and existence of any such determination. Besides, that I cannot
believe yet this Gentleman's interpretation of his Majesty's Act of Settlement,
or (which is the same thing) that his Majesty's meaning is, to exclude these
obedient Corporations from a Plea of Justice, in purs^ance of their Articles:
as neither those good men of even Galway, Limerick, and Waterford, that no way
concurred to the transgressions of the (sometimes) prevailing, either malignant
or inconsiderate Party in them.

58. Even my harmless peradventure must not pass without Page 28.
some unfavourable reflection from this Gentleman, as if it should have related
to all the three guilty Corporations, or as if I had doubted, whether any one
of them had been guilty. Whereas in truth, it must not import in any equal
construction, not even to the most rigorous Logician, Grammarian, or Lawyer
(considering what goes before, and follows after) any more than some doubt, or
some scruple about some one of the three, granting the other two without any
contradiction guilty. And that one, P. W. ingeniously confesses to have been
Galway. And the reason of his doubt or scruple then concerning this Town (which
occasioned the addition of that wary peradventure) to have been, that he had
not then had from such hands as he could wish, or could rely upon the perfect
relation of that Towns carriage, since 48. toward my Lord Lieutenant, or the
Marquess of Clanrickard. But whatsoever it was, nay whatever that of Waterford,
or Limerick either, has been, and however the evidence of their transgressions
Page 28.
amount to much more than P. W's. peradventure, yet is it very untrue (what
this Gentleman further asserts) that the subject reaches much farther than P.
W 's. two or three Corporations: Or that the highest Acts of Treachery and
Rebellion Page 29.
have been the general p^actice of all such into which his Majesty's Lord
Lieutenant desired admission. But his tongue is no slander, as the Proverb is;
especially since he neither does fix, nor (as I believe) can fix upon (even
any) one more since the Peace of 48. For if he should instance any other before
that, his allegation would be impertinent against me, even as to such, or to
overthrow the Articles of that Peace. And I say moreover, that whatever the
transgressions of the said three, and, if you please, add three more,
disobedient Corporations have been, I am sure they amount not to the Crimes of
those other Towns, possessed, even at that time in Ireland, and ever since the
beginning of the Wars to this very day, by English Protestants (such, I mean,
as went under that Notion) which a Person of as great Quality as this
Gentleman, either concurred with, or induced to manifest Rebellion, and
inexcusable Treachery (both without any comparison surmounting the
transgressions of Galway, Limerick, and Waterford) even to fall away openly
from his Grace, and from his Majesty, and turn professed Enemies to both, even
to declare for Cromwell, and the long Parliament, and receive in their Forces,
long before Galway, Limerick, and Waterford can be said to have been guilty of
any of the transgressions, true or false, charged upon them; and even (I say)
to receive those Enemy-Forces without any kind of necessity; nay to declare for
them, even before they had seen an Enemy come within sixscore miles of them,
nay to have made their bargain with them before Cromwell set his foot on Irish
ground. And I am yet further certain, that however Waterford, Limerick, and
Galway transgressed, their guilt cannot in justice render the generality of
other Corporate places guilty, nor consequently forfeitable; much less the
generality of the Catholic people, or Proprietors of Estates in Ireland. Nay
not even the faithful honest Inhabitants of those very Towns (I mean Limerick,
Waeerford, Galway) or such Inhabitants of them (I say) as were not guilty of
the Crimes committed by their fellow-Gitizens; Unless (peradventure) this
Person of Quality can evince, that the Laws involve the Innocent with the
Nocent; and that a good King doing Justice to his People (not by the Sword
drawn, or Cannon charged, or Legions marshalled, assaulting a Rebellous Town,
or Men in Arms, but by the Laws, and Judges, and other Civil Ministers of
Justice) ought not to discriminate 'twixt the just and the wicked: Or unless ^e
can maintain, that Kings may, without injustice, confiscate all Cities, Towns,
and even whole Kingdoms, where any D^sobediences, Contempts, Plots,
Conspiracies, or Rebellions, may be truly charged on some of their
fellow-Citizens, or Countrymen: Or that his Majesty (whom God preserve from the
unjust Contrivements of this Person of Quallty's good Subjects) could, upon his
Restoration, or before he was restored, entertain, without injustice, a
resolution to deprive all the honest Loyal Party of London, Bristow, etc. nay
all those were faithful to him, and his Father, in England, Scotland, Wales,
and Ireland, of their Estates.

59. When I say that the hand of God has punished them (to w^t, the refractory
Cities of Limerick, Waterford, and Galway, and other such, if indeed any other
has been such) but (says this Gentleman) that the Magistrate Page 30.
should spare because God punishes, is a non sequitur. Though the Lord sent
Hornets before Israel, to drive out the Hivite, and Canaanite, and Hittites,
yet he commands Israel to destroy those Nations, and their name from under
Heaven. And although this be true, is it not a non sequitar, that the
Magistrate is bound to destroy them, because God punishes them? Will he not
leave in his Majesty's power to be merciful? And will he not give me leave to
intercede for the poor remains of those Citizens whom God was pleased to spare,
to the end, perhaps, that the goodness of our Sovereign might be magnified in
their deliverance? And certainly himself must grant that Law given to the
Israelites for extirpation of the Hittites, etc. must not extend to the
destruction of any other People, and that it binds not any Christian Prince or
People.

60. I profess I am ignorant of what this Gentleman Page 31.
means by the Sin of Apostasy in the Irish; if he means the Catholics
generally, with relation to the Peace of 48. and I believe it was only
mentioned to bring in Lots Wife, and the Pillar of Salt, into which, his whole
discourse makes it very probable, he could wish every Irish Catholic turned,
that would look back either upon City or Country. But however this be, he was
very ill advised, to make the Reader, or P. W. reflect on the known,
undeniable, reiterated Apostasy of even a Person of Quality of this Gentleman's
own good people, even before and after the year 48.

61. This Gentleman allows me, that God delivered Page 31.
just Lot, yet that he transplanted him to Zoar, and that even so the King has
provided a Zoar for the Innocent, whether their souls may escape and live: And
I say, that if his Majesty had not provided that Zoar for more company than the
Innocent, it would be very thin set with those his English Protestants.
Besides, that if he would have his Example parallel in all things (as himself,
though unreasonably, would have mine of the Gibeonite^ to be) he should have
told his Majesty, that all the Cities, Towns, and Villages of the Irish should
be destroyed, razed even from the very foundations, and the Land it self
rendered unhabitable to Catholic or Protestant, or Man or Beast, even as far
as Zoar, and as much as the anger and revenge of man could effect.

62. As it is his Majesty's part to provide for securing the Peace of the
Kingdom, so it is my part to pray, that no Sword be put into the hands of any,
that from their heart Page 31.
do not think themselves obliged in Conscience to maintain Monarchical
Government, the Birth right of our Sovereign, and the Interest of his Crown.

63. Always when there is speech of Catholic Tenets, this Gentleman stumbles
unhappily. For where he says, The Doctrine of Regicide is common in the Roman
Schools, he mistook them for the Schools of Geneva, and of those of Page 32.
their Principles. Had he but enquired, he might have learned, that the
Doctrine of Reg^cide among Catholics is heretical, and so declared by a
general Council, even that of Constance I mean; though this Gentleman may
therefore except against the Fathers there.

64. From their Doctrine thus mistaken, he descends to prove them Regicides in
fact, by the same arguments that would conclude all Rebels that ever have been
to be Regicides: for sure such Rebels must set up a distinct Government, for
by the Laws of the Government they deserted, they must have been hanged; and
sure such Rebels did not fail Page 32.
to magnify their Jurisdiction, and give Laws to their Party to avoid
confusion. Yet in so many thousand years, no man, besides this Writer, found
out the way to make them Regicides. But what Royal Peculiars the Irish Papists
usurped, Page 32.
that might make them so Criminal beyond others, never came to my knowledge.
They neither used Scepter, nor Sword, nor Cap of Maintenance, nor Mace; the
Kings Arms were not cut in their Seal: nor did they conferr honors on any.
And this Gentleman, that speaks so much of extending the Jurisdiction of their
Government throughout Ireland, might do them right, to let the Reader know that
precedent to that Article, in their Model of Government, this Irish Model of
Government.
is inserted, Item, That all and every person or persons within this Realm,
shall bear Faith and true Allegiance unto our said Sovereign Lord King Charles,
by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, His Heirs and
lawful Successors: And shall uphold and maintain His and Their lawful Rights,
and lawful Prerogatives, with the uttermost skill and power of every such
person and persons, against all manner of persons whatsoever.

65. Among the many particular Observations with which I have, and shall be
hereafter forced to charge the memory of the Reader, I beg of him, that he be
so just, as not to allow this Gentleman to calumniate the Nation for the Crimes
of particular men: And, when he repeats, even to tediousness, the same thing,
not to expect from me a reiteration of the same answer. Here he says again,
and as untruly as before, that the Irish Papists did distrust, disobey, oppose,
and excommunicate the Lord Lieutenant; and this Page 33.
upon no other ground, than that the Clergy of James-town did so; when I have
proved before out of his own Doctrine Observe Reader, that the Person of
Quality never once mentions the Bishops convened at James-town, nor James-town
it self; not out of any desire to conceal or pass over that un-Bishop-like
Error of theirs, But of purpose to delude thee, and make it seem a general Act
of the whole Nation, which was only the Transgression of a few Prelates.
of free Representatives, that the Nation opposed their proceedings. Again he
says, that the Irish Papists did conspire to murder the Lord Lieutenant, or,
which is worse, to deliver Page 33.
him to the worst sort of Murderers, that is to Cromwell, whom perhaps this
Gentleman served at that time, when he himself Fol. 30. ascribes this design
only to the Citizens of Waterford. If Arguments of this nature be admitted, I
can prove by the same Logic, that his Majesty's Army, under the Command of the
Duke of Ormond, was defeated* at the Battle of Rosse, in the year 43. for it is
certain, that some did shrink, and would have been guided in their retreat at
any rate; Therefore the Army ran away.

66. I was astonished to find, that this Gentleman, because I writ, that when
England, Scotland, and the Protestants of Ireland, wholly deserted the Royal
Cause, the Irish Page 33.
Catholics fought against the Regicides, in defense of his Majesty's Rights,
should break out into so immoderate passion against me. And asking of some
Friends, whence they conceived this should proceed, I was told by one of them,
better versed in the propriety of English words than I am, that the words, to
desert, in English, are always taken in a bad sense, and among Soldiers,
signify commonly, not only a desisting from action, but a joining with the
Enemy; which, I protest, was not, nor in truth could be my meaning, I say in
relation to those Protestant Royalists, that, having past unblemished through
all trials, and being overpow'red, and seeing no way (under Heaven) left them
to maintain the most just Cause, which they endeavored through all extremities
to assert, deseruerunt causam, gave it over, and laid down Arms. And this and
no other being the sense I intended that assertion should carry, I believe this
Gentleman himself will say, the Irish Catholics were the last in the three
Dominions that laid down Arms, and gave over to fight for the Royal Cause. And
it may be that he himself is a witness beyond all exception in the case, since
perhaps he might have assisted to take in Limerick and Galway; after which
sieges there was no further exercises of that kind given to Cromwell, and his
Associates, any where, in favor of his Majesty's interests. And this truth
this Irish Papist dares speak in the sight of Heaven, how bitter soever Page 33.
this Person of Quality is pleased to be against him, both in his expressions
and silence. And yet further can tell both him and others, that since he is
loath to call me Rebel (as he says) I am no less him, though if the arguments
to prove me a Rebel, and those may be alleged for his having been such, were
put in equal balance, his side would perhaps Page 33.
overweigh, not only a thousand, but even ten thousand to one.

67. Now setting apart (as I always do) the Protestant Royalists of England and
Scotland, and those of Ireland, who know and will aver, that they were
dismissed where the Irish Catholics prosecuted the War against the Regicides,
under the Lord Lieutenant and the Marquess of Clanrickard Lord Deputy of
Ireland, I will proceed to give the Reader a more faithful Narrative of the
actions of those times. As for the Irish Papists their being Regicides
themselves, at least so far as conspiring to murder his Majesty in effigy at
Page 34.
Waterford, etc. These are but flourishes that may amuse the ignorant, but will
not satisfy the judicious Reader.

68. King Charles the First, of happy memory, having been forced, during the
late troubles in the year 43. to make a Cessation of Arms with his Irish
Subjects, the Covenanting Party of the Scots in Ulstor, and some of the English
both in Ulster and Connaght that adhered to them, paying no Obedience to his
Majesty's Authority, by which it was concluded, continued their Acts of
Hostility, and found employment both for the Arms of the Irish Catholics in
them parts, and those whom the Lord Lieutenant authorized to join to suppress
them, while the Party in Munster for some time submitted to his Majesty's
Commands in accepting the Cessation, and in that space of time sent over Forces
to his assistance; following therein the Lord Lieutenants directions and
examples, who shipped from Dublin upon that occasion the greatest part of his
Army under his command in Leinster.

69. It is certain, that both English and Irish were engaged by duty to
transport their Arms into England for his Majesty's assistance; but to say,
that the Irish were engaged by Page 35.
Articles to do the same, is a mere fiction, and the more notable, that at this
time, the clamor the Kings Enemies in England had raised against Popery, and
his Majesty's countenancing of it, was so great, as particular persons of that
profession could scarce find admittance to serve in his Majesty's Army. At
length those English Protestants in Munster, in the Month of June 1644. upon
pretense of Plots and Machinations against them by the Irish Catholics, Page
35.
whereof to this day no proof was produced, nor in that time any color
alleged, without informing the chief Governor of the Kingdom, or giving him
the least intimation of their resolutions, deserted the Royal Cause; and thence
after, until the year 48. fought under the banner of his Majesty's Enemies,
and were enlisted in their pay.

70. I cannot blame this Gentleman, that he seeks good company for those whom
he meant to patronize, and would Page 36, 34, 35.
rank them with those under the Lord Lieutenants immediate Command in Dublin,
who near upon four years after, having seen two Armies of the Confederates,
under the Command of the Nuncio, near the City, fearing a second attempt,
having had their quarters entirely destroyed, obeyed his Majesty's command, in
giving up Dublin, and the rest of the Garrisons to the Parliament. To make the
parity reach home, the party in Munster should have attended the commands of a
lawful power; and although they have obeyed necessity, and laid down their
Arms; yet it had been their duty, as Subjects, and Soldiers, to have behaved
themselves as did the generous Officers at Dublin, who neither sued for, nor
accepted employment under the Enemy. And I may well say, that this their
defection was fatal to his Majesty's interest in Ireland; for had they kept
themselves in a condition to join with the rest of the English Protestants in
the Peace which was concluded in the year 46. the confusion, which was
introduced by the breach of it, had been prevented, and Owen o Neill had wanted
strength to countenance that rupture.

71. In the Year 48. the Lord of Inchiquin having been advertized out of France
of the resolution taken again to engage the Lord Lieutenant in the service of
Ireland, and the supreme Council of the Confederates having received the same
advertizement, both readily condescended to a Cessation of Arms in order to
the Peace which was to follow. And the Lord of Inchiquin, who, with wonderful
dexterity, managed that affair, maugre the opposition of some of the Officers,
prevailed with the Army under his Command to declare for the King. And it
cannot be denied that they proved very useful in the Cause, as well in the
prosecution, Page 34.
as after in assisting to take in Drogheda, Dundalk, and other Garrisons kept
by the Enemy, after the conclusion of the Peace. But the defeat at Rathmynes,
and the landing of Cromwell, made them think of bettering their fortunes, by
siding with the more successful Party. And their Fellows having already
betrayed the Garrisons entrusted to them, to Cromwell, those that remained in
the Army, when they found opportunity, stole away to them. And I appeal to the
English Protestant Officers of L^i^ster, that continued irremovably fixed in
their Principles of Loyalty, whether those be not the men, upon whom they kept
a watchful eye at Thomas town, when Cromwell past the Barroe? And Page 34.
whether they, and the Irish Officers, did not throng about the Person of the
Lord Lieutenant, when he went to their quarters, to prevent his Excellencies
being carried away Prisoner to the Enemy, Whereof the fear was the common
discourse of all men? But this Gentleman changes the Guards, and would persuade
us, that the Protestants, for Page 34.
preservation of their lives, were forced to keep as strict Guards against the
Irish Papists, as against Cromwell. Which is a notorious Calumny, as the Lord
Lieutenant, and the Leinster Protestant Officers can testify; unless this
Gentleman intends, that bickerings about quarters, and animosities between
particular men, which are frequent in the bent regulated Armies, of the same
Nation, should pass for acts of hostility, and unquestionable grounds of a
general distrust.

72. From the year 48 until the year 60. those this Gentleman's Protestants did
indeed swim down the stream, and Page 36.
partake in the actings, and of the rewards of Cromwell. But then they did what
became them, and merited a most benign interpretation from his Majesty of the
duty which they had so early and so eminently p^rformed. Yet let us not wholly
deprive the people of England of the good effects of that influence, which
their so public expressions of their affections to the King, had upon Ireland
likewise. And for the honor of those be it spoken, who with Oars and Sails
made Page 37.
their way up the River, and would not hear of any restriction to be put upon
the King, that all their fellows left not the Stream as willingly as they came
to it; and that in the convention some men have been heard to speak of other
matters than of bringing in the King free and unfettered.

73. Although this Gentleman should be so indulgent to those English
Protestants, as to endeavor to persuade us they were but Rebels seemingly;
Yet I am sure he cannot Page 38.
have the confidence to say, but that they, who imbrued their hands in the
blood of those that avowedly, and under his Majesty's authority fought for his
Interests, who besieged his Cities and Forts, and took his Ships at Sea,
over-acted their parts.

74. Here again he repeats the expelling the Kings Authority by the Irish
Papists, and takes the liberty to compare Page 38.
the actions of both parties, and favor those he pleads for with the best part
of that, which is all but supposition.

75. But at length he is come to an experiment; and against an experiment (says
he) there is no argument, and he constitutes my Lord Duke of Ormond himself the
Judge. So Page 39.
as the Reader may well think the^e rema^ns nothing but a definitive sentence
to be given. In the year 1650 (says he) when it came in question which were the
worst, the Irish Papists, or the seduced Protestants, he permitted all the
worthy Protestants, which till then had served under him, to come off to the
rest of the Protestants, though then headed with Ireton himself, esteeming them
safer with that real Regicide so accompanied, than with those pretended
Anti-Regicides so principled.

76. Had not the Reader already been acquainted with the nature of those
inferences which this Gentleman frequently makes, sometimes upon illusorie,
sometimes upon false grounds, This, which he calls an Experiment, might have
past for a Judgment in the Case: Since the Irish Catholics are ready to
acknowledge all for a truth, which his Grace the Duke of Ormond shall relate of
their proceedings. But to unriddle the mystery of this Experiment, it will be
necessary we should know the truth of the story, and thus you have it. After
the revolted Party in Munster had rendered Cromwell Master of that Province; and
that (to use the Duke of Ormonds own words) for want of due compliance from
Limerick and Galway, but principally from Limerick, it has been impossible for
us to raise or employ an Army against the Rebels; for to attempt this any
where on the other side of the Shanon, but near Limerick, and without the
absolute command of that City to secure it, could be no other than the very
certain ruin of the design in the very beginning of it, the Rebels power
being such, as to dissipate with ease the foundation which should be laid
there: And to have done it on this side of the Shanon, was impossible, since
the groundwork of the Army must be raised and supported from thence, which,
whl^st it was in forming, would have exhausted all the substance of these
parts, and not have effected the work: After (I say) the Lord Lieutenant was
brought to these straights, and that the difficulties were increa^ed by the
unhappy Censures of James-town, his Lordship resolved to leave the Kingdom,
hoping the distractions which sprung from that fatal Excommunication, might be
appeased by giving them a Catholic Governor. And, fearing the success of a
War managed by a powerful prevailing Enemy, he dismissed the English Troops
before Ireton knew of his design of leaving the Kingdom, or the weakness of his
condition; that so their coming off might be the more acceptable, and the
agreement to be made with them, the more advantageous; and that for these
Reasons. First, To satisfy their own earnest desires, that would not willingly
serve un^er other Conduct than his own. Secondly, All the regular ways of
maintaining the Army must have been clear laid aside, the Charges being far
greater than the Taxes and Contributions would satisfy: and the English,
besides their being unacquainted with that Province, had no inclination to that
course the Soldier was necessitated to take for his subsistence, nor his
Excellency to put them upon it. Thirdly, The Lord Lie^tenant might fear, that
if the English had to the last gasp continued in Arms, with the Irish, such
their perseverance would be accounted an obstinate willfulness, and an
unnatural inclination in them of adhering to so hated a Rebel-party, against
their Countrymen; and that upon the upshot they might have received harder
measure than the Irish themselves. Fourthly, His Excellency might have
considered, that their Parents and Kindred, and those that would assist to
maintain them, upon laying down Arms, were, either in England, or in those
parts of Ireland, possessed by the Enemy. Lastly, He might have considered, that
so faithful a Party, as they were, being dispersed, might be able to have made
some impression upon that humor of many among the Rebels that had least
rancour in it, and have prepared the minds of men for the day of trial,
whenever God was pleased to give the occasion. And it is not to be doubted,
that some amongst them were fully instructed how to proceed in order to his
Majesty's service.

77. And now this Gentleman must give me leave to say, that Experiments,
against which there is no arguing, must be Page 39.
of some other nature than this he delivers us: And that the Text being such as
we find it, the Comments he makes upon it are of the same Edition; save that
where he extends the acknowledgement of his Majesty's Mercy to his Protestant
Subjects, he must allow me to say, that it cannot be more Page 40.
hearty, and more submiss in them, than in the Irish Catholics.

78. I am now come to that place, to which, upon former frequent repetitions of
the same thing, I transferred the Page 41.
Reader; and that is the Year 1641. And because I find that this Gentleman of
Quality, and the Man of the dark in England, do conferr notes, I shall only
here repeat what answer I gave the other, upon part of the same subject: Your
Grace knows with what horror the Irish Nation looks upon those massacres and
murders in the North, in the beginning I^ish Colors F^lded, Page
of the Rebellion, committed by the rascal multitude upon their innocent,
unarmed, and unprovided Neighbors; but the number of two hundred thousand
(although this Writer comes short one hundred thousand in his account, of what
the Convention-Commissioners gave up to his Majesty in their Answer to the
Irish Agents) is so exorbitantly vast, that a stranger, who finds the
dimensions of Ireland in the Map, and understands this certain truth, that
there were then in Ireland one hundred Natives for every Person these men would
pass under the notion of an Englishman, will readily conclude, that the whole
Island is but one City, so thronged with Inhabitants, as men cannot walk in the
streets unjustled.

79. I will not extenuate the sufferings of the English in their personal
Estate, which indeed is very great: Nay, I Page 41.
hope to be able to say, That it was more than the fee-simple of all the Lands
which his Majesty's mercy will allow to have been forfeited in Ireland, is
worth. But that this Gentleman should impute to the Irish Catholics, that they
did pretend his Majesty's Authority for raising the Rebellion, is Page 41.
to lay that to their charge, which was the sole and individual act of Sir
Phelim o Neill, who showing the People the broad-seal of an old Patent he had
lying by him, published that to be the Warrant from his Majesty for what he
acted. And I hope that unfortunate Gentleman himself has made some
satisfaction to the Divine Justice for so heinous a sin, by his free
acknowledging it at the time of his Execution, and by his penitent tears, and
freq^ent and public cries, that God would be merciful to him for so foul a
Crime.

80. Yet, as there have been some of our late King's Ministers in Ireland,
that, in favor of his Enemies, have endeavored industriously by the
exam^nation of Witnesses, even upon the Rack, to cause this Imposture to pass
for Truth: So this Gentleman, out of the abundance of his kindness to the Irish
Catholics, dictates the fiction, and makes all of them partake of that, which
Sir Phelim o Neill did wholly ascribe to himself.

81. When this Gentleman cites these words of King Charles the First, of ever
happy memory, Albeit We do extremely Page 4^.
detest the odious Rebellion which the Recusants of Ireland have, without
ground or color, raised against Us, Our Crown, and Dignity, he might have
remem^red those that immediately follow, viz. Which words ^e do in all humility
conceive to have proceeded from the m^s-represe^tations of our Adversaries, and
therefore do protest we have been most maliciously traduced to your Majesty.
And nothing can be more evident, than that Sir William Parsons, and Sir John
Burlace, then Lords Justices, and such of the Council, who from the beginning
favored those that opposed his Majesty in England, gave them this Character,
being glad to make the King Author of so indefinite a Charge, as themselves had
retracted before. For having issued forth a Proclamation the very day they
discovered the Conspiracy, and published that it was intended by some
evil-affected Irish: they having found men's general resentment of those so
general words, soon after, by a second Proclamation, printed and published,
declared, That they only intended by the word, Irish Papists, such of the mere
Irish in the Province of Ulster, as had plotted, contrived, and been Actors in
that Treason, and others, who adhered to them: and that they did not any way
intend, or mean thereby any of the old English of the Pale, or any other parts
of the Kingdom. We may join this to this Gentleman's former Experiment, and say
with much truth, that mis-informations were the least of those Ministers
crimes. As for those killing inferences which he drives from such springs, and
builds on such foundations, I leave them to the Reader to be considered.

82. I must not hope to dis-intangle even that particular Fallacy which this
Gentleman makes use of, almost in every Page, of attributing what is the Crime
of Particular men to the whole Nation, until he gives over to write upon this
subject.

83. Here we have him, in the Year 46. making the Attempt of Owen o Neill to
surprise the Lord Lieutenant, and Page 42, and Page 43.
his Party, in their return to Dublin, the general Act of the Nation: and
laying to their charge, that the Council and Congregation obliged General
Preston to exercise all acts of hostility against the Lord Lieutenant by name.
Although this be the first time that ever I heard of such an Oath; yet I will
easily believe, that the Nuncio, and those that went to besiege his Excellency
at Dublin, would not scruple at the exacting of such an Oath. But wherefore
does not this Gentleman deal so ingenuously with the Reader, as to let him
know, that those who gave Order to prosecute the Lord Lieutenant, were those
only that gave Orders to prosecute all Confederate Irish Catholics, who stood
in Arms against them, and had before seized on their very Persons, who, by the
general Assembly of the Confederate Catholics, were established Governors
over themselves, and made them Prisoners in the City of Kilkeny? Will any man
say, that the English Nation is answerable for the actings of Cromwell, or the
Rump? It is much pity, that the Gentleman, who has so good a faculty in
commenting sharply, has no^ chosen better Texts.

84. We are now come to the Year 1647. in which year this Gentleman says, that
the general Assembly of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland employed
Commissioners Page 44
to Rome, France, and Spain, to invite a foreign Power to Ireland. It were to be
wished, this Person of Quality did not imagine Truth to be such a Rock, as he
dares not approach, but by several windings. The plain relation of that Affair
is here given the Reader, by a Person of Quality entrusted with that
Negotiation.

85. The Power of those who were in Arms in England against his late Majesty
of ever blessed memory, was in the Year 1647. considerable in Ireland, The
Defense of his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects of Ireland, against the
O^jection made lately, touching their proceedings in the Y^a^ 164^, relating to
the Protect^on of some forei^ Prince.
who being then free from any opposition in England, and in absolute power to
dispose of their Forces for carrying on their Design in Ireland, the said
Catholics fore-see^ng the danger they were in, met in the winter season of
that year, in a general Assembly at Kilkeny, where they took in Consideration,
That his said late Majesty was in restraint; That all addresses to him were
forbidden; And that some of the Members of the Parliament, who spoke in favor
of his said Majesty, were excluded.

86. In that sad extremity there being no access to his said late Majesty, for
imploring either his Justice or Mercy, all Laws Humane and Divine did allow the
said Catholics to take some other Course in order to their Defense and
Preservation; not against his said Majesty, but against those who laid violent
hands on his sacred Person, who designed the abolishing of the Regal Authority,
and resolved to destroy and extirpate the said Catholics.

87. The said Catholics therefore, in the Month of January, in the said Year
1647. did in the same Assembly conclude, that the Marq^ess ^^ Antrim, Viscount
Musker, now Earl of Clankar^hy, (...) ^coffry Brown Esquire, should be employed
into France, ^^e Bishop of Ferns, and Nicholas Plunkett Esquire, into Rome; and
some others to Spai^. That the said Agents sent ^^ France, were by their
applications to his now sacred Majesty, then Prince of Wales, and to the Queen
his Mother, to declare the danger the said Catholics apprehended, and humbly
to beseech them to find out some expedient, by which those Calamities might be
diverted. That the said Agents were likewise entrusted, in case of absolute
necessity, to implore the aid and protection of some foreign Princes; but they
were lim^ted not to act any thing in order to such foreign protection, other
than by the direction of the said Persons who were employed to receive his
Majesty's commands. That upon the said application made to his Majesty, the
Duke of Ormonds Commission was renewed for his being Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and his Excellency qualified with Power to conclude a Peace with the
said Catholics. Whereupon, without excepting the Concessions to be had on the
Conclusion of that Peace, all further proceedings concerning the Protection of
any Foreiner were stopped, and the said Agents recalled, they, nor any of them,
having ever moved or acted any thing relating to any Foreiners protection. That
the Agents so employed to Rome, on their return, in the Year 1648. did in the
public Assembly then sitting, give (...) a satisfactory account of their said
Negotiation, that it encouraged the whole Assembly to hasten the Conclusion of
the Peace then in agitation. Which can be testified by very many yet living,
whereof several are now in this City: and that accordingly a Peace was soon
after concluded in the said year 1648. Wherein the Concessions which are
absolute, are only removing of Incapacities, and Indemnity, for ^^e lives of
the said Catholics: the rest being temporary, until his Majesty's further
pleasure in Parliament were known.

88. And the said Catholics are so conscious to themselves of the resolution
they took from the beginning to persevere irremovably faithful, through all
extremities, to his Majesty's Interest, that they are well assured, though
those who now possess their E^tates, have the Books of the said Irish
Assemblies, and the Transactions of the Councills entrusted by those
Assemblies, in their hands; yet can they not make it appear, that there was any
actual Treaty or Offer, for transferring the Subjection, naturally due from
them to his Majesty, or the Right of his Majesty's Dominion over them, to any
Foreiner whatsoever: or any thing tending thereunto, but what is herein
acknowledged.

89. To aggravate the hainousness of this Mission, which was no other than is
related, he adds, that the Commissioners to Rome were authorized to declare,
they raised Arms Page 44, 45.
for the freedom of the Catholic Religion: And then he flies out to those
Excursions, with which he garnishes each Dish of the great Feast he has with so
much pain and industry prepared for his Party. Certainly (says he) if ever
they may be believed to speak truth, it is when they speak to the Pope. Page 45.
And this truth, which is sought to be extorted from them by so witty an
argument, is a truth I never heard denied by any of them, viz. That they, in
part, raised Arms for the freedom of the Catholic Religion: (though partly
too, nay primarily, at first, and in relation to the generality of Irish
Catholics, who were forced out, for the safety of their lives and natural
being) Nay, it is probable, that they instructed their Commissioners to press
this Article, wherein his Holiness was most interested, to the Pope, as an
especial motive to procure them assistance. But was this the whole truth? Did
they raise Arms for no other end, than for the freedom of the Catholic
Religion? Nay did they raise Arms for no other end than this, and the safety
of their lives too? Will not this Gentleman, that believes them so obliged to
tell the Pope the Truth, have so much charity for them, as to think they
likewise spoke truth in the sight of Heaven, when they protest and swear before
God, his Saints, and his Angels, that they will bear, during their lives, true
Faith and Allegiance to their Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God King
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, his Heirs, and lawful Successors; and
that they will, to their power, during their lives, defend, uphold and maintain
all his and their just Prerogatives, Estates and Rights, etc? Could this
Gentleman, that set down in his Book the very Oath, be ignorant of what himself
writes? Or can his malice be so great, as to think, that those who meant to
perform that part of the Oath which concerned Religion, were resolved to be
willful Perjurers in that which concerns the King?

90. This Gentleman, to show how rigorously penal this freedom of the Catholic
Religion was to be to the Protestants, Page 45.
instances Dean York, who was forced to bury his own Children, that dyed at
Galway, in a Garden. Certainly if there had not been many indiscreet Zealots in
Ireland, the Kingdom had not felt the miseries to which it is reduced. But they
were far from being all so. And to oppose an instance to this, Sir Cyprian
Horsfall, a Protestant, by the allowance of David Rooth, Bishop of Ossorie, was
buried within the Cathedral Church of Kilkeny.

91. Taking only upon trust (for this Gentleman acknowledges he has our Papers)
what he speaks of those instructions, Page 46.
to which he again resorts, we may well say, that his Logic has taught him to
make strong inferences upon weak grounds. For taking both the Texts together,
which this Gentleman, to make the Comment the fuller, has divided; and
reflecting upon the evil times, and the necessity to which the Catholics were
reduced, and how nothing was to be acted, but by the advice of those that were
employed into France to his Majesty, and the Queen his Mother, it was no
wonder, supposing the Pope would be munificent toward the maintenance of that
War, which, besides the interests of Catholic Religion, had for scope the
re-inthroning of the King, that his Holiness should be admitted to receive
reasonable satisfaction by the Articles: and to oblige the Pope to descend to
such Conditions, as might be granted in matters of Religion, that they were to
represent to his Holiness the lowness of their own condition, the power and
strength of their Enemies; and to solicit for considerable aides whereby to
maintain a War; And not only that, but to ascertain and secure the same. Page
46.


92. This, and no other, being the sense of those Instructions, cited by this
Gentleman himself: And that their imploring of aid and protection tending to no
other end: Is it not strange, he could conclude with saying, Still the Page 47.
Pope is their King? Does it appear by this, That the Irish Papists hang, as
their Faith in God, so their Loyalty to the Prince, on the Popes sleeve? Yet
after his accustomed manner, Page 47.
he comments thus upon that Text, and would liken the protection they sought to
the power of the Protector Page 47.
in England, which beyond Royal was Tyrannical; although some men by elaborated
speeches strove to make it Legitimate, by conferring Kingship on Cromwell.

93. We are now come to the Year 1648. and here again we find this Gentleman
forgets not to allege, with the same truth he had before, that the Irish
Papists disowned the Peace Page 47.
then made, disobeyed, opposed, conspired to murder, excommunicated, and
banished his Majesty's Viceroy. But should I repeat my Answers, as often as he
reiterates his Charge, my Reply would grow to a Volume. And therefore I referr
the Reader to what is formerly said: as I do to what belongs to his summary
Conclusion.

94. It is true, that in some points of Faith, the Catholics oppose both the
Protestants and Sectaries; but the Catholic Page 48.
and Protestant Royalist agree in point of Loyalty. The fighting against the
Regicides, or Sectaries.
And to prove this by an Experiment, more convincing than that which this
Gentleman formerly gave us, these two Parties joined for two or three years
under the same Command, in the same Army, to fight against those this
Gentleman's Protestants, which can be no other than Sectaries. And if not the
fighting, but the ground and end of the fighting Page 48.
proves which is the good Subject: This reaches home to those, that to palliate
their evil intentions, feigned themselves Protestant Royalists. And when
Cromwell went into Ireland, deserting his Majesty's service, presented him with
the fruits of their treachery, the City of Cork, and the rest of those strong
holds in Munster, whilst the true Protestant Royalist, and the Irish Catholic,
stuck to their Principles: And not content to abstain from the Rebels in
Ireland, many of them adhered to his Majesty in his banishment, and followed
his fortune abroad. Now how could Sampson himself tie their tails together,
that scarce ever met, but as Enemies, is a riddle to me. Page 49.


95. The reason why I said that the power of this Gentleman's Protestants in
Ireland, was no greater than his Majesty was pleased to make it, was grounded
on the reports which were daily brought to London of the Phanaticks menaces,
Page 49.
not to give way to the execution of any of the Kings Orders, by which any of
the Natives was to be restored: And knowing that there wanted no hands among
the Protestant Royalists, and the Irish Catholics, sufficient to bring them to
reason, I slighted their threats, and their power, to second them, by saying,
that it is no greater (as in truth it is not) than his Majesty is pleased to
make it. As for the Elogium that follows, if the Gentleman holds himself to my
intention, he must allow that it wholly concerns the Phanaticks.

96. This Gentleman says after his manner, That the Contents of those Articles
are in themselves unwarrantable, except Page 50.
in case of necessity, which has no Law. His Majesty Concerning the Ple^ of
Justice grounded on the Articles.
(says he) having condescended by them, that the Militia, Treasury, and Army
of fifteen thousand Foot, two thousand five hundred Horse, of Irish Papists,
and even, in effect, the Legistative power, should be in the hands of twelve
men to be chosen by Irish Papists; and that there should be no alteration in
England, of what they in Ireland should think sit to transmit to his Majesty;
and that the Rebels should be pardoned, without consent of Parliament, when
his Majesty in Parliament adjudged such pardons before conviction to be ru^l
and void; and that they assumed the Legislative power by repealing Poynings
Act; all which (says he) is against Law, and the Oath the King takes at his
Coronation.

97. What a task would the answering of all these Heads, this Gentleman vents
at a breath, prove to me, if these Articles of Peace were not so common, as to
be in the hands of very many.

This Gentleman will give me leave to ask him whether he himself believes the
King broke his Coronation Oath, or Page 51.
gave away his Militia, because he granted that this so considerable an Army
should be kept on foot under the conduct of his Lieutenant of Ireland, for
maintenance of his interests, in so great streights as his Majesty was reduced
to, at a time when his enemies had thrice that number in the Field against him?
Did the King break his Oath, or give away his right in the Treasury, because he
gave power to his Lieutenant, with the advice of certain select Persons of the
Natives to levy money for the maintenance of this Army, and for other charges
incident to the Government? Or do those select persons assume the legislative
power of the Kingdom, because it is inserted in those Articles, that both
Houses of Parliament may consider what they shall think convenient touching the
repeal or suspension of the Statute commonly called Poynings Act? And cannot
his Majesty pardon his Subjects of Ireland, although he give his Royal Assent
to an Act past in the Parliament of England, by which such pardon before
conviction is declared null and void?

98. He adds, That although the Irish Catholics chiefly Page 51.
pleaded for restitution of their Estates by virtue of those Articles; yet if
they had prevailed therein upon the score of that plea, it must in consequence
have adjudged for them the benefit of all the other Articles as a Right. But
this Gentleman foresees not, that he is to convince himself of an untruth, fol.
79. where he says, and that truly, That the most essential parts of the
Articles of Peace were to be finally obliging, Page 79.
but as they were to be confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the next Parliament
which should be assembled after the perfecting of the said Articles of Peace.
So as his Majesty's promises are partly absolute, partly relative to his
further pleasure: But no Wood comes amiss to this Gentleman, of which Arrows
may be made to shoot at the Irish Catholics. And although we find
contradiction in his Words; yet there is never any in his Intentions, when the
question is of aspersing them.

99. This Gentleman might have taken notice, that the Irish Catholics have in
all the Papers published by them, Page 52.
and in all their pleadings before his Majesty, been so careful of the
intention his Royal Father of happy memory expressed to see the just Adventurer
satisfied, that they made no opposition thereunto. And although both Parties
were allowed, while the substance of his Majesty's gracious Declaration of the
30th. of November 1660. was controverted, to speak their minds: yet since his
Majesty's sentence is definitive in the point, their duty obliges him to
acqu^esce, as they did, long before, in order to the Declaration at Breda.

100. And let not this Gentleman trouble himself to find an answer for that
which P. W never intended to object. For he is confident His Majesty was not
under an Obligation precedent and opposite to those Articles, which might
extend to Page 52, and 53.
Ireland as a legal engagement. And therefore his excuses in behalf of the late
King were very superfluous: As it is untrue, that the breach of those Articles
on the Irish side, occasioned so long and so tedious a War. But the dividing
Page 53, 54.
of the Bear's skin, as far as it will go, has at this time raised the
malice of men to the height it is grown into: As the hope to attain the
dividing of it did at first foment the Rebellion, by the testimony of the best
of Kings, in that incomparable Legacy, which not long before his death he left
to the World. But some kind of Zeales counts all merciful moderation
lukewarmness, and rather be counted cruel, than cold, and is not seldom more
greedy to kill the Bear for his skin, than for any harm he has done; the
Confiscation of men's Estates being more beneficial, than the charity of saving
their Lives, or mending their Errors.

101. I shall entreat the Reader to observe, that in the several Dishes served
at this Feast, all is but Pork in a different dress. The difficult Conditions
which the murderers of his Father forced, compelled, and necessitated his
Majesty to grant, are written in Capital Letters: and the breach of the Peace,
which cannot be proved, is taken pro concesso: And thence, but not without too
much straining, this Gentleman inferrs, That the breach on their side
contributed to, if Page 54.
not acted that unparalled Crime. And he again comments upon the word freely,
as if his Majesty driven to so great streights, might not do that freely, which
he did upon difficult Page 54.
Conditions.

102. Again we have the broken Peace served up. But now he adds, to garnish the
Dish, That he had proved the Page 55.
violation of it by undeniable evidences, when the Reader is yet to seek even
for any plausible argument to induce him to believe the breach of it. And
again, The Irish Papists despised, disowned, rejected, expelled, banished, and
excommunicated Page 55.
the Lord Lieutenant, and all adhering to him, and in him, his Majesttes
Authority: Whereas we have already demonstrated, that the Nation was innocent
of that Crime.

103. I cannot imagine, wherefore a man, that shows himself so witty in
expressing his malice, should repeat in every Leaf, the Heads of his odious
Accusation against the Irish Catholics: unless that like a Fiddler, who had in
charge to sing the Ballad, he meant at every close to put his party in mind of
the Burden of the Song.

104. Now indeed we have somewhat new, but of the same stamp. For this
Gentleman alleges, That the Irish Papists being not able to keep the Condition
expressed in their Page 56.
Recognition which preceded the Articles, inviolable, they broke them. And
because the Reader may have all before him, I do here insert that Act of
Recognition.

His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects (as thereunto bound by Allegiance,
Duty, and Nature) do most humbly and Articles of Peace, Page 1, or 6.
freely acknowledge, and recognize their Sovereign Lord King Charles to be
lawful and undoubted King of this Kingdom of Ireland, and other his Highness
Realms and Dominions. And his Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects
apprehending with a deep sense the sad condition whereunto his Majesty is
reduced, as a further humble testimony of their Loyalty, do declare, that they,
and their posterity, for ever, to the uttermost of their power, even to the
expense of their blood and fortunes, will maintain and uphold his Majesty, his
Heirs, and lawful Successors, their Rights, Prerogatives, Government, and
Authority, and thereunto freely and heartily will render all due Obedience.

105. No man denies that this Recognition was made by their ruling power. And
it might be accounted a natural and genuine Inference, that those that brake it
denied themselves the benefit of the Articles of Peace. But that the ruling
Power of the Irish Catholics published the breach thereof to the World, or
that their ruling Power made that Doclaration Page 56.
of the 12th. of August 1650. is an evident untruth, as is formerly proved.

106. As for this Gentleman's Dilemma here in the 56. Page of his Book, to
prove, That even those who made these Articles with the Lord Lieutenant, were
guilty of their breach, Page 56.
it is answered, That such of that Assembly as broke them, or did not
effectually observe, as much as lay in them, the Conditions of the Recognition,
did really transgress the duty expressed therein; yet not when they made those
Articles, but when they broke them so. For it is evident, that every one had
sufficient power and liberty to observe them in his own particular, if he
pleased. But to say therefore, that such of that Assembly as preserved
themselves from disobedience, were answerable for other men (specially since it
is acknowledged that they resigned the power to others, even by those Articles)
or were abusers of his Majesty's Authority and service, must be a very wild
infeference. Wherefore our Gentleman's conditional not able, and were able, and
his Conclusion intended thence, is a mere Fallacy, confounding Times and
Abilities, and Universal, with Particulars, and Effects with their Causes, and
the obligations of using their best endeavors with that of the future being of
things, and of a success which God alone could ascertain.

107. Now we are come to the Oaths of Association, and to another Oath, by
which this Gentleman would prove, Page 57.
that the Peace was designedly broken before it was made. As nothing did ever
yet conduce more to the vindication of Charles the First, of ever blessed
memory, from the horrid Calumnies with which his Enemies did asperse him, than
the printing of his Letters taken at the Battle of Nasby: So with due reverence
to his Sacred name, I may say, that nothing could have befallen of more
advantage to the Irish Catholics, than that all their Books, and all the
original Papers of their home and foreign Transactions, have come into the hands
of their Adversaries; and that the whole substance of them should be thus
spread abroad, and be thus illustrated with such a Comment, as leaves nothing
unsaid that Art or Mal^ce could suggest. For if they had not been masters of
those Books, and Papers, they who now accuse the Roman Catholics to have
sought for assistance, in their greatest necessities, from a foreign protection;
would then proclaim to the World, that they were become the Subjects of another
Prince, and had sworn Fealty to him. They that now, by all the Cavills and
Fallacies imaginable, endeavor to find out Contradictions in their Oaths, and
do comment only upon their Intentions; would then publish, that they had
expressly sworn to exclude his Majesty, and to choose a King of the Nation. They
who now by weak inferences would prove, that the Irish Papists mea^t to
suppress Protestant Religion; would then averr, that they had sworn to
extirpate all Protestants, the Protestant Prelates especially. They who now
only upbraid them for having proceeded against the Laws of the Kingdom; would
then loudly declare, that they had clean, laid them aside; and that they had
introduced, and were sworn to maintain the Brehon Law. Their Crimes would have
been as many, and as heinous as their Adversaries could fancy them; and their
actions would have been conveyed to Posterity in a torrent of horror and
perfidy. But now they give us the Text out of their own Record, and nothing is
left them but to comment upon it; which this Gentleman omits not to do, with
such a sophistry, and so great a willingness, to make them seem black and
hideous, as the Catholics may esteem it happy for them, that he is not wholly
left at large to follow his invention.

108. But although this Person of Quality may have those Records in his
custody, yet I will give him my assistance to sort them, by letting him know
the Time and Occasion upon which these several Oaths were taken. And with his
good leave I must tell him, that this which he sets forth to be in the first
roll, is a complicated Oath, to which the later part, which begins Moreover,
was not added until the Year Page 58. Page 59.
1646. In which year likewise, the Oath of adhering to the present Union of the
Confederate Catholics that rejected the Peace was administered. And it might
very well have happened, that the Grand Committee, upon failer of the
performance of the Articles of Peace then to be concluded, obliged themselves
to reassume their Union. But this must have been in the Year 1645. before the
Peace of 46. was assented unto by a Party, that in favor of the Nuncio, who
opposed it, moved all scruples imaginable; and might have objected, that if
such another as Sir William Parsons, who would not perform those Articles, came
to govern the Kingdom, what was to be done in that Case? This remedy might
perhaps have been thought proper for their satisfaction. But that this should
have happened in the Year 48. is an assertion as vain, as it is malicious. For
the World knows that the Peace of 48. was treated and concluded unanimously by
the Assembly, the Lord Lieutenant being in the same City with them. And as to
the Committee, the name and use of it was very superfluous in a place where a
few Persons daily brought the sense of the House in difficult matters to his
Excellency, and what seemed to be knotty of the part of his Excellency, was
upon all occasions resolved by the Assembly, that constantly sat at so near a
distance.

109. I shall likewise give the Reader this faithful relation, as to the other
Oaths. When the Peace of 46. was rejected by the greater Vote of those, who, by
the terror of the Northern Army, by the suggestion of the Nuncio's Page 64, 65.
active Emissaries, and by the affright of an Excommunication, were induced to
violate the public Faith; Which undoubtedly is the ground of all the
sufferings of the Nation: Then it was that the same Assembly framed that Oath
of adhering to the Union of the Confederate Roman Catholics that rejected the
Peace. And having chosen a supreme Council, composed for the most part of the
rejecters of the Peace, they for that time conceived themselves secure. But the
People having had some respite from the fears they had before entertained,
coming to a new Election for the succeeding Assembly, such, for the most part,
were chosen to be of the supreme Council, that had served in that place before,
and were known to have good inclinations to settle the Kingdom under his
Majesty's Government. Wherefore the Prelates distrusting those hands, into
which the power of the Confederates was committed, got that part which begins
with the word Moreover, to be added to the Oath of Page 59.
Association; and the general Assembly, that knew it was, and always kept it
in their power to approve of, or consent to any Peace they thought fit, gave
them satisfaction in that which could no longer interrupt a settlement, than
they list.

110. Having thus placed the Gentleman's Records in due order, and given the
Reader some light to lead him through Page 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68.
a discourse knotty and perplexed, and endeavored to be made so, if I be not
much deceived, I shall descend to the Commentary. But I shall first desire the
Reader to consider, that I take not upon me, with relation to these happy
times, when the Restoration of his Majesty has given life to his Laws, to
justify the Irish Catholics against Mr. Attorney at the Bar. His Majesty's
Mercy is their sole plea, and the Sanctuary to which they resort.

111. Wherefore laying aside those legal Trials (by which infallibly, those who
set up a Government, in opposition to his Majesty's, by what hand soever that
Government was managed, those that swear to obey and ratify all the Orders and
Decrees made, and to be made by such a Government, would be adjudged Traitors)
let us resort back to those confused times, and examine whether, as things then
were carried, it might stand with the rules of Reason, and Self-preservation,
to admit, that (to swear) to bear true Faith and Allegiance to the King, and to
swear to obey and ratify all the Orders and Decrees made, and to be made by
the Supreme Council, are flat and known contradictories? To prevent confusion,
they swear to obey the Orders of that Government they had set up themselves;
and if we shall allow to the nature of the times those things which men seduced
think necessary for their preservation, why should it be a flat contradictory
to say, that at the same time they bare true Faith and Allegiance to the King,
not by desisting Page 60.
from doing those things, without which they could not subsist, but by
performing those eminent duties to which their Faith and Allegiance at all
Times, upon all Occasions, and in all Conditions subject them? That is, not to
pay the Fealty we owe him to any other Prince; not to assist or countenance the
doing of the least injury to his Person; to forbear taking any Oath that tends
to exclude him, and his Posterity, from his Dominions; to fight against those
that do; and since we are unhappily fallen from our Obedience, to return to our
former state, as soon as possibly we can; and things of this nature.

112. Certainly if this Gentleman be not extremely innocent, he is very
forgetful, that holds so close to the Law. And I assure him, That to maintain
the fundamental Laws of Page 60.
the Kingdom, and the free exercise of the Catholic Religion, were, in those
times, thought to be things very compatible, however he takes them to be
Contradictories.

113. He aggravates the matter (and so he might, if we did forget the nature of
the Times) with their swearing not to seek or receive any pardon or protection
for any thing done, or to be done, touching the general Cause. But allowing not
Page 61.
the Legality, but the Existence of their Government, what could have preserved
it without such ties?

114. This Gentleman is always at a fault when his discourse tends any way to
Catholic Religion. Our Tenet is quite contrary; for we know, that we cannot
receive, nor the Pope give a pardon for sins to come. Page 61.


115. Now we are come to that part which was added to the Oath in the Year 46.
and he tells us, they swear not to submit to any Peace, made, or to be made,
without the approbation of the general Assembly of the Catholics. Of a^l Page
61.
the parts of the Oath, this methinks, ought least to be oppugned. For it is no
wonder, that they should expect to have their own consent and approbation to
attend any Peace, that would be concluded, they themselves being the most
numerous Representative of the Nation. Had they confined it to the supreme
Council, that in truth might be thought a limitation.

116. But this Gentleman, to aggravate their guilt, makes use, in my opinion,
of a very speculative Argument, saying, That if the King did not so much as
name them, but Page 61.
make a Peace with them, as if they had never done any offense, they were
debarred of it by this Oath. And I desire to be informed, how it might
otherwise be known, than by the consent and approbation of an Assembly, that
they accepted of such a Peace?

117. I have already mentioned how the Assembly gave way to the Propositions
made by the Clergy, and had them confirmed by Oath, being loath to displease so
powerful a Party, in a matter which was no longer binding than an Assembly
thought fit. And therefore this Gentleman may, without Reply from me, comment
upon those Propositions as he thinks fit. But, with his leave, he will not
gather by any thing therein, That none should be admitted to live in Page 61.
Ireland but Papists. The French King maintains the Catholic Clergy and Laity
in the public and free exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion and Function
throughout France, in as full luster and splendor as it was in the Reign of
St. Lewis, yet he excludes not the Hugonotts.

118. Had this Gentleman dealt fairly with the Reader, he had not entertained
him with Propositions which interested Page 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70
71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79.
men do commonly make for their own advantage, and his Comments upon them: nor
with Instructions which upon every occasion are subject to alteration, and were
given those that agitated the affairs in 46. which I hope he will not deny. But
he should have laid before him the Result and Conclusion in the Articles of
Peace in 48. and told him what a numerous People the King was to satisfy, who,
without excluding his Protestant Subjects, might partake of his favors. But
this was not his design. He knew nothing could be grateful to the Party he
intended to pleasure, but the foulest aspersions, whether right or wrong, that
could be laid on those, whose Estates they possess. And we cannot say, but he
has been faithful to them, how unjust soever to Catholics.

119. Now passing over those things, which the Gentleman Page 80.
himself calls Digressions, and indeed are no other than a methodical way o^
venting his bitterness, I shall present the Reader, instead of those horrid
Oaths (as this Gentleman calls them) those, than which indeed no written
wickedness can ascend higher, with other Oaths that have been esteemed more
religious: Oaths taken by the Saints themselves: Oaths taken by the Fautors of
Cromwells Tyranny, and the Well-wishers of his Kingship.

I A. B. Being nominated a Member of the Council of State The Form of an
Expurgatory Oath, taken by the Counc^l of State, Feb. 22. 1648.
by this present Parliament, do testify, that I do adhere to this present
Parliament in the Maintenance and Defense of the public Liberty, and Freedom
of this Nation, as it is now declared by this Parliament (by whose Authority I
am constituted a Member of the said Council) and in the Maintenance and Defense
of their Resolutions concerning the settling of the Government of this Nation
for the future in way of a Republic, without King, or House of Peers; And I do
promise in the sight of God, that (through his Grace) I will be faithful in
performance of the Trust committed to me, as aforesaid, and th^rein faithfully
pursue the Instructions given to the said Council by this present Parliament;
and not to reveal or disclose any thing in whole, or in part, directly or
indirectly, that shall be debated or resolved upon in the Council, without the
command and direction of the Parliament, or without the order or allowance of
the major part of them that shall be present at such Debates or Resolutions. In
confirmation of the Premises I have hereto subscribed my Name.

I A. B. Do hereby declare, that I renounce the pretended Oath of Abjuration of
the King, and Royal Issue.
Title of Charles Stuart, and the whole Line of the late King James, and of
every other Person, as a single Person pretending to the Government of these
Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Duminions and Territories
thereunto belonging; And that I will, by the grace and assistance of Almighty
God, be true and faithful to this Commonwealth, against any King, single
Person, and House of Peers, and every of them; And hereunto I subscribe my Name.

And I shall give the Reader that pure, that holy Oath indeed, the Solemn
League and Covenant, which was the Head-spring of those others, and the
Fountain of all Evils that overflowed the three Nations.

WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, The Solemn League and
Covenant
Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one
King, and being of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the Glory of
God, and the Advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
the Honor and Happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true
public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private
Condition is included: And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots,
Conspiracies, Attempts, and Practices of the Enemies of God against the true
Religion, and Professors thereof, in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion; and how much their rage,
power and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and exercised,
whereof the deplorable Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the
d^stressed Estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public
testimonies: We have now at last (after other means of Supplication,
Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for the preservation of our
selves, and our Religion, from utter ruin and destruction, according to the
commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of Gods
people in other Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to
enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant; wherein we all subscribe,
and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most High, do
Swear,

1. That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several Places and callings, the Preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, against our common Enemies: The Reforma^^on of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches. And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God, in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity, in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing, that
we, and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy (that is Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues: And that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy in our several
vocations endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms.
That the World may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his. Majesty's just power and
greatness.

4. We shall also, with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such,
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign ^unishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require, or deserve; or the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them, for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded; and settled by both Parliaments, We
shall, each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor, that
they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; and that
Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Article.

6. We shall also, according to our places and callings in this common Cause
of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union, and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this
Cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same,
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; And what
we are not able our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented and removed: All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many Sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the World
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms; especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel; that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof; and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our Lives; which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us: And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and Man, to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation; That the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, and with a
true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly besee hing the Lord
to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association
and Covenant, To the Glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and the Peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

120. Now this Gentleman, to complete the work of his parties entire
satisfaction should give us Commentaries in excuse of these Oaths, and where he
found the matter grow knotty and hard, he might, as in the Case of the Irish,
against whom he averred with confidence, the most part Page 40.
of the Protestants of Ireland only served under the Usurpers to bring them to
reason; So in this say, That his Party only swore those Oaths in order to bring
in the King.

121. Here he descants upon my saying, that to deny the Irish Catholics the
benefit of the Peace, while those that were no great Friends to his Majesty
possessed their whole substance and livelihood, would estrange the hearts of
Page 81. R^ad my Book, Entitled, The more Ample Account, etc. Page 67. Page 81.
the Irish from him. And it is probable, nay very natural, that the ardencies
of men's zeal should remit, when they conceive themselves to be hardly used;
though I withal averr, that no pretense of injury, can in Conscience be a
sufficient warrant for them to transgress the limits of duty and loyalty.
Whence it is inferred, God wot, very preposterously, That the Irish follow the
King for naught but the loaves. Of this malicious obloquy his Majesty himself
is the best Judge, who saw the Irish Catholics, through Zeal to his service,
cast away the Loaves they had in assurance, and fed upon Turnops when they
could get them: Who saw them follow his Person in the lowest condition of his
fortune from Spain to France, from France to Flanders. The rest of his
Deductions were but to usher in that notable close, with which he thinks he
tickles his Party, and therefore writes it in Capital Letters, The Beast, if
pampered, will Page 82.
kick, if kept low, obey: That is, my Friends, the Land is for you, and
servitude for them.

122. As for the judicious Protestants, all what this Gentleman has said in
favor of them, cannot convince, me, Page 82.
but that even from the top of this so perfect an obedience, they sometimes
make reflections upon the state of other men.

123. Now passing over that part where he musters up the Heads of his
Invectiues, and praying as heartily as he, that credulity, and too hasty a
belief of real Conversions, do not bring a prejudice upon his Majesty's
interests in Ireland, I come to the fearful Judgments which I said were
wonderfully inflicted on the Irish Nation for their breach of the Peace in 46.
and such as were inflicted on Saul's House for his breach with the Gibeonites.
And this Gentleman blames my memory, as having forgot those other breaches in
1641, and Page 83.
1648. but never considers, that in neither of them the public Faith (whereof
the breach attracts those Judgments) was violated. In 41. a few not very
eminent Persons, of desperate fortunes, rebelled, and stood single in the guilt
they had contracted, until the mis-government of the Lords Justices, and that
part of the Council which savoured those that opposed the King in England,
forced the Nation to be Criminal in providing for their safety. This was a
Rebellion; who denies it? Yet although all Rebellions be grievous sins, they
pass not under the Notion of the breach of public Faith; such as Saul's House
was pushed for; And although this Gentleman have turned himself into a thousand
shapes, to deprive the Nation of the benefit of the Peace in 48. yet he has
not to this hour given the Reader any ground or color to believe, that it was
violated by breach of public Faith; as is evident by what we formerly said.

124. But (says he) if all were pardoned by the Peace Page 83.
made in the Year 1648. why does he remember the Judgments for the breaches in
1646? If he thinks all were not, why does he not remember the breaches made in
41, and at length attribute some Judgments to that breach? Alas! I could wish
that all were pardoned by the Peace in 48. But the punishment of the breach of
public Faith is an incommunicable privilege which the King of Kings reserves
for himself. And our Answer to that of 1641. you have already. But all this
preparation was made to introduce the Popes Bull with the more solemnity.

125. This Gentleman must afford me leave, not to give entire credence to his
Ad futuram rei memoriam, or pretended Bull of Urban the 8. unless the Original
can be produced. Page 84.
Not but that I know, that where there is question of the propagation of
Catholic Religion, many Popes have been accustomed, in those later Ages, not
to spare giving Encouragements by Bulls and Benedictions to those, even
Subjects, I say, who are engaged in that Cause (though I approve not the
practice or Doctrine whence it flows, when the question is of Subjects, but
openly disavow both in that case, as very unlawful, unchristian, and
uncatholick, even, I say, when the Subjects rebel against an Heretic or
Infidel King.) But because I have read an original Bull, which a Friend of mine
has at this present in his custody, from the same Pope, sent with his Minister
Petrus Franciscus Scarampus, bearing date the 18th. of April 1643. which is but
a few days above a Month before the date of this other Bull: and that Popes do
not usually send Bulls so thick upon the same subject, into the same Countries.
And to give the Reader all the light I can, I do here insert this Bull, which I
have seen faithfully translated into English.

Vrbanus P. P. VIII.
VEnerable Brethren, and beloved Sons, Health, and Apostolical Benediction.
Among the weighty Cares with which in this difficult time we are busied, we are
no way forgetful of that fatherly love which we cordially bear to all the
Catholics of that Kingdom. We embrace you with the Arms of Apost^lical
Charity, and that it may be effectually known, how much we desire the good of
your affairs, we have resolved to se^d thither a Person, no less prudent, and
learned, than approved, and that a long time, for the integrity of his manners,
and his zeal of piety, who will in our name comfort the Faithful, and direct
them aright, as well in things appertaining to the Glory of God, the Solidity
of the Catholic Faith, and the Decrees of Canonical Sanctions, as also the
maintenance and increase of the Orthodox Religion, and likewise will promove
the Conservation of the Obedience and Subjection which is fit to be paid to the
King. We have chosen to execute this Employment, our beloved Son Petrus
Franciscus Scarampus, who adorned with the fame of his Ancestors, and his
proper Virtues, preferring the Discipline of Ecclesiastical Institution before
his domestic advantages, inlisted himself among the Congregation of Saint
Philippus Nereus. He carries you our Pontifical Benediction; to whom we desire
you give full credence; especially when he declares with how propense an
inclination we wish well to the affairs of Ireland, and how earnestly we
desire, that all of you do walk with one consent in the House of the Lord, and
that all of you growing to one heart, and one soul, do serve the Almighty.
Truly we conceive that this is without doubt to be expected from the great zeal
with which you are inflamed in defending the Worship of the Divine Glory, and
the public good. As for the rest, we may well conjecture, with what humanity
you will receive this religious man, who both for his merit, but chiefly for
the Charge in which he is employed by us, carries more than ordinary
Recommendations with him; yet we assure you, that all the testimonies of
affection, which you think sit to impart to our Minister, will be grateful to
us. In the mean time we will pray to the Highest, that he come to your
assistance, and that he hear you in the abundance of his mercy, for whom, from
his Divine Clemency, we implore lasting felicity.

Given at Saint Peter's in Rome, under the Fishers Ring, this 18th. of April
1642. of our Pontificate the 20th.
126. The Reader may observe this Bull preceded that other which this Gentleman
pretends to have, and that in this the Pope makes it part of the Charge of his
Minister to promove the Conservation of the Submission and Obedience, which is
fit to be paid to the King. And therefore to make these two Bulls stand
together (if there be any such Bull as this Gentleman speaks of) it must be
said, That the Pope excited the Irish against those only, whom he well knew to
be Enemies, both to the Religion, and to the King; For it were a strange way of
paying Obedience to the King, to weaken his Party, and to root out those that
fought for him.

127. But if our Person of Quality, notwithstanding this other Bull, and
contradiction of it to his own, and my rational Comment on both, will needs
have his Bull to be a real one, and that indeed the Pope therein declared his
mind thoroughly, declining the former, as to that part of Scarampus Charge, To
promove the Conservation of that Obedience and Subjection, which is fit to be
paid to the King; And that indeed his Holiness (that was then) truly intended
(as much as lay in him) to sanctify the Rebellion, or the Arms of the Irish
against his Majesty's Father of blessed memory, I say, that all this granted,
makes nothing for him, no^ against the Irish in general. For as much as it is
very well (...) that it was never so much as heard of, either by the supreme
Council, or general Assembly of the Confederates, ^^ ^ndeed by any at all of
the Irish Catholics, either Lay or Ecclesiastical, for any thing I could ever
yet learn (and I call Go^ t^ witness that I speak truth.) And I am sure, had
the Keepers of that Bull, if any such has been, ever made it known to others,
I should have heard of it some way. Ye^ I w^ll not de^^, but it may be
probable, there might have been some such Letters procured from his Holiness
Urban the 8th. and that those who were of the Cabal among the more disaffected
Irish (for I know some such persons have been) might have had such Letters in
their custody, waiting a fit time, when their Designs had been ripe, to publish
them, or make use of them at least amongst a disloyal Party, or such, as would
alienate the Crown, and war against the Right English Interest. But I averr
withal, that the keeping of it so secret for so many years, and in all the
Revolutions of the Irish War, must be rather an argument of the aversion of the
Catholic Confederates, or Irish Catholics in general, from the belief, or
Doctrine, or practice of Indulgences in such a Case a theirs was, and in the
sense of that Bull, understood by this Gentleman, than of any approbation of
it. From which I profess my self to the World so averse, that I would have to
my power opposed all three, or the practice, Doctrine, and belief of Pardons in
that case and sense, and no less that of the hopes of a holy Martyrdom, as no
part of the Catholic Faith professed by the greatest Nations in Christendom,
which yet are in a most holy strict Communion with the Roman See.

128. But however this be, or any thing else I have hitherto alleged of my own
judgment, or of my own knowledge of the judgment of others, in answer to this
Person of Quality's arguments, grounded on his either true or forged Bull; and
supposing the Reader expects not from me, that I should walk after this
Gentleman in all the paths of those Comments he makes upon ill grounded Texts,
not that I should deny him the privilege to feast his Party with those hideous
words of general, if not universal massacring, and bloody Principles and
Designs (but I write not to fill the ea^s Page 88.
of men, but I write truth, and that will prevail) yet that I may endeavor to
reclaim this Gentleman, if it be possible, from that savage humor that makes
him express his malice with so much acrimony against Irish Catholics, and show
him how absurdly he charges their Religion with disloyal Principles, and show
this by manifest Arguments which he cannot deny, and Arguments by this time
known throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, nay in most Kingdoms of Europe,
even at Rome it self, I give the Reader those printed Remonstrances,
Declarations, Protestations, etc. presented to his Majesty, in the original
Writings and Subscriptions.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Remonstrance, Acknowledgement,
Protestation, and Petition of the Roman Catholic Clergy of Ireland.
YOur Majesty's faithful Subjects, the Roman Catholic Clergy of your Ma^esties
Kingdom of Ireland, do most humby represent this their present State, and
deplorable Condition.

That being entrusted by the indispensable Commission of the King of Kings with
the Cure of Souls, and the Care of their Flocks, in order to the Administration
of Sacraments, and teaching the People that perfect Obedience, which for
Conscience sake, they are bound to pay to your Majesty's Commands, they are
laden with Calumnies, and persecuted with severity.

That being obliged by the Allegiance they owe, and ought to swear unto your
Majesty, to reveal all Conspiracies and Practices against your Person, and
Royal Authority, that come to their knowledge, they are themselves clamoured
against as Conspirators, plotting the destruction of the English among them,
without any ground that may give the least color to so foul a Crime, to pass
for probable in the judgment of an indifferent person.

That their Crimes are as numerous, and as diverse; as are the Inventions of
their Adversaries: And because they cannot with freedom appear to justify
their Innocence, all the Fictions and Allegations against them are received as
undoubted Verities; and which is yet more mischievous, the Laity, upon whose
Conscie^ce^ the Character of Priesthood gives them an influence, ^uffer under
all the Crimes thus falsely imputed to them: it being their Adversaries
principal design, that the Irish, whose Estate they enjoy, should be reputed
persons unfit, and no way worthy any title to your Majesty's mercy.

That no Wood comes amiss to make Arrows for their destruction; for as if the
Roman Catholic Clergy, whom they esteem most Criminal, were, or ought to be a
Society so perfect, as no evil, no indiscreet person should be found amongst
them, they are all of them generally cried down for any Crime, whether true or
feigned, which is imputed to one of them; and as if no words could be spoken,
no Letter written, but with the common consent of all of them, the whole Clergy
must suffer for that which is laid to the charge of any particular person
amongst them.

We know what Odium all the Catholic Clergy lies under, by reason of the
Calumnies with which our Tenants in Religion, and our dependence upon the Popes
Authority are aspersed: And we humbly beg your Majesty's pardon, to vindicate
both by the ensuing Protestation, which we make in the sight of Heaven, and in
the presence of your Majesty, sincerely and truly, without Equivocation, or
mental Reservation.

We do acknowledge and confess your Majesty to be our true and lawful King,
supreme Lord, and rightful Sovereign of this Realm of Ireland, and of all other
your Majesty's Dominions. And therefore we acknowledge and confess our selves
to be obliged, under pain of sin to obey your Majesty in all Civil and Temporal
Affairs, as much as any other of your Majesty's Subjects, and as the Laws and
Rules of Government in this Kingdom do require at our hands. And that
notwithstanding any power or pretension of the Pope or See of Rome, or any
Sentence or Declaration of what kind or quality soever, given, or to be given,
by the Pope, his Predecessors, or Successors, or by any Authority Spiritual or
Temporal proceeding or derived from him, or his See, against your Majesty, or
Royal Authority, We will still acknowledge and perform, to the uttermost of our
abilities, our faithful Loyalty, and true Allegiance to your Majesty. And we
openly disclaim and renounce all foreign power, be it either Papal or Princely,
Spiritual or Temporal, in as much, as it may seem able, or shall pretend to
free, discharge, or absolve us from this Obligation; or shall any way give us
leave or license to raise Tumults, bear Arms, or offer any violence to your
Majesty's Person, Royal Authority, or to the State or Government. Being all of
^s ready, not only to discover, and make known to your Majesty, and to your
Ministers, all the Treasons made against your Majesty, or them, which shall
come to our hearing, but also to lose our lives in the defense of your
Majesty's Person, and Royal Authority, and to resist with our best endeavors
all Conspiracies and Attempts against your Majesty, be they framed, or sent
under what pretense, or patronized by what foreign Power or Authority soever.
And further we profess, that all absolute Princes, and supreme Governors, of
what Religion soever they be, are Gods Lieutenants on Earth, and that Obedience
is due to them, according to the Laws of each Common wealth respectively, in
all Civil and Temporal Affairs. And therefore we do here protest against all
Doctrine and Authority to the contrary.

And we do hold it impious, and against the Word of God, to maintain, that any
private Subject may kill or murder the Aunointed of God his Prince, though of
a different Belief and Religion from his. And we abhor and detest the practice
thereof as damnable and wicked.

These being the Tenants of our Religion, in point of Loyalty and Submission to
your Majesty's Commands, and our dependence of the Sea of Rome no way
intrenching upon that perfect Obedience, which by our Birth, by all Laws Divine
and Humane, we are bound to pay to your Majesty, our natural and lawful
Sovereign: We humbly beg, prostrate at your Majesty's feet, that you would be
pleased to protect us from the severe persecution we suffer merely for our
profession in Religion: leaving those that are, or hereaf^er shall be guilty of
other Crimes (and there have been such in all times, as well by their Pens, as
by their Actions) to the punishment prescribed by the Law.

Fr. Oliver Darcy, Bishop of Dromore. Fr. George Dillon of, S. Francis Ord.
Guardian of the Irish Franciscans at Paris. Fr. Philip Roch, of S. Fran. Ord.
Reader General of Divinity. Fr. Anthony Gearnon, of S. Fran. Ord. one of Her
Majesty's the Queen Mothers Chaplains. Fr. John Everard, of S. Francis Order,
Conf. and Preach. Fr. Anthony Nash, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preacher. Fr.
William Linch, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. Fr. Nicholas Sall, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf.
and Preach. James Cusack, Doctor of Divinity. Cornelius Fogorty, Protonot.
Apost. and Doctor of the Civil and Canon Law. Fr. Henry Gibon, of S. Aug. Ord.
and Conf. Preac. Daniel Dougan, Divine. Fr. Redmond Moore, of S. Dom. Ord.
Conf. and Preac. Bartholomew Bellew. Dennis Fitz Ranna. Bartholomew Flemming.
Fr. Peter Walsh, of S. Fran. Ord. Reader of Divinity, and Procuratour of the
Romans Cath. Clerg. both Sec. and Reg. of Ireland. Fr. Redmond Caron, of S. Fran.
Ord. Reader Jubilate of Divinity. Fr. Simon Wafre, of the same Order, Reader of
Divinity. Fr. James Caverly, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preac. Fr. John Fitz
Gerald, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preac. Fr. Theobald Burk, of S. Fran. Ord.
Conf. and Preac. Fr. Matthew Duff, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preac. Fr. Peter
Goghegan, of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preacher.


To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The faithful Protestation, and humble
Remonstrance of the Roman Catholic Nobility and Gentry of Ireland.
YOur Majesty's faithful Subjects, the Roman Catholic Nobility and Gentry of
your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, out of a deep sense of those prodigious
Afflictions, under which the Monarchy of Great Britain, has before your
Majesty's happy Restoration, groaned these twenty years: And out of our sad
thoughts, which daily bring more and more sight from our breasts, and tears
from our eyes, for not only the still and yet continued miseries, and
sufferings of the Catholic Natives of that our unfortunate Country, even
amidst, and ever since the so much famed joys and triumphs of your sacred
Majesty's most auspicious Inauguration; but also of the Causes, whereunto we
have made the most narrow search we could, of these our own unparalled
Calamities: And upon reflection upon that Allegiance we owe, and ought by all
Divine and Humane Laws, and which we are, and have been always ready to swear
and perform to your Majesty, our only Sovereign Lord on Earth, and on the
scandal (notwithstanding) which some persons (who are unwilling to understand
dright our Religion) cast upon it, as if it were not consistent with all
dutiful Obedience and Faith to the supreme Temporal Magistrate; And upon
consideration likewise, of a further tie of Conscience on us, for endeavoring,
as much as in us lies, to clear your Majesty's Royal Breast from all fears and
jealousies whatsoever, if any, peradventure, your Majesty entertain of us,
through the sugg^stion of such as hate our Communion or Nation; And to wipe off
that Scandal, and allay the Odium under which our Church has lain this last
Century of years, among other Christian people in these Nations, of a different
way from ours in the Worship of God; We humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, to
vindicate both our selves, and our holy belief; in that particular of our
Allegiance, by the ensuning Protestation. Which (in imitation of the good
example given by our Clergy, and pursuant to the general Doctrine and Practice
of the Catholic Church) we make in the sight of Heaven, and in the presence of
your Majesty, sincerely and truly, without Equivocation, or mental Reservation.

We do acknowledge and confess your Majesty to be our true and lawful King,
supreme Lord, and rightful Sovereign of this Realm of Ireland, and of all other
your Majesty's Dominions. And therefore we acknowledge and confess our selves
to be obliged, under pain of sin, to obey your Majesty in all Civil and
Temporal Affairs, as much as any other of your Majesty's Subjects, and as the
Laws and Rules of Government in this Kingdom do require at our hands. And that
notwithstanding any power or pretension of the Pope, or See of Rome, or any
Sentence or Declaration, of what kind or quality soever, given, or to be given,
by the Pope, his Predecessors, or Successors, or by any Authority, Spiritual or
Temporal, proceeding or derived from him, or his See, against your Majesty, or
Royal Authority, we will still acknowledge and perform, to the uttermost of our
abilities, our faithful Loyalty, and true Allegiance to your Majesty. And we
openly disclaim and renounce all foreign power, be it either Papal or Princely,
Spiritual or Temporal, in as much as it may seem able, or shall pretend to
free, discharge, or absolve us from this Obligation, or shall any way give us
leave or license to raise Tumults, bear Arms, or offer any violence to your
Majesty's Person, Royal Authority, or to the State or Government; being all of
us ready, not only to discover, and make known to your Majesty, and to your
Ministers, all the Treasons made against your Majesty or them, which shall come
to our hearing; but also to lose our lives in the defense of your Majesty's
Person, and Royal Authority; and to resist with our best endeavors, all
Conspiracies and Attempts against your Majesty, be they framed or sent under
what pretense, or patronized by what foreign Power or Authority soever. And
further we profess, that all absolute Princes, and supreme Governors, of what
Religion soever they be, are Gods Lieutenants on Earth; and that Obedience is
due to them, according to the Laws of each Commonwealth respectively, in all
Civil and Temporal Affairs; and therefore we do here protest against all
Doctrine and Authority to the contrary. And we do hold it impious, and against
the Word of God, to maintain, that any private Subject may kill or murder the
Anointed of God, his Prince, though of a different Belief and Religion from
his. And we abhor and detest the practice thereof as damnable and wicked.

These being the Tenants of our Religion in point of Loyalty and Submission to
your Majesty's Authority, and our Observance and Veneration of, or Communion
with the Sea of Rome, in matters purely Spiritual, no way entrenching on that
perfect Obedience, which, by our Birth, by the Laws of God and Man, we are
bound to pay to your Majesty, our natural and lawful Sovereign.

Prostrate at your Majesty's feet, we most humbly beg, that all your Majesty's
Roman Catholic Subjects of Ireland, who shall by subscription or consent,
concur to this public Protestation of Loyalty, be protected from Persecution,
for the profession or exercise of their Religion, and all former Laws, upon
that account, against them repealed.

Luke, Earl of Fingall. Mourrogh, Earl of Inchequin. Donoghe, Earl of
Clancarthy. Oliver, Earl of Tyrconell. Theobald, Earl of Carlingford. Edmond,
Viscount Montgarett. Thomas, Viscount Dillon. Arthur, Viscount Jueagh. William,
Viscount Clane. Charles, Viscount Muskry. William, Viscount Taaffe. Oliver,
Baron of Lowth. William, Baron of Castle-Conell. Colonel Charles Dillon.
Matthew Plunkett Esquire. Lieutenant Colonel Ignatius Nugent. Edward Plunkett
Esquire. Nicholas Plunkett Knight. Matthew Plunkett of Dunsany. James Dillon
Knight. Colonel Christopher Brian. Robert Talbot Baronet. Villick Burk Baronet.
Edward Fitz Harris Baronet. Valentine Brown Baronet. Luke Bath Baronet. Henry
Slingsby Knight. John Bellew Knight. Colonel William Burk. Colonel John Fitz
Patrick. Colonel Brian Mac-Mahon. Colonel Miles Relly. Colonel Gilbert Talbott.
Colonel Milo Power. Lieutenant Colonel Pierce Lacy. Lieutenant Colonel Villick
Burk. Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Scurlog.
Esquires and Gentlemen.
Jeoffry Brown of Galway. John Walsh of Ballyuoher. Patrick Brian. James Fitz
Gerald of Lackagh. John Talbot of Malahyde. Thomas Luttrell of Luttrells-Town.
John Holywood of Artayne. Henry O Neill, Son to Sir Phelim O Neill. Dudley
Bagnell of Dunlickny. Henry Dracott of Mornanton. Edward Buttler of Monihore.
Nicholas Darcy of Platin. Patrick Sarsfield of Lucan. John Macna-Mara of
Creattlagh. James Talbott of Bela-connell. Robert Balf of Corstown. James
Talbot of Templeoge. Patrick Archer. Luke Dowdall of Athlumny. Philip Hoar of
Killsalghan. James Barnewall of Bremore. James Allen of Saint Wolstans. Thomas
Cantuell of Balymakeddy. John Cantuell of Cantuells-Court. Edmond Dillon of
Stream's-Town. John Flemming of Stahalmock. Peter Sherlog of Gracedieu.
Christopher Archbald of Tymolin. Patrick Moore of Duan's Town. Nicholas Haly of
Towrine. Pierce Butler of Callan. Pierce Butler of Killuealegher. John Sedgraw
of Cabragh. Richard Wadding of Killbarry. Thomas Brown of Clan-Donel-Roe.
Oliver Cassell of Dundalke. Patrick Clenton of Irish-Town. Captain Christopher
Turner. John Baggott. William Grace. John Arthur of Hogestown. Marcas Laffan of
Grea^s-Town. Christopher Aylmer of Balrath. James Plunkett of Gibston. Thomas
St. John of Mortles-Town. William Barioge of Rincorran. Richard Strange of
Rockwell-Castle. James Butler of Ballenekill. Anthony Colclough. Thomas
Sarsfield of Sarsfieldstown. Pierce Nangle of Monanimy. James Wolverston of
Stalergan. Michael Brett. Patrick Boyton of Bally-turny-mac^oris. James White
of Chambolly. Major Lawrence Dempsy. Captain Richard Dempsy. Edward Nugent of
Calvin. Patrick Porter of Kingston. Major Marcas Furloag.


129. Notwithstanding this Gentleman's rare faculty of commenting, I believe he
will find little to be said upon this subject. And now we will descend to his
Pa^allels upon my example of Saul's Children, and the Gibeonites. Page 90.


130. Where, in the first place, I must tell our Person of Quality he has very
ill endeavored to show how far that is Page 90.
parallel to the present Case of the Irish, and how far it is not, And I must
tell him, that neither his paralleling, differencing, The Parallel made, and
the Differences given, by the Person of Quality, in the Case or Example of Saul
's Children, and the Gibeonites, proved rid^lous, end unconcludi^g, etc.
or indeed imposing here on the Reader, and on holy Scripture too, can prove
that I have unjustly applied t^ose examples of Gods most righteous Judgments.

131. He might without any labor have seen in that Letter, which without any
reason, he took so much pains to contradict, matter enough for a more
pertinent, and more ample parallel. He might have observed the great King of
Heaven and Earth, in a Parliament of Angels, bestowing the Land Canaan* on the
Descendants of Abraham, for the Rebellion of the Inhabitants, and this gift
again confirmed by him to them many hundred years after, even in that other
great Parliament of Angels and Men, both which he held on Sina Mount, amidst
lightnings and thunders, and those terrible voices, and the sound of Clarions
mingled in that loud dinn; confirmed, I say, with so much solemnity, and even
confirmed in his written Laws, given there by Moses to the Children of Israel;
and yet confirmed in a special command, given them, never to make Peace or
Truce with the old Inhabitants of Palestine, not even with the Amorhites by
name. He might have remembered the vast expense of an Army of 600000 fighting
men, employed by him to get possession of them, even by force and blood, and by
so many prodigious miracles and wonders, and Kings slain, and Monsters quelled,
and Cities overthrown, and Kingdoms harraz'd and ruined for ever, to make way
for his beloved People to enjoy the gift he had once made to them so solemnly.
He might, after this, have considered, a Treaty of Peace entertained,
nevertheless, with some of those very Nations, with the Gibeonites, I say, who
were the Children of Amorheus, and a Peace concluded with them by Josuah, even
God's own Lieutenant over his peculiar chosen people, and by his 12 great
Captains, and without the knowledge or consent of any other Assembly, Council,
or Parliament of Israel, or of his great Army, or of the infinite number of
other persons, young men, old men, and women, and children of Abraham and
Jacobs posterity, who yet were all highly concerned in the effects of it, as
being in part destructive to their rights, and lessening the gift which God
made to them, and quitting their claim to so many great Cities, and the
territories adjoining. He might further have remembered the delusion and
circumvention were such, whereby those Gibeonites obtained the Peace, that they
were not known, or thought by Josua, or by his Captains, to be Inhabitants of
that Land, which God had bestowed on the Children of Israel: the tattered rags,
and old Shoes and wine bottles rent, and the dry and moldy bread of these
crafty Inhabitants, and even those manifest express verbal lies, which the Book
of Josuah relates, having been made use of by the fearful Gibeonites to
circumvent Josuah, till he concluded with them. He might likewise have
remembered the advancing of the Camp within three days after this Treaty
perfected, to the very Cities of the Gibeonites, to storm them, as being within
the Lot of that Army of God, and such as they had been long before commanded by
God himself, and in his Law, to Conquer, even by destroying utterly the
Inhabitants, root and branch: And might remember the Countermand given by
Josuah nevertheless, when he understood they belonged to those he made Peace
with, and this Countermand given, and yet a further command, to observe
strictly the Articles, yea notwithstanding the general murmurings of his Army
and people against him: This great Commander of the Legions of God, who had in
all his enterprises the Spirit of God, judging it without any peradventure, to
be the pleasure of this great King of Kings, as flowing from the Dictates of
natural Reason, that such as, though by such arts, had undisposed themselves to
a War, and their own defense, and wholly relied on his word, should be
protected in all their rights, and their Articles observed most religiously to
them, and that no commands of God in his positive Laws, though in general terms
seemingly against it, did reach to this, or such a particular Case. Finally,
our Person of Quality might have considered the Gibeonites not only interceded
for four principal Cities in particular, and for the te^ritories adjoining, but
were even themselves and their Cities, professors of Idolatry, and Heathenisme,
and worshipers of false Gods: as on the other side Josuah and his Army, and
people, the propagators of the only true worship of the God of Heaven.

132. Our Person of Quality might have considered all this; which if he had,
and then reflected on the Rebellion of Ireland, even of those very Septs, which
without question he accounts not only as pricks in his sides, and thorns in his
eyes, but even as bad as the Canaanites, Hittites, etc. or the very worst of
the Amorhites, and to be extirpated, as these were, out of the good Land
flowing with milk and honey (but not the Land of Promise, I hope, to him alone,
or to the Saints of his Calender) and after did reflect on a good King, his
late Majesty so justly incensed by this provocation, and on his Parliament, and
Laws of 17 Caroli, and on his donation and division therein of the Rebels
Estates, and on the Army employed, and Captains made, and the great Commander
of them in that Kingdom under his Majesty, and on the bloody, though just
prosecution of that War, and Battails fought, and Legions vanquished, and the
better part of the four Provinces of Ireland utterly destroyed; if he had then
remembered the application made to his Majesty and his Lieutenant, and the
Treaty admitted, and a Peace concluded even with those very Septs, before
designed for destruction, even that very Peace of 48. I mean: if, I say, our
Person of Quality had soberly considered all this, and the circumstances, and
the advantages, which are for me, certainly he might have seen matter enough
for a more pertinent and more ample parallel; and might have seen it in the
Kings, in the Subjects, in the Lands or Countries, in the Crimes, in the just
offenses, in the resolutions of punishment, in the Parliaments, in the Laws of
Donation and Partition, in the Armies and Commanders, in the sharp prosecutions
of the War, in the Treaties nevertheless entertained with the Rebels, and
Peaces concluded with them; in the murmuring complaints of Armies, and of
inconsiderate People, and in their unjust endeavors to ruin those for ever,
and specially four Cities, who relying on the words of their great Commanders,
unfurnished themselves of all means for defense. And he might have seen, that
considering the powerful, though most ungodly, endeavors, and wicked
arguments used to persuade his most Sacred Majesty not to regard the
performance of that Peace, P. W. cannot be justly said to have in that occasion
unjustly applied, or made use of the Judgments of God on Saul and his
Children, for being mis-lead by such perfidious Counsels against the Laws of
God, Nature, and Nations. Not that P. W. did wish, (as God knows he did not,
but was and is from the bottom of his Soul far enough from any such wish) that
in the conditional contingency of such nonperformance, or of such a breach by
his Majesty with those can justly pretend to the benefit of that Peace, the
like, or indeed any other Judgments should light on himself, or on his
Posterity; but that his Majesty might be minded of this example, as of an
antidote against the poison of such Viperous Counselors, as our Person of
Q^ality seems to be, and the rest of his Consorts, that with so much
importunity, so much falsity, and such other evil arguments (which I will not
mention here) did then solicit, as they do still, for the perpetual
destruction of all Irish Catholics, that is to say, of more than a million of
people; yea of a great, though as yet (through such arts, and the endeavors of
this Gentleman, and his Associates) uncomfortable Nation and Kingdom to the
generality of Catholic Natives, and did and do solicit for the ruining them
so for ever, without any regard of their Articles, or of Public Faith given
them with so much solemnity by two great and good Kings, and upon
considerations so valuable, as the World knows; Nay did, and do at this very
present, solicit this destruction, to involve even those of that Nation and
Religion, who are confessedly innocent (of the Rebellion or prosecution of it,
or of any breach of Articles, or Peace) which yet is so well known, to be
against the most known fundamental Laws of the Land, and against all Divine and
Humane Laws, and against the very first Dictates, or even glimmers of Natural
reason, that I need not dilate upon it any further.

133 But that I may not seem to decline observing the advantages this Person of
Quality proposed to himself in that Parallel he would needs frame for me, let
us consider every Particular apart.

1. Josua (says he) knew not the Persons of those with whom he made that
League; neither did the King know the hearts of those with whom he made that
Peace. I would fain know of this Gentleman, whether Josua knew the hearts of
the Gibeonites? Or whether any of both sides, that make Peace or League,
whatever they be on Earth, the hearts of the other? Page 90.
The French of the Spaniards, or Spaniards of the French; the English of the
Hollanders, or Hollanders of the English? And since he must answer not, then I
demand, where is the advantage hence for him, that his Majesty knew not the
hearts of those with whom he made that Peace? Or is the Peace therefore not
obligatory? Indeed were the Persons of the Irish unknown to his Majesty, and
his Lieutenant, who treated with them, and so unknown (I say) to both, as to
think they had not been of the Irish Nation at all, but English or Scots
inhabiting some other Tract of Land, and some other Cities than those they did;
or had his Majesty, and Lieutenant, been so ignorant of those Irish
Commissioners, that they had taken them at that time to be another People, or
of another Country, not of that which was before, and through their Rebellion,
forfeitable to the Crown, and by the Act of 17. Caroli, of the Parliament of
Westminster (if that be of any force in Ireland) to be assured to, and shared
amongst adventurers and Soldiers; then might this Gentleman with some reason
say the Articles obliged not; whereas there was an error about the very
Persons; than which nothing seems more against freedom of consent, as to that
wherein the error is, even that essential freedom, I mean, without which a man
has no free consent in any sense at all. And yet in this case my Parallel
would be more plain in the extension of it; but his advantage no more, but
rather less, as from thence, to any purpose he ought to drive at.

2. Those were Neighbors, nay lived amongst the Israelites, Page 90.
to whom Josuah promised Peace, though they said they were of a far Country.
The Irish were Neighbors at least locally; nay they lived long amongst us,
though at last they would not let us live amongst them: But indeed they were
from a very far Country, even from Rome it self. Behold Reader two manifest
impostures in a few lines. The Confederate Catholics, when such, or come to be
joined in a body, or social defense, and have a general Assembly, which they
had very soon after the first insurrection, were so far from denying English,
Scots, or any other Protestant Subjects to his Majesty to live amongst them,
that even in their printed model of Government, which I suppose this Gentleman
has, they invited all such as Pleased, to come, and live am^^g (...) o^
G^^^rnment.
them. And their being from a very far Country, even as far as Rome, in this
Gentleman's sense, or their being so from Rome, that they acknowledge any
dependence from the Pope in Temporal affairs, or any that are not purely
Spiritual, or such a dependence, as cannot stand with a most Christian, most
Loyal, and indispensable Allegiance by any on Earth, to his Sacred Majesty King
Charles the ^. of England, Ireland and Scotland, the former Declarations,
Protestations, and their famous opposition of the Lord N^ncio, and of his
Excommunications and Interdicts in the Case of the Cessation with the then
Baron, now Ea^l of Inchiquin, and the Book printed at Kilkeny, and subscribed
by David Osoriensis, and approved by Thomas Midensis, and subscribed and
approved by the rest of the Divines convoked to that purpose, entitled,
Quaeries concerning the lawfulness of the present Cessation, etc. (whereof P.
W. is known, and confesses himself to have been the Author) manifestly convince
they are not. Yet I confess most freely and truly, they are, as to their
Religion, from a Country, as far as Rome, because they received it thence, and
from Countries too, in that, as far as Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, or
Jerusalem, as all the People of England have had theirs (even from Rome I say)
for a 1000. years, and amongst them a hundred millions of people, that have
been all their lives, as unalterably loyal to their Princes, as any people
could be, and more loyal without comparison, than I doubt this Person of
Quality can pretend himself to be, or at least to have been sometime in his
life past.

But suppose, that notwithstanding their being Neighbors at least locally, and
their living long with this Person of Quality, and amongst those he makes his
own, they have, after a War begun, not suffered Protestants live among them;
and suppose likewise they had been all that while, in his meaning, from a
Country as far as Rome it self, what will he conclude? Were they farther off
in judgment than the Gibeonites from Israel? Or would the Gibeonites more
endure, if they could help it, the Israelites to live with them? Or whatever
may be said to this, or whatever the carriage of the Irish was to the English,
or Protestants, or their affections too, or dependence from Rome in temporal
things, or such as could not stand with their true Allegiance to their King,
before the Peace, mu^t it have been so after? Or did not the Articles of Peace
which themselves freely concluded, tie them to a contrary resolution? As the
League did the Gibeonites from that aliedation they had before? Or did the
Gibeonites really perform? And could not, nay did not the Generality, or the
Representative of the Irish likewise? I have manifestly pro^^d they did so,
whatever this Gentleman imposes on them: And however, through the contradiction
of some, and the fatal division of all amongst themselves, their endeavors,
either for his Majesty, or themselves, proved unsuccessful, as to the great end
was driven at, and expected from them. But if the want of success be made use
of to asperse them, must not the Protestant Caval^^ers lie under the like
aspersion? Must not all the just men that ever have been in the World, and have
been withal unfortunate, suffer likewise?

-- Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Was the Poets answer to those that measured the justice of endeavors by
success.

And if notwithstanding all this, our Person of Quality will insist on the
being of the Irish Papists from Rome, I would fain know what Country Geneva is
in? Or cannot this Person of Quality's most religious Brethren Presbyters,
either Scots, Irish, or English, be said to be as truly from Geneva, as the
Papists from Rome? And whether of both these beings, especially considering
that sense the Irish Papists own theirs, must be most dangerous to the King, or
even to Kingship it self? And I am sure it matters not, that Rome be farther
off in Place, if Geneva be farther in Principles, that relate to the Royal
Person, Dignity, and Crown, and to the Obedience and Faith of Subjects to his
Majesty.

3. Those deluded Jos^ah into that League, and said they were his Servants when
they were his Enemies. The Irish Papists Page 91.
did also delude the King into that Peace, and said they were Subjects, when
indeed they were Rebels. But how can it ^e true, that the Parallel holds in
this delusion, which yet this Gentleman so confidently averrs immediately
after, where he has those words, Thus far the Parallel holds. Did not Page 91.
my Lord Lieutenant, who in behalf of his Majesty concluded that Peace, know
whether the Irish, that on the other side concluded it, were Subjects, or
indeed Re^els? Did not his Grace, nay did not his Majesty, both by his Grace,
and by many other ways, abundantly know, for so many years they warred, and
treated before the Peace of 48. all the several humors, inclinations,
intrigues, interests, affections, and aversions of the several known parties,
whereof the Confederates were composed? Or was the difference with the Nuncio
at that time unknown to his Majesty? Or the Civil war that succeeded in the
very bowels of the Confederates, where the Supreme Council, and their adherents
(who were indeed the far more considerable part) and even the generality of the
Confe^erates, upon conjunction with the Lord of Inchiquin, in order to reduce
themselves and the whole Kingdom to submit thoroughly to, and o^ey his Majesty,
and the Lord Lieutenant, pursued with fire and sword, and all other acts of
open hostility, even fights and sieges, those refractory Confederates, that
under Owen o Neill, and in conjunction with him, opposed their very loyal
designs? Or could his Majesty, or my Lord Lieutenant, but know the danger they
saw manifestly, that a Party would still, as long as they could, oppose all
conditions of Peace, and endeavor to frustrate both his Majesty's designs, and
that of the Supreme Council too and General Assembly, and of those Irish
Commissioners from both, and from the people they represented in concluding
that Peace? Or did these Commissioners assure, or the Articles they concluded
on, warrant for them that Owen O Neils party would submit, or would drive at
the main design of his Majesty? All which Queries must be answered so for my
advantage, that this Gentleman will find none at all to justify any delusion
of the part of the Irish Catholics that concluded this Peace, not although I
granted him that the Irish Papists did say they were Subjects, when indeed they
were Reb^ll; For yet there could be no delusion, since they were known to be in
Arms, and professed their resolution not to lay them down without Articles;
and yet they had spoken a known truth, saying, They were Subjects, since their
Birth, and the Laws made them still remain Subjects, even when they were most
disobedient and refractory. And they were not only Subjects, but loyal obedient
Subjects too, when they had concluded those Articles, and really divested
themselves of that power, whereof they made use t^ll then to defend themselves,
or offend others, and when his Majesty's Lieutenant, the then Marquess of
Ormond, and his Majesty himself, had assented to those Articles, and
accordingly governed the Irish Catholics, and no more accounted them Rebels,
but owned them indeed, and in-very clear express terms (both in the Articles
themselves, immediately after the Act of Recognition, and in the Proclamation
prefixed unto them, and in a thousand other instances) as His Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects of Ireland, Articles of P^^ce, Page 6. or 1. and Page 3.
and His loyal and dutiful Subjects. But this Gentleman, not forgetting, as it
seems, the greater guilt of others, whom he wished better than he did the
Irish, and whom yet he knew to have been far more hainously, and more
obstinately guilty of both particulars charged here on these, he would be sure
to cry Whore first, and would be sure by no means to use the language of his
Majesty, or of the Lord Lieutenant.

134. Having done with his Parallel, the Reader may next consider, how well
this Gentleman will now show, as he promises, in what, and how much, that
Scripture Example of mine differs from the Case it was applied unto in my
Letter.

1. The Gibeonites deluded Joshua into a Peace; but the Irish Page 91.
Papists (to use his sacred Majesty's own words) forced, compelled,
necessitated him into Cessations and Peaces. Had this been true, there had
indeed appeared some difference, though none material to his purpose. But as it
is manifest, that no force, compulsion, necessity, put on his Majesty, by
whomsoever, ^, has been such as deprived him of that freedom was sufficient to
render his Articles with the Catholics of Ireland binding as to his Majesty,
and binding even before God and Man, in order to such as have not forfeited
them (whereon I said enough before) and that therefore it is impertinent for
any material difference, or to this Gentleman's purpose, whether I reject or
admit his Charge here, being it cannot be denied, that the delusion whereof the
Gibeonites made use, imposed a far greater, and even an intrinsic force,
compulsion, or necessity on Joshua, or such as deprived of essential freedom,
and all kind of consent, as to these Gibeonites, or to any had been within the
Lot appointed in the Law for his People, which yet I have showed the force,
compulsion, or necessity, imposed on his Majesty (by whomsoever) to conclude
any of those Cessations or Peaces with the Irish, cannot be said to have
imposed: So it is no less manifest, this Gentleman imposes on his Majesty that
which he shall never prove, or that his Majesty should have said, that the
Irish Papists forced, compelled, necessitated, him into Cessations and Peaces.
Whereas indeed, if we make any true construction of his Majesty's words in his
Declaration, whence only this Gentleman must pretend his ground, for an
assertion so false, it must be obvious, even to the most common understanding,
that his Majesty says, that force, compulsion, necessity, for concluding a
Peace with the Irish, were imposed upon him by those that erected that odious
Court for taking away the life of his dear Father, as I have before
demonstrated, by giving and granting at large his Majesty's very words.

2. The Gibeon tes were strangers, but the Irish Papists were (at least ought
to have been) Subjects. All true; but nothing Page 91.
to his purpose. Articles made by a King with his Subjects in Arms, bind, even
by the Law of Nations, even before they are confirmed in Parliament, else what
could the Barons plead before a Parliament sat, if Magna Charta did not bind
the King that gave it? What so many other agreements in the world, as I have
before said? Or how should Kings, or their Rebellious Subjects, when a
Parliament can not be held without them, ever come to an atonement? And surely
this very Gentleman would plead for his life, and his estate too (since he can
now to possess other men's) the Letters from Breda, even before the Act of
Indemnity was passed: and when he was in Arms against the King, (as I suppose
he was sometimes) had he yielded in some extremity upon Articles of War,
wherein he had conditioned for life, liberty, and estate, for himself and his
party, he would plead these Articles, if he saw any danger of his or their
estates, and even plead them, before such Articles were confirmed by a
Parliament; nay plead them, I say, even in case his own estate and all those
belonging to his party, had been formerly sold or bestowed by the King on
Adventurers in Parliament. And yet both he and his party would be in that case,
by the Laws and Conditions of his and their Birth, Subjects. Whether he or they
be so by inclination, or longer at least than the loaves will hold, I know not
certainly; though I hope better of them all, than this Person of Quality seems
to do of me or my Countrymen.

3. The Gibeonites never broke those conditions granted to Page 91.
them, though by those conditions they were in effect Slaves; but the Irish
Papists broke, yea often, if not always, theirs, though after an unparalleld
Rebellion they were in effect made Lords of all the Land, even the bloody Stage
upon which they had acted their guilt. Lest this Gentleman should have intended
it as material to say, that the Gibeonites were in effect Slaves, I must tell
the Reader, these Gibeonites enjoyed peaceably, without fear, or danger, when
their Articles had been once published and debated, not their lives only, nor
their liberty alone, but life and liberty, and houses, and goods, and lands,
and Cities, and all they did pretend either of religious or civil right. And
that their slavery was no other than to provide Water and Wood for the
Sacrifices and public House of the God of Heaven. And therefore any man will
think they had a great deal of reason never to break those conditions granted.
And albeit I think there was as little reason for any Irish Catholic to break
the conditions given them, especially in that Peace of 48. and that I know
nevertheless some, if not many, have; yet I do (and will constantly, till I be
convinced with other arguments, than this answerer gives, which I believe I
shall never be) always deny the universality, generality, or indefiniteness of
this proposition, The Irish Papists broke, yea often, if not always, theirs, in
that sense at least he must have had, or intended to import, if he would speak
to any purpose; that is, in relation to the Peace of 48. in which meaning, as I
have before sufficiently declared, by relating this Gentleman's proofs, and
otherwise, the falsity of this assertion: so I now again briefly averr, that
neither the universality, or generality, nor greater part, nor ruling power;
nor the formal or virtual representatives of the Irish Papists, broke as much
as once that Peace: so far were they from brcaking often, if not always the
conditions of it. And if none of all these did, though confessedly some of the
Irish did, or the lesser, or even a great, or considerable part of them (if he
will have it so) did, what is that to the Universality, or Generality at least,
which that indefinite charge of his imports? or what indeed, to any other Irish
Catholic (to conclude them) but the very individuals that did so? He might as
well, and as truly have said, that the Protestants of England, or English
Nation were against the King, and for Cromwell, or the Rump Parliament; when
both or either did most cruelly Tyranize: For not only some of those
Protestants, or of that Nation, but even so great and considerable a party were
so; nay, which is more, both the representing and ruling power, which the
Protestants, or Nation of England were known at that time to own, or at least,
which in effect, and even with all formalities represented and ruled them
(whether by force and coaction, or not, it matters not here) without any
contradiction were so. Whence it is that I may advance a little further yet,
and may tell this Gentleman, that can be no refuge for him, if he should say,
that he can maintain peradventure, some appearance of Truth in some part, at
least of this proposition, that the Irish Papists broke, yea often, if not
always, theirs: or, (which is the thing I mean) that he can maintain that
latitude, universality, generality, or indefiniteness, in relation at least to
some one breach, and some one Peace, viz. that of 46. For I can averr
confidently, that all his arguments to prove this, will by a manifest sequel of
reason, prove, that the Protestants or Nation of England, broke all their ties
of Duty, and Allegiance, and Faith to his late Majesty, and his lawful
Successor (whom God, of his mercy, cont^n^e long and happi^y, and g^oriously
sitting on his Fathers Throne, and his Posterity to the Worlds end) I confess
that Peace was rejected, and most perfidiously, scandalously, and fatally too,
rejected; but I will ever say, nevertheless, it was rejected by a disobedient
Army, by some (in that) ungodly Clergy men, and a few other contrivers of
mischief, who by their numbers, proceedings, hypocrisy, force, craft, etc. and
by their breach of their own Oath of Association, and by their faithfulness to
their own acknowledged supreme Governors of the Confederacy, the Council, and
general Assembly, and by making themselves by such arts the prevailing party
amongst the Irish Catholics, at that very nick of time when the Peace of 46.
was proclaimed in Dublin and Kilkenny, not only may be said to have had in many
things a perfect resemblance unto the Janissaries of England, and their
Adherents there in the Parliament, and Council, and amongst the Clergy and
Laity in general, but even to have had the same proportion to the Confederate
Catholics in general, which those English Mamalukes, and their partakers, had
to the loyal Protestants, and mournful (at that time) Nation of England. To
demonstrate which, I shall give more evident proofs, if it shall, and when it
shall be necessary, as now it is not in answer to this Gentleman's present
Design, or Book, than he shall be able to give satisfactory answers. And shall
at this time content my self with telling the Reader, that if the (then Donogh)
Lord Viscount of Muskry (now Earl of Clancarthy) Edmond Lord Viscount
Montgarrett, Walter Bagnell Esquire, Sir Robert Talbott Baronet, Thomas Tyrell
Esquire, Richard Beallings Esquire, Gerott Fennel Esquire, Sir Lucas Dillon
Knight, Jeoffry Brown Esquire, Sir Pierce Crosby Knight, Sir Richard Blake, and
other Members of the supreme Council, and Commissioners, who concluded that
Peace, and published it at Kilkenny, and in pursuance thereof, received there
the Lord Lieutenant with all due respects and demonstrations of hearty joy and
loyalty, their imprisonments soon after, both there, at Wexford, and other
places, and their other sufferings then, by, and under their lately before
fellow-Confederates, and the power or authority by which they were so
imprisoned, and under which they so much suffered, and the illegal, violent,
forcible usurpation of it, even* I say, against the Laws of the Confederacy,
and Oath of Association, and without any consent, or even advice, or
requisition, but plainly against the known will and inclinations of the
generality of the Confederates, when the Lord Nuncio, and two or three more, by
the countenance and terror of armed Legions beeking them, made a new supreme
Council, and himself President of it, and joined Council and Congregation
together, and immediately after hurried on two Armies, in an evil hour, to
besiege the Lord Lieutenant at Dublin, and harassed the Country in their march,
und being disappointed by the justice of God toward them, and favor of Heaven
to the Loyal Party, and to the general^^y, even of the Confederatss, returned
in great displeasure and rage, and through despair, convoked an Assembly, which
otherwise he was never like to do, but of such men where they could possibly,
as were known to be most averse from all thoughts of Peace, and being sat,
overawed them, and took away all freedom from them, however they were composed,
and even forced them by threats of Excommunications, and power of that Army
(near the Town) whereof they were sure for such designs, to reject the Peace,
even after the Commissioners, who concluded it, were cleared upon too manifest
evidence to have proceeded according to their instructions to a tittle, and by
a full Authority given them by the precedent General, and free Assembly of the
Nation: I say, that if all these proceedings be considered, and particularly
the force that lay then upon all the Provinces, and Quarters, and People that
should otherwise have freedom of Election to Assemblies, and Suffrages in them,
and that would, in case of such due freedom, unquestionably vote for a perfect
submission to that Peace, the resemblance and proportion above given will
appear manifestly to all indifferent men, that have but even a very ordinary
knowledge of the Irish Nation, and affairs since 41. and of the difference of
interests among that People these 500. years past, since the first English
Conquest under Henry 2. and consequently it will appear, that our Person of
Quality will find himself obliged either to maintain a truth in this very false
assertion (which yet I believe he will not dare) The Protestants and Nation of
England were guilty of the sacrilegious breach with Charles the 1. which
through so many wiles brought him at last to the Scaffold: Or to confess, that
the Irish Catholics, or Nation of Ireland, cannot be said to be guilty, even
of that one persidious breach of the Articles of 46. much less guilty of having
often, if not always, broke the Conditions, either of that, or any other. And
yet I always grant him what I know to be true, and am right sorry to know,
that even some thousands have been guilty of that horrible breach in 46. Nay
grant moreover, all my Conscience, or knowledge, or (which is the same thing to
me) all that the truth it self will permit me to grant him, that some few
Persons of Quality, and some Regiments, and some Towns too of the Irish
Catholics, have often, if not always broke the Conditions, either of the
first, or last Peace, or of both, but withal say, that some Persons of
Quality, and some Regiments of England (and Scotland both) and some Towns too,
broke their Allegiance and Faith, and often too, if not always, in a far more
pernicious and horrible nature, with his late and present Majesty. And that my
Answerer will not therefore charge their Crimes on the Protestants, or Nation
of England, or on the universality, generality, or greater part of them, which
yet such an indefinite expression had he used it must do.

135. But however this be, or any thing else I have said in relation to that
Peace of 46, it can neither make nor mar his Objections or my Answers on the
subject of the last Peace, or that of 48. which is that only where on our
contest is, and must be. Neither can any thing said here be drawn to a
consequence that I would recall, or decline what I have confessed in my Letter
of the Judgments of God, most justly pursuing the Irish Nation in general for
the breach of public Faith so notorious and scandalous in that of 46. albeit
the Nation in general be not guilty of it. We know the very Army of God has
been defeated for the Judges, Chap. 7. V 4. and 5.
sin even of one man alone, as we find in the case of Achan at Ai, and whole
Nations, and great Kingdoms, and flourishing Empires most exemplarly punished,
and by conquest, and slavery and subjection to a foreign power for the sins of
the lesser part of the people, and sometimes for those of a very few; and
Innocents too involved in the common calamity, but involved justly by him who
is above all Laws, by his Sovereign Dominion over all Creatures, and by that
privilege which is incommunicable to any earthly Judge or King, doing Justice
in a legal way, where he may discriminate persons.

136. To that which our Person of Quality adds here, to end his third
difference, that the Irish after, an unparalleld Rebellion were in effect made
Lords of all Ireland, even the bloody Page 91.
stage upon which they had acted their guilt, I say that in a few words are two
manifest untruths, and one superfluous impertinent exaggeration, so often
repeated; and one too, which may be returned on himself, and those he pleads
for, not only with so many wicked Maxims, and sinful advices, but with so many
known falsities and impertinencies.

137. Though I detest all kind of Rebellion against lawful power, as being
condemned by the Laws of God and Nature, yet I can tell this Gentleman, that
Rebellion of Ireland was not only paralleled, but surpassed, and surpassed too
in a thousand degrees by many Rebellions of other Countries, even amongst
Christians. For not to speak of that of Catalonia in our own days, the Sicilian
Vespers, and the Butchery of Suisses, and the murder of the Danes in England,
and a hundred others which we read in History, did surpass it, and surpass it
so. And all those did that by design, and in effect subverted the very
fundamentals of all Government, Civil and Religious. And I am sure if none else
did, that of this Gentleman's Clients, and their partakers must have done so,
who made their Rebellion the most unparalled indeed, by the most execrable
Parricide that ever was; not to mention so many other adjuncts to render it
incomparably worse than that of the Irish, the cruel butchery of so many
thousand subjects, the perpetual ruin of so many millions of innocent people
in the three Nations, and the subversion, in part executed, and for the rest
intended of all the very fundamentals of the Commonwealth, both Temporal and
Ecclestical; yea of all Religion, and of all propriety and birthright
whatsoever.

And though I acknowledge (and hope all Irish Catholics do) his Majesty's very
gracious Concessions and favors in the Articles of 48. Yet I must tell this
Gentleman those very Articles no less manifestly convince of untruth what he
says here, that by them, or otherwise, the Irish were in effect Page 9
made Lords of all Ireland, then it is apparent out of the very Articles (and
no man of reason would believe otherwise, though he never had read them, and
yet seen this Gentleman's assertion to the contrary) they were not such as
forced from his Majesty all the Regalia, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal; nay
I say now, nor any essential or integral part of the Regalia; albeit this
Gentleman affirms in another they were; and I have already proved they were
not. And if this be true, my answer to his O^jection, concerning the Regalia,
as it is evidently such, without any question or contradiction, but that very
untrue and very irrational one of this Person of Quality; how can it be true,
that the Irish were in effect by these Articles made Lords of all Ireland? (For
to have been made otherwise, he does not dispute, as there is no ground for any
such dispute) Nay since the Irish Catholics, by these Articles, or otherwise,
were not made Lords, or did not pretend the Lordship, Right, Possession, or Use
of any Protestants Goods, Lands, Houses, Estates, etc. either English, Scots,
Welsh, Irish, or of any other Nation, having right by his Majesty's Laws, or
pretending such to live in Ireland, how could they, in effect, be made Lords of
all Ireland? So far they were from any such thing, that they excluded not any,
nor were made capable to exclude any at all, from any kind of Rights, either
Civil or Religious; the very possession of such Churches, as they then held in
their own quarters, at the making of that Peace, not being assured them
otherwise by Articles of Peace, Page 8. Art. 1.
those Articles, than that they should be permitted, or should not be disturbed
from that possession, till a Parliament were convened.

As for his exaggerating repetition of the bloody Stage upon which they had
acted their guilt, I am sure he may be upon Page 91.
certain grounds, and particular instances, answered:

1. by charging those who are his white boys with having made that Stage more
bloody, and as inhumanly too; nay yet far more than those very Irish miscreants
of the rascal multitude have, that acted their guilt even of so barbarous
murders, either precedently, concomitantly, or subsequently (however this
Gentleman will have it) upon their fellow Subjects of the Protestant Religion
in that Country: Whereof if he will see some particulars, I refer him to R. S.
in his Book printed at London, 1662. entitled, A Collection of some of the
Murders and Massacres committed on the Irish in Ireland, since the 23. of
October, 1641.

2. By denying his supposition of the Irish Nation, or Catholics of Ireland,
or of their known Representatives (the Supreme Council, or General Assembly, or
Commissioners that concluded that Peace) or of the generality, nay of any
considerable party of the people, after at any time confederated with the rest,
or that submitted to that Peace, or now desire the benefit of it, to have so
acted their guilt upon that Stage, as to be guilty of the bloodiness of it by
any barbarous or inhumane Crimes of Murder (which I know this Gentleman aims
at in this exaggerating repetition) For if he mean any thing else, or that of
the breach, it is answered already. And that he may see I give him not a bare
denial for an answer, I refer him to the 18 Article of that Peace of 48. where,
in the 21 Page of these Articles, printed, he may read the public desires of
that whole Nation: For there he will find it, provided (by them) that such
barbarous and inhumane crimes as shall be particularized Articles of Peace in
48. Page 21.
and agreed upon by the said Lord Lieutenant, and the said Thomas Lord Viscount
Dillon of Costilloe, Lord President of Connaght, Donogh, Lord Viscount Muskery,
Francis Lord Baron of Athenry, Alexander M. Domel Esquire, Sir Lucas Dillon
Knight, Sir Nicholas Plunket Knight, Sir Richard Barnewall Baronet, Jeffrey
Brown, Donagh O Callaghan, Tirlagh O Neile, Miles Relly, and Gerrald Fennel
Esquire, or any seven or more of them, as to the actors and procurers thereof,
be left to be tried and adjudged by such indifferent Commissioners, as shall be
agreed upon by the said Lord Lieutenant, and the said Thomas Lord Viscount
Dillon of Costilloe, etc. or any seven or more of them, and that the power of
the said Commissioners shall continue only for two years next ensuing after the
date of their Commission, etc. And I refer him (besides) to the several
Petitions of late exhibited by Sir Robert Talbott Baronet, and Colo^e^ Gerro^t
Moore, and others in behalf of their Countrymen to his Majesty at London, when
a Committee of the Council sat there, or the whole Council did upon the debate
betwixt the Convention Commissioners first, and after these betwixt the present
Parliament of Dublins Commissioners of one side, and those of the Irish
Catholics of the other, at several times; And referr him likewise to some
other Papers, then printed at London, in answer to some writings published or
given by those of the Convention against the said Catholics, and on this
Subject. In which Petitions and printed Papers, as likewise in so many other
public and private addresses at both times, the request of the Catholic Irish
Nobility and Gentry there, was very urgent in behalf of themselves and the
whole Nation of their party, that all murders on both sides, might be without
any exception tried, and punished according to Law.

139. Now wherefore the public and known Representatives of the Confederates,
the general Assembly of the whole Nation, which consisted of their Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Knights of Shires, and Burgesses of Corporations, did
provide so for the punishment of all barbarous and inhumane Crimes committed by
any of their own sides; and the Commissioners, Nobility, and Gentry at London,
since his Majesty's Restoration, did petition and desire, that all murders of
both sides may be exempted from any pardon, or out of any general Act of
Oblivion and Indemnity, and that this Gentleman's Friends, for whom he pleads,
would not assent to this, there is no man of reason but understands it was
therefore because the Irish Nation, who concluded and submitted to that Peace,
were not guilty of the bloodiness of that Stage, by barbarous or inhumane
Crimes or by Murders, notwithstanding any other guilt that might be justly
charged upon them: And that those who charge them so exorbitantly with such,
found themselves, or those of their Party, more truly chargeable with more
numerous, and more barbarous, and more inhumane Crimes and Murders, which in a
superlative degree blooded that very Stage too of Ireland, whereon they had
acted, and yet but p^rtly, their own proper guilt: For many of them did
likewise partly act their guilt, also, on that of Great Britain, even the most
horrid guilt imaginable, by the most bloody, and most execrable Murder (and in
the most unheard of, and most hideous manner) of the best and most innocent of
Kings.

4. But his 4th. and last difference (in the Cases) remains Page 91.
as yet. Saul 's Children were not executed (says he) for their Father his
having made the Gibeonites hewers of wood, and drawers of water (the utmost
that the Protestants desire even to the worst principled of the Irish Papists)
but for killing the Gibeonites after they were peaceably slaves; So that those
Judgments P. W. seems to threaten his Majesty with, if they have not the
Articles of 1648. made good, he and his Countrymen have only reason to fear;
for his Majesty kept them, and they have broke them. The Man in the dark in
England was once upon thoughts of relying on this difference; but immediately
after, finding the unsignificancy of that evasion, and his own weakness
therein, or rather indeed the clearness, and evidence, and applicableness of my
Example to the purpose I drove, and of all passages of holy Scripture made use
of by me in my Letter, changed his resolution, and confessed in plain terms, he
would not answer me at this weapon: Adding too some profane expressions, that
not unsignificantly imported he would not have the Saints governed by the
Oracles of God, or believe in them, but when they made for gaining or
preserving to them the good things of the Earth. And that so manifest
confession of his made me slight in my Reply to his Irish Colors displayed,
the transient reflection he made on the Gibeonites being made hewers of wood,
and drawers of water.

140. But for as much as a Person of Quality professedly insists upon it, as
his very last refuge, to show at least some kind of difference that might seem
not immaterial, I will not slight his Animadversions on this subject, but take
the pains to prove them as unfortunate, as any of those he has given all
along, either in his Parallel or difference of both Cases, or indeed in any
other passage of his Book since he turned Divine. I must therefore let the
Reader know, this Gentleman has not yet declined his customary arts, of
endeavoring to impose on the simplicity of some, and careless observation of
others, in running over his lines, not eve^ to impose (as much as in him lies)
on holy Scripture in this very passage. For I demand of himself, whether he
would not have the Reader understand him here, as if King Saul had been the
man, that made the Gibeonites hewers of wood, and drawers of water? And this to
have been a slavery and oppression so grievous, as it might be answerable to
that he would persuade his Majesty to lay on the Irish, by depriving them for
ever of their Estates, of their Cities, Corporations, Villages, Houses, Lands,
of all their Liberties, either Civil or Religious? And to have been moreover
against the Articles of the League made with Joshua? And besides that, King
Saul's Children were executed only for their Fathers killing of those
Gibeonites? And the three years mortal Famine on the twelve Tribes of Israel
was for that killing alone? And that neither this Famine, nor that Execution,
have been, even in any part, for any of those other oppressions the Gibeonites
suffered from Saul! And further yet, that no kind of unjust oppressions of
these peaceable Slaves, would have had provoked the wrath of God in any wise
against Saul, or his Children, or the People, had he abstained only from that
of killing? And lastly, that all that Vengeance upon their Tribes, aad the
seven Children of Saul, had no relation to the breach of Arricles, or of the
League formerly made with the Gibeonites, and should have been either deserved
by, or inflicted for the cruelty of Saul to these poor people, had they never
made by themselves, or by their Predecessors before them, any kind of League
with the Israelites? If our Person of Quality shall answer, his meaning was not
to abuse the Reader so, or to persuade him to any of those Particulars, I
demand of him then, what will his acute Animadversion signify, to prove any
difference here, that is not very immaterial? Would it not be (think you
Reader) an excellent Ratiocination if this Gentleman discoursed thus in plain
terms. Readiness Children were not executed, nor the twelve Tribes of Israel
punished with a grievous Famine of three years, because the Gibeonites had been
continued by Saul, hewers of wood, and drawers of Water, unto the House of the
Lord, as they had been many hundreds of years before, and had been so without
any injury or breach of their first Articles, or any farther slavery imposed
upon them; but Readiness Children were executed, and the twelve Tribes punished
so, because that King did kill some of them, and did not simply kill them, but
killed them against Articles, and against Articles sworn unto by invocation of
the God of Israel; and did not only kill some of them against Articles so
confirmed, but attempted to destroy all their Countrymen for ever, and
consequently brought on such as did survive all those other miseries and
oppressions, which must have attended his cruel attempt, to deprive them, and
their Wives, and Children, and all their Nation, of their Cities, of their
Corporations, of their Houses, of their Lands, of all their Liberties Religious
and Civil, and by consequence of their Lives too, or certainly to bring evils
on them worse than death. Therefore his Majesty needs not fear the application
of that Example, or of that Judgment of God on the House of Saul, or of any
part of it, or the like, or of any proportionable to the public and horrid sin
of the notorious breach of Articles, and even the breach of them, by destroying
not four Cities, nor four Corporations alone, but a hundred, and twenty or
thirty thousand Proprietors, and a million of Relations depending of them; yea
a whole and great Nation, by depriving them all for ever of all their Towns,
Villages, Houses, Lands, Liberties, both Religious and Civil, and (I say) by
depriving them thus against the express letter and sense of Articles of Peace,
and of such Articles too, as they had, for their parts, punctually kept;
provided only, that his Majesty killed not the Gibeonites, by shedding their
blood, though he make them groan perpetually under oppressions more
unsupportable to freeborn Subjects than death it self.

141. Think you not (Reader) this would be a most excellent Retiocination in
plain terms? That is, a very false impertinent Conclusion, derived without any
Cause, from very true, and very pertinent Premises? And yet behold that which
our Person of Quality, our acute Logician, and very Christian Divine must own,
as contained in his fourth Difference, if he do not own that first meaning I
gave, and all the particulars of it above by me explained, as that indeed which
to infer his wicked Conclusion, must have been virtually contained in so few
lines of his fourth Difference.

142. But lest our Person of Quality be more troubled, that he should be
thought to have committed an Error against the Topics of Aristotle, and Rules
which Logic teaches to guide Argumentations, than he could be known to have,
either ignorantly or wilfully, imposed on holy Scripture, and no less wickedly
for such a purpose, than ungroundedly have commented on it, I will save you,
Reader, some pains, by examining here every of those Particulars, which he must
of necessity insist upon, to maintain that meaning, or any rational inference
from such premises, or material difference in the cases.

143. And to begin with that of Saul his having made the Gibeonites hewers of
wood, and drawers of water, I shall give you no further trouble, than to read
the ninth Chapter of the Book of Joshua, where you shall find that convinced of
Joshua 9 v. 23.
manifest imposture. For the one and twentieth, and three and twentieth Verse
of that Chapter, tell plainly, it was Joshua himself, and the Princes and
People with him (long before Readiness days, God wot, even some hundreds of
years) that made the Predecessors of those Gibeonites, and Posterity after them
for ever, and consequently those in Readiness time, hewers of wood, and drawers of
water, for the House of my God, says Joshua himself.

144. That this condition imposed on the Gibeonites by Joshua, was neither
against Articles, nor at all an oppression so grievous as to be answerable in
any kind to those merciless oppressions this Gentleman would press his Majesty
to lay for ever on the Catholic Irish, cannot be denied. Not that I mean to
say, the Articles did not oblige Joshua before he confirmed them, after true
knowledge had of the Country of the People, with whom he made that League,
(though I might, upon very good grounds, deny, there was, before then, any
obligation on him arising from that League, as barely such, or as abstracting
from other circumstances of natural equity, or of some special revelation of
Gods pleasure to confirm it: whereas, relying thereon, the Gibeonites had
unfurnished themselves of all defense, and made themselves new enemies of all
their old friends, the adjoining Kings) but because the slavery imposed was not
against Articles, or the nature of a league made with Strangers become
Subjects, or even against the Liberties of natural Subjects, especially in that
Commonwealth, where viler ministeries imposed for the House of God, were
accounted no burden, nor oppression: and because the Gibeonites notwithstanding
their slavery, which this Gentleman of purpose, would heighten to abuse the
Reader with that of Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, enjoyed their Goods,
their Houses, and their Villages, and their Lands, and their Territories, and
their mighty Cities, whereof the tenth Chapter Joshua c. 10. v. 2.
of Joshua tells that Gabaa was a Royal one. Which kind of slavery I dare
promise the Catholics of Ireland would freely undergo, to serve the
Tabernacle of God, if our Person of Quality and his friends would be content,
that his Majesty should let them enjoy withal the other advantages of their
Peace, as the Gibeonites did of theirs.

145. Concerning the particular of Readiness Children to have been executed only
for killing the Gibeonites, I believe the testimony of the very executioners,
those other Gibeonites themselves, who escaped the designs and fury of Saul,
nay beyond exception, disprove him, and prove manifestly this truth, that
Readiness Children were not executed by them for his only killing of their
brethren, but for his other oppressions also, and for his farther designs
against all their Countrymen universally: Virum qui attrivit nos, and oppressit
inique, ita delere debemus, ut ne unus quidem residuus sit de stirpeillius in
cunctis finibus Israel. Dentur nobis septem viri de filiis ejus, ut
crucifigamus eos Domino in Gabaa. Saul, quondam electi Domini. The man that
consumed u^, 1 Samuel, 2. Chap. 5, and 6. Verse.
and that devised against us, that we should be destroyed from remaining in any
of the Coasts of Israel, let 7. men of his Son^ be delivered unto us, and we
will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did choose, are
the very words of the Gibeonites that executed them, and witness this truth in
the one and twentieth Chapter of the second Book of Kings (as the Title and
Order of these Books are in the vulgar Edition) Without question these men that
speak here, were then alive, or not killed when they spoke thus. And surely the
plundering of their Goods, and the beating them out of their Cities, Houses,
and Lands, the Inheritance of their Fathers, and the bringing upon them all the
miseries that are consequent to such a Design and Enterprise, and actual
effecting of it, even by the armed power of a King, were other oppressions, and
most grievous too, as they were against the very nature and essence of their
League in the highest nature. And therefore the Children of Saul were not only
executed for having killed their Brethren, but also for these other cruel
injustices done to such others as did with their lives escape his fury; if, I
say, the testimony of the very Executioners of these Children be admitted.
Whence, and out of those other natural reasons concomitant, as likewise out of
the known Declaration of Gods intention and prom^se, in so many Places and
Books of holy Writ (which I omit to give, because I am in have to conclude my
Observations on this Difference, and that those reasons and places are obvious,
and by none denied that is a Christian) to punish even whole Kingdoms with
most exemplar scourges, even sometimes with the translation of the Principality
to another people, for such public injustices; and out of the rule, moreover
of comparing Scriptutes, which rule this Gentleman must admit, the falsity of
the three next ensuing Particulars must appear; and the biased evil comment
which I justly suppose our Person of Quality will make on that of the first
Verse of the 21. Chapter 2 of Samuel, because he slew the Gibeonites, must
appear likewise: being the words a^e not exclusive or negative, but positive or
affirmative only: and being we may easily understand how the Oracle would have
expressed in the fewest words, and most significant, all those evils of Saul
against the poor Gibeonites, which provoked Heaven to a punishment so
exemplary, even upon the whole Nation represented by him.

146. But in answer to the last particular I need not allege more than the very
known Law of God to Moses, where express command was given the Israelites to
kill every Mothers (...) 7. (...), 2, and 3.
Child of the Amorrhites, and never to make truce or peace, or league with
them. Which is the reason our Person of Quality must confess, if he deny not
Scripture, even in his own sense of it, that Saul and his people had not sinned
at all, nor consequently brought any Judgments of God upon himself or his
Children, or Kingdom after him, had not his killing the Gibeonites been against
the conditions and Articles of that league.

147. So that from first to last, and more especially out of this observation
on that last particular of the meaning, which he must have, if he mean to say
any thing against me, I may evidently conclude, that in what ever sense this
Gentleman would have his fourth Difference understood, or into what ever kind
of argumentation he would have it molded, he cannot infer any difference that
will not appear to an understanding man, very immaterial, and very impertinent,
and no way becoming an Argumentator so acute and subtle, and laborious too.

148. I had almost forgot what he said in the perclose of this undiffering
difference, that his Majesty kept them (to Page 92.
wit the Articles of 48.) and they (that is, the Irish) have broke them. Indeed
his Majesty has not only kept them while he had any power left him (or his
Lieutenant or Deputy in Ireland) by this Gentleman's friends, but I am
confident will keep them now again, and ever henceforward, if this Gentleman or
his Associates do not put, anew, such necessities on him, as may hinder the
free current of Justice to all his Subjects indifferently. Which I hope the
Providence that restored our good King so miraculously, and preserved the poor
Catholics of Ireland alive under so many changes of Tyrants, will never give
any the power to do. And for his assertion of their having broken them, I have
already (...). 92.
more than sufficiently disproved it in his meaning, or as to the generality of
that Nation.

149. Yet his Parenthesis (Or that the utmost that the Protestants desire, even
to the worst principled of the Irish Papists, (...). 91.
is to make them hewers of wood, and drawers of water) I do allow in a good
sense. For indeed such as are truly the Protestants, have more of compassion,
to even the greatest Delinquents of the Irish, than to desire their
Transplantation, to the Isles of America, and to send them away even naked, as
this Gentleman's Protestants have done to whole Townships of them, and intended
to do with all the residue, had not the great mercy of God, and fortune of
Charles the Second, put a sooner period to their tyranny, than this Gentleman
peradventure sometime either expected or desired.

150. As for his observing transiently that P. W. seems to threaten his Majesty
with those Judgments come upon the Pa^ (...)
Kingdom of Israel, and Readiness Children, for the breach of Articles: P. W.
says, the manner of relating those Judgments, the modesty of the language,
and his own hearty wishes (in the Letter) immediately following his relation of
that Example, leave no ground for this injurious note. May Providence, and the
Kings Righteousness, and your sage Council (my Lord) obstruct all occasions of
reflecting on this (and so many other Examples of God's revenge of
Article-breaking) any further, than that the best of Kings may see the worst of
evils attending the Counsels of our Adversaries, and that their Power,
whatever it be, cannot be so dangorous as their Demands against our Articles,
is the hearty prayer of P. W. there, against those, or the like, or indeed
rather against any kind of Judgments on his Majesty; so false it is that P. W.
seems to threaten his Majesty with those Judgments. Unless peradventure his
Majesty's most loyal Counselors, and fastest Friends, and godliest Prelates,
debating a Case, and reasoning for the justice of it, in the absence, or even
in the presence too (if you will have it so) of his Majesty, or making public
speeches in the Parliament House, or preaching in the Church, even before all
the Estates of the Kingdom, and alleging exemplar punishments of God in former
ages, and in the particular of such a controverted Case (as for example, in
that of Article-breaking, or of any other you please) and alleging them out of
holy Scriptures, and pertinently, and only to dissuade his Majesty from
embracing, or to lay before him the dangers of regarding some ungodly wicked
Counsels that others would suggest, and yet alleging such with all due
respects for, and answerable affections to his most sacred Majesty: I say, that
unless such men, and in such Cases, or in such Auditories, or Places, would
seem to threaten his Majesty with those Judgments, they should relate as
inflicted exemplarily upon other Princes in the like Case. Neither can P. W.
justly be taxed even with seeming to threaten his Majesty with any such: Or if
they in such cases would seem indeed to threaten so, and yet be no way blamed,
nor blameable therefore, but esteemed by his Majesty, and all good men,
faithful, truly loving, and nothing less observant and respectful Subjects:
Neither can that Observation of this Person of Quality prejudice P. W. in the
Judgment of his sacred Majesty, or of any good man, or of any indifferent or
judicious Reader; especially when P. W. may be known to such as please to
enquire after him, to be such a man, as having already given sufficient
asguments of his faith, and his affection, and respects, and reverence, and
veneration too, of his Majesty's most sacred Person, is ready always to run
all kind of hazards for him, which any, the most loyal Subject ought, even
without expectation of other reward in this World, but what the discharge of
his duty, and satisfaction of a good Conscience must make him professor of.

151. After this Gentleman had proved himself (though a cunning, yet) a very
bad Expositour, and no less unfortunately given all along, and perclosed his
Differences, than he made a Parallel to his own disadvantage, he must seek
applause from the Reader, at least for some godly advice to the Irish Nation
first, and then to P. W. Since the breach of Faith is so foul a sin, and
deserves such heavy punishments, even by P. W 's own confession, and since it
is fully Page 92.
proved, those, for whom he pleads, have not only once, but often, yea always,
broken their agreements; let them with patience bear what they have drawn upon
themselves: and let him henceforth employ his Pen, and his Press, in inviting
his Countrymen, rather to acknowledge his Majesty's mercy, that no more are
punished, than some are, and that so little too, comparatively to their Crimes.
But if that undeniable Maxim hold, Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocunque
defectu, how can this holy Preacher, expect even upon this passage that
applause of his Auditory which he proposed to himself? For not to take notice
of a Confession attributed by him here to P. W. where he should ingenuously
have himself confessed it was the grand assertion of P. W. in that Letter (so
famous now by the man in the dark, and the Person of Quality's impugnation of
it in two several books) that the breach of Faith is so foul a sin, and
deserves such heavy punishments, and therefore allowing (as I must) his first
supposition here, without exception, I am confident the Judicious Readers of
this impartial Reply will not be persuaded, without farther proof than any, or
all he has given, that it is fully proved, those for whom P. W. pleads, have
not only once, but often, yea always broken their agreements. P. W. pleads the
Justice of public Articles, and of the performance of public Faith, only to,
and for the Iri^h Nation in general, or as to the generality, or greater part,
or (in all contingencies) for those only, who cannot be disproved (before his
Majesty or the Lord Lieutenant, or those other men of Honor appointed by his
Majesty as impartial Commissioners and Judges) to have forfeited the benefit of
those Articles, by an unlawful breach of them. And P. W. desires only his
Majesty's Royal and merciful regard of such unfortunate Irish Catholics as
have unlawfully transgressed against that Peace. And I am sure the first
(admitted) supposition, or the confession, or assertion too of Gods Judgments
pursuing most justly the breach of public Faith, will not argue any
unlawfulness, injustice, or unchristianity, either in that plea, or this desire
of P. W. Yet I grant him notwithstanding, that his advice of bearing with
patience, simply taken in it self, or (which is the same thing) without m^xture
of ungranted, unproved, or even untrue supposals, would be commendable, whoever
gave it, and the practice of it more, whether such as gave it made other
addition, true or false. And therefore I cannot allow his meaning in those
words, what they have drawn upon themselves.

152. For the Irish Nation, or Catholics of Ireland generally taken, or taken
only for the greater part, or, if he please, for the Representatives alone,
never drew upon themselves, by a public breach of those Articles of 48.
whereof they may be said to have been guilty, that, whatsoever it be this
Gentleman intends in the fore mentioned words. Well they might, by other sins,
have provoked Heaven to involve them in the common punishment, and so drawn
upon themselves that, which they have suffered hitherto, either from the
justice of God immediately, or from the injustice, violence, or tyranny of men.
But that they have, by any sins whatsoever, drawn upon themselves what this
Gentleman further, or indeed solely intends here, to wit, an absolute final
resolution of his Majesty, by a clear significative Declaration of his will in
his Laws, or Acts of Parliament, to make the Irish Nation evermore hewers of
wood, and drawers of water, in this Gentleman's interpretation, or in that of
the Man in the dark, that is, to let them live only, and make them ten million
of times more pitiful slaves than the Gibeonitet were, by taking away from
them all their Cities, Castles, Mannours, Villages, Houses, Lands, even to a
foot, and make them the contempt and scorn of all Christian Countries, of
Mankind, I must confess I want both Revelation and Reason to believe this
Gentleman's bare word for it.

153. Upon his advice to my self I shall not demurr, being I have anticipated
it long ago, and not by my Pen or Press alone, but my Tongue, and Voice, and
Mouth, and Lungs also, and by all the very faculties of my Soul, and Page 92.
not only to acknowledge his Majesty's mercy, that no more are punished, (of
those, I mean, who are by the Laws punishable) than that some are (whether by
his Majesty or not, I dispute not) and that (as by his Majesty) so little too
comparatively to their Crimes; but also to celebrate his Majesty's Justice,
that notwithstanding all those, even disobedient Oppositions, and prevaricating
Contradictions of this Gentleman's Party, these two years past, some, (though
very few) are in some measure delivered already out of the Lions throat, and
Harpies tallons. And I hope to have daily more and more cause to magnify this
Justice, and that Mercy, and to sing to his Majesty as David did sometime to
God, Misericordiam and Judicium cantabo tibi Domine.

154. Yet I cannot but observe here, how much more incomparably this Gentleman
is bound to employ his own Pen, and his own Press, in inviting his own beloved
people, even to super-magnifie, and super-exalt his Majesty's unspeakable Mercy
to themselves, and not his mercy alone, but his munificence, and his bounteous
goodness, and extraordinary favors: being that not only none of them (except
those very few of the most immediate Actors in that horrible Tragedy on the
Scaffold at White Hall) are punished, either so little, comparatively to their
superlative Crimes, or at all, positively, without any such comparison: And
being they are not only pardoned, not only indemnified in all respects, but
even equalled in all capacities (and by actual instances, and those too very
manifold, of titles of honor, and places of greatest authority, profit, and
trust) with his Majesty's most faithful and approved Subjects.

155. And I cannot but further observe the indiscretion of this Gentleman, that
by upbraiding others with a repetition of lesser Crimes (or suppose them
equivalent, which they cannot be justly supposed) and a repetition of such even
to loathing, leaves himself, or his Cause and Party, (let himself be guiltless)
open to the same reproach, or a far greater. He should have remebred how the
godly Malefactor on the Cross did rebuke his fellow, that railed, Neque tu Deum
times, qui in eadem damnatione es? Do Luc. 26. 40.
not thou fear God, since thou art in the same condemnation? Or at least
reflected on that of the King in the Parable to the cruel inexorable Servant,
Serve nequam, omne debitum dimisi tibi quia rogasti me, nunquid ergo oportuit
te misereri conservi tui, sicut and ego tui misertus sum? Matthew. 18. O Mat. 18.
32.
thou wicked servant, I pardoned thee ten thousand talents, and pardoned thee
so great a debt only of pure compassion, only because thou desiredst me;
should not thou also have compassion for thy fellow servant, and not
presently take him by the throat, and throw him in prison for a hundred pence,
and be nothing moved with his extreme poverty, and his unfeigned humiliation,
or with all his pitiful entreaties, or with all his best purposes, promises,
and offers? Our Person of Quality might have reflected hereon, if he pleased,
and on the terrible sentence immediately given* on that hard-hearted Servant*
and on the Ministers of Justice apprehending him, and binding him hand and
foot, and throwing him into utter darkness, even into a place of weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth. And this Person of Quality might have (on
consideration of all) determined with himself, that he had done much better to
have spared himself, and me both, some ink, and some paper, and some labor too.

156. But I fear he is one of those we read in Solomon's Wisdom, Blinded with
their own malice; or of those in Esaias, Wisdom c. 2. v. 21 Esaias, c. 6. v. 10.
Jeremy, c. 13. v. 23.
Who hear, and will not understand. But whether also that question of the
Prophet Jeremy in the 13 Chapter of his Book may not be, and that very
pertinently too, asked here in relation to him, Nunquid potest Aethiops mutare
pellem suam, aut Pardus varietates suas? Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or
the Leopard his spots? the Reader may determine. For my part, I cannot
otherwise think, than that it may, when I see this Gentleman t^ke a rise from
P. W 's. Parallel for the inserting of those two particulars, which immediately
Page 92.
follow his former advice: and when I yet see the further, and plain
explication of them both, and the period of his, otherwise incredible
malignity, in that which next comes after, and which he calls, and is indeed,
the conclusion of his whole infamous Book.

The first is, If any of the Children of P. W 's. Clyents lose their Lands,
though actually they were not guilty of their Page 92.
Fathers Rebellion, let him remember, even in the Case which he instances, that
the seven Sons of Saul were hanged up to the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, though
they had not actually slain these Gibeonites, for which they themselves were
punished. Let him also remember, that till justice was done the famine lasted,
and after it was done the famine ceased. Those lost their lives for their
Fathers sin; but these (if any) lose but their Fathers forfeited Lands for
their Fathers crimes.

157. Supposing, Reader, thou will not be abused by this Gentleman's if any
twice repeated here, either through some uncertainty belike of what he
apprehended may be future, or of purpose to conceal the Design (which yet he
cannot conceal in his next Particular, joined with his concluding Wish,
specially if you compare these to his very invidious, and very false, both
suppositions and assertions, before given of the whole Irish Nations having
broken the Peace, and consequently forfeited their Estates: And moreover, if
you compare that his Particular, and his conclusive Wish, to the strict
Qualifications of Innocents, could he or his friends enact such as they
strugled for) I must beg your patience a little, if I alter the Scene, and
place this Gentleman and his Party on the Stage, to answer this first
Particular, instead of P. W. and his Countrymen and Clients.

158. For put the case that some fourteeen years past, in the very heat of War,
when the long Parliament was rampant, and his late most sacred Majesty, of
glorious remembrance, was forced to put himself into the power of his Enemies,
this Person of Quality, and those he pleads for, had out of remorse of
Conscience, and real sense of their duty (though withal out of a desire to
provide for their own safety, under Kingly Government, according to the Laws
established in the Kingdom) returned willingly and passionately to their
Obedience, and this too upon public Articles of Peace; but with intent partly,
and of design to rescue his Majesty, whom they had never intended to dethrone,
or to exclude his Line or Family from the Crowns of England, Ireland, or
Scotland, notwithstanding any other evils, which the nature of a War into
which they had been hurried, and partly constrained to undertake, might be
charged upon them; yea notwithstanding the murder of some hundreds of innocent
people, which the rascal multitude amongst them, had upon the first
Insurrection committed, and the plundring withal of many thousands, and the
killing also of yet a far greater number in the prosecution of War, and of
Soldiers, or men armed, coming against them in hostile manner: And suppose
they had withal submitted, or brought in with them, to obey his Majesty, so
many strong Cities, Forts, Castles, so many great Shires, and fruitful
Provinces, and an Army so numerous of Horse and Foot, as the Catholic Irish
did, even a whole Kingdom for the matter; two Cities alone, and some few
Regiments, and other scattered Companies, adherents to them, in Boggs, and
Woods, and Mountains, only excepted: And that notwithstanding, through some
hidden causes, or secret displeasure of God, or accidents of War, that are very
ordinary, or through some unlucky division, arising, or newly kindled, or
revived, and heightened, and strengthened too, of purpose, either by a
distrustful or malevolent Party amongst them, the common Enemy (and suppose
that Enemy had been the Irish) did prevail: And suppose moreover, those
repentant Converts of our Person of Quality, as to their generality, or greater
part, and even as to their Representatives, had sadly beheld many of their own
People, and even some of their own Towns, proving disobedient and refractory to
commands, and even most grievous affronts done, and (if you please too) some
thoughts of treachery entertained by a few Citizens of one, or two, or three of
their Towns, and services lost, and the Enemies power escaped through the
peevish refractoriness or unreasonable distrusts of some, and the heads of
their Clergy besides, endeavoring, by threats of spiritual censures, to
withdraw the obedience of all their great and numerous Body from his Majesty's
Lieutenant over them, but not prevailing herein, as to the generality, or far
greater part, though hindering very much the service against the common Enemy:
And put the case too, that all had been finally undone, and the Kingdom lost
occasionally through such unlawful oppositions of a few, or the lesser part;
and yet that both sides of them, as well the disobedient as obedient, had to
the last man refused any Capitulations with such their common Enemy, to serve
him against the King; but had even very many thousands, even three or four
legions of them, withdrawn out of the Country, and ran his Majesty's fortune
abroad, or waited his commands, and in all Countries roamed after him
perpetually, fixing all their hopes upon, and quitting all other services under
foreign Princes for him, but such only as might stand with his pleasure; always
ready to venture again limb and life to reinthrone his Majesty, as likewise the
remainders of them at home, under the prevalent Usurpers, had been waiting all
opportunities for that end, and therefore upon that account partly, if not
principally, as persons suspected, made the most miserable slaves in the World,
and every new Moon confined to Gaols: And suppose that after many years had
been so past over, by this Person of Quality, and his Party, some wandering in
exile abroad, others at home groaning in captivity, all waiting with impatience
the occasion and hour, God of his mercy were pleased at last to throw an Apple
of Discord amongst those in that case now supposed usurping Victours (to wit,
P. W. and his Party) and raise between them such irreconcilable feuds, as,
together with the continual fears, arising partly from those abroad in
banishment, and those at home in bondage, though peradventure principally from
the more numerous Party of old Cavalliers, and from their Friends dispersed in
the three Nations, had forced them (viz. the said usurping Victours) to concur
to, though with much reluctance, or rather to behold (but with heavy hearts,
and arms across) the calling home of his Majesty to the possession of his
Fathers Throne, administration of Justice, or dispensation of Mercy, to each
one of his people, throughout the British Empire, answerable to their several
capacities, and to the Laws, and to the equity of them, and above all to his
own gracious, benign, and merciful Genius: And suppose yet further, that that
usurping people which had partly so called, or so looked upon his Majesty
returning home, and which had kept too this Person of Quality, and his Friends,
for so many years in exile and slavery, had been those too who had all along
concurred, and even acted with such others as bereaved his Majesty's dear
Father of his life, contrived the Oath of Abjuration, and so many others, took
it, and the rest all, and further made, and to their power observed, and forced
upon others the observation of all those Oaths and Acts we have seen against
the Line of King James, and Family of the Stuarts, and that the same Usurpers
(the supposed Enemies in our present case) had for that concurrence of theirs,
and prosecution of it, enjoyed so long the Lands and Estates of this very
Person of Quality, and his Friends, even a great Kingdom: And suppose lastly,
that (after all) his Majesty were sitting, as he now is, to administer Justice
to all his Subjects indifferently, and to give withal incomparable arguments
of his Clemency, and that P. W. were pleading there for himself, and his own
Party (supposed still in such a case to be of that side, whereof our Person of
Quality, and his People are now) and were pleading there, not for Pardon or
Indemnity alone to himself, and his Friends, but for the acquisition,
moreover, and continuation, and that by a new Law too, or by a Law to be made
anew for that purpose against all former fundamental Laws, and for the
enjoyment for ever, by his Majesty's grant, all the Lands, Houses, etc.
belonging formerly, o^ before the Wars to this Person of Quality, and other his
Friends (who fighting so many years continually for the King, were in that
Cause dispossessed of them by him, that is, by P. W. and his Partners, and that
P. W. were pleading too against innocent Children the Rebellion at any time of
their Fathers, although early Converts, and always after constant Subjects,
and were pleading, I say, for the acquisition, or continuation to himself, and
his, of the Rights and Lands belonging othewise to them, even by entail made in
consideration of a Marriage-Portion given by their Mothers: I demand, in such a
case (not whether this Person of Quality pleading on the other side, admitted
unquestionably by all indifferent to be the better side, would allow P. W. the
impudence of such a Plea, but) whether he would find it any difficult matter to
show the unfitness of that Example of the Seven Sons of Saul hanged up to the
Lord in Gibeah of Saul, to justify in that supposed case, or to persuade, or
even to move his Majesty to the cutting off all Entails, even such as were made
before the War begun, and such too, as were made in consideration of a
Marriage-Portion paid, or move his Majesty to the bereaving of all right of
succession or inheritance in their Fathers Estates, the Children of his (in
such a case) long suffering and loyal Party, even those very Children that were
not actually guilty of their Fathers Rebellion? Or would he think it an hard
task to prove the unsignificancy of the next allusion, That till Justice was
done the Famine lasted, and after it was done the Famine ceased? Or the
ineptitude also (to his end) of that following Antithesis, Those lost their
Lives for their Fathers Sin; but these (if any) lose but their Fathers
forfeited Lands for their Fathers Crimes? And whether he would not think, that
not only his Majesty, and all the Court, but all indifferent Persons on Earth,
would laugh even to scorn the brazen face of P. W. or at least his very extreme
lack both of Grace, and of Reason, if in such a case he made use of this
Rhetorical Divinity (which our Person of Quality uses against him) to get the
Lands of all such Innocents, the Children (in our supposition) of this Person
of Quality's repentant early Converts, bestowed on himself, and his Clients,
still supposed in the case to have fought all along against his Majesty, and
continued obstinate even to the last hour in pursuance of the Good Old Cause,
and to have dispossessed those very Children of this Person of Quality, and his
Friends, and to have dispossessed their Fathers too, fighting for the Royal
Quarrel.

159. But not to perplex the Reader any more with this imaginary case, or the
Person of Quality with troublesome apprehensions, how to answer in it, without
speaking his own condemnation out of his own mouth, let us on both sides put
off our suppositious Persons, and return again to our own, he to his, and I to
mine, and both to the case indeed, which has a real being. And let the Reader
judge of my following Answers to his evil Application of that Example of
Readiness Children, etc. For I must tell him,

First, That the hanging up to the Lord of the Children of Saul in Gibeah of
Saul, cannot be a Precedent to any mortal Man, King, or inferior Judge, to
warrant the like, or other punishment of Innocents, unless an Oracle of God, or
a special Revelation or Inspiration extraordinary from Heaven, did speak the
pleasure of God to that purpose; as in the permission given by David to put
those Children of Saul to death.

That otherwise, or without such an Oracle, or some heavenly Inspiration that
were indubitably such, David had most grievously sinned, in putting to death
the Children of Saul, for that breach of Saul; even sinned, I say, against the
ordinary known Law of God in Deuteron. 20. Chapter, 16 Verse, N^n occidentur
Patres pro Filiis, nec Filii pro Patribus, sed u^uquisque pro peccato suo
morietur: The Fathers shall not be put to death for the Children, neither the
Children shall be put death for the Fathers; every man shall be put to death
for his own sin. Which the Prophet Ezechiel some Ages after did again declare
to be the will of God. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father,
neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son; the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself, the Soul that sins it shall dye. Ezechiel, 18 Chap. 20 Verse. And
therefore, that instead of diverting the wrath of God from the People, David
were more like to incense it more and more, and continue the Famine, and other
scourges, had he, without a special dispensation from God, given over to death
innocent Children for the sin of their Father.

That it is more than our Person of Quality can be assured of, whether the
seven Sons of Saul, who were hanged to R^bby Solomon apud Lyran hic. 2 Reg ^1.
v. 6.
the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, had been guiltless, or not actually guilty in
their own persons of the blood or oppression of the Gibeonites.

That however this be, or whatever may be thought of that Law in Deuteronomy,
or of the repetition of it in Ezechiel, our Person of Q^ality will not say, his
Majesty, or any other earthly King, is bound in Conscience by that precedent of
David, or that it may be either convenient or exdient for his Majesty to look
upon it now as a pattern for himself, either in relation to the Children of
such Fathers, as are known to have washed off the guilt of their Insurrection
by a very early Repentance, and a very constant Obedience ever since 48. And
who moreover can plead the justice and indemnity of Articles which they have
not forfeited; or even to the Children of those others, who have been so
unfortunate the second time, as to have broke that Peace of 48. albeit they did
never submit to, or concur with the Regicides. For if our Person of Quality
will insist upon any such Obligation of Conscience, or even Expediency, as
arising thence, and that his Majesty were once persuaded thereof, what should
then become of this Gentleman, and his beloved People, in relation to whom
there must be in all Contingencies a far greater tie of Conscience or a far
greater Expediency arising from that very Example to punish them? What, I say,
of his or their Children, even such as have not been actually guilty of their
Fathers Rebellions? Rebellions ten thousand times more hainons, more execrable,
than that of the worst principled of the Irish can be justly said to have been.

160. And if our Person of Quality would, in case of any such resolution in his
Majesty, enter into a Plea of Justice, grounded now indeed upon that of the
Letters from Breda, or Acts of Indemnity confirmed by assent Royal, and would
enter this Plea of Justice, not for the innocent Children alone, but their
Fathers too, of his Party, who had not since that Oblivion trespassed against
the Laws: Why may not a fortiori, the Catholics of Ireland, who broke not
their Articles, be admitted likewise to a Plea of Justice, yea notwithstanding
their former Rebellions? Their Crimes have been less, and their Repentance
earlyer, and their Suffering for the King without any compare by him or his:
for those of this Person of Quality's Party never suffered the least
affliction, or one sole moment for his Majesty.

161. Or if the dispute had been before the Act of Indemnity, or Letters of
Breda, or any Promise given, or if this Gentleman's Plea must have been Mercy
alone, as verily it should be in that Case, or before any such Letters, Acts,
or Promises, even for the Children of his People, even for such of their
Children as were not actually guilty of their Fathers most truly unpar^ll^l^d
Rebellions; Wherefore may not the Irish, that even forfeited (so as abovesaid)
the benefit of their Articles in 48. be admitted to that P^ea too, and hope
even for that Mercy to themselves, and to their Children also, which this
Person of Quality would sue for to his own, in this last Case?

162. And if to these, or to their suit for Mercy, in such a case, that example
of Readiness Children hanged in Gibeah of Saul, could be no obstruction, no
hinderance of his Majesty's conscientious, gracious, and merciful pardon, or
gift even to their Children after them, of their Fathers Inheritance before the
Wars, and not only of such as were entayl'd; neither can it be in the present
case of the Irish, or of such of them as have broke, even the Peace of 48. any
more, but rather much less groundedly alleged to debarr his Majesty's
compassion of their Children, or themselves either.

163. Secondly, Or to his allusion to the Famine continued until Justice was
done, etc. I must tell him also, the answer is very obvious; that for the wrong
done the Gibeonites, Page 92.
there was no punishment inflicted, no reparation made, no Justice done by the
hand of Man, before the seven Sons of Saul were hanged: And therefore we may
conceive it is very suitable to the Justice of God that Famine should last,
until, even some descending from his very loins, that so cruelly oppressed the
Gibeonites against public Faith or Covenant, were punished by the very hands
of the self same people. Whereby to teach the world how horrible must be the
Sin of Article-breaking: Whereon peradventure, the very chosen Israelites
themselves had not otherwise much reflected. But for the wrongs done by the
Irish Catholics at any time, since the first insurrection on the 23 of October
41. not seven persons alone, but seven thousand, nay sevenscore (if not seventy
times seven score) thousand have been long since punished by the Justice, and
by the hands of men, and punished even most exemplarly, and not the nocent
only, but the innocent, without any distinction or compassion, even armless and
harmless day-labourers, and women, and children, even babes, and
Chrysome-sucklings, hanging at their Mothers breasts; yea very many punished in
a legal way, tried in open Courts, condemned, executed, hanged, shot, beheaded,
and quartered. So that to pretend in this case of Ireland any defect of
exemplary punishment, or sufficient public Justice, even by the hand of Man,
and from such defect a Famine, or other visible Judgment upon the Kingdom now,
or since the Restoration of his Majesty, were to allege a cause that is not,
and an effect which we perceive not; being we cannot but see and acknowledge
ever since that happy return of his Majesty, a return likewise of all plenty,
and other both earthly, and heavenly blessings throughout his Majesty's
Dominions. Which had this Person of Quality better considered, it is like he
would not have mentioned here, in this allusion, the lasting of the Famine till
Justice was done, and the ceaslng of it, after that was done. For if his
allusion hold, the cessation of all those foregoing public Judgments, and
the succession of the greatest mercies throughout the English Empire, must be
rather an argument that so much Justice is done already, as the just anger of
God required, than that any more should be.

164. Thirdly, Or to show the ineptitude likewise (to his end) of his
Antithesis; Those lost their lives for their Fathers Sin; but these (if any)
lose but their Fathers forfeited Page 92.
Estates. P. W. entreats the Reader to weigh this following Ratiocination,
which our Person of Quality will find himself obliged to build upon it.

165. By Miracle, and by Oracle, or by a special Revelation or Inspiration from
Heaven, and by wonderful Judgments on the twelve Tribes of Israel universally,
for three whole years, David the Prophet, and Familiar of God, was instructed,
that it was the good will of God, notwithstanding the Law of Moses to the
contrary, he should resign to the Gibeonites the 7 Sons of Saul, though
innocent of their Fathers Crimes, to lose their lives. Therefore his Majesty,
without any kind of Miracle, Oracle, Revelatio^, Inspiration, or any visible
Judgment inducing him, may for the sin of others, long since repented, or at
least pardoned by Articles, resign over, and for ever also, to such men as this
Person of Quality, and his Associates are, the Rights, Estates, and
Inheritances of above seventy thousand innocent Children, and Children
unquestionably innocent, and Children to Fathers too, that fighting as became
loyal Subjects, did through Gods permission thereby make themselves, and these
their Children so miserable as they are known to be at present, and to have
been those ten years past; And his Majesty not only may, but ought to do so.
And not only may, or ought not to regard the condition of Innocence, or the
justice of public Articles of Peace, or the Laws of God or Nations in this
Case, but even to forget his never to be forgotten Clemency to a million of
other Children, and Children to Parents guilty of more atrocious Rebellions,
than the most frequently, or most obstinately guilty of these Irish Childrens
Fathers.

166. Behold, Reader, the Argument contained in that rare Antithesis. And if
this be not Logic out of Schools, and Divinity out of Hell, I confess I know
not what it may be. But this Person of Quality will perhaps defend both with
his English Interest, and his Protestant Religion, though I am persuaded he
could sometimes have shaken hands for his own Interest, and his own Religion,
with the most disloyal Genevians in Scotland, and thrive there too, amongst
them.

The second Particular is, Though even the Spirit of God it self Page 92.
witnesses, that Saul sought to slay the Gibeonites in his Zeal to the
Children of Israel and Juda, yet that it self could not silence, or suspend the
Justice of God. And therefore let P. W. know, that though in the third Article
of their Instructions to the titular Bishop of Fernes, and Sir Nicholas
Plunkett (their Commissioners to Rome) they own to the Pope, that in their Zeal
they raised Arms for the freedom of the Catholic Religion, yet no Zeal in
Religion can apologize for, or will hinder the effects of Gods Justice on his
Countrymen, for their unparalled Murders, and their often breaches against
Nature, and against Stipulation. To do evil that good may come of it, may be
the Doctrine of Rome, but is not the Doctrine of Christ; and by the fruit the
tree is best known.

167. I am inclinable to believe there is nothing of Zeal, as this Gentleman
gives it, in that passage, or any other of these Instructions, not that I think
it had been improper to such as had been reduced to the straights the
Confederates were in then, although some of themselves brought themselves, and
all the rest to such, even by a very unlawful rejection of the first Peace in
46. But that I know my self, those of the supreme Council was then, to have
been of this persuasion, that no Zeal of Religion could warrant before God or
Man the justice of raising Arms against the Prince, Magistrate, or Laws: And
that I know the Commissioners sent by the Confederates to Oxford and Dublin,
pleaded always the necessity was put upon them by the Lords Justices, even for
the safety of their lives, to take Arms. Besides this Gentleman, who is
curious enough in distinguishing material words (related unto) by a different
Character from the Roman, that is by Italick Letters, omitted to give so here
that word Zeal, albeit the only word was material above all the rest there,
which yet he delivers in Italique, as part of that third Instruction. And this
partly too makes me suspect it, as a pretty additional invention, of purpose to
parallel the Zeal of Saul in killing the Gibeonites, which I said in my Letter
could not divert the wrath of God incensed against Saul.

168. But whether it be so or no, or whether this Gentleman relates those
Instructions truly or not, it matters not, being the contest is not indeed
material, and that he disputes against me, whose constant belief is (even as
part of Catholic Doctrine, clearly delivered in the Scriptures, and in the
Fathers, and would this Gentleman's, and his Party's persuasion were so too)
that no Zeal in Religion can apologize for any kind of Rebellion, much less for
unparalled Murders, or often breaches against Nature, or against stipulation
committed therein, or indeed for any murder at all, or any one even single
breach of a just promise.

169. Yet I must dissent from this Gentleman in two things he says here: And
must affirm again, because he provokes me again, That even those very horrid
murders, (and be they as numerous too, as he will have them*) committed by a
very few of the rude rabble amongst the Irish, are not only not unparalleld in
Histories of former ages, and Page 93.
other Countries, and by very many instances, but not even in the History of
our own days, or that of England, since the prodigious murder committed on the
Scaffold at Whitehall by those that shaked hands all along with this
Gentleman's Clyents. And that all those Irish murders, even quintessenced into
one, have been unquestionably not so little heinous comparatively as
paralleled, but even as overparallel'd by that only one; yea had the Actors in
it committed no more, as yet they are known to have ten thousand before and
after. And I must affirm, that although it be confessedly true, that no zeal in
Religion can apologize for the sins either Personal or National of my
Countrymen, as neither (if not rather much less) for those yet more hideous,
and more abominable crimes of some of this Person of Quality's Brethren; yet
both he, and I too, (if Christians, if rational men) cannot but affirm also,
That a Godly repentance, with all due circumstances of it, according to the
Religion and Faith of God, taught us in the Word of God, may for the time to
come, hinder the effects of Gods Justice on my Countrymen, even those very
effects which this Person of Quality wishes from his very Soul (I am sure)
that no Page 93.
godliness may hinder, and which he no less positively denounces than if he had
the mercy of God in his power, and the knowledge of Gods decrees, or of all
future contingencies revealed to him. But he is neither a Prophet, nor the Son
of a Prophet, if I may guess. And what ever he be, it is like he has neither
the Mercy nor the Justice and power of God at his devotion more, nor the
knowledge of Gods eternal or temporary pleasure (concerning my Countrymen) more
certainly revealed to him, than the Prophet Jonas had all of them together, in
relation to the Ninivites. And therefore notwithstanding this Gentleman's
prediction here, of, or against the Irish, be so positive, so absolute an
assertion of the effects of Gods Justice to fall upon them hereafter, viz. (in
his conception, and according to his affection) the loss of all their Lands for
ever, and the transplanting of them all from one end of the borders of Egypt,
to the other end thereof, as presently you shall see in his Conclusion; yet he
must grant me that this prediction of his can be no more infallible than that
of Jonas, Adhuc quadraginta dies and Ninive Jon. 3 Chapter V. 4.
subvertetur, yet forty days and Ninive shall be overthrown. And we know this
prediction of Jonas the very Prophet of God, yea preached by the very command
of God himself, was notwithstanding falsified, and Ninive saved then from V. 7,
8, 9, 10.
any such, or other Judgment threatened by the Prophet, because the Ninivites
humbled themselves truly before God, and with faith and hope cried unto him for
mercy. And I believe my Countrymen may imitate them, and hope they will.

As for his occasional assertion, That to do evil that good Page 93.
may come of it, may be the Doctrine of Rome, no Romanist I am certain will
ever allow. Nor can he charge any of all their Communion with that wicked Maxim
in any kind of sense, that may not be returned on himself again with very much
disadvantage to his party. For if he say (for example) that some Papist writers
teach, that Subjects may rebel against the Sovereign power, to the end that
Religion may be restored or preserved; and therefore teach to do evil, that
good may come of it, Rebellion questionless being a very great evil in it self,
and true Religion as great a good: I would fain know, whether his own Religious
Clients have not in a thousand Pamphlets, and ten thousand Pulpits, and for 20.
years complete, maintained that un-catholick, wicked, sinful Position, against
the Laws of God, N^t^ral and Positive, and against the Laws of Man, Civil and
Ecclesiastical? And whether they have not all that while taught, all of them,
and practiced too, a most impious Rebellion, partly to introduce the very worst
Religion in the World, and partly, to have none at all? Nay, whether they have
not taught, and practiced also, that infernal Doctrine of mere design, first to
ruin Monarchy, and then Prelacy, and after these Magistracy and Ministry both
in general, could they drive on their design; and so devour the Tithes, and
then pull down the Steeple Houses (for so the Saints did name all Churches)
and, in a word, set Hell wide open upon the face of the Earth, and make
themselves the sole Masters of it, yea absolute Lords of all the good things in
it: of all other men's fortunes, and lives too, and at their own pleasure wash
their hands in the blood of the wicked, as they term all honest men, because
not of their cabal? And if this Doctrine, and this Practice be not incomparably
worse than that which (though wickedly) teaches by word or example, to do
evil that good may come of it; nay if it lead not by the hand to do many great
evils, that many other, yet far greater, yea all imaginable evils in the
world may follow, I understand nothing at all by this word evil. But if such
Diabolical Maxims and Practices flow naturally from the Doctrine of Geneva,
Rome needs not blush hereafter, not even for the most unchristian Maxims
charged hitherto (though falsely) upon her. And since by the fruit the tree is
best known, what will our Person of Quality think of his own tree, that bears
abundance continually of so evil, so deadly poisonous fruit? Or will not he
think of it, as our Savior did, foretelling in general what would become of
all such? Omnis arbor, quae non facit fructum bonum, excidetur, Mat. 7.
and in ignem mittetur. Math. 7. Nay, will not he think, that if by our
Saviors prediction or judgment, Every tree that bears not good fruit, shall
be cut down, and thrown into the fire, those that bear so evil, even the most
evil fruit conceiveable, are by the j^stice of God reserved for such a fire as
ever shall burn, and never consume thoroughly, but always reserve them for new
punishment, unless they timely change their Nature, and receive Siens of Grace
inoculated on the old wicked stock.

171. Albeit I have no cause to quarrel at the first part of this Gentleman's
Conclusion of his Book, or of his concluding Wish, That his Grace the Duke of
Ormond may be as another Page 93.
Joseph to his Brethren, being it is, and was my own Wish, in the perclose of
that Letter, so diligently commented upon by this Person of Quality, and so
just, and so good a Wish too, as (by his confession) drew the hearts of the
Protestants of Ireland to close with, desiring that his Grace may be a Joseph,
not only to the Israel of God (the Religious Protestants) Page 93.
but also a Joseph even to the Egyptians themselves, feeding and preserving
them, yet so as becomes Pharaoh 's Steward: And although I dispute not, at this
time, the limitation or extension of this Author's meaning under these notions;
the Protestants of Ireland, the Israel of God, the Religious Protestants, nor
his allusions moreover, to the Egyptians themselves, and Pharaoh's Steward; on
all which I could say enough to his confusion: and notwithstanding himself
makes it appear sufficiently, that his feeding and preserving them, was not so
much an effect of his Charity, as a further argument of his Hypocrisy; yet for
the second part of his own additional Wish (which I am sure he had not from my
Letter, or from elsewhere, but from the abundance of his own heart, and from
theirs who are such as himself) I know not what to admire most therein; his
extreme hatred and malice, or his extreme impudence and rashness: that, in
harboring in his own breast, or thoughts, a desire so merciless, cruel, so
unjust, and tyrannical, even beyond almost all imagination: this, in giving it
as a good Wish to the Duke of Ormond, and publishing it in print to all others,
and in these very words, Yet so as becomes Pharaoh 's Steward, reserving Page
93.
the Lands of all, but the Priests, to the King's free dispose, and removing,
that is transplanting the people from one end of the borders of Egypt to the
other end thereof. No regard of any Innocents, no remembrance of any Articles,
no more thoughts of the services and sufferances of any, no Justice to, no
Pity for the Irish Nation; but the Laws of Nations, even in that of Public
Faith, and the Laws of God too, in so many particulars, and the Laws of the
Land also, even the very Fundamental Laws of England, and Ireland both, must be
controuled by a new Law against all those former, of purpose to make Slaves of
the King's Friends to the King's Enemies, even hewers of Wood, and drawers of
Water, even in the very worst sense of such hewers, or such drawers, and to
bestow for ever the Estates of those upon these, and even to transplant their
very persons, Men, Women, and Children, from one end of the borders of Ireland
to another, and even to transplant them to a very narrow nook there, and that
too for most of the transplanted so (if it should so happen) set out in Boggs
and Rocks, and uncouth horrid Wildernesses: and the Duke of Ormond must be the
great instrument hereof, and the King himself the primary efficient, by this
Person of Quality's good wish to the Duke, and just desire from him. And the
Lands of the Priests, and the King's free dispose must cloak all this: As if
our Person of Quality, and his Consorts, had not long since deprived of Lands
and Houses, both the Priests of the Egyptians, and the Priests of the Israel of
God; or that he would now exempt either, had he had the least hope to prevail,
or the least pretense to quarrel against these. And as if that must be termed
the Kings free dispose, which the daily Machinations, and bloody Contrivings,
and threatening Demeanor of so many of this Person of Quality's most godly
Brethren necessitates his Majesty at present seemingly to own, or connive at.
Or that any freedom whatsoever in disposing the lands of Innocent Subjects to
him and his against the Laws, or the Lands of the Article-makers that never
transgressed, after such Articles made, could excuse from a breach of the Laws,
and a breach of Covenant, or Public Faith, such disposal. And I am sure, this
Person of Quality will insist no longer on the Kings free dispose, than it
shall relate to himself, and his party, or that the Estates of the Irish* be
disposed to his advantage.

172. But if notwithstanding all this he will struggle yet in justification of
his good wish or desire, I would fain know of him, what would himself or his
party think of P. W. or even of the Protestant Cavaliers that from the first of
the War to the last, continued unchangeably faithful to his late and present
Majesty, if I s^y P. W. or these Loyal Gentlemen of all the three Nations, or
of any of them, would, even, in the present conjuncture, and reflecting on so
many horrid Plots, daily set on foot, wish, desire, and labor with the Duke of
Ormond, and present Parliament of England, and with his Majesty, that a new Law
should be made, and a new Act revoking the late Act of Indemnity; or a new and
far other Declaration set forth by his Majesty, and by the Parliament after,
and with his Majesty's Royal consent made a Law, whereby all the Lands
belonging at any time, even by a just title, or before the Wars, to this Person
of Quality's good friends, whether Anabaptists, Quakers, Fifth Monarchy men,
Independents, or even Presbyterians, or any other sect, of what Judgment
soever, throughout the three Kingdoms, should be reserved to the Kings free
dispose, that is, for ever disposed by his Majesty's Royal grant to these
Cavaliers, and a fit proportion too, to P. W. and such of his Clyents as lost
themselves, and adhered unalterably, at least since 48 to his Majesty's
interests, and whereby, moreover, all the above named, our Person of Quality's
good friends, should be removed, that is transplanted from one end of the
borders of Egypt, to the other end thereof, all those in Scotland, to some
narrow steril corner in the Highlands, or to the Hebrides, or Isles of Orkney;
and all their conforts in England, to the most barren and mountainous part of
Wales, and all his beloved in Ireland to Iarchonnaght and Barrin? I would fain
(I say) know what in such case our Person of Quality, and his friends would
think of P. W. and his Cavaliers, wishing, desiring, and laboring so? Nay what
if the case had thus only stood with the Person of Quality, and all those his
friends, that they might have alleged to themselves Articles of Peace and
Public Faith given them in such Articles, made (suppose it so) with his
Majesty before his return from Breda? And what if the case had thus moreover
stood with them, and P. W. and his Clients, and even with all those Cavaliers,
that our Person of Quality, and his people, might have alleged against all for
themselves, so many years constant fighting, Warring, suffering for, and
adhering to the Kings Interest, in bondage, and in banishment, and that P. W.'s
Irish friends, and the English Cavaliers had been the very persons, who had for
so many years too, and ever since 41 unalterably, even to the year 59 or 60.
(when they could no longer) fought against the King and them, and brought all
the miseries of those times on all? would not he and his in such cases, and
specially in the later, except against the unreasonable, groundless,
unmercifull rigor, and against the inhumanity, injustice, and against the
impudence also of P. W. and his Clients, and of the Cavaliers too? Would not he
and his admire to see men, and, in the later case, men too so criminal, so
guilty themselves, and yet forgiven all their Crimes through the merciful
indulgence of a good King, divest themselves notwithstanding, of all mercy, and
all modesty, and all shame (and not of justice only) of purpose to make that
very King, and for their own sakes who were (in the supposed case) always his
enemies, destroy a million of his friends, and without any new cause given,
ruin them for ever, without regard of either Mercy, or Justice, even to
Articlers, or Innocents, or Widows, or Orphans, who had their Estates entayled
upon them before the Wars, and never acted in the Wars any thing against the
Laws? And yet, I dare say, that such a wish or endeavor of the Cavaliers, or
even of P. W. and his Clients alone, would be in the former case, or in that
which really is of both sides now, comparatively far more suiting with reason,
and more excusable by necessity, than that of our Person of Quality here.
Though I withal confess my self to be of this Judgment (as I have always
been, and as my Letter all along, and after that my Irish Colors folded, but
most especially and plainly, in the Irish Colors folded, Page: 32.
conclusion demonstrates I have) that abstracting from the comparison, all such
desires or wishes, and much more other answerable endeavors, either of this
Person of Quality, or of P. W. should he entertain the thoughts of any such,
must be very uncharitable, and very unreasonable, and very unjust, and very
unchristian, yea and inhumane too I say, and becoming rather some Turk, or some
Tartar, or a Lestrigon and Canibal, than a man bred up amongst men, who know
any thing of Religion, and retain any part of the common resentments of Nature.

173. And for the practice of Joseph (which herein, that is, in reserving the
Lands of all to the Kings free dispose, and transplanting the People, this
Gentleman further wishes may Page 93.
be his Grace's the Duke of Ormonds pattern) it is as far as from East to West
from giving any, even probable argument, that may justify that our Person of
Quality's most cruel, barbarous, and savage desire: however he give this in the
name of the Protestants of Ireland, but I believe without the concurrence of
those who are truly such. Joseph reserved the Lands of all the Egyptians, the
Priests only excepted, to the free dispose of Pharaoh, because all the very
Genesis 47. 26.
Egyptians themselves, every man freely of himself, without any force,
coaction, or necessity put upon them by Pharaoh, or by Joseph, or by any mortal
Creature, sold all their Lands to Joseph for meat in the seven years of the
general Famine, and Joseph bought all for the use of Pharaoh. And Joseph
removed the people from one end of the borders of Egypt to the other end
thereof, because the people themselves had upon the same occasion freely (as
above) sold themselves, even their own Bodies, I say, for Bread, and Joseph had
bought them all to Pharaoh's use for ever. But Joseph notwithstanding so just a
title, dealed so equitably with them all, that albeit he saved their lives for
seven years together, and preserved their stocks, and gave them seed to sow
their lands, and bought (as I have said) all both lands and stocks, and bodies
too; yet when he removed them, or those he thought fit, he removed them not
into one little corner of Egypt, not into mountains, rocks, and boggs, nor into
uncouth Wildernesses, but into a large and fruitful soil, abounding with all
good things, as their own was, even into all the rich lands of Egypt, and into
the mighty, opulent, and pleasant Cities in all those borders and quarters, and
midland too of Egypt, and removed them also without encroaching on any others
right, without prejudicing any others title, without forcing any of the ancient
Inhabitants out of their own dwellings or lands, without any kind of injury
done to any, or any reluctance or unwillingness being in any, either these that
took the new possessions, or those that quitted their old habitations to give
the new comers place; because all, as well these as those by their free act,
without any kind of constraint, bound themselves to acquiesce, and accordingly
did so, and even acknowledged publicly and thankfully that they did so. And
yet he dealed with them so equitably, that notwithstanding he transplanted
them, all the Land of Egypt was still planted by those very transplanted
persons, no share in the lands of Egypt given to strangers, none such brought
or admitted in to supplant those Egyptians, not even the very true Israelites
of God themselves acquiring, or possessing anew, but what they had before the
Famine, and before any such bargain, and without the prejudice of any Egyptian,
a little parcel in the land of Ramesses to graze the Cattle belonging to a
small fam^ly of 70 Souls. And further yet he dealed so equitably with them, in
reserving to Pharaoh's free dispose the rights they had formerly, and which now
themselves had, in as much as in them lay, for ever bereaved themselves of, by
their own free consent, and deed, that nevertheless by a new Law, which he made
after all this, to hold forever in that Kingdom, those very Egyptians were
entitled anew to four entire parts, and Pharaoh only to a fifth of the increase
of those very lands, which otherwise did for all parts wholly belong to him, as
likewise did the very Oxen that ploughed Genesis 47. 26.
the lands, and the very seed, and the very persons that did sow them.

174. And this being the practice of Joseph, and that which I related, his
title, how can our Person of Quality expect any advantage from either to his
purpose? Certainly no sale of Lands, much less of Bodies to the Duke of Ormond,
or to his Majesty, or to any else for his Majesty's use, or even for any other
Persons use, as made by the Catholics of Ireland themselves, not only, not so
freely, or without any kind of violence, force, compulsion, or necessity put
upon them by any mortal man, but not even constrainedly made by them, can be
alleged by this Person of Quality, nor donation, nor exchange, nor promise of
either, nor any other title whatsoever, if not his false pretense of a general
breach of the Articles of 48. Which because I have abundantly showed to be
such, that is, de non ente, or a pretense of that which never had a being yet,
and have showed this too, by clearing most evidently all his Arguments to the
contrary, and even by showing them to be ridiculous, absurd, and very mere non
sense: how can the practice of Joseph be a Pat^ern to the Duke of Ormond for
confiscating all the estates of the Irish, and for the transplanting of all
their persons, even I say, in case the confiscation and transplantation of
them, intended by this Gentleman were as mild, and as tolerable, as that of
the Egyptians by Joseph? And since it is not by very many, and those too most
highly considerable degrees, how can yet the practice of Joseph be a pattern to
the Duke therein, even I say in case he had for such reservation, and such
transplantation of the Lands and Persons of the Irish, the very same, or like
right, or some other equivalent to that which Joseph had to r^serve the lands,
and remove the People of Egypt? The reservation enacted by Joseph to the use of
Pharaoh was of the fifth part only throughout all Egypt, leaving four
answerable entire proportions for the Egyptians themselves: but the
reservation, or confiscation this Gentleman drives at in Ireland, is of ^ll the
five parts, even of the whole; not so much as leaving one sole foot of Land
unto the Catholic Irish. And the Transplantation made by Joseph was into a
Land as rich, and as large as the fields and whole extent of Egypt, and even
unto the pleasant and beautiful Cities of that Country: But the Transplantation
this Gentleman intends of the Irish, must be from all the best Land of Ireland,
into the very worst of it, and must be from nineteen parts of the Land of
Ireland, whereof they were the lawful Proprietors, and lately the Possessors,
into far less than the twentieth part of the whole, divided into twenty equal
proportions; and must be into barren, desert, horrid places too, and must be
without Cattle to stock that very Land, without Seed to sow, or Plough to
manure it, without Servants, without Shelter, without House or Cabin to lodge
these Transplanted People in, or defend them from the Wolves, or from the
Robbers, or Heat, or Cold, or other Injuries of the open Air. And the miserable
Irish Transplanted so, must not even in those small Tracts allotted for them,
within the narrow precincts of some parts of three or four Counties in Connaght
and Tuomond, pitch in any place, or fix their dwelling Houses, or take any
Lands within two miles of the River Shanon, four of the Sea, and four of
Galway, the only City within their precinct: They must not enter this Town, or
any other Corporate or Garrisoned Place, without particular Orders, at their
peril, even of being taken by the throat, and thrown presently into Gaol; but
if to look back on the Country of their Nativity, they dare set foot on the
Bridge of Athlone without Pass, woe be unto them, either a builet or a cord
must end their days. And none of them all must as much as bear the Office of a
petty Constable, even amongst themselves, even within those very narrow
precincts assigned for them to sojourn in. For the dwelling intended them, even
there, can be no other than that of Sojourners, or at least of Tenants at Will,
since all the Lands of Ireland, except those of the Priests, are desired by
this Gentleman to be reserved by Law to the Kings free dispose, viz. to be
disposed again by the King to him, and to his People. So that if he prevail,
the whole Irish Nation must be perpetual Bondslaves in their own Country, or
like the accursed Jews, wandering and roaming abroad for ever amongst Foreiners.

175. Behold Reader, the Transplantation of the People of Ireland, and the
Reservation of their Lands, which our Person of Quality drives at, even the
very same Transplantation, and the very same Reservation invented first (but
not for the Kings use) and put in execution after by Usurpers, and by Tyrants,
by the Rump Parliament, and by the Protector Cromwell, and by Ludlow, and
Corbet, and Jones, and Fleetwood their Commissioners in Ireland in the days of
dread and darkness. And whether such reserving of the Irish lands, and such
Transplanting of the Irish People to be made into a Law for ever by the Duke of
Ormonds furtherance, or by him to be renewed, or by him to be as much as either
continued or permitted, have the practice of Joseph for a pattern, do you
judge, even I mean in case the Duke had undeniably the very title of sale, or
emption, or the right acquired by forfeiture, or any other answerable to that
which Joseph had.

176. But forasmuch as our Person of Quality's malice to the Irish, and
Catholics in general, is known to be such, that he will make use of any thing,
how weak and insignificant soever, to give some color of Justice, or some
right, or some title at least to enact or continue this Transplantation so
unmercifull, and because I doubt not he will endeavor to abuse those that will
believe him, with a pretext of some exchange, or some bargain made by the Irish
themselves, when they were thrown out of their own habitations, and put to
Conaght, and the proprietors of, or dwellers in such lands in Conaght as were
assigned to the rest of the Irish, were likewise constrained to flit; You (good
Reader) may be pleased to observe,

1. That of twenty or thirty, nay I may say, thirty and twice thirty thousand
Irish Proprietors, not one thousand of all, or near a thousand received the
least kind of compensation, not so much as one foot of land, either in Conaght
or Clare, or elsewhere from the Tyrants, or from any else since their time.

2. That the twentieth part, nay the fortieth of those that sued for Decrees,
Intents, or Charitable subsistence, or whatever else you call it (according to
the language and rule in the then Courts of Athlone, and Logriagh, held for
such purposes, and according to the variety of Qualifications prescribed by the
cruel mercy of those Parliamentary Cromwellians, who then ruled all) nay not
the fortieth part of such as prevailed in their suit, and were looked upon with
some kind of pity, had yet any valuable consideration of lands assigned them,
not only not for Inheritance, but not even for tenancy at will, for which any
rational man in the world might presume they had made an exchange of their own
proper estates, whereunto no body else but Rebels then and Usurpers did then
any way pretend, and whereof themselves, I mean the Irish then, or a little
before, were lawfully possessed, and their posterity after them should have the
lawful inheritance.

3. That we know some of those had not above ten pound Lands per annum assigned
them in Conaght, whose proper Estates at home in their own Countries, whence
they had been so removed, were worth a thousand a year.

4. That in case a bargain could be alleged here, as it can not; and although
it be true that a bargain is a bargain; yet it is likewise true, that a forced
bargain is still a forced bargain, and not, simply or properly speaking, any
bargain at all, when it is betwixt Subjects, or twixt a Loyal Subject and a
Rebel, or with an usurping Tyrannical Traitor, that by plain force and
starving, and threats of exile and death, put in execution on some to terrify
others, and signified to all by open Proclamation, and really so intended for
all, extorts from his fellow Subjects such a bargain. And that he must be a
very bad Christian, and a very bad Subject, and of very little honesty or
reason, that would persuade the lawful Prince to confirm such bargains, when
he can otherwise choose, and when such bargains (were there any such) relate
unto a case as ours at present is, where so many thousands, where a whole
Nation of his good Subjects must be lost for ever by a general Transplantation
of them all, enacted by law, or continued otherwise, and upon such grounds, and
even to gratify such people, as both invented and executed it.

5. That as well others that received such inconsiderable assignments of land
in Connaght, and others too that got nothing at all, and yet were transplanted
thither, allege all for themselves, that manifest violence, force, necessity
put upon them, as well by turning them out of their own houses and lands, and
fleecing them of all their goods, moneys, and stocks, and so reducing them to a
starving condition, by hunger, and cold, as by the Proclamation (which I have
before given, treating of this very same subject, in another part of this book)
for transplanting, and (which is more) for suing out Decrees in the Courts of
Athlone, and both at their highest peril, and by the rigorous execution of that
Proclamation, (the long imprisonment of some, and the exile of others, and the
death of Hedrington in the Marketplace at Dublin, for not obeying it, as the
Paper on his breast, when he was executed, expressing the Cause of his death,
did manifest) and by the general rule so well known, they had to force the
obedience of all the Irish to that Proclamation, Turning them to the Barbados,
or putting them to death, expressed in plain English at Killkenny, by Colonel
Axtel in the case of Mrs. Martha Harpoll.

6. That how-ever this be, all the transplanted Irish to a man, at least, the
generality of them, (and hereof I am very certain) deny any kind of exchange or
bargain made by them for such lands, in lieu of their own proper Estates, or
any release given, or evidences delivered, or disclaim made, or writings drawn,
or promise engaged to quit from thenceforth, or at any time after, their own
former titles to those Estates, whence they had been so forcibly removed. And
likewise deny, that they could, if they would, prejudice or bind those of their
children, who had, by ancient, or late agreements, before the Wars, those very
Estates entayled upon them.

7. Finally, that if there be any law in England or Ireland that in the letter
may seem to confirm bargains of such a nature, as binding, were there, I say,
any bargains at all of what nature soever, relating to the generality of the
transplanted Irish, or to the right of transplanting them; or if there be any
law, which in the Letter seems to entitle his Majesty to a right of continuing,
or enacting a Transplantation, so illegally invented first, and so tyrannically
executed after, P. W. thinks all good men, and good Lawyers in the world, will
be notwithstanding of opinion, that the sense and equity of such municipal
laws, (if there be any such) must be otherwise, and the laws of God far
otherwise, and the laws of Nations too.

177. Yet, if our Person of Quality can prove, that any one, or more, of all
these poor transplanted Irish, have, without any such constraint, force,
necessity put upon, or violence used toward him or them, or without any
rational fear of running the hazard of the penalties threatened by the said
Proclamation, and by the rules for observing it, gone into Connaght, or sued
for Decrees, accepted other Lands, or otherwise given up hs own former Estate,
and quitted all his rights to it for ever; and if our Person of Quality would
be so modest, as to desire the Transplantation of such only to be continued, or
enacted by law, provided such be not transplanted into any other Loyal Subjects
Lands, or into the Estates of those Connaght Irish, who have themselves the
just plea of Articles, or Innocence, as well as others: and if our Person of
Quality would be yet further so modest in that other of Reservation as to
desire only the reserving of such Lands of the Irish to the King's free
dispose, as before indifferent Judges shall be proved in open Court, upon a
legal trial, to have traytorously or perfidiously broke the Articles of 48. by
any rebellious or contumacious disobedience to his Majesty's Lieutenant the
Duke of Ormond, or to the Lord Marquess of Clanrickard, for a time after
Deputy, P. W. promises, in case of such modesty, or such moderation at any time
hereafter to be used by our Person of Quality, to join with him, not in wish
only or desire, but in prayer also to God, that herein the practice of Joseph
may be his Grace'^ (the Duke of Ormond's) pattern, reserving the fifth part
only to his Majesty's free dispose of Lands forfeitable, and removing the
persons transplantable, if any be such, into as good Land as their own was, and
removing them even to the good Cities in all the borders of Ireland; yet with a
proviso (if he please) that the true English interest, and even the true
English Religion be evermore secured. And whether our Person of Quality do so
reform or no, his own desires, or his own wishes, or intentions, as to that of
the practice of Joseph to be the Duke's pattern herein; yet P. W. shall ever,
and from the very bottom of his soul devoutly pray the blessings of Joseph may
be the Duke's portion, even by the God of his Father who shall help him, and
the Almighty who shall bless Genesis 49. V. 25, and 26.
him with blessings of Heaven above, and blessings of the deep that lies
under, and the blessings of the breasts, and of the womb, That all these
blessings be on the head of this Joseph, and on the Crown of the head of him
that was separate from (those which call themselves) his brethren, and who was
made such, Genesis 45. V. 7, and 8.
or separated by God himself, to preserve them a posterity on earth, and to
save their lives by a great deliverance.

And so, Reader, concluding here my animadversions upon this Person of
Qualitie's Comments, it remains that I leave both to thy Judgment, whatever
party thou art of; and that withal you determine freely of the truth or
falsity of his grand charge against my letter, in the first page of his book,
where he says, that in effect he has found it (whatever the words of it are)
extremely undutiful to his Sacred Majesty, very Page 1.
disrespectful to the Duke of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and most
scandalous, not only to the Protestants of Ireland, but also to those of the
same Religion in his Sacred Majecties other Kingdoms. And further, that with
the same freedom you determine whether I cannot groundedly answer his
following and first Dilemma there, and boldly say, that I writ that Letter out
of very much respect to his Grace, and out Page 2.
of no less respect did print it; and that you determine likewise whether my
light in the Triangle, acknowledged in that very Letter to be such that it
cannot be extinguished, give any ground to this Gentleman's fond conception of
P. W's despairing to receive from his Grace the effects of his (not unjust, as
this Person of Quality speaks, but) very just desires for his Countrymen? Or of
P. W's choosing this way to acquaint them, 'twas not for want of his
solicitation, and to let them see, since he could not make them beholding to
my Lord Lieutenant, Page 2.
that they were so to him? But I freely pardon the Gentleman's erroneous
conjecture all along of my despair, or of my design, being the Holy Week, and
the Ceremony of Tenebrae, and the Triangle, and the only Light remaining
unextinguished, which yet he might have seen in that Letter, seem to be
Mysteries, wherewith he is not so well acquainted, as to understand thereby a
hope remaining still in P. W. and surmounting at last all the despair of others.

Et nunc tempus Equum spumantia solvere colla. Virgil.
And I will say no more, but that we have heard from a Person of Quality
Reproaches, which by the number of them seek to make up their want of truth:
And have seen Wit made the Slave of Malice, and the foulest obloquies put into
a formal dress; and have beheld the degrees of Crimes inverted, and while the
more heinous pass with impunity, the lesser offenses condemned to the
chastisement due to those of the first rank. And have likewise heard good
intentions alleged to justify murders, rapines, desolation, and standing in
Arms against the King. And have finally observed that self-interest, and
complying with a prevailing party, has managed a very elaborate discourse to
the worst end a man by writing could propose to himself, which is to deceive
his Reader: and that nothing would be wanting to complete the Iniquity of the
Design, but to find out that this Unknown Author was a Person who had the
experience of more guilt in himself than he imposed upon others.

AN APPENDIX.
LONG after this Reply had been finished, I heard some other Persons of great
Quality, and Persons too whom I very much esteem, defend by way of Argument,
that the King is not bound at all to perform the Articles of 48. not even to
any part, or as much as to one individual Person of the former Confederates of
Ireland, I mean the Roman Catholics. And because these Persons of Quality (and
whom I otherwise hold to be really Men of Honor and Conscience) did not then,
nor for ought I know, could then, or at any other time before, or after (since
the very first time the Case was clearly disputed before his Majesty, and so
many printed Papers and Books came out on both sides) allege other Argument to
justify this Assertion against the unfortunate Irish, but only a Paper found,
as written by Sir Nicholas Plunket, which might have imported a precedent or
designed Resolution of breaking that Peace of 48. And because this is a clear
mistake, and to show evidently that it is, I give here at large, a true and
perfect account of that Paper. And beseech the impartial Reader, as likewise
those Perso^^ of Honor and Conscience, to consider how di^^onourable before
Men, how sinful and dangerous in the sight of God, their advice is, has been,
and shall be yet further (if, which God forbid, they chance to continue it) to
his Majesty, for not performing those Articles to any part of the said
Confederates, though ever since unalterably (of their part) observing those
very Articles. For by the ensuing relation, it will appear, that Paper (whether
rough draught only or not, whether signed or not) was not, in order to, or at
the time of the peace of 48. written, or any way relating to this Peace; but
verily to the former Peace of 46. as written before this very Peace of 46. was
concluded.

For in the Year 1646. when the then Confederate Catholics of Ireland treated
of a Peace with his late Majesty's Authority, placed in the Duke of Ormond,
then Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, there appeared much difficulty in
bringing that Treaty to a Conclusion, in regard the said Confederate Catholics
proposed for more advantageous Conditions in Religion, than those they could
obtain upon that Treaty. Whereupon the Earl of Glamorgan, being then in
Ireland, for carrying on the Conclusion of a Peace, with a general concurrence,
to the furtherance of his late Majesty's service, did declare unto the then
Council of the said Confederate Catholics, that he had power from his said
late Majesty, to grant unto them such Conditions in Religion, as they might
reasonably expect. Pursuant to which, Articles were agreed on between the said
Earl of Glamorgan, and the Counci^ (...) the said Consederate Catholics, in
order to their satisfaction in matters of Religion. But those Articles were to
be secret for a time, to avoid the prejudice that the then publishing thereof
might bring on his Majesty's service. The observance of which secrecy in those
Articles, and the publishing of the other Articles, between the Lord
Lieutenant, and the said Catholics, made some to doubt, that the said secret
Articles would be unsecure. For by the publishing of the said other Articles,
all Persons must have returned to their former obedience, and the Lord
Lieutenant neither knowing or owning the said secret Articles, there could be
little hopes of the performance of them. Which Reason induced those who were
acquainted with the said secret Articles, to bethink themselves of some
expedient to render them more secure. And thereupon it was concluded, upon the
request of some of the Clergy, that a motion might also be in the general
Assembly of the Confederate Catholics for an Order to reassume their former
Union, if the Articles concluded on were not performed, without mentioning the
particulars or matters contained in such Articles. Which was done accordingly,
and the Order was drawn up in general terms, that might comprehend the said
secret Articles: without discovering any thing of the matters therein
contained, or the Party with whom these Articles were concluded. After which it
happened, that the Archbishop of Tuam (to whose custody the said secret
Articles were entrusted) was killed in the County of Sligo, and those Articles,
found with him, were by that means discovered, and made public, and thereupon
the Earl of Glamorgan was imprisoned at Dublin, for his proceedings in that
Matter, and the first Peace, concluded in the said Year 1646. became useless to
his Majesty, and to his Subjects.

And yet the rough draught of the said Order, as all other the Papers of the
Irish Confederate Catholics, coming to the hands of the late Usurped Powers,
it has been, on some Debates since his Majesty's Restoration, objected, that
the Contents of that rough draught did import a precedent and designed
Resolution of the breach of the Peace made in the Year 1648. and so that rough
draught having no certain date, was made use of to the prejudice of that last
Peace. Whereas, in truth, that rough draught, and the Order of the Assembly
that followed it, was made and intended to relate to the former Peace,
concluded in the Year 1646. At which time there could be no thought of the
later Peace, made in the Year 1648. But to satisfy any indifferent Person of
the truth of this Assertion, let him, if he please, resort to the Book of the
Entries of Orders, made in the general Assembly, in the Year 1646. (which Book
is now in the Crimination-Office at Dublin, but was formerly in the Usurped
Powers hands) where he will find, there is no cause to doubt of this truth, and
will find himself necessitated to supply the defect of a date in the said rough
draught, and reconcile the frivolous Objection raised thereon, in order to the
later Peace, concluded in the Year 1648.

It was likewise long, and no less than a year and a half, after I had finished
the foregoing Reply to the Person of Quality, that a Book, entitled Horae
Subsecivae, Printed at London 1664. came to my hands, where I found the Author
D. W. Page 81, and 83. fall foully upon the Irish Papists, and their Peace of
48. and take it for granted, that P. W's former Writings for that People and
Peace have been already so fully refuted, etc. Which is the reason I find my
self engaged to add here my brief Observations on what he says. And thus take
them Reader.

That in relation to the taking Arms in the Year 1641. and to the extenuation
of the Crimes of those who began first, or were after involved in that Quarrel
or Insurrection, the relation given out of the Brief Narrative, which you have
near the beginning of this Reply, cannot, in my judgment, but satisfy any
indifferent person. That to his bold, temerarious, false, ignorant, and
impudent Assertion, Page 83. viz. That the Son (of our late King of glorious
memory) Charles the 2. is not obliged in the least, by any Law of God or Man,
of War or Nations, to keep any one Particle of the Irish Articles, made or
granted by King Charles the Father, in the Year 1648. There have been such
clear and satisfactory Answers made already, and in several Instances and
Occasions by Mouth, Pen, and Print, since his Majesty's happy Restoration,
that more needs not be said here, since this Author alleges nothing for his own
shameful and sinful Assertion, but another only of his own (which we shall give
here presently) and such a one too, as convinces him of no less ignorance and
impudence than the former, if not of more. That besides we have his Royal
Majesty's own judgment in point, P. the 10th. of the Act of Settlement. Which,
now being past into a Law, is likewise the judgment of a Parliament of
Ireland, where many of those possessed of the Estates of the former Proprietors
(who claim the benefit of the said Articles) do sit and vote His Majesty's own
words, in his gracious Declaration of the 30th. of Nov. 1660. and in the said
Act of Settlement, are these, We could not but hold our self obliged to perform
what we owe by that Peace. And in Page the 11th says, That others advising or
concurring in that Settlement, had a due sense of the Obligations which lay
upon his Majesty's Honor and Justice.

But this Author of Horae subsecivae goes further on, to his Reason or Ground
for sooth, that is to his other, not only no less false and impudent, but even
far more pernicious and dangerous, both Assertion and Supposition therein
contained. An interloping usurping Conqueror dispessessed both the Father, and
the Son, and also those very Popish Confederates, with whom those Articles were
made, To which Usurper also, those very Catholic Confederates, and their
Associates, submitted, owned him, and complied with him. Then comes the Son,
and dispossesseth the Usurper again, and recovers Ireland, as it were ^y a new
Conquest: In such Case (I say) the Son or Successor is not obliged to any
Articles the Father made with his rebellious Subjects, no, nor if he had made
them himself, but is freed of all such Obligations, both Jure Belli, and Jure
Gentium, as the Civilians in like Cases have long since decided it in their
Books. And therefore King Charles the 2. may, Jure Belli, and Gentium, and Lege
Talionis (for these too, are this very Author's own words, a little before, to
wit, Page 81.) without breach of Faith, or Articles (not excepting those of
1648. so much insisted on, and so mightily pleaded for by P. W. and so fully
refuted by the Earl of O^ery) by that just Law (so often used and prescribed by
God himself) take the Lives and Fortunes of all those blood-thirsty Popish
Rebels, and their Confederates, and Associaies, etc. So, and in such terms,
this moderate, knowing Author states the Case of the Irish, and gives his
Opinion, without any other kind of reason than what you see here, nay without
once mentioning, much less solving even any one Argument to the contrary, or
once seeming to doubt of the known falsity, of not only one, but of many of his
Suppositions, involved in the Antecedent of such a Consequent, or the
fallacious Premises of so wicked a Conclusion. But he must give me leave to
unseel his eyes, if himself will not, or at least to undeceive thee, good
Reader, if any way prepossessed by this Gentleman's, either bare Assertion, or
by his stating of the Case. For in lieu of his willful Omissions, and false
Suppositions, in his stating of it, I must give you these known truths, That
the said rebellious Subjects (so styled) before the Usurping Conqueror
dispossessed either the Father, or the Son, were returned to their former
Obedience, and accepted, owned, and governed, as such, by his Majesty, and his
Father of glorious memory, and fought both the Father and Sons Cause, therein
lost their blood and fortunes, and never submitted to the said Usurped
Authority, till they were over-pow'red, and forced thereunto. That when they
could not resist any longer the tyranny of the Usurper, many thousands of them
followed the Son's fortune in foreign parts, and there inlisted themselves under
his Ensigns. And that such as stayed at home, never made any Conditions with
the Usurpers, till they were licenced so to do by the Son. This being the full
and true state of the Case, it is to be considered, Whether, on the whole
matter, the Son be obliged to perform the said Articles? I say he is, both by
the Law of God and Man, by the Laws of War and Nations: because Promises,
Pacts, or Agreements, in things lawful, or that are not sinful, even betwixt
Kings and their Subjects, whether at any time Rebels or not, are binding by
all these Laws, as I have my self at large evidenced, partly in this Reply, and
partly in my Printed Letter, and Irish Colors Folded, and others have more
amply, in several occasions, and his Majesty, whose testimony and authority is
above all exception, most graciously and truly declares, in his public Act of
Settlement, as we have now seen. That what this Trifling Author of Horae
subsecivae, objects, of an interloping Conqueror, etc. makes no alteration in
the Case. For, 1. I must tell this Gentleman, he does no less ignorantly, than
improperly, style the success of the Usurper a Conquest, or him a Conqueror.
The raising of Arms by Subjects against their Sovereign, had never yet any
name in England or Ireland, or in the Laws of either, but Rebellion and
Treason. And the effects of Treason and Rebellion can never be termed properly
or truly a Conquest, nor the prevailing Traitor a Conqueror. For that were to
give a Right and Title that might pass to the Traytor's Posterity in
succession. 2. That Charles the 2. (whom God preserve) and his Father, are
looked on by this Author, and by this Objection, as dispossessed by the
Usurper. Which is plain ignorance, or at least a willful and malicious mistake
of the Laws of England, which so preserve the Possessions of the Crown, as the
King cannot be dispossessed by a Subject. A Subject may intrude, and take the
profits of the Land belonging to the King. But this, in Law, can never amount
to the dispossessing of the King. Wherever Charles the 2. was the 30th. of
January, in the Year 1648. being the fatal day of his Father's death, eo
instanti he began his Reign: and therefore now is the 16. Year thereof.
Whereas, if he could be dispossessed of his Crown by his rebellious Subjects,
and that horrid Action could be styled a Conquest, and his regaining thereof
again, a new Conquest, this should be but the fourth Year of his Reign. And who
sees not, it were a very ill exchange for his Majesty, to forgo his ancient
and undoubted Right to the Crown of England, and to own his holding and
enjoyment thereof by Conquest on an Usurper, who could pretend no right
thereunto? 3. That, that his ground (of his former bold, impious, and bloody
Assertion, or after-conclusion thence derived) of an interloping usurping
Conqueror, if admitted for sound or solid, for good or true Doctrine, might
prove very disadvantagious and injurious to his Majesty's Subjects in general,
English and Scots, of what Religion soever, no less than Irish Papists, even, I
say, in their Estates, Liberties, and Lives. For if a King come even to a
Christ an Kingdom by Conquest, he has Vitae and Necis potestatem. He may at
his pleasure alter and change the Laws of that Kingdom; as appears in Cook l.
7. Report, Calamy*s Case. 4. That he falsely charges the Irish Papists, to have
owned, etc. the Usuprer, as I have (a little above) declared. 5. That he does
as falsely and ignorantly, or at least out of designed malice, and against his
own Conscience, averr, That the Civilians have, in like Cases, long since
decided this Case of the Irish, truly stated, as I have above, or any way
decided for him, that of an interloping usurping Conqueror, etc. applied to
Charles the 2. and his good Subjects, whether English, Scots, or Irish, even, I
mean, those very Irish Papists that formerly had been Confederates, and after
submitted to his Majesty, or his Father, upon Articles, fought constantly for
him, and under his Banner, and by his Commission, against the Usurper, and
never submitted since to any other Power whatsoever, but with his said
Majesty's own consent. If this Gentleman can allege but even one Civilian for
himself, even, I say, in this Case of his, or any other such interloping
usurping Conqueror, truly applied, I will grant him somewhat to excuse his no
less inhumane, than uncharistian, and most horrid Assertion. But I am confident
all his malice cannot find one, whom he dares quote in writing or print. So
far does he speak, as out of all reason, so out of all Books. 6. That by
consequence, necessary following the obligation of public Agreements, the
Irish cannot be punished by the King, as this Author says they may, Lege
Talionis, no more than he can, by any other Law (as is before showed) of God or
Man, War or Nations. For the King has already bound his own hands from acting
against them, by retaliation, or otherwise, and acknowledges himself to be so
bound in honor and justice, according (I mean) to those Articles of 48. and to
such as cannot be proved to have, by after disobedience, or siding with an
Enemy, forfeited them.

And so I bid this learned, honest, prudent Author of Horaesubsecivae adieu,
and to his impertinent reflections on this subject, and my self. And will only
add this to thee, judicious Reader, to be considered, whether it be not
agreeable to all justice and equity, that those who lost their lives and
fortunes in asserting his Majesty's Cause, as they have been losers, and
afflicted with him, and for him too, in his adversity, ought not, in these
days of his Majesty's power and prosperity, regain thereby their lost
fortunes, especially where the Public Faith was engaged for their restitution.

As for that scruple, which, peradventure, some may think uncleared as yet, of
some few, or even many of those Articling Papists of Ireland, to have forfeited
the benefit of those Articles, and not for themselves alone, but even for all
the rest of their Countrymen, though not in their own persons guilty of any
such breach, as those were, or any at all: And for the ground or reason alleged
by some for this scruple, viz. That by the prevarication of those few or many,
whether the greater or lesser part of that People, whether the Representatives
of the whole or nor, the Kings end in granting those Articles was frustrated,
forasmuch as thereby it happened, that he could not carry on his main Design
then against the Usurpers: And as for that too, which is further alleged to
this purpose, or for the illustration of it, and further grounding of that
scruple, That if a Garrison be dismissed out of a Town, upon certain Articles
of War, to be freely and safely conveyed to their own Quarters or General,
and that any part of them break any of these Articles, which they were to
observe at their peril, the whole number have forfeited their right to any such
free passage, or safe convey, and are at the mercy of the Conqueror: It is
answered, That the End, by either side proposed to themselves in making a
Peace, or Articles, being frustrated, does not invalidate such Peace, or
Articles, unless such End be in those Articles expressed, and further clear
express caution inserted in the Agreement, that otherwise it shall be void.
Else, I pray, what Stipulation, Pact, Agreement, or Peace on Earth, can hold,
or oblige either side? And for that Example of a Garrison Town, or Soldiers,
capitulating on Articles of War, its answered, The condition of Subjects,
enjoying the benefit and protection of the Laws, is fa^r different from that of
Enemies. A just Co^querour may, without injustice, if he please, so he break
not his word, take from his Enemies, even their lives, and that not only for
the crime or breach of some, but in some cases without any such crime or
breach, by any of them: But a just King cannot so carry himself toward his own
Subjects, whom he does once own as such, and as such to be protected and
governed by his Laws, as other freeborn Subjects. For such he cannot without
injustice punish for the Disobedience, Breach, or Rebellion of any other,
lesser, or even greater part of their fellow Subjects, whether these represent
the whole body of his Subjects or not, whether they frustrate or not his best
Designs, and his greatest, most glorious, and just Enterprises, or nor.
Otherwise what should become, according to such Law and Justice, I speak, of
all the good Subjects of England, Ireland, Scotland, if the King pleased to
proceed according to that rigor of Justice against them, when he was
re-inthroned? Nay, what should become of all other good Subjects of any Prince
or State on Earth, against whom there have been such frequent Rebellions?
Besides it is against the true meaning of all Laws Divine and Humane, that a
Judge or Prince doing Justice to his ^ubjects in a legal way, not by force of
Arms, should involve the Innocent in the guilt or punishment of the Nocent.
And therefore it is plain, that neither that Scruple, Reason of it, nor Example
or Similitude brought to strengthen it, can make any thing for them, that would
thence conclude the King is wholly free from any Obligation, to any part of the
Irish Catholics, arising from the Articles of 48. They have been, since that
Peace of 48, Subjects, not Enemies: And those Articles had not any such Clause
inserted, that in case any part, lesser or greater, Representatives or not,
should break the Conditions, the rest should likewise forfeit: and the End
frustrated, does not make them to forfeit,

FINIS.

