THE Irish Colors FOLDED, OR THE Irish Roman-Catholick's Reply

To the (pretended) English Protestants Answer To the Letter desiring a just
and merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of Ireland.

(Which Answer is entitled The Irish Colors Displayed.)

Addressed (As that Answer and Letter have been) To his Grace The Lord Duke of
ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of that KINGDOM.

Vince in bono malum.

London: Printed in the Year 1662.

My Lord,
IT could hardly be imagined, that the Letter which I presented to your Grace,
and which I published of late, should have raised so great a storm against me
for no other reason then that I begged your Grace's favor in behalf of my
distressed Country, and implored the performance of public Faith, showing the
mischiefs that have followed the breach of it. This is done in the dark by an
impudent assertor of strange positions. But whoever he be, certainly his
passion and immoderation speaks him ignorant of the condition of the present
Times, of the actions of former Ages, and, above all, to be a mere stranger to
the heroic disposition of CHARLES the Second, and utterly to forget that if it
were in your Grace 's nature to entrench, for conveniences sake in the least
measure, upon the honor of your Master, or to have formed your self, even by
connivance, to a dexterous compliance with those different parties, that made
it their design to ruin Monarchy, you would indeed as to the quiet and
security of your person, the temporary improvement of your interest, have
floated calmly on the top of every bilow raised by the tempest of those evil
Times. But in so doing, your Grace would have left such a Monument to your
posterity, as you had not received from your Ancestors, and such as (although
the fate of the times had excused it in others) was unpardonable in the House
of Ormond.

In truth, I think there is somewhat more in the Letter, that tends to move
pity, and to implore Justice (which I conceive to be the scope of it) then the
Reader will think well paid with that brass penny in the heap of rubbish. But
there are slights in all Arts. And this of the Answerers puts me in mind how
the Lord Chancellor Bolton was wont to tell that a witty Lawyer coming before
him, and finding himself pressed with a throng of Arguments, whereof many were
unanswerable, he selected the slightest, alleging that those only were of
moment; but as to the rest, he would not give his Lordship the trouble of
dwelling upon the refutation of such impertinencies.

But it being not my intent to perplex so weighty a matter, by descending after
a Logical manner, to the particular defects in the Answer, I shall endeavor to
keep my self, as near as I can, within those Limits which the Answerers passion
and immoderation have made him walk in: and to show how amongst all his
considerations, he minds those things least on which he should have bestowed
the most solid reflections.

He that discourses of settling a Kingdom under the Government of its natural
Prince in peace and security, should first consider that a King is Father of
his people, and that they are a portion of mankind, whereof no one is exempt
from Rebellion against Heaven; that the bowels of this King's paternal love, in
imitation of God, whose Vicegerent he is, have compassion for the frailties of
his Subjects, and mercy for their greatest crimes. The eldest on might repine
at the favor done his prodigal brother, but his father made him a feast. Which
shows that the affection of Princes to their Subjects in general, moves in
another Orb then ours to one another. Our Interest may make us snarll; but our
King is our Common Father.

The want of duly weighing this principle, and the impossibility in a Prince to
divest himself of this genuin and natural property of being a Father, has
afforded the Answerer liberty to advance some positions, that (without any just
offense, I may say,) do not speak him either a charitable Person, or a prudent
Statesman.

The Answerer gives your Grace an account of a word or a fear which just then
fell from him, and in truth the word bears in it self very evident marks that
it was precipitat; but how the fear could express it self in that language, I
know not. However your Grace will conceive it a sad and severe position, that
this contention between the two parties in Ireland will never have an end. And
it is no wonder your Grace should startle at it, if you did not consider that
the same God, who makes the much opposite qualities of the Elements agree for
the conservation of the mixed, who deprest our King to raise him higher, and led
him by the hand of his Providence to the Throne of his Ancestors, without other
supports then a sense of their duty in his Subjects, has still a power left
him to put an end to the contentions of the two parties in Ireland, and that
not by the ways of his omnipotent will or miraculous actings, but by his
ordinary concurrence by secondary Causes. For if His Majesty's clemency could
make up so huge a breach as lay open before him by the Murder of His Father,
ought we not to hope that he may be imitated by his Subjects in laying aside
that everlasting contention to which the Answerer would condemn them? Shall no
length of time be allowed to set limits to the vengeance this Answerer would
have them to expect the one of the other? The Britains, the Danes, the Saxons,
and the Normans are now so incorporated in England, as the memory of all
distinction is lost amongst them. Yet much blood has been drawn in their
Contests, and the Actions of particular Men of each of those Nations have been
such, as they may be justly styled Barbarous and Inhumane.

Your Grace knows with what horror the Irish Nation looks upon those
Massacres and Murders in the North, committed in the beginning of the Rebellion
by the Raskal multitude upon their innocent, unwarned, and unprovided
Neighbors; but the number of Two hundred thousand, (although this Writer comes
short One hundred thousand in his account of what the Convention-Commissioners
gave up to His Majesty in their Answer to the Irish Agents) is so exorbitantly
vast, that a stranger who finds the dimensions of Ireland in the Map, and
understands this certain truth, That there were then in Ireland One hundred
Natives for each person; these men would pass under the notion of an English
man, will readily conclude, That the whole Ireland is but one City so thronged
with Inhabitants, as men cannot walk in the Streets unjustled.

There is no man who has a greater detestation for those foul crimes then I
have. And yet after exact enquiry, I dare aver there have been more
Patritians and Knights of Rome murdered in the Conflicts and Proscriptions
between Scilla and Marius, within the Walls of the City, then perished by those
infamous Massacres throughout Ireland, In the first two months of the
Rebellion. And that although the Streets were covered with Roman Carcasses, and
the Kennels ran Blood, yet a few years buried those Animosities, and both
Factions lived after, as peaceably as became Citizens that paid Obedience to
one and the same Emperor. We read, that the Hugonets of France, who under
Francis the Second conspired against the Government, and then, and in the Reign
of several Kings after, were as bitterly bent against the Roman Catholics, as
the Ancient Gawls were against Caesar, and where they had power left to
posterity strange Monuments of their Rage and Cruelty; Yet those so divided
Affections are so now composed, as both contend who shall best serve their
Prince, and the different Persuasion in Religion is so far from lessening the
French Kings trust in men of Merit, that Marshal Turein very deservingly
commands in Chief the Military Power of France.

John of Leyden for the short time of his reign had a numerous party, that laid
about them as barbarously and as inhumanely as men could do. Yet many of them
were Inhabitants of that City in Germany, where Peace was so successfully
treated between the Empire and Sweden, and between Spain and Holland: So quiet
was that place and people, then grown, that had been once so miserably
distracted.

Even the Catalonians, who not many years since, transferred the Dominion over
them to a Foreign Prince, That murdered their Viceroy, that imbrued their
hands in the blood of the Spanish Council, and all the Spaniards that came in
their way, and perpetrated such villainies as we cannot reach to express by
calling them Barbarous and Inhumane: Yet His Catholic Majesty has satisfied
His Justice with the punishment of the Principal Incendiaries in tha^ Revolt
and having brought the people back to a due sense of their Obedience, the
Spaniards and they fit down as amicably, and with as general confidence, the
one in the other, as they did at any time before. The Irish go further, and out
of desire to have the Grounds of future Animosities, utterly removed by the
exemplar Chastisement of the most Criminal, they have often moved, that no man
on either side may be exempt from satisfying the Law for any foul Murder.

Now Your Grace, who is better able to call to mind Thousands of Examples,
evidencing the little reason men have to despair of the perfect settlement of
the most discomposed States, and of the firm Union of different Affections,
will doubtless conceive that to say, The Contention between the two parties in
Ireland, will never have an end, is an Assertion full of diffidence in Gods
providence, and full of ignorance of what has succeeded in this, and in former
ages, upon the like occasion.

But that Your Grace may observe, that the Grounds whereupon this Gentleman
establishes his Prediction, are as vain and frivolous, as the Prediction it
self is temerarious and imprudent; I shall (without search into the Aspect of
the Planets, or that of sullying of the Moon, or influencing (as he speaks)
that climat) descend to the particulars of what he considers in the Case.

And first, he unluckily lays that for a Foundation which either must restrain
all Princes from making new acquisitions; or (if they pursue his Politic
Precepts) must turn the Territories they have acquired by any pretense of
Conquest, into a desolate Wilderness; there being no other mean, in this new
doctrine, to secure what they have once gained by the just title of lawful
Arms. Had the Romans, who for Six hundred years could not enlarge their
Territory beyond the Bounds of Italy, made this their Principle, they must have
spent more time in peopling then in conquering that the Seat of their Empire.

Your Grace knows, that the Irish for a long time after the first Colony of
Englishmen was planted in Ireland, were not only styled, but were actually
enemies to those that strove to prevail over them. And certainly that is so
Natural a Passion, as Beasts partake with man in it: For if the Invaded and the
Invader should concur, as to the end of the work, what needed Contention? Yet
Your Grace's famous Ancestors that acted a principal part in spreading the
Dominion of the Crown of England over those Irish Enemies, were (if our
Histories deceive us not) powerfully and faithfully assisted by those whom they
had not long before subdued. And the self-fame men that sharply contended
against them, were instrumental in acquiring them fame, and extending the
Bounds of the English Government.

His two next considerations concern the first English Colony and their
Descendents, until the Reign of Henry the Eight. Who without all doubt, were
better versed in the knowledge of those after-drops that commonly follow the
storm of Force and Invasion, then not to expect and prepare themselves for
those effects that for some time do attend the resentment of an over-mastered
people. But it is strange, that a man who would establish a new and an unusual
method of Policy, did not consider, that when a Nation is once generally
compelled to submit to the commands of the prevailing Invader, all after
Commotions do rather fix then unsettle the Government.

But methinks I hear him say, That this last Rebellion was no after-drop, but
an universal deluge. And this assertion is thus far true, That the Laws having
defined it Rebellion to raise Arms against an Authority established by the
King, this cannot be denied to have been a Rebellion, the extent whereof,
although it were not universal, yet it spread it self into the far greater part
of the Kingdom. But all unbyassed men distinguish between the first
Conspirators (that were a handful of Hare-brain'd fellows of broken fortunes,
and desperate resolutions, who upon the first noise of the extirpation of their
Nation, and their Religion, threatened to be executed by the Ministry of a
Scottish Army, took up Arms, and made the Crime of Rebellion more horrid by the
foul actions, with which the rude multitude did asperse it) and the Noblemen
and Gentry, with the rest of the Roman Catholics: who being sat in Parliament
at Dublin, had application made to them by those Rebels to mediate for redress
of their Grievances, and offered to continue their sitting in order to their
repressing of them; but were prorogued (as some do not spare to say) of Design
to increase the Confusion. Which, I am sure, was the success of that
prorogation. And I have heard a shrewd Argument aledged to prove, that such was
the intention of the Lords Justices, and those of the then Council who favored
the party opposing the King in England. The truth where of none knows better
then Your Grace, who made offer at the Council Board to raise Ten thousand men.
With which power, being assisted by the Lords Justices, You undertook to quell
those Northern Rebels, and to settle the Peace of the Kingdom. But this being
not accepted, and there appearing daily greater symptoms of the aversion to the
ways of our late King of ever blessed memory, the Confederate Catholics then
took upon them for their natural defense (as they alleged) a Government in
opposition to the Lords Justices: Whose Authority over them, having not then
been revoked by His Majesty, they could not have declined, nor have set up any
other of their own without His Majesty's Commission, nor have entered into such
Confederacy without being guilty of Rebellion. But for this, and crimes of this
nature, Your Grace has conveyed unto them His Majesty's Mercy in Articles of
Peace. Whereof, because they demand the benefit, they are exposed to the odium
of every person that detains any part of their Estates, by what title soever.
Could Your Grace but remove this incompatibility between men's possessions,
there would a word and a hope, as suddenly fall from this Gentleman, that the
Contention between the two parties in Ireland might have an end to morrow.

And now in my turn the Gentleman will give me leave to consider, That the old
English, the Posterity of that English Colony first planted in Ireland, are
more concerned in his reflections, then those in whose favor he writes. For if
the greatness of Estates, that have been or may hereafter be conferred, must in
his opinion foment irreconciliable animosities, there can no hope be left, that
they and the ancient Irish can ever agree, since it is evident those English
have been masters of the far greater part of their Country. What discovery the
Articles of Forty eight make of their resolution in cold blood, to unravel the
settlement of ages past, I cannot conceive: Nothing appears to me in them which
trenches upon His Majesty's Prerogative; nor the right which a Subject may
claim to his Inheritance. The Roman Catholics do not by those Articles ingross
the places of profit, honor, and trust to themselves, nor impose the exercise
of their Religion upon any man of a different persuasion.

When this Gentleman considered the dissimilitude of Customs, Manners, Habit,
and Language, between the English and the Irish, I expected he would have laid
before Your Grace, (who are to direct the Government of Ireland) the ways how
to invite, or enforce the ruder sort to conform themselves in all those
particulars to the rules of civility of the English. But Your Grace will of
your self find better ways, and more for His Majesty's advantage, then by
dispeopling the Kingdom, or beggering the people, to communicate this happiness
unto them. Which might have been introduced long since, if some former
Governors had not made it their studies rather to plant their Estates, then
cultivate their minds.

As for the reflection which he makes upon the manner of celebrating of
Funerals with howlings, which indeed is barbarous (although many in Poland and
other places in the continent do still continue that savage custom) I hope your
Grace, without sending the Natives to the Barbados, or forcing them to such
indigence as may compel them to cry for Alms, will not only supress the
Ditty, if any such be used, but ever abrogate the Tune.

And for the consideration which he raises from the common conversation of the
vulgar, and their brawlings: the Petty Constables, and the Stocks in every
Parish, without extirpating the Nation (for his assertion, That the contention
between the two parties in Ireland will never cease, always tends to that) will
ease your Grace from any great affright of a disturbance in the Government, by
reason of the terms of malice, suspicion, and contempt; yea in case they did
upbraid each other with as much acrimony, as if they were bred under the
discipline of the Oysterwives at Billingsgate.

What he next adds, seems to have more weight in it: and I confess it will be
worthy your Grace's care, not only to bring the common Irish to civility, which
of it self will rectify any supine ignorance they may be guilty of in order to
their incapableness of distinguishing what concerns the Spiritual, what the
Temporal Jurisdiction; but to give encouragement to the Roman Catholic Clergy
of Ireland, to infuse into the people a true sense of the Catholic Doctrine,
contained in their humble Remonstrance, Acknowledgement, Protestation and
Petition, Printed at London the third of February 1661. But this Gentleman must
give me leave to say, that your Grace, who knows as well as any man living, the
temper and inclination of that people, cannot be of that opinion, that the most
vulgar among them is persuaded, That the Kingdom of Ireland lawfully belongs to
the King of Spain. Nay, how little influence the King of Spain, or the Pope had
upon them when the Peace was concluded, your Grace best knows, who has found
by experience, that notwithstanding the Nuntio's Excommunication, the most
considerable parts of the Nation, made way for his Majesty's Government over
the Kingdom, and received your Grace, who was entrusted with his Majesty's
authority: and notwithstanding that senceless excommunication fulminated by the
Prelates at James Town, continued firm in their adherence to the Peace, which
by your Grace was conveyed unto them from his Majesty, and in their obedience
to his Majesty's authority, which upon your leaving the Kingdom, your Grace
did transfer to the Marquess of Clanrickard.

That which the writer of that answer considers next, and endeavors to advance
for the end he aims at (which is the extirpation of the Nation) is the most
uncharitable, the most unnatural, and the most ignoble argument that could fall
from the Pen of any man that professed a regard of Conscience or Honor: And
questionless did proceed from some person, that having himself for his
convenience, and the good of his interest, sacrificed his duty to his King,
when God was pleased in some small measure to overbalance the rights of the
Crown, with the power of his prevailing enemies, wonders why all men should not
be so wise as to relinquish for the same ends, all Patriotship and sense of
their declining Country. But he little knows how unfit a person he has chosen
to be entertained with so unworthy a suggestion. For if your Grace, in the Case
of the Earl of Strafford, barely upon the score of friendship, is said to have
been pleased to answer a person of quality, who laid before you the great
hazard you run in, speaking so freely of that great man's merit, and justifying
his innocence, at a time when the Parliament of England was so highly incensed
against him, That if his head were upon the block, you would profess him your
friend: can this writer hope that your Grace, who so early in your youth
cherish't a particular friendship with so much courage and gallantry, will not
think it a base and abject part in the few of the Nobility and Gentry now in
the City of London, to content themselves with saving their own stake, and
leave stickling in the patronage and defense of their common Country? But
however they may be lessened in the Gentleman's value, for performing this,
which is an indispensable duty they owe to their Country, and to those that
justly may claim benefit of the peace in it; yet they could not (in my opinion)
have otherwise prevented the clamor of all men of honor, nay of all mankind
against them.

Lastly, He considers that this enmity, which he calls implacable, of the Irish
to the English, springs from the same root with that of all other subjected
people to their Conquerors, and gathers for proof thereof the mischief befaln
the Roman Citizens in the lesser Asia, on the French in Sicily, and on the
Danes in England; and yet forbears to mind your Grace that the Normans were
Conquerors as well as they, and have to this day preserved their acquisitions
in England, as the English have done in Ireland since their first descent in
that Kingdom, by those means which have made the work lasting, without breaking
for conveniences sake, those limits which Mercy, Justice, and Honor, puts to
all humane actions. Herein the carriage of your Grace's famous Ancestors, will
better instruct you then the Politics of any interested person. And your Grace
having conformed your self to the rules prescribed by Mercy, Justice, and
Honor, what need the ballancing interests between English and Irish, or boying
up either of them? The Country must at length give denomination to all that
inhabit it: and the posteriry of those that proclaim lowdly the English
interest, must within an age, admit themselves to be called Irish as well as
the Descendants from the first Colony of English planted in Ireland.

Doubtless your Grace's first care will be to secure his Majesty's interest in
that Kingdom, and to provide that nothing remain, which under the title of
diversity of interests, may prevent all men's affections from meeting in the
center of his Majesty's service. And your next will be to convey to succeeding
ages, the blessings of that peace, which his Majesty after so evil times, and
so many sufferings has given his three Kingdoms.

And now your Grace will give me leave to consider, that this man of
separation, in flat opposition to his Majesty's paternal and prudent desire, so
frequently and so fully expressed in his Letters, in his Proclamations, in his
Discourses, both public and private, to have all seeds of animosities utterly
extinguished, imploys his talent wholly in making himself the Trumpet of men's
animosities: and least, time should mitigate them, he concludes them
everlasting. But your Grace has more reverence for things recommended with
that earnestness to his people by your great Master, then to countenance what
he prohibits, or to favor those uncharitable requests that oppose his commands.

My Lord, It shall suffice me instead of all vindication, that I persuade my
self your Grace believes that I am in my nature as averse from cogging or
clawing, as the Letter in it self, is far from expressing any such humor in me.
But men that have an inclination to be bitter rather then fail of exercising
their faculty, will create themselves a subject. And he that takes the Nations
hope, to be delivered by your Grace, for a complement, knows little of the
interest you have in them, and of the affection they bear you.

Now, without contending in a case so little disputable whose you are, I shall
conjure your Grace, not by his Majesty's favor, and the ways to preserve it;
not by the means to prefer your children, and to increase your fortune; nor by
those other politic considerations held forth by the Writer of that answer:
but by the mercy and honor of his Majesty; by the nobleness of your own nature;
by the constancy of the Nation in their sufferings under your Graces command at
home, and their wanderings in waiting on his Majesty's fortunes abroad; by the
memory of your Ancestors that have been such haters of oppression, as petty
Freeholders have held for many descents and still do enjoy, some two, some four
Acres, and others more or less, in the midst of your demeasnes, untouched by
them, or by you, in so long a tract of time: by these I conjure your Grace so
to temper convenience, as it may not overthrow his Majesty's promise, and so
to be friend the interest of the pretenders, as, the proprietors may receive
the benefit of his Majesty's mercy extended to them in Articles of Peace.

As to those contests that consist of recriminations, I desire never to engage
in them. But this Writer must not therefore think he may be at liberty to fill
the ears of his Reader, with the vast sound of two hundred thousand, and
enlarge the horror of the action, by suppressing the truth, and adding Ciphers
to enlarge the number. And truly had this Writer forborne in so despicable and
supercilious a manner to spurn at the Nation, by saying, That the Birds, no not
the Flies contributed less to his Majesty's Restoration then the Roman
Catholics in Ireland, I should not have put him in mind that the Duke of
Albemarle found not a concurrence so general (I mean in the Army) (for the
people of England, both Protestant and Catholic, opened their hearts in
prayers to God and their arms to receive him) as he owes not the glorious
success of his Actions more to the dexterity of his conduct, then the strength
of his party. And as to that general concurrence in Ireland, Ludlow and Sir
Hardress Waller may tell him how difficult the work had been, but that they
were taken napping. No man will say that an unarmed people, disposed throughout
the Goals of the Kingdom upon every rumor that was spread of any attempt to be
made by his Majesty for recovery of his right, could have contributed other
then by their prayers to his Majesty's Restoration. And in truth it is some
mark of Ingenuity in this Writer, that he endeavors not to persuade us that the
Irish did not so much as pray for the Restoration of his Majesty. And no
Church will deny that prayers are always good, and sometimes effectual.

I do not repine at the Act of Indemnity, granted by the King. And certain I
am that his Majesty, whose bowels of mercy could begin at that end, will in his
own good time enlarge it to all his Subjects of Ireland. And I hope that when
it is better understood in what nature the Roman Catholics depend upon the
Pope, there will be no cause to reproach them for their tenets in Religion,
although they modestly refuse to invest in his Majesty a power of administering
the Sacraments, which this zealous Gentleman, by his dependence upon his
Majesty in all Ecclesiastical matters, acknowledges to be in him.

Although the Writer in his next Paragraph, pursuing his ordinary method of
railing wittyries, speaks of a show of adherence to the King, which was the
next covert they shrunk under for shelter; yet I must confess it will be hard
to persuade me that the best and most natural shelter for a Subject fallen from
his obedience, is not the protection of his Sovereign, and the remission of his
crimes. And I cannot but say that the world would be much deceived in that
opinion they conceive of your wisdom, if your Grace had suffered your self to
be deluded by a show of the Irish adhereing to the King. Perhaps they fought
and were killed in a dream, and that the dints the Bullets made in your Armor,
while your Grace having acted all the parts of a General, exposed your self as
a common soldier to prevent the defeat at Rathmines, were the bitings of the
Irish Flies, whereof the Writer makes mention. Your Grace best knows, in
defense of whose cause you led that Army. And I dare swear Sir William Vaughan,
Sir Arthur Astowne, and many more of the English Commanders that lost
themselves in defense of it, would not have been so prodigal of their lives to
justify Murderers and Rebels against the English, and that Nation and
Government. And that Sir Thomas Armstrong, Sir John Stevens, Treswell, Travers,
Wogan, Biron, Ballard, etc. had not undergone the hardship, or the mainfold
hazards they did, to maintain the quarrel. And I likewise leave to your Graces
remembrance, how great a Friendship and confidence there was grown, by your
powerful influence upon both parties between them and the Irish. Which received
not the least diminution before the defection of those that betrayed their
trust and his Majesty's Interest in Cork, Youghall, Kinsale, and the rest of
the strong holds in Munster. Who these were, is known to all parties in that
Nation, and you can certify my Lord, they were not Irish nor Catholics.
Neither did this occasion lessen the esteem, which those, who by power derived
from your Grace, had the principal trust in the Nation. But your Grace, who
doubtless did then foresee of what use men of their loyal principles would in
future times be to his Majesty, having provided for their safty, dismissed them
at a time when many accidents, and much refractoriness concurred to weigh down
the scales of his Majesty's declining affairs. Yet your Grace dismissed them
after such a manner, as showed the Roman Catholics were very sensible of the
loss they were to receive by their absence, and the many good services they had
jointly performed under your Grace's command.

I must now forbear to give your Grace any further trouble concerning any shred
of this work, which this Writer says, he has taken to pieces. And to do him
right, I think he has unrip'd the skirts; but he leaves the Doublet entire.
And we are now as wise as we were before, and as far from knowing the true
value of the Stuff, or what it is lined with, save that we gather by it that
self interest is a rapid Torrent that bears all down before it; and a passion
that blinds us into a belief that nothing which advances our ends can be
dishonorable, imprudent, or unjust And this makes the Writer to pray in the
behalf of the English Interest, that under that covert he or his friends may
possess undisturbed, some honest men's Estates in Ireland. But that Nation,
whereof he seems to be, have made and for ever will make it their study to
preserve their Dominion by following those principles of Honor, and Justice,
which have made their Ancestors famous, and have obtained of God for them, the
Reslauration of so unparalled a King without blood, or the miseries of War:
and that at a time, when all disbanded Armies of Europe, expected but a call to
enrich themselves with their spoils. Yet if the Nation of England should even
in their wish remit any part of those principles, the observance whereof was so
propitious to them and their Country, does this Writer conceive they would not
consider what set of people they were to introduce, or whom they were to
oppress? Would they think it to be an essential part of the interest of
England, that Huson the Cobbler (suppose him free of that execrable crime of
Regicide) should enjoy six or seven thousand pounds per ann. in Ireland, and
that so many families descended from the Ancient English Colony, that had a
share in enlarging the Conquests and the fame of England, should be extirpated
and forced to beg their bread? Or that three or four men should by clandestine
bargains, at despicable rates, acquire titles to the possessions, and pretenses
of such kind of persons who were conscious to themselves of their incapacity to
be countenaneed by the Nation of England, in advancing even by just means an
English Interest, and suddenly grow to be Cedars, that were but the underwood
of the Forest: while those that maintained this four hundred years, the
Interest of the Crown of England, and the English interest in Ireland, are
condemned by the inference which this witty Gentleman makes to be cleavers of
wood and drawers of water? No, no. That Nation is too noble, and too just to
patronize such requests: and they have a horror for such tenets. And your Grace
will give me leave to say that those principles of Justice and Loyalty which
you have received from your Ancestors, which you have practiced your self, and
your Children by their own natural inclinations, and your Grace's example, are
imbued with, and which will be conveyed from hand to hand to your posterity,
have been, and will be the sole fortress that could or may defend your family
from the wrath or a more suspicious Master, then now you have the happiness to
serve. Pawns and pledges in England, alas, are but a Cobweb-wrought-defence for
a person whom so great a Monarch would ruin. He that holds the hearts of
Princes in his hands, can best and will protect those that are faithful to his
Vicegerent on Earth, how suspicious soever he may be, so they make it their
next care to be Just to their Neighbors, and redeem them from oppression, if
they have power.

As to those Texts of Scriptures, when it shall be made appear to me, that they
are miscited, misconster'd or misapplied, no humane respect shall make me
oppugn truth: and the same obligation is upon me not to desert it.

My Lord, These are the brief Animadversions, I thought fit, to give at this
time on the Irish Colors Displayed: such as indeed my other, although little
and private, yet necessary distractions, gave me the opportunity to perfect;
and which your Grace's most weighty, manifold and public may afford you the
leisure to peruse: having nevertheless by me, however yet unperfected, a more
ample and more exact reply to all the particulars of that seditious,
unchristian and very unreasonable piece. Wherein I take notice of his Motto;
his pretense; his epithets of bold and wise, wherewith he would flatter me; his
great advantage; justice of his case; his Ink or black, and the Crimson color
he would make ours; the Pamphlet; his difficulty to find the matter of it, and
the easiness to answer; his brass penny in a heap of rubbish; his labor to
put out your eyes and your judgment too, by endeavoring to persuade the matter
of my letter could be hardly felt in your hand; his little game; his planets
and chaffering vein; his unhappy engrafting such numbers of old English
Families upon the Irish stock and Interest; his imposing on and abusing of
Spencer's View; his next Paragraph after, of Spanish Papists; his displeasure
at our stickling one for another, desiring justice according to the fundamental
laws of both Kingdoms, and his Majesty's gracious Promises and Concessions;
and yet his inconsequence in the 15. page of his Answer, in stickling himself
for all his own gang, without exception of any, and in a cause of manifest in
justice, even against all laws both divine and humane; his something more; his
scribbling; his cogging and clawing, and unfortunate proofs thereof, your
constant believers, your passionate sticklers, etc. his imposture with charging
me to have threatened your failing would lessen your dependencies, etc; his
malicious application of my example of Joseph, even against his own knowledge,
and the whole design and express tenor of my Letter in the beginning,
prosecution and ending of it; his gross, wilful and affected ignorance (or
dissimulation rather) of not knowing how the Irish came to be your brethren
upon any other kindred: his minding you of your Ancestors and your own unshaken
loyalty to the Crown of England, and of your constancy to the old Protestant
Religion, so impertinent to the end he drove at; his own servile flatteries;
his unbelieved affections to, or confidence in you; his love to his mistress;
the forced or feigned smiles he would attribute to you; and the sullen aching
jealousies of himself and his party; those passages, without being too much
envied and some thing feared, etc. a testimony and a pawn of your Families
Loyalty, etc. how much the English Nation might be estranged from you by your
favor to the Irish, etc. suddenly either forgiven in heaven, or forgotten upon
earth; his bold slander; his Ravilliack and perhaps half a doozen Jesuits, and
perhaps half a dozen more with Cromwell and Ireton, and his outward compliance,
etc. his Birds, Flies and bare intentions; his unreasonable difference twixt
standing on Articles, and Claiming his Majesty's Grace held forth in the Act
of Indemnity; his not questioning but the same reasons which then induced His
Majesty to grant it them and deny it us, continue still, and will do so to
both our Posterities; his Long Parliament's, and the following tyrannous Powers
quarrel pursued against the Irish; his not allowing these had fought so long
(that is, since the peace made with your Grace) for the King; his having never
heard, and his saying, that none can believe, the overpowering them with
multitudes, and he must mean then (if he speak to purpose) when the last towns
and places of Ireland were given up: his quitting the field, and running away,
and giving up the quarrel, in the next paragraph 14. page of his book, where,
in effect, he not only acknowledges no answer given by him to my letter; but in
plain terms tells your Grace so much, that for matter of our Articles in Forty
eight, which (says he) the writer of that Letter presses to be observed, that
of Transplansplantation, Corporations, and the disposal of the Irish lands,
etc they are particulars he will not meddle with; and yet these are all the
particulars of that Letter, he would seem otherwise, or at least was concernd
to Answer; his reflection after this, on that passage of mine which relates to
the English Army in England, as then composed; and his confidence in them; his
other-shred, or will couched threatenings; his other truth, which yet has
nothing more than untruth; his evil Counsel, immediately following; his
declining the parrallel, and his flat refusing to answer at the weapon of holy
Scripture (although he brags it might be easily done) or try the justice of our
quarrel thereby; which manifestly convinces him to have little of an English
Protestant, or indeed a Christian in him, being he withal undertakes the
patronage of such a cause, or the defense of it in point of Piety and Justice,
which a little before, that is, in his 15. page, he obliges himself unto;
Lastly, the impertinency of his whole discourse, if considered as an answer,
having not answered any one argument of all my Letter; not even, with
satisfaction to the Reader, any one of those very immaterial passages he
singled out; but above all, the close and far yet more dangerous design this
Gentleman drives, (under that which is more overt in his paper) to create new
troubles to our Gracious King, to involve his subjects in bloody confusions
again, and even to destroy his Sacred Majesty at last by ruining first, and for
ever, those that have for so many years, and do yet suffer for him. My Lord,
of all these and what ever else is regardable in his Answer, I take a more
particular and more exact notice in some papers, I have by me, then I can here;
because my other occasions will not yet serve me to finish them as I would; nor
yours (I suppose) your Grace to read them at this time.

However, my Lord, that real and dutiful affection, which penned my former
Letter, gives in the mean time this. And withal craves your pardon; if I mind
you here, those truly sage, divine precepts, which this little politic spirit
of earth seemed not to be versed in, or at least either contemns or neglects.
For indeed my Lord he appears to me all along his writing, of the number of
those who see heaven, and all the hopes of the other life, as Mathematicians
make us behold in a dark Chamber, whatsoever passes abroad, through a little
crany, in such a manner, that all things we see, appear like shadows and
landskips turned topsie-turvy. Verily, I take this Gentleman to be abused so by
himself. And that after he has stopped up all the Windows and accesses to
heavenly rays, he has made a little hole for the Moon, and all the blessings
of the other life have seemed very slender to his distrustful spirit: and that
he has put on a resolution to make a fortune at what price soever, and to
build on earth like Cain, after he has almost renounced the hopes of heaven.
Behold, the reason why, with so little regret or shame, he adventures to lay
maxims before you, that suppose to hold on a course in all affairs and
Governments of the world, which may be crafty, captious, worldly, unjust, yea
cruel too, and inhumane (when it is for their interest) and a course (however)
which may be always independent of divine laws, if not for some popular
appearance

But, my Lord, the proofs you have constantly given of your chaste apprehensions
of a God, and a Providence ruling the Universe, of a strong virtue, and a
resolution firm, unchangable therein, both in your prosperous fortune, as well
now as heretofore, and in that condition, which has been so long most adverse,
and has tried you like gold in the Furnace, together with your two great
successive Masters on earth (whom you have served most faithfully in all
changes, and in obedience to that heavenly One, whom all Servants and Masters
too must revere) make all that know you well, be very confident this Enchanter
has labored in vain to charm you. And me no less, That you had rather take
your maxims, and measures, and rules, and examples of Government from the
Oracles of God, from the equity of the Laws, from the dictates of your own
severe Conscience, and from the model of so many great, honorable and holy
Statesmen, who flourished in the succession of all Ages, and governed
succesfully their people, then from the vain illusions and wicked policy of a
Machiavel or Achitophel, or from the diastrous undertakings, and sad
Catastrophe, of either themselves, or of those they tutord.

Never was there a more refined wit then Achitophel, of whom the Scripture
said, Consilium Achitophel, quasi si quis consuleret Deum, That men consulted
with him as with a God: Yet never was there any more unhappy in his practice.
For having disposed of the affairs of the Kingdom, and those of his own house,
there remaining none to be provided for but his own person, he took a halter,
and hanged himself, because they approved not one of his Counsels. Nor ever was
any more unhappy then Machiavel in all his enterprises, notwithstanding his
great list of refined precepts. And for those two unfortunate Princes, that
were Scholars or patterns to them, Absalom, and Duke Valentinois (besides
hundreds more that would not be wise by their fate) we know what end they had.
Besides, my Lord, you consider it has been the judgment, near two thousand
years ago, even of that very great Politician Thucidides, and ever since a
general observation, as it is to day, of all well understanding men, that those
curious wits, despoiled of the fear of God, have always been most turbulent
and unhappy in the manage both of their own affairs and the public also: As on
the contrary, those who had not so much knowledge and invention, but pursued
the general instinct of God, have held their Estates better governed in
simplicity, more prosperous in the ignorance of evil, and much more in the
lasting of their felicity.

And your own reading can furnish you with sufficient proofs, that ordinarily
the most unhappy among States have been those, who have made the greatest show
of knowledge, to deceive under humane Policy. That is it which overthrew the
Commonwealth of the Athenians. That which ruined the house of Jeroboam, who,
revolting against his Prince, having raised a State by ambition, and a Religion
out of fantasy, having seen the Altas crack with the horror of his crimes,
and his heart still remaining more obdurate then stone, in the end he is so
chastised by the hand of God, that there was not left so much as one handful of
dust of his house upon the face of the earth. Domus Jeroboam eversa est and
deleta de supersicie terrae. And even that which undid the very first King of
Gods own election. For this unfortunate Prince, while he makes show punctually
to obey the Law of God, under the direction of Samuel, but afterward learns to
become cunning, envious, faithless, plotting designs, consulting Pythonesses,
and seeking in all points his own petty interests: poor David (whose life this
King judged, without any other cause but envy, incompatible with his own
estate) dismounts him, using no other policy, but that of making himself an
honest man

Holy Scripture, and other Monuments of latter and former times, can further
tell your Grace, that considering so many other Politicians, who made
profession to refine all the world, who attempted to practice, according to
their own vain Idea's, either you have seen but the first station of their
plaistered felicity, or have ever found great labyrinths, horrible confusions,
fortunes little lasting, dejection in their posterity, hatred, and the
execration of Ages.

And that you may without enquiry or trouble to your thoughts behold with a
ready eye, how there is no policy powerful against God, and how he surpriseth
the most subtle, making snares of their greatest cunning to captive them, see
(my Lord) in the book of Hester, that wicked Aman, the great Favorite of
Assuerus, ^ho practiced, as our Gentleman does, the ruin of the Hebrews, who
prevailed so far, as to have the lots cast, and* warrants signed, and
proclamation made thereof in Sushan, and a day prefixed for the general
slaughter of that Nation, young and old, men, women, and children, and
Courriers dispatched to all Provinces of the Empire, to command the execution,
while these forlorn people, dispersed as they were then among strangers, moved
heaven and earth to pity with their yellings, because they saw not how the
Decree was avoidable; see this wicked Aman resolved on so horrid an act as was
the destruction of so many millions, and resolved upon it only to be revenged
on Mordecai that saved the King from murder, and, after this, to raise himself
with the wealth of the destroyed (all which the King bestowed upon him at the
same time.) See this Politician of Hell, yea notwithstanding all his power and
favor, ruined in a moment, yea within three days after the Decree published,
and ruined by this very Mordecai, a contemptible worm of the earth, till then,
in Amans apprehension. See presently a countermand of the bloody Edicts; Aman
forced to lead Mordecai's horse, and cry him in the streets of Susan the
greatest Lord of the Empire, next the King; and himself next day after raised
indeed, but on a gibbet of fifty cubits high, to humble him for ever, by the
most ignominious death could be: while the Jews on that very day, by him
designed for utter destruction, saw themselves masters, and (even by the Kings
commandment to all his Lieutenants and other Subjects) executioners, in the
Kings own Court Susan, of the ten sons of their great enemy, and of eight
hundred more, two days continually; and in other Provinces, throughout the
Empire, of threescore and fifteen thousand men, who had before conspired
against them with Aman.

Besides this, my Lord, see one example more very pertinent in the book of
Exodus. Behold Pharaoh turned ungrateful, and forgetful of all the obligations
laid by Joseph on him. See this Pharaoh becoming crafty, and thinking by
ruinating the Israelits his Scepter is thoroughly established. But see withal
how God surprizeth him in his subtilty, and makes him know the oppression of
this poor people is the instrument of his ruin. A little child, which lies
floating on the waters of Nilus in a cradle of bulrushes, as a worm hidden in
straw, and whose afflicted mother measures his tomb with her eyes in every
billow of this faithless element, is delivered from peril by the very blood of
Pharao, to turn the Diadem of Pharao into dust, and bury him with all his
Nobles, and an army of two hundred thousand men with him, as Josephus writes,
all enflamed in a gulf of the red Sea.

But, my Lord, I have almost forgot my self, being transported on this subject,
whereon the temerity of my Answerer has engaged me to dilate: not that I would
instruct your Grace by these examples of Gods confounding evil Counsels, whom I
know to need no such antidotes against the poison of this Writer, but that I
might convince, or confound him.

I know your Grace desires rather I should mind your self those Maxims, or
Precepts, and Examples too, that may confirm you in a resolution to be
thoroughly virtuous, to be exactly just and benignly merciful (being Justice and
Mercy are the Virtues, above all others, must be most proper to your great
charge:) then such as fortify against the Vices opposite, from which you are
by Nature and Education wholly estranged.

My Lord, I shall then, to that purpose, call to your memory, in the first
place, three passages of holy Scripture. The first is a Maxim of the ho^y
Ghost, by the mouth of the wisest King, or man, amongst the children of men;
and you may read it in the sixteenth Chapter of Solomon's Proverbs. Justitia
firmatur solium. It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness, for the
throne is established by righteousness. My Lord, even that very Throne, for
which you have undergone so many labors, hardships and hazards these twenty
years past, and for the fixing of which, you are now to undertake the greatest
charge that can be laid upon you, and the most difficult to perform will be
established by doing justice. The second is an admonition of the same Holy
Spirit (even to your self) by the month of Jesus the Son of Syrach. Noli
quaerere fieri Iudex nisi justitia valeas irrumpere iniquitatem: ne forte
extimescas faciem potentis, and p^nas scand lum in aequitate tua Ecclesiastic.
7. Seek not to be judge, if you have not the power to break through all
iniquity: lest any time you fear the person of the Mighty, and lay a
stumbling block in the way of your uprightness. I confess, my Lord, this Text
imports a seeking, and that according the literal rigor of that first word, it
is only against such; and therefore, insomuch, not properly applicable to your
Grace. But you know, my Lord, as well, by natural reason, as by forty clear
passages of Holy Bible, the duty of doing justice is nothing less incumbent on
Judges or Governors, that by injunction or command, they undergo their charge:
it being evident that none may tie our conscience to act unrighteously, and
that contrariwise by that very command to accept the charge, the obligation to
be just is the greater, if this may admit of any increase. Which is the reason
I aver the wise man speaks, even in this very passage, directly to your
Grace, advising you either to have sufficient power and a virtuous constant
resolution to beat down, trample under foot all obstacles, even that regard of
the Powerful or Mighty, which might otherwise hinder you from doing justice
indifferently to all persons in your great charge: or certainly to lay down (at
his Majesty's feet) your Commission, least otherwise it might be a scandal to
you, an occasion to lose the favor of Heaven, and the repute you have hitherto
preserved so entire on earth, as hereditary to your Noble House and Family. And
yet I alledg not this passage, as having the least fear of your being hereafter
unjust, or the least hopes that any man living is so fit for that charge as
your self, under our gracious Sovereign, in the present conjuncture, nor so
desired of all the different parties in that Nation; but that I would mind you
of it as very useful against this man of sin, who would have you buoy up one
Interest wholly, that is the strong and prevalent, and sink utterly the other,
against all Divine and Humane Laws. The third passage, and very consequent to
this, is a question, which it seems to me, I hear God himself demanding of you
here, by his afflicted Prophet, Job 40. c. Si habes brachium sicut Deus? and
voce simili tonas? Have you the arm of God? or can you thunder with a voice
like his? My Lord, if this Arm, and this Voice, has been ever yet necessary to
any man going to command a Country of iron and ire, a people that have not
these many years distinguished betwixt Might and Right, so many different
parties, and as opposite one to another in their demands and their interests,
as East and West, the South and North are, it must be to your Grace. And
therefore, my good Lord, it is but your duty to beg of God in humble prayer,
that he will give you both, in that proportion and respect any mortal can, and
one of your Place ought to have them, to overcome so many difficulties and
oppositions which lie before you.

In the next place, my Lord, I shall mind your Grace of what you know your self
already, That you shall behold under your Government a very great number of
simple, poor, innocent, and most afflicted creatures, if any such be in the
whole world. And that you are to think that God has principally created you,
and hitherto preserved you amidst so many dangers, and now at last inspired our
gracious King to send you, for them. And therefore that your greatest care must
be to open to them your heart with an amorous compassion, extend to them the
bowels of your charity, stretch out affectionately to them your helpful hands
take their requests, lend ear to their cries, cause their affairs to be
speedily dispatched, not drawing them along in delays which may devour them,
strengthen your arm against those that oppress them, redeem the prey out of
the Lions throat, and the Harpie's talons.

For this it is, my Lord, that Kings, Princes, States and Governors are made.
To actions of this kind it is, that God promises all the blessings of Heaven,
and admirations of earth. For this sort of processes are Crowns of Glory
prepared. By this means a man diveth into the bottom of the heart, and good
opinion of people. This is the cause that one has so many souls and lives at
command, as there are men, who the more sweetly breath air by the liberality
wherewith they are obliged.

And believe it, my Lord, your Greatness, before God, will not be to multiply
titles of Honor and Command (which yet have followed you still, as the shadow
does the body, and were most deservedly and most justly put upon you by His
most Sacred Majesty that now is, and by his Father of glorious memory) nor will
be to cover the earth with Armies, and make rivers of blood, and to raise up
mountains of dead bodies; but to do justice to a poor Orphan, to wipe away
the tears of a forlorn Widow, to steep in Oil (as the Scripture speaks) the
yoke of people which live on gall and wormwood, who sigh under necessities
almost unsupportable to the most savage, who daily charge ears with complaints
and altars with vows for their deliverance, and who cry for your Grace at this
time as the Fathers of the old Testament did for the Messiah, or as the unborn
children of that very Nation are said in Venerable Bede, to have done 1200.
years ago, to Him that redeemed them, immediately after, from the slavery of
Heathenisme, and power of Devils.

But when shall we expect that deliverance, if not now? Now that our good King
is restored by so many miracles and wonders; now that he is established by all
that may concur to fix his Throne; now that he is so well disposed to justice,
and to mercy both (as he has ever been) now that he has near his person a
Council so sage, a Parliament so zealous for the public good, so many
honorable men endowed with so sincere intentions; and now that your Grace is
(the second or third time) Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and ready to part hence
to your charge, when may we reasonably expect the comfort of that oppressed
people, if not at this hour, when miseries are eminent, clamours piercing, and
dispositions very good? Alas! my Lord, if there be any thing in the world,
wherein you may be seen to oblige the present, and replenish future times with
admiration of your virtues, it is in effecting this, for which Heaven is in
expectation and the hands of a million of poor disconsolate souls are daily
lifted to God.

Remember, my Lord, that such, and so many great Governors, for not having had
any other aim in charges, but the accommodation of their own affairs, have
passed away like phantasmes, leaving naught here behind them but ordure, nor
bearing any thing with them into the other world but crimes And that they have
found that the sold of the wounded have cried to Heaven against them, and that
God has not let it pass without revenge. Anima vulneratorum clamavit ad
Dominum, and Deus inultam abire non patitur, as holy Job speaks in the 24th.
chapter, where he at large explicateth both the calamity of the poor, and the
chastisement of the rich that oppress them.

Consider, on the other side, that all those who have constantly addicted
themselves to the maintenance of Justice, and the consolation of affl^cted
persons, besides the Crowns which they enjoy in Heaven, live gloriously in the
memory of men. Their mouths, which are opened for justice, after they are shut
up as Temples, are truly worthy to have Lillies and Roses strewed on the Marble
which encloseth them; and that their posterity also may reap the good odor of
their noble Ancestors, which has made it march with up-reared head before the
face of the people.

In the last place, my Lord, notwithstanding the Answerer's quarrel against
holy Scripture, to direct State-affaires, and fortify or clear disputes in
matters of public Justice (which is the most unreasonable saying could proceed
from a Christian; since if they be of any use at all, they must be in
State-affaires most of all others) I most humbly and most earnestly recommend
this Book of books to your Grace, whereby to guide your self always in your
most important determinations of State, for what may relate to right and the
law of God. Look upon it as the pillar of clouds and flames, which conducted
the army of the living God. There it is where you shall learn true maxims of
State, scored out with most vigorous reflections of the Wisdom of God: and
where you shall trample under foot, with a generous contempt, so many
illusions, which wretched souls seek for in the mouth of Sorcerers. Read the
book of Wisdom, the Prophets, the book of holy Job, and the Divine Psalms of
the King, chosen out according to God's own heart. Consider the stream of so
many Histories, written in this Theater of wonders, which are characters of
fire, wherewith the divine Providence is pleased to be figured to mortal eyes,
that we may learn the punishment of crimes and the crowns of virtue.

Represent unto your self often in your idaeae's, those great Statesmen, who
have flourished in the course of all ages: and derive light and fire from their
examples, to illuminate and inflame you in the self same list. Behold him who
has been refined above all others in the School of God, I mean Moses. Who
has been more humble in refusing charges, more obedient in accepting them,
more faithful in exercising, more industrious in executing the commandments of
God, more vigilant in government of the people, more severe in correction of
vices, more patient in sufferance of the infirmities of Subjects, and more
zealous in the cordial love he bare to the whole world?

With these gifts he became the God of Monarchs, he ruined the State of his
enemies, he unloosed the chains of an infinite number of slaves, he opened
Seas, he manured wildernesses, he marched in the front of fix hundred thousand
men at arms, he lived laborious amongst Shepherds, chaste in the Court of Kings,
temperate in government, a companion of Angels in his retirement, and as it
were a cabinet-friend of God, having continually heaven for object, and all
greatness in contempt. He had blotted out all that was man in him, by the
purity of a conversation wholly celestial. The flesh was in him in such
subjection, and the spirit in such Empire, that (as Ambrose speaks, in his book
of Cain and Abel) he merited the name of God, in the resemblance of whom he was
transformed by the superabundance of his virtues.

Behold that great Disciple of Moses, Josue. What piety in the service of the
Omnipotent, what sweetness in government, what greatness of spirit in noble
enterprises, what patience in difficulties, what prudence in direction, what
dispatch in expeditions? It is no wonder if in the fight of these eminent
qualities, Walls and Cities fell, Giants waxed pale, Rivers retired back, the
Sun stood still, and one and thirty Kings underwent the yoke.

Behold Samuel, the Father, Master, and Judge of two Kings, the Doctor of
Prophets, the Sanctuary of the poor, the pillar of the Church. Is it not a
magnificent spectacle to see him go out of charge, after so long a Government,
and so great a diversity of Affairs, with a heart so untainted, and hands
undefiled, as if he had perpetually conversed with Angels? Is it not a most
heroical action, which he did in the first of Kings, when after the election of
Saul, having voluntarily resigned his Dignity, he showed himself with upreard
head in the midst of the people, and gave liberty to all the world, from the
least to the greatest, to complain and make information against him, before the
King newly chosen? If it may be found that in his Magistracy, he ever did the
least wrong to any man, he is there ready to afford all satisfaction, that may
be thought fit. But as he had lived most innocently, at this word was lifted up
a loud cry, proceeding from a general consent of the people, which highly
proclaimed the integrity of his justice. Is not this a praise of more value
then millions of Gold and Empires? But above all reflect often on the Wisdom
of God Incarnate Jesus Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, as the Prime
model of all Statesmen, whom the Prophet Esaias has exactly represented in the
eleventh Chapter of his Prophecy; where he figureth the Redeemer unto us in the
quality of a Judge, to serve for instruction and example to all posterity.

First, for as much as concerns his perfections, he gave him seven sorts of
spirits very consonant to a true Politician; the spirit of Wisdom, and
Understanding, the spirit of Counsel, and Strength, the spirit of Science, and
Piety, and the spirit of the Fear of God, wherewith he was wholly replenished.
Then, describing the manner of his proceeding, says, He shall not judge
according to humane appearances, by the inconsiderate view of carnal eyes, and
the relation of a rash tongue; but he shall do justice to the poor, and
fortify himself with all kind of vigor, for the defense of so many gentle
souls, as are oppressed in the world. To this purpose he shall strike the earth
with the words of his mouth, using his tongue as a rod of correction, and shall
overthrow the wicked with the breath of his lips. Justice shall be so familiar
to him, that he shall make use of it as a girdle of honor, or a rich baudrike,
which brave Captains wear. The effects of his Government shall be so eminent,
that under his reign the Woolf shall be seen to cohabit with the Lamb, the
Leopard with the Goat, the Calf with the Lion, and little Children to play with
Basilisks and Aspicks. Willing in these Allegories to signify how this divine
Governor should mollify the most savage humors, and reduce them to the
temper of reason.

I conclude here, my Lord, wishing it may be so in Ireland under your
Government. That you may imitate this great Exemplar to Judges. That you may be
another Samuel, a Joshua, and a Moses to the people under your charge. That in
particular you may (in the present conjuncture) have the charity and compassion
of Moses for them all; since you know them (very near) all, one way or other,
guilty transgressors, as having either made, or followed, or adored the Gods of
Gold. And (therefore) that, without losing this last and best opportunity of
your departure hence, which now is drawing on so near, your Grace may be
pleased to speak your strongest intercession for them all, to his Majesty, and
speak it with that love, zeal and fervor Moses did for his beloved Israelites
to God (in the two and thirtieth of Exodus) when they had fallen into the most
grievous rebellion imaginable. And that you may be pleased to speak that
intercession, even in the very words of this great Prophetical Commander, this
Familiar of God. Either forgive them now their sin, or if not, then (I beseech
thee) blot me out of thy book which thou have written. Aut dimitte eis hanc
noxam: aut dele me de libro tuo quem scripsisti. Wherein (my Lord) prevailing
(as I doubt not you will) and obtaining this general Pardon from the most
gracious, indulgent, merciful Prince on earth, and affording effectually the
benefit thereof to all the Roman Catholic people of Ireland, and to so many
other different parties and interests in that Kingdom, without distinction,
without prejudice to the rights of any of all (according to that which might be
justly claimed by them from such an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, and, in
pursuance thereof, from the equity of the Laws, and from his Majesty's other
gracious Concessions in Articles of Peace) you will certainly give the most
hopeful beginning may be to your other glorious undertakings hereafter: as at
present evict this confession from all the world, that you have deafned your
ears to the Enchanter of injustice, and that, ever constant to your self, you
remember perpetually and follow this more Christian, more humane precept of an
Apostle, Vince in bono malum. Which is the vow for you of

My Lord, Your Grace's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Servant P.
W.


