THE ADVOCATE OF CONSCIENCE LIBERTY, OR, AN APOLOGY FOR TOLERATION RIGHTLY
STATED: Showing The Obligatory Injunctions and Precepts for Christian Peace and
Charity.

Adversus invidiam nil prodest vera dicere; ^a est enim calumniatoris natura in
crimen vocare omnia, probare vero nihil. Demosthenes. They shall be judged
without mercy that have showed no mercy. James 2. 12. Thou shall not calumniate
thy Neighbor nor oppress him by violence. Levit. 19. 13. Printed, 1673.

PROOEMIUM.
THe long and grand debate about Toleration (of late so often, and so fiercely
discussed pro and con) by some universally condemned and exploded: by others
with as much eagerness affirmed and approved* One party writes ^opiously of
the mischiefs which will follow Toleration; the other writes as copiously of
the necessity of it*

How to reconcile these two extremes is hard and difficult, especially when a
preposterous zeal to one side or other does first set so great a sally in our
wills and understandings. How many and h^w great have been the feuds and still
are of this tottering and broken age, there is no man so happy as to be
ignorant. And it is very strange and very sad; that an age which has so much
of light and faith in the pretense, should have so little love and charity in
the practoce. For how much of the Christian World is now in Sects, is a thing
which requires more lamentation then proof.

Now in this general Combustion, Its every Christian's duty to bring what water
he can to throw upon the flames: its the office of all peaceable men to
endeavor the quenchi^g of these intestine Conf^agrations: to supple and allay
the rancour and swelling of this Epidemical evil. He that can stand unconcerned
and deny his service to love and peace, and wounded Christ: may soon find he
has lost, even that which he thought to win.

Had all that profess the Gospel in England made Conscience of Schism:
forbearing to judge and despise those that are not of their opinion: loving
them still as Brethren and Christians; not censu^ing them as profane,
Antichristian-idolatrous, etc. our breaches had never been so great; nor lovers
of peace and truth so much ca^se to lament.

We have Enemies enough abroad in the world, though Christians be not at
variance with themselves. Did we conscientiously apply our selves and make it
our business to practice vi^^ues, govern our passions, and subdue our appetites
and self wills in order to the glory of God: we should find work enough in our
own hearts to employ: and neither have time, nor occasion to quarrel with
others; making Enemies, when we have so many within our selves. Did we
understand our danger or our duty, and seriously mind either; we should not be
so eager, against those whom we ought to consider as friends, upon the account
of our relation to God; and the tie of common nature, and obligations of divine
precepts, and practice of the best times and hope of future happiness.

I confess it is a thing unnatural for one Christian to afflict another, (and
that which is most to be lamented) for those who think themselves the Salt of
the earth, who instead of preserving the world from P^trefaction; and
concurring to heal the dividing principles, rather join with calumniators
encouraging them in misreports, being glad to hear of any miscarriages, and
very ready to take up any light rumors: and are willing tongues of slanderous
fame: as if God had need of their m^l^^^ous calumnies to his glory. These are
vices and immoralities impious and detestable against which every good
Christian, ought to manifest his resentment and be warned to indignation by
them.

Many confident reports, very strong pr^sumptions, may all prove injurious and
false: when it comes to the trial. This very age does experimentally confute,
how many impeaceable zealo^s have written and uttered false things, that had
neither trut^ nor ground at all in them? Extravagant crimes have been imputed
on the most ancient Christians. And this is done without Christ's way of a
regular process of a just trial and hearing; when the accused is not permitted
to answer, or heard speak for himself. So that there must be a sin and
injustice in the Calumniator, the believer and reporter.

How can we think that unbelievers and Infidels, should think well of them that
speak so ill of one another? to represent Christians like a company of m^d^nen
that are tearing out the throats of one another? or like drunken men who one
day fight and wound each other, and the next cry out of their wounds; and yet
go on in their drunken fits to make them wider. I had thought that in general
calamities every man should have laid his hand upon his own he^rt and suspect
himself to be that Acham that troubles the Camp, that Jonah that occasions the
St^^m: and not like guilty Ahab lay the fault of troubling Israel on good E^ias.

Now when Bellona shakes her bloody whip over this Kingdom: it becomes all
good Christians and subjects to leave their feuds, litigations, discords and
animosities. To lay aside all uncomely rigor and severities. Like the good
Samaritan to be free of their oil, and sparing of their vinegar. To confider
some way to engage all hearts and hands in this Nation unanimously (not to
multiply disincouragements by penal inflictions) to square out some mild,
moderate, pacifick way wherein tru^ liberty of Conscience or Toleration
(properly taken) (...). Which I will prove in this following Tractate, not only
lawful but necessary; and obligatory as relating to s^veral Religions in this
Kingdom. But because this virt^e is better ^lucidated, by showing the
vitiousness and exorbitancies of the opposite extremes. I will first prove
Persecution on the mere soore of Religion unlawful and to be condemned. To be
against Policy, Piety, and our own Principles. Secondly I will show that
Liberty or Toleration rightly understood is necessarily to be permitted: but
improperly taken to be disavowed and condemned. Thirdly, To undeceive many weak
and ignorant, I shall make it appear (against the prejudices, passions,
mistakes and blind errors of these sad divided times) that the Romanists have
as great a right and title to Toleration, as any other Sect whatsoever. Lastly,
Solving all the Modern and common Objections to the contrary: With a conclusive
exhortation to all pious wellminded and charitable Christians.

The Question Stated.
Note by Persecution, imposition and restraint: we only mean the strict
requiring to believe this to be true, or that to be false, etc. and upon
refusal to swear or conform; to incur the penalties enacted in such Cases. But
by these terms we do not mean any coercive let or hinderance into public
Meetings.

By Liberty of Conscience we understand only a mere liberty of mind in
believing or disbelieving this or that Doctrine, so far as may refer only to
religious matters in a private way of worship: which are not destructive to the
nature and grounds of Christian Faith: nor tending to matters of an external
Judicature: in abetting any contrivance or disturbance to common peace or
civility. Proceeding on the premises the title of the first Chapter will be.

CAP. I. Persecution on the score of Religion is utterly Condemned and unlawful.
IMposition, Violence, and Persecution for matters merely relating to
Conscience, directly invades the divine prerogative, for God alone is Lord over
the Conscience, it is his just Claim and privilege, for as Solomon says, no
man has power over Conscience. Luther Eccles.
in the Book of Civil Magistrates, says the Law of them extends no farther
then Body and Goods, for over Conscience God alone rules: in the same Book in
the building of the Temple, says he, there was no sound of Iron heard, to
signify that Christ will have in his Church a free and willing people not
compelled by human Laws and Statutes, God has exempted the soul out of your
Commission, etc.

The Cause and reason why Judicatures of men are appointed and set up, are that
Magistrates should be Ministers of protection and praise to them that do good:
and of terror and revenge of those that do Evil in matters to outward practice:
but to exceed these limits imposing nice and doubtful oaths (not having the
Conditions required in Scriptures) on the Consciences of men and other
pressure, and penalties concerning their souls only (of which Christ alone
Challenges the propriety) is neither lawful nor warrantable. it is Gods
prerogative to punish for Conscience, who has only propriety in the Soul, unto
whom all must give account, in spiritual things. For Religion is a virtue has
God for its immediate object, when according to all Divines it is not within
the vierge of humane Cognizance, because the Soul is not liable to our
tribunal. Keckerman a learned Writer says, that the Bond between the
Magistrate and Subject is essentially Civil. The saying of King Stephen, the
wise King of Poland, is Observable that he was King of men, not of Consciences,
Commander of Bodies not of Souls.

The practice of persecution merely for conscience, has been disavowed and
condemned by divine authority, and holy writ, by the Primitive Fathers, by many
of the most famous Princes in the world, by our own principles and concessions,
by the wisest, greatest, and Best States in ancient and modern times, as the
Jews, Romans, Egyptians, Germany, Holland, nay the Turks and Persians, Polish
and Bohemian Kings. Marcus Aurelius a Pagan permitted tolleration to
Christians. Ant^ni^^ Pius Emperor (so called for his great piety) whose Empire
God blessed with greater peace and felicity, then any Pagan Empeperor had
before or after him; for the favor he showed to Christians; in taking of the
many and Cruel persecutions suffered under his Predecessors; Forbad no man
should be accused for their Religion, affirmed that the great Earthquakes and
other Calamities wherewith the Empire was afflicted, proceeded of the justice
of God for the injuries done to the Christians: as it is manifested by a Copy
of the edict related by Eutrop. l. 10.

Gratian and Jovianus Caesar Emperors permitted various Religions, the old
Romans offered the Jews Liberty on condition they would be faithful. Theodosius
and Gratian most Christian Emperors were contented to tolerate the Arrians. At
Jerusalem in Christ time were two Sects living sociable, the Pharisees and
Sadduces; in Germany these hundred years Papists and Lutherans live together,
in France Calvenists are permitted. How often the French King gave Edicts of
pacification is set down in Laval. l. 3. Solomon permitted the Hittites,
Hivites, Perizites and Jebuzites to live quietly under his Reign, as Grotius
observes, on the 1 of Kings 19. 20. The Novatians says Baxter, were
tolerated and loved by the sober Catholic Emperors, because they had
tolerable principles when many others were otherwise dealt withal, and S.
Martin and Sulpitius Severus refused to be of their Council for inciting the
Emperor to the way of blood, and corporal violence. The Turk permits
Christians, Persians and Aethiopians in his Dominions. Venetians suffers
Jews; amongst them, as the King of Spain did the Moors till necessity forced
him to expel them by the Inquisition.

Its a false proposition proceeding from Gall and Spleen, only to breed an
exulceration in the hearts of the people that Catholics, Protestants, etc. may
not be tolerated in a well governed wealth, the wiser sort will not endure so
gross a paradox daily proved false before their eyes.

It was a notable observation of a wise Father, that those that persuaded
pressure of Conscience, were commonly therein interressed themselves for their
own end. And most that now plead against tolleration, would plead as much for
it, if they were once under the hatches and their Religion discountenanced By
Power, and we that once thought the imposition of a directory unreasonable; and
a restraint from our way of worship Unchristian; do not the same reasons remain
in vindication of indulgence to others? if you will have liberty to maintain
your own opinions, why should not reason tell you, others will exspect the like
for themselves. Protestants, Calvinist, Presbiterians, etc. living in popish
Countries will plead for tolleration.

Our first reformers were great Champions for liberty of Conscience, as
Wicliffe in his remonstration to the Parliament: the Albigensis to Lewis the
eleventh and twelfth of France. Calvin to Francis the First. Luther to the
several Dyets under Frederick and Charles the Fifth; our ancient Protestant
Divines Musculus, Osiander, S^ermius. The Protestants in Swetia desired
tolleration as Chytraeus shows in his Chronicle 1595. and Belloy in Apol.
says, that Melanchton consented. Erasmus labored to prove the necessity of it.

While Popery was prevalent in England, the Pope being then reputed Vicar of
Christ in spiritual things, yet notwithstanding so much liberty was given, that
no man suffered death for opposing his dictates in Religion: and then in the 2.
of Henry the fourth, a Statute being made against the Lollards, the Commons
petitioned the King, it might be repealed, and by complaint of the Commons it
was then in part repealed in Stat. Hen. 8.

A wise Emperor told Henry the third, King of France, there was no greater sin
then to force men's consciences, for such as think to Command them, supposing to
win heaven, do often loose what they possess on earth. King James in his speech
to the Parliment, says that it is a sure Rule in Divinity, that God never
planted the Church by violence or Bloodshed. Much less says the wise Sir
Francis Bacon, ought the Sword to be put in the peoples hands to persecute,
nourish sedition, authorize conspiracies, etc. for that is but to dash the
first table against the second, and to Consider men as Christians, as we forget
they are men.

The wise Romans in Case of Religion, were very tender and Cautious: for when
Cato was Consul and it seemed necessary to the Senate to suppress with
violence, the disordered Ceremonies of the Bacchinals, brought in by a strange
Priest into the City; he withstood that sentence, alleging there was nothing so
apt to deceive men as Religion, which always presents a show of Divinity; and
for that Cause it behooved to be very wary in Chastising the professors
thereof, least any indignation should enter into the peoples minds that
somewhat was derogated from the Majesty of God.

Others More freely, have not spared to place Religion (I mean that which is
ignorantly Zealous) amongst the kind of frenzies, which cannot be cured
otherwise then by time given to divert and qualify the humor of the conceit.
Whence Levia said to Augustus, Visne Muliebre Concilium? Let severity sleep a
while, and try what what alteration the pardonning of Cinna may procure. The
Emperor hearkened to her Counsel, and thereby found his enemies mouths stopped,
and their Malice abated. A soft gale of wind often allaies a great storm, the
warm Sun will prevail more with the traveller, then cold and boisterous winds.
The Goats blood will break the Adamant, which the hardest hammers cannot do:
Chronical diseases are not cured by physic and motion, but by time and rest.
It falls out many times that the remedy is worse then the disease, and while we
go about to cure the State, we kill it, and instead of purging out the peccant
humor of the body politic, we cast it into a Calenture or burning fever.
This was not unknown to that wise and good Emperor Theodosius, who could not be
persuaded to extirpate or use violent courses against the Arrians, knowing how
dangerous it would prove to the state if the quietness thereof should be
disturbed.

Lucretius the Poet when he beheld the act of Agamemnon that could endure the
sacrificing of his own daughter, exclaimed tantum Religio potuit suadere
malorum? what would he have said if he had known and seen the Christian
Bloodshed and Violence in Religion in these times? he would have been ten times
more Epicure then he was.

We read of Sabbacus a Heathen King of Aethiopia who being by dreams
admonished, that he could not possess himself of the Kingdom, but by the
slaying of the Priests: he chose rather to lay aside the Claim; and to refer
the government to twelve wise men; How much more will it become Christians not
to lay the foundation of Religion upon the Carcasses, spoils and ruins of their
distressed neighbors, relations, and fellow Subjects?

It has been an ancient aphorism of State and Wisdom of the greatest Princes,
punire raro, it was ascribed to Augustus Caesar as a title of honor, nunquam
Civilem sanguinem fudisse: and Seneca, who lived under a Tyrant says, frequens
vindicta paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat. Aristotle says, those are
ever held to be most godly Laws that are least Sanguinary, and yet maintain
Order.

The Kingdom of Christ is not carried on after the fashion of this World, with
arms and engines of War, to be erected on the bones and Sepulchers of our
Brethren and Fathers. The Throne of Christ is not supported as Solomon's, on
both sides with Lions and Tygres, Bears and Wolves; instead of Lambs and Doves,
as if we should change our meek, patient, crucified Messiah, and had got some
Muzzian a Mohammedan God of Forces, who is to be served in Buff Coats and
Armor. It was a great blasqhemy when the Devil said, I will ascend and be like
to the highest; but it is a greater blasphemy to personate God and to bring
him, saying, I will descend to be like the Prince of Darkness with furies and
persecutions: nay, what is worse to make the Cause of Religion (as is proved by
experience this last Century) descend to the Cruel and inhumane murdering of
Princes, butchering of the People, racking of Consciences, by Oaths and
Sequestrations; surely this is to bring down the Holy Ghost instead of likeness
of a Dove into the shape of a Vulture or Raven, and to set out for the Barque
of a Christian Church, a Flag of a Barque of Pirates and Assasinates, or to
bring in an armatum Evangelium, Christian Religion in Complete Armor; and
Christ marching like Alexander, Hannibal or Caesar: it is hard to pick out
Letters of Mart, from the Gospel, or to have any Commission to kill or slay
Jesus Christ in order to reform.

Whence a learned divine of our English Church says, it is a squalid
reformation, that is besmeared with the blood of Christians, it is against the
honor, order, unity and majesty of a reformed Church to persecute, and to be
like those canes sepulchrales, violating the bones and ashes of the dead.

Persecution sets a man as far from a true Christian temper, as burning
Fevers do from natural heat and health, when once a male contented member is
grieved then the rest of the body is sensible and secretly arm for opposition:
all cry pity any should suffer for their conscience, and silently say among
themselves sors hodierna mihi, Cras erit illa tibi, there being necessary
connection between Civil Liberty and that which is Spiritual, and, who would
divest any of their spiritual, do alarm them with just Causes of loosing their
Civil.

The nature of man however in hot blood, it be thirsty of revenge, yet in a
cooler temper it has a kind of nausea or distaste of taking the lives even of
the most Nocent insomuch that in Assizes or Sessions an Offender can hardly be
condemned, whom the pity of many will not after a sort excuse, with laying of
impositions on the Judge, part on the Jury, and much on the accusers. Hence the
name of a Sergeant or Pursuivant is odious and the Executioner esteemed no
better then an enemy of mankind, and if such as are tender of their reputations
be very scrupulous personally to arrest men for civil actions of debt, they
will be more unwilling instruments of drawing their Bodies to the Rack and
Gallows, especially when any color of Religion is pretended in defense.

In Counsels concerning Religion that advise of the Apostle should be prefixed,
ira hominis non implet justitiam, we are to consider we deal with men and not
with beasts, man is to be treated humanly, and a Christian, christianly, with
all reason and charity; and of tender Consciences ought to be had a tender
respect, man is sensible of gentleness, and may be obliged to quietness, by
humanity. Whereas if you take violent courses, and fight against the errors of
the times with prisons, dungeons, fetters, oaths, etc. they will make men the
greater hypocrites and be occasion of intestine division and bloodshed:
experience can speak somewhat in this behalf, which has evidently des^ryed
within the current of few years, that severity in Religion, has years caused
the long, known and manifest, miseries of this Nation.

Hence one of our late Divines says, it is sufficiently known what the
immoderation of a preposterous zeal, male contentedness, ambition and force,
has both machinated, and perpetrated to the destraction well nigh destruction
of Church and State. The impudence and imprudence of inconsiderable rash
spirits, in their actions, passions, and pretenses for the Gospel has caused
the slaughter of 200000 in Germany, has caused, at least occasioned most of
the wars, devastations, and bloodshed, the great alterations, tumults and
troubles in most places of Christiandom, and our late Bishop of Exeter says,
impositions on men's Consciences and Judgments in matters of Religion, to tie
them by penal and coercive Statutes (which like Persian sheep) carry tails of
incurious mulcts after them, that are heavier then their bodies.

To come with swords to put Religion into our heads with main force, is like
the watering of Plants with salt streams, or the lighting of a Candle with
gunpowder. Never was Christian Religion planted or propagated by wars, by the
civil and martial Sword; for God is not pleased with hypocrital and unwilling
worshippers forced thereto by outward violence; nor are Christian Societies
bettered by such force, but oft-times the contrary. Too much severity makes
men desperate and shows a will to oppress the offender, rather then cure the
offense, and nothing shows more evidently that authority inclines to
tyranny, then the multitude of Promoters, continual informations, and the name
of treason made as a Livery to put upon all offenses.

Unchristian persecution like a violent Chrysis, more frequently takes away
the Patient, then Contributes to his recovery! nourishes a wrathful devouring
spirit one against another, makes us transgressors of that Royal law, which
forbids us to do that one to another, we would not have them do to us, were we
in their condition: and by this rule whosoever is not against the cruelty of
persecution, has nothing to say against justice, of his being a slave; for
what measure he would mete unto others, he deserves himself.

If to hate our brother is murder, as he is man, 1 John 3. 16. sure not only to
hate, but even for Religion sake to kill our brother a Christian, and to be
destroyers of Christians, are rather deicides, then homicides! and if nothing
can have more of Christian then Charity, nothing can have more of
Antichristian, then such uncharitableness, which many nourishing for zeal,
mistake a Cockatrice for a Dove, and fiery Serpent, for a Phoenix.

Outward violence in Cause of Religion is also condemned by holy Write and
divine authority. Christ commanded both the tares and the wheat should remain
together in the world, Mat. 13. 30. he rep^oved his Disciples who would have
had fi^e come down from heaven to destroy the S^maritans, that would not
entertain him, in these word, you know what spirit you are of, the son of man
came not to destroy, Luke 9. 54. the servant of God must not strive but be
gentle to all men, 2 Romans 2. 24. as God has called every one so let him walk,
1 Cor. 7. 17. they who now are tares may become wheat, who are blind may see,
some there be that come not till the eleventh hour, Mat. 20. 6. let your
moderation be known unto all men. Phil. 4. 5. who art thou that judge
another servant, etc. Romans 4. now I shall beseech you by the meekness and
gentleness of Christ, 2 Corin. 10. Woe unto them that make a man an offender for
a word, or lay a snare for him, Esaias.

The Fathers of the primitive times pleaded against all force in Religion. The
Christian Church, says Saint Hillary, against Auxentius, does not persecute
but is persecuted. No man is forced against his will by the Christians, says
Lactantius. S. Hierom in paenit, cap. 4. says, that heresy must be cut off by
the Sword of the Spirit. And Tertullian says, seeing he that wants faith and
devotion is unserviceable to God -- for God being not contentious would not be
worshipped by the unwilling. The Arrians were the first introducers of
persecution. Let all the Canons of the Church be examined and searched, if one
be found that justifies the shedding of blood merely on the score of Religion.
S. Augustine complains, how the Donatists filled with blood and desolation
all Africa, persecuting the Orthodox under Julian the Apostate, Docendo magis
quam jubendo, monendo quam minando veritatem agnoscant, Aug. Epist. 63. Fides
siquidem suadenda est non imperanda, ait S. Bernard.

The Churches of the East grievously complained of the Arrians persecution;
Athan. Epist. ad Solicar. speaks much of their inhumane cruelty. Nil tam
voluntarium quam Religio, cogi non potestdiversa sunt, carnifex and charitas,
non potest veritas cum vi, aut justitia cum credulitate conjungi in primitiva
Ecclesia, says learned Becanus, haeretici non puniebantur morte corporali;
alius est spiritus legalis, says he, qui consistebat in severitate, alius est
spiritus Evangelicus qui consistit in mansuetudine, hunc debetis imitari. Et
Apost. ad Titum 3. haereticum hominem devita post unam and secundam
correptionem; Sciens quia subversus est; ubi notantur dixit devita, non occide:
and Esaias 11. 9. non occiderit in universo monte sancto meo, id est, in
Ecclesia, ubi Propheta praedixit doctrinam Evangelii propogandam in Ecclesia
sine sanguine and caede. See Becanus. Dominicus a Soto. in his 4. Sent. and
did. 5. says every man has a natural right to instruct others in things that
are good, but cannot compel. Strifes about Religion, says Grotius, are
pernicious and destructive where provision is not made for dissenters.
Persecution overturns the practice of Religion, from Abel to Moses and the
Prophets, even to the meek example of Jesus Christ. The Apostles and their
Successors for 300 years confirmed their Religion with their own blood and not
with the blood of their opposers.

External force in matter of Faith and Worship is repugnant to the nature of
Christian Religion, which is meekness; To the practice, which is suffering; To
the promotion of it, go teach all Nations. Christian Religion entreats all,
compels none. Force never yet made a good Christian or a good Subject. It
subverts all Religion, because men believe not, because it is true or false,
but because they are Commanded for to do, their interest and security oblige
them rather to obey then dispute.

It is very unreasonable to force men to declare or swear where their judgments
are not fully satisfied; to require Faith where they cannot choose but doubt,
to punish them for disobedience, if they go not against their consciences; and
to be punished hereafter if they do: For an erroneous Conscience binds a man
to follow it, according to the learned of all Religions.

Persecution destroys the noble principle of reason, for no man can believe
before he understands; and no man can understand before he is taught: for Faith
in all acts of Religion is necessary. Now to believe we must first will, to
will we must judge; to judge any thing we must understand; which cannot be
forced. How can the leprous disease of the mind be cured with corporal
catoplasts? or men's judgments be convinced of the truth by tormenting their
Bodies? the inflictions then of external punishments for mere mental errors
(not wilful) is unreasonable and inadaequate, for as corporal penalties cannot
convince the understanding, so neither can they be proportionable mulct* for
faults purely intellectual.

Before we can with justice inflict penalties upon any different profession, we
ought to use all means possible to recover them to truth. Arguments to rational
creatures as Christians, are to instruct, admonish, warn, and finally to
reject; to come to them full of compassion of their misery, full of affection
of their Salvation by reasonable and persuasive motives suitable to their own
nature; by somethng can resolve its doubts answer its objections, tenets, and
Propositions. Whence our first work should be to collect a Body of positive
articles evidently contained in Scripture and absolutely necessary to salvation
(for its improper to pen the form of Faith in the negative) because my
believing Christian truths makes me a Christian, and not my disbelieving the
errors that oppose it; else he that believes nothing at all would be the best
Christian.

We must fight against Antichrist by lawful ways prescribed by the Word of God,
by the spirit of his mouth, in preaching, instructing in Charity, Patience,
humility, according to the example of Christ and his Apostles. The weapons of
Christian warfare are not Carnal but Spiritual, 2 Cor. 10. For as they were not
the warlike engines of Joshua, but the trumpets of the Sanctuary, that made the
walls of Jericho to fall down: So it is not the Canon, but the trumpet of the
Gospel, which is required to pull down the walls of Babylon. True Religion was
never advanced by these ways, but propagated by patient sufferings: the Example
of Jesus Christ is so far from persecuting, that he would not revile his
persecutors; prayed for them; says, go teach all nations, etc. The Text
directs Christ's procedure in teaching, not in devouring.

Wherefore all wise, humble, and charitable Christians should so Order their
judgments and Censures, if at any time they are forced to declare them; they
must above all things take heed they nourish not, nor discover any uncharitable
fewds, antipathies, distances against others, after the rule of those passions,
which were the common source of Schism and Heresies. The free, meek, and solid
piety feeds it self on the substance of Religion, without picking quarrels at
the shell; free from the superstition and hypochondriacal Zeal of some who
pretend to advance the Kingdom of Christ by cutting the throats of his
Disciples, and cementing his temples with blood, instead of the Cement of
charity.

CAP. II. Persecution is against Policy and Piety.
THe grand fomenters of persecution can be no friends to the English State, for
what but imposition, immoderation and restraint in the cause of Religion (as a
learned divine Notes) has turned Episcopacy into Presbytery* Presbytery into
Independancy, Independancy into Quakerism, Religion into Policy, Reformation
into Innovation, Profession into Pretense, Ministry into Soldiers, Soldiers
into Preachers, Churches into Stables, Pulpits into Tubs, Degrees into Parity,
Pastors into Hirelings, Apostolical Hierarchy into Anarchy, with abusive fumes
and flames to build Babels of their own.

I am not able to express (says another great Doctor of our English Church)
how high an impiety it is, that at this time when Gods hand is out against us
justly for our sins, to be disposed and fixed upon a resolution that to redeem
external peace we will persecute, etc. -- I admire to see too too many in
Parliament here amongst us where is great plenty of able Gentlemen of excellent
learning, worth, wit and other perfections and endowments, as any nation
besides: to be inclinable if not actually resolved in all meetings to feud
about the Romans Religion especially now after this trial of their honesty --
more is to be admired, the preposterous machinations, and motions even of
Churchmen, who by the Canons are forbid to have any hand in blood -- when they
forsake the ancient refuges of Christians which were preaching and tears, and
betake themselves to swords and helmets, plots, conspiracies and pursuivants.

Wisemen have seen those obscurities and disgraces which as black shadows have
attended even Churchmen. Persecution is fitter for the hands of Cyclops who
forged Jupiters Thunderbolts, then the Priests of the Gods. Bishops should
always be tender of good consciences, and of the honor of Christian Religion:
which was not wont to see Ministers, rough and targetted as the Rhinoceroes,
b^^ soft and gentle, clothed as the Sheep and Sheepheards of Christ. There is
not a more portentous sight then to see galeatos Clericos. Christ long ago in
the person of Saint Peter commanded them to put up their Swords; nor was he
ever heard to repeal that word; or Bid them draw their Swords; no not in
Christ's Cause (that is merely for Religion) who has legions of Angels, armies
of Truth, gifts of Graces of the Spirit to defend himself and his true interest
in Religion withal -- and a little after --

Indeed our Ecclesiastical Rulers have reason to steer us cautiously, since
they sit at the Helm in such a Ship, as has thrown very many Pilots over board
-- it becomes those Bishops now got up newly to be most calm, quiet, and sedate
Spirits --

The great alteration of the Body of the People since these last twenty years
require that our old ends of promoting the welfare of the Church of England
should be attained by the conduct of new means -- Bishops should compose the
affections of the People by Liberty of Conscience, and not Acts of Uniformity,
for the greatest assertors of Episcopacy and Ceremonies of the Church are
lodged in their Graves; and the present major part of this Land consists in
those to whom the introducing of the old Church Prelatical Government, will
seem an Innovation: Its the interest of the Clergy here to temper the
Government of the Church: for its irrational to think that any Church
Government (in a Protestant Country of Sectaries) can be accommodated to the
content and satisfaction of all: which restrains a large and almost absolute
power to the heads of a few Protestant Bishops.

Its the concern of none but Soldiers of Fortune to oppose due Liberty of
Conscience. Whence the wise King James had wholly repealed the penal Statutes
engaged so to do (and Papistry then was declared tolerable) had he not been
diverted from it by Cecil and other Upstarts and Politicians, whose interest
was begun and grounded upon Heresy and destruction of the ancient Nobility and
Gentry of the Kingdom. For in his Speech, Sess. 1. Printed 161^. My mind,
says he, was ever free from persecuting and thralling my Subjects in matters
of Conscience, and in his next words -- I was so far from increasing their
burdens with Roboam, as I have so much as either time, occasion, or law would
permit me to have, lightened them. And in his Censure against Conradus Vorstius
the Dutch Heretic, recounting the difference between Protestants and
Catholics, he finds not any for which Papists may be persecuted but rather
the contrary.

You may object persecution is necessary in Policy of State. I answer, who is
swayed by this motive runs but the indirect way of State Policy! and makes use
of a title of that name only, to support what his ambition, malice, or interest
inforces him too; and is guilty not only of his own Evils, but whatever others
are thereby occasioned, in oppression of others. These mysteries of Machiavel
have been to far discovered to be of no use in this Nation for the future. This
Cloak of formal Godliness is now worn thredbare, and almost all men sees it to
be but a Cloak. Such specious devises appear now to be but like Flockwork upon
Canvas scattered over with glittering Copper or Tinsel. Experience has made
almost every Body able to look not only on the Colors and Pretext, but the
depth and motive of every such design.

The infinite eye and wisdom of God does pierce through all our pretenses; and
his justice does require no other accuser then our own consciences; which
neither the false beauty of our actions, nor all the formality (which to
pacify the opinions of men) we put on, can in the least kind cover from his
knowledge. We know that a good pretense cannot justify a bad action; and
therefore we ought to be as sollitous about the lawfulness of the means; as
about the goodness of the end: it is a maxim in morality that, bonum oritur ex
integris; and in Christianity, that we must not do evil that good may come of
it.

There is nothing that God's pure and undeluded eye looks on with more
abhorrence then Pseudopolicy, we may deceive men, but its in vain to put
Ironies upon God. A Counterfeit Religion shall find a real hell. And who have
conspired with the wrath of God in the stupefaction of their consciences,
though they may for a time struggle with those inward checks, yet there will be
a day (if not in this life) when that Witness, that Judge, that Jury will not
be bribed. Let it be part of our daily orisons, that God would banish this
cursed Policy, out of Europe and the whole World; and damn it down to Hell from
whence it originally came: and such as delight to abuse others, think of that
self-cousenage, with which in the interim, they abuse themselves, God
permitting the Devil to wrong the Impostor.

Admit that for some worldly respect, Laws were necessary in State Policy for
the time wherein they were enacted; yet the time changing, and those causes
entirely ceasing which made them seem necessary: now it will not only be safe
but necessary to repeal them; when after such tria^s there is no cause of
suspicion remaining n^r ^olour of jealousy, at least none but what may easily
be removed by the wisdom of the State, and plenary satisfaction in behalf to
themselves.

Wary superpoliticks are over curious Spirits, plead policy against Piety, and
prefer outward safety before inward peace, subject Faith and Truth to Policy,
our private and civil good to interest; Religion is suited to Government, and
Conscience to connivency. What is Policy against Religion? If it be iniquity,
injustice, and oppression to treat men so without cause or demerit, it is not
any feigned imaginary reason of State, will excuse those who act and give
counsel to such unchristian acts; lest the Blood of Souls lie upon their
account another day.

More Families have been ruined, more persons imprisoned, more moneys spent by
the cruelty of persecution, than by all Lawsuits in the Courts of Judicature,
or payments and ordinary Taxes. Our Churchwardens are perjured that swear to
present them to every Sessions (though imposing of such an Oath is breach of
the Fundamental Laws of the Land) and those Churchwardens that are not
perjured, but pursue the Oath, in persecuting their neighbors are plunged with
a horrid guilt of Conscience. Now there are above 9285 parishes in England, and
seventy four thousand Churchwardens and Sides-men in England every year, and
what a dreadful thing is it to have all these yearly either perjured,
persecuted or Persecutors?

I am by many reasons induced to conclude, that this severe ungospellary way of
proceeding has been the cause of ruin of Trade, impoverishing; and many
afflictions of this Nation. It has made us an Obloquy to all our Neighbors,
hinders Traffic, becomes a prejudice to the Reformed beyond Seas, a
discontenting our Friends at Home, a Scandal to all the World, a disheartning
of a great many good Subjects: Persecution stops all our Friends mouths,
weakens their hands, and droops their hearts; on this account many families,
have left the Land to remove into some country where they may have liberty, by
this means the trading stock of the Nation is conveyed away. To use external
force in matters purely of Faith and Religion, you must side with and support
all corrupt interest, tire and weary out your selves with never-failing
troubles and anxious difficulties, attended with a hundred fears: and in
conclusion if you prosper in such practices, you would but leave Posterity
partakers of the Bondage you entail upon the People.

What benefit or credit was ever got by persecution these eighty years? have
not many noble persons on that account left the Land? many Religious men and
women cloistered, to retire to spend their means and lives in other Countries?
have not Princes and States of that Religion expressed much disatisfaction to
see them unmercifully used? has not a general consumption of comfort, unity,
affection, settlement, and content, and many sad mischiefs befallen us the last
Century on this only score? and has not God showed his just chastisements,
judgments upon the chief actors, accomplices, contrivers and abetters of such
inhumane proceedings, as in Cromwell, Cecil, Dudley, Leicester, Somerset,
Walsingham, Bacon, etc.

We deceive our selves to promise or exspect to King or Kingdom, Prince or
Subject, Peace or Safety, or Deliverance from our Troubles, if we subordinate
Fundamentals in Religion and necessary Truths of Faith to our private or civil
Interest.

If he be an unwise man who provides means, where he designs no end:
persecutors will never be able to accomplish their end. For experience tells
us, that punishments and persecutions never lessens the resolution of
Christians, but always heightens Zeal and sometimes draws men into leagued
Factions: which indulgence and favor would prevent.

It is observed by all lookers into Antiquity, that Christian Religion still
got ground in the world, not by persecuting but by being persecuted. And our
penal Laws, rather increased then hindered the growth of Popery. Whence King
James observed that Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, the spilling of
Christian Blood is but the watering of Christ's Vineyard. This Pine Tree the
more it is pressed, the higher it grows. This Camomile the more it is trodden
the thicker it comes up. This Walnut-Tree the more it is beaten, the more
fruitful it waxes.

Yea even the Non-Conformists are likely still to increase, as from Edward the
sixts time to this, they have gradually done, notwithstanding the rigor of
Ecclesiastics against them, and that which we cannot without horror observe,
is, the not allowing of a due and regular Liberty of Conscience has instead of
advancing the Cause of Religion propagated Atheism in this Nation. It has been
an old Stratagem of Satan to oppose Religion against Religion, to leave us none
at all.

It has been likewise observed as a shuffling hypocritical distinction of
Lawyers (invented to deceive the innocent) pretending none are executed or
suffer for Religion or Conscience, but for Treason; or offending the Laws. Who
does not see but by this rule those Bloody Tyrants Nero, Dioclesian, Maximine,
etc. must be conscientious, because they judged according to the Law? and those
glorious Martyrs must be counted Traitors? nay even the cursed Jews who
crucified Christ alleged the self-same reason; we have a Law and by our Law he
ought to die, John 19. 7.

Treason must always be some action or intention discovered prejudicial to the
Sovereign or State: not an Opinion or Profession of Religion. For this reason
Sir John Old-Castle in the Reign of Henry the fifth, for his Treason was
condemned in one Court, and for his Heresy, in another. So were Cranmer and
Ridley in Queen Mary's time. And therefore also it is by the statute provided
22 and 27 Eliz. that if a Priest conforms, he is actually discharged of all
imputation of treason; no further proceeding can lie against him.

If Priesthood be no treason, a Priest in that he is a Priest can be no
Traitor: unless we will account Apostles and all ancient Priests both of
England and all Countries, whom Kings and Emperors have honored, and loved; as
their faithful friends and subjects. So far thought them from being enemies to
their Crown; that from their hands all Princes received their Crowns,
Consecrations, and Scepters.

CAP. III. Liberty or Toleration Rightly understood, is equitable, just or
necessary to several Religions.
I Have viewed most of the Tracts concerning Toleration, pro and con; Some I
find over strict and nice, austere, and rigid: others profane and loose,
arbitrary and remiss: and betwixt them both toleration ever scrapes the
imputation of calumny, either of too much restriction, or profane relaxation:
neither of them will know that true liberty is a middle kind of equity,
indulgency, benignity, betwixt both extremes: not cursed and cruel, but tender
and compassionate, has her commendation; for moderative, rather than
vindicative: minding rather to amend than confound: not rash and arbitrary
dispensing with the Law as if it were but a leaden rule; but circumspectly and
benignly interpreting it, that it might not prove an Iron-Rod.

We plead then only for such a Liberty of Conscience, as preserves the Nation
in Trade, Peace, and Commerce; which preserves a fair intercourse and
correspondency one with another, and with their respective members: and would
not exempt any man or party of men from not keeping those excellent Laws, that
tend to sober, just, and industrious living in a due Christian regulation;
consistent with the evident Laws of God and quiet Government; and that
indulging Dissenters in the sense defended, is not only, most Christian and
rational, but prudent also: and conformable to his Majesty's Gracious
Declaration.

It appears of neither pace to drive on furiously with Jehu in matters of
Policy, nor that he go softly with Ahab in matters of Piety. In matters of
Scruple or Controversy, it likes well of nothing but walking with a Right
Conscience, Gal. 2. 24. and that also of free choice like the Israelites among
the Edomites, Num^. 22. 26. above all it hates to remove the ancient
Landmarks, whether of Law or Religion, Deuteronomy. 19. 14. not thirsting one
another Blood, nor invading another rights as Wolves and Tigers; but as the
Apostle says, sobrie, just, and pie.

It being an apt Mediety or mediocrity betwixt the Rigid contention of a
furious Zeal or emulation, and the Lukewarm disposition of a reachless
indifferency or neutrality: and though it be tender and compassionate as a
mother; yet she is far from being over- remiss, Licentious or irregular, whence
some wise men take it for a Masterpiece of prudence wisely discerning 'twixt
what is just and fit; and so giving sentence rather congruously then severely.

Schoolmen and Moralists make it to be a potential part of justice bringing
(not severely) the Fact home to the Law: but rather in equity the Law down to
the Fact, regulating the strict words and rigor, for the common good and
particular relief of pesons in certain facts, times, contingencies and
circumstances. It Is a part of temperance amiable and amicable. It Is severally
translated and has many Epithets in holy Scripture, Modesty, equity, 2 Cor. 1.
1 Pet. 2. 10. Phil. 4. 5. 2 Timothy 2.
humanity, gentleness, clemency, courtesy, patience of Spirit. It Is the
blessing and comfort of peace and unity in the Church, of plenty and
tranquillity in the Commonwealth; of plain satisfaction to the Conscience, and
of plenary contentation to all sorts and conditions of rational men. Nothing
can be easy, sweet, and safe, in our lives, Religion, Consciences, or
liberties to God or man without it: without it we be tedious to our selves and
troublesome one to another.

This virtue is not a little illustrated by its contrary opposite, Persecution,
immoderation, austerity, rigidness, inexorableness, compulsion, imposition,
etc. which is an extreme vitiousness in persons, in their judgments, opinions,
passions, affections, pretenses, actions, and designs: of which we have been
more pathetically sensible in the effects, than in the qualities.

This medium therefore or middle kind of equity, indulgency or liberty betwixt
both extremities aforesaid, is the most just and reasonable unto which all
Christians have a right and title too; by virtue and purchase of Christ's
Blood, Death and Resurrection, who is become sole Lord over the Soul, unto whom
we are to give account only as our proper Judge, in matters purely internal and
Spiritual: for in this the Judicatures of men are not capable to make a clear
judgment, or declare certainly who are in the right or wrong.

This Freedom of Conscience is of so high concern to all (and not only to be
enjoyed by the strongest party) as well for the Magistrates sake as the Peoples
common good; and it consists in the Magistrates forbearing to impose pressures
and penalties in matters of Faith and Conscience, lest they intrude into the
Office of Christ, to whose decision such actions are only liable.

The ancient original Fundamental Laws (by which other Laws of less extent) are
to be regulated were intended as a Defense and Protection to all: providing,
one injure not another; and that Common Peace and Safety be secured; no other
subsequent inferior Law can therefore debar any peaceable Christian, that
answers the necessities of Church and State, Civil, Spiritual and Political) in
equal justice, and in foro Conscientiae from this privilege originally due to
all: For they that are contributaries to the peace and maintenance of
Government, are entitled to a protection from it, according to the just nature
of government which consists in a fair and equal retribution. Whence a late
Presb. Divine confesses, none ever saw any argument yet could clearly evince,
why any sort of men who would profess a peaceable subjection unto the Civil
Government, might not in all their Civil Rights be protected by it.

I conceive it therefore most clear, both in right reason and true Religion:
that Governors ought to move in that middle way between tolerating all
differences and none at all in matters of Religion: wherein men are variously
to be considered, according to the profession they own and make of Religion: as
none are to be tolerated in Blasphemy, or any that have cast off all sense of
justice, order, shame and humanity (seeing the nature of man is more prone to
imbibe noxious things then to eject them) so true virtuous liberty is not to be
infringed; nor any who can give a sober Christian and rational account for
their principles and profession to Church and State. For the Power among
Chrstians should not be a hard and sharp rock dashing presently all in pieces
that touch, and strike at it in the least kind though never so modestly.

Christian Religion (says a learned Divine) has moderated the extremity of
Servitude as to Civil things in all places where it was received, when
certainly it is much more consonant to that Religion, and especially that form
of Religion which has asserted its Spiritual Liberty from the impositions of
others, to allow a Spiritual Freedom to others.

Another of our Divines says, Christian Religion ought not to be made a snare,
harrow, a rack, or heavy yoke, or an Egyptian bondage, to men's minds and
consciences: this were to turn the sweetest vine into a sharp bramble, and
fig tree into a thorn: nor is there any thing Christians should be more tender
of (as the Ephesine Fathers admonish) than their own and others true liberty,
Christ has purchased with his precious Blood: of which Christian Magistrates
should be exact keepers and conscientious defenders, lest piety prove an
oppression, and the bracelets and ornaments of Religion become the chains of
hypocrisy and manacles of superstition binding such heavy burdens on men's
Consciences which God has not imposed, but exempted from their Commission.

The best way to convince opposers is by instructing them in meekness in the
Spirit of Love, by suitable acts of indulgency; for our dear Lord that bought
us, will take nothing more kindly at this time from us (says an ingenious
Author) as to be pitiful to his Servants, who are distressed about your acts in
point of Conscience, and who the more distressed they are and like to our Lord,
the fitter subjects they are for your Compassion. If you had no need of mercy
from God, it were tolerable then for you to be extreme toward others. In point
of Christianity we should be merciful unto them as our heavenly Father is
merciful, Luke 6. 36. Mercy is to be preferred before Sacrifice.

No torture, no rack or tyranny so great as when exercised on the conscience,
forcing to declare or swear where their judgments are not fully satisfied Force
may make an hypocrite, it is Faith grounded on knowledge and consent that makes
a Christian: no war so passionate as the war of Conscience, in Factions,
Conventicles, Associations, and Sects: such practices become not the Gospel,
nor are suitable to Christ's meek Precepts, Sufferings and Doctrine. True
Christian Concord is the consequence only of a favorable benignity or
toleration as before circumstantiated.

For a true Christian following the rules, precepts, and examples of our
Savior Jesus Christ, loves God above all things, and his Neighbor as
himself, does injury to no man, pardons all injuries done to him, esteems
and honors every one according to his degree and merit, represseth all
concupisence, unlawful desires, obeys Magistrates, Superiors and laws as the
ordinance of God; Non propter ^iram Sed propter justitiam. Romans 13. Not for
fear but conscience. Yeildeth to every one his due; to Caesar, that which is
due to Caesar, etc. And finally prefers in all things the public wealth
before his private Commodity: hence it follows that in whatsoever state he
lives, he is humble, meek, peaceable, obedient, temperate, just, religious,
and consequently a good and excellent member of his Commonwealth; insomuch
that if the precepts of Christian Religion were followed, there should need no
Political Law, which as the Apostle says, posita est injustis and non
subditis, ordained for the disobedient and unjust.

Christian Religion in respect of the means it gives for attaining of true
perfection and virtue, and for the purity and excellency of the doctrine, and
of rites and ceremonies, is truly Political, and most necessary for Government
of state; whence whosoever is a true and perfect Christian, is and must needs
be, Bonus Civis, a good Citizen as Aristotle terms a good member of the
Commonwealth.

This was evident to the Paynims, when they considered Christian Doctrine,
without Passion and partiality: that Pliny the Second, being proconsul of Asia
under Trajan Emperor, acknowledged the same in an Epistle to Trajan, written
in favor of persecuted Christians in his Jurisdiction; testifying of them they
were an innocent and harmless people; whose custom and exercise was to assemble
themselves in the night to sing Hymns and Praises to Jesus Christ; and that
they promised and vowed to Commit no offense; or do any hurt to other men: not
to steal, rob, perjury, break promise, etc. upon which testimony Trajan
ordained no Christian should be further punished or inquired of, for their
Religion, Eusebius. l. 3. Ecclesiast. c. 27. and his Successor Adrian upon Like
suggestion and information given by a noble man, Called Serennio Gramiano gave
order to Minutius Fundanus his proconsul; that Christians should not be
punished, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8. Hist. Eccles. Thus ordai^ed they, knowing only
some points of Christian Religion: if they had understood how it reforms men's
manners, how the Canons, Codes, institutes, digests out of the Corpus Civil,
are congruous and consonant with the good of Civil society, they would not have
held it only tolerable, but even necessary for establishment and conservation
of Government.

As nothing is more plain and sure then that the tolerating of all Sects,
errors and faults, which conscience may pretend for: or of none at all, are
utterly destructive of Christian and human peace, society and safety, nor is he
well in his wits that holds either part universally or unlimitted (who
thinks all or none to be tolerated) for by the one we should have no
government, and by the other in time, by death, banishments, persecutions etc.
we should have no Subjects to be governed, nor have any Servant; so no Master,
no Wife, so no Husband.

So seeing an universal unity among Christians is not to be attained, a
toleration of things tolerable is not only lawful but necessary: a Latitude of
Liberty is left in such things as are not clearly and positively laid down in
Scripture: Or in things of private practice, Romans 14. 22. have thou faith, have
it to thy Self.

But then it may be objected, seeing toleration must have its bounds and
limits, and those are almost indiscoverable, viz. what points are necessary?
and what not? what Sects and Opinions tolerable? and what not? and who must be
the Judge? or else we must deal partially, and unjustly condemn one Sect and
tolerate others?

I answer we must not cast away reason, because there is a difficulty in using
it aright. What if be a hard thing to enumerate how many bits a man may eat and
not be a glutton? or how much drink and not a drunkard? or what meats or drinks
must be used to avoid excess in quality? or what cloth, silks, fashion, may be
used without excess in apparel? will you thence infer that men may eat and
drink any think in quantity or quality, or else nothing? or wear any thing or
else go naked? as long as it is certain such a difference there is that some
opinons are tolerable and some not; you must distinguish; and then you will
find a necessity of discerning as you can according to right reason and grounds
of Christianity, the Tolerable from the intolerable.

The profession of the Creed and those who give some solid, succinct and
apodictical account directly grounded on Scripture, rightly understood, or in
right regulated reason which is able to bear a superstructure of Christian
Doctrine and practice (as enumerated before) agreeing upon the summary of Belief
in positive, evident, and fundamental points suitable to the Apostolical
Symbol, are conditions which require necessarily indulgency and toleration.

In these regards then, there can be no prevalent objections urged, why a wise
State may not tolerate (at least in private) different Religions: when
otherwise the public may be entangled or endangered; or rather because the
conscience cannot be compelled or Faith forced. And more especially if they be
such Religions as do not overthrow the fundamentals of Truth. Nor such as
disturb or impugn the Government established. Or if the professors thereof be
such as are not factious or pertinacious, but honest, simple, tractable,
obedient to Superiors having no other end in holding their Opinions in
Religion, than Gods glory or satisfaction of their own consciences, and withal
are willing to submit to better judgments, when they are convinced to be
Erroneous.

In this respect the late gracious Declaration for Liberty does sufficiently
appear (to all impartial men) to be prudent, pious, and politic. For this
purpose, the Turks and Muscovites inhibited all disputations in matter of
Religion, upon pain of Death: the like inhibition was made by the Emperor and
Princes in Germany after their Civil Wars; that there should be no Contention
between Catholics and Protestants, to this end that there may be no breach of
Peace and disturbance in the Government of the State.

Hence Leo Emperor made an Edict of union Called (...); that all the different
Religions within his Dominions might live quietly and friendly together. For
the same Cause Anastasius made a Law of Amnesty and accounted those the best
Preachers that were moderate.

Since there must be Heresies and our judgments are as different as our Faces;
since breeding and education does so much sway, and has so great influence on
many Religions; and that Sectaries are grown numerous; we ought to have a
Latitude of Charity for those that dissent, if they be not Impostors, or
turbulent Incendiaries. Dissenters in Controversies are obliged to a mutual
toleration. We cannot be ignorant of other States and Kingdoms (and now very
lately in the Empire and Denmark) those that Dissent from the Religion
publicly authorized, are permitted and secured so long, as they do not affront
Civil or Ecclesiastic Laws. For true Christianity adds such force and vigor
to Civil Power by planting in Men's hearts the awe of Religion (which is the
main pillar of obedience) by weeding out such Errors, as humane authority would
have much ado to pluck up.

CAP. IV. Toleration or Liberty improperly taken and unlimited is neither
reasonable nor justifiable.
I Dare not positively affirm that the Civil Magistrate is not to intermeddle
at all in matters of Religion: but how far he is to proceed and not exceed his
Commission is disputable; seeing learned Divines generally hold that the bond
between the Magistrate, and the Subject is essentially Civil.

Querulous persons have shown a Childishness in their complaints; without
telling what the very thing is that troubles them, and how far they would have
it removed; and so complain for want of Liberty, because they have not their
Wills: cry out before they know their own minds fully, or take care the
Magistrate shall know them otherwise then by inspiration.

Its the opinion of injudicious furious Spirits that no truth is to be silenced
for Peace, or forborne for spiritual advantage or true necessity. For every one
to hold what he pleases, and publish and Preach what he holds, confined to no
rule of Order, but contemning law, will rule as Transcendents. For as Plato
says, its a temerarious Liberty, to pronounce of what is known and unknown
with like confidence. Tell us of obeying the Laws of God as long as you please,
I dare not believe you as long as you break the Laws of those appointed to rule
over you: it is a distinction without difference, to separate and divide the
Laws of Men, from the Laws of God; for unless we observe both we obey neither,
says Hooker, l. 3. c. 107.

Here I confess Christian Governors are not to regard such pleas for private
Liberty as overthrow the Public Order and Peace, nor to regard those Clamours
against them and the Laws as persecuting: when they do but oppose and restrain
such perilous exorbitancies; as have no savor of reason or Religion, which
strikes at the foundation of Christianity, and opens a gap to Atheism,
Profaneness and Blasphemy. Here the Magistrate must interpose his Co^rcive
Power for remedy. Nor are they in this infringers of the Peoples Liberty, but
preservers of Freedom: not oppressors of others Consciences, but dischargers
of their own.

Its a false Liberty to imagine our Liberty consists in speaking or doing what
we List, without regard to God or man. Its no freedom for a man to think what
he lists, in vain, erroneous, Blasphemous thoughts, or to bolt out and vent his
raw indigested and rotten fancies, or irreligious opinions to others: its far
from Christian Liberty, for any Christian to start up loose Principles,
destructive to Government, subverting Order, violating Laws, breaking Oaths and
Covenants; contemning Authority: for every one to hold what he pleases, and
publish and Preach what he holds; upon light popular and untried grounds: and
publicly to act according to his private persuasions, passions lusts, or
interests: wherein neither right reason, nor common Order, nor public peace,
nor Conscience of Duty, nor fear of God have any such serious ties upon men as
necessary to the common good.

No Christian I say can religiously plead for a Liberty, seditiously and
factiously, to broach to others any new opinions he pleases. Nor may any part
of men (though never so godly) carry on any design (though it may be better
than what at present may be) by any violent, irregular and disorderly ways. For
every Christian duty has its Bounds beyond which it is not true and virtuous
Liberty, but inordinateness and excess. Some men's pedantick incivilities to the
Consciences of others may be instructive to us, as to convince the necessity of
setting out true bounds of Liberty; which should not be granted on other terms,
then as far as it conduces to Gods honor and the Peoples good. For if public
power should suffer arrogant ignorance, excess of passion, perverseness of will,
to come to its full rudeness and extent: tumultuary numbers and brutish Power
will soon make good private presumptions; and cover over the most impotent
Lusts, passions and ambitions of men, with the pleas and outcryes of Christian
Liberty.

For that is no other freedom, then that as water enjoys when it overbears and
overflows her Banks and Bounds: and such as the envious and malicious Devils
affects, and are most impatient not to enjoy: nor may they be touched or curbed
by any authority in Church or State, be their extravagancies never so
blasphemous; but presently they make great clamours of persecution: as if all
were persecutors who helped to bind a Madman, or put a roaring drunkard into
the Cage.

The vicious are not to be counted into the sort of mere Dissenters. Socinians
who are enemies to the Blessed Trinity; Atheists who hold Principles
destructive to Christianity, and those Parties whose Religion forbids
subjection, and carries an opposition to civil Government; and Commands by
Fire, and Sword to erect their new Spiritual Kingdom. And those who hold forth
notions and conceptions reforming or wholly changing the state of Religion and
Government; and in order to that shake even the frame of Civil things; to which
they think themselves no longer bound in subjection, then they want a party
strong enough for opposition: nor will they easily be persuaded that it is the
sin of Rebellion, carries the face of reformation: easily dispensing with
obedience to men, where they pretend amendment before God: putting on Sheeps
Clothing to no other purpose but the renting of Christ's seemless Coat. Sow to
themselves leaves of frivolous pretenses: dispute, Preach, Plead, Clamor,
about moderation and Liberty, when all the immoderation is in themselves,
contend to have privileges, prerogatives, freedom regulated so and so: yet
would they examine themselves, nothing needs more regulation then their own
judgments, opinions and humors.

There be others of hotter tempers, more Choleric Constitutions, and feverish
complexions, have such ferocious Spirits like pampered Horses whom no ground
will hold: daily neighing after novelties: who love to be moving in the
troubled waters of secular affairs, who seem most impatient of any order or
public rule in which they have not some stroke or influence: ready to undo
whatever is done without them; their Breast is full of turbulent and seditious
Spirits as the Cave of Aeolus of Winds. Forgetting what Spirit becomes
followers of the Gospel: whose heads are prone to move their hearts with
Specious novelties, quick excitations, and zealous resolutions, which soon
after (like salt-streams) descend and fall upon their Lungs provoking them
violently to the spreading their opinions to others, till they see the Children
of their brains prove mere abortions. To the misguided activity of such (even
Ministers) the Commonalty may owe much of its troubles.

These only and the like most truly forfeit their Christian private Liberty, to
the public discretion and power: who will not, or cannot use it, but to the
public detriment. Beware then of Compliances with, and indulgence to all
sorts, Sects and Schisms pleaded for: as if it were a part of Christ's Legacy
and Peoples Liberty to be tolerated in any Actions or Opinions never so
pernicious. Saint Paul beseeches the Romans to mark those that Cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine received, Romans 4. 6, 17.

As an absolute unity in judgment is not to be attained in this Life: so an
universal or absolute Liberty is not to be permitted or indulged in things
injurious to God. Toleration of all things is a destructive principle to State
and Church, a Cloak to Licentiousness, ushereth in Atheism and Libertinism;
Transports Men oft-times to such excesses beyond those bounds of duty which as
Subjects we ought to observe; Has many Latitudes, evasions, and distinctions
to unravel the Cords of any Oaths, and untwist the Bonds of any Covenant or
Protestations.

Those who are most pregnant and impatient of holding in their Opinions on the
pretense of Truth, do but proudly esteem their own understandings precious: to
vend some raw and indigested notions. The Devil usually pretends Truth to Cover
his Lies. Clamor must not prevail but reason. Is it to follow the direction of
Christ to Preach on the Housetop? If there were a Nero or Dioclesian at the
Helm, who should threaten to mingle our Blood with our Sacrifices, if you had
your Antelencana, and should flock into Caves of the Earth to worship Christ,
your zeal would be more tolerable.

True Christian toleration extends not to matters of an extern nature:
wherefore Magistrates may use a Coercive hinderance from public Meetings,
without impeaching it. When Subjects have expressed a due Regulation in it,
then is a King in Capacity to show a God-like benignity and Power in granting
the things they ask, as conducing to God's honor and the Peoples Good: nor is
it rational to be granted on other terms. For Religion cannot be defended by
transgression of God's Commands, which are the rule of it.

The true Liberty of conscience of any man, consists in a Constant tendency or
intention to the Supreme end, and those holy regulations which God has
prescribed; as it stands in referrence to God its Creator, and its Neighbor;
Wherein a Christian is free to declare and utter them, to know, consider,
meditate of; and believe whatever Truth God has revealed; When he is free to
declare and utter them in such a holy way, which Charity, Sobriety, Modesty,
Order and Gravity allow: or conferring so with others, as may have some savor
of Reason and Religion, in an humble and holy desire to learn, or teach in a
regular, not in a rude, insolent and imperious way. A wise humble Christian is
never far from his refuge, and when pursued and urged, beyond what he thinks
agreeablt to good Conscience, he is not to seek for, or take Foxes shifts,
subtle windings, or sinful coverts: Is more willing to hear, then earnest to
object, and labors to acquiesce in others satisfaction, as well as his own,
becomes all things to all men in regard of things Civil and extern.

CAP. V. Whether the Romanists have not a just and equal title to Toleration?
SUch is the multiplying of that breath giving Life, which God has cast upon
slime and dust: as every one has received a several external figure of Face,
and every one a diverse internal form of mind, every one a Cogitation and fancy
distant: from whence it comes that there is so great diversity of Opinions; so
strange a contrariety of inclinations; so different affections and passions in
mortal men, that no ordinary means is forcible enough to persuade them to any
thing to which their private Spirits or imaginations are not inclined. Hence so
many Scripture interpretations, so many quarrels and divisions in Religion even
to Massacres. Evils unknown to the very Heathens. Hence we have often seen
good, by false representations may pass for abominable, in the sight of sober
men.

Hence the inconsiderate multitude prejudiced by education, passion, interest,
or false Teachers; representing the Roman Church to them as a Monster composed
of all sort of abomination, having their Ears perpetually beaten with seven
Hills, Antichrist, Idolatry, Superstition: by many unchristian aspersions,
false pretenses, by private forgeries and public impressions wounding most
Christian and innocent men. How can they otherwise but hate them, they know no
better? and even suck from their first Milk such an ill Opinion, or odium of
them, as if they were Turks or Jews and had principles destructive to common
Society, Peace and Concord.

What a Wonder, and what a Lamentation is it that those men who cry out so much
for forbearance to Magistrates, should themselves be so rigid, and can less
forbear dissenters; or see the same sin in themselves? So justify all their
Cruelties and think persecution to be their Duty. Whence is persecution but
from thinking ill of others, abhorring and not loving them? condemning them
without hearing, bearing them down not with sincere and plain dealing, becoming
Christians: with inveterate malice filling Books with trivial Stories and
Fables, picked up out of Authors without discretion; make it their business to
seek calumnies and reproaches in the Sepulchers and Common-shores of
Schismatics; with untrue reporting of Doctrins, false and unjust Criminations;
and other indirect ways unseemly and unworthy the Cause of Truth, to the
dishonor of God, and disparagement of Christian Religion.

Reading a Treatise lately Printed against Toleration, by an university
Scholar. Had this Dilemma, if Liberty or Toleration may be granted, either an
universal Toleration or particular: not an universal; for then says he Papists
may be tolerated: which is against all. As if all the Monsters of Egypt may be
admitted so the Papists be excluded. Yet we must know if there had been no
Papists in the World, no other Sect among us had ever heard of Christianity.

If we knew all the Evils may ensue, we should then be forced to Check the
People from railing; and let them feel our anger who would deceive us with
Lies. Nor can we look on those men as either of wit or honesty, who are ever
promoting the harassing of a faithful party, needlessly to disoblige their
fellow Subjects and Sufferers.

Wherefore to undeceive the so long abused and deluded multitude, I will
endeavor in the ensuing discourse to wipe of the Paint and Fucus: that so
things may appear in their true complexion unadulterated, with the slights and
subtilties of deluders. I have chosen rather to expose these lines to Censure
than to forbear to speak or be silent in the Cause and Defense of the Innocent.
Silui a bonis, says the Prophet, and dolor meus renovatus est? in the
following lines shall be showed that the Law of God, Christian Religion,
nature, reason and our own principles does oblige us to more charitable
censures of the Roman Religion, And that they are as highly (if not more)
entitled to the true Christian Liberty of Conscience, than any other Sect or
Religion whatsoever: all objections to the contrary cleared and evinced to any
rational or impartial Reader.

If it remains as a Probatum est; that no Christian ought to be compelled in
matters of Faith or Religion (provided it broacheth forth no new Sects or
Schisms, or that it be not in Case of Scandal or open blasphemy.) And if the
Fundamental Laws and Government were established as a Defense and Protection to
all sober peaceable Christians; that immunity and freedom of Conscience ought
to be indulged to Dissenters in this sense, it being their due right; and not
only granted in policy to some persons or to oblige a party; (or to be enjoyed
by the strongest and subtilest only, to curb and subject the rest, as is showed
before) there can be no ground able to convince any rational man why Papists
should be excluded this privilege; unless we infringe the Laws and Government:
by not distributing equal and impartial justice; nay the truth of this
assertion is more evident and convincing for them, then any.

Primo, It is against reason and all examples of antiquity for men to be
punished for adhering to the Religion of their Forefathers. Now the
Roman Catholic Religion was the first Christian Religion planted in our native
Country, from whom we had and have our very Christianity; the first universally
spread and preached: by Government permitted and encouraged; by Counsels, and
Parliaments confirmed and approved, a thousand years there continued; even by
our deceased kindred and parents not long since professed; by our Universities
established and defended against all Adversaries. From whence we derive even
the Scripture ^t self, our ordinations, most of our material Churches,
Colleges, Inns of Court, Hospitals, etc. and shall Charity ever be so buried
in Oblivion in England, that the Posterity of those, from whom we must confess
to have received these and other great advantages, never be remembered and used
with equity and common Justice?

They are linked in Religion to all Catholic Princes and Countries about us:
who will be more loving Neighbors if they see their Brethren find favor from
us.

To persecute this Religion is to War against our Progenitors. It is this
Church in which so many Martyrs have dyed; so many Doctors have taught and
preached, so many Virgins have lived in flesh like Angels; so many Saints
wrought wonders and miracles: so many Councils called; so many Ecclesiastical
Laws enacted; so many Nations converted: so many Kings and Emperors lived and
died and hope to be saved: against which so many persecutors, Machiavels and
Tyrants in vain have used torments, and contrived all imaginable force, wicked
policy, or cruelty could invent.

This Faith has the best evidence as taught and instituted by Christ his
Apostles and Successors, in an uninterrupted series and delivery down to us.
Set before your eyes those glorious Champions of Christ's Church. Constantines,
Theodos. Pepines, Charles, all surnamed Great, more Glorious for Victories over
Heresies and Idolatries; than for conquests of Countries: more renowned for
propagating Catholic Religion, than enlarging their Dominions. See the
Catologue of noble Kings of England, Lucius, Ethelbert, Egbert, Oswald, Oswine,
Alfred, Edgar, before the conquest; William the Conqueror, and so many Henry's,
Edwards, Richards after the Conquest: mighty of force, rich of Treasure, so
noble of birth, so fortunate in Wars, zealous in Religion, who builded so many
Hospitals; founded so many Monasteries, enacted such wholesome Laws and
Statutes, got so many Victories in F^ance, etc. even to Palestine it Self all
professed Roman Catholics.

Secundo, It deserves one observation, that when Christianity became the ruling
Religion of the World under the great Constantine, and Emperors; his immediate
Successors, the very Heathens themselves, were exempt from all manner of
severity, upon the score of their Religion. Because they were in possession of
it by descent from Father to Son, and not by usurpation or intrusion. And we
have the like president in our own Country. For when King Ethelbert had
embraced the Christian Faith by the preaching of Saint Austin, he would not
force his own Subjects (though Pagans) to receive it. Bed^ l. 1. c. 260.

For this reason it was that the great Apostles treated the Synagogue (whose
Religion at that time was vacuated) and consequently void of Truth, with so
much respect and condescendency: and that afterward the most primitive Fathers
used so often this expression; that the Synagogue ought to be buried with
honor.

Whence one of our Protestant Divines says, even by the Law of Seniority
Catholics might exspect some favor. For what privileges or immunities have
we, but the old Church gave us? whence had we our Bible, Creed, Honors,
Donations, commendable Ceremonies, charitable Foundations? had not they
preserved them faithfully, we never had found them.

The first possession of a man is a good title by the Law of Nature until an
elder; or the Law of Reason (which with mankind is to have pre-eminence)
dispossesses it. The Roman Church had a possession unquestionable for above a
thousand years, and the Pope enjoyed jurisdiction a longer time, than any
succession of Princes can pretend to, and submitted to by all our Ancestors. In
Catholic Religion, they stand as defenders, others as invaders, they as
possessors, others as disseisors; they seek to keep what de jure they had;
Calvin, and others what they had not. There is a vast difference in these two
Cases, to oppose by force the introducement of innovations, and to attempt by
force the extinguishment of an ancient Religion of which the People are
universally in a quiet and immemorial possession. The one drives others out of
possession, the other maintains himself: the one invades his neighbors rights,
the other defends his own.

Apostasy and innovation with some color of right have been often in several
ages persecuted by rigor of Laws even by Protestants; and the reason, is
because innovation in Religion most commonly breeds disturbance in the
Commonwealth.

Natural reason teaches that no particular man is to be condemned much less
deprived of what he stands possessed, till his cause be judiciously heard and
sentenced. -- Nor ought any man to be Judge in his own Cause.

But penal Laws and Oaths made in contempt and derogation of that Religion
which through all Christendom abounds with learning civility and loyalty; whose
Doctrine amongst the primitive, greatest, and most learned societies, has been
and is avouched; in most Nations and Kingdoms allowed; and more freely
exercised and permitted: established by the Laws in which our Predecessors were
born and continued; wherein all our Progenitors, all the Peers Ecclesiast.
Nobles and Princes of our Realm in precedent ages thought themselves happy and
honorable. If they had imagined that in future times their Posterity would
revile that Religion with Epithets unbeseeming humane (much less) Christian
Ears, what an opinion would they have preconceived of us?

It was said by King James one of the most learned Princes (not in private, but
in open Parliament represented) I acknowledge the Roman Church to be our Mother
Church although defiled with infirmities and corruptions. Is it not then a kind
of Spiritual Parracide in the Daughter not only to revile the Mother, or which
is worse scratch her by the Face, call her Whore, Superstitious, Idolatrous,
etc. on whose Knees you have been dandled, nourished by her Breasts, and
carried in her Womb? Hear O you Heavens and give ear O earth, I have nourished
and brought up Children and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1. 2.

Let it be allowed some corruptions be of our aged Mother, this should be no
warrant for cruelty, but rather a motive of compassion: especially considering
that (by confession of all her adversaries) those pretended failings are of no
modern date; but such as they are now, such likewise they were, when first
Christianity was received by Englishmen under King Ethelbert.

The Church of England who Glory in their succession of Bishops; (and in this
is singular from other Reformers) acknowledge, they immediately derive their
true and lawful Ordination and mission; and from whom their first Mininistry,
viz. Cranmer, Baker, etc. were Consecrated: and consequently that the Roman
Church conveyed divine right and authority from Christ to them; the very
essence and being of Religion. Which Church notwithstanding they call
Antichristian, Idolatrous, etc. abusing tender Consciences, s^^press that which
themselves confess to be divine Truth: condemn as Tray^^rs and persecute to
death with p^^munire, loss of fortunes, etc. those from whom such Apostolical
Graces and Functions proceed and were continued and preserved. If our
succession from the Roman be the glory of the English Church; its our scorn and
ignominy to persecute and revile them.

Tertio, Penal Laws and Statutes against the Catholic Religion destroys the
ground and foundation of Justice; and the form Judicature. Because the Witness
can have no evidence for their Testimony, the Judges not any for their
sentence, and the Legislator as little for the Law.

Primo, There must be evidence of lawful Witnesses. In matters of Faith we go
by hearing, Romans 10. The best evidence then of any Religion, is the testimony
of our deceased Predecessors and Ancestry, whose Faith and Doctrine is fresh in
the memories and testimonies of the Christian posterity of the present Church.
For besides the Authority of the present Church we can have no greater evidence
in foro externo for the Law of God and Religion; then the testimony of
precedent ages confirmed with supernatural Signs: v. g. the fourteenth Age
delivered to the fifteenth, the Roman Faith which now they profess; assuring
them that it was the true sense and Letter of Scripture, which they had learned
from the thirteenth age and so forward to the Apostles.

No reformers can produce one lawful Witness against Catholic Religion, and
their sense of Scripture; yet the Greatest Crimes require at least one lawful
Witness. For what evidence had the first Reformers to oppose the testimony of
all former Ages, confirmed with so many miracles; and to make Statutes against
the known practiced Religion at least for nine hundred years? Antiquity affords
them none, because though in diverse Ages some odd men did testify sometimes
an error, they were in those very times contradicted by the Church, and
declared impostors and innovators. In this present Age no Sectaries can be
lawful Witnesses for their own lately modelled Religion, or against the ancient
Catholic, because their testimonies cannot be valid against so constant an
universal Tradition and practice.

Secundo, Its ridiculous and unjust in a Judge to pronounce sentence against
Roman Catholic upon the evidence and testimony of Calvin, Luther, etc. as in
open Court to condemn men to forfeit their Estates and ancient inheritances,
upon the word of a mad fellow, that produces no other evidence to confirm his
claim; but interior motions of the Spirit, or some obscure Text of Law
appliable to all Cases, and Subjects: for all the Protestant evidence is
reduced to the private Spirit and the pretended clearness of Scripture.

Tertio, The Legislative power ought to be subordinate to Christian Religion,
but Statutes against Catholics are evidently against the Law of God and
Christian Religion, if we may credit Antiquity, and stick to the Faith and
practice of the Church, and Princes that went before us; not only in England
but all other Christian Kingdoms. This way therefore of proceeding is
different from all other Nations, and alters the Style of natural reason,
humane nature, and the practice of all Antiquity; and consequently destroys
the foundation of justice and form of Judicature.

Quarto, The common temporal Municipal Laws (which Science above all others
next to Divinity) does confirm and evince unto the understanding of an
Englishman the Truth of Catholic Religion: Forasmuch as from our first
Christian Kings and Queens, which must needs be the origin and beginning of all
Christian Common Laws in England, unto the reign of Henry the eight, all our
Princes and People being of one and the same Catholic Religion, their Laws
must needs be presumed to have been conformed to their sense and judgment in
that behalf; and our Lawyers to our Laws. So as now to see an English temporal
Lawyer to impugn the said Catholic Religion by the antiquity of the common
Laws throughout the times and reigns of the said Kings and Queens, to favor
and countenance Luther, Calvin, etc. or any new Opinions, not known before: is
as great an absurdity, novelty and wonder as to see a Philosopher brought up in
Aristotle's School, to impugn Aristotle by Aristotle's learning in favor of
Petrus Ramus, Descartes or some other new Adversary.

Catholic Religion never prejudiced any Nation or State (where it had free
passage) in the least degree; but has ever been their safety, happiness, and
honor. No People or Church in the World so great a friend to loyalty and
obedience: they have the repute of honest men, patient and charitable; carry
themselves civilly and religiously; nothing is heard from their mouths of
Blasphemy or Atheism: or that may have ground of not believing, or adoring God
alone: or of not hoping to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ. They have
lived without just complaint sociable and amicable. If they meet you not at
Church, they meet you at Market. Do they not buy and sell with you? Are ready
to perform all Offices of good neighborhood and civility? Do they refuse any
kind of temporal duties or payments? Do ye not find them at home and abroad as
strict to their promises as any others you converse withal? They cannot be
persecuted by any Government that understands its own interest (unless first
abused by false Teachers) nor can we deny them what ancient and good Laws have
ever allowed; the^ being no innovators, but Professors of the same Religion,
which made this Nation Christian. If there were no other Apology for peaceable
men but only those Pleas of Conscience tendered to public view, those ought
not to be unconsidered by such as profess Christianity.

Never any Acts of Uniformity could expel Papists out of heretical Countries.
Do ye know what you ask when you are still urging the execution of pressures
against Catholics? even their blood, life and fortunes? can any Christian zeal
be so irregular? Can this come from the Spirit of the Gospel? Is this wisdom
from above? Whence comes all this anger? What evil have they done? What maxims
have they so rough and unreasonable that they must be taken away by the Sword?
Why should we be so bloody in our Tenets? How can our passions be so
intemperate? Our mercies so cruel? To them whose Faith was established by our
Fundamental Laws, and maintenance of it, sworn to at least by twenty of our
Monarchs; even by Queen Elizabeth her self. Why must the Papists be thus
singled out from all the rest and forced to forfeit all advantages, or forsake
his Conscience? They only exposed to public hatred and rigor, though they
only least deserve it.

Shall we extinguish all considerations of equity and charity toward them, of
whose honesty we are assured by their Long and Patient Sufferings; rather than
they would renounce their Conscience toward God? who are ready to abjure what
is, or may be objected as only dangerous in their Religion; who have given
evidences already they will perform those Oaths, and that they cannot be
absolved from them? If we apprehend their principles and doctrines are
inconsistent with the Gospel or Civil Government: grant them a free Conference,
about the points in question, which are those Tenets carry an opposition to
either? and if upon impartial enquiry they are found so Heterodox as
represented, then inflict penalties. If their Ecclesiastics are not able to
justisie both their Religion and Principles; let them renounce all mercy.

This offer is very fair and equal, a Vindication of Justice, and a legal
proceeding against the Criminal. And the contrary (how plausible soever
represented) pretending thereby to do God good service) is most injurious to
the Peace, Christian meekness, Reason, Religion, or Charity: and destructive to
that prudential Balance the wisest and best States have ever carefully
observed. Who always after questions of Religion freely discussed, relieved the
distresses of tender and innocent Consciences.

We must not judge of them, or any other, by the private and perhaps
misinterpretable assertions of some particular Doctors: but by the avowed
principles of their belief. This is the basis on which they build the rule, by
which they walk in point of obedience, to God and man: or if you would judge of
them by their proceedings, and addresses, their frequent petitions,
professions, protestations of all just obedience; will sufficiently clear them.
If by their practice, and manner of lives; their quiet deportment and manner of
living and conversing with all men: yea even their prayers and wishes (which
they daily make unto Almighty God in behalf of their Prince and Country) do
show how innocent they are; and how little they deserve those black aspersions
and calumnies some rash Satyrists are so diligent to cast upon them. In charity
we are bound to believe the best of others, and also to think they speak true
when we cannot prove the contrary.

Some destine them to destruction and extirpation, as Agapete did the Jews, Are
so eager declaimers of their corruptions, opinions; and not considering that
like Gehezi, the leprosy of those Syrians c^^^ves to most of their own
Foreheads. Nor taking any notice of the objections standing in force against
themselves.

The Cry against the Papists is but the Prologue: it was the Epidemical Frenzy
in Germany a hundred years since, which turned into smoke and confusion. I wish
it might not be truly said that those very persons, against whom you so
bitterly sharpen and pen your invectives (as if none were Sinners but they)
none were more dangerous; or their practices less pernicious in the Face of the
Sun.

Such is the general inclination and temper of all English Catholics that
preces and lachrymae, are their only weapons: an innocent and passive People,
as experience of their quiet behavior, so many years of hard times, have
clearly shown. Suffering with that patience, humility, equanimity, and resigned
temper of Spirit (imitating their grand Exemplar Jesus Christ) as if those
virtues were innate, and most natural ^o them. Nor can I think but those men
who are so hardened in their malice and persecution against them, do often hear
a voice secretly calling within them. O ye Saul's, why do ye persecute me in my
Servants?

Why should you be troubled, Papists are not more troubled than your selves?
Why should you grudge at their peace and protection? So long as they are
peaceable, either actively obey the Laws, or else passively ready to submit to
the penalties: They are objects of pity rather than envy.

They have formerly lived in their own native Country with less privileges
than Strangers; are excluded from all Offices. By Laws obnoxious to greater
sufferings than Enemies. Have suffered loss of Goods and Livings. Whose
Adversaries have left no Stone unrolled, no corner unsearched, no Pursuivants
uncommissioned to tyrannize over their Consciences: burnt their Antiquaries,
consumed their Monuments, violated their Virgins, racked even the very Souls of
Men with Oaths, when in humane prudence there was no fear: but God has showed
his just chastisements and judgments upon the chief Actors, contrivers and
Abetters.

Can we be such public contradictors of our own declared principles (whereby
we disclaim and profess against Persecution) as still to continue our mulcts
and penalties upon those whose condition have been such as every one might
abuse them in the Streets: (even with satisfaction to some) discredited,
contemned, trodden under every man's foot that lists to spoil them. To lie in
prisons, dungeons, felters, to be racked, bowelled, and boiled alive. We have
seen their families impoverished, their houses invaded by saucy Officers; their
lives forfeited as Traitors, for entertaining those, without whom they could
not live but as Pagans. Have been deprived of performing any Service to God,
debarred of any civil employments in the Nation, they were otherwise capable
of. These miseries have they groaned under without any demerit of their own
part; these sour herbs have they patiently and quietly tasted. Would it not be
an unreasonable president and incitement, toward our brethren, and all Nations
abroad; if we should begin again in the same Cup at home?

Some have so blackened and put them in so strange and monstrous a dress, by
calling them members of Babylon, Antichrist, Idolaters, etc. that I dare boldly
aver that some of the seduced herd who are ignorant of their meek, humble,
innocent and pious documents, (of which the whole world is to this time
witness) do s^arce believe them to be Men, (or if so) yet that they are some
terrible Cannibals that came out of some strange Lands.

Be pleased to consider, you asperse not one, but many: and those who have
given best evidence of being truly tender Consciences: Since they suffered so
generally, so constantly so deeply. If your passion will not, at least your
charity ought to think better: For if you prove not, what you say against them;
you are guilty of the breach of the Mandate, of love to your neighbor, in as
great a height as circumstances can improve a sin to.

Every Christian will have a Share in the injury; and a title to be righted,
and demand satisfaction. Must they carry all our Sins on their backs? Must our
faults be whipped on them? and they made particular oblations for us? is not this
to act the part of cursed Cham over again? or to be conformable to Core and his
company? by a wilful kind of Sophistry still casting all the odium upon them?
Can no Ellobore Purge this Frenzy? Shall we always like Flies dwell upon some
particular Ulcers? And for some misdemeanors, miscarriages, or the loose lives
of a few, traduce and defame the whole Profession and aggravate their failings?
We know it were no difficulty to recriminate in this kind, and repay you with
the same dirt, if it were any pleasure to scramble in such a Puddle.

As great an aversion and Antipathy as you have against them, it is worth your
labor herein, to make them your own examples in point of obedience and
Government; and so in respect of public Peace and Tranquillity.

It were to be wished by all honest men of what persuasion soever that a just
and equal Liberty in matter of Conscience, were granted unto all; if but for
this only respect, viz. that so by a free confident, and friendly conversation
one with another, void of suspicion, and jealousy, fear or danger, to one
party or other: and by amicable discourse and debating of things, truth might
come more clearly to be discovered. But this is a work has so much of God and
goodin it, as it must exspect many Adversaries. Moderation or true Liberty
meets with so many enormities, exorbitancies and obstacles to resist and retard
it.

Had we but a due latitude of candor and charity toward others, or understood
our own happiness; and took things in the best sense: Sure those billows and
waves would cease roaring. Were men so ingenuous to promote peaceable order as
they are watchful to find knots in Bulrushes, and torture their brains to find
scruples in what is most plain: and stood against the tempests and shakings of
virulent Tongues and cankered calumnies: our heats and animosities from
difference in opinion would gradually decay: and a foundation would be laid; On
which to raise a considerable Structure of Peace to Church and State, and
Prosperity to the Nation.

CAP. VI. Persecution of Recusants is against our own Principles and
Concessions.
PRotestant Religion does indemnifie us in the Court of Conscience for
believing in matters of Religion according to the Dictates of our own private
judgment; or rather does oblige us to do it. For as Bishop Gauden a learned
Protestant says, If it be not lawful for every one to be guided by his private
Spirit and Judgment in Religion, it will hardly be possible to acquit our
separation from the Roman Church of the guilt of Schism. Nor does it seem
worthy of Christ who has left us a Religion full of Mysteries, and not any
visible Judge of them: to have designed about those any visible executioners.
This premised, I argue thus.

Where there is a liberty of examining and judging, there must be a freedom of
election upon such judgment: but the Church of England, v. g. in her Doctrine
allows men to search the Scriptures, and examine whether her Doctrine be
agreeable to Scripture or no: Therefore the Church of England and other
Reformed cannot in reason and equity persecute such men as in foro
conscientiae, shall upon such due examination of judgment, dissent from their
Doctrine.

If this principle pass current amongst us, that every one may read, judge and
interpret Scripture: (which is by us the judge of Controversies) the only rule
to guide us to Faith: we are bound to give Liberty of Conscience to others.
Whence one of our own Doctors says, Our Bishops who have declared the Doctrine
of giving freedom of Conscience, what every one in their private judgments, do
of discretion hold to be most conformable to Gods Word: yet they very
inconsequently and disingenuously excite our Governors, to force their
Conscience to an exterior Conformity.

Secondly, We confess the Church of England and all Churches may err, and for
ought we know do err, and lead into error: and such an uncertain and fallible
guide or ground to rely on, is not proportionable to the nature and quality of
Faith; which must be certain and infallible: with an internal consent of the
Will, and subjection of our understandings to revealed Truths. Our Senses may
be deluded, but Faith not: for it must be more firm and certain than any thing
we see or feel.

Supposing then the Reformed Churches fallible: will it not be a most
unreasonable thing, to be still exacting of Recusants, by rigorous
Sequestratious, Oaths and what other penalties they think fit: to leave and
forsake the Church and Faith which they so groundedly hold to be the infallible
guide, appointed by God himself, as the only means to direct them securely to
eternal Salvation? And to yield exterior conformity to our own new molded
Church we all profess to be fallible? Or to be forced to embrace a Doctrine
deduced by fallible interpretations out of Scripture, which interpretations,
the far greater and learneder part of this very age reject as Heretical: and
which as such were rejected by almost all visible Christianity for these
thousand years. And which perhaps may shortly be rejected by us. We having
oft-times rejected that which we cried up before for verity: and the Religion
now in vogue not many years ago was cried down.

If our Church be not then infallible, in what we teach against them, but may
embrace a lie, for a divine Truth: they need not to vindicate and justify
their most just recusancy in refusing to submit; when we provide them no better
security: but force them to refuse due submission to that infallible direction
appointed by divine Writ to bring them securely to their end. To which the most
religious, the most learned, and the major part of Christians ever yet thought
and submitted too. If I should disobey the sentence of the Church, upon what
other authority can I more prudently rely? What Labyrinths and Abysmes should I
fall into? How can we force and draw others to our Churches, if we cannot agree
where and how to lay our Foundation? How can we impose upon and restrain
others; whom we are so far from assuring of Truth, as we pretend to be but
uncertain of it: and are not able to do so much for our selves? being liable to
change, and no ways certain of our own belief to be the most infallible? as our
multiplied Concessions are pregnant instances. What is this but to put certain
penalties upon an uncertain Faith? And if our Teachers agree not in all points
of Religion: the Dissenters in controversy are obliged to allow a m^tual
toleration.

If we say the Roman Church erred for 900. years till our Reformation we
exclude our selves from all possible assurance of true Faith or Salvation. And
to arrogate to our Selves, or to attribute to private persons or Pastors the
all-defining Spirit; which we deny to the whole Church represented in a general
Council is absurd. His presumption must needs be vast that builds more on his
own tenet, then the mature judgment of all successive Fathers. While he cries
down others for infallible, he lifts himself up to be so: as if God revealed
more to him than all the Doctors and Propagators of his Church.

Now let us hear what our own Divines acknowledge. Doctor Tailor says, -- but
alas notwithstanding our Religion thus framed by our Divines; yet it seems not
sufficiently marked; or the cognizance of Schism taken away: for yet we have no
particular positive points among us settled for undoubted Truths. -- those being
rather a medley of all Religions and new Sects professed among us, or a
negation of those tenets of the Church we went out of; and which stood a
thousand years before us, as Histories and Monuments witness: which is but a
negative Faith in effect: for what is positive or of Order and Government, is
wholly derived and taken from that Religion which not long since we pulled
down, abominated, and so violently persecuted.

Doctor Gauden says, I see not why Papists may not in reason of State, have
and enjoy that liberty (without perturbing the Public Peace) which
Presbyterians and Independents do enjoy in their new ways. For nothing will
savor more of an imperious or impotent Spirit (whose Faith and Charity are
Slaves to Secular Interests) than for those who have obtained liberty to their
Novelties; to deny the like freedom, to other men's Antiquity; which has
Ecclesiastical practice and precedence of a thousand years: besides the
preponderancy of much reason, Scripture and holy examples. All which to force
godly, grave, and learned men to renounce, or comply with other ways against
their judgments, must be a crying Self-condemning sin; in those men who lately
approved the ancient Church way, and after dissenting; at first desired but a
modest toleration. And in another place says, To Fleece and depress Popish
Recusants by pecuniary mulcts, exactions, etc. is to set Religion to sale, and
make Merchandise of Conscience and men's errors; rather than fairly to persuade
and win them by proper and persuasive engines of true Religion.

Thorndike a learned Divine says also. Cer^ainly it may be justi^^able for the
secular power to grant Papists exercise of their Religion in private places,
under such moderate penalties as disobeying the Laws of a man's Country
requires. For Persecution to Death in that case the whole Reformation condemns
the Church of Rome. And I conceive there is no reason for that, which will not
condemn Persecution to Banishment. The State may easier be secured of Papists
against all such power in the Pope, then of our Sectaries against that
Dispensation to their allegiance; which the pretense of Gods Spirit may import
when they please.

Whereas it is manifest that many Papists hold against those equivocations and
reservations which destroy all confidence in the Sovereign in Allegiance.
Though not secured in those that pretend Gods Spirit. -- Besides Recusants
being for the most part of the good Families of the Nation, will take it for a
part of their Nobility freely to profess themselves in Religion; whereas the
Sectaries are People of mean quality cannot be presumed to stand so much on
their reputation. And in another place he says, to proceed to divide the
Church more and more with Persecutions is more destructive to the substance of
Christianity; than all that corruption, Reformation pretends to cure.

Osborne a Protestant, Hist. mem. Q. E. p. 17. (...) that against the poor
Catholics, nothing in relation to the generality, remains upon due proof
sufficient to justify the severity of Laws daily enacted and put in execution
against them. -- All other Sects, says he, oppose the Roman with more spleen
and animosity then ordinary, yet they defend themselves and prevail against
all; still continue, and have been the most grand and principal Body of all
Christian Societies; and the greatest force and For^ress of Christianity
against Turks, and Heathenish impieties; and chiefest Propagators of the Gospel
in all Nations, etc.

I see no reason (says another Doctor of our English Church) why Papists in
England should not as well deserve, hope and enjoy; as any other order or rank
of men freedom to their Consciences. Nor can I think but those men who are so
hardened in their Malice and persecution against them, do often hear a voice
secretly call within them. O ye Souls why do ye persecute me in my Servants?

Its a kind of injustice, and an uncharitable course (as I conceive says he)
when we spare them that have no Religion at all; and censure those that can
give an account of somewhat tending to that purpose. Shall Atheists and
Socinians Enemies of the blessed Trinity be not looked after? And shall others
following the Heresy of Aerius, directly opposing the order of Bishops and
their Jurisdiction; (that is the whole frame of the Church of God assembled in
the first four general Councils asserted and affirmed to be of divine right by
Scripture and the Church of England) be winked at? And must we only incite our
Governors against Papists? Force them upon Banishments, Prisons, Persecutions,
Pressures and Calamities, and use such severity against that Religion, we our
selves hold Salvation to be acquired in: who hold all the positive Articles
with us.

I may loudly proclaim (says Bishop Gauden, with Samuel 12. 3.) this
Protestation in their behalf. Behold the Servants of the Lord and his Church (O
Christians causless Enemies) witness against them and before the Lord, and
before the People. Whose Ox or Ass have they taken? Whom have they defrauded
or oppressed? Whose hurt or damage have they procured? Whose evil of sin or
misery have they not pitied? What is the injury for which so desolating a
vengeance, must pass upon them and their whole Profession? What is the
Blasphemy against God or man for which these Naboths, must loose their lives,
liberties, and live^^hoods? Wherein have they deserved so ill of former and
later Ages, that they should be so used (as Ahab commanded of Mi^heas, and the
Jews did to Hieremias) to be cast into Prisons, to ^ordid and ^bs^ure
restraints, or to be exposed to Mendicant liberty, to be fed only with Bread
and water of Affliction? What necessary Truths of God or righteousness have
they detained? What error have they broached, revived, or maintained? What true
Christian liberty have they impeached? A little after --

They have not light conjectures, not partial Customs, not bare Profession,
not uncertain Tradition, not blind Antiquity -- but evident grounds, Scripture,
Succession, Conversion of Nations, planting of Churches all over the known
World; crowning their Doctrine with Martyrdom. Authors of best credit
undeniable; famous in Church through all the first Ages, showing us Catholic
Religion. And uncontradicted consent, constant, and uninterrupted Succession --
their great abilities -- Add those Credential letters, the testimonies and
seals which God has given of his holy Spirit. Lastly, the Civil rights and
privileges, the piety of the Nation, and the Laws of this Land have always
given to them by the fullest and freest consent of all Estates in Parliament.
these ought to be regarded much of men of Justice, honor and conscience; as
not to break all these Sanctions and Laws asunder, by which their forefathers
have bound to God, etc.

Whence Doctor Tailor in his Book concerning the unreasonableness of
prescribing to other men's Faith in liberty of prophesying,. 2. 249. that
Considerations to a charitable Toleration concerning the Roman Church, which,
says, he may easily persuade persons of much reason, and more piety, to retain
that which they know to have been the Religion of their forefathers, which had
actual possession and seizure of men's understanding before the opposite
Profession had a name.

Another learned Protestant Doctor says, the humble peaceable and discreet
carriage of them, may justly plead for favor and protection against this
calumny of proneness to Sedition, Faction or illegal disturbance in civil
affairs: Even in all the unhappy troubles of the late years. -- have generally
behaved themselves and showed they had no other design than to live a quiet
life in all godliness and honesty. If they could not help in fair ways to steer
the Ship as they desired; they did not seem to set it on fire and overwhelm it.
If at any time relating to public variations and tossings they could not act
with satisfied and good Consciences; they humbly bear with silence, and suffer
with patience. -- Intentive chiefly and fearful to offend God; tender of
Conscience and their own Religion. Whence.

The late Bishop of Exeter says, in these christian bounds of peaceable
subjection, humility and holiness: if the Papists in England may but obtain so
much declared favor and public countenance (which all other fraternities and
Professions have) as to be sure to enjoy their callings, liberties, and
properties; (which seem to be so many times in great uncertainties) under the
protection and obedience of the Laws) it would encourage them; -- and redeem
them from those menaces, insolences and oppressions, of unreasonable men; who
look upon them like public Enemies and perdue; because they have little of
public favor and encouragement.

Christian usage will no doubt win more upon them, than those rough storms and
winds, wherewith they are daily threatened, and are still distressed. Which
makes them wrap themselves up, as Elias in his hairy Mantle: when they think
their lives, liberties and livelyhoods are sought after; and no such protection
like to continue over them they thought in a Christian State and Church, they
might have obtained; and deserved through their quiet conversation. As a just
protection infers our due subjection: so no men pay more willingly then they;
who besides the Iron-rod of fear have softer cords of love and favor upon
them. How can we with justice, honor, or humanity inflict severe penalties
upon Papists as refusing to conform to our Church and Religion, when they
protest with so much truth to our faces; they cannot see any Church, any
Religion, among us as uniform, public, authentic, Constant?

We might consider that the enacting of laws penalties, and impositions against
Papists, is but a knotting Whipcord to lash our own posterity: Seeing now there
be so many Opinions in the World, God knows upon whose children it may fall
next: For the Church of England is not a Manna that relisheth in every man's
palate. Secondly, To use severity against Papists overturns the very ground of
our retreat from Rome. It is against Protestant sincerity; for how can they
exclaim against them for persecutors, and are now the men themselves? Was it an
instance of weakness in their Religion, and is it become a demonstration in
ours? Is it Antichristian in them and Christian in us? For if men must be
restrained upon prudential pretended considerations, for their Religious
exercise; why not the same in France, Germany, Holland, Constantinople, etc.
where matters of State may equally be pleaded? And if Protestants who maintain
that no Councils or Church without tyranny may require belief or internal
consent from their subjects to their definitions or Articles of Religion (a
practice much exclaimed against in the Church of Rome) why then do they of the
Church of England so inconsequently exact in practice, such consent blamed in
the Roman.?

CAP. VII. That by our own Concessions true Salvation is acquired in the Roman
Church, and therefore not to be persecuted.
THe most eminent Divines of the English Church, allow the Church of Rome to be
a true Church: whence they acknowledge and derive their Orders, Ordination,
Calling, Mission, Jurisdiction, Authority to Preach, etc. wherein they agree
Salvation may be had and all Fundamentals of Faith are professed, v. g. Papists
hold all positive Articles of Faith settled among Protestants, as divine and
undoubted Truths. Protestants and Catholics both are Christians, Both Baptized
in that holy name, both lay hold on the promises of the Gospel; have the Lords
Prayer, Belief, the same three Creeds, Apostolical, Nicene, Athanasian; The
first four General Councils.

They believe with the Roman Church Articles of Doctrine, that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son; terms of Trinity, substantiality,
virginity of our Blessed Lady, Scripture, all Laws, Canons, Ordinances, forms
of Liturgy, Prayer, Service, Discipline, etc. And though the Roman Church does
declare many doctrinal points as necessary to be believed (being deduced from
holy Writ, and practice of the primitive times) whch the Reformists deny: Yet
seeing they acknowledge all the necessary articles fundamentally required to
Salvation; as is by their Adversaries granted. What reason or justice is it to
condem them to so great cruelties for matters of their Belief.

I could produce innumerable testimonies from the best Authors and Writings of
the English Church; who teach the Roman notwithstanding her supposed errors, to
be the Church of Christ, and therein perfect Christianity, and hope of
Salvation to be found. To avoid prolixity I will mention a few.

Doctor Morton in his Treatise of King of Israel and the Church, p. 24,
Papists, says he, are to be accounted of the Church of God; because they hold
the Foundation of the Gospel. Hooker 5. Book of Eccles. Policy, says, The
Church of Rome is reputed a part of the House of God, and of the Family of
Jesus Christ. Doctor Couel in defense of Hooker p. 17. says, We affirm them of
the Church of Rome to be part of the Church of Christ, and those that live and
dye in that Church may be saved. Master White in defense c. 41. in the name of
his Brethren says, We profess the Church of Rome it self, in all Ages to have
been the visible Church of God. Field lib. 3. c. 8. says, We most firmly,
believe all the Churches of the World, wherein our Fathers lived and died to
have been the true Churches of God, in which undoubted Salvation was to be had.
And after in the same Book, We never doubted but that in the Churches wherein
those holy men St. Bernard and St. Dominick lived were the true Churches of
God. Osiander witnesses Bid had all Popish errors, yet Dr. Humphrey in his
Jesuitism acknowledges him to be in the number of the godly: so does Fulk of
St. Bernard, Luther, the Centurists, Tindal and Pantaleon title St. Francis and
St. Dominick holy men; though they bleieved all Papistical errors: therefore
Papists may be saved, if Protestants may be believed.

Dove persuas. says, in fundamental points of Doctrine the greatest Papists in
the world agree with us. Prot. rel. affirms the Roman Church has still
inviolably the foundation of Religion l. 48. Downam l. 2. Antichr. grants it
was a note of a good Christian to cleave to the Romish and Apostolical Church,
and p. 103. l. Antichr. he yields to Bellarmine, that S. Augustine and Victor
Oticensis were of opinion, to adhere to the Church of Rome was a mark of a true
Catholic in those times.

Our Stars of the first magnitude, as Luther in Epist. against Anabap. says,
we confess that all Christian good is in the Papacy, and from them it came down
to us; and ibid. I say in the Papacy is the true Christianity, yea the true
Kernel of Christianity: and on the 28 of Genes. we confess the Church to be
among the Papists: for they have Baptism, Absolution, the Text of the Gospel,
etc. and there are many godly men among them. Calvin Instit. l. 4. confesses
in the Roman Church in the deepest of her supposed errors, there ever remained
inviolabile foedus Dei: the Covenant of God inviolable.

Does not Bunny, Whitaker, Junius, Zanrchius, Seravia and almost all
Protestants generally hold as much, at least, that we agree in fundamentals,
that the Roman Church is a true Church, the Mother C-hurch.

A thousand of learned Reformists confess in general, Antiquity and the Fathers
are for the Roman Church. Whence a learned Writer notes in some things or
other; yea in every particular Controversy Protestants grant their Assertions,
and there is no assertion by the Papists defended, but some of the reformed
yield too and confess, as of great reason and authority.

Magdeburgenses 4. Cent. dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, and ad Jacobum Regem;
that the first and purest times of the Church, taught Sacramental Confession,
Tradition, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Mass, a propitiatory Sacrifice,
Miracles obtained at the relics of Saints, Images in Churches for the first
200 and 300 years. Concerning the Primacy that one must be Chief in the Church
is taught by Melancton, Luther, in loc. com. Couel in examen. Jacobus Andreas
related by Hospiuian.

Mr. Perkins Prob. p. 237. says, Appeals were often made out of Africa to
Popes of Rome in primitive days. Middleton Papist p. 39. that the first general
Council of Nice, taught the Dignity of Rome over the West Provinces, and hold,
p. 200. Papias, living in the time of the Apostles taught Peter's Supremacy.
Field. lib. Church says, the Title of Constantinople was but intruded and
usurped, and when the Council of Nice gave such honor to the Church of Rome;
there was not so much as mention made of Constantinople. Doctor Sutcliffe
subver* p. 51. is witness Irenaeus says, that every Church ought to have
respect to the Church of Rome for h^^ eminent principality: and Subvers. 19.
tells, how Saint Gregory commanded in England, instituting Saint Augustine
Archbishop of Canterbury a See of that preeminency. Downam lib. Antich. c. 3.
does not deny but that Justinian the Emperor and the general Council of
Chalcedon did attribute to the Pope of Rome to be head of the Church.

For the real presence Jacobus Accontius, a learned Protestant, says, though
one part err, yet both are in the way of Salvation. Whitaker, Bucer and Hooker
say the Body is really given to the Mouth of the faithful. So Doctor Reynolds
in his Conference 722. Prayer for the dead and free will, Cartwright, Fulke and
Spark say are not so necessary. Worship of Images is indifferent, says Master
Bunny and Bilney, and is defended by Protestants in Germany, as Beza relates.
Bowing at the Name of Jesus is affirmed and commanded by Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions. By Doctor Whitgift in defense; Mus^^lus in loc. com. Zanchius in
Epist. ad Ephesians. etc. But if bowing at the Name of Jesus being read or heard be
lawful; it follows, the honouing of Christ's Image is also lawful: since the
Name of Jesus is to the Ear, as his Image is to the Eye. Communion in one kind,
Luther in Epist. ad Bohem. says, is of indifferency.

That the present Roman Church and Religon continued and flourished during the
whole time of the primitive Church in the first six hundred years after Christ:
from Christ and his Apostles to Constantine the great, and from Constantine to
Gregory the great. Calvin, Zuinglius, Z^nchius, Danaeus, Beza, Brocord, N^pper,
Perkins, Whitaker, Powel, Fulke, Reynolds, Cartwright, Field, Willet,
Whiteguift, Midleton, Morton, the most renowned Protestant Writers acknowledge
in their Words and Books; as I could easily show, and cite their words and
places to that purpose, if it were not for brevitys sake: you may find it at
large in a Treatise dedicated to Dr. Morton of the Progeny of Catholics and
Protestants. And the continuance of the Roman Religion, those last 1000 years,
is acknowledged by Oslander, Danaeus, Magdeburgenses, Holinshed, Stow, Cambden,
Fox, Bale, Bilson, Whitaker, Mason, Cartwright, Godwine, Martin, etc. it being
evident to all that do not stupidly deny whatever was said or done in former
ages.

To conclude, I propose this Dilemma, either with extreme impiety you damn the
Souls of the whole race of your Progenitors, who, till the later end of Henry
the Eighth, lived and died Roman Catholics: or else, with no less cruelty, you
punish them for professing the Religion of your forefathers; in which, by your
own Concessions, Salvation may be attained. Whence a learned Protestant says,

The wrong which Protestants commit in afflicting Catholics, and unnaturally
trampling upon their dejected Estates, only for matters of Religion. -- Alas!
by our own Doctrine, they are neither* Babylonians nor Egyptians, but they and
we (as we teach) being Israelites. Why then should Israel thus persecute
Israel? are we not become a gaze of Christendom, thus to fight without an
Enemy, for kindred to wound his own kindred? -- inciting our Governors to
great severity in Religion; in which we our selves teach they may be saved. I
speak sincerely I hold morally, its most improbable that such as have been
conversant in Study of Controversies, must have a respect to Catholic
Religion, unless they break with all Authority, humane and divine.

Bishop Gauden, in the Sighs of the Church p. 202. says, The Dilemma and
distressed choice of Religion is now reduced to this: that peaceable and
well-minded Christians, wise, etc. -- so long harassed and wearied with novel
Factions and pretended Reformations, would rather choose their posterity should
return to the Roman Party, which has something among them settled, orderly, and
uniform, becoming Religion, than to have them ever turning and towering upon
Ixius Wheel; catching in vain, at fanciful reformations, as Tantalus at the
deceitful waters: rolling the reformed Religion like Sysiphus his Stone;
(sometimes asserting it by Law and power; otherwise exposing it to popular
liberty and looseness) then to have them tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, with the foedities, blasphemies, animosities, Anarchies, danger and
confusions, attending fanatic fancies, and quotidian Reformations; which like
Botches and Boyls from surfeited and unwholsom bodies, so daily break out among
those Christians, who have made no rule of Religion, but their own humor; and
no bounds of reformation, but their own interests. The first makes them
ridiculous, the second pernicious to all sober Christians. whereas the Roman
Church (however tainted with errors) yet it cannot be denied without a brutish
blindness and injurious slander, (which only serves to gratify the gross
Antipathies of the gaping vulgar) that the Church of Rome, amongst its tares
and cockles, has many wholesome herbs, and holy Plants growing: much more of
Reason and Religion, of good Learning and sober Industry, Order and Polity, of
Morality and Constancy, of Christian Candor and Civility, of common Honesty
and Humanity; becoming grave men and Christians; by which to invite after-ages,
and your posterity to adhere to it and them, rather than to be everlastingly
exposed to the profane bablings, endless janglings, miserable wranglings,
childish confusions, atheistical indifferencies, and sacrilegious furies of
some later spirits; which are equally greedy and giddy, making both a play and
a prey of Religion; who have nothing comparable in them to the papal party, to
deserve yours or your posterities admiration or imitation, but rather their
greatest caution and prevention.

CAP. VIII. Roman Catholics are not guilty of Practices or Principles
destructive to Government.
PRotestants have set it down as a Decree against Catholics and labor to
imprint it, as an eternal scandal in the hearts of the People: that Catholic
Doctrine and Religion, is dangerous to the State and Sovereignty: and therefore
not allowable. This being a matter of great importance; I will endeavor, not
so much to justify them, as to inform my self, in a point which has made so
many stagger: Being one that desires to defend the loyalty of innocent men,
rather than their Opinions or Doctrins; which they are best able to defend
themselves.

In this grand charge and Hyperbolical accusation, I find the contrary is
proved by evidence of Fact: that the Treasons, Seditions, factions, tumults
which have filled all Christendom with blood and calamity; sprung not from the
doctrine of Catholics, but from the Opinions and practices of Reformists; not
from Rome but from Wittenberg, Smalcald, Geneva, etc.

Was it the Papists that induced them of Geneva to expel their Lord and Bishop?
That moved them of Swedeland to deprive their lawful King? That procured
Holland to depose their Sovereign? That solicited Subjects to depose their
Emperor? King of Bohemia and Poland? That imprisoned Mary Queen of Scots? That
authorized Mountebank and Rochel to stand in defiauce against their King? That
begot so many conspiracies against Queen Mary of England as appears in our
Chronicles? That ravished from their lawful Governors the Low Countries and
Transylvania and many Towns now called free? Was it from any of their Books,
you have drawn these vile Maxims, viz. that the authority of the Sovereign
Magistrate is of humane right? That the People are above the King? That the
People can give Power to the Prince and take it away? That Kings are not
anointed of the Lord? That if a King fail in performing his Oath at Coronation,
the Subjects are absolved from their allegiance? That if Princes fall from the
grace of God, the people are loosed from their subjection? Do not these
doctrines proceed from Wickliffe, Waldenses and other Sectaries? Does not
Belforrest sufficiently prove the like maxims from Luther, Calvin, Melancton,
Peter Martyr, etc.? What Buchanan and Knox did against Queen Mary their lawful
Sovereign is evident in History, and Beza in Epist. 78. ad Buchanan approves
their actions. Calvin l. 4. c. 3. Instit. from his high Consistorian gives this
absolution to all Oaths of that nature. Quibuscunque hujus evangelii lux
effulgeat and ab omnibus laqueis juramentisque absolvitur. And the famous
Minister Surean called Rosiers writ a Book expressly, that it was lawful to kill
Charles the ninth, and the Queen Mother if they would not obey the Gospel.
Belforrest is sufficient witness. See more in Althusius Politics c. 35. Dausus
l. 6. Polit. c. 3. In all the Councils, Synods, writings of any Roman Divines,
no such matters are found and allowed; but only such as teach Subjects loyalty,
humility, obedience.

More Princes have been deposed by Sectaries in sixty years, than by Papists in
six hundred years: and that deposing of Kings is no doctrine nor practice of
Catholics shall be proved hereafter: and that others have been more faulty in
each of their respective Sects in all kind of disorders at home or abroad,
History and experience testify. In no Country or City in Christendom but
Catholic Religion ever entered by meekness and suffering: in no Country of
Christendom but other Sects entered by sedition, rebellion, disobedience: or
murdering of great Princes or Persons; by vast destruction of Cities,
Countries, Kingdoms. As in France, Holland, several States in Germany,
Scotland, twenty years in England, etc. Consider what was done against France,
Holland, several States in Germany Mary Queen of Scots; or the late
unparalled Rebellion.

In Catholic Religion I find they learn their duty toward God cannot be
complied with, without an exact performance of their duty toward their
Sovereign: to obey him not for advantages, or temporal concerns; but out of
Conscience. For no Roman Catholic can be true to his Religion, who is not true
to his Prince. Whom they obey for Conscience sake; whose Person they love and
honor; and whose prosperity they always pray for; Though stripped of their
Estates or laden with stripes. It is in the power of great ones to make them
suffer; but not to make them guilty. Their Religion tells them that Caesar's
due ought not to be kept from him be he of what religion he pleases.

This is the will of God in Scripture, preached by the Apostles and from them
derived to us: this doctrine is instilled in their Catechisms; confirmed by
their Sermons and conferences: Insomuch that a Papist that is not truly loyal,
is not truly a Papist, if to believe not, what they are taught by the Church,
makes a man cease to be of it.

From the Saxons to Edward the sixth, to be a Catholic was never taken as a
bar to loyalty. Nor does it seem possible a Religion which governed England
with glory so many hundred years; can teach a doctrine destructive to Princes;
or infuse Maxims that will breed Commotion in the People.

They are ready by Oath in the face of Heaven to profess loyalty a divine
command, and an indispensable duty: and any who pretend to know what Catholic
doctrine is; must know this to be a part of it. In matters of fact their
actions have given indubitable testimonies even by their Enemies own
Concessions. If Catholics had been disloyal, either the King or his Council;
or at least the Statesmen under Cromwell or the Rump must know it. They appeal
to the Council in all discoveries of their Treacheries against the King whether
ever any constant Catholic was accessory or concurred in any design against
his Majesty. They appeal and challenge all the black Catalogue of Cromwells
favorites and the whole Rumpists, to discover, if they can, any Papist who
concurred in any plot or action.

If Catholics refuse to go to Protestant Churches in respect of Conscience,
They will far more refuse for Conscience sake to commit Treason; a sin of a
higher degree; will hardly attempt or consent to any desperate act against
their State and Country: and commit such Crimes as hazard Body and Soul. Nay
what other Sectaries will boggle at, If the King should be a Heathen and make
Laws against them; they hold it not lawful to resist, but peaceably to endure.

During the time of the late King of France, there was proposed by an Assembly
of Catholic Divines and Bishops, this question or Problem: If it were
supposed the King of France became a Mohammedan, and by his Power endeavored to
force his Subjects to that infidelity: whether they might lawfully according to
the Principles of Christianity by arms resist him? to which question the
unanimous consent of the Assembly was, that such a resistance would be
unlawful: since Christian Religion allowed no other way of maintaining Faith
against lawful Sovereigns, but prayers, tears and sufferings.

When shall we find such a result from a Synod of Presbyterians? Compare these
primtive Doctrines, with new the Evangelists; and we shall find them quite
contrary to the rules of Wi^liffians, Waldenses, Paraeus, Knox and Buchanan,
etc. who teach that Subjects may not only defend by Arms their Religion; but
offend also. And lately Baxter in lib. of Rest. p. 258. says we may fight
against Kings if it were for cause of Religion; to purge the Church from
Idolatry and Superstition. The Genova Notes of the Bible, 2 Chronicles. c. 5. allow
the deposing of Queen Macha. See more in Belforrest.

On the contrary the Doctors and Casuists of the Roman Church hold it as an
Article of Faith; that neither Heresy nor Turcism can be opposed by Rebellion.
Belloy in Apol. part. 2. plainly says, Arms against Princes have no warrant.
Orationibus tantum pugnandum. Navar, Cunerus and all other Catholic Doctors
agree in the same; as most conformable to the doctrine and practice of the
Primitive Fathers. The General Council of Constance, Sess. 5. concludes it an
error in Faith to maintain Subjects may kill their Kings being Tyants, nuper
accepit Synodus, etc.

Cardinal Tolet in his Summolies l. 3. c. 6. affirms it not lawful to attempt
the life of a Prince: although he never so much abuse his Power. And that it is
flat Heresy to maintain the contrary. So Greg. de Valent. part. 2. Bellar. l.
3. of his Apology. Learned Lessius lib. de Scientia and jure. Serarius in cap.
3. Azor. in his Instit. Becanus in his answer to the 9. Aphor. Gretzer. in his
Vespertilio Heretico confutes all Mariana's grounds. Saint Thomas tells
expressly Tyrannus non potest a quopiam privata Authoritate occidi. The Canon
Law and Decrees, Decret. 2. part. 10. de Episcopis ac clericis quod nec sua
authoritate, nec authoritate summi Pontificis arma valiant accipere, etc. And
the Canon Law of England explains it more fully in the Council held at Oxford
by Stephen of Canterbury 1228. and anno Hen. 3. where Excommunication is
decreed against those who perturb the peace and tranquillity of our Lord the
King and Kingdom. Bellarmine himself maintains the Laws of Magistrates bind
even the Consciences of Christians, Lib. de Laicis. So the Rhemenses in this
Annotat. in 1 Pet. c. 2. Condemn treason and disobedience, and say, Subjects
are bound in temporal things to obey the Heathens being lawful Kings; and even
for Conscience sake to keep their temporal Laws, pay tribute, pray for them,
and other natural duties. And Doctor Kellison in his Learned Survey gives a
good reason for it; because, says he, Faith is not necessarily required to
jurisdiction; nor is authority lost by the loss of Faith.

The Bishop of Armagh confesses the English Papists in Ireland were faithful
in all the Invasion of Spain or Pope Sand. K. C. p. 88. Calvin himself their
greatest enemy on the first of Hosea and ninth of Amos, says, quam multi sunt
in Papatu qui regibus accumulant quicquid possint juris and potestatis. Whence
King James in his Basilicon doron Epist. to the Reader, says, Puritans had put
out many Libels against all Christian Princes; and that no body answered them,
but the Papists: that they were their only Vindicators. And the late King
himself in his excellent Book of Meditations, says, I am sorry Papists should
have a greater sense of their allegiance than many Protestants.

The Loyalty and Obedience of Catholics toward Princes appears undeniable in
all things; by their constant and general conformity unto temporal Government.
Have showed all the duty that men can fancy to own. Where shall we find better
Subjects? How much they are faulty, and how much others have been: let the
world judge. They may lay to our charge, ten Seditious Authors for one: and that
more Villainies have been perpetrated since the Reformation than in nine hundred
years before.

I must provoke both Angels and men (says a Divine of the English Church) to
consider their wrong. How we load them with Crimes of which they are innocent.
I might wonder how so wild calumnies could be laid to their charge. When their
constant Doctrine teaches, and their own persons have showed all duty
imaginable. Experience has proved their great integrity, that no advantages
offered can betray their fidelity to their King or Country. -- what wrong have
done? what peace have they broken? what plots have they fomented to the
prejudice of the present Government? or occasions given to hatch new
jealousies? treason is now left out of their charge. What discoveries were made
against them, either in the Rump or Olivers time when the Press was free? were
they not still owned as the most loyal and constant Royalists? and none of them
could ever be suspected for the least defection from our Sovereign. And yet
these are the men that are traduced, as inconsistent with civil polity and
regality. Yet none more inoffensive then they. Judge then whether it be not a
superlative injustice to incense the world against them. As if they delighted
in blood, and persecuting of men were a part of their doctrine.

Now because the contrary opinion has possessed the imaginations of so many,
by a self-deceiving wilfulness, predominant passion or partiality. I shall
clear and lay open the truth of this assertion in the sequent Chapter: So
plainly and Orthodoxally; that none but who can lay aside all reason, charity,
honesty and morality, may contradict and oppose.

CAP. IX. Principles and Doctrines of Roman Catholics are consistent with
Peace and Government, wherein a different Religion is established by Law.
LEt Politicians say what they will, there is no greater support to Monarchy
than Catholic Religion: whence one of our own Doctors says, The Fanatics did
conjecture, and were tenacious of opinion, that the late Acts put out aagainst
Papists and Priests, were but to bring others more easily into the snare. So
good and deserving opinion, they know Papists merited from those times, that no
security need to tie them deeper.

How all the Catholics of England have comported themselves, at least, these
sixty years last past, needs no further vindication; those that have been
witnesses of their actions can testify. I shall only intimate, that I have
heard them profess, that if at any time they have exposed their lives and
fortunes, in defense of their Sovereign and Country; they did but do that duty
which they shall be ready to do again, notwithstanding any disincouragement can
be put upon them.

Now in this Chapter I adventure to fight against a popular prejudice, and the
obstinacy of long verted opinions: considering the number of my Adversaries,
who so loudly and resolutely charge them with destructive Doctrines and
Principles to the public good and safety, that they seem to make it an Article
of their Creed: objecting Positions of some private and disavowed persons and
words only (when others rebelled indeed, and their Battles were real:) but
every man's work will bear a better testimony of him than other men's words do
against him.

I know great difficulties may be overcome by truth and time. And vulgar and
very general errors have often been easily detected by prudent and unbiasled men.
Whence to overthrow from the very foundation all such aspersions; let all
impartial men consider, first, these calumnies proceed originally from enemies.
Secondly, they are untruths forged against them, and taken upon trust, what
their Antagonists teach you. For it has been a course often practiced against
them, by many of their opponents:

First to frame Articles of their belief according to their own fancy, or out
of private and unapproved Authors; as if they were the true and real Articles
of their Faith. Who being often pressed to justify the accusations could never
do it: or durst not show their faces in a free or public conference, about the
points in question.

This way of proceeding is against all Law and Equity, to condemn them before
you hear them. No Judge sends men to be hanged before they speak for themselves,
and Sentence given.

Secondly, According to the rule of reason; they themselves should make the
Confession and Profession of their own Faith, and that of others, especially
their adversaries should not take it upon them: For any indifferent Judge would
wonder you should have better intelligence of their Religion than they
themselves.

Thirdly, All examples and practices of the Primitive Churches mentioned in the
Ecclesiastical Histories, the custom was, when any Dispute did arise,
concerning the integrity of the Doctrine professed in any particular Church,
that Church so questioned did always set down in writing a Confession of their
Faith; and transmit it either to the Patriarch or some general Council: that so
the sincerity of their belief might be tried by the touchstone of the Church
universal.

Fourthly, Faith being an internal consent of our will, and subjection of our
understanding to truths revealed, in absolute justice none but we our selves
can make an authentical manifestation of what passes in our souls of that
nature. And besides it being the duty of every Christian, not only to make open
profession of his Faith when occasion requires it, but also to make such a
profession with all possible sincerity and truth: (for to use any falsity or
dissimulation in a case of this concern, were not only to deceive men, but even
to belie the holy Ghost.) It will necessarily follow, first, no judgment can be
made of another faith, but by the confession of the party himself: and
secondly, that a greater assurance cannot be given between man and man of
veracity and secret dealing, than when we publicly declare our faith upon any
point of Controversy.

Upon these grounds and these circumstances, I presume, their Antagonists will
be so reasonable as not to question the truth and reality of their meaning in
what they declare concerning their Tenets in the points of Allegiance or
Doctrine. Here I will set them down, submitting to the honor and conscience of
all sober men, and to any indifferent Judges (who will not retain the animosity
and prejudice of parties) to give sentence, whether they are not consistent
with loyalty and the duty of good Subjects and Christians. v. g.

They hold CHARLES the II. is their true and lawful Sovereign. Secondly, that
no Power on earth shall absolve them from their natural Allegiance. Are ready
by Oath in the face of Heaven to profess their loyalty indispensable, from
which no power can free them. Thirdly, that they are bound with their lives and
fortunes to defend the sacred Person of his Majesty in his just Rights against
all opposers whatsoever, domestic or foreign. Fourthly, that Faith is to be
kept with all men indifferently and equally, whether they be Roman Catholics,
or of any other Religion. And that our engagements, promises and contracts
cannot lawfully be broken, or dispensed with by any power on earth to the
prejudice of any third Person.

They believe the holy Scriptures to be of infallible authority, and assent to
it, as the word of God. They believe the sacred mystery of the blessed Trinity;
one eternal, almighty and incomprehensible God, whom only they adore and
worship, as alone having sovereign dominion over all things: to whom only is
due from Men and Angels, all glory, service and obedience: abhorring to give
their CREATORS honor to any creature whatsoever.

Whence they solemnly profess, that by the Prayers they address to Angels and
Saints, they intend no more, but to solicit their assistance before the
throne of God; as we desire the Pravers of one another here upon earth; not
that they hope any thing from them as original authors thereof; but from God
through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Redeemer.

Neither do they believe any Divinity or Virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshipped, as the Gentiles did their Idols. But they retain them
with due and decent respect in their Churches; as instruments which we find by
experience do often assist our memories and excite our affections. Pictures may
be of good use (says our learned Bacon) if the representation of divine
stories, as well work upon them to contemplate those things, as lascivious
Pictures do Obscenity. Charity obliges us no other construction of the words
of men than what they profess to be their own sense: but I never heard or read
Images absolutely to be worshipped, or Saints absolutely prayed to.

They firmly believe that no force of nature or dignity of our best works can
merit our justification; but we are justified freely by grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ: and though we should, by the Grace of God,
persevere in a godly life: yet are our hopes of eternal Glory built upon the
mercy of God and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other merits (according to the sense of that word) signify no more, than
actions done by the assistance of Gods Grace; to which it has pleased his
Goodness to promise a reward. A Doctrine so suitable to the sense of holy
Scripture, that nothing is so frequently repeated in it, as his gracious
promises to recompense with everlasting Glory the Faith and Obedience of his
Servants. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Romans 2. 6, 8, 13, Heb. 6. 10. Luke 16. 38. thus we
believe the merit or rewardableness of holy living, (both which signify the
same with us) arises not from the value even of our best actions: but from the
grace and bounty of God. And for ourselves we sincerely profess, when we have
done all we are are able, or commanded, we are unprofitable servants. Luke 17.
10.

These they sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the
searcher of all hearts, taking the words plainly, without any equivocation or
mental reservation. And now let them that judge so severely, lay their hands on
their hearts, and with the same justice and equity with which they expect to be
judged themselves at the last day: Let them pronounce whether or no their
Doctrine or Principles are inconsistent with the duty of good Christans, or
Subjects, and the peaee and safety of Government.

In Law and Reason every man, a fortiori, a society of men ought to be esteemed
honest and just, till the contrary appear to be proved: but nothing has
hitherto appeared to be proved against the loyalty of Catholics: therefore in
reason and justice they ought to be esteemeed good Subjects and Neighbors: and
it is a mere Calumny to asperse them.

That nothing can be proved is evident, their accusers being often pressed
thereunto, were never able to produce any particular; or any proof sufficient
to satisfy any rational man: But dwelling in vain, general suspicions,
triflings and false presumptions; laying to their charge extravagant crimes,
that have not the least proof or probability: objecting positions of some
private and disavowed persons; the crimes and indiscretions of particular men
to all the party, to traduce and defame the whole, we aggravate the failings of
a few.

The world knows it were no difficulty to recriminate in this kind, and repay
them with the same dirt. If such accusations pass current, who would or could
be innocent? No people on the earth can be safe at this rate. Would not this
Logic make the Church of England guilty of Fanatic Principles; because,
Tailor, one of their renowned Doctors and Bishops writes for liberty of
Prophesying? And of Murder and Theft, etc. because some of them are condemned
every Sessions?

Whence an English Divine ingenuously speaks; We cast an aspersion on a sort
of people, whose tried loyalty in all vicissitudes of dangerous troubles, as it
should have altered your judgments (so their grievous sufferings for loyalty)
should from the Charity of our Profession, have found rather pity for their
afflictions than aspersion on their innonence. -- So good deserving an opinion
they know Papists deserve from these times that no security needs to tie them
deeper. -- Nor can there be any apprehension of the least danger from them to
his Majesty's Person or State; for in point of fidelity they have given
unquestionable proofs by their actions; as their enemies witness.

Needham, in his Book Interest will not lie, says, 'Papists adhered generally
'to the King. Oliver, pressed by Cardinal Mazarine for liberty to Papists,
said, they were his greatest enemies, lib. Of Treaty at St. John de Luze. They
can say two things no profession else can: viz. that no person of Honor or
Estate among them was ever against the King: and on the contrary, hardly any
one so qualified but did assist him. Who can therefore look on those men, as to
have any honesty, wisdom or charity, who are ever grudging and repining at the
least favor indulged to a faithful, loyal and sociable people? and can never
rest satisfied with their own unlimited immunities; unless they see others
contemned, afflicted and abused? When by all the Apostolic Rules of
Christianity, we should help and compassionate: and not make it our business to
supplant one another.

Before I answer the vulgar objections, and undeserved clamours so confidently
(though without any legal examination and process, according to justice and
judgment) laid upon them, and so frequently, though disingenuously; urged
against them. I will show more largely what they teach concerning loyalty and
fidelity to their King and Country.

1. It is an undoubted verity, generally taught in all their Councils, Canons,
Synods, Divines, Civilians, etc. that our duty to God cannot be complied with,
without an exact performance of our duty toward our Sovereign: to obey him not
for advantage, private interest or temporal concerns, but of Conscience. Nay
what other Sectaries have bogled at; if the King should be a Heathen, and make
Laws contrary to the Gospel, we ought not to resist, but patiently endure.

No Roman Catholic can be true to his Religion, who is not true to his Prince
and Country. Saint Peter and Saint Paul did vehemently press obedience to the
Emperors in Nero and Claudius times, who were Idolaters. No Divinity can be
warranted from Scripture against evil Princes, but Prayers and Tears.
Whatsoever they command, which is not contrary to the great Charter of the word
of God, I am bound in Conscience to obey. If they command any thing repugnant
evidently to Gods revealed Will; I must obey them still; though not actively in
doing what they command, yet passively in submitting to those penalties they
shall inflict. He that proclaimed the Prerogative of Kings, vos estis Dii,
taught the World, People are to obey. Xephlon in vita Mar. Anton. tells us,
Solus Deus est Index Principum, God alone is the Judge of Kings.

I know no sin against the second Table, set forth in more bloody colors by
Catholic Authors, than this of disobe dience to Governors: they saying it is
compounded of Homicide, Parricide Christicide and Deicide. They compare it to
Witchcraft where the party intends and covenants with the Devil himself.

God commanded the Amalekite, who had a hand in Saul's death, to be slain before
his eyes. Sheba blowing a Trumpet against David, is styled a Son of Belial.
What made Jerobo^m so infamous in Scripture, but because he lifted up his hand
against the King. 1 King. 11. 26. an irreverent or wry word against the King is
in Scripture called Blasphemy, Proverb. 27. thou shall not blaspheme the Gods.
And Naboth was accused in that he did blaspheme God and the King. Curse not the
King, no not in thy thoughts; for a bird in the air shall carry the voice: is
it fit to say to the King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly?
Job. 34. 18.

It has been observed God has signally punished those wrongs have been done
to his Vicegerents. What an unluckie time was it, and accompanied with a deluge
of miseries when Kings were taken away from Rome and Consuls set up? We read in
our Annals after Richard the Second was deposed followed a War, wherein a
hundred thousand were slain, besides what of late in our memory.

What more hurtful and hateful Creature than the Locusts? Y^^ they are observed
only to have no King: if we obey not the King, who is a visible God: how shall
we obey God, who is an invisible King? Since the lines of our peace and
happiness do meet and center in him, as in our common Father. Who can think
that any natives of a Land professing themselves followers of Christ (who in
the days of his humiliation was obedient to Caesar, that he wrought a miracle
to give him his due) and expecting a protection from a lawful Prince, should
once demur to swear and yield Obedience?

Men's ears are open, says a learned Divine, to receive any tragical complaints
concerning their Governors. Sheba's Trumpet is pleasant Music to that great
Beast, the common people: they hearken with both ears to Detractions and
Calumnies against Governors; that they are tyrannical Bishops, are
Antichristian, Popery is coming in apace; the Gospel is adulterated, Justice
obstructed, Profaneness countenanced. What Hurricanes will these men raise? I
even tremble any should profane the Pulpit, poison the Air, or (which is worse)
the very hearts of men with such seditious and devilish Doctrines.

Who can choose but renounce that way of Discipline, which startles at
renouncing War with the King?

For my part, as Lactantius said to Constantine, the same say I of our
Sovereigns Restoration. Ille dies foelicissimus illuxit, etc. Whose Person (if
we be not worse than Heathens) we ought to love and honor, and whose
prosperity we ought to pray for. His unquestionable Title and most noble and
high Descent and Birthright cannot but strike a reverential aw upon us: for it
may lineally and successively be derived from the British, Scottish, Danish,
Saxon and Norman Princes above two thousand years, which is more ancient and
truly noble than any Prince in the World ca^ show. A Prince, whose great
Judgment, Gentility, Educarion, candid Nature, Meekness, Generosity, Benignity
and justness in Dealing all the world cannot but know and may imitate: And his
very enemies (if he can contract any) must (if not injudiciously passionate, or
deserve in some measure to be ranged in the Categories of fools and mad men)
acknowledge. But we our selves, his Subjects, are more pathetically sensible of
the effects, in his gentle protection to us of the Laws, Lives and Liberties:
Every one quietly living under and possessing his own Vine, without the least
suspicion of being harrassed or disturbed: as they were in the late times of
Anarchie and Democracy. And most Nations daily feel more heavy Yokes, and
exactions under their (though moderate) Governors. In this where there is so
much truth and justice to own, it cannot be esteemed any Adulation, but rather
our duty to acknowledge.

Let Us study then to be quiet, to fear God and honor the King, and not spend
our selves in national and trifling Disputes, be so pragmatical, econtrical,
and magisterail, as to meddle with things above us, by lying in lurking places,
watching and meditating Ambuscadoes for the downfall of those we ought to pray
for. It looks like a studied piece of malice to be so angry one with another
for Religion, our own Nation and Natives; as Hypocrates was with the Persians,
who refused to give them Physic, or heal their Maladies when they sent for him.

Gold is the best metal, and it is also most ductile and malleable. If you are
Englishmen, of generous dispositions, and of a golden nature, you will be
pliable, to be advised, and aim at nothing but your own and the Nations
happiness. What though every pin in the Sanctuary does not stand point size, as
you would have it? must all Europe echo with your bellowings? must an
unwarrantable Covenant or pretense of Spirit hinder our cementing and soddering
together? do you think, like Sea-Pies, to rise by going against the wind? or,
which is worse, to rise by the fall of your Brethren and fellow Christians? do
you think to flourish in your private capacities? must the public suffer? You
know the Apologue the Members conspired against the Belly, and were starved
themselves. It Is impossible but private interest must sink, when public falls.

You are not such strangers in our Israel, as to be ignorant, how the waters
have swelled, the winds blew, the waves have beaten against the ship of the
whole Kingdom. You well know what Confederacies and Combinations are abroad
against our Tranquillity. Gabel, Ammon, Ameleck, all are bent upon our ruin.
Is this a time to cavil one with another, dispute in triflles, when Hannibal
has been so lately at your gates? What makes ye now again so inveterate to
preach down Charity, to curse, O ye Meroz! to stand so stiffly upon, in a rash
and false censuring of your Brethren?

Is this thy Kindness to thy Friend? as Absolon said to Hussy, Is this your
love to your native Country? that you had rather, barbaras has segetes, that
the Satyrs should dance here? and Foreigners should inhabit our dwellings,
rather than you will come short of your wills? What makes you now so spleenish?
have you felt the shaving of Selymus his Beard? or been subject to Neroes or
Dioclesians, who would threaten to mingle your blood with your Sacrifices?
Whose Ox or Ass was taken from him? Why should you grudg at Papists peace and
protection, when they give no just occasion to violate yours? Is it not a mere
piece of Sophistry, or Satanical stratagem, if any thing be amiss still to cast
all the odium and imputation upon them? like those Heathens that sent the
Christians to the Lions, if Nilus did not swell high enough to make their
fields fruitful; or if their legions miscarried in the field. So unhappy are
they, if their Teeth must be ^et on edge as often as the people eat sour grapes.

When Pirrhus proposed to himself to win Rome, Sicily and Carthage, Cyneus
asked him, what he would do at last? Pirrhus said, be merry: Cyneus replied, So
you may be already, if you would be contented with what you have. I must, like
another Cyneus, tell you, if you would rest satisfied with that spacious
liberty allowed you already, you may be as religious as you will, who hinders
you? Why should you murmur at the least indulgency to others, that are as
studious of a virtuous life as your selves? Why should you then still suspect
Popery and Superstition? and cry to Magistrates for Oppression to others?
Charity thinks no evil. It is a strong suspicion, where there is no evident
cause of such Envy, it does rather proceed from, or argue, guilt.

Thus we are still afraid of shadows, and by our active fancies frame such
Chimera's of danger, which have no footing in nature. Like untoward and unhappy
Children help forward to our own affliction. As the perfidiousness of the
Donatists and Manichees in Hippo, by their surmised jealousies were the cause
it was made a pray to the Vandals.

Thus having proved that the Doctrine and Principles of Roman Catholics are
not repugnant to any Government whatsoever; but very consonant to all moral and
pious living, and Christian peace and society. I shall now, in the sequent
Chapters, search (without partiality) and with all sincerity, into the depth
and bottom of the usual and common aspersions, mistakes and objections so
often and undeservedly cast in their teeth, taking measures of their manners,
actions, etc. without any due regard or examination.

CAP. X. Shows how widely we are deceived in our undue measures and censures.
I Am not so unadvised as to think their innocence stands in need of my pen:
since it is strong enough to rescue it self from the usual accusations and
tempestuous Hurricano^s of Calumnies groundlesly imputed. Yet being by justice
and title of this Apology obliged to this duty, my chief design in this
Treatise being true Charity; I shall speak more freely and heartily, to
justify the innocent, to remove that popular odium, to allay that plebeian
passion, to wipe away such impious Stains, Maculations and polluted Characters:
and take away those unjust jealousies; and rectify those unlearned prejudices,
which by so many are taken up and urged daily against them. Whereby Christian
Charity, according to the Gospel, our Profession, and promise in Baptism, by
which we are graduated Christians, may be maintained; that we as true Servants
of our great Master, may wear the Badg and Livery of Unity, Peace and Concord.

Suppositions and mere conjectures have been the best measures that most have
taken of them, their Pr^ctices, Principles or Doctrines. Whatever is said of
Papists is generally believed: how a^e they traduced? what Stories are told of
Popes* how many things of the whole body of Catholics? and all taken for
Gospel? yet have no solid foundation of truth in them? Whence one of our
English Church truly notes; saying,

We heighten little things of concern to Religion to make them odious, fill
Books with trivial Stories and Fables, picked out of Authors without any
discretion; make it our business to seek out Calumnies and Reproaches (which
good Authors cannot furnish us with) in the sepulchers and common shoars of
Schismatics, of private and disavowed persons.

Controversies in our time (says Doctor Field) are grown so many in number and
in nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength and
understanding, to examine them. It Is hard for the most judicious and learned
men to give a right judgment of many points; and yet notwithstanding many
engaged persons are ready to force Dissenters by coercive Power, or blacken
them with opprobrious terms.

The Controversies of Justification by faith or good works has filled volumes
with Arguments, Definitions and Distinctions: but it is hard to find, whether
the difference be not de nomine, and of words only. The Controversy of
freewill, since neither part does absolutely exclude Divine Grace, or
concurrence of the will with it, may be called verbal; if understood cum grano
salis, and by those who carry no partial biass on their judgments. Some rigid
Calvinists indeed (though not all) conclude an absolute fate by Predestination
to Salvation or Reprobation: to those I answer, they need not trouble
themselves, but let every one go quietly to his destiny; since, by their own
Principles, all their Praying, Preaching, etc. can neither help nor hurt:
Seeing it is not in their power to avoid evil or do good.

Worship of Images exclaimed as Idolatrous, the scandal is chiefly, as I
conceive, taken from the word Adoration, which in the Grammar sense is but
adorare, to pray to: but the generality of Rome disown that acceptance, and
told them chiefly as Memorials, as I showed before.

The Pope to be Antichrist, the Etymology of the very word is repugnant to it:
the being by us acknowledged likewise the great Patriarch of the most Christian
and Western Church; and every one that has but an ordinary reason, sense or
knowledge of Scripture can own but one Antichrist to come, the Prophet Daniel
spoke of. And that he should give pardon for Sins or Sinners whatsoever;
without first having remission from God, by Sorrow, Repentance and Amendment,
is so great a Calumny, that I pray God to pardon such malicious ignorance. I
tremble to hear such horrid blasphemies out of Christian mouths to derogate and
scandalize their fellow Christians with more than H^athenish impleties.

Many and other great things have been objected against them through ignorance,
weakness, mistakes or malice: which unjust men scatter too and fro as chasse to
blind the eyes of simple and credulous people. The crimes of a few miserable
wretches (by none more det^sted than themselves) are made their guilt: but it
is the fashion Papists and Popery must be brought in by head and shoulders, and
sit down under any affronts; what ever the difference be, to exasperate men's
spirits, and make odious and suspected those whom we can never confute. It is
hard they should always lie under such undeserved imputations, and be
persecuted without liberty of a just defense. The Morality of the Heathens was
more equitable and less envious: where the Emperor Adrian commanded unto
Minutius his Proconsul of Asia, as a thing of great importances, ne nomen
condemnaretur sed crimen.

A Divine of our English Church exclaiming against such proceedings, says, Our
affections change our thoughts, and our imaginations fit the scene; and what we
call reason is many times but a chain of phantasms: and we are guided by
prejudices, and overwhelmed by Authority, and formed by education, and suck in
opinions carelessly, -- are deeply settled before we examine them; and when we
examine them it is but by halfes; we see but few things, and judge all things by
them; and either seek not truth at all, or are unable to manage a due and
impartial search. When we stumble upon it, we are afraid, and run away from it,
or stand to pelt it with dirt and vile names. In the mean time we catch at
shadows, and grow fond of the imaginations of our own fancies.

Doctor Tailor, one of our late and most eminent Divines, in Treatise of
Liberty of Prophe^ying. 2. and 10. p. 249. Collecting some considerations
inducing persons (says he) of much reason and more piety to retain the
Religion of their forefathers. -- Their Doctrines having had a long continuance
and possession of the Church; which therefore cannot easily be supposed in the
present Professors, to be a design (for Covetousness, Ambition, etc.) since
they have received it from so many ages: and it is not likely, that all ages
should have the same purposes; or that the same Doctrine should serve the
several ends of diverse ages. Its long prescription, which is such a prejudice
as cannot be retrenched, as relying upon these grounds; that truth is more
ancient than falsehood: that God would not for so many ages forsake his Church
and leave her in error. I add not such gross errors as are imputed on them, as
Idolatry, etc. -- Again, the beauty and splendour of that Church, their pompous
Service, the stateliness and solemnity of the Hierarchy, their name of
Catholics, which they suppose and claim as their own due, and to concern no
other Sect of Christians. The antiquity of many of their Doctrines; the
continual succession of their Bishops; their immediate derivation from the
Apostles; their title to succeed Saint Peter (and in this regard chiefly
honored and submitted to by antiquity,) the supposal and pretense of his
personal prerogatives (much spoken of by the Fathers;) the flattering
expressions of minor Bishops (in modester language honorable expressions)
which by being old records, have obtained credulity. The multitude and variety
of people which are of their persuasion, apparent consent with elder ages in
many matters doctrinal: the advantage which is derived by entertaining some
personal opinions of the Fathers: -- the great consent of one part with another
in that which they affirm to be de fide. The great differences which are
commenced among their adversaries -- their happiness of being instruments in
converting diverse Nations: The advantage of Monarchical Government, the benefit
of which they daily enjoy: The piety and austerity of their religious Orders of
men and women: the single life of their Priests and Bishops, the severity of
their Fasts, and their exterior observances: The great Reputation of their
Bishops for Faith and Sanctity: The known holiness of some of those persons,
whose institutes the religious persons pre^end to imitate: Their Miracles false
or true, substantial or imaginary; The causalities and accidents that have
happened to their adversaries: the oblique acts and indirect proceedings of
some of those who departed from them.

To which, join that of Sir Edwine Sands, in his relation of the western
Religion, p. 29. saying, Beside the Roman Church and those Churches united with
her; we find all other Churches to have had their end and decay; as Hussits,
Sollards, Waldenses, Albigenses, Berengarians, etc. or their beginning but of
late. This being founded by the Prince of the Apostles with promise to him by
Christ, etc. much more to that purpose, ibid. What Church but one can show the
fulfilling of innumerable Scriptures touching the Churches Infallibility,
Universality, by time, place and person? Which can spread before your eyes her
Line and Pedigree, descend^ng from the Apostles to these times? which can
declare that in all ages she has had some glorious company professing her
Religion, even in points their adversaries now impugn?

There makes for them all that may or can be of any Christian man required:
Literal Text of holy Scripture, approved Tradition, general Councils, ancient
Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, Christian Laws, Conversion of Nations,
divine miracles, heavenly Visions, Unity, Universality, Antiquity, Succession,
their true Mission, Ordination, etc. all Monuments, all Substance, all
accidents of Christianity.

No wit of man can find out Arguments more convincing in themselves, the truth
of Religion, than plain Texts and literal Sense of holy Writ, the infallible
Decrees of Church and general Councils, the indubitable Writings and unanimous
consent of ancient Fathers, the credible Histories of all times and places, and
often the common light of Nature and Reason it self. And ad hominem, for
prevention of all evasions, no victory more certain, no objection more
unanswerable than the plain confession of their adversaries themselves. The
Volumes of Fathers and Councils in the eldest and purest times, be so clear in
themselves for Romish Faith, that the primest and most learned Reformists
studying the same, are enforced through evidence of their words and deeds, to
acknowledge, as Master Bierly in King James's time produces clear testimonies.

If that Church erred, or changed by little and little, or that the true Church
was invisible, etc. they require some humane reason to show it catigorically:
In what time? in what Articles? what Pope changed? what tumults rise thereupon?
what Councils withstood? etc. which in all innovations they can show easily a
total change, and in what particular points, as by Arrians, Sabellians,
Donatists, Pelagians, Protestants, etc. What places, what Countries changed
with them, what Catholics set against them, what kept the old paths? To say
the Church was extinct a thousand years, or unknown, is expressly against the
Scripture, Christ's Promises and Providence, and Reason it self. If the Church
were invisible whether should Gentiles address for their Conversion? or the
doubtful for resolution? or all faithful for their direction? was our Savior
who was promised to all Nations brought to that straight, that he had not a
visible Chapel reserved to him in the whole world? Is it not good reason, God
would preserve his Church which he had planted and watered with his Blood? Is
it not a denial of Gods Providence? and to say Jesus Christ was unjust, or an
Impostor, to oblige all men to indispensible obedience to her, if erroneous or
invisible? if men were changed into beasts they may be thus persuaded.

Is not the Church compared to a City, to a Light, to the Sun, etc. can the
Church, which is a Sun, be drawn into a chin^k? or all her Beams into the
center of a Burning-glass? Can any Proposition be more reasonable, than to ask
of those who maintain a thing to be in former ages to produce some marks
thereof? to show where they had a being, or a Company successively holding the
same Articles with them? The Building is perpetual where God lays the
Foundation.

The Church is the Pillar of truth, 1 Timothy 3. cannot err, Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4.
Mat. 28. Act. 3. Go teach all Nations -- and I am with you all days to the
consummation, John 17. Father keep them in ^hy name whom thou have given me.
See his Petition to keep his Church, gathered of all Nations, and his continual
protection, I will give you another Comfor^^^* ^o a^i^e with you for ever. John
16. When the spirit of truth comes he shall ^^ach you all truth. This
assistance promis^d was ever in all ages; no Heresy or Jew could ever prevail
against it.

The guard and strength of Truth in point also of antiquity is ever such, that
she rests still accompanied, attended and fortified with surest friends,
strongest towers and best munition. Priority and ancestry is so specially
affected by the Wisdom of God, and maligned by the enemy of man; that in first
planting the Church its said Mat. 4. 13, 24, 25. 5. Mat. 13, 17. Luke 8. 12.
that he first sowed good seed in the field, and after the enemy came and
oversowed Cockle; not obscurely intimating true Faith and Religion, that is,
good seed was first and ancient to Sects and Heresies. Even as temporal
nobility is most honorable which is derived from the a^cientest Blood: and in
earthly possessions that Title strongest, which pleads longest prescription,
or ancientest evidence. So it cannot be denied but truth was before falsehood,
substance before shadows; the Gospel, Faith, Religion, etc. which is first and
eldest is only the true Gospel, Faith, Church: and other Congregations
afterward arising or going out from thence are only malignant inventions of
the enemy.

In which respect to find out truth in all occurring difficulties we are
specially forewarned to recurre to antiquity, to suspect novelty, Moses, Deuteronomy.
32. before his death, leaving documents to the Children of Israel, says,
Remember the old days, ask thy Father, etc. so Bildab Jobs friend 1 Job 8.
advised him in greatest extremities -- ask the old generation, and search
diligently, Solom. Eccl. 9. 8. 11, 12. let not the ^^rration of the ancient
escape thee, etc. and Jer. c. 16. stand upon the ways and ask the old paths,
which is the good way, etc. -- on the contrary God reproves such as walk in a
way not trodden: and Solomon's lesson is Transgress not the ancient bounds which
thy Father has put. So Saint Paul to Timothy to keep the Depositum, avoiding
profane novelties.

It Is very ordinary with the Fathers to confute Heretics, by their innovation.
So Tertullian reproves Novelists of his time, saying to them, who are you?
when and from whence came you? what do you in my grounds? by what right,
Marcion, did thou cut down my woods? by what license, Valentine, do thou
overthrow my Fountains? etc. It is my possession long since I possessed it, I
possessed it first. -- So Saint Hierom. of the Luciferians, -- Why do you go
about after four hundred years to teach that we knew not before? until this day
the world was Christian without that Doctrine. So Athan. confuteth the Arrians,
Saint Hilarie and Saint Aug. Donatists. These reasons may induce us to take new
measures of that ancient Church, and may easily persuade persons (as Doctor
Tailor in his Treatise of Liberty of Prophesying) of much reason and more
piety, to retain that which they know to have been the Religion of their
forefathers; especially when her Sovereign Rights, Titles and Prerogatives are
admitted and acknowledged by her professed enemies. Whence,

Chillingworth confesses, that Protestants cannot with coherence to their own
grounds, require of others the belief of any thing besides Scripture, and the
plain irrefragable and indubitable consequences of it, without most high and
schismatical presumption. Dr. Bramh. Reply, p. 264. We do not (says he) hold
our 39 Articles to be such necessary truths, extra quas non est salus, without
which there is no salvation, nor enjoin ecclesiastical persons to swear to
them; but only to subscribe to them as theological truths. And Stilling. p.
153. says, men are herein to judge for themselves according to the Scripture;
because, says he 'every one is bo^nd to take 'care of his Soul and all things
that tend thereto.

Now if there be no absolute assent required to the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, as to matters of Faith; as Ar^^^bishop La^d, Bramhal,
Chillingworth, Fulk* St^llingfleet, etc. confess: do not we take hard measures
of Romanists, to force them ^^^ renunciation of their positive points revealed
by literal texts of Scripture; Gods holy spirit residing in general Councils,
confirmed by much reason and authority of all persons and ages: to put any
abuses and reproaches upon them because they do not conform to our negative
points not de fide.

CAP. XI. Answers more particularly all other vulgar objections and
aspersions so confidently (though erroneously) cast upon them.
IN the sequent Pages I judge it little to the purpose to observe any order by
Chapters or Sections. Seeing these usual imputations hang together like the
Tails of Sampsons Foxes; being by their Antagonists urged against them with
more bitterness and spleen then sincerity or verity. I will therefore refer the
Reply to the Censure of all judicious and honest-minded Souls: how weakly and
uncharitably these objections are taken up? how inconclusive is the inference
from them? and how unreasonably they are continued and urged against peaceable
people; to an abusive credulity and delusion of many other sober Christians.

I will take the first Objection and Answer from a Divine of the Church of
England. Their Adversaries object (says he) against the Papists, as Tertullus
and the Jews did against Saint Paul, Act. 2. Papists are Pestilent fellows,
stirrers up of the People, factious, turbulent, seditious, will not conform,
nor are well affected to the present constitutions of power and public affairs.

Against this calumny which with much cunning and eagerness is every where by
some levelled against them. And it is like to the policy of Julian the
Apostate, who to ensnare the Christians; set the Statues of the Emperors with
the Idols of the Gods: that if Christians did civil reverence as to the
Emperors; they should be defamed as Idolaters; if not they should be accused as
despisers of the Emperors.

To this sharp and poisoned arrow; I shall only oppose the Shield of plain
dealing; that in a matter so much concerning the satisfaction of others, and
Papists civil safety there may be no such obscurities as may harbor any
jealousies.

The humble, peaceable, and discreet carriage of them may justly plead for
favor and protection against this calumny; of proneness to sedition, faction,
or illegal disturbance in civil affairs; who even in all the unhappy troubles
of the late years have generally behaved themselves, as showed they had no
other design than to live a quiet life in all godliness and honesty, etc.

Next may be objected that Papists scruple to take the OATHS of ALLEGIANCE and
SUPREMACY.

I answer as for the Oath of Allegiance were it not for some incommodious
expressions nothing pertaining to the substance or design of the Oath it would
generally be admitted. There is nothing in the Oath of Allegiance which purely
concerns the practical part of Allegiance, but what Catholics will most
willingly swear unto. But they that attentively consider the several parts of
that Oath, shall find that some of them are speculative points, and general:
others practical and particular which relate, to the actions and demeanor of
him that swears, of which he is Master and consequently can answer for them.

To all the propositions of this second sort relating to the practice of
allegiance; there is no Catholic in England but will swear unto them. But as
to the first sort therein contained which involve speculative points and
general notions, and withal controverted by several learned men, I must
confess I think it would be very hard to excuse such an Oath from rashness and
ambiguity.

I humbly therefore entreat the Reader to consider: An Oath is by which God is
invoked as a witness to what we affirm. Three Conditions are required to it,
expressed by the Eccl. 9. 2.
Prophet, jurabis mihi in aequitate, veritate and judicio and justitia; Thou
shall swear in truth, judgment and justice. So that if an Oath be ambiguous or
false it wants the first condition, viz. truth, if used rashly without
discretion, good advice, and not of just necessity, it will be destitute of
judgment. 3. It must be sincere and conform to the eternal Law of God, lest it
want justice. So that it is a breach of solemn Oaths if they be ambiguous,
entangled, or contradicting one another, etc.

Now when we come to swear in general to the speculative points of the Popes
Power in deposing Princes excommunicated, and authorizing one Prince to invade
another, etc. although we suppose the assertion to be true that the Pope has
no such Power; Yet how can they with a safe Conscience swear point blanck
thereunto? It being a matter of fact, nor in our power to make true or false.
Secondly, they cannot swear that position of the Popes deposing power is
absolutely Heretical: because the contrary is not evident in Scripture nor
condemned by the Church. Any other ill names o^ epithets they will be content
to give it. Thirdly, In doing so they seem to profess a Declaration of a point
of Faith which a particular Christian cannot presume to do, and make himself a
judge and decider of a point of Faith. Fourthly, They would then by Oath
testify that all Popes that have exercised and all Writers that have written
or maintained such a power even in some extraordinary cases and emergencies are
to be esteemed Heretics; which is very rash for any particular to presume.

There is a great difference in swearing that I believe such a thing to be
true, and swearing absolutely such a thing is true, in the first, I swear, only
to my own Opinion (which any that is so persuaded may lawfully do.) In the
second I positively swear to the Truth of the thing. And to do this the
greatest probability in the world is not sufficient to warrant me: for the
greatest probability does not amount to an absolute certainty without which an
Oath is rash.

Papists refuse the Oath of Allegiance (as it is now worded) framed by one
PERKINS an Apostate Jesuit, purposely mingled with uncertain speculative points
ambiguous and difficult to be interpreted; to make them fall within the Law of
refusal: charged with expressions not pertinent to the substance or intention
of the Oath, or relating truly to the obedience of the King; nor King James
ever intended to entangle the Consciences of his Subjects, if he had foreseen a
few unnecessary words and expressions rendered it so. Nor would Catholics as to
Allegiance (if an Oath were worded a hundred times more strong than this) make
the least scruple of it.

This argument I urge no further than to evince in their justification that
their unwillingness to swear, is no evidence to prove their want of allegiance,
or any backwardness to lay down their lives and fortunes in his Majesty's
service: For the practical part of the Subjects allegiance is that which only
concerns the security of a Prince, which all Catholics will gladly swear unto.
Therefore I hope a true and real tenderness of Conscience (which can have no
ill consequence with it in relation to his Majesty's safety) will give no
offense to them that are over them; nor be a motive to hold a rigorous hand
upon them. Especially seeing these threescores years since* the Oath was first
established, it has been refused by Catholics to be taken upon the score of
Conscience though universally taken by others of any dignity conferred upon
them in Church or State. Yet no Catholic in England of any note or quality
that all this time did act contrary to their allegiance sworn unto in the Oath.
On the other side I could wish it were as difficult to name those amongst the
takers of the Oath, who have so fatally broken them; half the Kingdom being in
rebellion contrary to what they had sworn, to the ruin of the best King and
the best man which perhaps this Nation had ever cause to glory in.

As for the Oath of Supremacy, Luther, Calvin, Knox, Gilby all pretended
Reformers disliked it. Calvin in his Commentary on Osee, says, who advanced
Hen. 8. to such a height did not well, for they no less than blasphemed, when
they called him Supreme Head under Christ. Chemnitius a learned Lutheran in his
Epist. ad eloc. Briard. of Queen Eliz. Supremacy, says, quod foeminae and a
saeculis inaudito fastu se papissam and caput Ecclesiae facit. So Gilby in
Admonit. ad Angl. Our Cartwright also teaches against Supremacy. So do
Presbyterians generally here and beyond Sea. Henry the eighth once acknowledged
the Supremacy more than ever any King did, as appeared by Cardinal Campeius and
Wolsey Legates (he being called before them.) After his will being not executed
made the Oath against Supremacy.

This Oath of Supremacy as it is worded and according to the sense of the first
Lawgiver, cannot lawfully be taken by any Christian or assembly without
contradicting his belief, understanding it Grammatically according to the
proper and natural sense of the words at least ambiguous if not formally
contradictory. -- or the cause or reason of framing this Oath by Hen. 8. and
what power was exercised by virtue of it, and of the Parliament enjoining it,
appears to be a jurisdiction purely spiritual was communicated to him, and
assumed by him. Its evident also by the many practices it was only a spiritual
by-title of Supremacy he sought for, to deprive the Pope: for he stood in need
of such a power to justify his divorce and dispense with his intention of
taking Ecclesiastical livings of Abbeys and Monasteries into his hands. The
Protection in King Edward the sixth continued the Oath to make new Church-Laws,
Institutions and commit new Sacriledges, changes, ubique arti contrary to which
King He^. 8. published and declared. Queen Mary renounces this jurisdiction and
restores it to* the Church. Queen Elizabeth re-assumes it, having a greater
necessity for it then her Brother, because her marriage was declared null by
the Pope.

This Oath consists of two parts, the affirmative, as that the King is only
Supreme Head as well in Temporal as Spiritual, etc. Secondly, the Negative that
no Prince, Prelate, etc. has any jurisdiction or spiritual Power, etc. This
Negative part of the Oath is contrary to a point of their Faith wherein not
only all spiritual authority of the Pope, but of a general Council or Western
Church is disclaimed. Is all jurisdiction purely spiritual only in the Kings
right? are Princes Pastors of Souls? has not a Heathen King the same spiritual
right? How could King James then call the Pope Patriarch of the West? or how
can a free general Council oblige Christians, and to which learned Protestants,
profess to submit to as the chiefest authority under God?

And although in Queen Elizabeth's time the Oaths were explicated, that only
civil and Kingly authority in causes Ecclesiastical, was intended) yet this
negative clause cannot be by such expositions eluded. Secondly, An Oath to
Catholics and tender Consciences, is so dreadful that they dare not call God
to witness they sincerely swear the Pope ought not to have any Superiority in
spiritual causes; unless it might be permitted them at the same time, and the
same breath to signify that it is intended of civil and Kingly authority in
causes Ecclesiastical. They tremble to swear at words ambiguous but formally
contradictory. Thirdly, In the thirty nine Artticles of the Church of England
it is defined that the Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Kingdom,
and these Articles are confirmed by Act of Parliament. Whereby it appears their
intention is to require a renuntiation of a Catholic point of Faith, and the
Popes being Head of the Western Church. This Act being made since the said
exposition.

The Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, if the former were so expressed as to
require an acknowledgement of a civil Supremacy in his Majesty, and
Ecclesiastical to the Church Governors: and if the unfortunate word Heretical,
and speculative points were left out of the other, no Catholic would refuse
either. And more then this no Protestant, Presbyterian, etc. that freely take
them can intend by them: an Oath being in it self, a religious affirmation with
Gods Seal.

Whosoever takes these Oaths absolutely must swear to take Almighty God to
witness as he shall answer at the dreadful day of Judgment, that he believes
the Pope has no Power, etc. now this word believe (being in a matter of
Religion and Profession of the same) can signify nothing but a Christian
belief or Faith: and imports thus much, I N. N. do swear in the presence of
Almighty God that the Pope has no Power, etc. As I believe there is a God in
Heaven, or any other Article of Faith: all this is virtually and really
comprehended in the word believe.

Now what man of Conscience, of what Opinion soever, that fears an Oath to
use the Preachers words, Eccles. 9. 2. will venture his Soul so far as to swear
all this? are we all of us so certain that no foreign jurisdiction, etc. or
that its Heretical, etc. as we are certain there is a God, Heaven, Hell, etc.
and so make it a part of, and Article of our Belief, when it is not expressly
nor plainly revealed in Scripture or declared by the Church; and so not
fundamental to our Belief or absolutely necessary to our Salvation?

If you say it may be obscurely delivered in Scripture, then at least the
unlearned cannot be able to discover it. How then shall such dare to swear; as
in effect they do when they take the Oaths that they are revealed and contained
in Scripture? when by reason of obscurity they are not certain whether it be
revealed there or no? Is it not a just matter of scruple and fear for a
timorous Conscience to swear a thing not to be which he is not certain of?
Secondly,

May the very learned in points not necessary to Salvation, or obscurely
delivered venture to swear that such a thing is not certainly in Scripture,
only because he himself conceives it not there? will he make his private
judgment rule of his Faith and his Conscience as he must do who makes those
propositions in the Oaths Articles of his Belief? can it be denied that other
men no less learned dispute the case doubtfully? whence we can neither swear to
be or not be, because we have no sufficient certainty pro or con concerning
them. Though we may use such expressions as to avouch; we really think and are
fully persuaded that the Pope has no power, etc. But it is most rash and
temerarious to swear positively to such inevident propositions exposing our
selves to an eminent peril of taking a false Oath and thereby committing a sin
to God.

It Is pity such slender evasions should satisfy us, as have been scorned by
Heathens: it is much that a moral Conscience should more check them, than a
clearer light can awe us; as if we honored more the Genius of a Caesar, then
we reverence the presence of a God. They had their perjury-revenging Gods. Our
God hates false Oaths as appeared in his severity to Zedekias for breaking
Covenant with the Babylonish Monarch though a Tyrant of the first magnitude.
Were all Subjects duly sollicitous about the weight of this bond, we should be
less prone to take Oaths and more studidious to observe them.

Matter of an Oath ought to be plain and obvious to our understanding without
obscurity and intricacy: I must know what to swear otherwise I take Gods name
in vain in swearing without judgment. They must have the aforesaid three
conditions, viz. to swear in judgment, righteousness and truth, the matter must
be lawful, not rash, obscure, etc. it must not entrench on the authority of
Superiors temporal or spiritual; for Oaths are so sacred that it is a piacular
offense to break them. No sin is so followed at the heels with more signal
judgments then this of perjury, as might be convinced by a million of examples.

I will now conclude this question with the censure of two learned Divines of
the English Church concerning these Oaths: the first objecting Papists scruple
to take the Oaths.

Answers saying -- they think it is a Pill which will choke their Conscience
if they swallow it; or purg them out of their livings if they do not. For
contrary to other Physic this operates most strongly on those that never take
it.

Remember how cruel a thing it is to make men's consciences pass as Gideon did
the men of Succoth, or David the Ammonites under briars and thorns; under saws
and harrows of either sharp contradictions, or prickly distinctions; unsafe
Salvoes. God has often exacted the forfeiture of perjury as of Saul and
Zedekias: and howsoever God in his providence may put suspensions of Oaths as
to their actual execution, yet they cannot find any absolution from the
obligation which goes with inconditionate Oaths, so long as they are within our
moral possibility of keeping them. How any man can swear and promise to be true
and faithful to two different interests without being forsworn, or false and
unfaithful to the one or the other, seems a Gordian knot which only the Sword
dissolves by cutting not untying.

The State of humane affairs have been most fully represented in the glass of
our times with as many variating faces as the Moon. We have seen the threefold
cords of Oaths, Protestations, Covenants could not resist those Tides and
Storms which have driven the whole Nation (as to extreme events and affairs)
from grounds of fidelity and allegiance, both as to civil and ecclesiastical
obedience.

Furthermore men's refusing to take Oaths seems to be a great fortifying of
Power established. For experience has taught us how easily men are absolved
from such public ties, seem they never so strict. Neither is there any reason
to think they will be any stronger for the future than they were in former
times. Public security does not consist in any verbal formalities but in that
efficacious power we have by the Sword.

Public authority and safety rises from the satisfaction of men's judgments to
the justice of men's proceedings, winning respect and love by that equity in
Government and moderation which according to Gods ancient Laws is settled and
known, not by arbitrariness of will and mere force; which as to the principle
is tyrannical, be it never so tempered in the exercise.

Under such Government, wise Christians know how with humility, peace and
patience to submit so far to piety as is necessary for public peace.
Strictness of Religion terrifies Christians with fear of false Oaths (one of
the blackest Stains and most indelible Spots and unpardonable sins of the Soul,
if it be a blaspheming denying and renouncing of God) yet allows latitude of
peaceable subjection as may not always force them upon banishments,
persecutions, forfeitures* etc.

Whence Thorndike says, I conceive there is great reason the Kingdom: should
enact a new Oath. For they make limitations for the sense of the Oath to which
Oath, non obstante, they take in the full latitude of its words though they
express not any of the said limitations -- when the Oaths required bear two
senses in the proper signification of the words and are at least ambiguous but
formally contradictory; and destructive to one Article of the Creed: to the
being, viz. of any visible Church (if no supreme Head) as founded by God in it.

What can be more just, more conduce to Gods honor, more benign in the King
and Parliament, and more for reputation and future blessing to the Kingdom,
than that such ambiguous expressions in the Oaths should be cleared, and taken
away? that Oaths might be taken uniformly and cordially by all: that all tender
consciences need not scruple, when care is taken that men may clearly
understand what they are compelled to swear.

It will deeply concern us, says Thorndike, to avert Gods indignation from our
Nation, which involves Kingdoms in guilt and punishment for rash oaths; --
whence he calls them the crime and sin of the Nation.

What burden and guilt lies on the Kingdom by occasion of oaths so solemnly
imposed on the whole people, which if we regard the natural force of the words,
no man can take them sincerely, being ambiguous, and grammatically signify
more than intended; as they are explicated: seeing there is no necessity for
it, for what necessity is it to use such obscure phrases, and dubious
acknowledgments, which contribute nothing to safety or security to his Majesty;
but on the contrary infinite prejudice to his afflicted Subjects. And we have
experienced great disloyalty from them that have freely taken them, and none in
Catholics that have refused. For the Oaths by none more readily taken and
earnestly imposed on others, than by those who began the Wars, and promoted the
Covenant; and on the contrary, by none more scrupled and refused than by those
who always assisted the King.

Thirdly it may be objected, as lately by Doctor Denton, etc. That Papists
suffer not for Religion, but because they are not obedient to the Laws, etc.

Resp. 1. By a Proviso of the Act 25, and 27. of Eliz. if any Priest committed
shall submit to the Laws, and take the Oaths, they shall be freed from the
penalty; and not adjudged Traitors, if they renounce their Religion.

Resp. 2. Suppose that in the Apostles time a Law had been made by any King or
Emperor of a contrary Religion to them: that if any of the said Apostles or
Priests should enter into their Dominions, to preach a contrary Doctrine to to
the Religion there received, and to exercise any of their Apostolical or
Priestly Functions, it should be treason, and under pain of death.

Would or could the Apostles have obeyed those Laws? or did they obey the
Governors of the Jews, their lawful Superiors, when they commanded them to
preach no more in the name of Jesus Christ? or to disperse Christian Doctrine,
which they held for Treason? or did they fly out of their Dominions? lest their
sufferings should be imputed to disobedience, and not for the name of Christ?
Is there not another blood to be respected, called by the Prophet, the blood of
the Soul, whereof the Pastor shall be guilty if he fly for fear, or forsake his
flock in time of danger and persecution? Have not the English Priests the same
Obligation of Conscience to help their Countrymen in spiritual necessities, as
had the Apostles and Apostolic men to strangers, for whose help they were
content to offer their lives, and incur any danger whatsoever?

Fourthly, It may be demanded why cannot Papists come to our Churches?

Resp. Unity and Uniformity are two things, one being internal, the other
external; therefore if they should conform, yet they can have no verity, faith
or truth but as forced; by which Religion is never bettered. Truth and falsehood
are like the clay in Nebuchadonosors Image, they may cleave, but they will
never incorporate. Christ's Coat had no seam, though the Churches vesture was
of diverse colors: whence a learned Father says, in vest varietas sit,
scissura non sit. The true God has this attribute, that he is a jealous God,
and therefore his worship and religion will endure no mixture, or partner.

Fifthly, To say or object the Popes Supremacy is dangerous.

This reflects not only upon the honor of Catholics, but the safety of all
the Professors of it. They acknowledge the Pope, as Successor to Saint Peter, is
head of the Church, and has supreme Authority in matters spiritual: but how
this can be offensive to the Temporalities of Princes is not understood by me,
nor those great Monarchs that are of his Church, and submit to his authority,
and and yet are zealous and jealous of their own power and temporal Regalities
as any Princes can possible be.

Our graver and more learned Divines distinguish between the inward power of
the Keys and the outward jurisdiction, by temporal penalties: this they assign
to the King, in all causes and over all persons: that they reserve to the
Clergy, as neither derived from or dependent of the Civil Magistrate. And if I
rightly understand the Religion of the English Church, although they allow the
King to be supreme Governor of their Church; yet they do not confer any
Pastoral Office or Jurisdiction upon him; and consequently he is one of the
Flock, and therefore as such he is subject to Pastors. Wherefore if this be not
looked on by Protestants as derogatory to the Kings authority, I hope, by the
same reason Roman Catholics will not be found guilty for owning the Popes
Supreamacy in matters merely spiritual. There can be no just fear or jealousy,
that spiritual jurisdiction should supplant secular obedience, because the
Church Discipline in it self is so innocent and passive.

We our selves acknowledge a spiritual authority in the Bishops, promise a
Canonical obedience to them and not to the King; admit Jurisdiction in their
spiritual Courts, etc. nay the Presbyterians in their Consistory and
ecclesiastical Courts will allow the King no authority at all, more than the
meanest Subject; and so do other Sects. Now if a Subject v. g. the Bishop of
Canterbury may be supreme in Spirituals, without any derogation to the Prince,
may not the Pope with less danger and inconvenience be truly called (as King
James did) the Patriarch or Superintendent of the West?

For if that power be purely spiritual, being of a different nature (as is said
before) it cannot in the least degree be prejudicial to the Kings civil power,
but rather oblige those that acknowledge it faithfully to obey the King.
Therefore it ought to be no obstacle to Toleration; otherwise no Christians or
Sect whatsoever ought to be tolerated: for let them be Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, etc. do not they depend upon and own a power
distinct from his Majesty's Civil Power? I mean a Power merely spiritual or
pastoral, not subordinate to the King, but to which the King himself, if he be
of your Religion, ought to be subject, as no Pastor but a Sheep, no Teacher but
a Hearer, no Administer of Sacraments but a Receiver. Such a Power all Sects
and Religions seem to own, no Catholic depends on or can own more.

The spiritual Primacy of the chief Pastor preserves peace and unity, and is a
greater defense to them than many Armies, in subduing their minds to civil
obedience, without such a spiritual authority there is no influence on the
people, all preaching and Laws are but shaking Bulwarks to support Monarchy. No
Kingdom has been more happy at home, or glorious abroad, than when the Pope
was their spiritual Father. When such a Primacy, purely spiritual, was
acknowledged in England, the Church here was never torn in pieces with
Schisms, nor poisoned with Heresies: the honor and safety of our Dominions
were far from being prejudiced or invaded.

It is denied then the owning Supremacy should worse their condition: shall
notions convince experience? when a demonstration it self often gives way to
practice? Let Us summon the Kings of Europe of Catholic Profession to decide
the contrary unanimously, and proclaim their people are not rebellious by
reason of any ecclesiastical dependence abroad.

Roman Catholics did ever renounce any temporal power or jurisdiction
belonging to the Pope over any Subject of his Majesty's. But since there is a
Power purely spiritual (as is showed before) from which Princes are not
exempted. Is it not more for their temporal security, that the spiritual power
should reside in one single person, that usually is both learned and discreet,
and withal is a thousand miles removed, than in many thousand within his own
Kingdom, not all of them Angels? The King of France esteems it a privilege,
granted him in a Concordate by the Pope, that no particular Bishop should have
power, in any case, to excommunicate him.

Never was there greater supporters to the Crown than English Catholics have
been ever against the least encroachment offered by the Bishop of Rome himself;
as it is to be seen in the Stat^t *Laws of King Richard the Second, wherein you
find in many businesses (the Pope was interessed) the Roman Catholics flatly
denying the Crown of England to be subject to any immediately, but to God: yet
acknowledged in the very same Parliament the Bishop of Rome's spiritual
Jurisdiction. And Bishop Bilson, in his Defense between Christ and Antichrist,
brings in the Parliament consisting then altogether of Roman Catholics,
expressing their loyalty to their Sovereign Prince in these words, we will with
our said Sovereign the King and his said Crown and Regality, in cases
aforesaid, and in all other cases, attempted against Him, his Crown or Dignity
in all points, live and dye. p. 3. p. 243.

And in Holinshed 2. Volume of the last Edition, p. 309. we find in the Reign
of King Edward the First, all the Catholic Lords assembled in Lincoln in
Parliament in the name of all estates did answer, the Popes right to judge, etc.
that they would not consent their King should do any thing tending to the
disinheriting of the Crown or right of England. And that it was never known
(and consequently never practiced) that the King of this Land had answered or
ought to answer for their rights in the said Realm, before any Judge
ecclesiastical or secular. Yet at the same time they styled Pope Boniface the
high Bishop of the Roman universal Church, and themselves his devout sons, etc.
Therefore Catholic Religion has no headship prejudicial to temporal
Supremacy. If this were a Check to the Glory of Kings, why do the Kings of
France, Spain, Poland, Portugal, the Emperor and other great Princes in
Germany uphold it, and glory in it? the Duke of Savoy with the Florentine and
the rest of Italian Princes, living under the Popes Nose, absolute and
arbitrary in their Dominions, dispute with Sword in their hand for their
Temporalities.

And for the Catholic Church in England, in Catholic times Stat. 25. Edward
3. and Statut. 16. Richard, did not admit the Pope's deposing power in
temporals; made it a preeminence to appeal to Rome, or to submit to a Legates
jurisdiction, without the Kings License; or on the Popes summons to go out of
the Kingdom, or receive any mandates or brief from Rome, or purchase Bulls for
Preserments to Churches, etc. and the reason was given because the Crown of
England is free from earthly subjection, and immediately subject to God.

Our Catholic Lords of England have in the name of the whole Body made often
protestations of eternal fidelity to the King, and renouncing all dependence of
any foreign power, that can any way be prejudicial to him. Many Protestations,
Professions, Declarations have been printed by several Catholics, that no
authority on earth can absolve them from their necessary and natural
Allegiance: and that his fidelity was a duty of their Religion, have made and
will be ready to give all security of peaceable obedience and sincere
integrity, that any words or actions can confirm.

But you will object, and say, they allow a power in the Pope, to excommunicate
Princes, and thence follows a train of pernicious consequences of deposing,
raising his Subjects against him, etc.

Resp. That the power of Excommunication is indeed necessarily annexed to the
pastoral Function; and therefore to be allowed in the chief Bishop over his
Flock. But they deny and renounce any further extent of that power unto those
things which appertain to Caesar 5 and therefore they declare as firmly, that
notwithstanding any such excommunication they will bear true faith to our
Prince, and him maintain and defend against all opposers whatsoever.

You may again object the Council of Lateran decreed, Princes that savoured
Heretics after admonition given; the Pope might discharge the Subjects from
allegiance, and give away the Kingdom to some Catholic to root out Heresy.

Resp. 1. Councils are not infallible in every point, even in matter of fact;
and other Constitutions (not concerning faith or doctrine) being but human Laws
are changeable and often admit exceptions.

2. Council's Ordinations are to be taken according to the prudent meaning of
the Legislators, which bear another sense than the words taken lie.

In this case suppose the Emperors of the East and West, Kings of England,
France, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus, Arragon, etc. agree together to purge
their Kingdoms of Heresies; and upon forfeiture the Church should give their
Dominions to another that will perform their Compact: these Princes being
present (by their Ambassadors) at the Councils, and what was there done, was
done by their consent. The Albigensian Heresy beginning to be so numerous, and
even dangerous, those Monarchs thought themselves in no worse a condition for
that decree, nor did any Catholic King since complain or protest against this
Council for it.

3. Note, the Decrees of some Councils not received or acknowledged universally
by the Catholic Church are not obligatory, but that which is principally to be
considered is, that in the Decree of this Lateran under Innocent the Third, it
is ordained (not Supreme Princes) but temporales potestates and dominos, which
bear Offices in States and Kingdoms, to take Oaths to root out all Heretics,
under the penalty of being denounced to be deprived of their Estates, etc. yet
reserving the right of the supreme Lord.

4. This pretended Article of Faith has been disclaimed by a world of
unquestionable Catholics, and all allegations confuted by learned Authors of
our Nation, Doctor Bistop writ a Book purposely against it.

5. No proof can be given, that it was ever received or executed by any
Catholic Kingdom out of Italy. The reason is, because those decrees were never
published by Pope Innocent, nor a Copy of them extant either in the body of the
Councils or Vatican Library or elsewhere, till a certain German three hundred
years after said, he found them in a Manuscript, compiled he knows not by whom.

6. By testimony of all Historians at that time, Pope Innocent suffered in
Reputation, having convoked so many Prelates to no purpose. 60 Capitula were
recited in the Assembly, and many penned in a style as if they had been
concluded; but nothing at all could plainly be decreed; no Conciliary
determinations, made but one or two, viz. about the recovery of the holy Land,
and subjection of the Greek Church to the Roman: for a War began then between
them of Pisa and Genua, which called the Pope from the Council.

7. Be it granted a conciliary decree, it is so far from looking like an
Article of Faith, which (says Bellarmine and Canus) may easily be discovered
by the style. Here is nothing proposed to be believed, no Anathema fulminated,
no signification that the contrary is against the Scripture, etc. therefore at
most it is a mere ecclesiastical ordinance touching external discipline, and as
such, what is more ordinary, and permitted, than for Princes to refuse
admittance therein? we see some Churches of France reject the decrees of
reformation made in the Council of Trent; and also practiced in England.

8. Suppose it be an ordinance, yet supreme Princes and Kings are not named:
but excluded and only their Officers and Substitutes, etc.

9. No example can be produced in the Empire or other Catholic State that such
an Oath in succeeding times was imposed or threatened. But on the contrary we
know Charles the fifth by a Law of the Empire publicly permitted Lutherans in
several Provinces, and all the Kings of France sin^e Hen. 3. permitted the
Calvinists: yet the Pope never threatened deposition* or they feared it.

Therefore this doctrinal point of Faith is shamefully pretended to be involved
on that or the like Decrees, viz. the Popes power of deposing, etc.

What State, Kingdom or City received or taught the People this, even as a
probable Opinion? It is well known in practice and doctrine, other Sects and
their accusers have been more faulty in this point then they, as History and
experience testify of Princes actually deposed in Scotland, Denmark, Sweden,
Geneva, etc. and absolute rebellion following their doctrine in Poland,
Bohemia, England, France, Hungary, Germany, etc.

Obj. Innocent the third who presided in this Council actually deposed King
John and Otho the Emperor.

Resp. Popes as private Doctors may err in matters of fact; their Decrees and
Bulls are not always held as infallible, and may be opposed (as often they have
been by Papists) nor will they scruple to do it especially about temporal
affairs. We do not approve whatsoever Pope^ do in fact in deposing, etc. If
some Popes have been exorbitant, have not Papist themselves defended their
Princes against all pretended illegal impositions of Rome? If some Popes have
transgressed and been passionate men, it does not follow all have, as some
Princes have been Tyrants, not all.

This King John, Protestant Histories conclude (passing by his youthful
Rebellion, murdering his Nephew, his Atheism, etc.) they record he lost our
whole interest in France, discontenting all his people, not defending their
Rites and Privileges, etc. So Heylin, Daniel, Martin, Sir Robert Cotton Hist.
And,

Stow in his Chronicle 170. relates it thus: King John being dissolute and
perfidious, and would not grant the Laws or Liberties of the Charter, had as
many enemies as Nobles; Clergy and Layty petitioned against him for the Pope to
depose him (an opinion then in practice) the Pope would not but sent Paendulph
his Legate who comes over to Dover to King John, to counsel the King's peace,
and reconcile him to God and the Church. The King living then in great jeopardy
to loose his Kingdom. The King of France being invited by the Nobles and
Clergy to invade the Kingdom, saved the Kingdom by it, after this the Clergy
came over, and all was in peace.

The Pope after this excommunicates the Barons, for the disobeying the King,
and calling in the French King Lewis into the Realm. And Gaul the Legate was
sent from the Pope to forbid Lewis to go into, or invade England, to
excommunicate him if he did: But

Lewis of France arrived in England, whom the Barons assisted against King
John. John soon after died; his eldest son, Hen. 3. at nine years old was
crowned King by the Bishops of Winchester and Bath, etc. and the Government of
the King was committed to the Popes Legate, the Bishop of Winchester and Earl
of Pembroke. The Legate maintained the King's part, admonished, prayed and
commanded the disobedient to do as he did; called a Council at Bristol, caused
the Bishops to incline to the King's part, notwithstanding Lewis did what he
could to the contrary. Seeing Lewis and his accomplices were excommunicated every
Sunday by the Legate, though they had London and all the East parts of England.

Lewis had notice from Rome, except he went out of England, the sentence of
excommunication of the Legate should be confirmed by the Pope. For this cause,
says Stow 175. a truce was taken between Lewis and King Henry. Philip of
France called his son Lewis to return; he being passed over: the Earl of
Salisbury, Earl Warren, etc. revolted to the Kings side, and this by industry
and virtue of the Pope's Legate. Lewis, being absolved from the
excommunication, went into France, but his accomplices, were by the Legate
deprived of all benefit by their disobedience* See Stow 170.

Thus we see how for want of knowledge things are carried on, and reported very
frequently in the worst sense and construction: it may be easily collected out
of our own Authors and Chronicles, that Popes have been great friends to our
Princes, and this Nation. Take in short out of Stow 883. that Pope Adrian the
fourth, an Englishman, invested Hen. 2. with the Dominion of Ireland, and had
it confirmed with an Assembly at Waterford. Pope Vrbane who sent a Legate, the
Bishop Sabrine into England, with sentence of excommunication against the City
of London and Cinque Ports, and all those that troubled the King's peace.

King Richard of England being taken Prisoner unjustly by Leopold Duke of
Austria, in return from the Wars with the Saladine; demanding a great ransom
and misusing him. The Pope excommunicated the Duke of Austrich, and enjoined
him to release the Covenants that he constrained our King to make; and send
home the Pledges. The Duke refusing this Order shortly after broke his Leg, and
in great anguish ended his life; and was kept unburied till his Son released
the English Pledges. Thus were the Pledges restored and the money behind
released.

How often did the Pope grant to the King of England the Tenth of all
Ecclesiastical Goods, as to Edward the first and second? Sent the Abbot of
Saint Denis, Legate, to request Edward the second to remove from him Pierce
Gaveston, without which the Kingdom could not be in peace, nor the Queen enjoy
the Kings true love, Vide Stow 213. Edw. 2. The Pope sent Ganelinus and Lucius
de Flisco (by the Kings request) to make peace between England and Scotland,
and reconcile to the King Thomas Earl of Lancaster -- who brought Bulls from
the Pope to excommunicate the Scots, except they returned to peace with the
King of England.

William Longshamp Bishop of Ely and Legate to the Pope and Chancellor of
England was made Governor of the Realm by Richard the first. Afterward the
Archbishop of Roan was made Regent of England, then being made Archbishop of
Canterbury. Then you see there was no jealousy of the Pope or his Clergy, but
on the contrary for many hundred years our Princes and Nation reposed (as with
just reason they might) the greatest trust, and confidence in their loyalty,
faith and honesty. It would fill a volume it self to recount all the benefits,
privileges, honors and advantages this Nation has received from the Popes
and See of Rome. See Bishop Smith in his Epist. Histor. ad regem Jacobum of the
Pope's favors to England.

Hence our first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, Parker in Eliz. lib.
antiq. Britan. ait, hanc insulae nobilitatem atque gloriam Dei providentiae
atque beneficentiae, etc. The nobleness of this Island for being the first of
all Provinces of the World that received the Christian Faith, and the glory
thereof is to be acknowledged to have proceeded from the providence and
goodness of God: yet the way it self and means by which this nobility and glory
was won unto it, it was first and always laid open unto us from the Sea of
Rome; we have always from that time persevered in the unity of the Roman Faith,
and our subjection to the Roman Church is most ancient. Haec ille.

Abbot Fecknam in his Oration to the Parliament of the first of Eliz. says
thus, Damianus and Fugatianus, as Ambassadors from the Sea of Rome, did bring
into this Realm a thousand four hundred years past, the very same Apostolical
Religion we are now in possession of. (For then the Roman Religion was not
voted down) he would not have dared to have uttered in that time and place, but
that he could produce good witness and antiquity to his warrant.

Let not now their Adversaries be so unreasonable as to quote Mariana, Suarez
or Bellar. or any other private Author that may have enlarged the jurisdiction
of Popes, to the prejudice of Kings, and then lay their particular Opinions to
the charge of all. For were this a just and fair way of dealing, they could,
with as much ease, requite them with Text for Text out of Luther, Calvin, Knox,
Buchanan and many more, whose Opinions are at least as dangerous to the safety
of Monarchy. The difference betwixt them being only this, whereas the former
lodge the deposing power in the Pope only (whose person is at a safe and
sufficient distance, at least, from us:) the latter bring the danger home to
the doors of Princes, and place it in the people whom they make both judges and
parties in the case.

Secondly, Mariana's personal fault and his opinion were condemned by a
Provincial Council of the same Society held at Paris 15 16. and that
confirmation ratified by Claudius Aquaviva, the General of the Order: and the
Doctors of Sorbon in the same year declared it an ungodly position. Thirdly,
Mariana was not resolute in that opinion neither, but handled it
problematically. Fourthly, It was not for deposing of Kings but Tyrants which
alters the case.

In France 1614. a Book written by Suarez against the Oaths, in which the
deposing power was asserted, was by Decree of the Parliament of Paris condemned
to be burnt by the public Executioner, as containing scandalous, seditious
positions, etc. and Armandus, Cotton, Front and Symond four chief Jesuits, were
to take order their General should renew a prohibition to teach like Doctrines,
and the whole Order after disavowed them.

Eight Universities, viz. Paris, Valentia, Toulouse, Poicteirs, Bordeaux,
Burges, Reims and Caen, did of their own accord (not expecting a command from
the Court) 1626. brand this Doctrine of Pope's deposing power with titles of
impious, seditious, infamous, etc. And Fossart of the Society in a public Act
advancing the proposition, although it was interpreted to extend only to
Tyrants; by decree of the whole University of Caen, the Proposition and
Expositions were censured impious and condemned, Fossart imprisoned and
sentenced, bareheaded to acknowledge the said positions false and contrary to
the decrees of Councils, etc.

But to silence all impertinent objections in this nature, or in any other
matter, they declare to the whole world, that no private authors (but only the
Decisions of lawful general Councils) have any influence upon their Faith or
Doctrine in any point whatsoever. Therefore if their adversaries will conclude
any thing against them from their own Principles; they must do it from their
own proper uncontradicted confession, or from the Decrees of General Councils,
from which they only take the Rule of their Faith.

The Project of the Gunpowder Treason, undertaken only by a few malcontents;
in justice might rather be burned in oblivion with the offenders, than objected
perpetually to innocent men, who abhor the fact; and were publicly acquitted
thereof, by the King himself in the Parliament following. See the Kings
Speeches.

That the Catholic Body had no hand in this Treason, appears by the quality of
the actors, and number of them, being but four Gentlemen. The Catholic
Noblemen then were the most considerable of the Nation; their first Marquess
viz. Winchester: The first Earl, viz. Arundel: Their first Vicount, viz.
Mountague: Their first Baron, viz. Abergaveny, etc. Now none of these or any
chief of the party had any intrigue in the design, though all imaginable
industry was used by the Commons, Lords, and Privy Council, and by Cecil their
plotting enemy to bring them in.

Therefore to call this an universal Popish plot is in it self a contradiction,
because no plot can be looked on as geneneral when no number of the chiefest
part are intrigued in the design. If then some four necessitous or loose
persons have been of the Gunpowder Treason, to infer thence all other of the
same profession are of the same stamp: Do not all rational men see this
inference is irrational? That it may be retorted against any other profession
in England in other things? Is it not unreasonable and uncharitable to infer
from thence an imputation upon all others? Can any one in his right senses
accuse the whole Church of England, for incestuous, or drunkards, because some
of them have been guilty of those crimes?

Stow Chron. p. 882. notes by many factious people, it was given out, this
Treason was attempted by consent of the King of Spain, French King and
Archduke. Catesby, at his Death, said, the plot and practice of this Treason
was only his, and that others were but his assistants, says Stow. And the
Council perceived it was practiced by some discontented Papist, Staw 879. --
many untruths were divulged -- hoping to have drawn into their rebellion those
of their Religion, and other malcontents.

In all their examinations none else were discovered though they revealed
several secret particulars, as is seen in their printed confessions -- they
would not have spared others, seeing they accused their Confessor.

Garnet, says Stow, Provincial of the Jesuits, for concealing it in confession
only, was executed. -- Acknowledged to God his offense, was heartily sorry,
asked God and the King forgiveness, and beseeched God to bless the King and his
issue: exhorted all Catholics not to attempt any Rebellion or Treason, etc.
for all such courses, said he, are utterly against Catholic Faith and
Religion. Vide Stow.

To find out the depth of the plot they left no stone unrolled, to show how
nice they were. Sturton and Mordent, two Catholic Lords, were fined because
they were absent from Parliament that day: their circumspection was so great,
that the Lord of Northumberland, a Protestant, was imprisoned for many years,
because, being Captain, he admitted Piercy into the Bond of Pensioners. Thus
any indifferent Reader may see how improbable or rather impossible it was the
Catholic party to be involved therein.

Concerning Plots we know it was counted a piece of wit in Queen Elizabeth's
time to draw men into such devices; and none more excellent than Burleigh and
Walsingham: the first of which Cecil was son to, and successor to the others
secretariship, and fomenting of plots then in fashion. Who has forgot the
plots of Cromwell framed in his Closet, not only to destroy many faithful
Cavaliers, but also to put a luster upon his intelligence.

This Gunpowder Treason was a mere device (though acted by the hand of some
desperate persons) as King James says in his second Proclamation. (whereas
Thomas Piercy and some other confederates being of l^wd life, insolent
dispositions, and for the most part of desperate Estates, etc.) Yet contrived
and invented by a crafty Statesman; who every one knew hated their profession
(to make them odious and suspected in that Nation, and to disoblige his Majesty
of his promises in favor of them) and this his jealousy increased, seeing the
King received in his Council Henry Earl Will. Hist. in King James, p. 3. p. 190.
of Northampton, an eminent Papist, and no friend to the Statesmen. And his
Majesty's speech then to the two Houses against persecution of Catholics, as
Wilson notes, as it may be justly thought, considering what Politician sat at
the helm then. Nor was it hard for a Secretary to know turbulent and malicious
Spirits, as Stow calls Catesby a malecontent in Queen Elizabeth's days; and
when King James came to the Crown, no favorable Article concerning Indulgency
to English Catholics. And that the King of Spain and Archduke minded only
their own interest, etc. Vide Stow 880.

It Is argument enough to assert this, that if a Statesman professed in tricks,
hating and envying Roman Catholics, contrived the material part, contrived
also the rest: and certainly the miraculous letter which discovered the
Gunpowder Treason, will discover our Statesmen to be the author of it. The
Letter is this to the Lord Mounteagle a Roman Catholic.

MY LORD,
OVt of the Love I bear some of your Friends, I have care of your preservation;
therefore I would wish you (as you tender your life) to forbear the attendance
at this Parliament; for God and man have concurred to punish the wickedness of
the time. Think not slightly of the advertisement; for though there be no
appearance of any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this
Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them. This Counsel is not to be
contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm; for the danger
is past as soon as you have burnt the Letter, and, I hope, you will make good
use of it.

Now this Letter could not be written by Piercy, as reputed; because first,
there was little intimacy between the Lord Mounteagle and Piercy, as Wilson
says. Secondly, the Earl of Northumberland, Percy's Patron and only support;
he was to be sacrificed, and all Catholic Lords of his Religion: therefore no
Plotter writ this; for here a hundred suspicious things, in the opinion of any
fool, would endanger the discovery. Thirdly, Notice also given so long before
the execution; for the Letter was sent to Mounteagle ten days before the 5. of
November, as Saunderson p. 383. Hist. says, the long warning being opposite to
the design of a Conspirator. Fourthly, in their examinations they never
confessed it, as they did things of higher secrecy.

Now the interval was beneficial to a Machivilian, it would be more grateful to
the Council, to have time to consider the difficulties, to ruin his enemies
and make his vigilance appear. And Cecil did not miss of his aim; for, as
Saunderson says, he was made Earl for his Service. For the Letter came by his
contrivance, being, as Osborn. Prot. Hist. confesses, a neat device of the
Treasurers. Nor was he ignorant from time to time of their actions, Osborne
Mem. K. Jam. p. 360. For Tresham and another, who were Cecil's instruments, had
access to him at midnight, and last he should discover it he was never brought
to a public trial, were sent to the Tower, and never seen afterward, lest they
should tell tales. And Piercy and Catesby might have been taken alive, but
Cecil feared these two would have related the Story less to his advantage.
Whence they were not made Prisoners, though they had no weapons but their
Swords.

Besides many knowing men, Strangers abroad have writ; And Protestants
themselves at home have discovered since, this to be a purposed contrivance: So
Ossate Letters Livr. 2. Epist. 43. Prins Antip. of Prelat. p. 151. His Majesty
also well knew some had learned this art in their old Mistress's time. Whence
he often said, the fifth of November was Cecils holiday; as the Lord Cobham and
others have protested to have heard from his own mouth. Therefore the Roman
party had no hand in the Treason, being but thirteen Laymen, and all those
drawn in by their mortal enemy.

This desperate attempt seemed rather of a private Kindred, or Acquaintance,
than of any Religion. Catesby and Tresham were Sisters Children, the two
Graunts two Brethren; and the elder intermarried with Winters Sister; Faux and
Keys were but Servingmen; the two Wrights long time dependers on Catesby, and
their Sister married to Piercy.

If any of these were Papists, or so died, they were not so long before; for
the true Priests and Catholics in England knew them not to be such; they being
never frequenters of Catholic Sacraments; and none of them convicted and known
recusants before; as our Courts witness. Papists and Priests know Catholics,
by using Sacraments. These they renounced by public Writings, and condemned
their Enterprise for impious malefactors of this hellish Conspiracy. The Lord
Mounteagle with his Lady and Children who disclosed it, indeed were known
Catholics.

No Priest or known Catholic, after many strict examinations, searches and
scrutinies, was either proved or probably suspected of it: but so far freed
that the Lords of the Council requested, that a Priest should be appointed to
persuade and assure Faux (an agent in it) that he was bound in conscience to
utter what he could of that Conspiracy. And Master Thomas Wright, a learned
Priest did hereupon come to the Council and offer his best Service therein, and
had a Warrant to that purpose subsigned with twelve Privy Counselors hands:
but Faux had confessed all they could wish, before he could come to him.

So that no man of Conscience can think but Recusants rather deserved favor
for their loyalty. Seeing the Archpriest condemned it, all Catholics detested
and abhorred it, as appears by their Petitions to the King, Parliament, and
chief Secretary, printed at that time; and neither could any noted or known
Catholic, by any device, be drawn into this matter.

Those that were up in tumult with Catesby were, by our Prot. Hist. Howes,
never full fourscore; and those made up with servants, horse-boys and
houshouldattendance, as Saunders and Speed confirm. For if Priests and
Recusants, so many thousands then in England, would have entertained it; no man
can be so malicious and simple, to think that there would not have been a
greater assembly to take such an action in hand; and the Council could not have
been so ill-sighted, but that they would have found some other culpable; as
some by all imaginable craft and industry endeavored and desired.

But to confirm their innocence, King James in his own Declaration says, that
the generality of Catholics did abhor such a detestable Conspiracy no less
than himself. And he was so kind to Catholics, the last half of his Reign, of
which Wilson complains in several places, Wills. K. of 193.
which was impossible he should have been so favorable, had he not been
convinced they never had had any design of destroying him or his.

Secondly, the King in his second Proclamation 1605. and in his third
Proclamation 1605. when they were all discovered; in which Proclamation we
plainly see the King and Council knew the Accomplices and partakers of that
villainy, yet never taxed any Priest or Papist therewith.

Thirdly, the King in public Parliament did free Catholics as much as
Protestants, when he plainly says (as truth is) if it had taken effect,
Protestants and Papists should have all gone away and perished together. The
King in his second Proclamation against the Conspiracy calls the Confederates
Men of lewd life, insolent dispositions and of desperate estates.

And to demonstrate from the public Act their innocence as well Protestants,
he declares by Proclamation, Proclamatione die 7. November. 1605. We are by good
experience so well persuaded of the loyalty of diverse Subjects of the Romish
Religion, that they do as much abhor this detestable conspiracy as our self,
and will be ready to do their best endeavors, though with expense of their
blood to suppress all attempters against our safety and the quiet of our State;
and discover whomsoever they shall suspect to be rebellious. This by good
experience he pronounces.

Priests and Catholics notwithstanding were upon this pretense persecuted;
though besides all these reasons aforesaid, by public consent both of their
Clergy and Layety, Catholics presented and offered to maintain their cause and
innocence in many humble Petitions, whereof two were printed to the King. The
first begins

To the most excellent and mighty Prince, our gracious and dread Sovereign
James, King of England, etc. justifying of Catholics, and the Truth of their
Religion against their Adversaries.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe late intended Conspiracy against the Life of your Royal Majesty, the Life,
Union, Rule and Direction to these united Kingdoms, was so heinous an impiety
that nothing which is holy can make it legitimate, no pretense of Religion can
be alleged to excuse it: God in heaven condemns it, men on earth detest it,
innocents bewail it, and your dutiful Subjects, Catholics, Priests and others,
which have endured most for their Profession hold it in greatest detestation
and horror, etc.

Yet this is the miserable distressed state of many thousands of your most
loyal and loving Subjects (dread Liege) for their faithful duty to God and
Religion, taught in this Kingdom, and embraced by all your Progenitors and our
Ancestors, so many hundred years, that every adversary may preach and print
against us, and make their challenge, as though either for ignorance we could
not, or for distrust of our cause, we were not willing to make them answer, or
come to trial: when quite contrary, we have often earnestly, and by all means
we could, desired to have it granted, etc.

And at this time when your chief Protestant Clergy, Bishops and others is
assembled, we most humbly entreat this so reasonable a placet, that although
they will not (as we fear) ever consent to an indifferent choice, opposition
and defense in questions: yet at least to avoid the wonder of the world, they
will be content, we may have public audience of those Articles, Opinions and
Practices, for which we are so much condemned and persecuted. If we shall not
be able to defend or prove any position generally maintained in our Doctrine,
to be conformable to those rules in Divinity, which your Majesty and the
Protestant Laws of England (we can offer no more) have confirmed for holy
Canonical Scripture; the first four General Councils, the days of Constantine
and the primitive Church: let the penalties be imposed and executed against us,
etc. and in fine --

Your Royal person and that honorable Consistory now assembled are holden in
your Doctrine to be Supreme Sentencers even in Spiritual businesses in this
Kingdom: we therefore hope you will not in a Court from whence no appeal is
allowed, and in matters of such consequence, proceed to Judgment or determine
of execution, before the arraigned is summoned to answer, has received or
refused trial, is or can be proved guilty, etc.

Deny not that to us (your true and obedient Subjects) in a Religion so
ancient, which your colleagued Princes the King of Spain and Archduke do offer
to thee so many years disobedient Netherlands, upon their temporal submittance
in so late an embraced doctrine; That which the Arrian Emperors of the East
permitted to the Catholic Bishops, Priests, Churches, toleration: What the
Barbarian Vandals often offered and sometimes truly perforformed in Africa;
what the Turkish Emperor in Greece, and Protestant Princes in Germany, and
other places conformable to the example of Protestant Rulers, not unanswerable
to your own Princely piety, pity and promise -- no disgust to any equally
minded Protestant or Puritan at home, a Jubilee to us distressed, a warrant of
security to your Majesty in all opinions from all terrors and dangers -- from
which of what kind soever we most humbly beseech the infinite mercy of almighty
God to preserve your Highness, and send you, your children and Posterity, all
happiness and felicity both in Heaven and Earth.

Amen.
Another Petition to the King and Parliament from the Cath. in Eng. allowed by
the Priests, was presented by Sir Franc. Hastins and Sir Richard Knightly,
which urged likewise for a Disputation.

Another to the same tenure was then, with the same assent, subscribed with
three and twenty hands of the greatest Catholic Gentry of England; and
presented to the chief Secretary of State, potent in those times, in Court and
Council, and (as Recusants feared) not equally affected toward them, though
never so innocent. And the same Recusants were more than jealous, that this
practice of Conspiracy was no great secret to that Secretary, long before
diverse of them, that were actors in it (by him named Catholics) were
acquainted with it: an invention to entrap those he did not affect. Whence
Master Howes in his Hist. makes relation, -- A great Protestant had more, or
not much inferior knowledge of it, than some that were put to death for
concealing it.

Thus the crimes of a few miserable wretches, necessitous and loose persons,
are perpetually objected to the innocent, and made their guilt (though by none
more detested than themselves;) but how unreasonable and how great a solecism
it is in Christianity, to conclude all guilty of every horrid crime, which some
few are known to have perpetrated? none but injudicious furies, and such as, in
some measure, may deserve to be ranged in the categories of fools or madmen,
but must needs acknowledge. And unless we will renounce all charity, justice and
humanity, we must not impute particular men's actions (either of this or other
matters) to Catholic Religion, and for their faults expose them to common
hatred and violence. For in common sense, if Catholics refuse to go to Church
in respect of Conscience, they will far more refuse Treason, to attempt or
consent to any desperate act against our Country or State, or commit such sins
as hazard both body and soul.

O but bloody Queen Mary! O what cries against the days of Queen Mary! as if
her cruelty were unparalleled? when it plainly appears, to any impartial
inquirer, that more Catholics have died by Protestants, than of them by
Papists; and that since the exclusion of the Pope, there has been a greater
quantity of blood judicially spilt among us, on the score of Religion, than
from the Conversion of England to Hen. 8. Why do we then cry out, like men in
the fit of fury, of the bloody Papists? Its suspicion some radicated hatred
obfuscates our intellect; as the Poet says,

Impedit ira animum, nec potest cernere verm. Queen Mary put none to death, but
by the known Laws established many hundred years before the malefactors were
born, and which are still used to this day by Protestants against Heretics.
None were then put to death, but by virtue of ancient Laws of Christian
Emperors, and Kings of England: therefore not the Queen, nor Bishops, but the
Law was cruel: yet the said Laws are still in force, still continue, and were
made use of since the Reformation, by Elizabeth and King James, to burn
Heretics in their time; as Stow and Baker note. Why did King James put Legate
and Wightman to death, but because he religiously thought it unfit they should
live any longer to blaspheme? why did Queen Elizabeth 1587. hang Coppinger and
Thacker at Saint Edmundsbury, for publishing Brown's Book, says Cambden,
which, says Stow p. 1174. was written against the Common Prayer.

I will not apologize for any extravagancies done by our predecessors in the
beginning of Reformation. He that will judge, let him lay his hand on his own
breast, and examine what he would do in this condition. Suppose he were of a
Religion he thought the whole visible Church from age to age delivered to his
ancestors, and saw Professed in all Kingdoms; Suppose then the preaching of two
or three men, base in rank, and taxt in moralities, broaching forth new and
dangerous opinions to Church and State obstinately, and would not be silenced
by any satisfactory means, would he think it then cruelty to put Laws in
execution against such novelties? the consequences whereof proved seditious and
rebellious, as is seen in History.

There died of the Reformists in the the whole but two hundred seventy seven;
as Baker in Queen Mary p. 467. and Speed in Queen Mary p. 833. and other
Protestant Writers record: And were there two hundred of those now living, they
would suffer for extravagancies and perpetrated villainies; as most of those did
in the voluminous Legend of Fox, stuffed with Wicliffians and Waldenses (whom
Philip Melancton and other Protestants disown,) with Tinkers, Cobblers,
Butchers, Tailors and prating Wives, very few of them put to death on the score
of Religion, as the Records testify.

Cranmer and Ridley so much spoken of were attainted of Treason defending the
Title to the Lady Jane. Cranmer being a Counselor in the business, and Ridley
Bishop of London preaching a Sermon for it at St. Paul's Cross the Sunday after
King Edward died. So Cranmer was condemned of Treason and arraigned with the
Lady Jane. He was also an Instrument of divorce to bring Anna Bullein to the
Kings appetite; and afterward, he and Cromwell the chief actors for her death,
as p. 3. Statut. 28. Hen. 8. c. 1. where Cranmers Sentence is recorded
judicially, as of his own knowledge, convincing her of the foul fact. Or if
there were some at that time put to death (for their conscience only, which can
hardly be proved, and that there was no faction, exterior disobedience or
innovation in the case,) yet they could not be properly Protestant Martyrs;
because they suffered before the thirty nine Articles or Church of England was
established.

Reformed Historians, viz. Bishop Goodman, Baker, Speed, etc. do agree Queen
Mary was a mavelous good Woman, had many troubles; Cranmer and Ridley, with a
thousand more, set up as busy as Bees against her: when she was to be invested
in her Rights, Reformists would not receive her as their Queen, but upon
condition (as Suffolk people) nor assist her without Indentures, Stow annal.
p. 1064. nor acknowledge her but upon such and such terms, yet her Right was
indubitable. How Wars were waged against her by the Dukes of Northumberland and
Suffolk, Bills spread abroad, and several treacherous practices contrived
against her and her Dignity, by Archbishop Cranmer, see Stow Annal. printed
1592. p. 1039, 1042, etc. What great commotions and insurrections were made
against her by Wiat, on the score of Religion? How Towns and Castles were taken
and held out against her by Stafford? p. 1047. ibid. How Daggers were thro^n
and Guns shot off at Priests of her Religion, whiles they were preaching at
Paul's Cross, viz. Doctor Pendleton and Master Bourne. How many treasonable
Books writ against her after she came to the Crown by Goodman; insomuch, that
more open rebellion and insurrection was in five years of her short Government,
from such as were not affected to her Religion, than Queen Elizabeth had from
Catholics in forty years. vide Stow 1039, 1058.

How plain and sincere her Government was, how free from tricks, and such
strains of Policy as were afterward used; is manifest to all the world; How
just was she? if severe for a time, that severity was necessary, not only by
the judgment of Parliament, which a little before had enacted the Laws on which
she proceeded, and before which she acted nothing in that kind, but also in
respect of her own safety and of the State. And to vindicate their Clergy, let
all the Canons of the Church be examined and searched, if there be one to be
found that justifies the shedding of blood simply on the account of Religion.

That She was withal a merciful Princess, is evidenced by the compassion showed
to such as deserved not well of her, as the Duchess of Sommerset, to Sir John
Cheek, to Sir Edward Mountague, Lord chief Justice, who had subscribed and
counseled her disinheriting, to Sir Roger Cholmey, to the Marqness of
Northampton, to the Lord Robert Dudley, to Sir Henry Dudley, to Sir Henry
Gates, etc. who stood attainted, and the Duke of Suffolk, all obnoxious to her
Justice, she knew very well, neither affected her Religion nor Title: they
being her prisoners in the Tower, she released them all.

But for all this the Zealots of her time would not be quieted; they libel
against the Government of Women; they pick quarrels and murmur at her Marriage:
they publish invectives and scurrilous Pamphlets against Religion: yet forbear
not to plot and conspire her deprivation. Goodman writ a pernicious Book to
have her put to death: William Thomas, a Gospeller, conspires to Out of Fox his
Martyrs.
kill the Queen, and when hanged said, he died for his Country. Stow in Queen
Mary p. 1056.

On the contrary, in Queen Elizabeth's time, although Catholics then were the
chief Ministers in Church and State, and might have used indirect means against
her, she being of a contrary Religion, and not of so clear a Title: yet
Catholic Bishops who set the Crown upon her head are commended by Holinshed, a
Prot. Hist. ann. Eliz. 26. page 1358, and 1360. for peaceable quiet Bishops,
and the Catholic temporal Lords there by him recorded to be far from opposing
themselves against her interest, as they are said there to offer her Majesty in
her defense to impugn and resist any ^orreign force, though it should come
from the Pope himself. Insomuch, that they are commended by Holinshed for
loyalty and obedience. And,

Stow testifies how diligent Catholics were to offer their service in that
great action 88. neither were they altogether refused by her Majesty. How the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, Doctor Heath, a
Catholic Bishop, instead of inveighing against her, or casting forth of
Libels, (as Cranmer did against Q. Mary her entrance and Government) made a
public oration in her behalf, to persuade the people to obedience, and to
acknowledge her power and authority, Holin. ib. 1170. whence the said
Archbishops faithfulness was left to commendation also by Protestant Bishop
Goodman in his Catalogue of Bishops. How all Catholic Lords and Bishops
repaired to London to proclaim her Queen, who not long after turned them out of
several Offices and Bishoprics; Holinshed p. 1171.

To use Cambdens own words and phrase, the world stood Cambdens Britann. p. 163.
amazed and England groaned at it; what would flesh and blood move him to? was
it not strange in the beginning to behold Abbeys destroyed, Bishoprics gelded,
Chaunteries, Hospitals, Colleges turned to profaneness? change of Liturgies,
Rites, etc.? to see people renounce their pious vows? -- such unexpected
alterations -- it being a pitiful thing, as Stow says, to hear the
Lamentations in the Country for religious Houses, St^w p. 964.

Notwithstanding the loyalty and obedience of Catholics toward her appeared
undeniable in all things, not only in their humble petitions, but by their
constant and general conformity unto her temporal Government in 88. and by
their Protestations made at Ely 1588. as by other offers made to the Lord
North, the Queens Lieutenant there, and by their just actions afterward, by
their submission as to the Lords of the Privy Council, and profession of all
due acknowledgment to her Majesty, notwithstanding the Sentence of
Excommunication. Whence the Author of Execution of English Justice acknowledges
their obedience and loyalty to Elizabeth, in a time when they wanted no matter
of complaint.

Any man of candor and integrity may easily convince the vulgar error, the
unevenness of Queen Elizabeth's nature and severity to that of Queen Marys.
Queen Elizabeth made new Laws against Catholics, and put them to death for not
embracing a new heresy, which has been condemned to the fire here, and in all
other Christian Countries. She embrued her hands in the blood royal of Mary
Stewart, lawful Heir to the Crown, put to death many noble persons by their
blood, to color her Supremacy, raised up upstarts, Heretics from nothing,
annihilated the ancient Nobility and Gentry, etc. to use a Protest.
Historiographers words, the bloody practices of Queen Eliz. if not so barbarous
in appearance (though more wicked in substance) as being exhibited under the
color and pretext of Law, in the starving and racking so many innocent,
worthy, learned persons, tearing out their hearts and bowels in public view,
upon suborned witnesses, base vagabond and perjured Catchpoles hired to swear.

Neither was there any reason then for persecution on the account of the
Catholics misdemeanors. For as Cambden, her own Historiographer, notes: The
reason of the penal Statutes in Eliz. was 1. the opinion of the Queens
Illegitimation abroad: 2. Jealousies had of the Queen of Scots her nearness to
the Crown: 3. the Bull of Pius 5. 4. the doubt of the house of Guise in behalf
of their Niece. 5. the offense given to the King of Spain in assisting Orange.
These causes induced the Queen with her Pauculi intimi, says Cambden.

We cannot excuse the persecution therefore under Queen Elizabeth against
Catholics, for any cause given by them, or just fear of their fidelity, nor
from the example of Christian Emperors and Kings, that both for zeal of
Religion and human policy (to avoid danger of Rebellion) made Laws and Statutes
against Heretics and innovators of the ancient faith and sense of Scripture,
which descended to them by Tradition from the Apostles. Queen Elizabeth, taking
a contrary way, made Laws and Statutes against the ancient Religion, and known
sense of Gods word delivered from age t^ age: which practice destroys the order
of Justice, to persecute Christians for professing a Religion confirmed by the
public testimony and practice of the Christian world, from the first
propa^^tion of Christianity to this present t^^e. No part of their Dectrine
being ^^er judged an heresy or novelty by antiquity: otherwise they had not
escaped the rigor of penal Laws made against Heretics and Novelists in former
ages. But no History did or can ever mention any person that suffered as an
Heretic, for broaching or maintaining any one point which they now believe and
profess.

Whereas Q. Mary her predecessors, Emperors and Kings punished Novelists only,
that made Religons of their own heads, condemne^ as Heretics by the Church in
ancient times. The disparity therefore was great: Catholic Princes standing as
defenders of their ancient Faith, others as invaders and introducers of a new
Belief. They seek to keep what de jure they had, Calvinists what they had not:
they possessors of the traditum and depositum left by Christ and his Apostles;
others descissors and injurious infringers of those Apostolic ties and
regulations so carefully delivered to all posterity.

Laws indeed have been made in Catholic Countries, very severe against those
the Church calls Heretics, but they were none of the Churches Laws, (nor
made by the principles of Catholic Doctrine.) The Arrians were the first
introducers of persecution; they were not, I say, enacted by Ecclesiastics,
but by civil Governors only. We know, that by the Canons of the Church ever in
force, their Clergy, under the penalty of irregularity, are forbidden to have
any hand in blood. And whatsoever civil Laws have been made, by Catholic civil
Governors, were but as prudent means to prevent Sedition or Rebellions justly
apprehended. And though for some later ages civil Magistrates, in some
Countries, exercise greater severities than anciently were used; must England
imitate the rigidest of other Countries?

Neither can our hatred or persecution against Catholics be any more excused,
by the proceedings of the Spanish or Italian Inquisitions, than our penal
Statutes have been by the Laws of ancient Kings and Emperors against Heretics.

First, Because the Inquisition proceeds according to the rules and forms of
justice; none is declared an Heretic or guilty by any new Law or Oath, made
only to the end, that by them men may be entrapped both in Soul, in Body and
Estate. It was no crime in England to be a Roman Catholic before the penal
Laws were enacted: but it was a crime to be an Heretic or an Apostate, or
broacher of new Doctrines, before the ancient Emperors and Kings made penal
Laws against Heresy. The Law supposed and did not make the crime. As penal
Statutes do in England, making a crime of Christian Religion.

Secondly, Heretics are never condemned by the Inquisition, without the
testimony of many lawful witnesses, both living and dead: All the ancient
Fathers, Councils, and the Christian Church of former ages testify their
errors are new and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. No
Rebel was ever more evidently convicted of Rebellion against his Prince, then
Heretics are by the Inquisition of Heresy against God and the old Apostolical
Church. Catholics cannot obtain so fair a Plea, they are condemned by a new
Law, because they are not Heretics, and separate from the ancient Faith.

Thirdly, The Inquisition practiceth all imaginary means toward the accused to
reduce his judgment.

Fourthly, The Inquisition it self is permitted in no Kingdom where Heresy is
numerous: nor can it be in justice: they strive to keep out Sects and new
Opinions in Countries totally of one Belief. We do not morally blame the very
Moors in Africa being of one profession for keeping out the Gospel it self. In
England where all fell not from the Papacy, there is not the same just motive
for severity, as if it brought an upstart Religion, never heard of or spread
over the Nation.

Fifthly, The Inquisition medleth not with those who never were Catholics: but
the penal Statutes comprehend them who never were of their Church or Communion.

Sixthly, The Inquisition condemns no Heretics to death, but only declares
their heresy to the end the faithful may avoid their conversation: its true
the Secular power executes the sentence of death against them, notwithstanding
the Inquisition does protest against the rigor, and desires that Heretics
may not be punished with death.

Seventhly, Though the Inquisition were rigorous and unjust (as adversaries
pretend) it is not a blemish to Catholic Religion, because, it is not an
universal practice but limited to Spain and Italy at the instance of secular
Princes, looked upon as a necessary means to keep their Subjects in awe of
their (...).

Eighthly, The Inquisition ^oth seriously wish and endeavor the con^ersion and
amendment of Heretics, implo^ing learned Divines to convince them, and by fair
ways and reason to win them.

Neither can the Muthers or Massacres in Ireland so much and so often
exaggerated in Protestant Pamphlets and Pulpits be any pretext of rigor or
austerity to English Catholics. What has an English Catholic to do with an
Irish Massacre? Can we our selves excuse all the extravagancies by some of our
natives and party? Does Catholic Religion either incline him to or teach
murder or rebellion? Have they not a settled sense of Scripture for loyalty and
obedience? Which none can alter without breach of his Catholic Faith? And they
are not their own interpreters and and judges in points controverted; that is
the privilege of others. I only say and wish from my soul that some indiscreet
Zealots had not a greater hand in them than Catholic Religion, whose tenets
are contrary to cruelty and murder on any pretense whatsoever.

Is it not notorious that the Reformed Zealots in Ireland signed a bloody
Petition offered to the Parliament in England, that all Irish that would not go
to Church might be extirpated or banished? This was done before the Irish
Catholics did stir.

Suppose that in Vlster some of the rascality or Kerns (being exasperated by so
many and continual injuries, had murdered some persons, must that reflect upon
the English Catholics and all the Irish Nation? or what is the Irish R^^ellion
to English Catholics who detest it) more than the Amboyna to Reformists? it is
too much ascertained, that the Murders and Massacres done in Ireland by
Reformists furious zeal against Catholics, exceeded those committed by
Catholics, witness their murders about Dublin: the County of Wicko and
Fingcole, by the transplantation of them into Canaught, and by the transporting
them into the Plantations of America, forcing them to the Oath of Abjuration,
and almost starving them in those places, contrary to the Public Faith given
them by printed Declarations in the Name of the English Parliament to Irish
Catholics, Anno 1649. -- 1652. that the Oath of Abjuration shall not be
administered to any in Ireland.

Baxter in his Cure of Church-Division; confesses and says, they put the
Irish to death that went to defend themselves and stand for the King and
Country -- yet they who seemed so godly themselves Massacred millions of their
own Country that were for the Country and King, and gave God many humiliation
days, and thanks for their success -- killing after so many Scots in cold blood
after they were taken at Worcester Fight. See Baxter.

But whosoever desires to be better satisfied in this of Ireland, let him read
the printed Remonstrance of the Irish Confederate Catholics delivered by their
Commissioners the Lord Vicount Preston and Sir Robert Talbot the seventeenth of
March 1642. to his Majesty's Commissioners at Trim. There he will see how the
Irish desired the murders on both sides might be punished: and how they were
forced to take up arms by the wicked practices of Sir William Persons, Sir
Charles Coot, and other fiery Protestants who governed the Kingdom. Therefore
whatsoever may be said in passion of the Irish war, its evident that the
Calvinistical Zealot had great influence upon their injurious provocations,
murdering seven or eight hundred women, children, Ploughmen, and laborers in
a day in the Kings Land; whenever the Army went abroad, the poor
Country People did betake themselves to the Firrs where the Parliament Officers
did besiege them, and set the F^rrs on fire, and such as escaped that element
were killed by the Army. These cruelties were ordinary not only near Dublin but
in all other parts of the Kingdom, where the Parliamentarians were. As may be
read in diverse Remonstrances and Relations published in the beginning of the
late troubles.

Massacre in France so much objected also against Catholics in general; The
world knows was a Cabinet Plot condemned by Catholic Writers, there and in
other Countries. Although it was evident in matter of fact, their powerful
Rebellion drew them into that Machinated destruction; and the King was moved to
it by Interest of State, and security to himself, not for Religion.

They fought many Battles with their Prince, fortified Towns against him. And
Coligni their great Commander known to be a grand Rebel. They brought foreign
Forces into France as Rutyers from Germany, and English from us. They delivered
Havra de grace to Queen Elizabeth. Nay they began first to murder Catholics
in Paris: and also Coligni and Beza got Poltrot to murder the Duke of Guise,
as Davila l. 3. Hist. who is thought by Protestants, an authentical and
impartial Author. And Poltrot confessed so at his death for the Fact, so
Davila. Moreover there were other motives that caused the King and Councils
dipleasure against these rebellious People. For

Baxter in his Cure of Church-Divisions, p. 365. who is known to be no friend
to Catholics, confesses in these words.

Historians tells us, says he, that when King Francis of France had forbid the
reproaching of Papists way of worship, and silenced the Ministers for not
obeying him: Many of of hotbrain'd people took up the way of provoking them by
scornful Pictures and Libels, hanging up and down in Streets such ridiculous
and reproachful Rhimes and Images: (but this which was none of the way of God)
began that persecution, (by provoking the King) which cost many thousand lives
before it ended (and the Protestant Synod at Rochel refused the Council of du
Plessis, du Moulin and many others) was stirred up by the Peoples zeal, and
ended in the blood of a thousand, and ruin, and power of the Protestants in
France, See Baxter.

How false therefore and malicious it was to affirm that a Jubilee was kept for
this Massacre, let the world be witness. When even Thuanus a malicious and
partial Writer as ever undertook History, as Doctor Heylin confesses) writ in
spleen and Faction against Popes, first belched out this notorious Fable -- yet
he himself confesses, p. 1069. The Jubilee was to thank God for the victory at
Lepanto, for the Election of a Catholic King of Poland, etc.

Another Calumny and not long since spread abroad by many ignorant and
illiterate people, and imprudently reassumed by Doctor Stilling. Tillot. etc.
that many Quakers, and Tub-Preachers among the Sectaries were disguised
Jesuits, Friars, etc. or had their Fanatic principles from them.

This weak, childish (if not malignant slander) is refuted, and known to be a
manifest untruth by all understanding men. Since such wicked dissimulation is
clearly against the principles of their Religion, damnable in it self, and by
no power on earth (upon whatsoever pretense) dispensable.

Secondly, It is known false by the Sectaries themselves, who are always well
acquainted with their Preachers, Education, former Profession, Trade, Family,
etc.

Thirdly, Those disguised Preachers, after so many years could never be
detected by themselves, or any others, or brought to trial. It Is yet uncertain
whether this charge does proceed from impotent malice or desperate impudence.
This Imposture is now so transparent that the meanest capacity now begins to
see through it, and discover the Legerdemain therein.

I ask was there ever any such thing duly proved? was there ever any such
Priest or Jesuit taken under such disguise? let any man of honor or
conscience, mark the proceedings of these men; I mean the Authors and spreaders
of such reports and stories. They are challenged to make discovery; to
prosecute the business. The Papists disclaim the imputation as a most injurious
slander suggested against them merely by the malice of their enemies. Insomuch
that I dare confidently assure my self; that if an Oath were tendered to all
the Papists in the Nation; they would willingly swear; that neither they
themselves, nor ever any they knew, did ever use any such practices; or ever
thought them lawful.

What man in his right senses, can believe such gross calumnies? so groundless,
so full of contradictions? insipid accusations which seem to cheak reason. If
these and the like can be thought to deserve credit; ere it be long no man's
innocence will be able to protect him against suspicion and slander. But who is
acquainted with antiquity will find their accusers in such points to imitate
the old Heathens; who imputed the unluck^ mischievous accidents that happened
amongst themselves, to the primitive Christians.

We have seen of late (to the regret of all moderate and judicious men) how
some unquiet and uncharitable Spirits by false insinuations, have abused the
Nation into most antichristian thoughts, suspicions and jealousies, of the
greatest, most prudent and peaceable Society of Christianity.

Never did Jacob Behmen, Stifeler or any of their Fraternity, write more
malicious self-contradictions, or that had more inference of confusion and
disorder then a late calumniating Polyprag^us.

What candor, morality, or justice, or charity can there be in a person, for
accusing the whole Catholic Church Western and Eastern for practice of
Idollatry? which must unchurch this great Body and divorce this Adultress from
Christ, it being a fundamental error. Can any think it agreeable to the
gracious nature, design and office of Christ to cast of and condemn, for so
many ages the visible Body of Christianity? have not the Egyptians,
Aethiopians, Syrians, Armenians, Abyssines and Greeks almost all the same
manner of worship in those things we so much censure the Roman?

Is it not a gross injustice that most men's Christianity and Church-Rites
should be judged null, upon the censures and rumors of suspicious men, without
any just proof or trial? to traduce and defame almost all the whole world; to
judge the generality of Christians visible members of the Devil? does not this
^acerate and defame all Religion; and make all Christian Churches lubricous and
uncertain shadows? that any such man that is unconscionable enough to say they
are profane, idolatrous, etc. may unchurch at his pleasure? and what you say of
others, another may say of you, and as justly exspect to be believed.

You have great errors your selves ex concessis, should you be made odious for
them to hearers: you must all put up your pipes, and find your artifice would
first silence your selves. What if any should say of you, that you are,
antichristian, seditious, bloody-minded, superstitious, etc. would you not
think they should every one personally appear before the accused; and proof
brought against them: and that they should speak for themselves before they are
condemned? Seeing in this age men censure and persecute most, where they are
acquainted least.

Can such Champions hope for success that go down into Egypt for help? cutting
and launcing with lies and falsities as with sharp Razors? can such weapons
prosper as are sharpened at the forges of Philistines? is there no way to
undermine Romanists, but by digging as low as Hell in slandering the footsteps,
and traducing the persons of our Progenitors? can that wisdom come from above
which represents the highest devotions practiced from antiquity as
Fanaticism? that makes all supernatural favors, revelations, ecstasies, etc.
matter of drollery? to term S. Francis, S. Dominick* etc. Enthusiasts? whom
Tindal, Act. Mon. 1338, Pa^teleon, Luther and the Centurists their very
Adversaries call holy and good men: and our very Almanacks these two hundred
years have included in the Category of Saints?

The Doctor has founded all the weight of his arguments upon false
suppositions, grossly imagining any inferior relative honor given to Saints,
Angels, etc. it is derogatory to the honor of God and perfect idolatry,
imitating therein the craft of the Devil, who always covers his malice with
pretext of good: impugneth the same under color and pretense to defend Gods
honor, so the Serpent s^duced Eve. So he boldly charge them with giving
divine honor to Images, accidents of bread and wine; and unto Saints, using
the word adoration, or honor, for divine worship: this we must suppose
otherwise his whole book and arguments does not ^ouch them, or any thing to the
purpose, but phalerae a^ populum.

Who ever that prete^ds to the name of a Christian, but conf^sses all religious
divine worship is proper and due to God alone, and no created thing whatsoever
is capable of it?

He should have first proved his grounds solidly before he made his inferences
upon them: And so his large chapter of Idolatry, might have seemed at least to
have been somewhat ad rem: whereas now it serves to no other end but to
discovery his f^lly and humo^r against Catholics. Why does he cavil so about
words? all the ground of his disputation is upon the equivocation of words. Can
he be ignorant that the vulgar use have not words enough properly to signify
all our notions and conceptions?

The terms, worship, prayer, invocation, bowing down, adoration, etc. for want
of words are or may be equivocal. For worship or prayer directed to God imports
a total dependence in him; and so our prayers, etc. are offered to God alone.
As applied to just and holy men it implies only a communion in the members of
the Church militant; or assistance of their prayers, to him who only can give
what we ask. They pray not to Saints in the manner as they pray to God, but
desire their prayers, as we do the just men on earth to pray for us. How comes
then the one to be idolatry, and the other a recommendable action?

The word Adoration, signifies not only divine honor and worship, but also
religious and civil. As may be proved out of the Scripture and Fathers. The
Protestants themselves grant the different kinds of worship and honor
signified thereby.

These three Adoratious have many examples and testimonies in holy Writ, as the
word adoration is to be understood diversely: either to God alone, called
Latria: or to Angels and Saints, holy men, as servants of God, and for love of
him called Dulia. The third a civil worship to men of dignity for some civil or
temporal excellency.

These three kinds of adoration, etc. according to the different applications
thereof, cannot be distinguished in reading, but by circumstances: And because
the corporeal exhibition of the same exterior acts of submission and reverence
is common to all kinds of worship; thence they are distinguished and
diversified only by the intention and will of him that does perform them.
Whence it is not to be wondered that, as the ancient Fathers; so Catholics now
following the custom and phrase of holy Scripture, do use also the word
adoration in different manner and sense.

The Doctor grants the civil adoration, though absurdly he denies the
Religious; Calling that civil worship which is testified in Scripture to have
been done to Angels and holy men. Whence the adoration Abraham, Lot, and Joshua
did to Angels could be only civil. Which would be absurd, because there was not
therein any civil or temporal respect, the motive of their adoration being a
supernatural excellency, including also a sanctity, or holiness; as appears by
the example of Joshua's adoration of the Angel; who, besides his falling
prostrate on the ground, was commanded to do more reverence; viz. to put off
his shoes, because the place was holy, viz. in respect of the Angels presence.

The like is to be said of the examples exhibited by Abdias to Elias, of the
children of the Prophets to Elizaeus; for although Abdias was in temporal
dignity a greater man and more worthy than Elias the Prophet; yet he fell upon
his face before Elias 3 Kings 18. acknowledging thereby the spiritual
excellency of Gods Prophet, and did therein an act religious. So the children
of the Prophets did the like to Elizaeus, adoraverunt ^um proni in terram 4
Reg. 2. specifying a supernatural respect of his miraculous passage over the
River, the motive of this adoration. Therefore it cannot be only civil.

This I thought good to note by the way, to show by this occasion the piece of
Legerdemain i^ the Doctor, who denies that Angels might be adored in any sense:
yet it appears that Abraham, Lot, Joshua adored Angels prostrate on the ground
Genes. 18. 19. Joshua 3. therefore there is some inferior adoration, or we
must charge the holy men with Idolatry. It cannot be called civil only, for the
spiritual excellency of Angels, and sanctity of the Prophets being
supernatural, does not import any temporal or civil consideration, but a
religious respect, because it is exhibited to Angels and Saints as Servants of
God, for the honor and love of him: so as the worship rests not in them, but
has a spicial relation to Almighty God, being yielded to them for his sake;
because they are his Servants; and to the end to honor him in them, which must
be a religious act. This honor being finally and principally to God, for whose
sake they are honored in respect of the participation of the divine excellency
and abundance of Grace given them; which is so far from dishonouring, that we
do him a special honor and service therein; for seeing he said to his
Disciples, qui vos recipit me recipit, qui vos spernit me spernit, he that
receives you receives me, etc. so that the honor done to them redounds to
the honor of God.

This being so and most manifest in our Doctrine and Practice: How impudent and
unheard of a thing is it to make them idolaters? whereas their Books written of
Worship and Ad ration etc. and their Doctrine in Schools and Pulpits do
proclaim unto the world, and their Consciences do witness it betwixt God and
them, although they honor Saints and Angels; yet they hold and believe them to
be creatures of God, and the honor they yield to them is not a divine honor,
but such as may be given to a gloriefid creature, whom God will have to be
honored, according to the testimony of our Savior, John 22. quis mihi
ministraverit, etc. for God is honored and glorified thereby.

Did Saint Hierome, when he wrote to Marcella, and invited her to adore the
ashes of Saint John Baptist, Elizaeus and Abdias commit flat idolatry? did not
Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine and other Fathers, yea the very Penners of
Scripture apply adorare very often to the worship of creatures? Saint Ambrose,
says Helen, did wisely to cause the nail of Christ's Cross to be set in the
Diadem of the Emperor Constantine, ut (...) Christi adoretur in regibus: and
Saint Augustine (as Collins, an eminent Protestant, confesses) applied the
word adorare to the Sacrament of Baptism and Circumcision, saying to Faustus
the Manichean, Adoratur in gestante. Did not St. Ambrose reverence and worship
holy Relics, the Bodies of Saint Gervasius and Protasius, Nazarius and
Celsus, Vit^lis and Agricola, found out b^ a revelation he had from God? and
were by him translated and honored with pomp and solemnity, and approved by
many Miracles, as St. Aug. witnesses in his Confess. or Book De civit. Dei?

But this Doctor imitateth Vigilanti^s the Heretic, who charged Christians of
those days with flat Idolatry, for worshipping Relics of Saints, calling them
Cinerarios, kissing and adoring a little dust carried in a little vessel,
taking adoration for worship due to God alone. Whence Saint Hierome answering
him in the same sense says, non adoramus martyrum, etc. viz. with divine
honor committing idolatry, as Vigilantius charge us: sed honoramus reliquias
martyrum, ut eum cujus sunt martyrs adoremus and honoremus s^r^os, etc. we
honor the Servants, to the end that their honor may redound to the honor of
their Lord; who says, He that receives you receives me. Vigilantius did not
herein reprove the custom of particular men, but the practice of the whole
Church. So Saint Hierome impugned him with public examples, as of the public
translation of the relics of Saint Andrew, St. Luke, Saint Timothy to
Constantinople by Constantine, apud quas, says he, demones rugiunt, etc. and
then produces another example of the most solemn translation of the Relics
of Samuel the Prophet, from Judaea to Calcedon in Thracia, sumptuously carried
by Bishops in a golden vessel; met, received and accompanied by people of all
Churches by the way. Whereupon he asks Vigilantius whether he took Arcadius
the Emperor (who caused this to be done) and all the Bishops and multitude for
sacrilegious persons and fools? as we may ask the Doctor in the same manner.

Saint Hierome said of himself praefepe domini and incunabula adoremus: and
expounding the verse of the Psalm adorate scabellum pedum ejus, he takes the
footstool to be the Cross. See Saint Gregor. Naz. Theod. who makes a plain
distinction betwixt Latria and Dulia. They came not, says he, to the Martyrs
as to God, therefore did not give divine honor due alone to God, but an
inferior honor due to Gods Servants. So there is some intermediate worship
between a divine and mere civil worship: let the Doctor find out a suitabe name
for it, we will not stand upon terms; -- but nothing will serve him, but a
religious and divine worship must be all one.

I wish the Doctor had studied Metaphysics better, and not to confound and
jumble together the Notions of those things, which ought to be distinguished,
abstracted or severed one from another. Is it not an errant fallacy to infer
and conclude an absolute divine worship; when the premises only understood in
some inferior relative respect?

The very light of nature and common sense may decide this Controversy:
touching the honor and dishonor done to a picture or image of them we hate or
affect, reflects upon the person represented. Yet this man, who prattles much
of reason and sense, denies the honor or respect given to the image of Christ
or his Saints does at all redound to them: nay that it is flat idolatry? What
Logic is this? is it the same thing to worship an image instead of God; and to
worship God himself before an image? The Jews, we know, did worship God by
bowing down before the Ark and Cherubims, and yet they did not worship them
instead of God. Do all of the English Church commit idolatry entering the
Churches uncovered, in revererence to the walls, bowing at the Altar or Name of
Jesus, kneeling at their Communion, to their Parents for Blessing? all which
may be as truly called, and are, as much a religious worship, or inferior
honor, as any practiced by the Papists.

Does not he interpret the word of God and the second precept falsely? in
charging others with idolatry, for doing the self same things which God himself
commanded the Jews to do, to whom he gave this Precept? Did not God command
Moses to make two Cherubims of Gold in the two ends of the Mercy Seat? Exodus
25. 18. Were there not graven Images on the walls of the Temple? 2 Chronicles. c. 3.
were not the two Cherubims in the most holy place of image work? Psalm. 99. 5.
were not the people to pray in the Temple, and commanded to worship at the
footstool of our Lord, that is, the Ark of the Covenant, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.
over which were Cherubims of image work?

Behold now what a deep Divine and terrible Logician the Doctor is, the Papists
were never so much put to their trumps, he argues so substantially (against
Scripture and against charity) his inference you must mark well.

God commanded the making of Images after he had given the second Precept:
therefore Papists can make no Images, but they are Idolaters. Images were
placed in Gods Temple: therefore Papists are Idolaters, in placing Images in
their Churches. God commanded to bow down and be prostrate before the Ark:
Therefore Papists who kneel in the sight of an Image are Idolaters. Are not
these good consequences? and yet this is the weighty and wildy club whereby
this great Hercules hops to beat down Popery.

I leave it to all wise men to judge whether he be not self-conceited and
presumptuous; who would make so many Christians Idolaters whether they will or
no? and those who so much detest it, that it is incompatible to all the
Articles of their Belief. To go about to paganize and make Antichristian all
Christian Predecessors of this Nation, and all the Churches of Christ for a
thousand years, and so by a necessary consequence to be members of perdition.

Can any commit Idolatry against their will and intention? can you think it
credible, that prudent men should be so dull; as, in the midst of a people that
cry out against Idolatry, they should deny God, and make Gods of Stocks and
Stones? they who labonred these thousand years, by the conversion of Nations,
to persuade people from Idolatry, to be charged themselves with the same guilt?
Good Sir, you may as truly say they worship an Asses head (as the old Heathens
accused the primitive Christians:) a wise man will as soon believe if you
should affirm, those that approve all things in the Alcaron are Christians; or
that England reaches as far as Greece. This Web which you weave with so much
earnestness will only catch dotterils and fools, such as have shaked their
hands with their reason; or else enthralled or captivated it under tyranny and
partiality; and locked it down to the galleys of their own passions.

It is not my business to dispute this polemical Article at large, which is
better done by Doctor T. G. and V. C. I find his whole Book like that
paralitick Discourse, written rather Rhetorically ad captandum populum, to
insinuate into vulgar capacities, then logically to evince the Hypothesis
contended for: strip it out of its multifarious fallacies, ungrounded surmises
and erroneous suppositions; and it will not only be a massy body without bones
and nerves to support it and join it together: but sine succo and sanguine, a
very Skelleton.

Pardon me, good Reader, if thou think me oversharp with this man, who has
kindled my zeal and whetted my style against him: in that his procedure is
unchristian, that it tends to destroy all, but settle no Religion. The greatest
heathen could never reproach Christians with more injurious slanders. And shall
it be lawful for a private person to condemn and deride, on false grounds and
surmises, those duties which the most learned and major part of Christians ever
admitted of? and shall such a one be entreated to preach and print, and others
abler and honester forbid the Press and Pulpit? are we not then partial to our
selves, and become judges of evil thoughts. James 2. 1, 4.

When the Doctor proves that they worship Idols, together with God, as the
Kings of Israel did. Or alone without him, as the Pagans did: or that they
adored with Sacrifice the Sun, the Moon, etc. and other inferior Deities, as
he calls them, we will grant him flat idolatry. In the mean while, all sober
men must think,

These are devices to seduce the vulgar into strange opinions and unchristian
thoughts of others; to traduce honest men and their principles: let them be
fairly heard in a public conference, how far they can justify themselves from
being deservedly suspected of such abominations: if our passion will not our
charity ought to think better.

I intended here to have a lash or two at the late uncharitable Pamphlet,
called ( A seasonable Discourse:) but hearing it is already fully examined and
corrected by a better Quill, I will only give these Animadversions; viz. that
all or most of his material Arguments, are sufficiently answered in this
Treatise, viz. concerning the Popes Power of Excommunication, Deposing,
Suprem^^y, the Inquisition, Massacres, disguised Jesuits, opinions of Mariana,
etc. as you may find in the Objections and Answers before; as also that faith
is not to be kept with Heretics; that dissimulation of Equivocations in
Religion is permitted: all these are confuted to be most manifest untruths and
falsehoods: he cites also very insincerely many Authors: and brings in for his
best proofs for witness, our enemies or partial Authors not to be credited; as
Thuanus, Platina, Myster. Jesui^. Cornel. Agrippa, Sleiden, ^ll^ry de Foulis,
etc.

The Pamphlet indeed rather indeed deserves a rebuke for his slanders (and
therefore the name is wisely concealed) than for any man to take the pains to
read or answer it. It is but a cheating Drollery to delude the people; whence
he makes merry with the life of Saint Francis, as fabulous, though written by
the hand of Saint Bonaventure, a seraphical and holy learned man, reputed
amongst wiser Protestants: he takes pleasure to rail at the Popes; to whom all
western Churches did ever bear a respect, and ought to do, as being the chief
Patriarch of the West acknowledged by the adversaries themselves.

All men should speak honorably and reverently of Princes and Bishops, the one
being Gods Vicegerents in temporals, the other in spirituals, and Successors to
the Apostles. Suppose some Popes have behaved themselves too severe, or
haughty, (being Princes as well as Bishops) it is not so strange, all great
mean should be Saints. But the very name of a Pope is a scarecrow to this man;
as if he were one of the ignorant Herd, credulous to believe any fabulous
stories picked out of Legends (like his own Pamphlet) that have neither
charity, truth or civility. Why cannot he (if he were just and honest) rehearse
as well the pious acts and memories of good Popes, where there be twenty to
one; famous in approved Authors, and undeniable History? but that, like some
venomous serpent he loves to suck only in poisoned places: To speak of our own
days, (as he does at random, without jugment or sincerity) what can he say
against the lives and the actions of the last three Popes? have not they
incessantly labored for the peace and support of all Christian Princes, among
themselves and against the common enemy? and now in particular uniting the
Polanders, and assisting them with money against the Adversary of Christianity.

Is it not then a weakness in this man, (worthy to be derided by all the
moderate and wiser sort) who would make the world believe Popes are so
dangerous to Monarchy? What Kings or States complain against them? Are his
neighboring Princes jealous or fearful of his power or encroachments? and
cannot more potent Princes and Commonwealths, at a distance, better secure
themselves by their own power? Are not Catholics in all places obliged to
stand to their Sovereign, in defense of their Country, against the Pope as
effectually as against any other? Have not the English Catholics long ago in
open Parliament declared, that the Imperial Crown of England is, and has been
at all times, free from all sabjection to the Pope? and provided a Statute of
praemunire, against any abuses as they thought might happen?

Look on the English Catholics in 88. when the Pope was excited and backed by
the power of a great Prince, (Her Title being disputable) and urged by some
abuses, and continued severities, to excommunication, etc. Do not our own and
foreign Writers notwithstanding testify, the Catholics stood firmly to their
Allegiance? and the most learned Priests, by an authentic Writing,
acknowledged the Q. (though excommunicated) to have still the same authority as
her Predecessors, and cheerfully offered to hazard their lives in defense of
her Dignity and Country?

Suppose eight or ten men talk at random in Schools of the deposing power, etc.
must that be the Doctrine of the Church? Did the Church ever approve or teach
any such maxims, or were they ever tolerated? (as he most falsely would have
it.) Have not all other, numerous, learned men contradicted them? did not all
the Universities of a great Kingdom condemn such opinions, and their Books to
be burnt, by a Decree in the face of the world, by public Justice? did not a
General Council of Constance sentence the Deposing Power as erroneous and
scandalous, although he were a Tyrant? Have any other reformed Churches
proceeded so far? The Doctor does well to cry Whore first, and take no notice
of the many standing objections in this and other things, against his own
Calvinistical party.

But what need I trouble Ink and Paper to examine this man's absurdities, when I
had taken but three hours to run them over, they are increased to so many, I am
come into a Labyrinth: you may judge by his first ten lines, wherein he
commits three: first he says, His Majesty found it necessary, for good of
his affairs to grant freedom to all Dissentors. If His Majesty found it
necessary, is not he presumptuous, being a private man and a subject, to make
this invective (he calls seasonable) Discourse to impeach it? to offer weak and
lying motives to obstruct it? Secondly, what confidence has he to utter so
notorious an untruth, as to say, Now Priests openly act in all parts their
functions? In what City or Country Town, has he found them publckly preaching
or praying? Thirdly, is it not absurd, that being an ecclesiastic, he (should
so mind us of Capital punishment) who, by the Canons, should have no hand in
blood?

He is much troubled at the Co^^iers Crred, viz. to believe as the Church
believes. Which gives a suspicion he does not believe or would not have his
Parishoners believe one article of the Creed. He calls charity and love, but
tempting charms: as if he did not know or believe the Gospel; where there be
innumerable commands for it. But then he comes a canting (being suspicious his
Book tends to Sedition and to breed feuds amongst us) says, no price can be to
great for peace, but truth. But what truth does he mean? the many imputed
slanders in his Book? or would he have truth separated from love, peace, and
charity? He cites Authors falsely; as Thomas Aquinus Peron, etc. he has false
supposals, viz. that Catholics take away the Scripture, give a half Communion,
make new Articles of Religion, etc. that indulgencies remit the guilt of sin,
and that the gifts of God are bought with money, etc. who ever writ more
against such Simony than Catholic Authors? or hold more plainly that sin is
never forgiven without sorrow and repentance from God by the Merits and Passion
of Jesus Christ? So much for the Unseasonable Discourse.

Now to overthrow from the foundation all other aspersions in this kind. Let
all impartial men consider, first those criminations proceed originally from
enemies, and grand animosities of parties adverse. Secondly, Papists
universally disown them. Thirdly, unrepentant traitors and implacable enemies
are amongst their accusers, and which most encourages them is their constant
fidelity: they might easily vindicate themselves from all such imputations by
the putting their adversaries to the proof, had they but liberty to question
them, and bring them to a trial: For they never durst appear or show their
faces in an open and impartial audience. We might admire where such deep malice
could be found, but much more how any prudence could believe them; and that no
reason or experience will restrain them.

How strange a wickedness is then the groundless censuring, so highly and
publicly, so many noble and honorable personages, so many eminently deserving
subjects of his Majesty? so many grave, most venerable and most sacred
personages in the world? What account shall such give at the last day? what is
this less than persecution? what mischiefs flow and are apt from such libelling
by sad experience, we have tasted the bitterness of the fruit.

The dreadful ruin of Jerusalem was brought about by such furious ones,
Josephus calls the Zealots. And should they still be countenanced, it
unavoidably brings incurable divisions; for there is no certain rule of
Justice with such persons. Secondly, It breeds an ill correspondence between
our fellow subjects, and makes them ill looked upon, which violates civil
unity, so necessary for the peace and strength of a Kingdom. Thirdly, It
disincourages Loyalty, to see that after such testimonies it may be lawful for
any, at pleasure, to brand them as Traitors publicly in Print. Fourthly, It
tends to excite our Governors, that they are not fit to be endured in any
State. Fifthly, It must breed fouds between private persons all over England,
Scotland and Ireland. 6. It is a reproach to Christian Religion, when the world
must see, we have not so much justice and equity as Heathens have in their
worldly Societies. Seventhly, It is a great cause of the persecution of
Christians, and the damnation of Persecutors: being foolisher than the Devil,
who would build Christ's house or Kingdom by dividing it. Mat. 12.

And that which must sanctify all this sin, is, the seeming interest of God
and Religion, to hinder the growth and increase of Popery. If it was an untruth
they spoke, it was for Religion; if they did backbite and revile, it was to
preserve the hearers from errors and infection. If they used their reputation
to murder love, and make others odious, and rejoiced in their sufferings and
afflictions. all this is but for defense of truth. They think all this is a
part of Christian zeal.

And this is a mark of Satan's way of Reformation he does it by dividing, and
teaching Christians to form odious thoughts of one another: And when his
meaning is to save you from heaven and truth; he takes upon him, he is only
saving you from sin, or errors or corruptions of the Church.

By these notes and signs (says an English Divine) you may easily perceive how
the dividing zeal of such differs from the true, genuine Christian Catholic
Zeal. If your zeal be raised for some singular opinion, not for the common
salvation; moved by some personal interest, honor, or dishonor, for
strengthening a party, etc. And not to promote godliness the common cause of
Christianity, or general cause of pedce and piety.

A hurting burning zeal, for execution of penal Statutes. When it causes you
to revile, backbite, despise, censure, and zealously to make dissenters odious,
that hearers may abate their love. When your zeal tends to hurt and cruelty,
and is greater for the adversaries destruction, than your desire and prayer for
his conversion.

Its a false zeal, more inclined to their sufferings, reproach or hurt with
some secret desire of fire from heaven, etc. when it tends to separations,
divisions, distances from our ancient Brethren.

This is the complexion of the proud, false, conceited and surly sort of
professors, which flies outward against the sins of other men, and can live
with pride, selfishness, and sensuality at home -- a contemptuous persecuting
zeal, kinled by inflaming censures of rash passionate Preachers.

First it is an ill sign when their censures are beyond the proportion of their
understandings; and their experience and prudence much less then others whom
they censure. Secondly, When it is hardly restrained; it shows the World and
the Flesh are too much it friends. Thirdly, When it burns where lust, pride
and malice burn. Fourthly, When it carries you from those holy rules
prescribed: and pretends to come from a spirit which will not be tried, but
by Scripture. Its a suspicious sign when it is contrary to the judgment,
experience, and zeal of the generality of most well experienced, sober godly
Christians. And so contrary to the ordinary working of Gods Spirit in others,
who are as good as you: for this zeal comes not from heaven. For Gods Spirit
is not contrary to it self.

But the true Catholic genuine Christian zeal appears in its own likeness,
in wisdom, love, humility, meekness and and sobriety: Provokes hearers to
love; and good works. Is not contentious, reproachful, injurious: loves virtue
in a heathen. Is kindled by humble meditations of Christ's example, to study and
imitate him and his Saints in forbearance, patience, forgiving others and doing
good.

Promoting Christian Religion with sincere and plain dealing; winning men by
Morality, justice and charity, and offending them by no unnecessary thing; by
no imputed calumnies; sticking closer to justice and peace than to any party:
Owneth virtue and goodness that is in all parties and opinions. Which will be a
means to remove the animosities we are so apt to receive against dissenters,
and lessen our differences and disagreements.

The true means of gaining souls to God, is the Gospellary way of meekness,
persuasion, etc. Christ and his Apostles appeared without words of man's
wisdom, assistance of Kings or Princes; without fines, imprisonments, oaths,
etc. By his admirable mildness he condemned all these politic Religions, by
using cruelty to support them. If it had been otherwise I would have told you,
John 14 if the way of planting or preserving my faith had been by imposing
penalties, by cruel Oaths, or watering it with the blood of Refusers, I would
have told you. The son of man came not to destroy men's lives but to save them.

To wind up all in few words of what is said in this Book, I desire no prudent
man to give any credit further than his experience shall find true after
diligent search made as concerns every one; before he pass sentence. If this be
not enough to disabuse your credulity, (of criminations imputed without proof
or probability) let all impartial men judge whether you have not shaked hands
with all morality. For who can pretend any charity that will harbor detected
calumnies? or who can love truth that will not acknowledge it when represented?
The reasons above given I doubt not, which would serve to clear the Catholics
from such aspersions, before any just or reasonable Judge, Pagan or Mohammedan.
How much more ought they to serve among Christians; who profess not only truth,
but charity, which is the life of Religion and bond of perfection. Hence, says
the great Siracides, blame no man before thou have enquired the matter;
understand first and then reform righteously.

CONCLUSION.
IN Conclusion now of this Apologetick Discourse; it will not be improper, once
again to mind you of the necessity we have to Christian love. Seeing the neglect
of it, and a persecuting hurtful spirit (mistaken for zeal) has been and is
the issue and consequence of all the immoderation, feuds and antipathies we
have one against another.

It is then the duty of every serious Christian to lay aside all vain
jealousies, idle suspicions, rude severities; (and much more forged calumnies)
against any persuasion whatsoever. The Authors and Meditators of such
aspersions, though they may pretend much Conscience and Religion, can have
none. For S. James assures us, that whosoever would seem religious and tempers
not his tongue, that man's religion is vain: And in Leviticus 19. 15. Its
commanded, thou shall not calumniate thy neighbor nor oppress him by violence.
Its against a divine precept to bear false witness or detect our brother; its
against the luster of Christian Religion, it gives scandal abroad to the very
Heathens, its against the peace and settlement of the Nation at home, which
must be conserved by mutual concord and unity of affection.

No moderate man that has left any room in his breast for truth; or charity in
his heart; can abet such fierce, censorious unchristian tempers, (which have
appeared of late) which have made and still keep open, our divisions and
distances: if the same sins are continued without repentance, and if after such
warning (as the whole world ever scarce had the like) we remain still
self-conceited, and arrogantly ignorant. How heinous is our crime, and how
dreadful is the prognostic of our greater ruin? and how guilty are those
Ministers of the blood of Souls, who tell not men of this sin and danger?

When I consider Christ's precept of mutual love, and the Apostle abridging it,
the whole duty of a Christian: I cannot sufficiently wonder to see Christians
in this present age; so furiously to persecute and hate one another only on the
account of Religion. If we reflect upon the difficulties that encounter us in
the way of truth, and withal consider the shortness of our sight, for here we
see but in part, and understand but in part, There will appear more reason to
endeavor the mutual assist^n^e and support, than malicious destruction and
ruin of one another. To hate and vilify others for their opinions, is
repugnant to Scripture which commands us to love our brother and not persecute
him. To despise our brother for his innocent mistakes, or to constrain him to
profess more than he is convinced of; proceeds from a great tyranny and
presumption.

I searched Evangelical records; and there was nothing but mildness, and soft
doctrine: I enquired into the breathings of the Spirit, and they were all
pacificatory. I wondered from what Scriptureencouragement these men deducted
their practices. At last I was forced to conclude, they were only pretended
Chaplains to the Prince of peace: And those Teachers that should have been
saving lights, were degenerated into firebrands.

Different Opinions in Religion, might consist well enough, with peace and
public safety, would men be persuaded to be modest, to keep them to
themselves, and not to fancy their conceits necessary to the rest of mankind;
to vex their neighbors, provoke their rulers, dissettle the government and
disturb the peace for the propagation of them.

Unity and affection might be preserved amidst diversity of opinions; if we do
but consider that errors are infirmities of the understanding, and no man is
willing to be deceived. So are not objects of our hatred, but our pity. We hate
no man for being blind, poor, lame, etc. ignorance and infirmity require our
compassion and our charity: but nothing can justify our rage and malice. If we
were infallible and all our opinions were certainties and demonstrations; we
might then have more pretense for our stifness, rigidness, and severities. But
to confess the infirmities of our own faith and understanding; and to give no
candid allowance to others in many failings, this is utterly inexcusable.

The way indeed may not be broad in respect of practice, or sensual indulgence:
yet it has a latitude, in respect of judgment and circumstantial opinion. A
middle; moderate, pa^ifick way. He that stands in the middle path, may extend
the arms of his charity on both sides. Extremes are dangerous. Our affections
ought to meet, though our judgmen^s cannot; Christian love is necessary, but
agreement in opinion is neither necessary, nor possible. Love and goodness
prevail. Where nothing else will; these win and captivate the Soul. And such
conquests are more noble and better than either those of arts or arms.

Now to attain this excellent Catholic temper, we are to love virtue in a
Heathen, and S. Paul 1 Cor. 7. says If any brother has a wife an Infidel and
she consent to dwell with him, let him not put her away, what can be said more
to oblige Christians to charity and meekness, to forbear one another, than an
injunction of an Apostle to live peaceably even with an Infidel?

The excellency of christian love is preferred before all gifts and natural
perfections: Cor. 13. it is the image of God, it is his vital Spirit infused
into us, and renders us most like to our Maker. It is the Spirit of Angels and
glorified Souls. The Celestial Inhabitants live and abide in love, sweetness
and benignity. Nor is that love confined to the blessed and glorified company,
but it sheds it self abroad upon the nether world. And they are ministering
Spirits for our good, Heb. 1. 14. They so far love us, that they can stoop from
heaven to serve us: for there is joy at the conversion of a sinner, and
consequently love to converted Saints, and care and pity for the rest of men.

Love and charity is the vital grace of Christian Religion; and though men's
understandings, are convinced already, that charity is their duty: yet there is
too much need to represent some of the vast heap of Injunctions that make it
so, to incline their wills. I shall therefore briefly lay together a few of the
chief instances of this kind.

Our Savior urges it in his command John 13. 34. he makes it a
distinguishing note of his Disciples, 13. 35. and enjoins them to love their
enemies, Mat. 3. 24. And the want of it the reason of the curse pronounced on
those on the left hand at the solemn judgment, Mat. 41. 42.

This love and union was so recommended to all Christians by the Apostles, that
they inculcated nothing more than the necessity thereof. Saint Paul attributed
thereto all the persecution of Christian Religion, saying, qui diligit proximum
legem implevit, Romans ^3. 3. and Galat. 3. 22. reckons it five times over, under
the names of peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness and meekness, Gal. 22.
23. He advances it above all gifts and graces, 1 Cor. 13. above prophecy and
mysteries, and knowledge of faith. And the beloved Disciple Saint John
attributes unto it our being born of God: And the want of this an evidence of
not knowing God, and a sign of one that abides in death, 1 John 3. 14. he
calls him a murderer that hates another, 11. 15. a liar if he pretend to love
God and loves not his brother, 1 John 4. 20. we are commanded to be kindly
affected one toward another, and to be pitiful and courteous, 11. 10. S. Peter
exhorts to mutual charity above all things, mutuam charitatem ante omnia,
etc. Pet. 1. 8. and 4. 14.

This our charity, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. ought to extend to all
men universally without limitation; but especially to all Christians as
Christians: because such are the more special objects. It must not be consined
by names and the interest of parties or sects; but ought to reach as far as
Christianity it self. To love those that are of our way, humor, and opinion,
is not charity but self-love: and it is not for Christ's sake but our own.

It is rare to meet with serious Christians who are not so deeply engaged in
some party or other, as to darken their judgments, and pervert their affections
as to all the rest. What company can you come into but all their discourse is
to stigmatize dissenters? what bitter lies, what invectives have been raised
against most grave, solid and ancient Christians? how blindly do they look on
all that is good in those that differ from them? how partially do they
aggravate the faults of all that are against their way? and how small a thing
will serve their turn to excuse the faults of their own party? and they think
all this is a part of Christian zeal, as if Christians engaged in a war against
themselves. And when all men should know them to be Christ's Disciples by loving
one another; most men may perceive (that contrary to the essence of
Christianity) they endeavor to make each other odious.

So that though I see never so much eagerness for an opinion, I shall never
call that zeal or* religion without the conscience of christian love. Yea
though such men should sacrifice their lives, I should not think them martyrs:
and in this I have the warrant of the great Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 3. though I
give my body to be burned and have not charity it profits nothing.

Even those that killed Christ and his Apostles, did it as a duty, and a part
of service of God, John 16. but believe it, it is Apostasy, to fall from love;
your Souls die, when charity dies: that which kills love and charity;
kills all grace and holiness. The opinions, principles, sidings, practices,
which destroy love, destroys your Souls. O what a loathsome sacrifice is it to
the God of love, if we must leave our gift at the altar till we are reconciled
to our offended brother: what a gift is theirs who are unreconciled to almost
all Churches of Christianity?

Young unexperienced Christians are ignorant of Satan's wiles, thinking when a
wrathful enemies heat is kindled in them, (even against men of ancient
principles) that it is a zeal of Gods exciting spirit, and that it is your
duty, or that you should be lukewarm in the cause of God and truth, if you did
it not: when alas! it has more of wrath than love. The white Devil is a killer
of Souls as well as the black.

And now considering the express recommends and injunctions of all the
aforesaid and many other places of holy writ, to this grand duty of Religion:
if any can quiet their Consciences, and yet continue in the contrary
persecuting spirit and practice: they have found a way to escape all Laws of
God; and may conceit themselves religious, though they live in the works of the
flesh, hatred, variance, sedition, etc. Gal. 3. 22.

There was never a more seasonable time to tell men of this great sin, than
when the temptation to it is greatest; when God has been so frequently
dishonored by it; when the world does ring of it. All Sides and Nations
reproach us for it: when the sensual and partial are so hardened in their
selfishness, that no warning can take off the Bias of their Judgments. There is
a kind of spirit in some, which is so different from that charity which
thinks no evil: that it thinks nothing 1 Cor. 13.
else concerning those that differ from them: this is contrary to that charity,
which is not puffed up, and does not behave it self unseemly.

In that almighty God has put enmity between the Seed of the Woman and the
Seed of the Serpent; we may gather, that as the Seed of the Woman should be at
enmity with the Seed of the Serpent; so should it be at unity with it self. If
even with Infidels and Heathens the Servant of God must not strive, but be
gentle to all men, apt to teach, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 24. How much more is Gods
family and inheritance to be used with love and tenderness?

There is in many Christians a strange inequality of partiality. Alas! how
often have I heard wise, and otherwise prudent persons, cry out against pride
and partiality in others; who in their next discourse have shamefully showed it
themselves? making much of their own inconsiderable reasonings, and vilifying
urgent evidence. And being so intent on their own cause, that they could scarce
have patience to hear another speak, and when they have heard them, their first
words show, that they never well weighed the strength of his arguments, but
were all the while thinking what to say against him, or how to go on as they
had begun.

Many an error is taken up by going too far from others. Some giddy and heady
Professors (says Doctor Gauden) have been so eager to come out of Babylon,
that they are almost run out of their wits; so jealous of superstition, that
they are pandors for confusion; so scared with the name of Rome, that they are
afraid of all right reason and sober Religion; so fearful of being
over-righteous, by following traditions of men, that they fear not to be
over-wicked, by overthrowing the good ^oundations of honor, order, peace and
charity: fierce enemies indeed against the Idolatry of Antichrist, but fast
friends to Belial and Mammon, to Schism and Sacriledg.

And thus men's judgments and practices are depraved by flying indiscreetly from
others; while they think more from whence they go than whether: More favoring
the separate zeal of Pharisees than the winning zeal of Christ: calling
themselves a godly people, and are but a company of superstitious Pharisees, or
a sort of melancholy humorists, who must sit because their neighbor stands, or
must go out of the way because their neighbor goes in it.

They that will find out the bottom of any Religion must prepare themselves to
carry a spirit thoroughly discharged of all animosities, passions and false
apprehensions, which corrupt the judgment, and raise a mist upon the most
resplendent lights of truth. If we were impartially willing to know the truth,
and did pray God in meekness of spirit: we would avoid, and not choose deceits,
and resist the light, and provoke God to forsake our understandings.

Many Christians are as children tossed too and sro, fluctuating 'twixt wind
and water: there is no other remedy for such, or satisfaction or pe^ce to their
Consciences, but Christ's precept and prescript: to hear the Church; to be of
the number and in the community of the generality of agreeing Christians; seeing
the generality of those that have a long and constant delivered Series of their
Doctrines, is more unlikely to be in error, or forsaken of Christ, than a few
odd-conceited new opinions. And this may be one rational means left us to find
out the truth; as Baxter confesses in cure of Church, etc. to submit to that,
the most religious, the most learned, the major part of Christians ever taught
or submitted to. Whence Bishop Gauden notes; The primitive Churches were as
careful to act in their outward Order and Government of the Church, according
to Apostolical pattern, and traditional constitutions (which were first the
rule of the Churches practice) as they were faithful to preserve the Canon of
Scriptures, which were after written and delivered without corruption to
posterity.

Every one will confess that the true spirit of Christianity is meek,
peaceable, gentle; and yet how contrary is the practice? the people of God are
realous, but of what? not to consume and destroy one another, not to hate and
vilify one another: but they are zealous to love one another, to forbear what
is contrary to love: zealous of good works, patient, temperate, gentle, etc.
the way of heavenly wisdom is meek, peaceable and easy to be entreated, by all
offices of Romans 12. 18.
love, inclined to good to all. The spirit of false zeal is censorious,
hurtful, dividing, following the works of the flesh, which are hatred, malice,
Galat. 5. 12.
variance, leading the way to cruelty and persecution.

Where is persecution, but from thinking ill of others? abhorring, and not
loving them? robbing men of the privileges of Christians, not leaving them
common liberty of men and subjects, nor to plead for themselves. This
destroying cruelty leaves them neither, and will not suffer them to enjoy so
much liberty as Heathens and Infidels may enjoy; or as S. Paul did under such:
condemning them to the loss of the greatest Act. 28.
privileges on earth, and to be left out with the dogs, publicans and heathens.

Is persecution worthy all the calamitous divisions in Christendom, and the
blood of so many thousands shed for conscience sake? and enduring the outcries
of the imprisoned and banished, and their prayers to Heaven from men's hands,
and the leaving such a name upon record to posterity, as is usually left in
History on the authors of such sufferings? besides the present regret of mind
in the calamities of others, and sad divisions and destructions of charity
which comes hereupon?

Will force cure disagreements and errors better than evidence of truth and
love will do? will they be so cured without a greater mischief? Is not the work
to be done for saving men's Souls, and shall any be saved against his will? will
penalties change the judgment in matters of religion? is he any better than a
knave or hypocrite who will say or swear to do that through fear which he
thinks God forbids him, and fears may damn his Soul? is it the honor of
Church or Kingdom to be composed of such? and are the lives of Kings, peace of
Kingdoms, Estates, etc. competently secured where God is not feared more than
fines or corporal punishments?

Is this to teach in love, to instruct in meekness? it is certain, whosoever
swerves from the dictate of his Conscience commits a sin, Romans 14. So they that
endeavor to force or draw any man to profess or act contrary to what his Soul
believes are as deeply guilty of the same crime. We are all infirm, and of
imperfect understandings, therefore we ought not to be too imperious or too
censorious toward other dissenters, lest you James 3. 12.
receive a greater condemnation: take heed you fall not into the hands of the
living God. They shall be judged without mercy, who have showed no mercy.

The rod of discipline must be used, but it must be done only to the
scandalous: and so done, that it may appear to be Christ's own work, and upon
his interest, and his command; and not either arbitrarily or for our selves.
Christ teaches us not to use violence, when we speak for him, but to beseech
men in his name to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. And men would more easily be
persuaded to believe that Religion to be from God, whose Professors they saw to
be god-like. The whole Gospel is a revelation of the love of God, and a Messiah
of peace, and very opposite to envy and animosity: all principles which are
against universal love, are against God and holiness: it is Love which is
predominant, Fear is subservient, and that fear which is contrary to love is
vice.

I dare proclaim true piety, love, humility and prudence may happily heal a
great many dissentions, and the wounds which rash injudicious zeal has made,
that to the proud, carnal and uncharitable seem incurable; and the cessation of
unnecessary impositions might cease the saddest distractions of the Nation.
Oppression makes a wise man mad, says the Preacher, Eccles. 7. 7. Conscience
Persecution then among Christians is clearly repugnant to the Law of God, the
Light of Nature, and evidence of our own principles.

For the sake then of Christ, who purchased the weakest with his blood: for the
sake of those who are in danger of turning to Atheism: for the sake of the poor
distracted Nation: for the sake of the King, that he may have comfort in his
Subjects, of governing a quiet, peaceable people: and for your own sakes, that
you may give up account to God of your principal and most Christian duty; and
not make Apocriphal all those Texts of Scripture, and plain injunctions to
charity and love above cited, and Romans 14. 2, 3, 4. and 15. 34. Matt. 25. 40. 1
Phil. 15, 16, 17.

Let then the Scripture, Reason and Experience, the Petitions and Tears of the
distressed entreat you to moderation, Romans 3. 16. let the deformity and
unreasonableness of the cruel maxims of persecution, bringing nothing but
destruction and misery, be a determent to all tempestuous spirits; let the
conscientious and godly-minded people out of the bowels of mercy and compassion
solicit the Governors of the earth, and pray unto heaven for an impartial
freedom.

That eternal Majesty who raised so brave a fabric of such indisposed
materials, that controuls the waves, and checks the tumults of the people; let
his mercy be implored for speedy succor to the distressed, for unity and
charity to the divided: That the rod of Aaron may blossom, that the Tabernacle
of David may be raised, that the subtle and envious may be caught in their own
snare, that the result of all afflictions may be the greatening of his Glory
and the exalting of his Scepter.

Amen.
FINIS.

