A SERMON Preached to the NATIVES Of the City and County OF WORCESTER IN THE
Church of St LAVRENCE JEWRY, at their SOLEMN MEETING, June 28. 1681.

By GEORGE WALLS, M. A. and Student of Christ Church Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Samson Evans, Bookseller in Worcester; and Robert
Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter, over against St. Dunstans Church, in
Fleetstreet. MDC LXXXI.

Nehem. VIII. at the 10th Verse. Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet,
and send portions to them for whom nothing is prepared.
THIS solemn Assembly and great Meeting, as exactly answers and fully complies
with some great circumstances of this Feast of Tabernacles meant in my Text, in
some of the highest reasons of it is institution and most admirable rules for
its observation, as if Moses had been interested in the Original appointment,
and Nehemiah and Ezra had directed us too how to keep the Feast. For if we
consult Deuteronomy. 16. we shall find it designed (though there were other causes of
its institution) for the benefit of the Fatherless and Widow; where it is said,
Thou shall observe the Feast of Tabernacles, -- and thou shall rejoice in thy
Feast, thou and the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the Widow. And that there
might juster occasion be ministered for their rejoicing, the males were not to
appear at this Feast before the Lord empty, but every man was to give as he was
able, according to the blessing of the Lord his God, which he had given him.
And on the last day of it, which in the 7th of St John is called, The great day
of the Feast; and amongst the Hebrews, The day of retention, from the People's
being retained (as Fagius conjectures) in order to a public collection; there
was a stock of money raised, which though some Learned men have appropriated to
the service of the Altar, and the buying in of the Sacrifices; may besides very
reasonably be supposed meant for their support also, to whom portions were
allotted in my Text. For though their interest was manifest in the
contribution, supposing it was made for no other purpose than Provision of
Sacrifices, for as much as they did feast on these at solemn times, and were
equally concerned with others in the atonements made by them: it is not
improbable, but they might have a more particular interest and immediate share
in the distribution, especially if we consider what care they had of their
Poor, as appears (among other instances) from the (...) or Conclave Masseceth
Schekalim e versione Joh. Wulferi, p. 132.
silentum, as it is rendered by a late Author, a chest into which devout Persons
were used privately to convey their Charities for the relief of Poor Children,
one of which the Talmud tells us, was in every City; though something of the
Jew mixed it self with these best Actions of theirs: for we are there told,
that only good men's Sons were to have relief thence. But if we read the
foregoing part of the Chapter, we shall find a nearer resemblance betwixt these
two Feasts still; for besides the Charitable intendment of it, they took a care
to join Prayers to their Alms, and the devotion was as solemn as the Feast: For
the People gathered ver. 1.
themselves together as one man, and spoke to Ezra the Priest who stood upon a
Pulpit of wood, as appears from the 4. verse of the Chapter, and blessed the
Lord the great God, and all the People answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up
their hands; and they bowed their heads and worshipped the Lord, with their
faces to the ground. And it follows, that he read (or expounded) to them in the
Book of the Law of God: that is, he prayed and Preached before his Countrymen
at the Feast. The resemblance betwixt the two Feasts being thus stated, I shall
consider,

1. The good influence and natural effects of such Meetings.

2. The advantages and usefulness such kind of Charities (the conseqences of
these meetings) have over all private ones.

3. The great motives and encouragements we have to acts of charity and
beneficence.

1. The good influence and natural effects of such Meetings.

First, Such Meetings give a weight and credit, revive and renew, as it were,
the obligation, pay a respect, and are a kind of annual homage to that so
considerable relation of Neighborhood, under which God chose to represent men,
when he proposed them to one another as the objects of Universal and perfect
love, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And if the Duties of mutual
love, kindness, assistance and good Offices, which are due to Neighborhood,
were but well performed; all the disorders of the world would be cured, and
mischiefs prevented: men would live at perfect peace, and happiness would
overspread the face of the Universe: since all the harm and inconveniences men
receive, are from those that are near them, their Neighbors. And therefore the
keeping up the Authority of this relation of Neighborhood, is no small Duty,
no ordinary encouragement of virtue and preservation of Peace. And though the
Athenians were so ill natured, as to leave the rest of mankind out of their
Prayers; yet they could not forbear to desire the blessings of Heaven on those
who lived within the Confines of their own Country, O Jupiter let thy rain fall
upon all the good Lands of the Athenians.

Secondly, These (...) or Love Feasts were the places and occasions wherein
Christians in the first Ages of the Church, grew into one Body, one affection,
one Friendship. And the growth and establishment of Religion seems to derive
much thence, for as much as such Meetings were frequent and easier to be had,
than other Religious Assemblies; because they gave less jealousy and scandal
to the Heathen Persecutors, and did not appear to have such tendency toward
the introducing of a new Religion; Feasting being what they themselves
practiced, as well as the Christians. And that they were to no great degree
alarmed by this Christian practice, seems probable from the long continuance of
these Feasts, which we are told were in use till near two hundred years after
Christ; and then too, were laid aside upon prudential considerations, and only
by consent. And though corruptions and abuses at length crept into them, and
Satan came and presented himself amongst the Sons of God at these Feasts too,
those miscarriages were the effect of their other conversation, and these spots
not contracted by, but appearing only in their Feasts of Charity. For the
quality of some, and reputation of others, and the great security that so
numerous a Body gives to it self, are such strong Guards against disorder and
irregularity in such Conventions, that the same causes that make this, on
several accounts, a great, do, in some sort, make it a Religious Assembly too.
This works off the ill influences of a private conversation, and the sowrness
of none at all: roots up or stifles those seeds of prejudice and dislike, that
insensibly slide into our natures, corrupt our spirits, and darken our minds,
which are equally cherished by bad, or no company: masters all these diseases
of the mind, by the powerful charms of a pleasant, and the strong diversion of
various conversation. This is the Music that cures the evil Spirit of every
Saul among us, which the Jewish Scholiasts tell us was fundamentally nothing
else but a sour and distracted temper of mind, arising from the dregs of
Melancholy, grief and malice; and then joy and cheerfulness seem so natural to,
and becoming of such solemnities, that in the Feast of Tabernacles the Levites
stilled the People, Nehem. 8. 11.
that wept when they heard the words of the Law, saying, hold your Peace, for
the day is Holy, neither be ye grieved: as if not to rejoice in it, were a
pollution of the holiness of the day. This gratifies and solaces all good
natures, and sweetens and reforms the ill; for compliance with such a
circumstance of time, and the decency of suiting ones self to the mode and
Fashion of a Feast of Love, requires him to bring thither a good Humor, that
has none of his own: and the very dressing himself, though but for the
occasion, may make him like the Habit, and keep on the so becoming guise.
Fasting makes men good solitary Christians; but when they are to be molded and
cemented into one Body, one Society, Feasting most effectually operates toward
it. Refreshing of the Spirits with Wine, and the good things God has given us,
the mirth and rejoicing of such meetings, abates the inequalities of men's
minds, smooths the ruggedness of their tempers, and makes them fit to piece and
fall in with each other. This is the most likely means to enlarge inclination,
break up and lay open all sordid enclosures of the soul; to take away all the
base confinements and determinations of our love; to give that generous
affection its due latitude and liberty, not suffering it to be pent up within
the little compass of a Family, or to contract it self into the narrow
interests of Blood. For Love as other fires, the farther it spreads, the
greater and warmer it grows; he that would shut up this flame, endangers to put
it out. This furnishes it with numerous objects, stretches it out to a
considerable part of the world: a due and proper exercise of that love that is
to become universal, and a suitable Preface to its enlargement to all mankind.
And methinks there needs no better argument of the usefulness of such public
conversation and meetings as these, than to consider the ill impressions, and
dangerous consequences of a solitary and Monastic institution; witness those
Seminaries of ill nature and mischief, the Cloisters; where, by conversing with
very few, and those the worst of men, themselves; they, by being much alone,
have arrived to such sour and malicious tempers, that it becomes unsafe for
the world they should ever be in company: the narrow Cell becoming as
frequently the hole of the Asp, as the Retirement of the Christian. But God
grant we may never so mistake the Prophet, become such sucking Children, so
foolish as to play there, arrive to such a dangerous degree of Familiarity, as
to put our hand on that Cockatrice den. Nor is that black temper of Soul (which
is naturally acquired in those retirements) more acceptable to God than it is to
Man, as being directly opposite and running counter to the Gospel spirit; and
therefore the Jews glancing at that contempt which the Wiseman in Ecclesiastes
Gem. Schab. c. 2.
casts upon mirth and laughter, tell us, that the Shechinah or holy Spirit
resides not with dull sadness, but with due and innocent cheerfulness; and
observe that when the minstrel played, the hand of God came upon Elisha 2 Kings
c. 3. v. 15.
and he prophesied; and they have a common Tradition, that Jacob prophesied
not, while his grief and melancholy for the loss of his Son Joseph remained on
him. And we shall find that the great disturbers of the World (like the more
terrible and frightful appearance of those that are once departed) have been
such, as have first forsaken and left it, (as they please to style it.) And in
one sense they seem to have renounced and cast it off, to disown their interest
in, and relation to it, in that they endeavor to destroy it. If a sharp and
Bloody persecution be to be carried on; the Covent is sure to act a large part
there; and the Moinks head or hand is always concerned in the Massacre. Their
Feet are swift to shed Blood, destruction Romans 3. 15, 16, 17.
and misery are in their ways, and the way of Peace have they not known. If
unheard of Butcheries are to be acted upon the Waldenses, Mornaeus Hist. Papat.
p. 385.
the Dominicans are made the Inquisitors, and then they are burnt alive in
heaps, as appears from the public Records of Avignon. And Jacques Clement had
possibly, prudently resisted the force of the Principles of his Bloody
Religion, as some others do, had not the Monk been acted by the influences of
his education, and by the same institution that disposes to hate ones Brother,
become a Murderer of his Prince. Let not us therefore forbear the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is. For besides the secret
Springs and movements, that, on such occasions, dispose and turn our looks and
hearts toward each other, and somewhat arising from the whole and Body, which
the parts and members seem not to have brought thither, (it frequently
happening with men as it does with some Chemical Liquors, that ferment better,
and acquire nobler and more useful qualities by the mixture:) Besides (I say)
the obvious tendencies of such Assemblies to continue and keep warm friendship,
it appears a suitable means of reconciliation, and begetting it where it is not;
the method and progress of which may possibly be thus stated and accounted for:
That the Laws of Decency and most approved Rules of Conduct at such
solemnities, require men to leave at home the rougher part of themselves, and
bring nothing with them into such public and friendly Meetings, but what is
suitable to the ends of them, Love and Friendship. And though we should suspect
that there might perhaps be some hypocrisy in this civility and outward
smoothness; yet this too may not seldom make way for kinder thoughts, and be an
introducement to a real good will and lasting Friendship. For that which keeps
many men at a distance, is nothing but their appearing neglect of each other in
their outward conversation; and they return to the ease and satisfaction of a
good understanding, as soon as civility and frankness on either side open but a
way to it. And whosoever believes another in earnest, does very naturally and
justly treat and receive him, as if he truly were so; which treatment seldom
fails to make him really become what he before mistook him for. So that the
embraces that proceed only from the rules of decency and civil behavior, may
here improve into lasting kindness, and the Table become a snare only to a firm
and inviolable Friendship. And a H. Thorndike of Rel. Assem. c. 3.
Learned man is of Opinion that the reason why the Jews were so little
inclinable to Idolatry after the Captivity, to which before it, they had such
strong propensions, that neither punishment nor Prophecy extraordinary could
withold them from running into it, was, That after the Captivity their
Synagogues were far more numerous than before it (but that they had then some,
appears from the 74th Psalm) and so their accesses to each other frequent and
easy; and that what operated in them to the begetting some Love of God, should
yet leave that of their Brother in its former Ebb and Coldness, must not be
resolved into any insufficiency in the means to unite them, but to some
irreconcileableness in their tempers, and hidden causes, that would they should
longer wander and go astray, not yet be adopted into the Family of Love: Which
brings me to speak,

2. Of the advantages and usefulness which such kind of Charities (the
consequences of these Meetings) have over all private ones.

Now solemn and public practices of any virtue have these two good effects
above private and solitary.

First, That it recommends this virtue which they have owned in public more
strongly to every man of that Society in his private practice, and engages him
more effectually in observance of it.

Secondly, In that it recommends it more powerfully to others.

First, It recommends this virtue which they have owned in public more
strongly to every man of that Society in his private practice. For besides that
the Original and first reason, all the former motives that prevailed with any
man to join in the public practice, and solemn profession of that virtue, are
still in force, and retain their persuasive efficacy; he has fresh
encouragements, and new motives, from the approbation, consent and testimony of
all that were interested with him in the open acknowledgment, as so many
distinct evidences of its laudableness and necessity: so that this truth is
proposed to him, not as the Opinion of a Doctor, but the Act of a Council. He
has the advantage of many circumstances to bring it home to, and root it in his
memory, and as many arguments to recommend it to his reason and practice.
There Is his own public Act, a standing Record against him, if he should disown
or neglect it; and his own vote for it, registered to his condemnation.

Secondly, In that it recommends it more powerfully to others: such deliberate
Acts of great and considerable Societies, give the Virtue, they thus solemnly
promote, authority in the world. Virtue has always reason on her side, but
fashion and number often beat her out of countenance, and Conscience is not
always stout enough to bear up against a multitude. Though it be a thousand
witnesses within, it is not always able to stand as many contrary examples
without. Let virtue have but the protection of any number of men, who profess
publicly to own, and do really practice her; and all is done almost that is
needful to make her prevail in the World. The sentiments of men's minds, the
repose and quiet of their Consciences, reputation and esteem, all vote for her:
nay ease and Riches too are on her side. It Is almost only fashion, and a custom
of following examples, which mislead men into vice, and mischief that attends
it. Such public Acts therefore of virtue as are at this Meeting performed, are
more valued in the example, than the performance it self: and what is here said
of all other virtues, is much more true of that leading and universal one, that
root of all other, Charity; and they that will but return a charitable thought,
for your charitable Actions, will have reason to think, that you who part with
your money only for Duty, for Religion, for Virtues sake, will not keep any
chargeable vices (as they almost all are, but the opposite to Charity) and at a
dear rate purchase misery here and hereafter. Besides, these solemn and public
Charities have this farther advantage, that in them the good man gives with
greater security, and better assurance, that he pursues the true ends of
Charity. For in private and solitary distributions, through a too easy
compassion he may believe too soon, or through a too stubborn distrust he may
perhaps not at all; and so is liable to mistake, to the encouragement of Sin,
or continuing of Misery. Nor will the conveying it by the hands of any other
single person, alter the case, or remove the inconvenience; for he has the same
difficulties to encounter, and is equally liable to miscarry with the former.
And then the Casuist too, does so perplex this admirable Duty, in our private
executions of it, making the labor of Love so great, by too nicely stating its
qualifications, and clogging it with too Critical Rules of secrecy; that
sometimes the scruple swallows up the virtue; and by too exact a care that it
should not be seen, it becomes frequently not to be felt neither: as may appear
from the practice of some Jews, a late Writer mentions, Wolferus ex Orchot
Zdikin.
that out of a too nice regard to privacy, were used to drop money out of their
garments for the Poor, not considering it might be lost, or a rich man pick it
up. But these inconveniences are all remedi'd in our solemn and public
Collection; for here when Love has once opened, there is the Wisdom and Counsel
of the whole Body, to direct and guide my hand. And whereas in private
Charities, the shining of the good Work frequently destroy's it; here the light
and bright appearance of it, is the excellency of the virtue. The Trumpet that
always sounds when these public Alms are done, may raise some that are cold
and dead, and provoke them to Love. The left hand may here know what the right
does, and the World the liberality of both, and I not lose my reward.

Thirdly, The great motives and encouragements we have to acts of Charity and
Beneficence, and the obligations we lie under to distribute and send portions
to the Poor. And this will appear if we consider,

1. The Advantages that arise to our selves by so doing. 2. The Honor that is
done to God. 3. The benefits that accrue to our Brother.
1. The Advantages that arise to our selves by so doing. And here we seem to be
moved by all the springs to generous and great, or what ever may incline us to
good and virtuous undertakings; and to be engaged in the performance, by the
united influence of Pleasure, Profit, Honor and Duty. The latter of which is
too evident, and each of them would be too tedious to be insisted on. I shall
only therefore briefly mention Pleasure and Profit. These Acts of Beneficence
and Charity, are attended with,

(1.) Pleasure and Delight. And therefore Dr. Hammond calls the charitable man
a Sensualist. For the workings of nature are so strong, the pangs of compassion
so violent, and it is so difficult and uneasy to hide our selves from our own
flesh, that to do good and to distribute, is a Sacrifice with which the
Offerer, as well as God is, certainly, well pleased. The object of misery is so
moving, that the soundings of my own bowels, are silenced with as much
satisfaction, as my Brothers are refreshed: and whilst the Churl that says,
Shall I 1 Samuel 25. 11.
take my Bread and my Water and my Flesh and give it? whilst this cruel man
troubles his own flesh, Prove. 11. 17.
the merciful man does good to his own Soul.

(2.) With Profit. For when God's pleased to recommend the Duty, he thinks fit
to address himself to the charitable man in terms that look like encouraging to
a gainful profession, rather than pressing an indispensable obligation; stating
it in words expressive of the most direct methods of thriving and good
husbandry; such as lending, watering, and sowing. And then he cannot be
defeated of his harvest; For though the Heaven over Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
his Head should be brass, and the Earth that is under him should be Iron (as
we had very lately almost seen) though the Clouds should drop no fatness, yet
the liberal Soul shall be fat. He scatters Prove. 11. 25.
and yet increases, has sowed plentifully, and therefore shall reap so. And
though God, that he may administer all kind of encouragement to this Duty, is
pleased sometimes so to order the flight of those riches, the good man gives
wings to, as to direct their motion to the place it began; and to convey back
into their Sacks the Money of those, that like Joseph's Brethren, lay it out in
Corn, to relieve the Famine, and feed the hungry of the Land, as appears from
the not failing of some Cruses of Oil, and Barrels of Meal, that several
Prophets have had Cakes of, and did eat of, many days: and frequent instances
from History; as the gold conveyed back to Epiphanius his Steward, and the bag
of Meal that was thrown by an unknown hand into the good Widows House, in the
Siege of Rochel; when she had not one handful left in her Barrel, that she
might eat with her Children and die. Though he is pleased sometimes thus to
reward acts of Charity, either for a declaration of his all sufficiency, the
addition of a fresh motive to virtue, or the justifying of his Providence to
such as are too apt to distrust; that can allow no other recompense, but
downright payment, and return almost in kind. It does not suit with the bounty
of the great Benefactour (that has so many ways of rewarding our services) to
confine himself to this one: to send the good man back the very Present that he
made him, and make him suspect he refused his Offering. If he should think fit
not to reward him with the Fruits of Cornfieldsd, Olive-yards or Vineyards; he
can give him a cheerful countenance without them, and put gladness into his
heart; more than in the time when his Corn and Wine and Oil increased. There
may be abundance of Peace, when there is but moderate plenty; and he may
sanctify, when he does not enlarge my possessions. My recompense may consist
in degrees, when it does not in number; and when he pleases to contract the
multitude, he may bless me in the greatness of his mercies: For there is no
restraint to the 1 Samuel 14. 6.
Lord, to save by many or by few. He sometimes exchanges and gives me more
suitable blessings; and I hope the kindness is not the less, because he adds
the bounties of his Wisdom to those of his Love. Although the Fig Tree Hab. 3.
17.
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the
olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls: though all those
blessings are denied me, I may be yet blessed with the Prophets resolution, in
the following words, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation. Verse. 18.
Wisdom (which is but a perfect Charity) may more liberally dispense to me out
of her right hand, when she is sparing with her left, and length of days may
supply the want of some degrees of Riches and Honor. And this righteousness or
Charity (for the same word signifies them both) has so much the promise of the
life that now is, as well as that to come, that it has not only frequently been
continued, but sometimes miraculously recalled too, for the more absolute
completion of the promise: for Saint Chrysostom says expressly, that the force
Chrysostom. in Genesis Homil. 55.
of the Alms-deeds which Dorcas did, made her capable of that great and
extraordinary favor, of being restored to life. And Saint Cyprian gives the
very same reason why God Cypr. de Op. and Eleemos.
was pleased to honor her with this miracle. But then the charitable man's
great Estate is in reversion, where not only the labor of Love, but the faith
that worked by it, and always accompanied it, in its trust in God, and reliance
on his promises, will plentifully be rewarded. For he has sowed to the Spirit,
and therefore of the Gal. 6. 8.
Spirit shall reap life everlasting. His wise improvement of the unrighteous
Mammon has strengthened his interest in the other World, made him friends there,
which, when he fails, will receive him into everlasting Habitations. And the
Fathers were so persuaded of the charitable man's share in those many mansions,
that Saint Cyprian encouraging his Cypr. de Mortal.
Brethren to die cheerfully, by an argument drawn from the blessed Society, they
would be admitted to; when he thinks fit to mention but five eminent orders of
those glorified ones, he assigns one of them to the Charitable and Merciful,
and ranks them with no worse company than the Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and
Virgins.

2. The Motives and encouragements we have to acts of Charity and Beneficence
will appear, if we consider the Honor that is done to God.

When in compliance with his commands, we distribute our substance, and part
with our beloved treasure, we allow his Dominion and confess his Authority,
declare that the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. We magnify his
bounty and liberal provision for us, by thinking it sufficient for our selves
and others; we acknowledge his veracity, show we dare trust him and believe him
faithful that has promised. And in the Apostolic Constitutions, amongst other
very severe Charges, the uncharitable man is said to be an Infidel, and that
such a one does not believe God (...). Zonar. Constable. Apost. l. 4. cap. 3. (...).
. In the 14th of the Proverbs, the Wiseman makes Charity the great proof and
evidence of honoring God; where it is said, He that honors him has mercy on
the poor. For this is in regard to their Father, to adopt his Sons, and become
Guardians to his Family. This takes off all Scandal from his Providence, and
reflection from his government, by furnishing them with peace and quiet, that
could never reason themselves into it: that are of so little, or dull sense,
that they could never see how good the Lord is, unless, in the bounty of
others, they taste it too. For narrowness and distraction of mind furnish the
Poor man with so few, and disorderly, and misery with so bad thoughts, that
they are either too short and dark to discover the right, and reach the
foundation of Gods Dominion; or too corrupt and perverted, to allow the
distinguishing exercise of it. And though more considering heads have stumbled
at this, and the best of men had well nigh slipped: yet Charity herein can outdo
Philosophy, and great degrees of Religion too; and, by the relief of a liberal
hand, reconcile ignorant heads, as well as empty bellies to the acknowledgment
of the good providence and bounty of the Almighty, who dispenses liberally to
them, by the hands, and out of the portions of others. So that he who
charitably gives them their daily Bread, leads them not into this Temptation,
but delivers them from Evil. And I am sure he properly honors God with his
substance, that by it breaks off his own, or prevents another sins. So that
there will be glory to God on high, when there is good will toward men.

3. Another motive to acts of Charity and Beneficence, is, The benefit that
accrues to our Brother thereby.

Now though to free one from the uneasiness of having the keen and eager
appetites of nature awaked, and not satisfied; to rescue from the shame of
nakedness, and smart of pain, seems a sufficient motive to, and worthy exercise
of our Charity; and the weight of the burden is not only reason enough to
incline one that has senses to desire, but also him that has compassion to
endeavor its removal: yet the beauty and true value of Beneficence, and Love
then only appears, if we consider that every instance of it to the Body,
frequently reaches the Soul too; being usually as sovereign a remedy to the sin
of the one, as the sufferings of the other: and therefore we find, that their
conversion was the frequent effect of our Saviors kindness to those he healed,
and restored to their sight; as may appear from the two blind men in the 20th
of Matt. for the Text says, Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their
Eyes, and immediately they received their sight and they followed him; as
Bartimaeus did in the 10th of Mark: The miracle of mercy being to them the
truest evidence of his Divinity, and the power of God to their Salvation. For
distress and want do naturally imbitter the Spirit, sower the temper, and
indispose the mind for God and Duty. Which probably is the reason, why the
Hebrew Doctors (amongst other qualifications for the residence of the Spirit of
Prophecy) require, Massec. Sanhedrin cited by R. Albo.
that he on whom it rests, should be a rich and great man. For when the
miserable and calamitous Wretch has cried, and behold there is none to help, no
charitable hand to unloose the heavy burden, and let this oppressed go free:
How is he disposed to fulfill Isaiah's Prophecy Isai. 8. 21.
concerning the behavior of some others in the like distress; and when he
shall pass through the land hardly bestead and hungry, to sret himself, and
curse his King, and his God, and look upwards? How inclined to quarrel at his
Father (and perhaps question his being so) that has bestowed so large
patrimonies on those he is told are his Brethren, (without any kindness, the
proof and evidence of that relation) when he is dis-inherited? For with how
unpleasing a relish, must he feed on the husks, and how little thankful is he
apt to be to him that furnishes the coarse entertainment, when he never spent
any part of his substance in riotous living, and his hereditary beggary forbid
him ever to be the prodigal Son? How hard is it for one so early and so
constantly miserable, to lie quiet, or innocent in the Dust, not to contract
pollution there: for if he must always feed with the Swine, it is odds but he
goes farther with them yet, and wallows in the mire; and so the destruction of
the poor is his poverty. Nor will he Prove. 10. 15.
easily, or scarce innocently, digest the scorn of this mock-subjection, when
he is told, that all things are put under his feet, all Sheep and Oxen, and the
beasts of the field; and yet knows not how to prevail for one Fleece or Morsel,
of these his own so large possessions, to warm his back or cheer his Bowels.
And if this Beggar that lies at the Rich man's Gate, instead of having his
Sores licked and gently treated, in order to their being healed, shall meet
only with the Teeth of the dogs, that shall tear and make them bleed afresh;
his rags and nakedness become more so, by the rough handling and coarse
treatment of those that should have covered it. If this ill and deformd sight
(that Charity might have made a pleasanter and more delightful prospect) shall
be injuriously chased thence: in this bitterness of his Soul he may curse God
and die; and his Blood do that which the Poor man was not permitted to do, lie
at the Rich man's Door. Whereas if some compassionate Soul had timely and
seasonably come in to his relief, some merciful Ear had been open to his cries,
before he repined into rage and exclamation. If some charitable hand had been
reached out to him, it had prevented his sinking and perishing for ever; and
had possibly reconciled him to his condition and his God together. So that our
Brother may be in a sort redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold;
and the unrighteous Mammon be a means of his Salvation.

What then remains but that we heartily pursue the design and end of our coming
together, call in all the motives and considerations that can create or
maintain Love. That there be no root in us bearing gall, and that all
bitterness be put away. That Ephraim envy not Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; but
that what St. Paul commended in his Thessalonians, the Charity of every man may
toward each other abound. Let us wear this great badge of our profession, and
make it the highest evidence of the sincerity of our Religion, by giving our
Hearts both to God and our Brother, for it is his right also. And after the
wonderful Union of God and man, let not that of one man with another be unusual
or surprising, let Love as well as Faith have its mysteries, and as here three,
so let there many become one. And since no one thinks it safe to let his last
Sun go down upon his wrath, how many soever he has imprudently suffered to set
so; if we must die Friends, why don't we live so? If my last affections will,
and must then embrace my Brothers hand, when the strong convulsions of mine,
can hardly let it go? if that be necessary to support me, when my Feet are
stumbling on the dark mountaions, and the entrance of the Grave, Why do I take
hold on it so late? Why should my heart and affections be disposed of like my
Goods and Estate, and my Love that would be so much more acceptable to God, and
useful to my Brother, in a gift, be reserved for a Legacy.

And if the being born within such a circuit of ground, be a reason (as really
it is) for men to enter into a more intimate Society and conversation one with
another; how much more reason have they to unite, who are not only born in the
same Country, but have one common Interest (as all true Englishmen have) both
of Laws and Religion? And therefore we have now the strongest motives to become
as one man, and with united hearts bear up against the common danger, that
threatens us, both from the unwearied contrivances and designs of the Papist,
and the growing greatness of any ambitious Popish Neighbors. Nor should
distances amongst Protestants, that differ in lesser matters, make them disown
one another in this common concern; more than being born in different Parishes,
or at some miles distance, makes any one lose the privilege of this friendly
Society of Worcestershire men, or causes any unkind divisions amongst you. And
if Herod and Pontius Pilate were contented to become Friends, in order to
strengthen themselves to effect no better a purpose of theirs, than the
Crucifixion of Christ; methinks we that are Members of the same Body, might
imitate the prudence, though not the guilt of their policy; and join forces in
the just, and quite contrary design of opposing his pretended Vicar, who
threatens us with Fire and Faggot. And did not a greater degree of perverseness
rule us in our Religious Interests, than does in our Civil; we might as easily
unite (notwithstanding our differences in Opinion) against the disturbers of
our common Peace, and the Enemies of our Religion, as we do against those of
our Trade. Nor is it improbable, but joining together against these troublers
of the World, may tend to a better composure amongst our selves, as fellow
Soldiers frequently become true and lasting friends. Were the Sea breaking in
upon us, men who lay within the reach of the danger, would cease to pursue
their private differences and lesser quarrels, and all join to keep out the
common inundation. Popery has as little mercy as the Sea, however it may look
smooth, and seem gentle as the yielding Water; where it prevails it swallows
all. In this deluge, none of us shall be thought the Sons of Noah, but
offsprings of the accursed Race: a Heretic is a beast too unclean to have any
place in their Ark. And if so different Nations, and that understood not one
another, made no mutiny in Hannibals Army; but readily fell in with each other,
in order to humble the pride, and chastise the insolence of old Rome, (which
was yet far more tolerable and less oppressive than that of the new) methinks
our Brethren that speak almost the same language with us already, should find
no difficulty to join our Army in order to a mutual defense: and that there
should no Hanno's be in our Carthage to keep back our supplies, and hinder the
success of our Battles. And since the Ephramites were so highly incensed, Judge.
12. 1*
at their not being called in by Jephtha, in his Expedition against the
Children of Ammon; and were so ambitious of assisting in the War against that
Idolatrous Nation, that they resolved to burn his House, that robbed them of the
Glory of fighting this Battle of the Lord: 'twere to be wished, that our
dissenting Brethren would so far imitate their Zeal, as to accept our
invitation to unite with us, against the no less abominable Idolatries of Rome.

Let us therefore invite the Almighty's protection, by showing our willingness
not to be destroyed, and our readiness to save each other. Let the circulation
of love and friendship be as free in this great Body, and convey it self as
kindly to every part, as the Blood does in the natural, that the extremest
parts may be warm too. And let those uncomely parts of us, the poor; deformed
through misery and Rags, by our bounty and Charity receive more abundant
comeliness. Then you have Solomon's warrant to go Eccles. 7. 9.
your way, eat your bread with joy, and drink your wine with a merry heart, for
God now accepts your works. Your feasting need not like that of Job's Sons be
atoned by a Sacrifice, but is it self an acceptable one. This sanctifies your
Meeting, and prepares you for the solemn Assembly of the firstborn, hallows
your rejoicing here, and compleats it hereafter; gives you a part in that new
Song, which you will be able to learn, as being of the number of those that were
redeemed from the Earth. Now the peace of God which passes all understanding
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God and of his Son Jesus
Christ; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost be with you all now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

