To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of Elizabeth Wandesford, formerly Widow and Relict of
Garret Foulks, Esquire in behalf of her self and Children.
Humbly shows,
THAT Your unfortunate Petitioner having lost her Husband and five Brothers in
His Majesty's service in Ireland, had therefore all her worldly Substance
seized and Taken from her, in which deplorable Condition your Petitioners Aged
Mother, who lay ready to sink under the Oppression of too Just a Grief for the
Loss of all her Sons, was with her Children fired out of your Petitioners
House, and after Exposed to all the Misery Imaginable: From which distressed
Condition she and those Orphans attempted to make their Escapes to Cork, or
where ever else their pity less Fortune should lead them; but the Enemy soon
pursued their unhappy Wondering Lives, and with an inflexible Cruelty
barbarously Murdered one of your Petitioners Brothers; But to him was more
Mercifully Cruel then to the rest: For your Petitioners Aged Mother, Sister and
Children, they Stripped even of their very Shifts, with the Terror and Cold of
which her Sister and Child died in the Field, and by the hardship they endured
shortened the lives of several of your Petitioners own Children also, and the
Miserable survivors of them lay a Considerable time in a very week Condition,
in the Ruins of some old Walls in a Wast and desolate part of the Country,
where the sense of their Miseries was Crushed by the said wait of peoples own
Misfortunes, till General Ginkell, under whose Command your Petitioners friends
were Lost, joined with the Government of that Kingdom in representing the
hardships of their Case to their Majesty's, who in Compassion to their
Misfortunes was Graciously pleased to Grant Your Petitioner for the support of
her self and Children, a Pention of Two hundred pounds per Ann. to be Continued
to her and them, as appears by the Express words of the Patent, as well as the
annexed Certificate of my Lord Rumney's, till their Majesty's could make some
better provision for them, or Give something more Considerable and better in
lieu of it, in Consideration of their great Sufferings, in Order to which His
Majesty was Graciously pleased about three Years since, to accept of a
Surrender of the said Pention, and did in lieu of it, and in Order to a farther
Grant, Give you Petitioner a Custodiam for three Years of Lands of the same
Yearly Vallue; but your Petitioner, whose unhappy fate too much resembles that
of her unfortunate Families, had most of those little broken pieces of Land
taken from her by other Peoples Agents, which she with great Charge, and
Dificulty found out; and being then deprived both of Land and Pention together,
His Majesty therefore last Spring was Graciously pleased, upon the Government
of Irelands report, and representation of the hardship of your Petitioners
Case, who prayed His Majesty to accept of a Surrender of the said Custodiam,
and to Grant her in lieu of it, and of the Pention she had Surrendered, a Lease
of Ninty nine Years of the above mentioned Two hundred pounds per Ann. out of
the Forfeited Estates; upon which His Majesty, according to His first
Intentions, was pleased to Grant Your Petitioners Request, by giving his
Letter, which directed them to find Your Petitioner as many of the Forfeited
Lands as should amount to the Clear Yearly Vallue of Two hundred pounds per
Ann. which the Government there has accordingly done; But Your Petitioner being
unfortunate in all things, is afraid she shall still meet with the same Fate,
and be Excluded from the Favor and Compassionate Consideration of this
Honorable House; which sevear Decree would soon Complete the Ruin of Your
Petitioner and Children, whose sufferings already have been, God knows, too
Cruel to be pattern'd among the Worst of their Country: Therefore Your
Petitioner humbly hopes, that Your Honors will not look upon her Case as a
Common one, having besides the first Dear Purchase, given a Valluable
Consideration for this small Estate, besides the Expense and Attendance of
seven or eight Voiages, too and from that Kingdom, in Obtaining, Fixing and
Exchanging those Grants, which has not only Eaten up the benefit of His
Majesty's Intended Bounty, but Cost Your Petitioner from first to Last, twice
more then the Inheritance of so small a Grant can possibly be worth; all which,
together with three Years Loss of the Income of her Pention, Your Petitioner
humbly Submits to Your Honors Consideration.

And humbly prays, Your Honors will in Consideration of her great Sufferings,
and of the Pention which she has Surrendered, propose some way to Establish her
and her Children, who otherwise must Inevitably perish, in their Grant of Two
hundred pounds per Ann. together with what in Your Wisdoms Your Honors shall
think proper toward the vast Charge Your Petioner has been at, and the Loss of
so many Years Income of her Pention, all which appears by the Lords Justices
Report ready to be produced; and Your Petitioner who has smarted under a
Succession of Trouble and Affliction of the heaviest kind, humbly hopes Your
Honors will not assign her Miseries a Longer date, nor think her request
touching those Lands unreasonable, since her nearest and dearest Relations have
Contributed to the recovery of them, with the Loss of their Lives and Fourtunes
and utter ruin of their Families, and that it was Her Majesty's particular
desire of ever Blessed Memory, as well as Her declared intentions to the Lord
Leiutenant of Ireland, that a better Provision and more suitable to her
Sufferings should be made in a more Convenient time for Your Petitioner and
Children as appears by his Lordships annexed Certificate. Your Petitioner
therefore humbly begs this Honorable House will be pleased in some kind or
other to fulfill Her Majesty's desires and Gracious Intentions, and not suffer
Your Petitioners hopes after such a Scene of Misery, to be at Last buried in
the same Grave with her Royal and bountious benefactor.

And She and her Children shall ever pray, etc.


