THE WONDERS OF THE Little World: Or, a General HISTORY of MAN. IN Six BOOKS.

WHEREIN By many thousands of Examples is showed what MAN has been FROM THE
First Ages of the World to these Times. In respect of his Body, Senses,
Passions, Affections: His Virtues and Perfections, his Vices and Defects, his
Quality, Vocation and Profession; and many other particulars not reducible to
any of the former Heads. Collected from the Writings of the most approved
Historians, Philosophers, Physicians, Philologists and others.

By Nath Wanley, M. A. and Vicar of Trinity Parish in the City of Coventry.

Quicquid agunt Homines Votum, Timor, Ira, Voluptas,
Gaudia, Discursus, nostri est farrago libelli.
Juvenal. Satyr. 1. Conamur tenues grandia.
Hor. lib. 1. ode. 6. LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in
Fleet Street: R. Cheswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard: I.
Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill, And T. Sawbridge, at the three Flowers de
Luce in Little Britain. 1678.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir Harbottle Grimstone KNIGHT and BARONET, MASTER of the
ROLLS.
SIR,
THose who have done good offices for other men, may forget them if they
please; and by how much the less they insist upon them, the greater certainly
is their Generosity: But he who has been on the receiving hand, or any way
assisted by the Goodness of another, is bound to preserve the obligations he is
under, in everlasting remembrance. Besides, if when opportunity favors him, he
do not some way express his Gratitude, and show at least his willingness to be
thankful, he betrays abaseness utterly unworthy of a second Benefactor. Sir,
many years ago it was my happiness to have you my Friend; and then I had
frequent experience of a Steadiness and Constancy, a Humility and Integrity,
which I have met with but in few of those persons that are of a quality like
unto that of yours. You were pleased to do for me more than ever you had made
me the promise of, and much more than a man of my slender merit might
reasonably expect from you, or any other. These things I have many times
delightfully considered of; and since I am not likely to render you any other
compensation or return, I was willing to make you this Address, wherein I might
give some public testimony how sensibly I find my self affected with the
memory of your manifold kindness toward me: a great addition to which will be
the acceptance of this mean Present which I here lay at your Feet; and then
cease to give you a further trouble from

Coventrey: June 17, 1677. Honorable Sir, Your most Obliged Humble Servant
NATH. WANLEY.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE first thoughts I had about the Entrance upon such a Design as the History
of Man, were occasioned by some passages I met with in my Lord Verulam's Book
of the Advancement of Learning; Lib. 4. c. 1. p. 179, 180.181.
where I found him saying, That Touching the matter of Man's Prerogatives, it
is a Point that may well be set down amongst Deficients. He adds, I suppose it
would much conduce to the Magnanimity and Honor of Man, if a Collection were
made of the Vltimities (as the Schools speak) or Summities ( as Pindar) of
Humane Nature, principally out of the faithful Reports of History; that is,
what is the last and highest pitch, to which Man's Nature, of it self, has
ever reached, in all the Perfections both of Body and Mind. It is evident (goes
he on) what we mean; namely, that the Wonders of Humane Nature, and Virtues as
well of Mind as of Body, should be collected into a Volume, which might serve
as a Calender of Humane Triumphs. For a Work of this nature, we approve the
Purpose and Design of Valerius Maximus and C. Plinius; but it could be wished
they had used more choice and diligence.

When I had read thus far, I considered what had been done already in this
matter by the two forenamed Writers; and in the issue, was well satisfied that
they had not performed so much herein, but that there was yet Field-room enough
left for any such as had the leisure and inclination to exercise themselves
further upon this Subject.

As for my self, I was sufficiently sensible that I lay under too many
Discouragements to adventure upon a Work of this nature. For whereas it
requires variety of Books, great Judgment, vast Reading, and a full Freedom and
Leisure to attend upon it: In respect of all these, I knew my own Poverty; and
thereupon that I had no reason to intermeddle in an Affair, wherein I could
expect to meet with little or no success.

But whereas my first intentions were to make some such little Collections and
References in this kind, as might some way be serviceable to my self only; I
know not how by degrees I found I had enlarged far beyond my own purposes; and
then was persuaded by some such persons as I have reason to esteem, that this
Collection, such as it now is, might not be unuseful nor unacceptable to some
sorts of Men, in case I should make it public, as I have now done.

I must confess, that in the whole of this Book there is little of my own,
besides the Method, and way of its Composure; and therefore if some of these
Examples which I have set down may seem utterly incredible, or at best but
improbable, let it be remembered that I am not the Inventor, but Reciter; not
the Framer, but only the Collector of them; wherein too, I have usually laid
the Child at the Father's own Door; or however, have cited those Authors from
whence I received the report and the intelligence thereof.

I impose nothing upon any Man's belief, but leave every Reader at his full
liberty for the degree of his Faith in these matters. And if I have cited more
than one or two Writers for this or that Example, it is not of mere vanity, but
for some such reasons as these; sometimes I have ^ssisted my self with some
Circumstances from one, which were not to be met with in the other Author. Or
it may be, it was partly to show that I am not the only Man, who have thought
fit to gather up such trifles, as some (it may be) will be ready to call some
of these I have here concerned my self with.

The Marginal Citations are made to the very Pages for the purpose, that such
as have any of those Editions which I followed, may immediately turn to what
they desire to peruse. And for others whose Editions are different, they have
at least the Book, Chapter and Section for their Guide, to further them in
their speedy finding of what they look for.

If any man find fault that the several Heads I treat of are not so orderly
placed and disposed as they might have been, I shall say, it is not unlikely;
but withal, it may be considered, that a Book of this Volume is too much to
write over often; and that the exactness (as the matter now is) would not
answer the labor, nor quit the cost.

To as many as shall seem displeased that I have so far concerned the Feminine
Gender in the History of Man, as to fetch many of my Examples from thence, my
reply is; That under the notion of Man both Sexes are comprehended: So that a
History of Man (according to my intention) is no other than the History of
Mankind; not to say that there are diverse Perfections and Virtues (such as
Beauty, Modesty, Chastity, etc.) whereunto the weaker Sex may pretend so strong
a Title, that it would seem highly injurious as well as envious and
over-partial, to conceal those things which so eminently conduce to the honor
of it.

I shall no longer detain my Reader, after I have remembered him that the
scarcity of Books, and want of such Conversation as would have been very
necessary for me in a business of this nature, is the reason why I have not
reached either my own desires, or given that satisfaction to those of others
which I could have wished. All I can pretend to have done, is somewhat to have
marked out the way for some other of greater Abilities and more Leisure to
restore and polish this part of Learning, which is so worthy of any Man's
pains; and wherein (when it is well performed) there will be found such a
considerable measure both of pleasure and profit.

THE CONTENTS.
The FIRST BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of such Infants as have been heard to cry while they were in the Womb
of their Mothers. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of such as have carried their dead Children
in their Wombs for some Years. 2 Chap. 3. Of such Women whose Children have
been petrified, and turned to Stone in their Wombs; and the like found in dead
Bodies, or some parts of them. 3 Chap. 4. Of such Persons as have made their
Entrance into the World in a different manner from the rest of Mankind. 4 Chap.
5. Of what Monsters some Women have been delivered, and of Preternatural
Births. 5 Chap. 6. Of the Birthday, and what has befallen some Men thereon:
Also of such other days as were observed fortunate or otherwise to several
Persons. 8 Chap. 7, Of the Signatures, and Natural Marks upon the Bodies of
some Men. 9 Chap. 8. Of the strange Constitution, and mavelous Properties of
some Humane Bodies. 10 Chap. 9. Of Natural Antipathies in some Men to Flowers,
Fruits, Flesh, Physic, and diverse other things. 11 Chap. 10. Of the mavelous
Recompense of Nature in some Persons, 14 Chap. 11. Of the Head and Skull, and
the unusual Structure of them in some Men. 16 Chap. 12. Of the Hair of the
Head, how worn; and other Particularities about it. 18 Chap. 13. Of the Beard,
and how worn by some Persons and Nations. 19 Chap. 14. Of the Teeth, with their
different Number and Situation in some. 20 Chap. 15. Of the Tongue, Voice and
manner of Speech in several Persons. 21 Chap: 16. Of the Eye, its shape, and
the strange liveliness and vigor of it in some. 23 Chap. 17. Of the Face and
Visage, and admirable Beauty placed therein, both in Men and Women. 24 Chap.
18. Of the Majesty and Gravity in the Countenance and Behavior of some
Persons. 26 Chap. 19. Of the signal Deformity, and very mean Personage of some
great Persons, and others. 29 Chap. 20. Of the great Resemblance and Likeness
of some Men in Face, Features, etc. to others. 30 Chap. 21. Of the Heart; and
in what manner it has been found in some Bodies. 32 Chap. 22. Of Giants, and
such as have exceeded the common proportion in Stature and Height. 34 Chap. 23.
Of Pigmeys and Dwarfs, and Men much below the common height. 36 Chap. 24. Of
the mighty Force and Strength of some Persons. 37 Chap. 25. Of the mavelous
Fruit^ulness of some; and what number of their Descendants they have lived to
see: Also, of Superfaetation. 40 Chap. 26. Of the strange Agility and
Nimbleness of some, and their wonderf^l Feats. 42 Chap. 27. Of the
extraordinary Swiftness and Footmanship of some Men. 44 Chap. 28. Of Men of
Expedition in their Iourneys, and quick dispatch in other Affairs. 45 Chap. 29.
Of the Fatness and Unwieldiness of some Men, and the lightness of the Bodies of
others. 46 Chap. 30. Of the Longaevity and length of Life in some Persons. 47
Chap. 31. Of the memorable Old Age of some, and such as have not found such
sensible Decays therein as others. 49 Chap. 32. Of some such Persons as have
renewed their Age, and grown young again. 51 Chap. 33. Of such Persons as have
changed their Sex. 52 Chap. 34. Of the strange rigor in Punishments used by
several Persons and Nations. 54 Chap. 35. Of the unusual Diseases wherewith
some have been seized, and when and where some of them began. 56 Chap. 36. Of
the different and unusual ways some Men have come to their Deaths. 59 Chap. 37.
Of the dead Bodies of some great Persons, which not without difficulty found
their Graves: And of others not permitted to rest there. 62 Chap. 38. Of
entombed Bodies, how found at the opening of their Monuments: And of the parcel
Resurrection near Gran Cairo. 64 Chap. 39. Of such Persons as have returned to
Life after they have been believed to be dead. 86 Chap. 40. Of such who after
Death have concerned themselves with the Affairs of their Friends. 88 Chap. 41.
Of the strange ways by which Murders have been discovered. 89
The SECOND BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of the Imagination or Fantasy, and the force of it in some Persons
when depraved by Melancholy or otherwise. 94 Chap. 2. Of the Comprehensiveness
and Fidelity of the Memories of some Men. 96 Chap. 3. Of the Sight, and the
vigor of that Sense in some, and how depraved in others. 99 Chap. 4. Of the
Sense in hearing, and the quickness and dullness of it in diverse Men. 100 Chap.
5. Of the Sense of Feeling; the delicacy of it in some, and its Abolition in
others: Also, what Virtue has been found in the Touch of some Persons. 101
Chap. 6. Of the Sense of Tasting, how exquisite in some, and utterly lost in
others. 103 Chap. 7. Of the Sense of Smelling; the Curiosity of it in some, and
how hurt or lost in others. 104 Chap. 8. Of the Passion of Love, and the
effects of it in diverse Persons. 105 Chap. 9. Of the extreme Hatred of some
Persons toward others. 107 Chap. 10. Of Fear, and the strange effects, of it:
Also, of Panick Fears. 108 Chap. 11. Of the Passion of Anger, and the strange
effects of it in some Men. 110 Chap. 12. Of such as have been seized with an
extraordinary joy, and what has followed thereupon. 113 Chap. 13. Of the
Passion of Grief, and how it has acted upon some men. 115 Chap. 14. Of Desire,
and what have been the wishes of some men for themselves or upon their enemies.
116 Chap. 15. Of Hope, how great some men have entertained, and how some have
been disappointed in theirs. 118 Chap. 16. Of the Scoffing and Scornful
disposition of some men, and how they have been rewarded. 119 Chap. 17. Of the
envious Nature and Disposition of some men. 120 Chap. 18. Of Modesty, and the
Shame-faced Nature of some men and women. 122 Chap. 19. Of Impudence, and the
shameless Behavior of diverse persons. 124 Chap. 20. Of Jealousy, and how
strangely some have been affected with it. 125 Chap. 21. Of the Commiseration,
Pity, and Compassion of some men to others in time of their Adversity. 127
Chap. 22. Of the deep Dissimulation and Hypocrisy of some men. 128
The THIRD BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of the early appearance of Virtue, Learning, Greatness of Spirit, and
Subtlety in some Young Persons. 130 Chap. 2. Of such as having been extreme
Wild, and Prodigal, or Debauched in their Youth, have afterward proved
excellent Persons. 132 Chap. 3. Of Punctual Observations in Matters of
Religion, and the great regard some men have had to it. 134 Chap. 4. Of the
Veracity of some Persons, and their great Love to Truth, and hatred of Flattery
and Falsehood. 137 Chap. 5. Of such as have been great Lovers and Promoters of
Peace. 139 Chap. 6. Of the signal Love that some men have showed to their
Country. 140 Chap. 7. Of the singular Love of some Husbands to their Wives. 142
Chap. 8. Of the singular Love of some Wives to their Husbands. 144 Chap. 9. Of
the Indulgence and great Love of some Parents to their Children. 147 Chap. 10.
Of the Reverence and Piety of some Children to their Parents. 149 Chap. 11. Of
the singular Love of some Brethren to each other. 152 Chap. 12. Of the singular
Love of some Servants to their Masters. 154 Chap. 13. Of the Faithfulness of
some men to their Engagement, and Trust reposed in them. 157 Chap. 14. Of the
exact Obedience which some have yielded to their Superiors. 159 Chap. 15. Of
the Generosity of some Persons, and the Noble Actions by them performed, 161
Chap. 16. Of the Frugality and Thriftiness of some men in their Apparel,
Furniture, and other things. 164 Chap. 17. Of the Hospitality of some men, and
their free Entertainment of Strangers. 165 Chap. 18. Of the blameless and
innocent Life of some Persons. 167 Chap. 19. Of the choicest Instances of the
most entire Friendship. 168 Chap. 20. Of the Grateful Disposition of some
Persons, and what returns they have made of Benefits received. 171 Chap. 21. Of
the Meekness, Humanity, Clemency, and Mercy of some men. 174 Chap. 22. Of the
light and gentle Revenges some have taken upon others. 177 Chap 23. Of the
Sobriety and Temperance of some men in their Meat and Drink, and other things.
179 Chap. 24. Of the Affability and Humility of diverse Great Persons. 181 Chap.
25. Of Counsel and the Wisdom of some men therein. 182 Chap. 26 Of the Subtilty
and Prudence of some men in the Investigation and discovery of things, and
their Determinations about them. 184 Chap. 27. Of the Liberal and Bountiful
Disposition of diverse Great Persons. 186 Chap. 28. Of the Pious Works and
Charitable Gifts of some men. 189 Chap. 28. Of such as were Lovers of Justice,
and Impartial Administrators of it. 192 Chap. 30. Of such Persons as were
Illustrious for their singular Chastity, both Men and Women. 195 Chap. 31. Of
Patience, and what power some men have had over their Passions. 199 Chap. 32.
Of such as have well deported themselves in their Adversity, or been improved
thereby. 200 Chap. 33. Of the willingness of some men to forgive Injuries
received. 201 Chap. 34. Of such as have patiently taken free Speeches, and
Reprehensions from their Inferiors. 203 Chap. 35. Of the incredible strength of
Mind wherewith some Persons have supported themselves in the midst of Torments,
and other Hardship. 205 Chap. 36. Of the Fortitude and Personal Valor of some
famous Men. 207 Chap. 37. Of the fearless Boldness of some Men, and their
desperate Resolutions. 210 Chap. 38. Of the immovable Constancy of some
Persons. 213 Chap. 39. Of the great Confidence of some Men in themselves. 214
Chap. 40. Of the great reverence showed to Learning and Learned Men. 216 Chap.
41. Of the exceeding intentness of some Men upon their Meditations and Studies.
218 Chap. 42. Of such Persons as were of choice Learning, and singular Skill in
the Tongues. Chap. 43. Of the first Authors of diverse famous Inventions. 222
Chap. 44. Of the admirable Works of some curious Artists. 224. Chap. 45. Of the
Industry and Pains of some Men, and their hatred of Idleness. 229 Chap. 46. Of
the Dexterity of some men in the instruction of several Cr^atures. 230 Chap.
47. Of the Taciturnity and Secrecy of some men instrusted with privacies. 232
Chap. 48. Of such who in their raised Fortunes have been mindful of their low
beginnings. 233 Chap. 49. Of such as have despised Riches, and of the laudable
poverty of some illustrious persons. 234 Chap. 50. Of such Persons as have
preferred Death before the loss of their Liberty: and what some have endured in
the preservation of it. 237 Chap. 51. Of such as in highest Fortunes have been
mindful of humane frailty. 238 Chap. 52. Of such as were of unusual Fortune and
Felicity. 239 Chap. 53. Of the Gallantry wherewith some Persons have received
death, or the message of it. 241
The FOURTH BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of Atheists, and such as have made no account of Religion, with their
Sacrilegious actions, and the punishments thereof. 361 Chap. 2. Of such as were
exceeding hopeful in youth, but afterward improved to the worse. 363 Chap. 3.
Of the rigorous Severity of some Parents to their Children, and how unnatural
others have showed themselves toward them. 364 Chap. 4. Of the degenerate Sons
of illustrious Parents. 366 Chap. 5. Of undutiful and unnatural Children to
their Parents. 368 Chap. 6. Of the Affectation of divine Honors, and the
desire of some men te be reputed Gods. 370 Chap. 7. Of unnatural Husbands to
their Wives. 372 Chap. 8. Of such Wives as were unnatural to their Husbands, or
evil deported toward them. 373 Chap. 9. Of the deep hatred some have conceived
against their own Brethren, and the unnatural actions of Brothers and Sisters.
374 Chap. 10. Of the Barbarous and Savage Cruelty of some men. 376 Chap. 11. Of
the bitter Revenges that some men have taken upon their enemies. 379 Chap. 12.
Of the great and grievous oppressions and unmercifulness of some men, and their
punishments. 382 Chap. 13. Of the bloody and cruel Massacres in several places,
and their occasions. 384 Chap. 13. Of the excessive Prodigality of some
Persons. 385 Chap. 14. Of the Prodigious Luxury of some men in their Feasting.
387 Chap. 15. Of the Voraciousness of some great Eaters, and the Swallowers of
Stones, etc. 390 Chap. 16. Of great Drinkers, and what great quantities they
have swallowed. 391 Chap. 17. Of Drunkenness, and what has befallen some men
in theirs. 393 Chap. 18. Of the Luxury and Expense of some Persons in Apparel,
and their Variety therein, and in their other Furniture. 395 Chap. 19. Of
Gaming, and some men's Expensiveness therein, together with the woeful and
dreadful Consequences of it. 397 Chap. 20. Of the oversights of some Persons of
great Abilities, and their Imprudence in their Speeches or affairs. 398 Chap.
21. Of the Dangerous and Destructive Curiosity of some men. 400 Chap. 22. Of
the Ignorance of the Ancients and others. 401 Chap. 23. Of the Slothfulness and
Idleness of some men. 403 Chap. 24. Of the blockish Dullness and Stupidity of
some Persons. 404 Chap. 25. Of the Treacherous and Infirm Memories of some men,
and what injuries have been done thereunto through Age, Diseases, or other
Accidents. 406 Chap. 26. Of the Absurd and strange Follies of diverse men. 407
Chap. 27. Of such as have been at vast expenses about unprofitable attempts,
and wherefrom they have been enforced to desist, or whereof they have had small
or no benefit. 409 Chap. 28. Of false Accusers, and how the Accused have been
acquitted. 410. Chap. 29. Of Perjured Persons, and how they have been punished.
412 Chap. 30. Of the Inconstancy of some men in their nature and disposition.
414 Chap. 31. Of the Covetous and Greedy Disposition of some men. 416 Chap. 32.
Of the Tributes and Taxes some Princes have Imposed upon their Subjects. 418
Chap. 33. Of Cheats, and the extraordinary boldness of some in their Thefts.
420 Chap. 34. Of Persons of base Birth who assumed the names of illustrious
persons. 424 Chap. 35. Of the huge Ambition of some men, and their Thirst after
Sovereignty. 425 Chap. 36. Of the great desire of glory in some Noble and other
Ignoble Persons. 429 Chap. 37. Of the intolerable Pride and haughtiness of
some Persons. 426 Chap. 38. Of the Insolence of some men in Prosperity, and
their abject Baseness in Adversity. 431 Chap. 39. Of the vainglorious Boasting
of some men. 433 Chap. 40. Of the unadvised Rashness and Temerity of some
Persons. 443 Chap. 41. Of such Persons as were discontented in their happiest
Fortunes. 434 Chap. 42. Of Litigious Persons, and bloody Quarrels upon slight
occasions. 436 Chap. 43. Of such as have been too fearful of Death, and over
desirous of Life. 437 Chap. 44. Of the gross Flatteries of some men. 404 Chap.
45. Of such as have been found guilty of that which they have reprehended or
disliked in others. 441 Chap. 46. Of such Persons as could not endure to be
told of their Faults. 442 Chap. 47. Of the base Ingratitude of some unworthy
Persons. 444 Chap. 48. Of the Perfidiousness and Treachery of some men, and
their Just Rewards. 447 Chap. 49. Of Voluptuous and Effeminate Persons. 451
Chap. 50. Of the Libidinous and unchaste Life of some Persons, and what
Tragedies have been occasioned by Adulteries. 452 Chap. 51. Of the Incestuous
Loves and Marriages of some men. 453 Chap. 52. Of such as have been warned of
their approaching Death, who yet were not able to avoid it. 455 Chap. 53. Of
such as have unwittingly, or unwarily procured and hastened their own Death and
Downfall. 458 Chap. 54. Men of unusual Misfortunes in their Affairs, Persons, or
Families. 459 Chap. 55. Of the Loquacity of some men, their inability to retain
entrusted Secrets, and the Punishment thereof. 461
The FIFTH BOOK.
CHap. 1. The Succession of the Roman and Western Emperors. 463 Chap. 2. Of the
Eastern, Greek, and Turkish Emperors. 469 Chap. 3. Of the Bishops and Popes in
Rome, and their Succession. 493 Chap. 4. Of such men as have been the Framers
and Composers of Bodies of Laws for diverse Nations and Countries. 482 Chap. 5.
Of Ambassadors, what their Negotiations, and after what manner they have
behaved themselves therein. 484 Chap. 6. Of such as were eminent Seamen, or
Discoverers of Lands, or Passages by Sea formerly unknown. 486 Chap. 7. Of the
Eloquence of some men, and the wonderful power of persuasion that has been in
their Speeches and Orations. 488 Chap. 8. Of the most Famous Greek and Latin
Historians. 489 Chap. 9. Of the most Famous and Ancient Greek and Latin Poets.
492 Chap. 10. Of Music, the strange efficacy of it, and the most famous
Musicians. 496 Chap. 11. Of such as by sight of the Fa^e could judge of the
Inclinations, Manners, and Fortunes of the Person. 497 Chap. 12. Of the
Painters in former Times, and the Principal Pieces of the best Artists. 491
Chap. 13. Of the most eminent Artists for making of Statues and Images in Clay,
Marble, Ivory, Brass, etc. 493 Chap. 14. Of the most applauded Acters upon
Theaters, and the Name, Riches and Favor of Great Persons, they have thereby
attained unto. 494 Chap. 15. Of men notably practiced in Swimming; and how long
some have continued under water. 504 Chap. 16. Of the most famous Philosophers,
Academicks, Stoics, Cynicks, Epicureans, and others. 505 Chap. 17. Of the most
Famous Printers in several Places. 510 Chap. 18. Of such men as were of unusual
Dexterity in shooting with the Bow, or otherwise. 510 Chap. 19. Of the
Heretics of former Ages, and the Heresies maintained by them. 511 Chap. 20. Of
the most Famous Magicians, Witches, and Wizards, and their mutual Contests;
their Diabolical Illusions, and Miserable Ends. 515 Chap. 21. Of the Primitive
Fathers and Doctors of the Church. 518
The SIXTH BOOK.
CHap. 1. Of Dreams, and what have been revealed to some Persons therein. 545
Chap. 2. Of such Presages as have been to diverse Persons and Places, of their
good and evil Fortune, also of Presages by men to themselves or others, by
casual Words or Actions. 549 Chap. 3. Of the Famous Predictions of some men,
and how the Event has been conformable thereunto. 554 Chap. 4. Of several
Illustrious Persons abused and deceived by Predictions of Astrologers, and the
equivocal Responses of Oraracles. 558 Chap. 5. Of the Magnificent Buildings,
sumptuous and admirable Works of the Ancients, and those of later Times. 561
Chap. 6. Of the Libraries in the World, their Founders and Number of Books
contained in them. 564 Chap. 7. Of such Persons, who being of mean and low
Birth, have yet attained to great Dignity and considerable Fortunes. 566 Chap.
8. Of Wonderful and sudden Changes in the Fortunes and Conditions of many
Illustrious Persons. 569 Chap. 9. Of such as have left Places of highest Honor
and Employment for a private and retired condition. 575 Chap. 10. Of Persons
advanced to Honor through their own Subtlety, some Accident, or for some
slight occasion. 577 Chaap. 11. Of sundry Customs that were in use and force
with different Nations and People. 580 Chap. 12. Of the several things that the
several Persons and Nations have set apart and worshipped as their Gods. 584
Chap. 13. Of the manner of Food which has been, or is yet in use amongst
diverse Nations and People, or Persons addicted to some Idolatrous Sect. 588
Chap. 14. Of some Persons that have abstained from all manner of Food for many
years together. 589 Chap. 15. Of such as refused all Drink, or to taste of any
liquid thing, or else found no need thereof. 591 Chap. 16. Of such men as used
to walk, and perform other strange things in their sleep. 592 Chap. 17. Of the
long sleeps of some, and of others that have been able to subsist for Months
and Years without it or were difficultly brought to it. 594 Chap. 18. Of such
as have fallen into Trances and Ecstasies, and their manner of Behavior
therein. 595 Chap. 19. Of extraordinary things in the Bodies, Fortunes, Death,
of diverse persons. etc. 598 Chap. 20. Of matters of Importance, and high
Designs, either promoted or made to miscarry by small matters or strange
accidents. 600 Chap. 21. Of such as have framed themselves to an Imitation of
their Superiors or others, with the force of Example in diverse things. 601
Chap. 22. Of the Authority of some persons amongst their Soldiers and
Countrymen, and Seditions appeased by them diverse ways. 603 Chap. 23. Of such
Princes and Persons as have been fortunate in the finding of hid Treasures, and
others that were deluded in the like expectation. 604 Chap. 24. Of the Election
and Inauguration of Princes in several places and Nations. 605 Chap. 25. Of the
Games and Plays of sundry Nations, by whom they were instituted and when. 607
Chap. 26. Of such Persons as have made their Appeals to God in case of Injury
and Injustice from man, and what has followed thereupon. 608 Chap. 27. Of the
apparition of Demons and Specter, and with what courage some have endured the
sight of them. 611 Chep. 28. Of the Imprecations of some men upon themselves or
others, and how they have accordingly come upon them. 614 Chap. 29. Of the
Error and Mistakes of some men, and what has fallen out thereupon. 615 Chap.
30. Of Retaliation, and of such as have suffered by their own devices. 620
Chap. 31. Of such persons as have been extremely beloved by several Creatures,
as Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, etc. 622 Chap. 32. Of the extraordinary
honors done to some great persons in their lifetime, or at their death. 624
Chap. 33. Of the strange and different ways whereby some persons have been
saved from death. 626 Chap. 34. Of such persons as have taken Poison, and
quantities of other dangerous things without damage thereby. 629 Chap. 35. Of
such as have been happily cured of diverse very dangerous Diseases and Wounds,
etc. 630 Chap. 36. Of Stratagems in War for the amusing and defeating of the
Enemy, and taking of Cities, etc. 633 Chap. 37. Of the secret ways of Dispatch,
and the delivery of Messages by Letters, Ciphers, and other ways. 637 Chap. 38.
Of the sad Condition and deplorable Distresses of some men, by Sea and Land.
638 Chap. 39. Of Conscience, the Force and Aesfects of it in some men. 643
Chap. 40. Of Banishment, and the sorts and manner of it amongst the Ancients,
etc. 645 Chap. 41. Of the wise Speeches, Sayings, and Replies of several
Persons. 646 Chap. 52. Of such persons as were the first Leaders in diverse
things. 647 Chap. 43. Of the witty Speeches or Replies suddenly made by some
persons. 659 Chap. 44. Of Recreations some men have delighted in or addicted
themselves unto at leisure hours, or that they have been immoderate in the use
of. 651 Chap. 45. Of such People and Nations as have been scourged and
afflicted by small and contemptible things, or by Beasts, Birds, Insects and
the like. 652
Imprimatur,

June. 25. 1677.

Guil. Jane. R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.

THE WONDERS Of the little WORLD: Or, a General and Complete HISTORY of MAN.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of such Infants as have been heard to cry while they were in the Womb
of their Mothers.
THat which Mr. Beaumont wrote in his Elegy upon the Lady Rutland may very well
be pronounced upon every of the Sons and Daughters of Men.

But thou had e're thou came to use of tears,
Sorrow laid up against thou came to years.
So true is that of the sacred Oracle: Man is born to trouble. It seems trouble
is his proper Inheritance, and that as soon as he enters into Life, he is of
Age sufficient to enter upon the troubles of it also. Yet as if this were
somewhat with the latest, there are some who seem even to anticipate their
birthright: and as if the World was not wide enough to afford them their full
measure of sorrow: they begin their lamentations in the Womb. Or whether it is
that provident Nature would have them to practice there in the dark, what they
shall afterward seldom want occasion for so long as they enjoy the light. The
Histories of such little Prisoners as have been heard to cry in their close
Apartments, take as follows.

1. A poor Woman in Holland being great with child and near unto the time of
her delivery: Hist. of the Netherlands page 91.
the child in her Womb (for the space of fifteen days before that of her
Travail) was heard almost continually to cry and lament; Clark's mir. cap. 104.
p. 497.
many worthy persons went daily to hear so great a novelty, and have testified
upon their own knowledge the unquestionable verity of it.

Barthol. Hist. Anatomic. Cent. 1. Hist. 1. page 1.2.
2. When I was of late at Argentina with my Brother, says Leonardus Doldius, it
was credibly reported that the Wife of a Tailor in that Neighborhood together
with diverse others, did hear the child cry in her Womb, some days before the
time of her Travail. He adds to this the History of another in Rotenburgh.

Sennert. pract. Med. lib. 4. part. 2 5. cap. 8. p. 359.
3. In our Town says he Anno 1596. November 12. which was the forty second day
before the Birth, the Parents heard the cry of their Daughter in the Womb once,
and the day following twice; the Mother died in Travail, the Daughter is yet
alive.

Barthol. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 1. p. 2. Sennert. prax. l. 4. par. 2. 5.
c. 8. p. 359.360. Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 1. p. 3. Salmas. respon^.
ad Beverov. de calculo p. 198.
4. Anno 1632. In the Town of Wittenberg, on the Calends of March there was a
Woman who had been big with child more then eleven Months: This Woman together
with her Husband have sometimes heard the child cry, before she was delivered
of it; which she was afterward very happily.

5. I my self together with the Learned Salmasius will be witnesses of such
like cryings in the Womb: I lived 1640. in Belgia, when it was commonly
affirmed of a Woman near Vessalia, who then had gone three years entire, big
with a child, that that child of hers was heard so to cry, by many persons
worthy of credit.

6. A noble Person at Leyden used to tell of her Brother's Wife, Barth. Hist.
Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 1. p. 3.
that lying in Bed with her Husband near her time; she heard the child cry in
her Womb, amazed with which she awakened her Husband; who put his head within
the clothes and listening, did also hear the same: the Woman was so affrighted,
that few days after she fell in Travail.

7. Anno 1648. Th^re was a Woman, the Wife of a Seaman near to the Church of
Holmiana, Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 1. p. 4.5.
who had been big for eight Months, she was of a good habit of body, and not
old: this Woman upon the Eve of Christmas Day; upon the Calends of the year
following, and in Epiphany, all those several times heard the child that was in
her Womb, who cried with that noise that it was heard by the Neighbors. They
thronged together in great numbers to hear so unusual a crying, both such as
knew the Woman, and such as knew her not. The Magistrates in the mean time
caused the Woman to be carefully watched, that afterward the birth of that
crier might be the more certain. Diverse spent their judgment before hand of
what shaped Monster she should be delivered: but at last the Woman was safely
brought to bed of a perfect Female child: who with her Mother are both alive at
this day. Let no Man question the truth of this History; for I who am not wont
to rely upon rumor; can for certain affirm that I have heard this relation
from the Mother her self.

8. Dr. Walter Needham an eminent and learned Physician; N^edh. disquisit.
Anat. cap. 3. p. 84.
discoursing about the Air that is contained in the membranes of the Womb: as a
proof thereof relates the story of a child that was heard to cry while as yet
in the belly of its Mother. A long time says he, I could scarce believe, that
there were any such kind of cryings: till I was informed of that which I now
set down, by a noble Lady in Cheshire: As this Honorable person sat after Meat
in the dining room, with her Husband, their Domestic Chaplain, and diverse
others: she was sensible of an extraordinary stirring in her belly: which so
lift up her clothes, that it was easily discernible to those that were present
(she was then with child; and it was the seventh Month from the time wherein
she had conceived) upon the sudden there was a voice heard; but whence it
should come, they were not able to conjecture; not suspecting any thing of the
Embryo in her Womb. Soon after they perceived the belly and garments of the
Lady, to have a second and notable commotion; and withal heard a cry, as if it
had proceeded from thence. While they were amazed at what had passed; and were
discoursing together of this prodigy: All that had before happened, did a third
time so manifestly appear, that (being now become the more attentive) they
doubted not, but that the cry came from her Womb: the Girl that was so
loquacious in the Womb of her Mother, does yet live, and is likely enough so to
continue. I cannot doubt of the truth of so eminent a story, receiving the
confirmation of it, from so credible persons; nor was I willing longer to
conceal the thing it self; seeing it is of such moment in the controversy
aforesaid.

9. Anno 1233. Schenck. observat. l. 1. p. 13. obs. 1. Weinrich. de Monstris c.
26. p. 62. Sennert. pract. Med. l. 4. part 2. 5. cap. 8. p. 359.
In Rathstadt a Town in the Noric Alps, was born a child whose crying was
heard fourteen days before the birth of it.

10. Martinus Weinrichius writes thus: even in our times says he, and in this
our City of Bressa, an Infant was heard to cry, three days before it came into
the light: and he observes that the Man so born, was miserable in respect of
his fortune and Diseases he was seized with; even to the day of his death.

CHAP. II. Of such as have carried their dead Children in their Womb for some
years.
SO unwilling are Parents (for the most part) to survive the funerals of their
Children: that some have thought it a very desirable thing to have their dying
eyes closed by the hands of such as have issued from them. It was the wish of
Penelope that the performance of this last Office for her self and her Ulysses,
might be reserved to their dear Telemachus, according to that of Ovid.

Ille meos oculos comprimat ille tuos. Ovid Epist. l. 1. Ep. 21.

By him let my Eyes closed be,
And may he do the same for thee.
We cannot then but pity those unhappy Mothers, whose Children have not only
died before them, but within them: in whom the punishment of Mezentius may seem
to have been revived in such a coupling of the living with the dead: and who
(with a fatal disappointment of their hopes) are sensible their expired Infants
have found their untimely Coffins in the midst of their own Bowels. The
transcribed Histories of some such disconsolate Creatures you have here
underwritten.

1. Catherine the Wife of Michael de Men, Schenck. observe. lib. 4. p. 575.
obs. 8. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 240.
a poor Countryman; for twelve years together carried a dead Child, or rather
the Skeleton of one in her Womb. A monstrous and miraculous thing, and which
yet is manifest to the touch, says Aegidius de Horthoge. I my self says he,
and many other, both Men and Illustrious Women are witnesses hereof; it is
enough to name the excellent Henricus Cornelius Mathisius; who heretofore was
domestic Physician to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, he when he had handled
the Woman beforesaid both standing and lying, and by touch had easily
distinguished all the bones of the dead Infant, in a great amazement cried out,
nothing is impossible to God and Nature. She conceived of this child in March,
Anno 1549. who desires to see this History more at large may have it from
Schenckius in the place forecited.

Schenck. observe. lib. 4. p. 577. obs. 9.
2. In the Town of Sindelfingen, there lives a Woman of thirty years or
thereabouts, who six or seven weeks before her expected delivery, by reason of
a slip upon the Ice, hit her back against a wall; and from that time never
afterward felt her child she went with to stir. The bigness of her belly was
the same; only a little after her fall it did somewhat increase and after fell
again; but she brought not forth her dead child; nor from that time forth was
she sensible of the ordinary purgation of Women. She had her fall, Anno 1590.
After which notwithstanding she conceived twice or thrice, and was as often
delivered of living Children: But after her delivery; her usual bigness
continues: so that she verily believes the dead child is yet in her Womb.

3. Anno Dom. 1545. at Vienna in Austria, Margarita Carlinia, Zuing. Theatr.
vol. 2. lib. 4. p. 357 col. 2. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 239.
the Wife of Georgius Volzerus, being big with child, and in Travail; in her
labor pains, was sensible that somewhat seemed to crack within her, and from
thenceforward never felt her child to stir: but for the entire space of four
year afterward, she was afflicted with vehement pains; so that at the last she
was given over by the Physicians: After which Nature endeavoring an
evacuation: caused an Ulcer about her Navel, which discharged it self of an
abundance of matter, and so closed it self again; till at length, Anno 1549.
upon the collection of new matter, there appeared the bone of the child's elbow
in the very orifice of the Ulcer, together with a mavelous weakness of the
Woman: In this desperate Disease there was recourse had to a desperate remedy,
which was incision; her belly was opened by the advice of Mathias Cornax the
Emperor's Physician, and by the operation of the chief Chirurgions there, a
masculine child half putrid was drawn out thence piecemeal: the wound was
afterward so happily cured; that the Woman attained to so entire health; as
that it was hoped she might conceive again: Alexander Benedictus says she did,
and died in Travail of her next child.

Zacut. Lusit, praxis Medic. admirand. lib. 2. obs. 157. p. 276.
4. Zacutus Lusitanus has set down the History of a Woman of mean fortune, and
sixteen years of Age, who being with child, and the time of her Travail come,
could not be delivered by reason of the narrowness of her Womb, the Chirurgions
advised section, which they said was ordinary in such cases, but she refused
it; the dead child therefore putrefied in her Womb: after three years the
smaller bones of it came from her; and so by little and little for ten years
together, there came forth pieces of corrupted flesh, and fragments of the
skull: at last in the twelfth year there issued out piecemeal the greater
bones: her belly fell; and after some years she conceived again, and was
happily delivered of a living boy.

Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 241.
5. Marcellus Donatus relates a History, for the truth of which he cites the
testimony of Hippolitus Genifortus a Surgeon, and Josephus Araneus a
Physician, and it was thus: Paula the Wife of Mr. Naso an Innkeeper in the
street of Pont Merlane in Mantua, having carried a dead child of five Months
Age, much longer in her Womb: by a continued collection of san^ous matter in
her Womb, not without a Fever, she at last was exceedingly wasted and consumed.
At which time, by way of siege, she voided certain little bones which gave her
a great deal of pain: these she gathered, cleansed and showed them to
Gemfortus, who soon discovered them to be the bones of a young child; when this
was related to me I could not believe till such time as I asked the Woman her
self, who confirmed the truth of it by an Oath, and s^ew'd me diverse of the
bones, which she kept amongst Rose leaves: nor did she cease voiding them in
this manner for months and years, till she was this way quit of very many of
them: certainly a most wonderful operation of Nature this was, and that she
sometimes works in this manner is easily proved by other Histories.

CHAP. III. Of such Women whose Children have been petrified and turned to
Stone in their Wombs, and the like found in dead bodies, or some parts of them.
WHen Cato had seen Caesar victorious, though at that time the Invader of the
Commonwealth: and the great Pompey overcome and overwhelmed, who as the
Guardian of his endangered Country had undertaken her protection: when he saw
on the one side successful villainy, and on the other afflicted virtue: he is
said to have cried out in a deep astonishment: well, there is much of obscurity
in divine L^ps. de constant. lib* 2. c. 1^. p. 172.
matters. As God Almighty has the ways of his providence in the deep; so
Nature his handmaid has many of her paths in the dark; and by secret ways of
operation brings to pass things so strange and uncouth to humane reason and
expectation: that even such as have been long of her Privy Counsel have stood
at gaze at, and made open confession of their ignorance by their admiration. I
take that for a Fable which Ovid tells befell Niobe through excess of grief for
the Death of her Children.

Stiff grew she by these ills; no gentle Air
Does longer move the soft curles of her Hair; Ovid Meta^ l. 6. p. 101.

Her pale Che^ks have no blood; her once bright Eyes
Are fixed, and set, in liveless Statue wise;
Her Tongue within her hardened mouth upseal'd;
Her Veins did cease to move; her Neck congealed;
Her Arms all motionless; her foot cannot go,
And all her Bowels into hard Stone grow.
And yet there have been some Women, who in themselves have experienced but too
much of the verity of this last Verse: such was

1. Columba Chatry, Sennert. prax. Med. lib. 4. par. 2. 4. c. 7. p. 311.
a Woman of Sens in Burgundy; she was Wife to Ludovicus Chatry, this Woman by
the report of Monsieur John Alibaux an eminent Physician (and who also was
present at the disse^tion of her) went twenty eight years with a dead child in
her Womb: Sch^^k. obs. lib. 4. obs. 21. p. 537. Barth. Cent. 2. Hist. 100. p.
76. Rosse. Arcan. Micrososm. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 76. Addit. ad Do^at. per Greg.
H^rit. lib. 7. cap. 2. p. 659. John's. Not. Hist. Cent. 16. cap. 5. p. 334.
Konaman. de Mir. Mort. par. 3. c. 34. p. 117.
when she was dead and her belly opened, there was found a Stone; having all
the limbs and exact proportion of a child of nine months old. The slimy matter
of the child's body (says one upon this occasion) having an aptitude by the
extraordinary heat of the matrix to be hardened, might retain the same
lineaments which it had before. This child was thus found Anno Dom. 1582.
Sennertus confesses this accident so rare, that it was the only instance in its
kind that he ever met with (at least to his remembrance) in the whole History
of Physic.

2. Because I foresee I am not like to meet with many more such instances as
that I but now mentioned; I shall therefore set down under this head a History
which is very near unto it: It was communicated by Claudius a Sancto Mauritio
in one of his Letters and thus related by Gregorius Horstius. Addit. ad Donat.
per Greg. H^r^i. lib. 7. cap. 2. p. 663.


On the 25. of January in this present year; there fell out a mavelous thing
to us. In the dissection of a Woman of about thirty seven years of Age, we
found her Womb all turned to stone of the weight of seven pound: her Liver upon
the one lobe of it had a cartilaginous Coat or Tunicle about it: her Spleen was
globular; her Bladder stony: and she had a Peritonaeum so very hard that scarce
could it be cut with a knife: the view of all which occasioned our wonder,
which way the Spirits should be conveyed throughout the whole Body; and by what
means it came to pass that this Woman lived so long, and that too, without any
manifest sign of sickness all her life time, as far as could be observed.

3. I can for certain affirm thus much, says Heurnius, Ad. Donat. lib. 7. p^^
H^st. cap. 2. p. 664.
that I have seen at Padua the breast of a Woman which was also turned into
stone: and that was done by this means: as she lay dead, that breast of hers,
lay covered in the Water of a certain Spring there.

Z^^ch. qu. Medico-legal. lib. 4. tit. 1. qu. 10. p. 235.
4. Pompilius Placentinus gives us the History of a Venetian Woman, who being
done to death by a poisoned Apple, when dead she grew so stiff and congealed,
that she seemed to be transformed into a Statue of Stone, nor could they cut
open her belly by knife or Sword.

Karnman de Mir. Mort. par. 3. cap. 36. p. 18.
5. Not far from Tybar which is a City of the Sabines, runs the River Anien, on
the Sands of which are found Almonds, the seeds of Fennel, and Anise, and
diverse other things that are turned into Stone; whereof I my self was an
eyewitness, when some years agone I traveled that way. A while since there was
found the body of a Man that was killed and cast into this River Anien; he lay
close at the root of a Tree that grew upon the Bank-side, and the Carcass
having there rested a considerable time unputrefied, when it was found and
taken up it was turned into stone. Titus Celsus a Patritian of Rome, told this
unto Iacobus Boissardus affirming that he himself had seen it. This River
arises from cold Sulphurous veins, derived from Subterranean metals, and by a
kind of natural virtue, it consolidates, and agglutinates all kind of bodies,
such as sticks and leaves; and passing over more solid bodies, it by degrees
wraps them about with a stony bark.

CHAP. IV. Of such persons as have made their entrance into the World in a
different manner from the rest of mankind.
Mill modis morimur, uno tantum nascimur (says Tully) we die a thousand ways
but we are born but one. But certainly as there is a mavelous diversity of
accidents through which Man arrives to his last end: So also curious Nature
has in a various manner sported her self in the birth of some. And howsoever
she brings most of us into the World as it were in a common Road: yet has she
also her bypath; and ever and anon singles out some whom she will have to be
her Heteroclites and so many exceptions from the general rule.

1. Zoroastres was the only Man that ever we could hear of that laughed the
same day wherein he was born; Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 16. p. 164. Solin.
cap. 4. p. 181.
his brain also did so evidently pant and beat, that it would bear up their
hands that laid them upon his head. An evident presage (says Pliny) of the
great Learning which he afterward attained unto.

2. M. Tullius Cicero, Zuing. Theatr. Vol. 2. lib. 5. page 414. col. 1. Plut.
parel. p. in Cicerone. Solin. c. 4. p. 180. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 8. p.
160. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 1. p. 270. col. 2. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
p. 164. Solin. c. 4. p. 181.
is said to have been brought into the World by his Mother Helvia (upon the
third of the Nones of January) without any of those pains that are usual in
childbearing.

3. Such as were born into the World with their feet forward, the Latins were
wont to call Agrippae, and Agripina (says Pliny) has left in writing, that
her Son Nero the late Emperor (who all the time of his Reign was a very enemy
to mankind) was born with his feet forwards.

4. Some children are born into the World with Teeth, as M. Curious, who
thereupon was surnamed Dentatus; and Cn. Papyrius Carbo: both of them great
Men, and right honorable Personages. In Women it was looked upon as of ill
presage; especially in the days of the Kings of Rome; for when Valeria was born
toothed; the Soothsayers (being consulted) answered, that look into what City
she was carried to Nurse; she should be the cause of the ruin and subversion
of it. Whereupon she was conveyed to Suessa Pomeria, a City at that time most
flourishing in Wealth and Riches; and it proved most true in the end, for that
City was utterly destroyed.

5. Some are cut out of their Mothers Womb; Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 9. p.
160. Schenck. obs. Med. lib. 4. obs. 15. p. 580. H^yl. Cosm. p. 336. Baker.
chr. p.
such was Scipio Affricanus the former; so also the first of those who had the
surname of Caesar: thus (says Schenckius) was that Manilius born, who entered
Carthage with an Army; and so (says Heylen) was that Mackduffe Earl of Fife,
who slew Mackbeth the usurping King of Scotland: and so Edward the Sixth of
England.

6. Anno 959. Buchardus Earl of Lintzgow, Buchorn, and Monfort, Schenck. obs.
Med. lib. 4. obs. 15. page 580. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. lib. 1. p. 270. col. 2.
a person of great bounty to the Poor; chosen Abbot of Sangal; and confirmed
therein by Otho the Great was vulgarly called unborn; because he was cut out of
his Mothers Womb.

7. Gebhardus the Son of Otho Earl of Bregentz; was cut out of his Mothers
Womb, Schenck. obs. p. 580. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 1. p. 270. col. 2.
and was consecrated Bishop of Conslantia, Anno 1001.

8. I saw, says Horatius Augenius, a poor Woman of a ^leshy and good habit of
body, who for nine months had an exulceration of the Ventricle; Schenck obs. p.
580. Sennert. prax. Med. l. 4. part. 2. 6. cap. 8. p. 419.
and for twenty days space; vomited up again, all that she eat or drank, as
soon as she had taken it, of this Disease she died; and dissecting her womb, we
took out thence a living boy; who by my direction had the name of Fortunatus
given him at his Baptism, and he is yet alive.

Schenck. obs. Med. p. 580.
9. I my self says Cornelius Gemma, have cut out of the Womb six living
Children from six several persons.

Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 3. p. 158. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 1. p. 270. col.
1.
10. Amongst many strange examples appearing upon record in Chronicles; we read
of a Child in Saguntum (that very year wherein it was forced and razed by
Hanibal) which so soon as it was come forth of the Mothers Womb, presently
returned into it again.

Camerar. horae subcisiv. Cen. 1. c. 55. p. 241. Schenck. obs. Med. lib. 5.
obs. 1. page 674. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 1. p.. 270. col. 1.
11. Johannes Dubravius has observed of Lewis the Second, King of Hungary and
Bohemia, that there were four things wherein he was over hasty: That he became
great in a very small time, that he had a beard too soon; that he had white
hairs before he was past seventeen years of age, and that he was over forward
in his birth; for he came into the World without any of that skin which is
called Epidermis; which yet he soon after got: the Physi^ians lending their
assistance to that which Nature had not time to finish, he died in the 21. of
his Age, Anno 1526. August the 29.

12. When Spinola besieged the City of Bergopsoma; a Woman who was near her
count, going out to draw water, Barth. Hist. Anat. Cen. 2. Hist. 8. p. 159.
was taken off in the middle by a Cannon-bullet, so that the lower part of her
fe^l into the water; such as were by, and beheld that misfortune, ran to her,
and saw there a child, moving it self in the bowels of the Mother: they drew it
forth, and carried it into the Tents of Don Cordua, kept it with all care;
being afterward brought thence to Antwerp, the Infanta Isabella caused it to
be baptized, and gave it the name of Albertu^ Ambrosius, one of her Father's
Captains.

13. Anno 1647. Iacobus Egh in the City of Sarda in B^lgia, had a Bull which he
fed, tying him in a Close near his house; Barth. Ibid. Cent. 2. Hist. 8. p. 157.
but provoked by the boys, he brake his bonds and ran to the Cows, the Herdsman
endeavored with his staff to return him to his former place; the bull being
incensed with his blows ran upon him, and with his horns bore him to the
ground; his Wife being now in the last month of her count, seeing the danger of
her Husband, ran in to his assistance; the bull with his horns hoisted her up
into the Air, the height of one story, and tore the belly of the woman: from
the wound in her belly forthwith came the birth with its secundine; and was
thrown at some distance upon a soft place; was carried home, diligently looked
after by a Midwife; and upon the first of September baptized, had his Fathers
name given him, and is yet alive; the Man lived 36. hours, the woman but 4. the
bull was slain the day after by the command of the Magistrates.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 30. Zuin. The^t. vol. 2. l. 1. p. 270. col. 1.
14. Gorgias a gallant Man of Epirus, slipped from the Womb in the Funerals of his
Mother: and by his unexpected crying caused them to stand who carried the Bier,
affording thereby a new specta^le to his Country, having his birth and cradle
in the Cossin of his Parent: In one and the same moment a dead woman was
delivered, and the other was carried to the Grave before he was born.

Zuing. Ibid. p. 270. Senn pra^. Med. l. 4. par. 2. 6. c. 8. p. 419.
15. Fn^cho Arista the first King of Navarr being dead, Garsias his Son
succeeded* who being one day in the Village of Larumbe; was surprised ^y some
Moorish Robbers, assaulted, and slain; they wounded Vrracha his Queen, in the
Belly with a Lance: the Thieves put to flight; the Queen at the wound was
delivered of a Son and died, the child to all Men's wonder was safe, and was
named Sancius Garsia; he was well educated by a noble person; proved a gallant
Man; and succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, Anno Domini, 918.

16. The Wife of Simon Kn^uter of Weissenburgh, Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1.
Hist. 1. p. 6.7.
went with child to the ninth month, and then falling into Travail, her pains
were such, as that they occasioned her death, and when the assistants doubted
not but that the child was dead also in the Womb, they disposed of the Mother
as is usual in the like occasion; but after some hours they heard a cry, they
ran and found the Mother indeed dead, Id. Cent. ^. Hist. 99. p. 307.
but delivered of a little Daughter that was in good health, and lay at her
feet. Salmuth says, he has seen three several women, who being dead in
Travail, were yet after death delivered of the Children they went with.

CHAP. V. Of what Monsters some Women have been delivered, and of
praeternatural births.
IT is the constant design of provident Nature to produce that which is perfect
and complete in it is kind: But though Man is the noblest part of her operation;
and that she is busied about the framing of him, with singular curiosity and
industry: yet are there sundry variations in her mintage, and some even humane
medals, come out thence with different Errata's in their Impressions. The best
of Archers do not always bore the white; the working brains of the ablest
Politicians, have sometimes suffered an abortion, nor are we willing to bury
their accidental misses, in the memory of their former skilful performances. If
therefore Nature (through a penury, or supersluity of materials, or other
causes) has been so unfortunate as at sometimes to miscarry: her dexterity and
Artifice, in the composition of many, ought to procure her a pardon for such
oversights as she has committed in a few. Besides there is oftentimes so much
of ingenuity in her very disorders, and they are disposed with such a kind of
happy unhappiness, that if her more perfect works beget in us much of delight;
the other may affect us with equal wonder.

1. That is strange which is related by Buchanan; Rosse Arcan. Microcosm. l. 3.
c. 7. 7. p. 89. Camerar. Hor. Subcis. Cen. 2. c. 67. p. 275. Ioh^st. Not. Hist.
Cent. 10. c. 5. p. 334.
It had says he beneath the Navel one body; but above it two distinct ones;
when hurt beneath the Navel both bodies felt the pain; if above, that body only
felt, that was hurt. These two would sometimes differ in opinions and quarrel;
the one dying before the other, the surviving pined away by degrees. It lived
28. years, could speak diverse Languages, and was by the King's command taught
Music. Sandy's on Ovid Metam. lib. 9. p. 173.

2. Anno 1538. Schenck. obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 7.
There was one born who grew up to the stature of a Man, he was double as to
the Head and Shoulders, in such manner as that one face stood opposit^ to the
other; both were of a likeness, and resemb^^, each other in the beard and eyes,
both had the ^ame appetite, and both hungered alike, the voice of both was
almost the same, and both loved the same Wife.

3. I saw (says Bartholinus) Lazarus Colloredo the Genoan, first at Hafnia,
after at Basil, when he was then 28. years of Age; Barth. Hist. A^at. Cent. 1.
Hist. 66. p. 103.
but in both places with amazement. This Lazarus had a little Brother growing
out at his breast, who was in that posture born with him. If I mistake not, the
bone called Xyphoides in both of them grew together, his left foot alone hung
downwards, he had two arms, only three fingers upon each hand: some appearance
there was of the secret parts; he moved his hands, ears, and lips, and had a
little beating in the breast. This little Brother voided no excrements, but by
the mouth, nose, and ears, and is nourished by that which the greater takes: he
has distinct animal and vital parts from the greater; since he sleeps, sweats,
and moves, when the other wakes, rests, and sweats not. Both received their
Names at the Font, the greater that of Lazarus, and the other that of Johannes
Baptista. The natural Bowels, as the Liver, Spleen, etc. are the same in both.
Johannes Baptista, has his eyes for the most part shut; his breath small, so
that holding a Feather at his mouth, it scarce moves; but holding the hand
there, we find a small and warm breath; his mouth is usually open, and always
wet with spittle; his head is bigger then that of Lazarus, but deformed; his
hair hanging down while his face is in an upward posture. Both have beards,
Baptista's neglected, but that of Lazarus very neat. Lazarus is of a just
stature, a decent body, courteous deportment, and gallantly attired; he covers
the body of his Brother with his Cloak; nor could you think a Monster lay
within, at your first discourse with him. He seemed always of a constant mind,
unless that now and then he was solicitous as to his end, for he feared the
death of his Brother; as presaging that when that came to pass he should also
expire, with the stink and putrefaction of his body; and thereupon he took
greater care of his Brother then of himself.

Lemnius de Nature. Mir. lib. 1. cap. 8. p. 38. Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 1.
cap. 54. p. 240.
4. Lemnius tells of a Monster, that a certain Woman was delivered of (to which
Woman he himself was Physician, and present at the sight) which at the
appearing of the day filled all the Chamber with roaring and crying, running
all about, to find some hole to creep into: but the Women at the length sti^led
and smothered it with pillows.

Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 10. p. 20.
5. Johannes Naborowsky a noble Polonian, and my great friend, told me at Basil,
that he had seen in his Country, two little Fishes without scales, which were
brought forth by a Woman, and as soon as they came out of her Womb, did swim in
the Water as other Fish.

Barth. Hist. Anat. Cen. 1. Hist. 10. p. 19.
6. Not many years ago, there lived a Woman of good quality at Elsingorn, who
being satisfied in her count, prepared all things for childbirth; hired a
Midwife, bought a Cradle, etc. but her big belly in the last month seemed to
be much fallen, which yet (not to lessen the report that went of her) she kept
up to the former height by the advantage of clothes which she wore upon it. Her
time of Travail being come, and the usual pains of labor going before; she was
delivered of a creature, very like unto a dormouse of the greater size, which
(to the amazement of the Women who were present) with mavelous celerity
sought out, and found a hole in the Chamber into which it crept* and was never
seen after. I will not render the credit of these Women suspected, seeing
diverse persons have made us Relations of very strange and monstrous births,
from their own experience.

7. Anno Dom. 1639. our Norway afforded us, an unheard of example of a Woman,
Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 4. p. 10, 11, 12.
who having often before been delivered of humane births: and again big: after
strong labor was delivered of two Eggs; one of them was broken, the other was
sent to that excellent person Dr. Olaus Wormius, the ornament of the
University: in whose study it is reserved to be seen of as many as please. I am
not ignorant that many will give no credit to this story; who either have not
seen the Egg, or were not present when the Woman was delivered of it. In
witness therefore of the truth of this matter: I shall cite the testimonies of
Religious persons: and such as are worthy of credit: who by their Letters under
their seals, have confirmed the truth of that which we have now related: I have
thought fit to transcribe the Original it self: which in our own Tongue is
preserved by the foresaid Wormius.

We whose Names are here under written, Ericus Westergard, Rotalph Rakestad,
and Thor Venes, coadjutors of the Pastor in the Parish of Niaess: do certify
to all men. That Anno 1639. upon the 20 th. day of May (by the command of the
Lord President in Remerige, the Lord Paulus Tranius Pastor in Niaess) we went
to receive an account of the monstrous birth in Sundby; brought forth by an
honest Woman, Anna the Daughter of Amundus; the Wife of Gudbrandas
Erlandsonius, who already had been the Mother of eleven Children, the last of
which she was delivered of upon March the 4 th. 1638. This Anna in the year
1639. upon the 7 th of April, began to grow ill: and being in great pains in
her belly, she caused her Neighbors to be called in to her assistance; the
same day about the Evening, in the presence of her Neighbors, she brought
forth an Egg, in all respects like to that of an Hen, which being broken by the
Women then present; Anna Grim, Elen Rudstad, Gyro Rudstad, and Catharina
Sundby; they found that in the yolk and white it answered directly to a common
Egg. Upon the eighteenth day of April about Noon in the presence of the same
persons, she was delivered of another Egg; which in figure was nothing
different from the former. The Mother reported this to us; the Women that
assisted at her delivery confirmed the truth of it: as also that the pains of
this birth had been more sharp to her than all the rest of her former. That
this was the confession as well of the Mother as of them that were present: we
do attest by our Seals in the presence of the Lord President, in the Parish of
Niaess the day and year above said. The great Wormius looks upon this as a
diabolical work; since by the artifice of the Devil, many other things are
conveyed into, and formed in the bodies of Men and Women.

8. Anne Tromperin the Wife of a certain Porter in our Hospital, S^nnert.
pract. Med. l. 4. par. 2. 4. cap. 10. p. 326.
being about thirty years of Age was delivered of a Boy and two Serpents upon
St. John's day, Anno 1576. She told me upon her faith, that in the Summer
before in an extreme hot day, she had drunk of a Spring, in the Grove called
Brudetholk, a place within a quarter of a mile from Basil; where she suspected
that she had drank of the sperm of Serpents: she afterward grew so big, that
she was fain to carry her belly in a swathing band: the child was so lean, as
that he was scarce any thing but bones: the Serpents were each of them an ell
in length, and thick as the Arm of an Infant: both which alive as they were,
were buried by the Midwife in the Churchyard of St. Elizabeth. This History is
from the Relation of Caspar Bauhinus, in his Appendix to the book of Franc.
Rossetus de partu Caesareo.

Camer. hor* subcis^v. Cen.
9. The Concubine of Pope Nicholas the third was delivered of a Monster, which
resembled a Bear; Martin the fourth in the first year of his Popedom
entertained this Lady, and fearing lest she should bring forth other
Bear-whelps, he caused all the Bears, which were painted or carved in the
Pope's Palace, whilst the Lords of the Family of the Vrsini bore sway in Rome,
Schenck. obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 543.
to be blotted out and removed; For this Pope was not ignorant how the shapes
and pictures which are conceived in a Woman's imagination at the time of her
conception, do remain imprinted for the most part in the body of that which is
conceived.

Camer. hor. subcis. Cent.
10. Margaret Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian the first, told the
Ambassador of Ferdinand King of Hungary; that at Tsertoghenbosch a City in
Brabant, in a procession upon a solemn Festival; some of the Citizens went
disguised according to the custom of the place: (some in the habit of Angels,
and others in the shape of Devils as they are painted) one of these Devils
having played his gambols a great while; Schenck. obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 1. p.
^54.
ran home to his House in his Devils attire, took his Wife, threw her upon a
bed, saying that he would get a young Devil upon her. He was not much deceived,
for of that copulation, there was born a child, such as the wicked Spirit is
painted, which at his coming into the World, began to run and skip up and down
all over the Chamber.

11. Anno Dom. 1578. upon the 17. day of January at eight a clock in the
afternoon, there was (at the little Town of Quiero amongst the Subalpines) an
honest Matron who was then delivered of a child, Zuin. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p.
305. col. 2.
which had upon its head five horns, opposite each to other, and like unto
those of a Ram. Also from the upper part of his forehead there hung backward a
very long piece of flesh that covered most part of his back, in form like a
Woman's head-tire: about his neck there was a double row of flesh, like the
Collar of an Horse: Paraeus de Monstris. l. 24.
at the ends of his finger were claws like to those Tallons we see in Birds of
prey: his knees were in the hinder part of the Leg. His right Leg and Foot were
of a shining red color: the rest of his body all swarthy. He is said to come
into the World with a great cry, which so frighted the Midwife and the rest of
the Women then present, that they ran immediately out of the house. When the
Prince of the Subalpines was informed of this Monster: he commanded it should
be brought to him, which accordingly was done, and it is strange to think what
various judgments were then passed upon it by the Courtiers.

12. Lesina is the biggest Isle in all the Adriatic Sea, the Governor of
which was a Venetian, who inviting me to dine with him, Lithgow's Travels par.
2. p. 52.53.
told at his Table the story of a mavelous misshapen monster born in the
Island, asking if I would go thither to see it; proffering me the honor of his
company: we went and the unnatural child being brought out to us, I was amazed
to behold the deformity of Nature; for below the middle part there was but one
body, and above the middle there were two living souls: each one separated from
each other with several members, their heads being both of one bigness, but
different in Phy^iognomy; the belly of the one joined with the posteriour part
of the other, and their faces looked both one way, as if the one had carried
the other on his back, and often (in our presence) he that was behind would lay
his hands about the neck of the foremost. Their eyes were exceeding big, and
their hands greater then an Infant of three times their Age, the excrements of
both creatures issued forth at one place, and their Thighs and Legs were of a
great growth not agreeable to their Age which was but six and thirty days.
Their feet were proportionably made like to the foot of a Camel, round and
cloven in the midst. They received their food with an insatiable desire, and
continually mourned with a pitiful noise, when one slept the other waked, which
was a strange disagreement in Nature, the Mother of them bought dearly that
birth with the loss of her life, and as I was afterward informed, these lived
but a small time after we had seen them.

13. Ser. Fulvius Flaccus, P. Orosii Hist. l. 5. c. 6. p. 190.
and Q. Calphurnius Piso, being Consuls, there was then in Rome a Maid Servant
delivered of a child that had four feet, and as many hands, four eyes, four
ears, and two members of virility.

14. At Prague (this Summer) upon the 18. day of July, Fabrit. obs. Chirurg.
Cen. 3. obs. 55. p. 239.
there was born a boy, whose Liver, Intestines, Stomach and Spleen, with the
greatest part of the Mesentery, hung out beyond the Navel, who lived but a few
hours, the Mother being asked by Gregorius Horstius and Dr. Major, if she knew
any thing that might occasion such a birth? answered with tears, that three
months before her delivery she was compelled to hold a Calf while he was
killed, and that standing by while he was opened, at the falling of the bowels
she felt a commotion within her, unto which she imputed this accident.

15. At Cracovia there was born of noble Parents a child that was terrible to
behold, Lycosth. de prodigiis. p. 582. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Class. 10. c. 5. p.
334.
with flaming and shining eyes, the mouth and Nostrils were like to those of an
Ox; it had long horns, and a back hairy like a dogs. It had the Faces of Apes
in the breast where the Teats should stand* It had Cats eyes under the Navel,
fastened to the Hypogastrium, and they looked hideously and frightfully. It had
the heads of Dogs upon both Elbows, and at the whirl-bones of each knee,
looking forwards; it was splay footed, and splay handed, the Feet were like
Swans feet, and it had a Tail turned upwards, that was crooked backwards, about
half an ell long; It lived four hours from the birth of it; and near its death
it spoke thus; Watch, for the Lord your God comes: this was says Lycosthenes
in Anno Dom. 1543.

16. In the year 1573. there was a Monster born at St. Lawrence in the West
Indies, the narration whereof was brought to the Duke of Medina Sidonia; Dr.
Henry More's Immort. of the Soul. l. 3. c. 7. p. 173.
from very faithful hands. How that there was a child born there at that time,
that besides the horrible deformity of its mouth, ears and nose; had two horns
on the head, like those of young goats, long hair on the body, a fleshy girdle
about his middle, double, from whence hung a piece of flesh like a purse, and a
bell of flesh in his left hand, like those the Indians use when they dance;
white boots of flesh on his legs, doubled down. In brief, the whole shape was
horrid and diabolical; and conceived to proceed from some fright the Mother had
taken, from the Antic Dances of the Indians, amongst whom the Devil himself
does not fail to appear sometimes. Clark's Mir. c. 63. p. 249.


At Boston in New England, October 17. 1637. Mrs. Dyer was delivered of a
Monster which had no head, the face was on the breast, the ears like Apes grew
upon the shoulders, the eyes and mouth stood far out, the nose hooking upward,
the breast and back full of prickles, the Navel and belly where the hips should
have been, instead of toes, it had on each foot three claws; upon the back it
had two great holes like mouths, above the eyes it had four horns, and was of
the Female Sex. The Father and Mother of it were great Familists.

CHAP. VI. Of the Birthday, and what has befallen some Men thereon, also of
such other days as were observed fortunate or otherwise to several persons.
THe Ancients used to celebrate the annual returns of their birthday with
feasting, Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 19. c. 9. p. 511. Tibul. l. 1. Eleg. 8.
Horat. l. 4. ^d^. 11.
music, sports, mutual presents, and whatsoever else might serve to witness
how desirous they were, to entertain with highest solemnity the revisits of
that light wherein they had first beheld the World: And yet notwithstanding all
their courtships, it seems the Tragedian had truth on his side, when he said,
-- Nulla dies
Maerore caret, sed nova fletus
Causa Ministrat.
Senec. Troad.
No day from sadness so exempt appears
As not to minister new cause of tears.


Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 51. p. 184. Schenck. obs. Med. l. 6. ob. 1. p. 721.
Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 32 Schenck. observe. lib. 6. obs. 1. p. 721 Epiph.
Ferd. casus Med. casus 81. p. 259.
1. For Antipater Sidonius the Poet, throughout the whole space of his life,
every year for one only day; that is to say, the day whereon he was born, was
seized with a Fever; and when he had lived to a great Age; by the certain
return of his wonted Disease; he died upon his birthday.

2. Johannes Architectus, every year, at a set time, that is upon his
birthday, was taken with a Fever; which proceeding of putrid choler, keeping
it is circle, never exceeded the fourteenth day, at last being spent with Age,
and his wonted Fever assailing him, he was overcome by it, and yielded to
Nature upon his birthday.

Bak. Chron. p. 360.
3. Elizabeth eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth, and eighteen years the
Wife of King Henry the Seventh; died in childbed, in the Tower of London, the
eleventh of February, the very day upon which she was born.

4. I know a Man says Amatus Lusitanus, who every year upon that day in which
he first entered the World, Schenck. obs. Med l. 6. obs. 1. p. 721.
is seized with an evident fit of a Fever: all the rest of the year, he enjoys
very good health. Thomas a Veiga witnesses that he has observed the same in
another; and also that he has known a Man, who every year had a Fever for
three days and no longer.

5. Alexander the Great is said to have been born upon the sixth day of the
Month Targelion, Alex. l. 4. c. 20. fol. 233.
and also to have died on the same, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 561. Plut. in
Camil. p. 135.
that is to say, on the sixth of February.

6. Attalus the King of Pergamum, and Cn. Pompeius the Great, both died upon
their birth-days.

7. Caius Julius Caesar was born in the Ides of March, Sabel. l. 9. c. 4. Zuin.
Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 561.
and by a conspiracy of the Nobles was slain in the Senate House, upon the
same; although he was forewarned to take heed of them.

8. Antonius Caracalla the Emperor* Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 561.
was slain by Macrinus the Praetorian prefect at Carris near to Edessa in
Mesopotamia, upon his birthday, which was the sixth of the Ides of April, the
twenty ninth year of his Age, and the sixth of his Empire.

9. Pope Gregory the Great, Zuin. Theat. Ibid.
was born and died upon the same day, to wit, upon the fourth of the Ides of
March.

10. Garsias the Great Grandfather by the Father's side to Petrarch, Zuin.
Theat. Ibid.
having lived one hundred and four years, died (as also did Plato) in the very
day of his Nativity; and in the same Chamber wherein he was born.

11. The Emperor Charles the Great, Crantz. l. 2. Saxon. c. 20. Zuin. Theat.
vol. 2. l. 7.
was buried at Aquisgrave upon the same day wherein he was born, in the year of
our Lord, Anno Dom. 810.

12. Philip Melancthon died Anno Dom. 1560. in the sixty third year of his Age,
Zuin. Theat. Ibid.
and upon the day of his Nativity, which was the 13 th. of the Calends of May.

13. The Emperor Charles the Fifth was born on the day of Matthias the
Apostle, Treasury of Ancient and modern times. l. 4. c. 12. p. 330. Heyl. Cosm.
p. 734.
on which day also (in the course of his Life) was King Francis taken by him in
battle, and the Victory likewise won at Biccoque, he was also Elected and
Crowned Emperor on the same day, and many other great Fortunes befell him still
on that day.

14. M. Ofilius Hilarus an Actor of Comedies (after he had highly pleased the
people upon his birthday) kept a Feast at home in his own house, Plin. l. 7.
c. 53. p. 186.
and when Supper was set forth upon the Table, he called for a mess of hot
broth to sup off; and withal casting his eye upon the Visor he had worn that
day in the play, he fitted it again to his face, and taking off the Garland
which he wore upon his bare head, he set it thereupon, in this posture
disguized as he sat, he was stark dead and cold too, before any person in the
company perceived any such thing.

15. Augustus Caesar had certain Anniversary sicknesses, Suet. p. 105. and p.
55. in August^.
and such as did return at a stated and certain time, he commonly languished
about the time of his birthday, which was the ninth of the Calends of October,
a little before Sunrise, M. Tullius Cicero, and Antonius being Consuls.

16. On the contrary the birth-days of some Men have been very fortunate to
them, Alex. ab Alex. dies Genesis l. 4. c. 20. fol. 233.
as was that of the great Captain Timoleon general of the Syracusans, who
obtained for them the chiefest of his Victories upon the day of his birth,
which thereupon was annually and Universally celebrated by the Syracusans, as a
day of good and happy fortune to them.

17. It is said of Julius Caesar, that he had often found the Ides of July to
be very happy and auspicious to him, Idem Ibid. fol. 233.
at which time he was also born.

18. King Philip of Macedon used to celebrate the day of his birth, Idem, ut
sup. fol. 233.
with extraordinary joy, as the most favorable and fortunate to him of all
other: for once upon that day, he had a triplicity of good tidings, that he was
Victor in the Chariot race in the Olympicks, that Parmenio his General had
gained a most important victory, and that the Queen Olympias was delivered of
his Son Alexander.

Cael. Rhod. Sect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 13. p. 498.499.
19. Ophioneus was one amongst the Messenians had the gift of Prophecy, and
Pausanias says of him, that immediately after his birthday, he was annually
stricken with blindness; nor is that less wonderful in the same person, that
after a vehement fit of the Headache, he would begin to see, and then presently
fall from thence into his former blindness.

Stow's Annal. p. 812.
20. It is a note worthy to be remembered, that Thursday was observed to be a day
fatal to King Henry the Eight, and to all his Posterity, for he himself died on
Thursday the 28 th. of January: King Edward the Sixth, on Thursday the sixth of
July; Queen Mary, on Thursday the seventeenth of November; and Queen Elizabeth,
on Thursday the four and twentyeth of March.

Kornm. de Mir. Mort. l. 8. c. 12. p. 8.
21. Franciscus Baudinus an Abbot, a Citizen of Florence, and well known in the
Court of Rome, died upon the Anniversary return of his birthday, which was
upon the 19 th. day of December, he was buried in the Church of St. Silvester
in Rome, and it was the observation of him that made his Funeral Elegy; that
the number nine did four times happen remarkably in his affairs, he was born on
the 19 th. day, and died on the same, being aged twenty nine, and the year of
our Lord being at that time, 1579.

Heyl. Geog. p. 734.
22. Wednesday is said to have been fortunate to Pope Sixtus the Fifth, for on
that day he was born, on the same day made a Monk, on that day created General
of his Order, on the same made Cardinal, then chosen Pope, and finally on the
same inaugurated.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 734.
23. Friday was observed to be very lucky to the great Captain Gensalvo, on that
day having given the French many notable overthrows, Saturday was as fortunate
to Henry the Seventh, King of England.

CHAP. VII. Of the Signatures, and natural marks upon the bodies of some Men.
Hak^w. Apol.
IN Sicily there have been often dug up bones of a monstrous and prodigious
bigness, in all appearance resembling those of a humane body: but whether they
were the Skeletons of deceased Giants; whether bred and formed in the Earth, by
some peculiar influx of the Stars, and secret propriety of the Mould? whether
made by the Artifice of Man, and there buried to beget wonder in after times;
or by the Devils to promote some of their malicious ends: is yet variously
disputed. So concerning the causes of those impressions, which some bodies
bring upon them from the Womb, and carry with them to their Graves, there is
not so great a clearness, as not to leave us in some doubts. For if the most of
them are occasioned through the strength of the Mothers imagination: there have
been others of so peculiar a Form; so remote from being thought to leave such
lively touches upon a Woman's fancy, so continued to the Descendants of the same
Family; and so agreeable with the after fortunes of the person so signed: as
may possibly incline unto farther enquiries.

Marinus Barletius, reports of Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus; Mar. Barlet, l. 1.
Camer. hor. subcis. l. 1. ^ c. 69. p. 308
(that most terrible enemy of the Turks) that from his Mothers Womb he brought
with him into the World a notable mark of Warlike Glory: for he had upon his
right Arm, a Sword so well set on, as if it had been drawn with the pencil of
the most curious and skilful Painter in the World.

2. Among the people called the Dakes, Plin. Na^. Hist. l. 7. c. 11. p. 161.
the Children usually have the Moles and Marks of them from whom they are
descended, imprinted upon them even to the fourth generation.

3. Laodice the Wife of Antiochus, Schenck. obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 543.
Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 151. Usserii. Annal. p. 475. Just. l. 15. p. 176.
dreamed that she received a Ring from Apollo; with an Anchor engraven upon it:
Seleucus the Child that she then went with (who afterward was remarkable for
his famous exploits) was born with an Anchor impressed upon his Thigh; and so
also his Sons and Grandchildren, carried the same mark upon the same place
from the time of their birth.

4. In the Race and Family of the Lepidi, it is said there were three of them,
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 12. p. 161.
not successively one after another, but out of order, and after some
intermission; who had each of them when th^^ were born, a little pannicle, or
thin skin growing over the eye.

5. It is observed by Plutarch, Plut. de sera numinis vind. Zuin. Vol. 2. l. 2.
p. 180. Fitz. o^ Rel. and policy par. 1. c. 27. p. 283.
that the resemblance of the Natural properties, or corporal marks of some
Parents, are continued in their Families for many Descents: yea, and sometimes
not appearing in the second or third generation, do nevertheless show
themselves in the fourth or fifth, or others, ensuing some Ages after; whereof
he brings an example of one in his time, called Python, who being descended of
the Spartiatae, the Founders of Thebes, and being the last of that Race was
born with the figure of a Lance upon his body; which had been in former Ages a
natural mark of those of that Family; and discontinued in them for many years.

6. I have heard says Camerarius when I was young, Camer. hor. subcis. l. 3.
c. 42. p. 145. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 5. p. p. 340.
and it is at this day the common report and public Fame, (although I have not
met with it in any Author) that the Counts of Habspurg: have each of them
(from the Womb) a golden Cross upon the back, that is to say, certain white
hairs after a wonderful manner formed into the figure of a Cross.

7. Marcus Venetus who for forty five years traveled up and down in the
Countries of Asia reports in his Itinerary; Camer. hor. subcis. l. 3. c. 42. p.
145. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 5. p. 340.
that he came into the Kingdom of the Corzani: the Kings of which place (though
subject to the Tartarian) boast themselves of a Nobility beyond that of all
other Kings of of the Earth; and upon this account, they are born into the
World with the impress of a black Eagle upon their Shoulder, which continues
with them to the last day of their lives.

8. I have received it from the Relations of Persons worthy to be believed,
Camer. Ibid. p. 145. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 5. p. 340.
that the most potent King of Great Britain now reigning (that was King James)
brought with him from his Mothers Womb, certain Royal, and those not obscure
signatures: for as soon as he was born, there was beheld imprinted upon his
body, a Lion and Crown, and some also add a Sword, which impressions do
undoubtedly portend great things; and would require a further explication.

9. That is a memorable thing and worthy of observation, Camer. Ibid. p. 146.
which is set down by Abrahamus Bucholtzerus. John Frederick (says he) Elector
of Saxony, Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cent. 10 c. 5. p. 340.
the Son of John, was born the 30 th. of June, Anno 1503. and brought with him
from his Mothers Womb, an omen of his future fate. For (as I had it from
persons of unquestionable credit) he was born with a Cross of a splendid and
golden color upon his back, upon the sight of which a pious and very ancient
Priest was sent for by the Ladies of the Court, who thereupon said; This Child,
shall carry a Cross Conspicuous to all the World; the Emblem of which is thus
apparent in his birth. The truth is his Mother Sophia died upon the twelfth day
after his birth: I have noted this the rather (says the forecited Author)
because no Man has done it before; though worthy to be transcribed to
Posterity, and withal because the event did declare and confirm the truth of
the presage.

Gaffarel. curiosities. c. 5. p. 143.
10. A Sister of mine (says Gaffarel) had the figure of a Fish upon her left
Leg, caused by the desire my Mother had to eat fish when she was great, and it
is represented with so much perfection and rarity, that you would take it to be
drawn by some excellent Master; and the wonder is, that when ever the Girl eat
any Fish, that upon her Leg puts her to a sensible pain.

Gaffar. c. 5. p. 144.
11. That which I now relate to the same purpose is very well known to all
Paris, that are curious enquirers into these things. The Hostess of the Inn in
the Suburbs of St. Michael at Bois de Vincenne; (who died about two years
since) had a Mulberry growing upon her nether Lip, which was smooth and plain
all the year long till the time that Mulberries began to ripen, at which time
hers also began to be red, and began to swell more and more, observing exactly
the season, and nature of other Mulberries, and coming at length to the just
bigness, and redness of other ripe Mulberries.

Za^ut. Lus. prax. admir. l. 2. obs. 133. p. 251.
12. A Woman in the seventh Month of her being with Child, longed to eat
Rose-buds in a time when they were di^ficultly to be procured: She had passed
two days thus, when after much search, there was a bough of them found in a
private Garden; she greedily devoured the green buds of two Roses, and kept the
rest in her bosom: In the ninth month she was happily delivered of a fair babe;
upon the Ribs of which there appeared the representations of three Roses very
red; upon his Forehead and on either Cheek; he had also depainted three other
exact resemblances of a Red Rose, so that he was commonly called the Rosy boy.

Sutton. inejus vita. l. ^. c. 80. p. 104.
13. Octavius Augustus the Emperor, was all spotted on his body, his Moles
being dispersed upon his Breast and Belly, in the manner, order, and number with
the Stars of the Celestial Bear.

CHAP. VIII. Of the strange Constitution, and mavelous properties of some
humane Bodies.
THat the original of Man's body is nothing else besides the dust of the ground
is a certain and unquestionable truth. Yet as out of that dust there springs
such variety of Trees, Plants, Flowers, with different Forms, Colors, Virtues,
as may reasonably solicit a considering mind to a just veneration of the
Wisdom and Bounty of the Creator: so though all humane bodies are framed of the
same course materials; yet some of them are endowed with such peculiar
proprieties, and qualities so removed from the Constitution of others; that Man
need travel no further then himself, for a sufficient theme, wherein he may at
once enlarge his thoughts to the praises of his Maker, and admiration of his
own wonderful composure.

Every Man is a moving miracle: but there are some that may justly move the
wonder of all the rest. For, De civ. Dei l. 14. c. 23. Zuin. Theat. Vol. 2. l.
5. p. 419.


1. Saint Austin says, he knew a Man, who could sweat of his own accord as
often as he pleased.

2. Avicenna writes of one, that when he pleased could put himself into a
Palsy; Call. Rhod. Ant. lect. l. 20. c. 16. Schenck obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 3. p.
85.
nor was he hurt by any venomous creature, but when he forced and provoked them
to it; of which notwithstanding, themselves would die, so poisonous was his
body.

3. I knew one says Maranta, who was of that strange constitution of body;
Schenck. obs. Med. lib. 3. obs. 3. p. 384.
that he was made loose by asbringent simples, and on the contrary bound up by
those that were of a loosening Nature.

4. There are some Families of that mavelous constitution, Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 28. c. 3. p. 298.299. Pasch. Leg. c. 8. p. 43. Solin. c. 8. p. 207. Plut. in
Catonem minore p. 787.
that no Serpent will hurt them, but instead of that they fly their presence,
the spittle of these Men, or their sucking the place is Medicinable to such as
have been bitten or stung with them, of this kind are the Psylli and Marsi,
those also in the Island of Cyprus, whom they call Ophiogenes, and of this Race
and house, there came one Exagon Ambassador from that Island, who by the
commandment of the Roman Consul was put into a great Tun or Pipe, wherein were
many Serpents, on purpose to make experiment and trial of the truth. The issue
was, the Serpents licked his body, in all parts, gently, with their Tongues, as
if they had been little dogs, and he remained unhurt, to the great wonder of
them who beheld the manner of it.

5. Those Men that are bred in Tentyrus, Plin. Ibid. l. 28. c. 3. p. 299.
an Island lying within the River Nilus, are so terrible to the Crocodiles,
that they will not abide so much as their voice, but fly from them as soon as
they hear it.

6. When Pyrrhus King of Epirus was dead, Plut. paral. in vita Pyrrhi. p. 384.
Fulg. Mi^. l. 1. c. 6. p. 151. Delrio disq. Magic. l. 1. c. 3. Quaest. 4. 19.
p. 36. Donat. Hist. Med. l. 6. c. 3. p. 306. Henric. ab Heers. obs. Med. l. 1.
obs. 29. p. 244.
and all the rest of his body consumed in the Funeral Fire, the great Toe of
his right Foot was found entire, having received no damage at all by the
flames, this Toe that was so able to preserve it self, after his death, had
also in his life time, a healing kind of virtue in it, against Diseases of the
Spleen, which used to retreat at the powerful touch of it. Kornman de Mirac.
Mortuor. lib. 3. cap. 8. page 8.

7. I know a Family at Liege, in which all the Persons of both Sexes, sick and
well, Summer and Winter, sleeping and waking, have their Nostrils extreme cold,
whence it fell out, that administering Physic to two Brothers, seized with a
burning Fever, when upon the eleventh day there was no Crisis, nor any
appearance that there would be, finding the Nostrils of both of them colder
then Ice, I adjudg'd they would die; and so did three other Physicians with me,
yet both escaped and are yet alive, being the 14 th year after their Disease.

Henric. ab Hiers. obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 27. p. 236.237.
8. A certain Canonical Person who having perfected his course in Philosophy,
had studied Divinity for five years space in Lovain; by his over intense study,
he arrived at last to be a very Fool. Five years since he cam^ to the Spa,
where he was purged and drank the Waters, but in vain. Without my consent he
would bleed often in a month, and notwithstanding the clamours of all who were
present, he would not suffer the vein to be closed, till above thirty and
sometimes forty ounces of blood were slow'd out, this he continued for three
years and more. When I told him by this means he would incur the danger of a
Cachexy and Dropsy, he was not moved at all; In the mean time he daily eat
diverse handfuls of Wheat, raw, and unground. When once he complained that his
Potions did not work well with him; I at last gave him two grains of our white
Elaterium, by which when he had been strongly purged, he took them unknown to
me, more then twenty times, notwithstanding all which, he is well, nor can we
observe or discern that his strength is in the least impaired, by so many
blood-lettings and purgations.

Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 4. p. 306.
9. Demophon the Steward to Alexander the Great, is reported to be of that
strange Constitution, that standing in the Sunshine, or being in a hot Bath,
he was ready to freeze for cold, and on the contrary would sweat in the shade.

Donat. ibid. p. 306. Curt. Kornman de Mir. Mort. l. 4. c. 95. p. 38.
10. Quintus Curtius tells of Alexander the Great, that as often as he sweat,
there issued a fragrant odor from his body, that dispersed it self amongst all
that were near him, the harmony of his Constitution was such, as occasioned
that natural Balsom to slow from him.

Donat. ibid. p. 306. Solin. c. 8. p. 206.207.
11. Not far from the City of Rome amongst the Falisci, there are some few
Families who are called Hirpiae, who (in that annual Sacrifice that is made to
Apollo at the Foot of the Mountain Soracte) use to walk upon the heaps of the
live Coals of the burnt Wood, and yet receive no damage by the fire.

Alex. ab Alexand. Genesis Dier l. 2. c. 21. p. 91. Marcel. Donat Med. Hist. Mir.
l. 6. c. 3. p. 307. Trea^^^ of An^i^^t and M^^^rs t^^es l. 1. c. 29 p. 75.
Sandys on Ovid. M^t. l. 13. p. 252.
12. That is exceeding wonderful which is related by Iovianus Pentanus,
concerning one Co^an of Catana in Sicily; surnamed the Fish, who lived longer
in the Water then on the Land, he was constrained every day to abide in the
Water, and he said that if he was long absent thence, he could scarce breath or
live, and that it would be his death to forbear it, he was so excellent in
swimming that as a Seafish he would cut the S^as, in the greatest storms and
tempests, and in despite of the resisting Waves swim more then five hundred
furlongs at once: At last in the Sicilian Sea, at the Haven of M^ss^na, diving
for a piece of Plate which the King had caused to be cast in as a prize to him
that could fetch it from the bottom, he there lost his Life, for he was never
seen after, either devoured by a Fish, or engaged in the Concaves o^ the Rock.

13. It is related of the Lord Verulame, that he had one peculiar temper of
body, Lloyd's State worthies. p. 837.
which was that he fainted always at an Eclipse of the Moon, though he knew not
of it, and considered it not.

Petr. Serve. in dis^^rt. de Ung. A^mar. p. 29.30.
14. Rodericus Fons^ca a Physician of great reputation in Pisa, bought for his
Household employment a Negro slave; she as often as she pleased took burning
Coals into her hands or mouth without any hurt at all; this was confirmed to me
by Gabriel Fonseca an excellent Physician in Rome; and by another of deserved
credit, who told me he had frequently seen the trial, and red hot Coals held in
her hand till they were almost cold, and this without any impression of fire
left upon her: and I my self saw the same thing done by a She-Negro, in the
Hospital of the Holy Ghost, to which I was Physician.

15. It is ^amiliarly known all over Pisa, Petr. Serv^ in diss^rt. de Ung.
Armar. p. 33. 34.
o^ Martinus Ceccho a Townsman of Montelu^o, that he used to take hot Coals in
his hand, put them in his mouth, bite them in pieces with his Teeth, till he
had extinguished them; he would thrust them up as a suppository into his
Fundament, and tread upon them with his ba^e fe^t, he would put boiling lead
into his mouth, and suffer a burning Candle to be held under his Tongue, as he
put it out of his mouth; and many such other things as may seem incredible: all
this was confirmed to me by diverse Capuchins, and my worthy Friend Nicholaus
Accursius of the Order of St. Francis.

16. Andrenicus Comnenus Emperor of Greece, ^ulier's profane State l. 5. c.
18. p. 501.
was of that sound and firm Constitution, vigorous Limbs, etc. that he used to
say, he could ^ndure the violence of any Disease for twelve Months together, by
his sole natural strength; without being beholding to Art, or any assistance of
Physic.

CHAP. IX. Of Natural Antipathies in some Men, to Flowers, Fruits, Flesh,
Physic, and diverse other things.
WE read in the Poet of one saying -- Non amo te Sabidis -- etc.

Thee Sabidis I do not love,
Though why I cannot tell:
But that I have no love to thee,
This I know very well.
Thus the seeds of our aversion and Antipathy to this or that, are often lodged
so deep, that in vain we demand a reason of our selves for what we do or do
not. The Enemies of our Nature work upon us (it seems) whether we are aware or
not. For the Lady H^nnage of the Bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth, Sir K^nelme
Digby's Treatise of bodies c. 38. p. 336.
had her Cheeks blister'd by laying a Rose upon it, while she was asleep, says
Sir Kenelm Digby; and worse has be fallen others, though awake, by the smell
of them.

1. Cardinal Don Henrique a Card^na would fall into a swound upon the smell of
a Rose (says Ingrassia) and Laurentius Bishop of Vratislavia, Schenk. obs.
Med. l. 7. p. 891. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 305. Sche^^^. obs.
Med. l. 7. p. 891.
was done to death by the smell of them, says Cro^erus de rebus Polon. lib. 8.

2. The smell of Roses how pleasing soever to most Men, is not only odious but
almost deadly to others. Cardinal Oliverius C^raffa during the season of Roses,
used to enclose himself in a Chamber, not permitting any to ^nter his Palace,
or come near him that had a Rose about him.

3. The smell of a Rose or sight of it at a distance, Donat. Hist. M^d. Mier.
l^ 6. c. 3. p. 305. Amat. Lu^. Cont. 2. Cur, 36.
would cause a noble Venetian of the Family of the Barbarigi, to swound and
become like a dead Man, who was therefore advised by the Physicians to keep at
home, and not to hazard his Life by going abroad while Roses continued.

Z^c^^. qu. Med. legal. l. 2. tit. 2. p. 61.
4. Zacchias tells of himself, that the smell of white Roses was such an enemy
to him, that though he loved it well enough, yet would it forthwith cause his
Head to ache in violent and extraordinary manner.

Schenck. obs..Med. l. 7. p. 891. Donat. Hist. Medel. 6. c. 3. p. 306.
5. I know a stout Soldier, says Donatus, who was never able to bear the smell
or sight of the Herb Rue, but would evermore betake himself to slight at his
first notice of its presence.

6. Johannes ^ Querecto a Parisian, and Secretary to Francis the First King of
France, Donat. Hist. Mid. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 307. Schenck. obs. Med. l. 7. p.
890. Petr. Servius ia dis. s^^t. de odoribus, p. 19.
was forced to stop his Nostrils with Bread, when there were any Apples at
Table, and so offensive was the smell of them to him, that if an Apple had been
held near his Noise, he would fall a bleeding: such a peculiar and innate
hatred to Apples had the Noble Family of Fysta^es in Aquitain, we call them now
the Foesii.

7. Vladislaus Iegello, King of Poland, did so abhor Apples, Schenck. ibid. p.
890.
that he was not able to endure the smell of them, says Cromerus.

Schenck. l. 7. p. 890.
8. I have seen, says Brassavolus, the younger Daughter of Frederick King of
Naples, that could not eat any kind of Flesh, nor so much as taste of it; and
as often as she put any bit of it into her mouth, she was seized with a vehement
Syncope, and falling to the Earth, and rouling her self thereupon, would
lamentably shriek out: This she would continue to do for the space of half an
hour, after she was returned to her self.

Z^^ch. Q^^st. Med. ^^^^l. l. 2. til. 2. p. 73.
9. Guainerius tells of himself, that Hogs-flesh was so very great an Enemy to
him, that it produced the same accidents in him that Poison would have done,
although he used but any part of it in Sawces: as also that when his Mother
(who was desirous to accustom her Son to all kinds of Meats) had prepared for
him (without his knowledge) a dish of that Flesh, minced into smallest bits,
and offered it to him to eat; within an hour after he fell into a palpitation
of the Heart, and thence into a Syncope, and thence into a vomiting, in which
he brought up pure blood; so that they looked ^or no life of him.

Pl^t. obs. l. 1. p. 238.
10. Antonius Posrellus, a French Boy that tabled with my Father, would eat
nothing that was roasted, boiled or fried; contenting himself with Bread,
Fruits and Milk; nor could he eat the finer sort of Bread, but such only as had
course brans in it. In the Winter time he eat dried Apples, Pears, Cherries,
Nuts, etc. his Milk also must be cold, for he could eat nothing hot or warm. In
the mean time he was of good habit of body, fresh and well colored: this
custom he kept many years, wherein he dycted with my Father; and (as it is said)
he continued it afterward.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.
11. I saw a Noble Countess, says Horstius, who (at the Table of a Count)
tasting of an Udder of Beef, had her Lips suddenly swelled thereby; who
observing that I took notice of it, told me that she had no dislike to that
kind of Dish, but as often as she did eat of it, she was troubled in this manner;
the cause of which she was utterly ignorant of.

S^^^^k. obs. Ibid.
12. A Learned person told me, says the same Author, that he knew one at
Antwerp, that would immediately swoun'd, as o^t as a Pigg was set before him,
upon any Table where he was present.

(...) 247.
13. There lives a person amonst us of prime Quality, who at the light of an E^l
is presently cast into a swound; yea, though it be brought to the Table
i^clos'd in Past, after the manner of a Pie; yet falls he down as one that is
dead, nor does he return to himself, till the Eel is taken off from the Table.

14. The most Learned Johannes Heurnius writes of himself, H^^ic. ab H^^rs.
obs. M^d.l. 1. obs. 29. p. 249.
that as often as he eat of any Pepper or Rhadish, he was sure to be tortured
with the cruel pains of the Colic.

15. The mildest Medicines create such distuarbances to some, Schenck, obs.
Med. l. 7. p. 891.
as if they were of the most vehement sort. Which Physicians did frequently
observe in an illustrious Lady, who was the Light and Ornament of our Age: for
while they endeavored to purge her but with Manna, she was suddenly taken with
torments, loathings, belchings, weariness, and involuntary sweats, and other
worse and more dangerous symptoms did ever follow; yet with stronger Medicines,
she was purged without any trouble. Also her Nephew (though of a bilious
temperament) a man excellently well versed in the Art Military, and all other
laudable Studies, could never be happily purged with Manna; so that it seemed
to be a certain peculiar property of that Family.

16. A whole Family of our City (says Donatus) were never able to bear the
Electuary, Donat. Hest. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 308.
called Diaphoenicon, though it was never so privately mine'd with other
Medicines; but they would straight reject it by vomit, as my self have often
seen.

17. There was even in your City (as modern Physicians report) says Scaliger
to Cardan, Scalig. de subtle. ad Card. Exercit. 153. p. 513.
a whole Family, that would dye at the taking of a little Cassia Fistula.

18. A Noble Count of Arnstadht had such an antipathy to Oil Olive, Schenck.
obs. l. 7. p. 89^1.
that all kind of Sawces that were prepared with it, and set in the room where
he was, must suddenly be taken thence, or else he would immediately fall into
deadly faintings.

19. Bernardus Bonius of a Patrician Family in Ragusa, Schenck. obs. Med. lib.
7.^.891 Amat. Lusit. Cent. 6. Cur. 60.
a young man of about twenty years of age, caused his water to be brought to me
(says Amatus Lusitanus) with request, that if it portended any evil, I would
administer to him. I found he had a weakness in the Reins, and the seminary of
the French Disease. I therefore prescribe him this and the other Syrrup from
the Apothecaries: but he desired, I would not be so forward to prescribe
Syrrups to him, for he hated all sweet things; and as I afterward found,
Honey, Sugar, and all things made up with these, are most immediate Poisons to
him, he eat not Grape, nor Fig, nor Pear, Quince, Pomgranate, Peach, nor
Prunes; of all kind of Fruits, he only eats Nuts, Almonds, and Pine Kernels; he
d^lights in Vinegar, sour Sauces, and Water of Tamarind^, and salt things; his
usual drink is Water. These things exactly considered, I prescribed such
Medicines as the Disease did require, made up of things, whose taste tended to
bitter, by which he was afterward cured.

20. A Student in the University of Hafnia, Barthol. Hist. Anatom. Cent. 5.
Hist. 64. p. 134.
was so overcome with Melancholy, that he had thoughts of laying violent hands
upon himself; but before hand consulted Dr. Christianus Ostenf^ld, the Kings
Professor of Physic, about that Case of Conscience: who with forcible
Arguments labored to reduce him to more Christian resolves, promising that by
Physic he would purge away those Melancholy Humors, which occasioned such
black and evil cogitations. In the mean time, he prepares an infusion of
Antimony, and delivers it to his Chamber-fellow, to be drank off in the
Morning, he upon the sight of the infusion, immediately found such a loathing
arise, that he besought him to take away the Medicine, and soon after such
abundance of humors were voided by him upward and downwards, that in a short
time after he was sound and safe, and with a cheerful and lively countenance
gave thanks to his Physician.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 3. obs. 3. p. 384.
21. Rondeletius says, he knew a Bishop of France, who when he was by no means
able to take any Physic, as often as he had nee^, he used to have it prepared
for him in a great quantity; that done, he caused it to be poured hot into a
clean basin, where he used to stir it to and fro with a small stick, and to
hold his Mouth and Nostrils over the steam of it, by which he was purged as
plentifully as if he had taken any convenient M^di^ine for that purpose.

Schenck. obs. Med. Ibid.
22. When I was at Pisa says Fallopius, and was Physician to the Nuns of St.
Paul's in the East; I often prescribed Pills to the Abbess of that place, who
never swallowed them, but crushed them ^lat with her ^ingers, forming them as
it were into little Cakes, then she moistened them on the one side with her
Spittle, and so applied them outwardly to the Region of the Ventricle, binding
them on with a swathing band; and in the space of four or five hours, she would
be as well purged, as if she had swallowed down the Pills themselves, this I
observed in her for two years together, and it seemed wonderful to me.

Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 305. Schenck. obs. Med. l. 7. p. 890.
23. That is wonderful says Donatus, which was observed in a Boy, the Son of a
Count; that if at any time he eat of an Egg, his Lips would swell, in his Face
would rise purple and black spots, and he would froth at mo^th, after the same
manner as if he had swallowed poison.

24. Schenckius tells of a Norman Rustic, who had never tasted Bread, Schenck.
l. 7. p. 889.
Flesh, or Fish, but fed only upon Eggs, by reason of which he was commonly
called the Weasell; that Creature being so very desirous of that Food.

Schenck. l. 7. p. 890. Zach. Quaest. Med. legal. l. 2. Tit. 2. p. 73.
25. I knew (says Bruyerinus) a Maid born at Chauniacum in Flanders, who being
sixteen years of Age or more, had been brought up only with Milk, without any
other kind of Food, for she was not able to endure so much as the smell of
bread, and if the smallest particle of it was put into her Milk, even at a
distance she would discover it by the smell (a wonderful thing) the truth of
which notwithstanding, I am able to confirm, as being an eyewitness of it.

26. Iacobus Foroliviensis, the most excellent Physician of his Age has left
it witnessed of himself, Schenck. l. 7. p. 890. Zach. Quaest. Med. legal. l. 2.
Tit. 2. p. 60.
that if at any time he eat Garlic, he was no les^ tormented then if he had
drank Poison, the very same symptoms appearing in him, as are usual in those
that are poisoned, and was hurt by the smell of it, as if it had been something
Pestilential. Schenck. l. 7. p. 890. Amat Lusit. C^nt. 2. Cur. 36. Donat. Hist.
Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 305.


27. I know one (says Amatus Lusitanus) who had never tasted of any sort of
Fish, and when once a Friend of his had invited him to a Supper, and on purpose
given him Fish, well prepared and wrapped up in Eggs, he immediately f^ll into
sainting pressures of the heart, accompanied with Vomitings and seige, so that
little wanted but that he had died upon it. His Name was Stephanus Surdaster, a
Spaniard of Toledo.

Schen^k^ l. 7. p. 890. Z^in. Th^at. Vol. 1. l. 1. p. 66.
28. Germanicus could not endure the sight or voice of a Cock; and the Persian
Magi were possessed with an extreme hatred to Mice.

29. There was (says Weinrichus) a Person of a noble Family, Sch^nck. l. 7. p.
339. Kornman de Mir. Mortd. 4. c. 85. p. 34.
who was not able to bear that an old Woman should look upon him, and being
once drawn out by force from his Supper to look upon one such, that which was
only intended for merriment, as to him, cnded in death, for he fell down and
died upon it.

30. There is in Hafnia, Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 3. Hist. 28. p. 65.
a Man, in other respects strong, healthful, and of a good courage, who yet as
often as he sees a dog, (though it be never so small a one) is not only
af^righted, but also seized with Convulsions in his left hand.

31. Ten years since, Henric. ab Heers obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 29. p. 253.
I was called to Namurcum to the young Daughter of a Nobleman, who as often as
she heard the sound of a bell, or any loud voice speaking or singing, so often
was she cast into a swound; so, as that she differed not from one that was
dead: this Person was cured by me by purgation, the Waters of the Spa, and
Anti-Epileptical Medicines.

32. I know a Nun in the Monastery of St. Clare yet living, Zach. Quaest. Med.
l^gal. l. 2. Tit. 2. p. 61.
who at the sight of that insect we call a Beetle, is strangely affected. It
fell out that some young Girls, knowing this disposition of hers, cast a Beetle
into her bosom, betwixt her breasts; which when she perceived, she presently
fell into a swound to the Earth, deprived of all sense, and remained ^our hours
in cold sweats: when she came to her self, and that her Spirits were recreated
by degrees; yet she recovered not her former strength in many days after, but
continued trembling and pale.

33. Marcellus Donatus speaks of a Noble man of Mantua, Donat. Hist. Med. Mir.
l. 6. c. 3. p. 306. Zach. Q^ae^t. M^d. legal. l. 2. Tit. 2. p. 61.
that could not endure the sight of a Hedgehog without falling into a Syncope,
and cold sweats immediately upon it.

34. Mathiolus tells of a German, who coming in Wintertime into an Inn to sup,
with him and some other of his Friends; Schenck. obs. Med. l. 7. p. 889.
the Woman of the House being acquainted with his temper (lest he should depart
angry, at the sight of a young Cat, which she kept, to breed up) had before
hand hid her kitling in a Chest, in the same room where we sat at Supper. But
though he had neither seen nor heard it, yet after some time that he had sucked
in the Air, infected by the Cats breath, that quality of his temperament that
had antipathy to that creature, being provoked, he sweat, and a sudden paleness
came over his ^ace, and to the wonder of all us that were present, he cried
out, that in some corner or other of the room, there was a Cat that lay hid.

35. There lived amongst us a young Lady, who as o^t as she tasted any Raisins
or Sugar, Henric. ab Heers. obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 29. p. 254.
or any other sweet thing, was afflicted with intolerable pain in her teeth,
nor was she freed from it before she had eaten something that is bitter or
sharp, and yet it is the common opinion that we are nourished only by sweet
things. This very Summer at the Spa, eating Anniseed Comsits in my presence,
she was taken both with pain in her Teeth, and a swelling of the Jaws, which
the day following was discussed by Cathartick Pills administered to her.

CHAP. X. Of the marvelous recompense of Nature in some Persons.
IN a Game at Tables, when the cast of the Dice does not answer the desire and
hope of him that plays, the discreet Gamester mannages his ill chance to the
best advantage; and by his skill in play, many times repairs those injuries,
his Perverse Fortune and the Dice have done him. Provident Nature takes the
same course, she ever designs well; but if she chance to fail in her good
intentions, she yet makes such after provisions to supply her former defects;
or else prepares so fair a recompense in some other things, that we often see
with admiration, that even her maimed Clients have as little cause to complain
of her, as those upon whom she has seemed more studiously to confer her
favors: We have notable instances hereof in the following Examples.

Niphil. in Augusto. p. 55.
1. The Indians presented Augustus with a young man without Shoulders or Arms,
who yet could perform with his Feet, what others did with their hands: he could
bend a Bow, shoot Arrows, and sound a Trumpet; how he did it, I know not, I
only write what is in common discourse.

Camerar. hor. subsicivae Cent. 1. c. 37. 169, 170. Hist. manual Arts. c. 4. p.
50. S^nart. prax. Med. l. 4. part 2. 6. c. 7. p. 303. Iohnst. not. Hist. Class.
10. c. 5. p. 335. K^ckerm. i^ Physic. l. 1. cap. 4. p. 1370.
2. My self and others (says Camerarius) being once at Combourg in the House of
Erasmus Neustetetur; he sent to a place, not far off, for one Thomas
Schiveiker, a young man of one and thirty years age, descended of a worshipful
House, and born without ever an Arm, who did with his Feet, all that a ready
man could do with his Hands. Having seated himself in a place equal with the
height of the Table, whereon the Meat was placed; he took a Knife with his
Feet, begins to cut Bread and Meat, which he carried with his Feet to his
Mouth; and likewise the Cup, with as much ease, as another would have done with
his Hands. After Dinner he wrote Copies in Latin and German Letters, so fair
and so straight, that every one of us, desired to have some of them to keep, as
a special Monument. Being requested, he did with a Penknife make Pens very good
to write with, which he gave us. While he was thus doing, I observed the make
of his Feet, and saw that his Toes were long, fit to lay hold of things. This
sight, as it was pleasing to us, so was it, at another time, to the Emperor
Maximilian the Second; who passing that way, desired to see the man; and having
observed the strange recompense of Nature, dismissed him with a Princely gift.
Of this man Posthius thus in English: Thomas by nature wanting Arms, with his Feet
Performs all things, you would wonder for to see it:
With His Feet he eats and drinks full well, and then
With His Feet he turns his Books, or makes a Pen.
With His Feet to Write and Paint, does understand,
No man can do it better with his Hand.


Car^. her. subsici^. C^nyt. 1. cap. 37. p. 17^
3. Of late there was a man born without Arms, that went about Germany, who had
learned by Custom, turned into Art, to handle a Sword, and flourish it about
his Neck; to sling Javelins, and do other things so nimbly, and withal so
surely, that he would commonly hit the Mark. All other the duties of the Hands
he performed with his Feet; he was after broken upon the Wheel, for sundry
Robberies and Murders by him committed.

4. I remember I have seen a woman at Basil, Plat. obs. l. 3. p. 593.
spinning artificially with her Feet, sweeping the House, and performing all
other the Offices of a good Huswife.

5. I have also (says the same Platerus) seen a man, Plat. obs. Ibid.
who with his Head and Shoulders; would take hold of things, and handle them
after various manners. I have seen him with Instruments and Weapons held in
that fashion, to cleave, cut off, dig and strike with a wonderful force; and
yet both he and the woman before mentioned were without Arms.

6. A Swedish woman, Barthol. Hist. Anatom. Cent. 3. Hist. 26. p. 61.
called Magdalene Rudolph Thuinby, was here of late at Hafnia, she was aged
forty two; married to a German Soldier: She was born without Arms; and that
there might be no suspicion of fraud, by her consent I saw that she had nothing
but Shoulders; yet though she thus was maimed, she performs all offices with
her Feet, with that dexterity and readiness, that she is deservedly the wonder
of the Spectators, and may seem to have no want of her Hands. With her Feet she
spins, and threads her Needle; she weaves, she charges and discharges a Gun:
With Scissars and a Knife she cuts Papers into diverse artificial Figures; she
plays at Tables and Dice; she drinks, and swathes her little Infant, she knows
how to bring her Feet to her Breast and Head; so as to take her Child to her
Breast, as if she did it with her Hands. She feeds both her self and her Child,
she combs her hair; to conclude, without trouble she does all, that is
sufficient for her own necessity, and to gratify others curiosity.

7. Mr. Crispe (Brother to Sir Nicholas Crispe) his dexterity in knowing the
meaning of men by the motion of their Lips, Clark's Mirror chap. 44. p. 156.
is very well known to Merchants upon the Exchange, and is yet fresh in every
ones memory. At the time when Sir Alexander Carry was beheaded upon Tower Hill,
this Mr. Crispe, having been long deaf before, pressed to stand near the
Scaffold; whereupon Mr. Hust, an Officer in the Train-bands, that kept the
Guard, spoke to him to forbear; he not hearing him, continued his labor to get
a convenient place; till Mr. Hust being told by some, who he was, suffered him
to place himself right against the front of the Scaffold: And when Sir
Alexander turned himself to speak to the people, Mr. Crispe fixed his eyes upon
his Lips, during all the time of his Speech, which he so perfectly understood
and carried way, that relating it to his Friends, they much wondered at the way
of his perception.

8. There was a Nobleman in Spain, the younger Brother of the Constable of
Castile, Clark's Mirror. chap. 14. p. 157. Sir Kenelme Digbyes Treatise of
Bodies. chap. 28. p. 254, 255.
born so deaf, that he could not hear a Gun shot off close by his Ear, and
consequently dumb: Yet the lovelyness of his Face, vivacity of his Eye,
comeliness of his Person, and the whole composure of his Body were pregnant
signs of a well tempered mind. The Physicians and Surgeons had long employed
their skill to help him, but in vain. At last a certain Priest undertoook to
teach him to understand others when they spoke, and to speak himself, that
others might understand him. This attempt was at first laughed at; but after
some years, with great pains, he taught this young Lord to speak as distinctly
as any man; and to understand so perfectly what others said; that he could
understandingly converse all the day with them. Prince Charles, when he was
wooing the Infanta of Spain saw, and often made trial of him, not only with
English words; but making some Welsh-men of his train to speak words of their
language; all which he perfectly repeated: only for want of his hearing, his
tone was rather vehement and shrill, than pleasing.

Fullers Worthies, p. 206. in Cornwall.
9. Edward Bone of Ladock in Cornwall, was Servant to Mr. Courtney therein; he
was deaf from his Cradle, and consequently dumb (Nature cannot give out where
she has not received) yet could learn and express to his Master any news that
was stirring in the Country. Especially if there went speech of a Sermon within
some miles distance, he would repair to the place, with the soonest; and
setting himself directly against the Preaeher, look him steadfastly in the face,
while his Sermon lasted. To which religious Zeal his honest life was also
answerable. Assisted with a firm memory, he would not only know any party whom
he had once seen for ever after, but also make him known to any other, by some
special observation and difference. There was one Kempe, not living far off,
defected accordingly, on whose meetings there were such embracings, such
strange often and earnest tokenings; such hearty laughters, and other
passionate gestures, that their want of a Tongue, seemed rather an hindrance to
others conceiving them, than to their conceiving one another.

Plat. obs. l. 1. p. 118.
10. There was one that was deaf and dumb from his Birth, who nevertheless could
write his own thoughts, and note the Writings of others in a Table Book, which
he continually carried about him for that purpose. My Father has told me, that
when Oecolampadius preached, he used to hear him with great zeal, and by the
motion of his Lips, and the gesture he used* (...) could understand many
things, and so also when others preached.

Camerar. hor. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 37. p. 171. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 6.
p. 336.
11. We have at Nuremburg (says Camerarius) a young Man and a young Maid, born
of one Father and Mother; (of a good House and well known) that are of a
s^ngular quick conceit: For although they be deaf and dumb by Nature; yet can
both of them read very well, Write, Cipher, and cast Account. The young Man
conceives at first, by signs that are made him, what he is required to do. If
his Pen be wanting, by his countenance he shows his thoughts, being the
quickest and cunningest at all Games, both at Cards and Dice, that one can find
amongst the Germans, although there they are very dexterous. His Sister passes
all other Maids, for working with her Needle, all kind of Sempstry, Tapestry,
Embroydery. But above all this is the most remarkable in them, that for the
most part as soon as they see ones lips stir, they understand his meaning. They
are oftentimes at Sermons; and a man would say, that they draw and conceive
with their Eyes the words of the Preacher, as others do with their Ears. When
the Preacher names the Name of Jesus; the young man is ready before any of the
hearers to take off his Hat, and to bow his Knee.

Plat. obs. l. 1. p. 110.111.
12. There was one who was blind from the seventh year of his Age* that from his
Youth had so accustomed himself to the making of Organs; that with his own
hands he made Organs with Pipes of Wood and Tin, of great price: Frederick Duke
of Wirtenburg showed me an Organ of this blind man's making; and I heard the
Artist himself playing on it: looking upon his Eyes, I could not discover any
spot therein; but all those who had lived with him for many years together,
affirmed that he was blind; and proved that he could do these things, by a
convincing Argument: for that he wrought in the dark, and they said he could
discern the several sorts of Wood by the touch only.

13. Didimus of Alexandria, Socrat. l. 4. c. 20. p. 331 Camerar. bor. subcis.
Cent. 1. ^. 37 p. 171.
being blind, spent all his time in hearing, in so much, that by his diligent
atttention, he attained to that, which others obtain by reading, and became so
skilful in Divine and Humane Learning, that he excelled amongst the Divines of
his time.

14. Our Ancestors have seen John Ferdinand, Camer. hor. subcis. p. 171.
born in Flanders (his Father was a Spaniard) a blind and poor Soul; who yet
happily overcame that, which most Learned Men find hard: For he was at once a
very learned Poet and Philosopher; he was also an excellent Musician, he played
skilfully upon diverse kinds of Instruments, and was a great composer of Song
for all parts.

15. Vldaricus Schonbergerus, a Doctor of Phisophy, Barthol. Hist. Anotom.
Cent. 3. Hist. 44. p. 87, 88.
in our time, begat the admiration of all men, for though he was blind, yet
with his singular Wit and Industry he attained to that, that few who had the
advantage of their Eyes surpassed him; he was learnedly skilled in the Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, and Syriack Languages; an excellent Naturalist, an acute
Disputant in Philosophy; skilful in Music; studious both in Picture and
Sculpture; he would discharge a Gun with that dexterity, that the Bullet should
often hit the Mark; he died of late years at Regiomont, of which unusual Example,
the excellent Simon Dachius has left to Posterity an elegant Elegy.

16. James Usher, Clark's Lives. p. 190, 191.
Lord Primate of Ireland, was first taught to read by his two Aunts, who were
blind from their Cradles, and so never saw Letters; yet were they admirably
versed in the Scriptures, being able suddenly to have given a good account of
any part of the Bible.

17. Nicasius of Werd, Kornman. de mirac. vivor. p. 76. Camer. hor. subcis.
Cent. 1. c. 37. p. 172.
born at Macklin, falling blind when he was three years old, and not being able
to learn one Letter, he so profited in the knowledge of Philosophy, both Humane
and Divine, that all men were ravished with him. Having proceeded Master of
Arts at Lovain, he was afterward made Principal of Macklin College, where he
discharged his duty very well: he ascended afterward to the degree of
Licentiate in Theology: And though he was blind, he read, and Preached openly:
Furthermore, being made Doctor of the Laws in the University of Colen: he read
there, and expounded the Civil and Canon Law; repeating by heart the Text which
he had never read: He died at Cologne. Anno Dom. 1492.

18. I was told (said Antonius de Palermo) by King Alphonsus of a Sicilan,
Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 8. p. 28. Ioh^st. Not. Hist. Class^ 10. c. 6.
p. 337.
born blind (then living in the City of Gergento, of old called Agrigentum) who
had followed him osten times on hunting: showing to the Hunts-men (who had
their sight well enough) the retreats of the Wild Beasts: He added further,
touching the industry of this blind man; that having by his sparing and
scraping, gotten together about 500 Crowns, which put him to a great deal of
care; he resolved at last to hide them in a ground of his: As he was making a
hole in the earth to that end, a Gossip of his, being his Neighbor espied him;
who so soon as the blind man was gone, searched, found the Money, and carried
it away. Two or three days after, the blind man returning to visit his cash,
and finding nothing there, like one forlorn he frets and fumes; and after much
debating with himself, he concludes none but his Gossip could have played him
this trick. Having therefore found him out, he began thus to say to him:
Gossip, I am come to have your opinion; I have 1000 Crowns, and the one half of
them I have hid in a safe place, and for the other half, I know not what to do
with them, having not my sight, and being very unfit to keep any such things;
therefore what think you, might I not hide this other half with the rest in the
same place of safety? The Gossip approved, and commended his resolution; and
going speedily to the place, carried back the 500 Crowns, he had before taken
away, believing he should have the whole 1000 together. A while after the blind
man goes to his hole, and finding there his Crowns again, carried them home;
and returning to his Gossip, with a cheer^ul voice, said to him, Gossip, The
blind man sees better than he that has two Eyes.

^.
19. It is reported of Count Mansfield, that though he was blind; yet with the
touch alone, he was abl^ ^o distinguish white from black.

^.
^^. Sc^liger tells of one Antonius, who (as him^^^^ said) was born at Naples:
This man, although he wants Arms, could toss a Pike with his right Foot, mend
Clothes, Write, Eat, Drink, and thread a Needle; he could drive a Na^l into a
piece of Wood, up to the head with a Hammer; and then immediately pull it out
again with Pincers: Scaliger saw him in the Province of the Allobroges; and
supposes (as he tells Cardan) that there are fi^ty thousand persons alive, who
saw and wondered at him.

Za^ch. qu^^st. Med. legal. l. 5. Tit. 3. p. 325. Schenck. obs. ^. 1.
21. That is next to a miracle, which is recorded by Schencki^s, of a certain
blind man, who received visible species through his Nostrils; although it is
not so very impossible, but that the species of visibles might pass through his
Nose to his Eyes, which were otherwise perfectly Organized, and only impeded
from without by the closing of the Lids, or the light of the Eyes themselves,
might through the conveyance of the Nose be conjoined to the external Light to
perceive visible things that way.

No^^ol. Talpii obs. Med. l. 3. ^. 54. p. 273.
22. There is a woman of Britain, who was born with Arms and Legs, distorted in
so strange and unusual manner, that she might well seem unfit (to any man that
see her) to do any thing: Yet had she acquired from officions Nature such a
dexterity, that she could spin with her Tongue, with the same she could thread a
Needle of the smallest size, with great expedition: with the flexure of her
Tongue only she could readily tie that fast Knot, which we call the Weavers
Knot; and with the same Tongue she would write, and that in a fair Character;
amongst others, she so wrote the name of my Son Petrus Tulpius, which I yet
keep by me.

Sir Ke^elme Dig^y Treatis^ of Bodi^s, c. 28.2^ p. 253, 254.
23. I have seen one who was so thoroughly blind, that his Eyes could not inform
him when the Sun shined, for all the Crystalline Humor was out in both his
Eyes; yet his other senses instructed him so efficaciously in what was their
office to have done, as what he wanted in them seemed to be over-pay'd in other
abilities. To say that he would play at Cards and Tables, as well as most men,
is rather a commendation of his Memory and Fancy, than of any of his outward
Senses: but that he should play well at Bowls and Shovel-board, and other Games
of aim, which in other men do require clear sight, and an exact level of the
hand, according to the qualities of the Earth or Table, and to the Situation
and Distance of the Place he was to throw at, seems to exceed possibility,
and yet he did all this. He would walk in a Chamber, or long alley in a Garden
(after he had been a while used to them) as straight, and turn just at the
ends, as any seeing man could do: He would at the first abord of a stranger (as
soon as he spoke to him) frame a right apprehension of his stature, bulk, and
manner of making. And which is more, when he taught his Scholars to declame
(for he was a Schoolmaster to my Sons, and lived in my House) or to represent
some of Seneca's Tragidies, or the like; he would by their voice know their
gesture, and the situation they put their bodies in; so that he would be able,
as soon as they spoke, to judge whether they stood or sat, or in what posture
they were, which made them demean themselves decently before him whiles they
spoke, as if he had seen them perfectly; though all this be very strange, yet
methinks his discerning of light is beyond it all, he would feel in his body,
and chiefly in his brain (as he has often told me) a certain effect by which
he did know when the Sun was up; and would discern exactly a clear from a
cloudy day. This I have frequently known him do without missing, when for
trials sake he has been lodged in a close Chamber, whereinto the clear Light
or Sun, could not arrive to give him notice, by its actual warmth, nor any body
could come to him, to give him private warnings of the changes of the weather.

24. Pictorius Villinganus testifies, Keckerm. in Physic. l. 1. c. 4. p. 1370
Iohnst. Not. Hist. cl. 10. c. 5. p. 337.
that he saw a Spaniard born without Arms; so cunning with his Feet, that he
could spin, and use the Needle with great curiosity; even to an equality with
most Women. He was also so dextrous in the management of his Arms, that few
Soldiers were able to vye with him in his agility therein; He shot from a Bow,
in such manner, that he seldom did miss the Mark; and would with an Axe give so
strong a blow, as to cut in sunder at one stroke a reasonably piece of Wood.

25. Keckerman also speaks of Scholar, Iohnst. Not. Hist. cl. 10. c. 5. p. 335.
that had but one little Finger on each Hand, and his Feet were triangular
without any Toes; yet had he more force in one Finger, than others had with
five; he wrote curiously and swiftly, and stood so firm, that in very slippery
places, he would seldom slip.

CHAP. XI. Of the Head and Skull, and the unusual structure of them in some Men.
THe Brain of Man is that vigorous and active thing, that insinuates it self
into all places and times; reaches the heights, searches the depths, and pries
into all those recluded Cabinets of Nature, wherein she has stored up the
choicer and abstrusest pieces of all her work-manship, and these it
contemplates and admires. No wonder then if Nature has been solicitous to
lodge so noble a guest, in Sanctiore hominis part, as the Philosophers call
the Head, the most honorable part of Man, appointing its residence where it
may repose with the greatest safety and and advantage, and be defended from
casualties by a wall of bone of that thickness and hardness in some Men as is
wonderful.

Ia^i Nicii pinacothec. prima p. 43.
1. Nicolaus Ricardius an Italian, had a Head of an unreasonable bigness, and
his skull was of that solidity and hardness, that he oftentimes brake Nuts, or
the stone of a Peach with one blow of his head.

Herodot. l. 9. p. 544.
2. Some time after the Greeks had overthrown Mardonius, and the Persians at the
Battle of Plataea, when the bones were freed of the flesh, by lying in the
Field, and that the Plataeans had gathered them together, to bury them in one
place, amongst the bones there was then found a skull, without any future, but
framed of one solid and entire bone.

Zuin. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 5. p. 385.
Milo who was otherwise so famous for his wonderful strength, is said also to
have made this Trial, he would tie a Lute-string or Bow-string, round about his
Head, and then closing his Lips would keep in his breath with all the might he
could, and then as soon as the Veins of his Head were swollen with blood, the
string would burst asunder.

Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 5. Hist. 44. p. 97.
4. The diligent Bartholinus, tells of a Religious Person of forty years of Age,
who had the hinder part of his skull so firm and compact (though Hippocrates
affirm it to be the weakest thereabouts) that he was able to endure a
Coach-wheel to pass over it, without any sensible damage to him.

5. Amongst the rarities of Pope Paul the Fourth, Columb. Anat. l. 15. p. 484.
there is to be seen (says Columbus) the Head of a Giant (for it is the
biggest that I ever beheld) in which the lower Jaw is so connate and conjoined
to the Head, that it utterly wants all motion, and could not but do so when the
Person was living; for I saw with these eyes the first joint of the Neck, so
fastened to the hinder part of the Head, that it is impossible it should ever
move.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. adm. l. 3. obs. 93. p. 395.
6. In the County of Transtagana in Portugal near the Town called Villa Amaena;
there lived a Rich Man, whose Wife was brought to bed of a Man-child, which at
his birth had a broad and hard knot upon his Forehead: his Parents by the
advice of the Physicians made little of it, the child being arrived ^o five
years of Age, it also was in that time much grown out: so that the Physicians
betook themselves to frequent purgations, but all in vain, for the knot
(without any pain) grew out into a Pyramidical Horn, of the length of a Span
broad at the root of it, and at the point the thickness of a Man's thumb end:
being grown to Man's estate, he would not suffer it to be cut off, though both
Physicians and Surgeons affirmed it might be done without danger, he addicted
himself to his studies, and made singular progress therein. Zacut. Lusi^. prax.
adm. l. 3. obs. 93. p. 396. Hi^d. Cen. 2. obs. 25. p. 104. Administ. o^ Card.
Ximen. c. 15. p. 145.


7. Hildanus reports, he saw a Man who came into the World with a horn in the
midst of his Forehead, it was inverted like to that of a Rams, and turned
upwards to the coronel ^uture, or the top of his head.

8. Twenty eight years after the death of Cardinal Ximenes, the Grave wherein
his body lay was dug up, his bones taken out, and his Head once the Palace
of the greatest Judgment that ever appeared in Spain, his skull was found to
be all of a piece without any ^uture, the mark of a strong brain, but withal
the cause of the continual Head-achs he was so very subject unto in his Life,
the vapors that ascended into the head wanting that vent which is so usual in
others.

9. The Egyptians have skulls generally of that hardness, Iohnst. Not. Hist.
Cl. 10. c. 8. p. 350. Kornman. de Mir. Mort. par. 3. c. 3. p. 4.
that hardly can they be broken with a stone that is flung at them; on the
contrary the skulls of the Persians are so very weak, that they are broken with
a small and inconsiderable force. The cause of this is believed to be, that the
Egyptians from their Boyage, are used to cut their hair, and their skulls are
thus hardened by the heat of the Sun, which also is the reason that few of them
are bald; on the other side the Persians do not cut their hair from their
infancy, and are accustomed to have their heads always covered with their
Shasnes or Turbants.

10. Albertus the Marquess of Brandenburgh, Kornman. de Mir. Mort. l. 4. c. 78.
p. 32.
who was born the 24 th. of November, Anno Dom. 1414. and had the surname of
the German Achilles, had no junctures or sutures in his Skull, as is yet to be
seen at Heilbronna, where it is kept.

11. Nicholo de Conti says, Purch. Pilg. Tom. 1. l. 5. c. 17. p. 695.
that in his time the Sumatrians were all Gentiles, and the Man-eaters amongst
them, used the skulls of their eaten enemies instead of Money, exchanging the
same for their necessaries, and he was accounted the richest Man, who had most
of those skulls in his house.

12. In Thebet amongst the Tartarians, Purch. Pilg. Tom. 1. l. 4. c. 16. p. 48^.
the people in times past, bestowed on their Parents no other Sepulcher then
their own Bowels, and yet in part retain it, making fine cups of their deceased
Fathers skulls, that drinking out of them in the midst of their jollity, they
may not forget their Progenitors.

13. The Men of the Province of Dariene paint themselves when they go to the
Wars, Purch. Pilg. Tom. 1. l. 9. c. 1. 1. p. 1010. Trenc^^. hist. improved. p.
37.
and they stand in need of no Helmet or Head piece, for their skulls have such
natural hardness upon them, that they will break a Sword, that is let drive
upon them.

14. Johannes Pfeil lived at Lipsia, and while he practiced Physic there,
M^lch. Adam. in. vit. Germ. Med. p. 41.
a Citizen was his Patient, who was so vehemently troubled with a daily and
intolerable pain in his head, that by reason of it he could take no rest
either night nor day, the Physician prescribed to him all things that might
seem convenient for him, and procure other Medicines at his own charges, but
all to no purpose, for the sick Man over-powred with the extremity* of his
pain, and want of rest gave up the Ghost. Pfeil his Physician (with leave of
his Friends) dissected the Head of the Deceased; and in the brain found a
stone, of the magnitude and figure of a Mulberry, (by eating of which fruit the
Patient had said, he had contracted his Disease) this stone was of an Ash
color, and he afterward showed it unto many, as matter of singular admiration.

15. Pericles the Athenian, Zuin. T^eat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 291.
was of a decent composure in respect of the other parts of his body; but his
Head was extraordinary great, and very long in the figure and shape of it, no
way answering to the other lineaments of his body: Hereupon it is, that almost
all the Statues that remain to be seen of him, have Helmets upon the heads of
them. The Artificers taking that course to hide that natural deformity that was
in ^^ Illustrious a Person.

Z^i^. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 291.
20. Philocles a Comical Poet, was Aeschylus his Sisters Son; this Man had a
Head that was sharp, raised, and pointed in the Crown of it like a Sugar Loaf.

Z^in. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 291.
21. Mahomet that great impostor, and the framer of the Alcoran, is said to have
a head of an unusual and extraordinary bigness.

CHAP. XII. Of the Hair of the Head, how worn, and other particularities about
it.
APuleius thought the hair of the Head to be so great and necessary an
Ornament, that says he, the most beautiful Woman is nothing without it, Cael.
Antiq. Le^^. l. 18. c. 10. p. 838.
though she came from Heaven, be born of the Sea, brought up in the Waves, as
another Venus, though surrounded with the Graces, and attended with all the
Troops of little Cupids, though Venus girdle be about her, and she breath
Cinnamon and sweet Balsom; yet if she be bald, she cannot please, no not so much
as her own Vulcan. As a Beast without Horus, a Tree without Leaves, and a Field
without Grass; such (says Ovid) is one without Hair; It is without doubt a
considerable ornament and additional beauty: how some have worn it, and
concerning other accidents about it, see the following examples.

(...). Hist. (...). C. l. 3. Hi^^. 33. p. 77.
1. Cardanus relates of a Carmel^te that as o^t as he kemb'd his head, sparks of
fire were seen to ^ly out of his Hai^, and that thereupon he was invited to
feasts, that they who were present might see the trial and truth of it.

Scalig. de (...). c. 174. p. 567.
2. Scaliger mentions a noble Lady of C^umont, whose Hair while it is kemb'd
('it is his own expression) seems to vomit ^ire.

3. The very same thing often befell Petrus Io. Faber, (...) Hist. (...) C ^. 3.
Hist. 37. p. 77.
an excellent Chemist; as he says of himself and he adds, that he saw a noble
and beautiful Maid (who kembing her Head in his presence) the sparks ^^ew from
her Hair into her Lap, as Stars falling from Heaven; at which she was so much
a^^righted, that the had fallen into a swound, had they not dispelled her fears
by jesting with her about it.

(...). ^^id. p. 78.79.
4. The Illustrious Prince Christian, the Fi^th of that name, King of Denmark
and Norway; when he kemb'd his head, oft^n saw and showed to them that were
present, sparks of ^ire flying from his Hair.

5. St. Augustine speaks of some Men, who at their pleasure, ^.
and without moving of their heads, would bring all the Hair of their Head
forward to their Forehead, and then put it all backward to the hinder part of
their Head.

6. T^mberlan^ wore the Hair of his Head long an^ ^urled, contrary to the
manner of the Tartar^, who shave their heads, (...) hist. p. 23^.
having the same always covered, whereas he contrariwise was for the most part
bare headed, commanding his Son to be brought up so by his Tutors; his Hair was
of a dark color, somewhat drawing toward a Violet* right bea^tiful to behold,
which his Mother coming of the ra^e of Sampson (as he gave it out) commanded
him to nourish, in token of his descent; this was one cause that made him to be
more respected of his Men of War: most part of them believing, that in those
hairs were some rare virtue, or rather some fatal destiny; an old practice of
many great Commanders of former Ages, to fill the Heads of their Soldiers with
some strange opinion conceived of them, as if something was in them
extraordinar^.

7. C^odion the Second, John de S^res Hist. of France p. 7. Camer. op^r.
s^bcis. Cent. 1. c. 36. p. 166.
King of France, was called Le Chevelu or the Hairy, for that he made a Law,
that none but Kings, and their Children, and the Princes of the Blood should
wear long Hair, in token of command; this custom confirmed by the Law of
Clodion, has been long time observed in France, so as by this mark Clodamire,
the Son of Clovis being slain in a Battle by the Bo^rvig^o^s, was known amongst
the d^ad. And in token of a degrading or dishonouring, the French shaved such
as they degraded from the Royal Dignity, as appears by numerous examples:
Amongst which that of Queen Clotilda is memorable, who chose rather to cut off
the heads of her young Sons, then to have their Hair poll'd or shaven; that is
to say, she preferred an honest death, before the dishonor of her Children, for
in cutting off their Hair, they were deprived of all hope to enjoy their
degree, and were confined to a base estate unworthy of their greatness.

8. Lucius Martius being about to set upon the Carthaginians under the leading
of Asdrubal their General, Live. l. 25. Val. Mar. l. 1. c. 6. p. 14.
while he made a Military Oration to his Soldiers, his whole Head seemed to be
encompassed with a flame; this was beheld by the Soldiers that stood about him
to their great terror, but himself had no sense of it, nor any damage by it.

9. Herodian says of the Emperor Comodus, Herodian l. 1.
that his Hair was yellow and curled, that as often as he walked in the Sun, it
seemed to sparkle with fire, insomuch that some supposed, that he powdered it
with dust of Gold, others looked upon it as an Argument of Divinity, and that
he brought the early marks of it on his Hair into the World with him.

10. Osyris going from Egypt upon an expedition into Aethiopia, Diodor. Sic.
rer. Antiq. l. 1. c. 2. p. 10.
made a vow to nourish his Hair until his return into Egypt again; whereupon
it has been a custom and is continued unto these times, that whenever the
Egyptians travel into any other Country, they also nourish their Hair till
their return.

11. The Caribbians are black hair'd as the Chinese are, Hist. of the Caribby
Islands l. 2. c. 9. p. 252.
their Hair is not curled and frizzel'd as that of the Moors, but straight and
long as those of the M^ldive^es, and the Women attribute the highest perfection
of beauty to this black color as to what concerns the Hair. It is reported
also that the Indian Women of Peru, are so enamored of black Hair^ that to
make their own of that color by Artifice, when Nature does it not, they are
willing to endure incredible pains and torments.

12. In Spain many Ladies to make their Hair seem to be of a golden yellow
color, Hist. of Car. Islands l. 2. c. 9. p. 252.
perfume it with Sulphur, steep it in Aqua fortis, and expose it to the Sun, in
the hottest time of the day, nay in the very Dog Days, and in Italy the same
color is much affected.

13. C^esias says, there is a race or kindred of the Indians named Pandore
inhabiting certain Valleys, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 2. p. 156.
who live two hundred years, and have this difference from other Men, that in
their youthful time their Hair is white upon their Heads, but as they grow into
Age, it grows into a farther degree of blackness.

Purch. Pilg. Tom. 1. l. 5. c. 15. p. 667.
14. They of Iapan pluck o^f the Hairs from their Heads; Children before, the
common people half way, the Nobility almost all, leaving but a little growing
behind, which grows long, and is tied up in knots; to touch which, is by them
conceived as great an indignity, as can be offered to a Man.

Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 36. p. 166.
15. As Tacitus says, it is of the Germans, so Boethius writes it was a Custom
in France, that if any Man accused his Wife of Adultery, and had lawfully
convicted her thereof; he caused the Hair of her Head to be cut short, and her
garments to be also cut round in the middle, and then the Woman was to be lead
from street to street, in this ignominious posture.

Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 36. p. 168.
16. The use of long hair, both in Germany and France, and other places by
degrees, and in the memory of our Fathers, has grown out of reputation, and
many are of opinion, that the chief occasion thereof was this: About the year
1460. Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, fell into a long and unknown kind of
Disease, and amongst variety of other remedies made use of for his recovery:
his Physicians advised him to cut off his Hair, which in those days the
Nobility wore very long. When he had so done, finding that by reason of the
novelty of the thing, he was laughed at by his Friends, and the Nobility about
him* he sent forth his Edict, that all his Courtiers and the Nobility in his
Dominions, should have their Hair cut in such manner as he himself had. Five
hundred noble Persons were thus shorn at Bruxels in one and the same day, and
that all others should do the like, Petrus Vasquembacchius, a Noble Person, was
appointed to take the charge and care: by this means, both at Bruxels, and in
all the Towns and Cities of his Dukedom, the Nobility were deprived of their
long hair, and were thereupon su^^iciently derided by the common sort of people.

CHAP XIII. Of the Beard, and how worn by some Persons and Nations.
WHen Alexander the Great was about to fight with the Persians, his Captains
brought him word, that all things were prepared and in readiness for the
Battle; and demanded if he would have any thing further? Nothing said he but
that the Macedonians cut off their beards. Parmenio wondered at this saying of
his: What said Alexander, know you not that there is no better handle to take a
Man by then the beard? he meant they were to fight close, and their beards
would be some advantage to the enemy, when they should grapple with them. It
seems there is little use of a beard in War, less in a Woman, though she had
none of the least who is next mentioned.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 3. obs. 92. p. 394.
1. In a Town called Penheranda, which is 30. Miles distant from M^drid, the
King of Spain's Court, there was a Country Woman called Brizida de Penheranda,
she was Aged 60. years, she had a beard from her youth, which she suffered to
grow, so that in her Age it reached down to the Pit of her Stomach. My
Ancestors who were Persons worthy of credit have seen this Woman, and I my self
have beheld her Picture.

2. Franciscus Alvar^z Semedo a Portuguese, Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist.
43. p. 61.
a Father of the Society of Jesus; Procurator of Iapan and China; upon his
return thence to Rome, had a beard of that length that it reached down to his
Feet, so that for convenience sake, he used to have it girt about him with a
girdle, whoever desires to see his Effigies, may behold it prefixed to his
Learned Book of the History of Coina.

3. When Urban the Eighth was Pope, Gasp Sc^o^^. Phys. (...). l. 3. c. 23. p.
518.
a Swisse by Nation, coming in pilgrimage to Rome, obtained of the Captain of
the Swissers (who are the Pope's guard) to be admitted to receive the Pope's
Benediction, and to kiss his Foot, this Man had a red beard of that length and
breadth, that it covered his whole breast unto his knees, so that the Pope while
he spoke to him (as he presented himself before him upon his knees, and
inquired of his Country, and the state of it) gave him the Title of
Father-hood, (which the Italians give to Monks) for at the first sight he
thought it not a beard, but such a garment as Monks wear about their shoulders,
which so fell from his Neck to his knees, as he afterward confessed,
acknowledging his error, P. Athanasius Kircherus an eyewitness told me this I
have now written.

4. A Person famous throughout the whole World by his Writings, G^sp. Sc^^^t.
P^ys. curios. l. 3. c. 23. p. 517.
being at Rome, and returning in the Winter at Evening to his house, shut his
Windows and doors, and by a Candlelight composed himself to study; when he saw
a huge Weasel at the door, seeking a way to get out, he snatched up a Staff,
and laid it so lustily upon the Weasel creeping up the Wall, that the blood
spirted upon his Staff, and hand, he opened the Window and threw out the dead
Weasel, and betakes himself to his study, sustaining his chin and jaw with his
right hand, as it is usual with Students; The day following as soon as he came
into the sight of his Colleagues, he was received with great laughter, for he
had lost all the Hair on the right side of his face, which himself had not
observed; he therefore soon left the company and got the other side shaved, and
a Medicine to procure Hair applied: but when the Hair was grown he was received
with no less laughter then at first, for those Hairs which were newly come,
were like the softest Wool or Down, and the other stiff as bristles, and it
would require to small space of time, to have them matched with any
suitableness; who would have thought the blood of a Weasel to have been (but
for this accident) so potent a depilatory?

5. The Turks in the Reign of Orchanes and long time after, Knowl's T^rkish
hist. p. 183.
used not to cut or shave their beards, but did wear them long, so that if the
King would disgrace any Man, he would in his displeasure command his beard to
be cut or shav^n. The manner of cutting or shaving their beards, which they now
use, they learned of the Italians of whom they have also borrowed many other
fashions, not only di^fering, but quite contrary to their ancient manners and
customs.

6, The Lombards or Longobards as most think, Zui^. Thea^. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 294.
had their name from the great length of their beards, because they only
(almost) of all the r^st of the Germans did nourish their beards.

7. The Emperor Otho the Great, Zuin. Ibid. p. 294.
after the manner of the ancient Germans, used to wear his beard down to the
breast, and his custom was to swear by it, as often as he spoke of any serious
matter.

Zuin. Ibid. p. 295. Alex. genial. Dier. l. 5. c. 18. p. 290.
8. Adrianus the Emperor (says Dion) was the first of all the Caesar's, who
nourished his beard, and this he did on purpose to cover some natural marks and
scarrs that were upon his face.

Erasm. in Adag.
9. The Romans anciently wore their beards long, and a bearded Man, in a
Proverbial sense amongst them, was as much as to say, a Man of ancient
simplicity and virtue; Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 59. p.
for it was late e're shaving came in use amongst them, Pliny says, that P.
Ticinius Mena was the first, who out of Sicily had brought a Barber to Rome,
which was in the four hundred fifty and fourth year from the building of the
City.

10. The first amongst the Romans, who usually shaved his beard off, Alex. ab
Alex. genial. D^^r. l. 5. c. 18. p. 290.
was Scipio Affricanus the Son of Paulus Aemylius; afterward Augustus: the
slaves and Servants might not do it, but were commanded not to poll their hair,
or shave off their beards.

Olearius Travels. l. 6. p. 360.
11. Seach Sesi King of Persia had commanded the execution of Vgurlu chan, his
high Steward, when his head was brought him, he touched it with a little Wand,
and looking upon it said, it must be confessed thou wast a stout Man, it
troubles me to see thee in this condition, but it was thine own fault; it is
pity were it only for that goodly ^eard of thine: This he said, by reason his
Mustachoes were so long, that coming about his neck they met again at his
mouth, which is accounted a great ornament in Persia.

12. The Caribbians wonder much to see our Europeans suffer their beards to
grow so long, Hist. of the Carib. Island l. 2. c. 9. p. 252.253.
and think it a great deformity to wear any; as they account it a perfection in
themselves to have none. The Brasilians and Cumaneses, and certain Nations
subject to the Empire of the Tartars, have always an Iron Instrument in their
hands, wherewith they pluck out the hair of their beards, as soon as they come
out, but the Caribbians are seldom seen to put themselves to that trouble,
insomuch that it is conceived they have a secret to prevent the growth of Hair,
when it is once gotten off.

Hist. of Caribby Island. l. 2. c. 9. p. 253.
13. Anno 1652. the French Consul at Alexandria, being charged with having done
some unhandsome things in his employment, had his beard shaven off as a mark of
ignominy; his beard had such a natural graceful curle, and was of so fair a
flaxen color, that some Turks would have given him a considerable sum of Money
for it, and kept it for a rarity, but he chose rather to bring it along with
him into France.

Sut^on. in Neron. c. 12. p. 238.
14. At the Gymnick Games which Nero exhibited in the Septa, during the solemn
preparation of the great Sacrifice ( Buthysia) he cut off the first beard he
had, which he bestowed within a golden Box, adorned with most precious Pearls,
and then consecrated it in the Capitol to Jupiter.

15. Of old time amongst the Greeks, and indeed almost throughout the East,
Camer. oper. subcis. C^nt. 1. c. 36. p. 166.
they used to nourish their beards, reputing it an insufferable injury and
ignominy, to have but one single hair plucked out of it. It was therefore
ordained as the punishment of Whoredom and Adultery: that whosoever should be
convicted of that crime he should have his beard publicly chopped off with a
hatchet, and so be dismissed as an infamous person. Besides this, it was
esteemed the most sacred pawn or pledge of any thing whatsoever, a Man that had
obliged his beard for the payment of a debt, would not fail to pay it.

16. The Candiots or Cretans looked upon it as a punishment, Camer. oper.
subcis. Cent. 1. c. 36. p. 167.
to have the beard clipped off from them. And so of old amongst the Indians, if a
Man had committed some great crime; the King of the Country commanded that his
beard should be shaven or cut off; and this was esteemed as the greatest mark
of infamy, and ignominy as could befall them.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Teeth, with their different Number and Situation in some.
NAture has provided Mankind with Teeth upon a twofold account especially;
the one is to reduce his Meat and Food into so soft and pliant a posture, as is
most convenient for the Stomach to receive it, and this by Physicians is called
a first digestion. A second and principal use of the Teeth is, for the
furtherance of Speech, without which the pronunciation of some words cannot be
so direct and express, but how it comes to pass, that some have come into the
World with them, and others have had none, all the time they have lived in it,
let others (if they please) enquire.

1. Some Children are born into the World with Teeth, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c.
16. p. 164.
as M. Curious, who thereupon was surnamed Dentatus. So also was Cn. Papyrius
Carbo, both of them great Men.

2. Pherccrates, Schenck. obs. Med. l. 1. ob. 3. p. 188.
from whom the Pherecratick verse was so called, was born Toothless, and so
continued to his lives end.

3. The number of the Teeth are 32. sometimes I have seen one over says
Columbus, Reald. Columb. Anat. l. 1. c. 10. p. 65.
as in a certain Noble Person, sometimes two or one under, in some also but 28.
are found, which is the least number that is ordinary, though I observed that
Cardinal Nicholaus Ardinghellus had only six and twenty in his mouth, and yet
he had never lost any.

4. Pyrrhus King of Epirus had no Teeth in his upper Jaw, Plut. in vit. Pyrrh.
p. 384.
that is, distinguished as others have one from the other, but one entire bone
throughout his gumb, marked a little at the top only, with certain notches,
where the Teeth should be divided.

5. In the Reign of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, Barth. Hist. Anat.
Cen. 1. Hist. 35. p. 48.
there were brought by the King's Fleet some of the Inhabitants of Greenland to
Hafnia, that their language might be the better understood by us. Amongst these
Barbarians there was one, who showed to as many as had the curiosity to see it,
that he had but one continued Tooth, which reached from the one end of the Jaw
to the other. For which I have the sufficient testimony of Dr. Thomas Finchius
a venerable person, in whose house the Barbarian did often feed upon raw flesh,
according to the custom of his own Country.

6. Euryphaeus the Cyrenian had in his upper Jaw one continued bone instead of
Teeth. Schenck. obs. M^d. l. 1. obs. 6. p. 188.
So had Euryptolemus King of the Cypriots; So says Melancthon, had a Noble
Virgin in his time, in the Court of Ernestus Duke of Lunebergh, and the Duke
said she was of great Gravity and Virtue.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 32. Columb. Anaton. l. 1. c. 10. p. 67. Barthol.
Hist. Amdt. Cent. 1. Hist. 35. p. 48.
7. Dripitine, ihe Daughter of King Mithridates by Laodice his Queen, had a
double row of Teeth; and though this is very rare in Mankind, yet says
Columbus of his Boy Phoebus, that he had a triple row or order of Teeth.

8. It is constantly reported of Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, that he
had a double row of Teeth, in one of his Jaws, which was some hindrance to him
in the readiness of his Speech.

Benedict. Anatom. l. 3. c. 22. p. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. p.
9. There are Teeth found to be bred in the Palate of some men, says
Benedictus: Pliny propounds the Example of one such; And it happened that I saw
the same in a Roman Woman, says Eustachius, which he caused to be cut out and
burnt: He instances in another Youth of eighteen years of Age, who lived in a
Monastery of the Holy Trinity at Eugubuim, in whom the same thing was to be
seen.

Aristot. l. 5. l. 5. de gener. Animal. cap. ult. Donat. Hist. Med. l. 6. c. 2.
p. 299. Iohnst. Not. Hist. cl. 10. c. 8. p. 351.
10. Aristotle writes, that not only men in old Age, but also Women, sometimes
at eighty years of Age, have put forth their-great Teeth: My Wife, says
Donatus, in the thirty sixth of her Age, put forth the furtherst jaw Tooth. A
learned man tells of himself, that in the fortieth year of his age, he had a
jaw Tooth came: Vessalius also writes, that in the twenty sixth year of his
age, he had one of his Grinders that discovered it self.

Plin. Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. p.
11. Mutianus says, that he saw one Zancles, a Samothracian, who bred his Teeth
again, after he was now arrived to the hundred and fortieth year of his Age.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 31. Plin. l. 7. c. 16. p. Solin. c. 4. p. 181.
12. Prusias, the Son of Prusias, King of Bythinia, ha^ instead of Teeth one
continued and entire Bone in his upper Jaw, nor was it any way unhandsome to
the sight, or inconvenient to him for use.

Herodot. l. 9. p. 544.
13. After the Battle at Plataea, wherein so many thousands of the Persians
fell, when the Bones were gathered together to be buried in one place, there
was found amongst them a little Skull; which though it had distinct Teeth in
the Jaw, yet were they all as well grinders as others, consisting of one solid
Bone.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 294. col. 1.
14. Zenobia, the Queen of the Palmyrens; as she was in diverse other respects a
beautiful person; so had she Teeth, of that bright and shining whiteness, that
in discourse, or when she laughed, she seemed to have her Mouth rather full of
Margarites than Teeth.

Barthol. de Luce. homin. l. 1. c. 13. p. 101.
15. Nicholaus Sojerus, a Belgian, a person of great integrity and prudence has
a set of Teeth, of such an unusual property; that being struck upon with a sor^
of Indian Wood, they are seen to sparkle Fire, as if they were Flints: This was
delivered me as a certain truth, by his own Brother Guilielmus Sojerus, a
person well skilled in the Greek Learning.

Barthol. ibid. p. 103, 104.
16. The Ancients had a great opinion of the Teeth, as the principles of their
being, they therefore buried them with care, when they fell out through time or
accident: nor was this respect done to them by the vulgar alone, but by the
Lawmakers themselves, as may appear by that Law in the twelve Tables; wherein,
though it is forbiden to burn Gold with the Body; yet there is added, that such
as have their Teeth fastened with Gold, may be buried or burnt with it.

17. The Negroes of Mosambico are extremely pleased to have their Teeth very
sharp, History of the Carri^by Islands, l. 2. c. 9. p. 253. 254. Herberts Trav.
l. 3. p. 318.
so that some use Files to make them such. Among the Maldiveses, they are no
less desirous to have them red, and to that end, they are continually chewing
of Petel. Among the Iaponeses, and the Cumaneses, they are industrious to have
them black, and they purposely make them such, because Dogs Teeth are white,
whom they hate to imitate or be like.

18. Saint Augustine says, Camerar. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 82. p. 384.
August. lit. De civit. Dei. 15. c. 9. p. 310.
he saw upon the shore of Vtica, a man's Tooth, one of those which we call the
Grinders, of that huge bigness; that if it had been cut into the form and
magnitude, that is usual amongst us in our times; that Tooth might easily be
judged to be an hundred times biger than any of ours.

19. Phlegon Trallianus remembers, Kornman. de Mirac. Mortuor. part 3. c. 42.
p. 22.
that in the Reign of Tiberius the Emperor; in a part of Sicily, there were
dug up some dead Bodies; the Teeth were found to exceed in length the Foot
of an ordinary man.

20. In the days of Lewis Duke of Savoy, Kornman. de Mirac. vivor. p. 92.
the Lord Michael de Romagnano, being then aged above ninety years, cast his
Teeth; and had almost a complete new set that succeeded in the place of those
that were fallen out. And Anno 1372. when the Emperor Charles the Fourth,
abode above the Rhine; one night in his sleep he had one of his Grinders that
dropped out, and another immediately came in the room of it, which was the
greater wonder to those that were about him; seeing the Emperor at that time
was in the seventy first year of his age.

21. In the time of King Edward the Third, Chetwinds Hist. collect^ Cent. 10.
p. 283.
there reigned a great Pestilence over most parts of the World, and from that
time all that ever have been born, have two Cheek Teeth less than they had
before. Fullers holy State, lib. 3. cap. 2. page 146.

22. Eurydamas a Cyrenian was Victor in the Olympic Game at Whorl-bats:
Aelian. var. Hist. l. 11. c. 19. p. 275.
this man had his Teeth stricken out by a blow that was given him by his Enemy,
all which he immediately swallowed, lest his Adversary being sensible of what
had befallen him, should thereupon take fresh courage.

CHAP. XV. Of the Tongue, Voice, and manner of Speech in several Persons.
SOme are of opinion, that Nature has shut up the Tongue with a double
Port-cullis of Lips and Teeth on purpose, that man by their manner of
contexture, might have a constant and silent kind of admonition, that he should
not be over hasty to speak. It being too easy to pull great mischiefs upon our
selves, by an unwary indulgence to this little member. I will not say, that he
that has the longest Tongue is the greatest speaker. But

1. Donatus tells, Hist. Med. Mirab. l. 6. c. 3. p. 304.
that he knew one John Fugacinas, a Merchant of Mantua, who had so long and
flexible a Tongue, that as often as he pleased, and with great falicity, he could
lick his Nostrils with it as an Ox does.

2. Amatus Lusitanus, relates of one James, that he had long hairs growing upon
his Tongue, Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 2. p. 302.
which he sometimes pulled up by the roots with his own hands, to whom he also
showed them; and adds, that although they were thus pulled, out, they would
nevertheless grown again.

Schenck. obs. Med. 1. obs. 1. p. 182.
3. Schenki^s propounds the Histories of diverse, out of whose Tongues were taken
Stones; from some one only, from others more, some of the bigness of a Pease,
others of a Bean, and some that hindered the liberty of Speech, which upon their
removal, was again restored.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 3^.
4. The Wife of Nausimenes, the Athenian, having found her Son and Daughter in
the act of an incestuous copulation: struck with the horror of a thing so
unexpected, she immediately became mute, and utterly bereaved of the use of her
Speech.

Sch^n^k. obs. Me^. l. 1. obs. 4. p. 180.
5. Maximilian, the Son of the Emperor Ferdinand the Third, was altogether mute
and dumb, to the ninth year of his Age, but by the benefit of Nature, he
afterward arrived not only to Speech, but also to Eloquence, the cause is
supposed to be too great humidity, which in process of time was wasted and
consumed.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 3^.
6. Aegles a Samian wrastler was dumb from his Nativity, but when the Honor and
reward of his Victory was taken from him, enkindled with rage, he brake
silence; and spoke ever after.

(...). l. 1. obs. 2. p. 133. (...). c. 7. p. 195. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 4. p.
145. G^ll. Noct. l. 5. c. 9. (...). p. 27^.
7. Atys, the Son of King Croesus, beholding a Persian Soldier rushing upon his
Father to kill him, being before altogether dumb, struck with fear and anger,
he cried out, Soldier do not kill Croesus, by this means the strings of his
Tongue being loosned, he ever after had a free use of it.

8. Thrasybulus, the Admiral of the Athenian Navy excelled all the Athenians of
his time in the mighty strength and loudness of his voice.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 382 Lu^^ii vit. Phil. l. ^. p. 112.
9. Carneades the Cyrenian, an excellent, both Philosopher and Logician, had
from his Youth so full and strong a Voice, that his Master was constrained to
call to him, that he would not roar in that manner: Prescribe me then (said he)
the measure of my Voice. Your Auditors, said his Master.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 382
10. Basil the Great, Bishop of Caesaria, was ever of weak Smell, and difficult
Voice: but at his last (somewhat before he died) he spoke more loud and strong:
And, says Nazienzen, as dying Swans, with words of Truth he fell asleep.

Zuing. Ibid. p. 383.
11. Michael Balbus the Emperor, was so exceeding slow in naming of Letters,
and composing of Syllables; that another might with more ease read over a whole
Book, than he was able to pronounce all the Letters of his own name.

C^el. Rhodig. Antiq. l^ct. l. 19. c. 12. p. 901.
12. Pescennius Niger, so called, because though very white in all the rest of
his Body, yet his Neck only was extremely black; he is said to have had so
strong and loud a Voice, that when he spoke in the Camp, he might be heard at
the distance of a mile, unless the wind was against him.

Herodot. l. 4. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 382.
13. When Darius fled from the Scythians, he came to the Bridge upon the Ister,
which he found broken down; he had left Histieeus the Milesian there with some
Ships to receive him at his coming: Histiceus had withdrawn himself as far as
to be out of the Scythian darts: but being dark, and at the dead of the Night,
they could not discern any of his Ships, so that Darius thought himself
betrayed; yet caused an Egyptian, who had the strongest Voice of all Mortals,
to stand upon the shore, and call to him as loud as he could; he invoked the
name of Histiceus with that notable sufficiency, that he was heard by him in
his Ship at the first call, so that he came and delivered Darius of his fears.

14. Johannes the Dumb had his Surname given him upon the occasion of his
misfortumes, Nich. Tulpi^ obs. Med. l. 1. c. 41. p. 77.
for in his Voyage to Italy, he fell into the hands of Turkish Pirates, who
upon his refusal to turn Turk, endeavored to pull out his Tongue by the Roots,
at a wound they had made for that purpose under his Chin; but that cruelty not
succeeding according as they desired; they cut off all the rolling part of the
Tongue; and by that means deprived the young man of his Speech. In this state
he had remained three years; when he was much frighted one Night, by reason of
such Lighning, which so affected his fearful mind, that it dissolved that
tenacious bond which had hitherto tied up his Speech: When he found it
restored, he scarcely believed it himself; and this unexpected Speech of his so
wrought upon the whole Family, that a young Woman in the House did miscarry
upon the fright of it. The fame of this accident dispersing it self abroad, I
my self went to Wesopus, a little Town in Holland, on purpose to see him, and
found all things agreeable to the report that went of him. Him who three years
before had lost the half part of his Tongue, I heard not only speak distinctly,
but also accurately pronouncing any Letters, though Consonants; which the
Learned say, Is not to be done, but with the forepart of the Tongue, which he
wanted. He told me ingenuously, that in the time of the Lightning, he perceived
a greater motion in the Muscles of the Tongue, but his swallow (to which the
Tongue is not less serviceable than to Speech) did as he acknowledged remain
impedited; so that he then complained, no Food would pass into his Throat, but
such as he thrust down it by the help of his Finger.

15. Diodorus Siculus writes of an Island found out by Iambulus, Diodor. Sic.
Rer. Antiq. l. 2. c. 13.
in the Southern parts of the Ocean, wherein, says he, there are men whose
Bones are flexible as Nerves; the holes of their Ears are far wider then ours;
and Nature has divided their Tongues, so that they are cloven at the little
end of them; by virtue of which they not only speak, but imitate the Voices of
sundry Birds, with great exactness: what he adds, that they can ordinarily
speak to two men at once, I leave to the liberty of the Reader to believe as he
pleases.

16. Gomara tells that there were some in Mexico that understood each other by
whilstling, Purcha^. Pilgr. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 13. p. 1002.
which was ordinarily used by Lovers and Thieves, a Language admirable even to
our Wits, so highly applauded by our selves: while we despise these Nations for
their silliness and simplicity. Yea Captain Smyth, told me, says Purchase, that
in Virginia there are some Natives thereof, which the spacious divorce of the
wide stream notwithstanding, will by hallowing and whoops understand each
other, and entertain conference.

17. There were some Orthodox Bishops, Gaulter. tab. Chron. p. 481.
out of whose Mouths the Vandals had cut their Tongues; yet these were
afterward (by Miracle heard to speak distinctly as other: The Miracle hereof
had also this increase, that one of these Bishops, growing proud of this gift;
and carrying himself thereupon with an unusual instance, his Speech was again
taken from him, and he remained dumb to the Day of his Death.

Plut. Moral. de ria cohibend. p. 122.
18. Cajus Gracchus the Orator, a man by Nature blunt, rude in behavior, and
withal over-earnest, and violent in his manner of pleading; had a little Flute
or Pipe made on purpose, such as Musicians are wont to rule and gu^de the Voice
gently with, according to every Note as they would themselves, teaching their
Scholars thereby to have a tuneable Voice. Now when at any time Gra^chus
pleaded at the Bar; he had one of his Servants standing behind him with such a
Pipe; who observing when his Master was a little out of tune, would sound a
more mild and pleasant Note unto him, whereby he reclaimed and called him back
from that loud exclaiming and vociferation which he used, and gently took down
that rough and swelling accent of his Voice.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Eye; its shape, and the strange liveliness and vigor of it
in some.
I Have read of a Painter, that having drawn the Picture of Venus lying with
her eyes closed, and as one asleep, he wrote thus at the bottom of the Table.

Cave viator excites somno Deam:
Sua adaperiens, tua namque claudet lumina.
Be sure you wake her not out of her sleep so sine;
For if she open her eyes, she soon will shut up thine.
Such a Divine luster has appeared in the Eyes of some, that others have not
been able to look upon it.

Hist. Med. mirac. l. 6. c. 2. p. 303.
1. Donatus assirms, that he saw the young Son of a certain Baker, the sight or
black of whose Eye, was so extended and large, that none, or at most a very
small part of the white could be discerned.

Iovii Elog. l. 4. p. 4.201.
2. Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valentia, had Eyes so ^iery and sparkling, that his
very friends* and familiar acquaintance, were not able to look upon them,
though when he was disporting himself among the Ladies, with an admirable
change he could convert his cruel looks into that of lenity.

D^ florib. Philos. l. 4. Problem. 11. p.
3. That History is strange, which is recorded by Francis Mendoza, of the Duke
of Brigantia's one Eyed Servant, who with his Eye could make any Falcon on
Sparrow Hawk in their slight fall down to the ground, as if they were dead; of
which we can give no more reason, than why the Loadstone draws Iron.

Sueton. in Augusto. p. 103. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 231. Camer. oper. subcis.
Cent. 1. c. 31. p. 309.
4. Octavianus Caesar had clear and bright Eyes, in which he would have it to be
though that there was a Divine vigor, and he was well pleased if any that
looked earnestly upon him, cast down their Eyes as at the splendour of the Sun.
Sextus Aurelius writes of him, that he was beautiful in every part of his Body,
but especially in his Eyes, the light of which did shine, after the manner of
the brighter Stars; so that one said, Oculorism tuorum fulmen far non possum.

5. In the Eyes of Tamberlain sat such a rare Majesty, Knowi^^ Turk. Hist. p.
235.
that a man could difficulty endure to behold them without closing of his Eyes,
and many in talking with him, and often beholding of him became dumb, which
occasioned him often times with a comely modesty, to abstain from looking too
earnestly upon such as spoke to him or discoursed with him.

6. Malcotius, Knowl^s Turk. Hist. p. 415.
in the Reign of Mahomet the Second, adjoined himself to Aly-beg in the siege
of Scodra, of him it is reported, that the Majesty of his countenance, with the
resplendent beams issuing out of his Eyes (as if the rays of the Sun) were of
such piercing brightness, that no man was able with immoved and fixed Eye, long
to behold the same.

7. Martin Luther had such a Lion like vivacity of the Eye, Zuing. Theatr. vil:
2. l. 2. p. 295.
that all men were not able to look directly upon them. Its said that there was
one sent, who under the pretense of private conference with him, should Pistol
him; that he was courteously received by him, but so amazed and affrighted with
the vigor of his Eyes, that he soon conveyed himself away by flight.

8. Anastasius the Emperor was sirnam'd Dicorus, Zonaras in Annal. toul. 3. p.
126.
because he had the Apples of his Eyes of two different colors, for that of
his right Eye was somewhat black, and that of his left was gray.

9. Olo, the Son of Syward King of Norway; Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 380.
SaxoGrammati^. l. 7.
by the Sister of Harold King of the Danes, had so truculent an Aspect, that
what others did with Weapons, that did he with his Eye upon his Enemies,
frighting the most valiant amongst them with the brandishes of his Eye.

10. Apollonides tells that in Scythia there are a sort of Women, Donat. Hist.
Med. mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 302. Solinus c. 6. p. 191.
which are called Bythiae, that these have two sights in each Eye, and that
with the Eye they kill as many as they look upon, when they are thoroughly angry.

11. Theodorus Beza (as was observed in him by those of his Family) had Eyes of
such a brightness, Barthol. de (...). l. 1. c. 14. p. 107.
that in the night time, when it was dark* they sent out such a light, as
formed an outward Circle of it about the rounds of his Eyes.

12. Mamertinus, Barthol. Ibid. l. 1. c. 14. p. 111.
in his Panegyric Orations says thus of Julian the Emperor, while he warred
upon the Barbarians. Old men, says he, have seen the Emperor (not without
astonishment) pass a long life under the weight of Arms; they have beheld large
and frequent sweats trickle from his gallant Neck: and in the midst of that
horror of dust, which had loaded both his Hair and Beard, they saw his Eyes
shining with a Star-like light.

13. The Soldiers of Aquileia, (...). oper. subcis. cent. 1. cap. 57. p. 252.
by a private sally set upon Attila; being at that time attended with a small
company, they knew not then that Attila was there, but they afterward
confessed, that nothing was so great a terror to them, as those fiery sparkles
that seemed to break from his Eyes, when he looked upon them in the fury of the
sight.

14. It may seem incredible, Kornman de Mirac. vivar. p. 70. August. Sermon. ad
fratres in Er^m. 37.
that there should be found a Nation, that are born with one Eye alone: And yet
St. Augustine seems not to doubt of it, but says, That he himself did behold
such persons. I was now, says he, Bishop of Hippo, when accompanied with
certain of the Servants of Christ; I went as far as Aethiopia, that I might
preach the holy Gospel of Christ to that people; and in the lower parts of
Aethiopia, we saw men that had but one Eye, and that placed in the midst of
their Foreheads.

Sandys in Ovid Met. l. 2. p. 43.
15. Iulio de Este, bad such a peculiar sweetness; and alluring force in his
Eyes; that Cardinal Hypolito de Este, his own Brother, caused them to be put
out, because he had observed, that they had been overpleasing to his Mistress.

Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 21. l. 4. p. 4. p. 3877.
16. Maximus the Sophist, a great Magician, and of whom it was that Julian the
Emperor learned Magic at Ephesus: Of this man it is reported, that the Apples
of his Eyes were voluble, and turning, and the vigor and agility of his swift
and ready wit did seem to shine out of his Eyes; whether he was seen or heard,
both ways he strangely affected such as had conversation with him; while they
were neither able to bear the sparkling motion of his Eyes, nor the course and
torrrent of his Speech; so that even amongst eloquent persons, and such as were
improved by long practice and experience; there was not one found that did dare
to oppose him, when he had conference with any of them.

Polyd. Virg. l. 17. Zui^ger. Th^atr. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 260.
17. Edward the First, King of England, is described by Polydor Virgil to be a
Prince of a beautiful countenance; his Eyes were inclining to black, which when
he was inflamed with anger, would appear of a reddish color; and sparks of
fire seemed to fly out of them.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Face, and Visage, and admirable Beauty placed therein, both
in Men and Women.
THe Ancie^ts were so great admirers of Beauty; that whereas Gorgon had such a
loveliness imprinted upon her Face, that she ravished the Eyes of her
Spectators with it, and made them stand as men amazed and astonished: They
hereupon feigned in their Fable, that she convertted Men into Stone, with the
sight of her. The barbarous Nations had also such veneration for it: that they
thought no Man capable of any extraordinary action, unless his person was thus
digni^ied by Nature: And further, the accidental meeting of a beautiful person,
was held as a special passage of some future good; whereas, the sight of one
deformed, was reputed a most unlucky Omen. Thus Beauty has found its favorers
amongst all sorts of persons; it has done so too in all places, not excepting
such as are the very Theater of Blood and Death: For

Ral^igh. Hist. world l. 2. c. 13. 7. p. 371.
1. Parthenopaeus, one of the seven Princes of the Argives was so exceeding
beautiful, that when he was in Battle, if his Helmet was up, no man would offer
to hurt him, or to strike at him.

Aelian. var. Hist. l. 12. c. 1. p 300.
2. Tenidates the Eunuch was the most beautiful of all the Youth in Asia, when
Artaxerxes King of Persia heard that he was dead, he commanded by his Edict,
that all Asia should mourn for him; and he himself was difficultly comforted
for his death.

3. Antinous of Claudiopolis in Bythinia, was a young Man ex^eedingly d^ar to
Adrian the Emperor, for the perfection of his Beauty: so that when he was
dead, the Emperor in honor of him, Caelius lect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 5. p. 484.
Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 49. p. 139.
built a Temple at Mantinea, and another at Jerusalem; he also built a City
near the River Nilus, and called it by his name: he caused his Coin too, to be
stamped with his Essigies.

4. Alcibiades the Athenian, Plutarch. in Alcib. p. 139. Textor. Officin. l. 2.
c. 49. p. 139
was a person of incomparable Beauty; and which is remarkable, the loveliness
of his form, continued constant to him, both in his Youth, Manhood and Age: It
seldom falls out that the Autumn of a Man should remain ^lourishing as his
Spring; a thing which was peculiar to him with few others, through the
excellent temper of his constitution.

5. Xerxes Army which he lead to Thermopylae against the Grecians is computed
by Herodotus to amount to the number of five hundred twenty eight Myriad,
Herodot. l. 7. p. 446. Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 49. p. 147.
three thousand and twenty eight fighting men; amongst all which almost
incredible number of Mortals; there was none found who could compare with
Xerxes himself, for extraordinary handsomeness in person, or elevated Stature
of Body; nor any who in respect of Majestic port and mien, seemed more worthy
of that command than he.

6. Dometrius Poliorcetes, Dido. Sicul. Bibliothec. l. 20. p. 694 Plut. in
Demetr. p. 889. Aelian. var. Hist. l. 12. c. 14. p. 308
Son of Antigonus, King of Asia, was tall of Stature, and of that excellent and
wonderful Beauty in his Face, that no Painter or Sratuary was able to express
the singugar Graces of it; there was Beauty and Gravity, Terror And amiableness
so intermingled, a young and fierce Aspect was so happily confounded, with an
almost invincible heroic and kingly Majesty, that he was the admiration of all
strangers; and was followed wheresoever he went on purpose to behold.

7. Maximinus the younger, was a most beautiful Prince: Capitolin. in Maximi
Iun. p. 6. Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 49. p. 145.
In the Letter of Maximinus the Father, to the Senate concerning him, is thus
written: I have suffered my Son Maximinus to be saluted Emperor; as in respect
of the natural affection I bear him: So also that the people of Rome, and the
Honorable Senate may swear they never had a more beautiful Emperor: His Face
had such Beauty in it, that when it was black and discolored with Death, and
slow'd with corrupt flesh; yet even then there was a loveliness upon it: To
conclude, when the Head of the Father being. fastened to a Spear, was carried
about, and there was a mighty rejoicing at the sight, there was almost an equal
sorrow, at the beholding of that of the Son, when it was born about in like
manner.

8. Conradus, Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 285
Son to the Emperor Frederick the Second, King of Sicily and Naples was so
beautiful, that he was commonly called Absolon; but of a slothful disposition,
and very degenerate from the Virtue of his Father.

9. Frederick Duke of Austria, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 285. Cuspinian.
in respect of the elegancy of his form, had the surname of the Beautiful; he
was made Prisoner in Battle, by Lewis of Bavaria, and detained for some time in
safe custody: being afterward set at liberty, he returned to Vienna, with his
Beard horridly overgrown, and with a squallid Aspect, who in time past excelled
all the Princes of his age, in the Beauty of his Face and Lineaments of his
Body.

10 Maximilianus, Zuinger. ibid. p. 285. Cuspinian.
the first Emperor of that name, was of a just stature, a person in whom
shined the Imperial Majesty; there was no stranger but who knew him to be the
Emperor amongst thirty great Princes, though he had never seen him before;
something there was in his countenance, so great and so august, that served to
distinguish him from others.

11. Spurina a young Man of Hetruria was of exquisite beauty, by this means he
allured the eyes of very many Illustrious Ladies, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 113.
Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 49. p. 146.
though without design of his own, at length finding he was suspected by their
Parents, and Husbands, he destroyed all the beauties of his Face by the wounds
he made in it, choosing rather that his deformity should be the evidence of his
innocence, than that any comeliness of his should incite others to unchastity.

Steph. in voce. p. 10.
12. Abdalmuralis an Arabian, the Grandfather of Mahomet, so excelled in the
beauty and lineaments of his face and body, that all sorts of Women who beheld
him fell in love with him.

13. King Richard the Second was the goodliest Personage of all the Kings of
England that had been since the Conquest; Baker's Chr. p. 222.
tall of stature, of straight and strong Limbs, fair and amiable of
Countenance, and such a one as might well be the Son of a most beautiful Mother.

14. Owen Tudor an Esquire of Wales, after the death of Henry the Fifth,
Baker's Chr. p. 255.
married Katherine his Widow, the meanness of his Estate was recompensed with
the delicacy of his Personage, so absolute in all the lineaments of his body,
that the only contemplation of it might well make the Queen forget all other
circumstances.

Baker's Chr. p. 312.
15. King Edward the Fourth (says Comines) was the goodliest Personage that
ever mine eyes beheld, p. 310.
exceeding tall of stature, fair of complexion, and of most Princely presence.
When in the 14. year of his Reign a benevolence was devised toward his Wars in
France, amongst others a rich Widow was called before him, whom he merrily
asked what she would willingly give him toward his great charges. By my troth
(quoth she) for thy lovely countenance thou shall have even twenty pounds. The
King looking for scarce half that sum thanked her, and lovingly kissed her,
which so wrought with the old Widow, that she presently swore he should have
twenty pounds more, and paid it willingly.

H^rodot. l. 9. p. 205.
16. Tigranas was left by Xerxes with sixty thousand Men for the defense of
Ionia, and was the most commendable Person for beauty and stature of all that
multitude of Persians.

Zuin. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 286.
17. Ephestion was preferred by Alexander above all the rest of his Commanders,
he was of that noble Presence, that when the King and he first entered the Tent
of the Captive Princesses of Persia he was by them adored, instead of Alexander
himself.

18. Queen Suavilda is said to be of that excelling beauty, that when she was
bound with thongs, Saxo. Gram. Danic. Hist. l. 8. p. 121. Iohnst. Not. Hist.
Cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.
and laid on purpose to be trodden in pieces under the feet of Horses, the
delicacy of her Limbs was such, that the Horses feared to tread upon her, nor
could be induced to hurt her.

Athen. l. 13. c. 9. p. 609.
19. Anatis the Wife of Bagazus, and Sister to Xerxes by the same Father, was
the most beautiful, and also the most intemperate of all the Women of Asia.

Sab^l. l. 7. Ennead. 7.
20. Zenobia Queen of the Palmyrenians, was of singular beauty; her eyes black,
and sparkling with an extraordinary vigor, her voice clear, and she had Teeth
of that whiteness, that diverse suspected, she had placed something else in
their stead.

S^et. p. 62. in Augusto.
21. Cleopatra was the most beautiful of all the Women in Egypt, and that
beauty set off with such an eloquence, and peculiar grace in speaking, that the
great heart of Julius Caesar was subjected by her after he had subdued Pompey.
And after both were dead, when Augustus and Anthony had shared the Roman Empire
betwixt them, she had charms enough left, to engage the latter so firmly in her
service, that his loves were the only cause that he lost his Kingdoms, his
Honor, and his Life.

22. Aspasia the Daughter of Hermotimus the Phocensian, Aelian. var. Hist. l.
12. c. 1. p. 288, 289.
surpassed all the Virgins of her Age in the elegancy of her form. Aelian
describes her thus, her Hair was yellow, and had a natural curle, her Eyes
large and full; her Ears small, and her Nose a gentle rise in the middle; her
Skin was smooth, and her countenance of a Rose color, for which cause the
Phocenses (while she was yet a Girl) gave her the Name of Mil^o. Her Lips were
red, and her Teeth white as snow; her Foot was small, and her Voice had in it
something so smooth and sweet, that while she spoke it was like the music of
the Sirens: She used no Feminine Arts to render her beauties more advantageous,
as being born and brought up by poor Parents; she was as chaste as lovely, so
that allured by both, Cyrus the younger King of Persia made her his Wife, and
after him she was married to Artaxerxes.

23. Agarista the Daughter of Clisthenes the Sicyonian Tyrant, Zuin. Theat.
Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 286.
was so beautiful, that to obtain her as a Bride there were instituted several
solemnities, wherein all sorts of Masteries were to be tried amongst her
Suitors, that so he who was adjudg'd the most worthy Person might carry her
away; and to this kind of trial the most Illustrious youths in Greece submitted
themselves.

24. Timosa the Concubine of Oxgartes is said to have excelled all other Women
in respect of her incomparable beauties, Athen* deipnosoph. l. 13. c. 9. p. 609.
and for that reason was sent by the King of Egypt as a present to Statira,
Wife to the great King of Persia.

25. In the Feast of Ceres Eleusina, Alex. ab Alex. die^. Genial. l. 5. c. 8.
p. 263.
near the River Alpheus, there is a contest about beauty, in which it is said
the Women of Tenedos used to excel, and to bear away the prize in this kind
from all the rest of the Women of Asia; some admire most the Hypepae; and Homer
will have the most beautiful Women to be in Hellas.

26. Jane Shore Concubine to King Edward the Fourth, Stow's Annal. p. 449.
and afterward to the Lord Chamberlain Hastings; by the commandment of King
Richard the Third to the Bishop of London was put to her open penance, going
before the Cross in procession upon a Sunday, with a Taper in her hand, in
which she went in countenance and pace demure, so Womanly, and albeit she was
out of all array, save her Kirtle only, yet went she so fair and lovely,
namely, while the wondering of the people cast a comely red in her cheeks, that
her great shame wan her much praise, amongst those that were more amorous of
her body, than regardful of her Soul. Many also that hated her manner of Life,
and were glad to see sin corrected; yet they more pityed her penance, than
rejoiced therein. She lived till she was old, lean, withered, and dried up;
nothing left but rivel'd skin and hard bone, and in such poverty, that she was
constrained to beg of many, who had begged all their time if she had not been.

27. Phryne was a most beautiful Woman, Heid^eld in Sphing. c. 1^. p. 349, 350.
but a Strumpet; it is said of her, that once at Athens fearing in a cause of
hers to be condemned; in pleading for her self she bared her breasts, and
disclosed some part of her beauties to the Eyes of her Judges, who were so
enchanted thereby, that they pronounced her guiltless, though at the same time
they ordained that thenceforth no Woman should be permitted to plead her own
cause. The same Phryne, being once at a public Feast where it was customary to
have a Queen amongst them, and the rest were bound to do what they saw her to
begin; it fell out that Phryne was Queen, she therefore put her hand into a
basin of cold Water twice, and therewith washed her Forehead; the rest that
had painted their Faces, had their Artificial beauties turned into deformity by
the Water, and so were exposed to the laughter of the company, but Phryne whose
beauty was native, and beholden to nothing of Art, appeared by this touch of
the Water, to be rather improved then any way impaired.

Aelian. var. Hist. l. 12. c. 1. p. 350.351.352.
28. Atalanta excelled all the Virgins of Peloponesus for beauty, she was tall
of stature, her Hair was yellow, not made so by Art, but Nature; her face was
Rosy colored, and very lovely, yet was there something therein so Majestic
and severe, that no timorous or dissolute Person could love her, or scarce
endure to fix his Eyes upon her. Her appearance in company was very seldom, and
even that rendered her yet more amiable and admirable in the estimation of all
Men: She was exceeding swi^t of Foot, and knew so well how to use her bow, that
when Hylaeus and Rhaecus, two dissolute young Men came with purpose to attempt
her Chastity in her solitudes, she sent two Arrows to their hearts, which made
them resign up their lust, together with their lives.

29. Lais was a famous and renowned Curtizan, so beautiful that she en^lamed
and set on fire all Greece, Plut. Mor. l. de Amor. p. 1154.
with the love and longing desire of her. After the love of Hippolochus had
seized on her, she quitt the Mount Acrocorinthus, and flying secretly from an
army of other Lovers, she went to Megalopolis unto him; where the Women upon
very spite, envy, and jealousy, in regard of her surpassing beauty, drew her
into the Temple of Venus and stoned her to death; whereupon it is called to
this day, The Temple of Venus the Murderess.

30. Helena that beautiful Grecian, who caused so much blood to be shed before
the Walls of Troy, Dares de excid. Trojae l. 1. p. 161.
and ten years siege to be laid to that City, is thus described by Dares the
Phrygian, who was present in that War: She was says he, yellow hair'd, full
Eyed, exceeding fair of Face, and well shaped in her body, a small Mouth, her
Legs exactly framed, and a Mole betwixt her Eyebrows. As to her disposition it
was open and ingenuous, and her deportment courteous and obliging to all sorts.

31. Polyxena says Dares, was very ^air, tall, beautiful in her features, her
Neck was long, her Eyes sparkling, Dares de ex^id. Trojae p. 162.
her Hair yellow and long; her Body exactly shaped throughout, her fingers
small and long, her Legs straight, her Feet as neat as could be wished, and in
the whole such a one as for beauty excelled all the Women of her time. Besides
which she was plain hearted, bountiful, and affable to all Persons.

32. Panthea was a noble Lady, taken Prisoner by Cyrus King of Persia, Plut.
Mor. l. de (...). p. 142.
Araspes one of his Favorites and Minions, made a report to him that she was a
Person of extraordinary and wonderful beauty, and therefore worthy to be looked
upon and visited; but such was the Chastity and gallantry of that Prince: that
he thus replied, if so (said he) I ought the rather to forbear the sight of
her; for if by your persuasion, I should yield to go and see her, it may so
fall out that she her self may induce me to repair unto her, even then when I
shall not have such leisure, and to sit with her and keep her company,
neglecting in the mean time the weightiest affairs of the state.

33. There were diverse places, Cael. Rhad. Antiq. L^ct. l. 24. c. 9. p. 1122.
Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 49. p. 143.
wherein there were famous contests amongst the Women, who amongst them all
should bear away the prize for beauty. At the Feast of Ceres Eleusina, near the
River Alphens, there was one of these contentions; and there it was that
Herodice was adjudg'd to be the most beautiful of all the rest of the
pretenders. Those Women that were the contenders were called Chrysophorae, the
reward was a Crown of Myrtle to her, who was pronounced to have the prelation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Majesty and Gravity in the Countenance and Behavior of
some Persons.
THe Sophiti a people of India, have the stature and comeliness of the body in
such estimation, that in their infancy, they made such discrimination of their
Children this way, as to bring up none but such as they judged to have such a
Nature and Limbs, as did presignifie a good stature of body, and a convenient
strength, as for the rest supposing their Education would prove but labor in
vain they put them to death. And amongst them, and the Aethiopians likewise,
they made choice of such to be their Kings as were most remarkable for stature,
and strength, etc. Nor has Nature it self seemed to ordain it otherwise,
seeing that for the most part, persons of Illustrious Fortunes, have a
Character of Majesty imprinted upon them, very different from the common sort.
We read how,

1. Pyrrhus the King of Epirus assaulting Argos, Plut. in Pyrrh. p. 405. Fulg.
l. 2. c. 5. p. 277.
was there slain by the fall of a huge stone cast upon him from the top of an
House, his Soldiers being retreated, he was found dead by Zotypus, who taking
off his Helmet, with the greater facility to cut off his Head, was so terrified
with the Majesty of his Royal countenance (which even in death it self had not
forsaken him) that he went his way not daring to execute the villainy he
intended. But his covetousness prevailing over his fears he at last returned,
yet so timerously set his hand to the work, that not daring to look upon his
face, he struck sometimes upon his Neck, at others upon his face, and with
multiplied strokes, had much ado at length to divide the head from the body.

2. One of the chief Men amongst the Gauls, confessed to one of his Friends,
Suet. in Augusto. p. 103.
that he had fully resolved, to pretend as he would have parlied with Augustus,
in his passage over the Alps, and that at his coming within him, he would have
tumbled him down headlong, but that Augustus when he spoke, and when he was
silent showed such an amiableness, and Majesty in Face and Voice, that he
relented, and was held back from his purpose.

3. When the Emperor Charles the Fifth went up to the top of the Temple of
Panth^on in Rome; Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 30. p. 148.
a certain Italian moved with desire of revenge, or transported with some other
passion, resolved to throw the Emperor headlong from a Window which is the
highest part of it, but being amazed with the portly Majesty of the Emperor,
he desisted from this mischievous Act, of which before he died he made
confession.

4. Gabriel Fondulo Lord of Cremona* confessed before his death, that he had
once resolved with himself to throw down headlong from the high Tower of
Cremona, Camer. Ibid. p. 148.
the Emperor Sigismund, Pope John the 23. and Mocenigo the Venetian
Ambassador, who were gone up thither to see the City and the Country
thereabouts, but that he was frighted and terrified from his enterprise by the
like means.

Camer. ibid. c. 57. p. 251. Dion in vita Trajani.
5. The Emperor Trajan having besieged the Agarenians in a certain City of
theirs, and going about the same in a disguise that he might not be known, was
yet noted for his gallant Age, and Majestical port, how well soever he sought
to dissemble; so that the Enemy making full account that he was the chief
Commander of the Army, shot many Arrows at him, one of which lighted upon him
that followed the Emperor, and killed him.

6. Sir Thomas Egerton made Keeper of the Great Seal by Queen Elizabeth, in the
38. of her Reign, Fuller's Worthies p. 177. Ch^sh.
1596. of him it is said, that surely all Christendom afforded not a Person,
who carried more gravity in his countenance and behavior than Sir Thomas
Egerton; insomuch, that many have gone to the Chancery on purpose only to see
his venerable Aspect and garb (happy they had no other business) and were
highly pleased at so acceptable a spectacle.

Knowles Turk. Hist. p. 455.
7. Ferdinand King of Naples, being shut out both of Capua and Naples, departed
with twenty Galleys well appointed unto Aenaria, an Island not far from Naples,
having in it a commodious harbor, and a strong Castle, where Fortune never
firm but in misery, seemed again to deride the poor remainder of his honor;
for coming thither the Captain of the Castle (unworthily named Iustus)
forgetting his duty toward his Sovereign (of whom he had before received many
extraordinary favors) most traitorously now (in this his so hard distress)
shut the Gates of the Castle against him at his landing, with which unexpected
ingratitude, the poor King was wonderfully perplexed and almost abashed, yet
with earnest entreaty and ample commemoration of the benefits and preferments
which both his Father and himself had in times past bestowed upon him, he
prevailed so much with this unthankful Man, that he was content to receive him
into the Castle, so that he would come himself alone; of which offer (when no
more could be got) the King seemed to accept, so the Captain having opened a
Port to receive him in, was in the very entrance thereof suddenly stabbed to
the heart with a Dagger by King Ferdinand, and slain in the midst of his Armed
Soldiers, which was done with such a countenance and Majesty, that the Warders
with their Weapons in their hands (dismayed with his look) forthwith at his
commandment opened the gate, and received him in with all his Followers:
whereby it appears that in the countenance of Princes, rests a certain divine
Majesty in all Fortunes above the common course of Nature, which is of power to
daunt the hearts of most disloyal Traitors in the performance of their
unnatural Treasons.

8. Darius the Son of Hyst^spis, that some Persians of great Authority, Camer.
her. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 6. p. 20. Aelian. var. Hist. l. 6. c. 14. p. 196.
had a Traitorous design upon him, and a purpose to kill him as he hunted; he
unappall'd at the news, commanded them to take their Arms and Horses, then that
they should draw and assault him, and frowning upon them, why do you not (said
he) execute* that for which ye are come hither? But they observing the
undaunted spirit and countenance of the King, not only relinquished their
purpose, but were struck with such a terror, that they cast down their spears,
adored Darius, and yielded themselves to be punished at his pleasure.

9. It is recorded of Alphonsus Este the first Duke of Ferrara, Camer. oper^
subcis. Cent. 2. c. 6. p. 21. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.
that when the Traitors who conspired against him had him often in their power,
and might have slain him, yet (as they afterward confessed) they were so
affrighted with the Majesty of his countenance, that all the strength of their
hearts and hands did forsake them. In this manner they delayed till they were
discovered by Hippolytus, and underwent the punishment of their designed
(though not executed) Treason.

10. The Emperor Maximilian the First, Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 6. p.
18. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.
was made Prisoner by the Men of Bruges, and treated unworthily by them, yet in
this solitude and extreme danger of his Life, he retained the Heroic greatness
of his mind, and neither did nor spoke any thing that might misbecome him. His
greatest Enemies did revere his Visage, and the seditious people were awed by
his presence, for which cause he was but rarely suffered to be seen by them;
for there sat in his countenance and eyes, a Majesty worthy of a great Prince,
such as strangely moved and shook the consciences of the Rebels; there was in
him a gravity that extorted a due reverence from the most refractory amongst
them, all the lineaments of his body did so lively express a Royal and Imperial
Dignity; his habit and gate was so decent, his motion so temperate, and his
words had such weight, that he drew the affections of all that beheld him.

11. Francis the First, King of France, Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 6. p.
19. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.
after that unhappy Battle at Ticinum, where he (with the chiefest of his
Nobility) was taken Prisoner, did yet remain undaunted, carried himself with
that Princely behavior, as if he being overcome had triumphed over the
Conqueror. He comforted the King of Navarr, Francis Burbon, Anne Mommorance
and other great Persons who were in the same case with himself, saying it was
no wonder if some things fell out to Man contrary to his will; and that Mars
above all the Deities of the Heathen vanity was most mutable. His whole
demeanor was so perfectly Royal, that his enemies revered him with the
greatest observance: His Illustrious Conquerours strove with emulation to
administer to him Royal Furniture, Provisions and Plate, and scarce could
Burbon, Lanoy, and Daualus be persuaded to sit down with him, though they had
his command so to do.

12. In the Person of the great Sfortia, Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 41.
p. 139. Zui^. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 286.
all other things did so answer to that military reputation and glory he did
acquired, that being oftentimes in the same habit with many of his Attendants,
and at other times alone without any retinue, yet was he easily discerned and
saluted as the chief and Prince of the rest, by the Contrymen, and such
Rusticks as had never before seen him.

13. Alexander the Great, Aelian. var* Hist. l. 12. c* 14. p. 3^9*
though he took little care of his body, is yet reported to be very beautiful,
he is said to have yellow ha^r, and his locks fell into natural Rings and
curles; besides which in the composure of his Face, there was something so
great and august, as begat a fear in them, that looked upon him.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Plut. in C. Mario, p. 428.
14. Caius Marius, being cast into the depth and extremity of misery, and in
great hazard of his life, was saved by the Majesty of his Person; for while he
lived in a private house at Minturn, there was a public Officer a Cimbrian by
Nation, that was sent to be his Executioner; he came to this unarmed, and at
that time squallid old Man, with his Sword drawn, but astonished at the noble
presence of so great a Man, he cast away his Sword and ran away trembling and
amazed. Marius had conquered the Cimbrian Nation, and perhaps it was this, that
helped to break the courage of him that came to kill him; or possibly the gods
thought it unworthy, that he should fall by a single person of that Nation, who
had broke and triumphed over the whole strength of it at once. The Minturnians
also themselves, when they had taken and bound him, yet moved with something
they saw of extraordinary in him, suffered him to go at liberty, though the
late Victory of Sylla was enough to make them fear, they should e're long
repent it.

15. Ludovicus Pius King of France, had many virtues worthy of a King and
Hero: Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 41. p. 141.
This is also remembered of him; that upon the taking of Damiata, he was
circumvented and taken by Melaxala, the Sultan of Egypt; when unequal terms
were proposed unto him, he refused them with great constancy, and although he
was in great danger amongst such as had slain their own Sultan, and though
while he lay sick they rushed upon him with their drawn Swords, either to kill
him, or force him to subscribe to unequal conditions; yet with the Majesty of
his Face, and that Dignity that was in his countenance, he restrained their
fierceness, so that they desisted to afford him further trouble.

16. Alphonsus King of Arragon, is famous for the like Majesty and Princely
constancy, Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 41. p. 141.
of whom after in a Naval fight he was taken Prisoner by the Genoans; Panulphus
Collenutius, thus relates; that he bare such a countenance, was of that Majesty
and constancy, that as well by Sea as Land, at Millain and in all other places,
he commanded and was obeyed, in no other manner than if he had been free and a
Conqueror. For to omit other things when he was brought before Ischia, and the
Captain of the Ship wherein he was, spoke to him, that he should command that
City to submit it self to the Genoeses; he gallantly replied, that he would not
do it, and that he hoped they should not gain a stone of his jurisdiction
without Arms and blood, for he well knew that none of his Subjects would obey
any such command while he remained a Captive; he so confounded the Captain,
that Blasius the Admiral was constrained to appease him with fair words, and to
declare that the Captain had not spoken this by any order from him, but that it
was the effect of his own imprudence. So that it was commonly said, that
Alphonsus alone, in whatsoever fortune he was, was deservedly a King, and ought
so to be called.

P^zel. Mell. Hist. Tom. 2. p. 223.
17. Philippus Arabs having obtained the Empire, in his Journey toward Rome,
made his Son C. Julius Saturnius co-partner with him in that honor. Of this
young Prince it is said, that he was of so severe and grave a countenance, and
disposition, that from five years of Age he was never observed to laugh, and
thereupon was called Agelastus; nothing how ridiculous soever could provoke him
to a smile: and when the Emperor in the secular Plays brake out into an effuse
laughter, he as one that was ashamed or displeased thereat, turned away his
face from him.

18. Cassander having made Olympias (the Mother of Alexander the Great) his
Prisoner, Pezel. Me^^. Tom. 1. p. 420.
and fearing the inconstancy of the Macedonians that they would one time or
other create him some trouble in favor of her; sent Soldiers with express
command to kill her immediately. She seeing them come toward her obstinate and
armed, in a Royal Robe and leaning upon two Maids, of her own accord she set
forward to meet them. At sight of her, her intended Murderers stood
astonished, revering the Majesty of her former fortune, and the names of many
of their Kings that were so nearly related to her. They therefore stood still,
but the Kindred of those whom Olympias had formerly put to death; that at once
they might gratify Cassander, and revenge the dead, these slew the Queen,
while she neither declined the Sword nor wounds, nor made any feminine outcry,
but after the manner of gallant Men, and agreeable to the glory of her ancient
stock, received her death; That Alexander himself might seem to be seen to die
in the person of his Mother.

19. When Alexander the Great was dead, Just. Hist. 1. 13. p. 153.
his Soldiers were in expectation of Riches, and his Friends to succeed him in
the Empire; and they might seem the less vain in such expectation, seeing they
were Men of that virtue, and Princely port, that you would have thought each of
them a King; such Majesty and beauty in the countenance, such stature and
talness of body, so great strength and wisdom, was conspicuous in all of them;
that they who knew them not, would have concluded they had been chosen, not out
of any one Nation, but out of all the parts of the World. And certainly before
that time, neither Macedon nor any other Nation could ever boast of the
production of so many gallant and Illustrious persons at once, whom Philip
first, and after him his Son Alexander had selected with that care, that they
seemed to be made choice of, not so much to assist in the Wars, as to succeed
in the Government. What wonder is it then that the whole World was subdued by
such able Ministers, when the Army of the Macedonians was conducted by as many
Kings as Captains, who had never found their equals, unless they had fallen out
amongst themselves; and Macedon instead of one, had had many Alexanders, unless
Fortune (in emulation of one another's virtue) had armed them to their mutual
destruction.

20. Guntherus Bishop of Babenberg died in the year of our Lord 1064. in his
journey as he was traveling toward Jerusalem and the Holy Land. Zuin. Theat.
Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 284.
This Prince besides the composedness of his Life, and the riches of his mind,
was also remarkable for the ornaments and perfections of the body; for in
respect of the height of his stature, the beauty and Princely gravity of his
Face, and the frame and deportment of his whole body, wherein he so excelled
all Mortals; that as he passed along in his journey toward Jerusalem, the
people flocked out of the Cities and Fields, for no other purpose but to have a
sight of him, so great a Fame there went of his perfections both in body and
mind.

CHAP. XIX. Of the signal deformity, and very mean personage of some great
persons and others.
THe Philosopher advises young men frequently to contemplate their Faces in a
Glass, that if they were fair, and well featured, they might thence be provoked
to an endeavor, to make the Beauties of their Minds answerable to that of
their Bodies: And if they were misshapen and disfigured, they might strive to
recompense the disadvantagious appearance of their outside, by the acquired
Ornaments of Learning and Virtue. This advice has been followed so well by some
of those that were none of the handsomest; that their dark Lanthorns have been
provided with very glorious Lights; and they have outdone others in the
accomplishments of their minds, as much as others have surpassed them in the
lineaments of the Body: The rest have remained monstrous in both, with
lamentable distortions within and without.

Bakers Chr. p. 337. Dan. Hist. Engl. l. 3. p. 256.
1. Of Richard the Third, once King of England, it is thus remembered, that of
Body he was but low, crook'd-back, hook-shouldred, splay-footed, and
gogle-ey'd, his Face little and round, his complexion swarthy; his left Arm
from his birth, dry and withered; born a Monster in Nature, with all his Teeth,
with Hair on his Head, and Nails on his Fingers and Toes, and just such were
the qualities of his Mind.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 15. p. 355* 356. Erasm. Adag. Drexel. oper. l. 3. c. 8.
2. p. 424. Plutarch. in Agesilao, p. 6116.
2. Agesilaus King of Sparta, in his old age went with succors to Tacchas King
of Egypt: before he landed, there was a mighty number and concourse of the
Egyptians upon the shore, to behold the great Captain, of whom there went such
an extraordinary fame. They had preconceived they should see a glorious person
in sumptuous habit, a splendid retinue, and a countenance and stature
comparable with that of the Ancient Heroes: when out-came he, in a short and
course Cloak, nothing different from the meaner sort, his stature very small,
and an aspect that promised little; he was therefore openly contemned and jests
made upon him: Is this (said they) the Anchor of our Hope? Is this the Restorer
of a broken State? the Mountain was in travail, and Jupiter in a fright; and at
last it was delivered of a Mouse: but ere long he that was thus despised,
approved himself a Soldier and Leader no whit below but above the fame that
went of him.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 15. p. 356, 357. Plut. parallel. p. Polyb. Drexell.
oper. l. 3. c. 8. 2. p. 424. Patrit. de r^gno, l. 2. tit. 3. p. 88.
3. The great Philopoemen was a person, of a very mean presence, and one that
neglected the Ornaments of the Body; for both which he sometimes did Penance:
once going to Megara, he sent one before to tell his friend, he would be his
guest in the Evening: who upon the news went straight to the Market to seek for
provisions; leaving order with his Wife, to put the House in such order as
might suit with the entertainment of so great a Guest. Philopoemen outstrip'd
his retinue, and came sooner than was thought of* and the Woman supposing him
by the meanness of his outside, to be one that was sent before, set him to
cleave wood for the fire; which he was busily about, when his friend returns
from the Market, and amazed to see him thus employed: What, said he, does
Philopoemen thus dishonor himself and me? The other smiling, replied, I am
now, said he, doing Penance for my ill Face, and my bad Clothes.

4. Socrates the Philosopher is said to be flat-nos'd, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l.
2. p. 287.
bald headed, to have hairy Shoulders, and crooked Legs: and therefore when his
two Wives, Xantippe and Myrto, in a jealous fit of each other were scolding
together: Why, said he, do you two handsome Women fall out about a man whom
Nature has made so deformed?

5. Atila, Zuin. ibid. p. 288. Sab. l. 1. Ennead. 8. p.
King of the Hunns (sirnam'd the wrath of God, by reason of those horrible
devastations he made) is thus described: he was low of Stature, broad and flat
breasted; his Head greater than ordinary: his Eyes very small, his Beard thin,
his Nose flat; the color of his body livid, and his Eyes were continually
rolling about.

6. Haly, Busbeq. Epist. 3. p. 115.
Bassa of Epirus, and a great Warrior in the time of Solomon, Emperor of the
Turks, is thus described by Busbequius. He was, says he, an Eunuch: but what
was taken from his body, seemed to be added to his mind: He was of low Stature,
his Body was puffed up; of a yellowish color, his Aspect sad; his Eyes had
something of cruel in them; he had broad and high Shoulders, and his Head sunk
down betwixt them: he had two Tushes like those of a Boar, that hung out of his
mouth, and his voice was hoarse. In a word, he seemed to us the fourth Fury.

7. Gillias, Diodor. Sic. Bibl. l. 13. p. 366.
a rich Citizen of Agrigentum; the same who was called the very Bowels of
Liberality, in respect of his mavelous Hospitality; was sent Ambassador to
the Centoripines; and when he made his appearance amongst the multitude that
were on purpose convened, his presence was so mean and despicable, in respect
of what they had expected, that all the assistants brake out into a sudden and
unseasonable laughter at the sight of him, which he observing, told them, That
they had the less cause to wonder at what they saw, seeing it was the custom of
Agrigentum, to send Ambassadors suitable to the places they went to; mean
Personages to mean and base Cities; and Men of the most excellent form, to such
places as were of Reputation and Dignity.

8. A certain Emperor of Germany coming by chance into a Church upon a Sunday,
Clark's mirror, c. 84. p. 367. Fitzherb. of Relig. and policy, part 1. c. 8. p.
59. Fuller. Guil. Malmesbury, p. 38.
found there a most misshapen Priest, Pene portentum Naturae, almost a monster
in Nature, insomuch as the Emperor scorned and contemned him, but when he
heard him read those words in the Service; For it is he that made us, and not
we our selves: The Emperor checked his own proud thoughts, and made enquiry
into the quality and conditions of the man, and finding upon examination, that
he was a very Learned and Devout Person, he made him Archbishop of Colen* which
place he discharged with singular fidelity, and much commendation.

9. Aesopus, Coel. Rhod. A. L. l. 15. c. 26. p. 707 Heidseld. in Sphing. c. 15.
p. 335.
that famous Apologist, and composer of Fables, is said to have had a body more
deformed than that of Thersites: It is reported that he was a Black, and
thereupon had his name; for that Aesop, and Aethiope have the same
signification; he was also extremely crooked, hook shouldered; large and high
bellied, and flat nosed; but Nature made him amends for this his deformity, by
giving him a most admirable Wit.

10. When Croesus King of Lydia, a most wise Prince, Fitzherb. of Relig. and
policy. part 1. c. 8. p. 59.
invited Anacharsis the Philosopher to come to his Court; he wrote thus of
himself: That although Nature had made him deformed, crookback'd, one Eyed,
lame of a Leg, a Dwarf, and as it were, a Monster amongst Men; yet he thought
himself so monstrous in nothing; as in that he had no Philosopher in his Court
and of his Council.

Patrit. de regno, l. 2. tit. 3. p. 89.
11. Xantippus a Lacedemonian, was the General of the Carthaginians, at such
time as they took prisoner Attilius Regulus; this Man was of a horrid and
truculent Aspect; his personage made no show of dignity or comeliness, and his
stature was very small; but with these disadvantages, he had a sharp Wit, and a
body so strong, that he was too hard for those, that were much taller than
himself.

Patrit. de regno, l. 2. tit. 3. p. 88.
12. Tyrteus, the Poet, who was appointed by the Oracle to be the Leader of the
Spartans against the Messenians, and under whose conduct they became
victorious, after they had been three times overthrown by their Enemies; was of
a foul and contemptible Aspect, and lame of one Foot; insomuch, as he was
scoffed at by those whom he came to assist; but they soon found how much so
deformed a person was able to contribute to their successes; for he so enflamed
their crest-fallen courages by his verses, that they resolved rather to dye,
than return without conquest.

Burton's Melanch. part 2. 3. p. 290. Diodor. Sic. r^r. Antiq. l. 1. c. 2. p.
30.
13. Boccharis was a most deformed Prince, as ever Egypt had: Yet as Diodorus
Siculus says of him, in Wisdom and Knowledge he went far beyond all his
Predecessors.

14. Crates the Theban was a wise Philosopher, yet of a deformed Aspect, and
crooked, insomuch, that when he exercised himself, he was commonly derided by
all the bystanders. Then would he lift up his hands and say, L^^rt. vit.
Philos. l. 6. p. 159, 160.
Courage Crates in respect of thine Eyes, and the rest of thy Body; for thou
shall shortly see those that deride thee consumed with diseases: and then
detesting their own sloth, they will begin to applaud him whom they so lately
scorned.

Plut. Moral. in Sympos. Quaest. l. 1. p. 653.
15. As it is said of Plato, that he was bunch-back'd, and of Aristotle that he
did stammer and stutter in his Speech: So we read of Agamesor an Academick
Philosopher, that amongst other deformities, he had a withered Leg, and nothing
left thereof but skin and bone, yet a wise and prudent person: for being once
met with some others at a Feast, all the other by way of mockery insulted upon
him, and made a law amongst themselves, that they should all stand upon their
right Leg, and every one so drink his Bowl of Wine, or else pay a piece of
Money as a forfeiture. Now when it came to Agamesors turn to command, he
charged all to drink in that manner, as they saw him drink: then called he for
an earthen pitcher with a narrow mouth; into which, when he had thrust his poor
consumed Leg, he poured a cup of Wine and drank it off; and when all the rest
had assayed, and found they could not do as he did, they were all enforced to
pay the forfeiture, and had the malignity of their scoffing at him, returned
upon themselves.

CHAP. XX. Of the great resemblance and likeness of some men in Face, Feature,
etc. to others.
THe Faces of Men are little Tablets, which (though but small in compass) the
skilful Hand of the great Artificer has wisely drawn over with such infinite
variety; that amongst the millions of millions, wherewith this Globe of Earth
is furnished, there is not any two of them to be found, that are in all points
so alike, but that they carry certain Marks upon them, whereby they are
distinguishable from each other; were it not for this, no man could know to
whom he is indebted, by whom he has been injured, or to whom he is beholden;
the murderer would be concealed in a crowd, and the world would be full of
incests and adulteries. As for those few that are extremely like, they are
rarities that serve rather to administer to our pleasure, than our fears,
through any error or mistake, that may arise about them.

1. Nicholas and Andrew Tremain were Twins and younger Sons to Thomas Tremain,
Fullers worthies, p. 266. Devonshire.
of Colecomb in the County of Devonshire Esquire, such their likeness in all
lineaments, they could not be distinguished, but by their several habits, which
when they were pleased in private confederacy to exchange for disport, they
occasioned more mirthful mistakes, than ever were acted in the Amphitruo of
Plautus; they felt like pain, though at distance, and without intelligence
given, they equally desired to walk, travel, sit, sleep, eat, drink together,
as many credible Gentry of the Vicinage (by relation from their Father will
attest) In this they differed, that at Newhaven in France, the one was a
Captain of a Troop, and the other but a private Soldier, here they were both
slain, 1564. death being pitiful to kill them together, to prevent the
lingering languishing of the survivor.

2. Artemon, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 14. p. 273. Plin. l. 7. c. 12. p. 161. Solin.
c. 5. p. 185, 186.
a mean man amongst the Commons, was so like in all points to Antiochus King of
Syria, that Laodice the Queen, after that Antiochus her Husband was killed,
served her own turn by him, and made him play the part of Antiochus, until she
had by his means, as in the King's person, recommended whom she would, and made
over the Kingdom and Crown in succession and reversion, to whom she thought
good.

3. Vibius a poor Commoner of Rome, Plin. l. 7. c. 12. p. 161. Val. Max. l. 9.
c. 14. p. 272. Solin. c. 5. p. 186.
and Publicius, one newly of a bondslave made a freedman; were both of them so
like unto Pompey the great, that the one could very hardly be discerned from
the other. So lively did they represent that good Visage of his, so full of
honesty; so fully did they resemble and express the singular Majesty that
appeared in the forehead of Pompey.

4. The Father of Pompey called Strabo, Plin. ibid. p. 161. Val. Max. ibid. p.
273.
had yet the additional surname of Menogenes, which was his Cook and Slave, and
this merely, because he so much resembled him.

5. One of the Scipio's was sirnam'd Serapius, Plin. ibid. p. 161. Val. Max.
ibid. p. 273.
for that a base Slave of his, no better than a Swine-herd of that name, did so
nearly resemble him. Another of the Scipio's of the same House, after him was
called Salutio, because a certain Jester of that name was so like unto him.

Plin. ibid. p. 161. Val. Max. ibid. p. 273. Soll^. c. 5. p. 186.
6. After the same manner, one Spintber and Pamphilus, two Players, gave their
names to Lentulus and Metellus, who were both Consuls together in one year; and
that because they resembled them so much; contrariwise Rubrius the Stage Player
was surnamed Plancus, because he was so like unto Plancus the Orator.

Plin. ibid. p. 162. So^in. c. 5. p. 186.
7. Burbuleius and M^nogenes, both Players of Interludes, so resembled Curio the
Elder, and Messala Censorius, that though this latter had been Censor, neither
of them could avoid the being surnamed after them.

Plin. ibid. p. 162. Solin. c. 5. p. 186.
8. There was in Sicily a certain Fisherman, who resembled in all points Sura
the Proconsul, not only in visage and feature of the Face, but also in putting
out his mouth when he spoke, in drawing his Tongue short, and in his huddle and
thick Speech.

Plin. ibid. p. 162. Solin. c. 5. p. 187.
9. Toranius, a Merchant Slave seller, sold unto Marcus Antonius one of the
greatest Triumvirs, two most beautiful and sweet faced Boys for Twins, so like
they were one to the other; albeit, the one was born in Asia, and the other
beyond the Alps: But when Antonius came after to the knowledge thereof; and
that the fraud was bewrayed by the Language of the Boys; he sell into a furious
sit of choler, rating Toranius that he had made him pay two hundred Sesterces
as for Twins, and they were none such. The wily Merchant answered that it was
the cause, why he held and sold them at so dear a rate: For, said he, it is no
marvel if two brethren Twins, who lay in the same Womb resemble one another;
but that there should be any sound, born as these were in diverse Countries, so
like in all respects as they, he held it as a most rare and wonderful thing.
Antonius at this was appeased, and well contented with his Bargain.

Plat. obs. l. 3 p. 752.
10. Anno 1598. There were with us at Basil two Twin-brothers, who were born at
one Birth in the seventh Month 1538. they were so like to one another in the
features of the Body, that I have often spoke to the one instead of the other,
though both were very well known to me; and that they had been frequently
conversant with me: Nay, they were so like in their natural inclinations, that
as they often have told me, what the one thought, has secretly come into the
mind of the other, at the same time; if the one was sick, the other was not
well; as it fell out when one was absent and sick in Campania, the other at the
same time was sick at Basil.

Mersenn. Quaest. and Comment. in G^n. p. 124. Henri^. Steph. in Apolog. pro
Herodo^. p. 7.
11. Martinus Guerre, and Arnoldus Tillius, in features and lineaments of the
Face were so exceedingly alike, that when Martinus was gone abroad to the Wars,
Tillius by the near resemblance of his form, betrayed the chastity of Martinus
his Wife; and not only so, but imposed upon four of his Sisters, and diverse
others both Neighbors and Kindred, who were not able to discover the
difference betwixt them, and which is the strangest of all, he lived with this
Woman as her Husband for some years together, the companion both of her board
and bed.

Xiphil. in Nerone.
12. Sporus the freed-man of Nero the Emperor, was very like unto Sabina, a
most beautiful Lady, beloved also by the same Emperor; he so resembled her in
all lineaments, that Nero caused him to be cut, that so instead of Sabina, he
might filthily use him as his beloved Lady.

13. Medardus and Gerardus were Twin-brothers and French men, Fulgos. l. 1. c.
6. p. 188. Kornma^de mi^a^. mortuor. l. 8. c. 10. p. 7.
they were not only born one and the same day, but also both of them in one day
preferred to Episcopal Dignity; the one to the Sea of Rhotomage, and the other
to that of Noviodunum; and lest any thing should be wanting to this admirable
parity, they also both deceased in one and the same day: So that the
Philosophers, Hypoclides and Polystratus, are no way to be preferred before
these remarkable Twins; one of these Twins instead of Gerhardus, is called
Chiladius by Kornmannus.

14. Lucius Otho, Sutt^n. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 289. P^zel. M^^lis^^. Hist.
^om. 2. p. 169.
the Father of Otho the Emperor; (one of very Noble Blood by the Mothers side,
and of many great Relations) was so dear unto, and not so unlike unto Tiberius
the Emperor, that most men did verily believe he was begotten by him.

15. Even in our days we have heard of two young Children, Gas^^r. curiosities.
c. 6 p. 220.
which were Brothers at Riez, an Episcopal City of Provence in France, who
being per^ectly like one another, if one of them was sick, the other was so
too; if one began to have pain in the Head, the other would presently feel it;
if one of them was asleep or sad, the other could not hold up his Head, or be
merry: and so in other things, as I have been assured by Mr. Poitevin, a very
honest man, and a Native of that City.

16. At Mechlin there were two Twin-brothers, the Sons of Petrus Apostolius,
Vives in Aug. d^. Civit. d^s. l. 21. c. 8. p. 601. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 289
a Pr^dent Senator of that place (and at whose House Vives had friendly
entertainment) the Boys were both lovely to look upon, and so like, that not
only strangers, but the Mother her self often erred, in the distinction of them
whilst she lived; and the Father as often, by a pleasing error, calling Peter
for John, and John for Peter.

17. Babyrtus a Messenian, Polyb. Hist. l. 4. p. 274.
was a man of the meanest degree, and of a lewd and silthy life; but was so
like unto Dorymachus, both in the countenance, all the lineaments of the Body,
and the very voice it self; that if any had taken the Diadem and Robe of State,
and put it upon him, it would not have been easy to discover which was which;
whence it came to pass, that when Dorymachus, after many injuries to the
Messenians had also added threats to the rest of his insolence; Sciron one of
the Ephori there, a bold man and lover of his Country; said openly to him, Do
thou Babyrtus suppose, that we matter either thee or thy threats? at which he
was so nettled, that he rested not till he had raised a War against the
Messenians.

18. That in the two Gordiani is a most memorable thing, Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2.
p. 289 Sab^lic. l. 6. Enn^ad. 7. Pe^el. M^llisi^. Hist. tom. 2. p. 222.
that the Elder of them was so very like unto Augustus; that he not only
resembled him in the Face, but also in Speech, behavior and stature. The Son
of this man was exceeding like unto Pompey the Great, and the third of the
Gordiani, begotten by him immediately before mentioned; had as near a
resemblance to Scipio Asiaticus, the Brother of Scipio Affricanus the Elder: so
that in one Family there were the lively pourtraiture of three illustrious
persons, dead long before.

19. I have seen, Fulgos. l. 9. c. 15. p. 1349. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. ^90
says Fulgosus, amongst the Soldiers of Franciscus Sfortia the Duke of
Millain, a young man who did so resemble that countenance of his (then which
nothing was more amiable to look upon, nor more worthy of a Prince) that by the
general consent of the whole Court, he was called the Prince. Franciscus
himself, as he was most courteous in all things, not without pleasure did
sometimes contemplate his own Image in him, as in a Glass; and in most things
beheld and acknowledged his own gestures and voice.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 290.
20. Io. Oporinus, the Printer at Basil, was so like unto Henry the Eighth, King
of England, in the Face, but especially to Albertus the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, that they might well seem to be natural Brothers: there was also
this further similitude betwixt them; that as one filled all Germany with Wars,
so the other replensh'd all the Christian World with Books.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 15. p. 1349.
21. Sigismundus Malatesta, Prince of Ariminum, was so very like in all the
features of his Face to Marchesinus the Mimick, that when he went to Millain,
this Marchesinus was sent away elsewhere by Franciscus Sfortia, Duke of
Millain, and Father-in-law to Sigismundus (as being ashamed of him) for
Marchesinus in his prattle, by reason of this resemblance, used to call
Sigismond his Son.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 290.
22. A certain young Man came to Rome in the shape of his body so like unto
Augustus, that he set all the people at gaze upon that sight. Augustus hearing
of it, sent for the young man, who being come into his presence; Young man,
said he, was your Mother ever at Rome? he (discerning whither the Question
tended) No, Sir, said he, my Mother never was, but my Father has often,
wittily illuding the intended suspicion of his own Mother, and begetting a new
concerning that of Augustus.

Plut. in Pompeio. p. Zuing. ibid. p. 290.
23. Pompey the Great, carried such a resemblance in his Visage to the Statues
of Alexander the Great, that some called him Alexander; and Pompey himself
seemed not against it: So that Lucius Philippus, a consular person, one time
pleading for him, said that he did nothing absurd in that action; for seeing he
was Philip, it was no wonder, if he was a lover of Alexander.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 14. p. 273. Zuing. ibid. p. 289.
24. Hybreas the Mylasenian, an Orator of a cop^ous and quick Eloquence, was so
like unto a servant, that gathered up what was scattered in the Theater, that
the Eyes of all Asia designed him for his natural Brother, although he was not
in the least of kin to him.

Donat. Hist. mi^. l. 6. c. 2. p. 304.
25. Amatus Lusitanus tells of two Monks of the order of the Predicators, who,
though they were not of the same Country, yet were most like one to the other,
in age, temperature, and physiognomy; these two were in one and the same day
seized with a Pleurisy, and both on the same day restored to their health.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 32.
26. Polystratus and Hippoclides, were both Philosophers; they were both born
upon the same day, both followed the Sect of their Master Epicurus; and as they
were both School-fellows, so they equally participated of one and the same
Estate; being both arrived to a very great age, they both died in one and the
same instant of time: Such an equal society both in fortune and friendship who
can think otherwise but that it was begot, nourished and finished, in the very
bosom of a Heavenly Concord?

Stowes Annals, p. 325.
27. John Maudelen, a Priest, was Chaplain to King Richard the Second; and so
exceeding like him in all proportion and favor, that the one could not without
difficulty be discerned from the other; Many a time (says one) have I seen him
in Ireland ride with the King his Master, so fair a Priest and goodly a person
I had not lightly seen. When the Dukes of Excester and Surrey conspired against
Henry the Fourth, they made use of this man, and his likeness to the King; they
persuaded the people, that the King was escaped out of Pomfret Castle, and was
now amongst them, and to make them believe it the better, they put the Priest
in Armor with a Crown upon his Helmet, so as all men might take him for King
Richard. This cost the poor Priest dear, for soon after he was executed for
Treason at London, by command of King Henry.

28. I have heard a Gentleman yet living say, Sandys in Ovid. met. l. 3. p. 60.
that his Mother knew not his Brother from him, but by the treading of their
Shoes; that when they were Scholars, both of them were ordinarily whipped for the
offense of one; and that being bound Apprentices to two Merchants in London,
they would ordinarily wait in one another rooms undiscovered by their Masters,
or any other of the Family.

29. Cambyses, Justin. Hist. l. 1. p. 23, 24.
King of Persia, dreamed that his Brother Smerdis sat upon the Throne as King
of Persia; troubled at this, he made choice of Comaris, one of the Magi, from
amongst the rest of his friends, and sent him away with orders to kill his
Brother: Cambyses in the mean time by a fall upon his Sword received his death
in Egypt-Comaris understanding the Kings death before the fame of it was
arrived to Persia, executed his former order, and had privily made away Smerdis
the Kings Brother, which done, he set his Brother Oropastes (by some also
called Smerdis) upon the Throne instead of Smerdis. Two things there were which
served well to help forward his design, one was, that amongst the Persians, the
King is but very seldom seen, and the contrary is thought a diminution to his
Majesty: A second thing that preserved the fraud from being detected, was, that
Smerdis the Kings Brother, and this Counterfeit Oropastes were so extremely
like both in the features of their Face, and the lineaments of their Bodies;
that by these means, and the diligence of the Magi, he held the Kingdom, till
such time as by the industry of a Nobleman, called Orthanes, the whole plot was
revealed, and the design overthrown.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Heart; and in what manner it has been found in some Bodies.
SUch as are skilful in the way of Natures production and generation do assure
us, that of the Embryo in the Womb, the first part that is formed is the Heart;
which says Galen is the first root of all the entrails and members of the
Body, and the very fountain of Life, and of all innate and vital heat. It is
(say the Peripateticks) in a Humane Body, as the first intelligence is in the
World, and as a kind of Monarch in the little World. The substance of it is
therefore more solid and compact, both that it may be the less obnoxious to
receive damage, or harm; as also, the better to preserve the vital heat and
spirit, which would soon breath out and vanish away from it, were it of greater
rarity and softness. What curiosities have been found in this little Cabinet,
upon the death of its owner, together With other not unpleasant observations
about it, takes as follows.

Petrus Servius in dissertat. de Unguent. Armario, p. 49, 50. Howels Epistles,
vol. 1. 6. Ep. 43. p. 234.
1. Richard London, of London, a person learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues;
and an assistant Physician in our Hospital of the holy Ghost; has set down in
Latin the Epitome of a History written originally in English by Edward May: in
this manner, Anno 1637. October. 7. in London, at the opening of the Body of John
Pe^n^nt, his Heart was found globular, more broad than long; the right
Ventricle of it was of an ashy color, wrinkled, and like a leathern Purse
without Money; we found nothing in it; and the Water of the pericardium was
perfectly dried up. The left Ventricle of his heart was three times bigger than
the right, and seemed as hard as a stone, upon incision the blood gushed out,
and in it was found a fleshy substance wrapped in various folds like a Serpent;
the body of it was white, as the skin of a man, but slippery, transparent, and
as it was painted over; it had Legs or Arms of a fleshy color, Fibers or
Nerves (call them as you please) were found in it; the body of it were hollow,
but otherwise solid; in length a Roman Palm of the lesser sort; it had a Gut,
Vein, Artery, or somewhat Analogous, subservient to the uses of Nature) found
in it.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 1. obs. 130. p. 121.
2. There was a man, who at several times was exceedingly troubled with fainting
fits, and a strange palpitation of the Heart, at last overcome with his Malady,
he sudden died: at the opening of his body, there was found sticking to the
right Ventricle of his Heart* a Worm, it was dead, the color of it black, and
in shape like to those Worms that are bred in Wood.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 1. obs. 131. p. 122.
2. There was a bold Thief who had been often seized with a palpitation of the
Heart, being apprehended, he was adjudg'd to the Wheel by the Magistrate; my
self with two more of my Colleagues, desirous to see the Heart of this Man; (as
soon as his Body was divided into four quarters) cut it open, yet beating; and
in the right Ventricle of it, we found three stones, of the bigness of a pease,
of an ash color, somewhat long, and of the weight of one dram; these were
not only seen, but wondered at, by diverse persons of Learning and Curiosity.

Wierus de praestig. Demon. l. 4. c. 16. p. 315.
4. Upon the dissection of the Body of the Emperor M^ximilian the Second; there
were found in his Heart three stones of the bigness of a pease, one bigger than
the other, of a redish or rusty color, by reason of these he had in his life
time been much a^flicted with the palpitation of the Heart.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 2. obs. 1. p. 259
5. Hieronymus Schreiberus leaving Italy came to Paris, Anno 1549. and under
Sylvius, Fernelius, and Hollerius studied Physic: In March the year aforesaid,
he fell into a violent and unknown Disease, and in May following died of it,
his body was opened, and when the substance of the heart was cut* therein was
found a stone, big as a Nutmeg, hard, somewhat black colored, round, and
weighing some drams, which his Masters and others taking in their hands, not
only saw but wondered at.

Columb. Anatom. l. 15. p. 4^2.
6. In the dissection of the body of Cardinal Gambara Brixianus at Rome, I found
^aith Columbus a very hard tumor in the left ventricle of his Heart, which was
of the bigness of an Egg.

Ioh. Riolan. Anthropog^aph. l. 3. p. 370.
7. Within the right ventricle of the heart near the ori^ice of the Vena Cava,
in such persons as die suffocate with sudden and unexpected death, there are
sometimes found pieces of fleshy substance, growing together to the bigness of
a Man's fist, as was lately found by my self in the heart of the Bishop of St.
Maloes.

8. Anno Dom. 1602. there were these wonders seen in the hearts of two
Polonians who were Brethren, Ioh. Riolan. ibid. p. 370*
the heart of the one was solid without any Ventricles; but toward the Basis
of the Heart, the Vessels were exceedingly dilated; and those Anastomoses,
which are in the foetus did remain; the Heart of the other Brother had in the
middle Sept of it a remarkable glandule.

9. Anno 1644. Ba^thol. Hist. Anatom. ^^nt. 2. Hist. 45. p. 211.
The Body of Pope Urban the Eighth was opened (in order to the embalming of it)
By Io. Trullus, an excellent Anatomist, and in the left Ventricle of his Heart
there was found a triangular bone in form of the letter (T) as also five stones
in his gall, each of them of the bigness of an Hazel Nut.

10. Upon the dissection of the Body of a Rustic, who died at Copenhagen,
Barthol. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 77. p. 112.
of a consumption, his Heart was found so vast, that oftentimes that of an Ox
is neither bigger nor more weighty; the left Ventricle (as yet unopened) felt
more hard than usual, to the touch, which begat suspicion, that a Cartilage
might be bred there, like to those that are found in the Hearts of Stags; nor
were we mistaken; for at the Root of the Aorta, there was a three corned bone,
resembling the figure of a Heart, or the Letter (Y) but the bone was somewhat
spungy, and friable, not unlike to some of those stones that are voided by
Urine.

11. I dissected a Scholar at the Academy at Rome, Columb. Anatom. l. 15. p.
489.
in the presence of that excellent Physician Alexander Trajanus Petronius; the
Heart of the miserable young man was found without its pericardium; by reason
of which he fell into frequent Syncope's, and of this kind of disease he died.

12. We read of some Hearts quite dried and shrunk up for want of the Water in
the pericardium, Schenck. obs. Med. l. 2. obs. 5. p. 254.
such was the Heart of Casimire Marquess of Brandenburg, which was like unto a
roasted Pear, and shrivelled up in that manner.

13. The Body of a Noble Roman (who dyed vexed with a continual disease) being
opened, Schenck. obs. l. 2. obs. 3. p. p. 258.
there was found in him no Heart at all, only the tunicle it was wrapped in, the
Heart it self, and every portion thereof, being dried up, and consumed by an
immoderate heat.

14. I remember when I was at Venice (says Muretus) there was a famous Thief
executed, Muret. variar. lect. l. 12. c. 10. p. 315.
and when he was cut open by the Executioner, his Heart was found all hairy.

15. Aristomenes the M^ssenian was a valiant person; Val. Max* l. 1. c* 8. p.
32.
he was several times taken by the Athenians, and shut up in prison, from
whence notwithstanding by admirable subtilty, he made his escape; but at
length, when they had retaken him, by reason of his craftiness they resolved to
make sure work with him; they cut out his Heart, and found it all hairy.

16. The Greeks write of that Hermogenes (whose Books of Rhetoric are yet
extant, Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 16. p. 170.
and composed with a great deal of wit) that his Heart both for bigness and
hairiness) was remarkable above t^ose of all other mortals.

17. Leonidas Plut. in paral.
, a Noble Spartan Captain, the same who kept the striats of Thermopylae against
the huge Army of Xerxes, where also he was slain. Xerxes in revenge of the
affront, caused his heart to be pulled out, and found it all rough with hair;
he lived Anno Mund^ 3470.

Plut. Cael. Rho. A. L. l. 4. c. 16. p. 170.
Lysander, a Lacedemonian Captain, under whose conduct Sparta overcame the
A^henians, he was a crafty man, one that cared not for oath or truth longer
than they served his turn; when he was dead, his Heart was found hairy: He
lived An. Mund. 3550.

Melch. Adam. vit. p. 37. Bark^dale Monum. literar. p. 1. Th^an. Hist. sui.
Temp. p. 65.
18. Zuinglius fighting valiantly in the foremost ranks of his party against the
Swissers, was by them beaten down and slain: after which his Body was cut into
four parts by the Enemy, and cast into the ^lames to be burnt to ashes: three
days after some of his friends came to the place, and amongst the ashes found
his Heart whole, and untoucht by the Fire. This was Anno Dom. 1531.

Bak^rs Chr. p. 463.
20. Upon the 14. of Febr. in the 30 year of Q. Marry, was Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury brought to the stake, where he first thrust his right hand into the
^ire (with which he had before subscribed a recantation) till it first, and
then his whole Body was consumed, only (which was no small miracle) his Heart
remained whole, and not once touched by the ^ire.

Virulam. Hist. of life and death Art. 15. tit. 32. p. 363.
21. I remember I have seen the heart of one that was bowell'd (as suffering for
high Treason) that being cast into the fire, leaped at first a foot and half in
height, and after by degrees lower and lower; for the space, as we remember, of
seven or eight minutes.

Za^ch. qu. Med. l^g. l. 5. tit. 2. p. 300.
22. Prosper Cecchinus a Roman Surgeon, related an accident above all
admiration. A certain Priest, in his madness had guelded himself, and
persisting in the same fury, he thrust himself with diverse stiff needles into
the Breast, under the lest Pap. At last, that is after five or six days, as he
had hated life; so he easily obtained death by these wounds. Upon the opening
of his Body, it appeared that all the Needles had pierced the very substance of
the Heart, with all which yet he could live as you have heard for several days.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 2. obs. 2. p. 262
23. A Student at Ingolstadht was stabbed into the left side by a Printer, the
wound was made in the substance of the Heart, a cross each Ventricle of it, and
yet being thus wounded, he ran the length of a pretty long street; and but only
so, but for almost an hour, he was so perfect in his senses, as to be able to
speak and to commend himself to God. His Body being opened after his death, all
the Professors of Physic, and not a sew of other spectators beheld the wound,
and by the form of it was able to discern of the kind of weapon it was made
with, and to speak to that purpose at the bar.

Barthol. Hist. Anatom. Cent. 1. Hist. 77. p. 112.
24. An insolent young man here at Copenhagen stabbed a Pilot with a knife,
betwixt the third and fourth rib on the left side. The wound reached the right
Venticle of the Heart, so that his Body being afterward opened, there was
found therein a round and crooked hole; yet thus wounded, he not only went out
of the Suburbs on foot to his own house, but lived after it for five days. As
far as I am able to conjecture (by reason of the narrowness and obliqueness of
this wound in the Heart, the lips of it falling together) the circulation of
the Blood was uninterrupted for so many days.

Ambro^. Par^y, l. 9. c. 30.
25. I saw, says Parry, a Noble man, who in a single Duel was wounded so
deeply, that the point of the Sword had pierced into the very substance of his
Heart; yet did he, notwithstanding (for a good while) lay about him with his
Sword, and walked two hundred paces before he fell down. After his death, the
wound was found to be the breadth of a ^inger, and a great quantity of blood in
the Diaphragma.

26. I knew, Schenck. obs. Med. l. 2. cap. obs. 11. p. 290.
says Cardan, Antonius Benzius, a man of 34 years of age; pale-faced, thin
bearded, and somewhat fat, out of whose Paps, such abundance of Milk issued, as
would almost suffice to suckle a child.

27. I knew one Lawrence Wolff, Schenck. ibid. p. 299*
a Citizen of Brisac, says Conradus Schenckius, who from his youth to the 55
th. year of his age, did so abound with Milk in both breasts; that by way of
mirth in their merry meetings, he would spirt Milk into the Faces of his
companions, who sat over against him. He was well known to all the inhabitants
for this faculty; yet did he find no pain, gravity, or tension in those parts.

CHAP. XXII. Of Giants, and such as have exceeded the common proportion in
Stature and height.
AS the tallest Ears of Corn, are the lightest in the Head; and Houses built
many stories high, have their uppermost rooms the worst furnished: so those
humane Fabrics, which Nature has raised to a Giant-like height, are observed
not to have had so happy a composition of the brain as other men; so that like
Pyramids of Egypt, they are rather for ostentation than use, and are remembered
in History not for any accomplishment of mind, but chiefly, if not only for the
stature of their Bodies.

1. Artachaees, Herodot. l. 7^ p. 4.419.
of the Family of the Achaemenidae, a person in great favor with Xerxes, was
the tallest man of all the rest of the Persians, for he lacked but the breadth
of four fingers of full five Cubits by the Royal Standard.

2. There was a young Giant, Scalig. de subtle. in Card. Exercit. 263. p. 804.
whom Julius Scaliger saw at Millain, who was so tall, that he could not stand
but lie along, extending his body the length of two beds joined together.

3. Walter Parsons born in Staffordshire, Fullers Worthies, p. 48.
Staffordshire.
was first Apprentice to a Smith, when he grew so tall, that a hole was made
for him in the ground to stand therein up the knees, so to make him adequate
with his fellow workmen; he afterward was Porter to King James; seeing as
Gates generally are higher than the rest of the Building; so it was sightly
that the Porter should be taller than other persons. He was proportionable in
all parts, and had strength equal to his height; valor to his strength, temper
to his valor, so that he disdained to do an injury to any single person; he
would make nothing to take two of the tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the
Gizzard and Liver) under his Arms at once, and order them as he pleased.

4. Williams Evans was born in Monmouthshire, Fullers Worthies Wales. p. 54.
Monmouthshi^e.
and may justly be counted the Giant of our age, for his stature being ^ull two
yards and a half in height, he was Porter to King Charles the First, succeeding
Walter Parsons in his place, and exceeding him two inches in height; but far
beneath him in equal proportion of Body, for he was not only what the Latins
call compernis, knocking his knees together, and going out squalling with bis
feet, but also halted a little; yet made he a shift to dance in an Antimask at
Court, where he drew little Ieffery the dwarf out of his Pocket, first to the
wonder, then to the laughter of the beholders.

Plin. l. 7. c. 16. p. 165. Solin. c. 5. p. 188.
5. The tallest man that has been seen in our age, was one named Gabara, who in
the days of Claudius the late Emperor, was brought out of Arabia: nine foot
high was he, and as many inches.

Barthol. Hist. Anatomic. Cent. 1. Hist. 98. p. 138.
6. I saw a young Girl in France, of eighteen years of age, who was of a Giant
like stature and bigness; and though she descended of Parents of mean and small
stature, yet was her hand such as might equal the hands of three men, if they
were joined together.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 276.
7. Iovianus the Emperor was of a pleasant countenance, grey-ey'd, of a vast
and huge stature; so that for a long time, there was no Royal Robe that was
found to answer the height of his body.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 276 Capitolin.
8. Maximinus the Emperor was eight foot and a half in height; he was a
Thracian, barbarous, cruel and hated of all men; he used the Bracelet or Armlet
of his Wife, as a Ring for his Thumb, and it is said, that his shoe was longer
by a foot, than the foot of another man.

Plat. obs. l. 3. p. 582.
9. I saw a young man of Lunenburg, called Iacobus Damman, who for his
extraordinary stature was carried throughout Germany to be seen, Anno 1613. he
was brought to us at Basil; he was then 22 years of age and a half; beardless
as yet, strong of body; and in all his limbs, save that at that time he was
somewhat sick and lean; he was eight foot high complete; the length of his hand
was one foot and a third, he surpassed the common stature of man two foot.

Zacch. qu. Med. legal. l. 7. tit. 1. p. 472. Delr. disquis. Magic.
10. Anno 1572. Martinus Delrius (as himself tells us) saw a Giant; the height
of whose body was full nine foot: And in the year 1600 (says Zacchias) I my
self saw another not inferior to the former in stature.

11. I saw (says Wierus) a Maid, who for the Gigantick proportion of her body,
was carried from one City and Country to another, Schenck. obs. Med. l. 6. obs.
6. p. 716
on purpose to be seen, as a monstrous representation of humane Figure. I
diligently enquired into all things concerning her* and (...) informed both by
the Mother, and her mighty Daughter, that both her Parents were but of low
stature, nor were there any of her Ancestors, who were remembered to exceed the
common stature of men: This Maid her self, to the twelfth year of her age, was
of a short and mean stature; but being about that time seized with a Quartane
Ague, after she had wrestled with it for some months, it perfectly left her;
and then she began to grow to that wonderful greatness; all her limbs being
proportionably answerable to the rest. She was then when I beheld her about
five and twenty years of age, to which time it had never been with her as is
usual to women; yet was she in good health; of feature not handsome, her
complexion somewhat swarthy, of a stupid and simple wit, and slow as to her
whole body: For The greater Virtue oftenest lies
In bodies of the middle size.


12. F^rdinand Magellane (before he came to those Straits, Clark's Mi^. c. 58.
p. 234. Purchase. Pilgr. vol. 1. p. 35.
which now bear his name) came to the Country of the Patagons, which are
Giants; some of these he enticed to come a Shipboard: they were of an huge
stature; so that the Spaniards heads reached but to their waste. Two of them he
made his Prisoners by policy; who thereupon roared like Bulls: their feeding
was answerable to their vast bulks; for one of them did eat at a meal, a whole
basket of Biskets; and drank a great bowl of water at each draught.

13. As I traveled by Dirnen, Plat. obs. Med. l. 3. p. 583.
under the jurisdiction of Basil, Anno 1565. I was showed a Girl of five years
of age, who was playing with the Children; she was of as vast a body, as if she
had been a woman of many years of age. After I had looked more nearly upon her
and measured, I found that her thighs were thicker than the neck of my Horse:
the calf of her legs bare the proportion of the thigh of a lusty and strong
man. Her Father and Mother being set together, might be compassed within the
girdle, which she commonly wore about her middle. Her Parents told me, that
before she was a year old, she weighed as much as a sack of wheat that held
eight modii. Anno 1566. I saw her again, for Count Henry of Fustenburg, lodging
at my house, she was brought to him, and there both of us admired at her
wonderful bigness, but in few years after she died.

14. That is a memorable Example of a Giant, Thuan. Hist. l. 61. Anno 1575.
Hak^w. Apolog. advert. 3. p. 9.
reported by Thuanus, Anno 1575. where discoursing of an inroad made by the
Tartarians upon the Polonian Territories, he there speaks of a Tartar, of a
prodigious bigness, slain by a Polander; his words are thus translated; Amongst
whom there was one found of a prodigious bulk, slain (says Leonardus Gorecius)
by James Niazabilovius: his forehead was twenty four fingers breadth, and the
rest of his body of that magnitude, that the carcass, as it lay upon the
ground, would reach to the navel of any ordinary person that stood by it.

15. There were in the time of Augustus Caesar two persons, Plin. l. 7. c. 16.
p. 165. Solin. c. 5. p. 187.
called Idusio and Secundilla, each of them was ten foot high, and somewhat
more; their bodies after their death were kept and preserved for a wonder in a
Charnel house or Sepulcher within the Salustian Gardens, vid. Kornman. de
mirac. vivor. 25.

16. In the 58 Olympiad, Solin. c. 5. p. 188.
by the admonition of the Oracle, the body of Orestes was found at Tegaea by
the Spartans, and we understand that the just length of it was seven Cubits.

17. The Son of Euthymenes of Salamina, Solin. c. 5. p. 188.
in the space of three years, grew up to three Cubits in height; but he was
slow of pace, dull of sense, a strong voice, and an overhasty adolescency; soon
after he was seized with manifold diseases, and by immoderate afflictions of
sickness, made an over amends for the precipitate celerity of his growth.

18. Anno 1584. In the Month of July, Plat. obs. Med. l. 3. p. 584, 585.
being at Lucerne, I was there showed by the Senators the fragments of some
bones of a prodigious greatness, kept in the Senate House. They were found in
the Territories, not far from the Monastery of Reiden, in a Cave of the
adjoining Mountain, under an old Oak, which the wind had blown down: When I had
considered them, and perceived most of the lesser sort, and such as are
thinnest (as the bones of the skull) to be wanting, whether neglected, or
consumed by age, I know not: I then turned over the greater sort, as well such
as were whole, as the remainders of such as were broken. Though they were
wasted, spungy and light, (yet as far as I could discern) I observed, that they
answered to the body of a man: I wrote upon each of them what they were; and I
the rather concluded them to be the bones of some Giant, because I found
amongst them the lowest bone of the thumb, a cheek-tooth, the heel-bone, the
shoulder-blades, the Cannel-bone, which are only found in man of that form.
Also the long and thick bones of the Thighs, Legs, Shoulders and Arms (the
utmost ends of which with their heads were found) and they differed in nothing
from the bones of a humane body. Having afterward all the bones sent me to
Basil (by the command of the Magistrates) and looking diligently upon them, and
comparing them with a skeleton of mine own (as well the whole as the broken) I
was confirmed in my opinion, and caused an entire skeleton to be drawn, of such
greatness, as all those bones would have made, if they had been whole and
together; it amounted to full nineteen foot in height: and since no Beast is
found of that stature, it is the more probable they were the bones of a Giant.

19. We find it left in the Monuments and Writings of the Ancients, Solin. cap.
5. p. 188. Korn^an. lib. de mimirac. vivor. p. 25.
as a most received truth, That in the Cretan War the Rivers and Waters rose to
an unusual height, and made sundry breaches in the earth: when the Floods were
gone, in a great cleft and fall of the earth there was found the carcass of a
man, of the length of thirty and three cubits. Lucius Flaccus the then Legate,
and Metell^s himself allured with the novelty of the repo^t, went on purpose to
the place to take view of it; and there they saw with their eyes that which
upon the hearsay they had refuted as a fable.

20. While I was writing of this Book, (that is, in December, 1671.) there came
to the City of Coventry one Mr. Thomas Birtles, a Cheshire Man, living near
unto Maxfeild; he had been at London, where, and in his journey homewards, he
made public show of himself, for his extraordinary stature: his just height,
as himself told me, was somewhat above seven foot, although upon trial it
appears to want something. His Father he said was a man of moderate stature,
his Mother was near two yards high: and he himself has a Daughter, who being
but about sixteen years of age, is yet already arrived to the height of six
foot complete.

^
21. Antonius was born in Syria in the reign of Theodosius, he exceeded the
measure of humane s^^ture; for he was five cubits high, and an hands breadth:
but his feet did not answer in proportion to the magnitude of his body. He
lived no longer than twenty five years, says Nicephorus.

(...) lib. 18. ca^. 6. p. 469.
22. Vitellius sent Darius the Son of Artabanus in hos^age to Rome with diverse
presents, amongst which there was a man seven cubits high, a Jew bo^^, he was
named Eleazar, and was called a ^^^nt by reason of his greatness.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Pygmeys and Dwarfs, and men much below the common height.
IN the former Chapter we had some of the works of Nature written in Text
Letters: here we are presented with some of her writing in Short Hand; wherein
many times she has been so happy to comprise much in a little compass. The
Elephant, though so vast of Bulk, is not yet so great a marvel as the smaller
sort of Insects, where we behold with equal pleasure and wonder how the Soul
acts in those narrow and strait confinements, as regularly, as where it has
much larger room. The like may be observed at least in some of those Examples
hereafter mentioned.

1. Iulia the Niece of Augustus had a little dwarfish fellow called Conopas,
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 16. p. 165.
whom she set great store by, and made much of; he was not above two foot and a
hands breadth in height; and Andromeda a freed Maid of Iulia was of the same
height.

2. Marcus Varro reports, Plin. Ibid. p. 165.
that Marius Maximus and Marcus Tullius were but two cubits high; and yet were
they both Gentlemen and Knights of Rome: and in truth we our selves have seen
their bodies, as they lie embalmed, which testify the same thing.

3. In the time of Theodosius, Camerar. hor. subcisiv. cent. 3.^ 79. p. 300.
Niceph. hist. Eccles. lib. 12. cap. 37. p. 379. Plater. observe. lib. 3.581.
there was seen in Egypt a pygmey, so small of body, that he resembled a
Partridge, yet did he exercise all the functions of a man, and could sing
tuneably; he lived to the twentieth year of his age.

4. I have seen some men of a very small stature, not by reason of any
crookedness in the spine of the Back, or Legs; but such as were so from their
Birth, though straight in all their Bones: of this number was John de Estrix of
Mechlen, whom I saw when he was brought through Basil to the Duke of Parma,
then in Flanders, anno 1592, he was aged 35, he had a long beard, and was no
more than three foot high; he could not go up stairs, much less could he get
upon a form, but was always lift up by a servant: he was skilled in three
tongues, ingenious and industrious; with whom a while I played at Tables.

5. There was about forty years ago, Plater. observe. lib. 3. p. 582. Iohnst.
not. hist. Class. 10. cap. 4. Artic. 2. p. 325.
a Dwarf whom I saw at the Court of Wirtemberg, at the Nuptials of the Duke of
Bavaria: the little Gentleman armed cap-a-pee, girt with a short Sword, and
with the like Spear in his hand, was put into a pie, that he might not be seen,
and the pie set upon the table; at last raising the Lid, and breaking loose
thence, he stepped out, drew his Sword, and after the manner of a Fencer,
traversed his ground upon the table, to the equal wonder and laughter of them
that were present.

6. M. Antonius is said to have had Sisyphus a Dwarf, who was not of the full
height of two foot, Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 277. Plater. obs. lib. 3. p. p.
582.
and yet of a vivid wit.

7. Anno 1610. I saw John Ducker an Englishman, whom some of his own Countrymen
carried up and down to get money by the sight of him. I have his picture by me,
drawn at full length; he was about forty five years of age, as far as might be
discerned by his face, which now began to be wrinkled; he had a long beard, and
was only two foot and an half high; otherwise of straight and thick Limbs, and
well proportioned. A less than he I have never seen.

Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 277. Sueton. p. 81. in Augusto. Macrob. Saturnal.
lib. 2. cap. 3. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 278.
8. Augustus Caesar exhibited in his plays one Lucius, a young man, born of
honest Parents: he was not full two foot high, says Ravisius, he weighed but
seventeen pounds, yet had he a great and strong voice.

9. Marcus Tullius Cicero had Quintus his own Brother, and Lentulus his
Son-in-law, who were both of them men of a very low and small stature, and he
put a jest upon each of them for it: when he came into the Province where his
Brother had been Prefect, and there beheld a statue representing his Brother,
done only to the waste, but huge, and a Shield in the arm of it: My half
Brother, said he, is much bigger than my whole. And seeing another time
L^ntulus girt with a long Sword: Who, said he, hastied my Brother to his Sword?

Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 278. Eunap. in Iamblic. Voss. instit. lib. 1. cap.
5. 19. p. 72.
10. In the time of Iamblicus lived Alypius of Alexandria, a most excellent
Logician, and a famous Philosopher, but of so small and little a body, that he
little exceeded the stature of those pygmeys who are said to be but a cubit
high. Such as beheld him would think he was scarce any thing but spirit and
soul: so little grew that part of him which was liable to corruption, that it
seemed to be consumed into a kind of divine nature.

11. Characus was a man of exceeding small stature, Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 2. p.
878. Burton's melanch. part. 2.. 3. p. 290.
yet was he the wisest counselor that was about Saladine that great
Conqueror of the East.

12. Anno Dom. 1306. Vladislaus Cubitalis, that pygmey King of Poland reigned,
and fought more Battles, and obtained more glorious victories therein, than any
of his long-shanked predecessors. Nullam virtus respuit staturam: Virtue
refuses no stature: but commonly vast Bodies and extraordinary Statures have
sottish, dull and leaden spirits.

13. Cardan says, that he saw a man at full age in Italy, Sandys in Ovid
Metam. lib. 6. p. 114.
not above a cubit high, carried about in a Parrots cage. This would have
passed my belief, had I not been told by a Gentleman of a clear reputation, how
he saw a man at Siena, about two years since, not exceeding the same stature. A
French man he was, of the Country of Limosin, with a formal Beard, who was also
shown in a Cage for money, at the end whereof was a little hutch, into which he
retired; and when the assembly was full, came forth, and played on an
instrument.

14. C. Licinius Calvus was an Orator of that reputation, Zuinger. Theatr. vol.
2. lib. 2. p. 278.
that he a long time contented with Cicero himself, which of them two should
bear away the prize, and chiefest praise of eloquence; yet was this man of a
very small and low stature. One time he had pleaded in an action against Cato;
and when he saw that Asinius Pollio, who was the accuser, was compassed about
with the Clients of Cato in Caesar's Market place, he required them about him to
set him upon some turfs thereby; being got upon these, he openly swore, that in
case Cato should do any injury unto Asinius Pollio, who was his accuser, that
then he himself would swear positively to that whereof he had been accused. And
after this time Asinius Pollio was never hurt either in word or deed, either by
Cato, or any of his Advocates.

Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 2. lib. 2. p. 278.
15. There were two of the Molones, who were remarkable for the noted brevity
and shortness of their stature, the one of them was an Actor in Plays and
Interludes, the other was a famous Robber by the high way; both of them were so
little, that the name of them passed into a Proverb, men using to say of a
little man, that he was as very a dwarf as Molon.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the mighty Force and Strength of some persons.
THe Northern Nations have made frequent invasions and irruptions into the
Southern parts, wherein as an irresistible torrent they have born all away
before them; yet it is observed they never established any durable Empire
there: the reason is said to be, because the Southern wit in the upshot has
always proved an overmatch for the Northern Strength. What might we not expect
from an able body in conjunction with a fertile brain, when we see such wonders
performed by each of them single? Admirable are the instances of bodily
strength from the relations of most credible Authors.

1. A few years since there was one Venetianello, Wier. depraes^ig. da^. lib.
1. cap. 18. p. 57.
well known throughout all Italy, a famous Dancer upon the Ropes; a Venetian by
birth, and called Venetianello because of the lowness of his stature: yet was
he of that strength and firmness, that he broke the thickest shank bones of
Oxen upon his knee, three pins of Iron as thick as a man's finger, wrapping
them about with a Napkin, he would twist and writhe as if they were softened by
fire. A beam of twenty foot long, or more, and a foot thick, laid upon his
shoulders, sometimes set on end there, he would carry without use of his hands,
and shift from one shoulder to another. My Son Theodorus was an eyewitness of
all this, and related it to me.

2. George l' Feur a learned German, Hakewell Apol. lib. 3. cap. 5. 4. p. 214,
215.
writes, that in his time in the year 1529, there lived at M^saia in Thuring,
one called Nicholas Klunher, Provost of the great Church, who was so strong, as
without Cable or Pulley, or any other help, he fetched up out of a Cellar a
Pipe of Wine, carried it out of doors, and laid it upon a Cart.

3. I have seen a man (says Mayolus an Italian Bishop) in the town of Aste,
Hakewell Ibid. p. 214. Sandys on Ovid. Metam. lib. 9. p. 178.
who in the presence of the Marquess of Pescara, handed a pillar of Marble
three foot long, and one foot in Diameter, the which he cast high in the air,
then received it again in his arms; then lashed it up again, sometime after one
fashion, sometime after another, as easily as if he had been playing with a
Ball, or some such little thing.

There was (says the same Author) at Mantua, Hakew. Ib. p. 215.
a Man called Rodomas, of little stature, but so strong, that he brake a Cable
as big as a man's arm, as easily as if it had been a small twine-thred. Mounted
upon a Horse, and leading another by the bridle, he would run a full career,
and stop in the midst of his course, or when it liked him best.

5. Froysard (a Man much esteemed for the truth and ^idelity of his History)
reports that about two hundred years since, Hakew. Ib. p. 215.
was one Ornando Burg a Spaniard, he was companion to the Earl of Foix: one
time attending the Earl, he accompanied him into a higher room, to which they
ascended by twenty four steps: the weather was cold, and the fire not
answerable; so that espying certain Asses out of the window laden with wood, as
they stood in the lower Court, he goes down thither, lifts up the greatest of
them with his burden upon his shoulder, and carrying it to the room from
whence he came, cast both as he found them into the fire together.

H^kew. Ibid. p. 215.
6. Lebelski a Polander, in his description of the things done at Constantinople
in the year 1581, at the Circumcision of Mahomet the Son of Amurath Emperor of
the Turks, writes, that amongst many active men who there showed their
strength, one was most memorable, who for proof thereof lifted up a piece of
wood which twelve men had much ado to raise from the earth; and afterward
lying down ^lat upon his back, he bore upon his breast a weighty stone, which
ten men had (with much ado) rolled thither: and this he made but a jest of.

Iovii Elog. lib. 6. p. 285. Reus^er. de scorbu^o exercit. 1. p. 29. Camerar.
cent. 1. cap. 82. p. 380.
7. Many yet alive, know how strong and mighty George of Fronsberg, Baron of
Mindlehaim was: he was able with the middle finger of his right hand to remove
a very strong man out of his place, sat he never so sure. He stopped a Horse
suddenly, that ran in a full carriere; by only touching the Bridle: and with
his shoulder would he easily shove a Cannon whither he listed. His Joints
seemed to be made of Horn: and he wrested twisted Ropes and Horse-shooes in
sunder with his bare hands.

Full. Worth. p. 215.
8. Cardan writes, that himself saw one dancing with two in his arms, two upon
his shoulders, and one hanging about his neck.

H^kew. Apol. lib. 3. cap. 5. 4. p. 216. Full. Worth. p. 205. Cornwall.
9. Of later days, and here at home, Mr. Richard Car^w a worthy Gentleman, in
his Survey of Cornwall, assures us, that one John Bray well known to himself, as
being his Tenant, carried upon his back at one time, by the space of well near
a Butt's length, six bushels of wheaten meal, reckoning fifteen Gallons to the
Bushel, and the Miller a lubber of twenty four years of age upon the whole:
whereunto he adds, that John Roman of the same Shire, a short clownish Grub,
would bear the whole carcass of an Ox, though he never tugged with it when it
was a Calf, as Milo did.

10. Julius Capitolinus and others report of the Tyrant Maximinus (who murdered
and succeeded the good Emperor Alexander Severus) that he was so strong,
Camerar. hor. subsi^. c^nt. 1. cap. 82. p. 377. Capitol.
that with his hands he drew Carts and Wains full laden: with a blow of his
fist he struck out a Horses teeth, and with a kick brake his thighs: he
crumbled stones of Tuph betwixt his fingers: he cleft young Trees with his
hands; so that he was surnamed Hercules, Anteus and Milo.

Pollio. Camerar. hor. subcis. cent. 1. cap. 82. p. 377.
11. Trebellius Pollio writes of Caius Marius, a Cutler by his first occupation
(and who in the time of Gali^nus, was chosen Emperor by the Soldiers) that
there was not any man who had stronger hands to strike and thrust than he; the
veins of his hands seemed as if they had been sinews: with his fourth finger he
stayed a Cart drawn with Horses, and drew it backward. If he gave but a fillip
to the strongest man that then was, he would feel it as if he had received a
blow on the forehead with an hammer: with two fingers he would wrest and break
many strong and twisted things.

Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2^. p. 166. Camerar. (...). s^^^is. cent. 1. ^. 82. p. 3^7.
Solin..4. p. 182. ^alg^s. lib. 1. ^. 7. p. 187.
12. Tritanus a Samnite Fencer was of such a making, that not only his Breast,
but his hands also and arms were furnished with sinews both long-wise and
across, and side-ways: so that without any pain, and with the least blow, he
overthrew all them that encountered him. The Son of this Fencer, of the same
name and make, a Soldier in Pompeys Army, when he was challenged by an enemy,
set so slight by him, that he overcame him by the blows of his bare hand; and
with one finger took him up, and carried him to Pompey's Camp. Bruson.
Facetiar. lib. 2. cap. 43. p. 152.

13. Flavius Vopiscus writes, Vopiscus. Camerar. hor. subcis. cent. 1. c. 82.
p. 378.
that the Emperor Aurelian was of a very high Stature, and mavelous strong:
and that in the war against the Sarmatians, he slew in one day with his own
hands eight and forty of his enemies; that in diverse days together he overthrew
nine hundred and fifty. When he was Colonel of the sixth Legion called Gallica,
at Mentz he made strange havoc of the Franci, who forraged over all the
Country of Gaul; for he slew with his own hands seven hundred of them; and sold
three hundred at Port-sale, whom he himself had taken prisoners: so that his
Soldiers made a military song in praise of him.

14. The Giant Aenother was born in Turgaw, Camerar. hor. subcis. Aventin.
hist. Boior. lib. 4.
a a Village of Suevia, he bore Arms under Charlemaign; he felled men as one
would mow Hay, and sometimes broached a great number of them upon his Pike or
Spear, and so carried them all on his shoulder, as one would do little Birds
spitted upon a stick.

13. George Castriot, Iovii Elogia lib. 3. p. 146. Camerar. hor. subcis. cent.
1. c. 82. p. 378. Barlet. hist. of Scanderbeg. lib. 12. p. 496, 497*
for his valiant exploits, surnamed of the Turks Ischenderbeg, that is, Lord
Alexander, he slew in several conflicts with his own hands two thousand Turks,
says Iovius: three thousand, says Barletius; never using to give but one blow
where he struck: and whereas his Scimiter was very great and massy, he handled
it with such force, that he never spent blow in vain, but it fell so right,
that either he cleft them asunder whom he met with, or cut them in two by the
waste, or whipped off their heads, and sometimes all the top of the shoulders
withal. He cleft steel Helmets and all sorts of Harness with his Scimiter. This
most valiant Prince was taken out of the world by a fever in the sixty third
year of his age, Ian. 23. 1466. having defended his Kingdom twenty four years
against two Turkish Emperors.

16. Thomas Farel reports of Galeot Bardasin a Gentleman of Catana, Camerar.
hor. subcis. cent. 1. c. 82. p. 379. Reusner. de scorbuto exerc. 1. p. 28.
that he grew from time to time to such a height and bigness of body, that he
exceeded all other men, how great soever from the shoulders upwards. He was too
hard for all others in leaping, throwing a stone, tossing the Pike, and in
Justing; for he was strong and mighty according to his stature. Being armed at
all points, his Casque on his head, a Javelin in his right hand, and holding
the pommel of his Saddle in the left, he would spring into the seat without
help of Stirrup or other advantages: sometimes he would bestride a great
Courser unbridled, and having given him the cariere, would stop him suddenly in
his course, by straining him only with his Thighs and Legs: with his hands he
would take up from the ground an Ass with his load which commonly weighed three
Kintals. He struggled in the way of pastime, with two of the strongest men that
could be found, of which he held one fast with one arm, and threw the other to
the ground, and keeping him under with his knee, at last he pulled down the
second, and never left till he had them both under him, and bound their hands
behind their backs.

17. Potocova, Camerar. hor. subcis. cent. 1. c. 22. p. 381. Zuing. vol. 2.
lib. 5. p. 385. Reusner. de scorbuto exerc. 1. p. 29.
a Gentleman of Poland, Colonel of the Cossacks (who of late years was beheaded
at Warsovia, by the permission of Stephen Batoxe King of Poland, at the
instance of the Turkish Ambassador) this Gentleman was of that strength, that
he could as readily with his bare hands break Horshooes new out of the Forge,
as he could have torn leaves of paper, or other such like thing easily to be
broken.

Iohnst. hist. won^er^ul things in nature. class. 10. c. 4. Artic. 1. p. 325.
18. Our Chronicles (says Bertius in his description of Zealand) relate that
from Gulielmus Bonus Earl of Holland, unto the Marriage-Solemnities of Charles
the Fair, King of France, was brought a woman of an unusual stature, born in
Zealand, in respect of whom, very tall men seemed but Dwarfs: so strong, that
she would carry two Barrels full of Beer under both arms, each of them weighing
four hundred Italian pounds: and a Beam which eight men could not lift, she
would wield at her pleasure.

19. Julius Valens a Captain-pensioner, or Centurion of the Guard of Soldiers
about the body of Augustus Caesar, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 20. p. 166.
was wont to bear up a Wagon laden with Hogsheads or a Butt of Wine, until it
was discharged thereof, and the Wine drawn out of it: he would take up a Mule
upon his back, and carry it away: also he used to stay a Chariot against all
the force of the Horses striving and straining to the contrary; and other
wonderful masteries, which are to be seen engraven upon his Tombstone.

Plin. ibid. p. 166.
20. Fusius Salvius having an hundred pounds weight at his feet, and as many in
his hands, and twice as much upon his Shoulders, went with all this up a pair
of Stairs, or Ladder.

Plin. ibid. p. 166.
21. My self have seen (says Pliny) one named Athanatus do wonderful strange
matters, in the open view and face of the world, he would walk upon the Stage
with a Cuirace of Lead weighing five hundred pound, and booted besides with a
pair of greaves upon his Legs of the same weight.

22. Milo the great wrestler of Crotona, Plin. ibid. p. 166. Zuing. vol. 2.
lib. 5. p. 384. Solin. c. 4. p. 182.
was of that strength that he carried a whole Ox the length of a furlong: when
he stood firm upon his feet no man could thrust him off his standing; or if he
grasped a pomegranate fast in his hand, no man was able to stretch a finger of
his, and force it out at length.

Iovii Elog. lib. 2. p. 102. Reusner. de scorbuto exercit. 1. p. 29.
23. Tamberlane the Scythian was of a mighty body and exceeding strength; so
that he would draw the string of a Scythian Bow (which few were able to deal
with) beyond his ear, and caused his arrow to fly with that force, that he
would shoot through a brazen mortar which the Archers used to set up for
themselves as their mark.

24. Cunipertus King of the Lombards, Paul. Diac. hist. Longobard. lib. 5. c.
40. p. 301. Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 5. p. 385.
was of that strength in his arms, that when a boy, he would take two Rams of
wonderful bigness in his hands by the wool upon their backs, and lift them from
the ground, which no other was found that could do.

25. When the Emperor Frederick Barbarussa lead his Army to the Holy War:
Dinoth. Memorab. lib. 3. p. 240, 241.
amongst diverse other notable persons he had about him, there was one an
Almain, of a vast body, and invincible strength; who not far from Iconium
followed the Army at a great distance, leading in his hand a Horse by the
Reins, which he had tired in the journey. About fifty Mahometans scouting up
and down there a way, lighted upon this man, and set upon him on every side
with their Arrows, he couching under his broad shield, securely eluded their
att^mpt upon him this way: at last, one bolder than the rest, put spurrs to his
Horse, and assaulted him with his Sword; but the Almain at the first blow
struck off the fore legs of his Horse, and redoubling his stroke, struck with
that mighty force upon the head of the Mohammedan, that dividing it in twain,
the sword passed through part of the saddle, and left a wound upon the back of
the Horse. The Mahometans observing that terrible blow, provoked him no
farther, but departed as they came. The Almain without mending his pace, came
up safely to the rest of the Army.

26. John Courcy, Full. Worth. p. 26. Somersetshire. Camd. A^nals of Ireland.
p. 153, 154.
Baron of Stoke Courcy in Somersetshire, the first Englishman that subdued
Vlster in Ireland, and deservedly was made Earl of it: he was afterward
surprised by Hugh Lacy (corriva^ to his title) sent over into England, and by
King John imprisoned in the Tower of London. A French Castle being in
controversy, was to have the title thereof tried by combat, the Kings of
England and France beholding it. Courcy being a lean, lank body with staring
eyes, is sent for out of the Tower to undertake the Frenchman; and because
enfeebled with long durance, a large bill of Fare was allowed him to recruit
his strength. The Monsieur hearing how much he had eat and drank, and guessing
his courage by his stomach, or rather stomach by his appetite, took him for a
Cannibal, who would devour him at the last course, and so he declined the
Combat. Afterward the two Kings desirous to see some proof of Courcy's
strength, caused a steel Helmet to be laid on a block before him, Courcy
looking about him with a grim countenance (as if he intended to cut with his
eyes, as well as with his arms) sundred the Helmet at one blow, striking his
Sword so deep into the wood, that none but himself could pull it out again.
Being demanded the cause why he looked so sternly: Had I (said he) failed of my
design, I would have killed the Kings and all in the place. Words well spoken,
because well taken: all persons present being then highly in good humor. He
died in France, anno Dom. 1210.

27. Polydamus the Son of Nicias, Zuing. vol. 2 lib. 5. p. 384. Val. Man. lib
9. c. 12. p. 270. Coel. Antiq. lect. lib. 13. c. 36. p. 624.
born at Scotussa in Thessalia, was the tallest and greatest man of that age,
his strength was accordingly; for he slew a Lion in the Mount Olympus, though
unarmed: he singled out the biggest and fiercest Bull from a whole Herd, took
hold of him by one of his hinder feet, and notwithstanding all his struggling
to get from him, he held him with that strength, that he left his hoof in his
hand: being afterward in a Cave under a Rock, the earth above began to fall,
and when all the rest of his company fled for fear, he alone there remained, as
supposing he was able with his Arms to support all those ruins which were
coming upon him; but this his presumption cost him his life; for he was there
crushed to death.

28. Ericus the second King of Denmark was a person of huge Stature and equal
strength; Zuing. vol. 2. lib. 5. p. 384. Sax. Grammatic. l. 12.
he would throw a Stone, or a Javelin, as he sat down, with much greater force
than another that stood: as he sat he would struggle with two men, and
catching one betwixt his knees would there hold him till he had drawn the other
to him, and then he would hold them both till he had bound them. He also would
take a rope by both the ends of it, and holding it thus in his hands sitting,
he gave the other part of it to four strong men to pull against him; but while
they could not move him from his seat, he would give them such girds now with
the right, and then with the left hand, that either they were forced to
relinquish their hold, or else notwithstanding all they could do to the
contrary, he would draw them all to the feat where he sat.

29. The Emperor Tiberius had the joints of his Fingers so ^irm, Sueton. l.
(...) c. 63. p. 160.
and strongly compacted, that he could thrust his Finger through a green and
unripe Apple: and could give a ^illip with that force, that thereby he would
break the head of a lusty man.

CHAP. XXV. Of the marvelous fruitfulness of some; and what number of their
descendants they have lived to see; also of superfoetation.
IN the front of this Discourse, it will not be amiss to revive the memory of a
Roman Matron, in whom there were so many wonders concentred; that it would
almost be no less to forget her: Ausonius calls her Callicrate, and thus
Epitapheth for her, as in her own person. Full. Worth. p. 138. Buckinghamshire.
Viginti atque novem genitrici Callicrateae
Nullius Sexus mors mihi visa fuit
Sed centum and quinque explevi been messibus annos;
Intremulam baculo non subeunte manum.
Twenty nine birth's Callicrate I told;
And of both Sexes saw none sent to grave:
I was an hundred and five Summers old,
Yet stay from staff my hand did never crave.
A rare instance, which yet in the two former respects you will find surpassed
in what follows.

H^kew. Apolog. l. 3. c. 5. 7. p. 224. Full. ^orthies, p. 119 Bed^ordshire.
1. There lies a Woman buried in the Church at Dunstable, who as her Epitaph
testifies, bore at three several times three Children at a Birth, and five at a
Birth two other times.

2. Elionora Salviata, the Wife of Bartholomew Frescobald, a Citizen of
Florence, was delivered of fifty and two Children, never less than three at a
Birth. Sch^nck. obs. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 562.


3. One of the Maidservants of Augustus the Emperor, was delivered of five
Children at a Birth; Gell. noct. Attic. l. 10. c. 2. p. 249.
the Mother, together with her Children, were buried in the Laurentine way;
with an Inscription upon them, by the order of Augustus relating the same.

Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 23. p. 180.
4. Also Serapia, a Woman of Alexandria, brought forth five Children at one
Birth, says Coelius.

Schenck. obs. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 563.
5. Anno 1553. The Wife of John Gissinger a Tigurine, was delivered of Twins,
and before the year was out, brought at once five more, three Sons and two
Daughters.

Schenck. Ibid. p. 563.
6. Here is at Bononia one Julius Seutinarius, yet living, and is also a
fruitful Citizen himself, he came in the World with six Births, and was himself
the seventh, his Mother was the Sister of D. Florianus de Dulphis my Kinsman,
says Carpus.

Camer. hor. sub^is. Cent. 2. c. 66. p. 273. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10. c. 5.
p. 332.
7. Thomas Fazel writes that Jane Pancica, (who in his time was married to
Bernard, a Sicilian of the City of Agrigentum) was so fruitful, that in thirty
Childbirths, she was delivered of seventy and three Children; which says he,
should not seem incredible, seeing Aristotle affirms, that one Woman at four
Births, brought forth twenty Children, at every one ^ive.

Camer. ibid. p 274. Schenck. obs. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 562. Rei^^. r. Reine^c. de
Welphor. prosapia, p. 16.
8. There is a famous story of the beginning of the Noble Race of the Welfs,
which is this: Irmentrudes, the Wife of Isenbard, Earl of Altorf, had
unadvisedly accused of Adultery a Woman that had three Children at one Birth,
being not able to believe that one man could at one time get so many Children;
adding with all, that she deserved to be sowed up in a Sack, and thrown into
the River; Ioh^st. N ^ Hist. Cl. 10. c. 5. p. 333. H^yl. Co^m^gr. Clark's Mir.
c. 104. p. 497. Rezel. Mellisic. tom. 3. p. 109.
and accusing her in that regard to the Earl her Husband. It happened that the
next year the Countess felt her self with Child, and (the Earl being from home)
she was brought to Bed of twelve Male-children; but all of them very little:
She fearing the reproach of Adultery, whereof yet she was not guilty, commanded
that eleven of them should be taken and cast into a River, not far from the
House, and one only brought up: It so fell out, that Isenbard met the Woman,
that was carrying the little Infants to their death; and asking her whither she
went with her Pail; she replied she was going to drown a few baggage Whelps, in
the River of Scherk. The Earl came to her, and in despite of her resistance,
would see what was there; and discovering the Children, pressed her in such
wise, that she told him all the matter. He caused them to be secretly educated;
and so soon as they were grown great, and brought home to him, he set them in
the Hall by him whom his Wife had brought up: Being thus by their Faces all
known to be Brethren; there Mother moved in Conscience, confessed the fact, and
obtained pardon for her fault: In remembrance whereof the honorable Race of
the Welfs (that is whelps) got that name, which ever since it has kept.
Schenck. obs. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 563.


9. John Francis, Earl of Mirandula, tells of one Dorothy, a German by birth,
who in Italy, at two several births brought forth twenty Sons, nine at the one,
and eleven at the other; while she went with this burden, by reason of the
mighty weight, she was wont to tie a swathing band about her neck and
shoulders, and with that to bear up her swollen belly, which fell down to her
very knees.

Mathias Golancevius, Schenck. obs. p. 562.
was Bishop of Vladislavia in Poland, in the time of Vladislaus Loctitius the
King; it is said of his Mother, that she was delivered of twelve Sons at once,
and that of all these he only lived, the rest dying as soon as they were born,
says Cromerus.

11. Alexander de Campo Fregoso, Schenck. ibid. p. 1^4.
Bishop of Ventimilium, professed to me, says Carpus, (upon the faith of a
Bishop) that at Lamia, a woman of the Noble Family of the Buccanigers, brought
forth sixteen humane births, of the bigness of a man's palm, all which had
motion; and that besides these sixteen, which had humane likeness, she brought
forth at the same time a Creature, in the likeness of a Horse, which had also
motion: All seventeen were wrapped in one and the same secundine, which is
Monstrous.

12. Anno 1217. Upon the 20 th. of January, Schenck. ibid. p. 562.
the Lady Margaret, wife to the Earl Virboslaus, was in Country of Cracovia,
brought to bed of thirty living bodies, all at once, says Cromerus.

13. In the Annals of Silesia, Schenck. ibid. p. 563.
it is recorded, that a woman at one birth was delivered of thirty and six
Children.

14. Count Flons the Fourth, Grimst. Hist. Netherlands. l. 1. p. 52. Camer.
hor. subcis. C^nt. 2. c. 66. p. 273, 274. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 188. Heyl.
Cosmog. p. 384. Schenck. obs. l. 4. p. 562. Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 187.
of that name Governor of the Netherlands, had amongst others his Children one
Daughter, called Mathild, some say Margaret, she was married to Count Herman of
Henneberg; William King of the Romans, and Earl of Holland was her Brother;
Otto, Bishop of Vtrecht, her Uncle by the Fathers side; and Henry Duke of
Brabant her Uncle by the Mothers side: Alix Countess of Henault her Aunt; Otto
of Gelders, and Henry Bishop of Liege her Cousins: On a time this Countess of
Henneberg did see a poor Widow Woman, begging her bread for God's sake, having
in either Arm a Child, which she had at one birth. This poor Woman craving her
Alms: Morisons Itinerar. part 1. c. 4. p. 52. Schot. Physic. curios. l. 3. c.
29. p. 547. Guicciard. in discript. Belgiae. Ludovic. Vives in colloq. H^wel's
Epistles vol. 1 2. Ep. 13. p. 14. Stowes Annals, p. 217.
the Countess rejected with reproachful words, saying, That it was a thing
against Nature (in her opinion) for a Woman that is honest to conceive by her
Husband two Children of one birth; and therefore that this her deliverance had
bewrayed that she had lewdly abandoned her self to some others. The poor Woman
having her heart full of discontent for her bitter speeches, lifted up her eyes
to Heaven, and said, O great and mighty God, I beseech thee for a testimony of
m^ne innocence, that it will please thee to send this Lady at one burden so
many Children as their are days in the year. A while after this Countess was
big with Child by her Husband, and for her lying in she went into Holland to
see the Earl of Holland her Nephew; lodging in the Abbey of Religious Women at
Losdunen, where she grew so exceeding great, that the like was never seen. Her
time being come the Friday before Palm Sunday, in the year 1276. she was
delivered of three hundred sixty and five Children, half Sons and half
Daughters, the odd one being found to be an Hermaphrodite, all complete and
well fashioned, of the bigness of Chickens new hatched, says Camerarius: These
were laid in two Basins and Baptized by Guidon Suffragan to the Bishop of
Vtrecht, who named the Sons John, and the Daughters Elizabeth, in the presence
of some great Lords, and notable persons; as soon as they were baptized, they
all died together with their Mother. The two Basins are yet to be seen in the
said Church of Losdunen, not far from the Hague, with an Epitaph, both in Latin
and Dutch, which at large express the whole story.

Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 66. p. 273.
15. Albertus Magnus writes, that a woman of Germany, made abortion of twenty
two Children at one time, all having their perfect shapes; and another Woman
seventy: and that another Woman delivered into a Basin, an hundred and fifty;
every one of the length of ones little finger.

Plin. l. 7. c. p. 162.
16. In the History of the Acts of Augustus Caesar, we find upon Record, that in
his twelfth Consulship, upon the eleventh day of April; C. Crispinus Helarus a
Gentleman of Fesulae; came with solemn pomp into the Capital, attended upon
with his nine Children, seven Sons, and two Daughters; with seven and twenty
Grandchildren, that were the Sons of his Children; and nine and twenty more,
who were his great Grandchildren, the Sons of his Sons Sons: and besides these
with twelve Females, that were his Childrens Daughters, and with all these he
solemnly sacrificed.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 11. p.
17. There was a Noble Lady of the Family of the Dalburges, who saw of her race,
even to the sixth degree; whereof the Germans have made this Distich.

Hakewel. Apolog. l. 3. c. 5. 7. p. 224.
Matter1 ait Natae,2 dic Natae,3 Filia Natam4
Vt moneat Natae,5 plangere Filiolam6.
Which because I have not found already translated, I shall venture at it in
this Tetrastick.

The aged Mother to her Daughter spoke,
Daughter, said she, arise,
Thy Daughter to thy Daughter take,
Whose Daughters Daughter cries.
18. In the memory of our Fathers (says Vives) there was a Village in Spain,
Vives in Commen^. sup. lib. de Civit. dei. l. ^. c. 15. Hakewells. Apolog. l.
3. c. 5. 7. p. 224.
of above a hundred Houses; whereof all the inhabitants, were issued from one
certain old man, who then lived, when as that Village was so peopled: the name
of propinquity, how the youngest should call him, could not be given; for our
Language (says he) meaning the Spanish, affords not a name above the great
Grandfathers Father.

19. In the place and parish where I was born, viz. in the Borough of
Leicester, in the Church of St. Martin, I my self have seen; (and it is there
yet to be seen by others) a very remarkable Epitaph: which is this: Here lies
the body of of John Heyrick of this Parish; who departed this life the second
of April, 1589. being about the age of seventy six years; he did marry Mary the
Daughter of John Bond of Ward^nd, in the County of Warwick Esquire. He lived
with the said Mary in one house full fifty two years; and in all that time,
never buried Man, Woman nor Child, though they were sometimes twenty in
household. He had Issue by the said Mary five Sons, and seven Daughters: The
said John was Mayor of the Town, 1559. And again, Anno 1572. The said Mary
lived to ninety seven years, and departed the eight of December 1611. She did
see before her departure, of her Children and Childrens Children, and their
Children, to the number of one hundred forty and two.

20. In St. Innocents Churchyard, H^kewel. ibid. p. 224 Versteg. Res^it
Decayed. I^tell. c. 1. p. 3.
in the City of Paris, is to be seen the Epitaph of Yoland Baily, Widow to
Mounsieur Dennis Capel, a Proctour at the Chastelet, which does show that she
had lived eighty four years, and might have seen 288. Verstegan says, 295 of
her Children, and Childrens Children, she died the seventeenth of April 1514.
Imagine how she had been troubled to call them by a proper denomination, that
were distant from her in the fourth and fifth degree.

21. In Markshal Church in Essex on Mrs. Honywoods Tomb, is this Inscription:
Here lies the body of Mary Waters, the Daughter and coheir af Robert Waters of
Lenham in Kent Esquire, wife of Robert Honywood of Charing in Kent Esquire, her
only Husband, who had at her decease, lawfully descended from her 367. sixteen
of her own body, 114 Grandchildren; 228. in the third Generation, and nine in
the fourth. She lived a most pious life, and in a Christian manner dyed here at
Markshal, in the ninety third year of her age, and in the forty fourth of her
Widowhood, May 11. 1620.

22. Dame Esther Temple, Fullers Worthies, p* 138. Backinghamshire.
Daughter to Miles Sands Esquire, was born at Latmos, in Buckinghamshire, and
was married to Sir Thomas Temple of Stow Baronet: She had four Sons, and nine
Daughters, which lived to be married; and so exceedingly multiplied, that this
Lady saw seven hundred extra^ted from her body. Reader, I speak within compass,
and have left my self a reserve, having bought the truth hereof by a wager I
lost, says Dr. Fuller: Besides there was a new Generation of marriageable
Females just at her death. Had the Offspring of this Lady been contracted into
one place, they were enough to have peopled a City, of a competent proportion,
though her Issue was not so long in succession, as broad in extent: I confess
very many of her descendants, died before death: the Lady Temple died, Anno
1656.

(...) 113 (...).
23. John, Henry and Thomas Palmer, were the Sons of Edward Palmer Esquire in
Sussex. It happened that their Mother being a full Fortnight inclusively in
labor, was on Whitsunday delivered of John her Eldest Son; on the Sunday
following of Henry her second Son; and the Sunday next after of Thomas her
third Son: This is that which is commonly called superfoe^ation (usual in other
Creatures, but rare in Women) the cause whereof we leave to the disquisition of
Physicians. These three were Knighted for their Valor and success, as in their
Nativi^ies.

(...) 542.
24. Another Example of superfoetation, I will set down for the stories sake, in
the year of our Lord 1584. dyed the Noble Lord Philip Lewis of Hirshorne, at
his mansion House in the Palatinate, three Miles from Heydelberg, he left no
Heir, but his Lady was with Child; his Kindred forthwith enter upon the Rents
and Royalties, and to gain the more full and perfect knowledge of them (soon
after the death of her Lord) they pluck from her waste the Keys of all private
places (and that not without violence) the better to enable them for the search
they intended. This outrage redoubled the grief of the poor Lady; so that
within few days after she fell in travel, and brought forth a Son, but dead and
wanting the Skull: Now were the next Heirs of the deceased Noblemam exceeding
jocund, as having attained to their utmost hopes; and therefore now used the
Estate as their own. But it pleased God as out of a stone) to raise up a Son to
that desolate and disconsolate Widow: For though she was not speedily delivered
of him, after the (...), yet she remained somewhat big after her delivery,
suspecting nothing but that it was some pr^^ternatural humor, or some disease
that was remaining in her body: She therefore consulted the Physicians, who all
thought, any thing rather to be the cause of her disease, than that in the
lea^^ they suspected, a second Birth so long after the first. They therefore
advised her to go to the Baths by the Rhine; she accordingly did, as a sad and
comfortless Widow, attended only with one Maid; came thither, July 1584. where
(it so fell out) she found Augustus the Elector of Saxony, together with the
Princess his Wi^e; as also many other Princes and their Ladies; by which means
all lodgings were so foretaken up, that she could not find entertainment in any
Inn: especially being not known of what quality she was, coming thither with so
private a retinue as a single Maid. At last discovering to the Governor of the
place, who she was, and her last misfortunes (not without some difficulty) she
procured lodging in his House for that night, wherein she came thither. But
that very night, when it was the tenth week from her former delivery; it
pleased God to send her (in her a^^liction, and amongst strangers) a lovely
Boy. The fame of which came to the ears of the Illustrious Princes, who were
then in Town. The Elector of Mentz made her a noble provision for her Lying in.
The Elector of Saxony also sent her by way of Present one thousand Dollers:
Also all the Rents and Royalties before seized upon, were restored to this
lawful Heir of her Husbands, and Child of hers; who also is yet alive, says
C^spar Bauhin^s.

(...) 11. p. 215.
Super^oetation is by the distant Births of diverse not ra^ely confirmed. A Dutch
Woman in Southwark some twenty years since, having invited diverse of her
Neighbors to her Upsitting, found her self not well on a sudden; and rising
from the table, was forthwith brought to bed of another. This falling on a time
into our discourse, one then present reported, that the like befell a Sister of
his; who three months after the birth of her first Son, was delivered of a
second.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the strange Agility and Nimbleness of some, and their wonderful
feats.
HOmer in the commendation of the activity of Meriones calls him the Dancer; in
which Art he was so famous, that he was known not only amongst the Greeks, but
to the Trojans also, his enemies; probably because that in time of Battle, he
made show of an extraordinary quickness and nimbleness of body, which he had
acquired unto himself by the practice of this Art, some of these who follow
(though they wanted an Homer to recommend them to posterity) have excelled not
only Meriones in point of agility; but have attained the utmost of what a
humane body (in this kind) is capable of acquiring.

1. Amongst those shows, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 386. Sabellic. Ex. l.
10. c. 9. p. 586.
which were presented to the people of Rome, in the time of the Caesar's; there
was exhibited to them a man; who was of that strange agility that he would skip
from place to place, and cli^^ up a smooth wall, after the same manner, as ^
Cat uses to do.

2. I have seen oftentimes (says Camerarius) in the Prince of Bamberge his
Court, Camer. ho^. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 75. p. 343. Iohnst. Not. Hist. Cl. 10.
c. 8. p. 352.
a certain Peasant of Germany, nourished and brought up (as himself avouched)
in the Mountains thereby amongst Beasts; he was so active, and nimble of his
Body, that he amazed all that saw him. He showed his agility, not standing, but
walking upon his Feet and Hands, like a Dog or Cat, he would scramble up by the
Coyns toward the roof of the Hall; in such manner as an Ape could scarce do;
though otherwise he was a rustical Fellow, heavy and of a gross making. I saw
him twice (adds he) as I was at the Princes Table, leap upon the shoulders of
one of the Guests; and from thence upon the Table, without overturning Dish or
Cup, and then cast himself with such a spring upon the Floor, that one would
have said it had been a Squirrel or Wild-cat. He did use to skip as fast from
place to place, upon the tops of Towers and Houses built point wise, as our
House Cats will do: There was in the Court a Dwarf, called Martinet, who used
to mount the back of this nimble fellow, and turn him too and fro, and wheel
him about as a Horse; exercising him in diverse leaps, and sundry postures; but
whenever he pleased (with one leap) he would cast his Rider, though he
endeavored to sit never so surely. I would not have made any mention of this
strange man, in this Book, says the forenamed Author, if I had not seen with
my eyes his tricks of activity, as many others yet living have done: when I
wrote this Chapter, he was alive with a Wife he had married.

3. The great S^ortia, Zuin. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 385.
was of that notable agility, tha^ (without the least assistance from another,
or any advantageous rise of the ground) when he had once put his lest Foot into
the Stirrup, though his Helmet was on, and all the rest of his Body complete
armed; yet would he neatly put himself into the Saddle of his great Horse.

Zuing. ibid. p. 386.
4. The Lapones, are of a moderate Stature, but of such agility of Bodies, that
with a Quiver at their back, and a Bow in their hand; they will at a leap
transmit themselves, in such a round or circle, whose Diameter is but one Cubit.

5. Totilas, King of the Goths, being to enter battle with Narses, Zuing. vol.
2. l. 5. p. 386.
and his forces; came into the midst of the Field, mounted upon a brave Horse,
his Arms of Gold, and his Purple Royal Robe upon them, where he showed his rare
Horsemanship; excercising his Horse various ways, with strange agility, casting
his Head upon his Crupper, at others upon his Belly; then turning himself on
this, and straight again upon his other side, in performing of these feats; he
industriously wasted a great part of the Day, from the first break of it, on
purpose to amuse the Enemy; till such time as two thousand Horse were come up
to him, whom he expected before he would begin the fight.

Kornman. de mirac. vivor. p. 256.
6. Antonius Nebrissensis tells, that he saw a man at Hispalis, who was born in
the Canary Islands, that would ke^^ (...) of his feet in the same footsteps
continually, and suffer a man to stand at the distance of eight paces from him,
to throw stones at him: He in the mean time, by an artifical declining head, by
wirthing of his body this and that way; and sometimes by the change and
shifting his legs, would avoid the blow and hurt that was aimed at him. To this
danger he would readily expose himself, Kornman. de mirac. vivor. p. 256.
as often as any man would give him a brass farthing.

7. I saw, says Simon Maiolus, in the Cisalpine France, an Asiatick
Rope-dancer, that danced securely upon the Ropes with two Rapiers made fast to
the inside of his legs; in which condition he must keep his legs at a great
distance, or be wounded with the sharp points of the weapons he carried. After
this, the same man had two round pieces of wood; of the breadth of three
fingers, and somewhat more than a Cubits length, fastened to his feet, with
these he danced, standing upon them end ways. Many other feats of activity he
performed, that will difficulty be believed by any, Kornman. de mirac. vivor.
p. 257.
besides such as were eyewitnesses thereof.

8. Luitprandus, no contemptible Author writes, that Anno Dom. 950. at soch
time as he was Ambassador from Berengarius, to the Emperor at Constantinople,
he saw a strange sight: A Stage Player, says he, without any assistance from
his hands, bore upon his forehead a straight piece of wood in a pyramidical
form, the length of which was twenty four foot, the breadth at the bottom two
cubits, and one cubit on the top of it. Two naked boys (except a modest
covering) climbed up to the top of this piece of wood, which the man kept in a
straight and even poise from turning this and that way, as if it had been
rooted in his forehead: having mounted the top, the boys played upon it, the
wood remaining immovable; after this one of the boys came down, while the
other remained playing, to the great content of the spectators; the wood
standing fast all this while. The Stage Player continued all this space of time
(which was no small one) with fixed feet, his hands unemploy'd, his body
upright, and his forehead immovable, although he bore upon it, so great and so
ponderous a piece of wood, besides the weight of the boys.

9. Anno 1507. Purchase. pilgr. tom. 1. l. 6. c.. 5. ^ 5. p. 748.
The Sultan of Egypt made ostentation of his magnificence to the Turkish
Ambassador: There were 60000 Mamalukes in like habit assembled in a spacious
plain, in which were three heaps of Sand, ^ifty paces distant, and in each a
Spear erected with a Mark to shoot at; and the like over against them, with
space betwixt ^or six Horses to run a breast: Here the younger Mamalukes upon
their Horses running a full carreer, yield strange experiments of their skill.
Some shot Arrows backwards and forwards: Others in the midst of their race,
alighted three times, and their Horses still running, mounted again, and hit
the mark nevertheless: Others did hit the same, standing on their Horses, thus
swiftly running: Others three times unbent their Bows, and thrice again bent
them whilst their Horses ran, and missed not the Mark: Neither did others,
which amidst their race, lighted down on either side, and again mounted
themselves: no, nor they which in their swiftest course, leaped and turned
themselves backwards on their Horses, and then their Horses still running,
turned themselves forward. There were which while their Horses ran, ungirt
rheir Horses thrice; at each time shooting, and then again girting their
Saddles, and never missing the Mark. Some sitting in their Saddles, leaped
backwards out of them, and turning over their heads, settled themselves again
in their Saddles, and shot as the former three times. Others laid themselves
backwards on their running Horses, and taking their tails, put them in their
mouths, and yet forgot not their aim in shooting: Some after every shot drew
out their Swords, and flourished them about their heads, and again sheathed
them; Others sitting betwixt three Swords on their right, and as many on the
left thinly clothed, that without geart care every motion would make way for
death; yet before and behind them touched the Mark. One stood upon two Horses,
running very swiftly, his feet loose, and shot also at once three Arrows
before, and again three behind him. Another sitting on a Horse, neither bridled
nor sadled, as he came at every Mark, arose and stood upon his feet, and on
both hands hitting the Mark, sat down again three times. A third sitting on the
bare Horse, when he came to the Mark, lay upon his back, and lifted up his leg,
and yet missed not his shoot: One of them was killed with a fall, and two sore
wounded, in these their feats of activity. All this is from Baumgustens
relation, who was an eyewitness thereof.

10. Bemoine, Purch. Pilg. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 14. 2. p. 810.
in an accident of Civil Wars in Gia laff, came to the King of Portugal for
aid, with his followers, amongst whom some were of such admirable dexterity,
and nimbleness of body, that they would leap upon a Horse as he gallopped; and
would stand upright in the Saddle, when he ran fastest, and turn themselves
about, and suddenly sit down; and in the same race would take up stones laid in
order upon the ground, and leap down and up at pleasure.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the extraordinary swiftness and footmanship of some Men.
THe news of the overthrow of King Perseus, by L. Paulus Aemylius, is said to
be brought from Macedonia to Rome in a day; but then it is suspected to be
performed by the ministration of Spirits; who free from the burden of a body,
may well be the quicker in their intelligence. We here have an account of some
such, who may seem to have divested themselves of flesh, and almost to contend
with Spirits themselves, in the quickness of their conveyance of themselves
from place to place.

Plin. l. 7. c. 20. p. 167.
1. Philippides, being sent by the Athenians to Sparta, to implore their
assistance in the Persian War, in the space of two days, ran one thousand two
hundred and sixty furlongs, that is one hundred, fifty seven Roman miles and a
half.

Lips. Epist. Cent. 3. Epist. 59. p. ^69.
2. Euchidas was sent by the same Athenians to Delphos, to desire some of the
holy Fire from thence; he went and returned in one and the same day, having
measured 1000 furlongs, that is, 125 Roman miles.

Solin. c. 6. p. 191. Plin. l. 7. c. 20. p. 167. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 146.
3. When Fonteius, and Vipsanus were Consuls, there was a Boy of but nine years
of age, ( Martial calls him Addas) who within the compass of one day, ran 75
miles outright.

4. But that amazes me (says Lipsius) which Pliny sets down of Philonides the
Courier, or furlongs, that he dispatched in nine hours of the day 1200
furlongs, Plin. l. 2. c. 71. p. 35. Lips. Ep. Cent. 3. Ep. 59. p. 269. Solin.
c. 6. p. p. 191.
even as far as Scycione to Elis, and returned from thence by the third hour of
the night: And the same Pliny speaks of it as a known thing; We know those now
adays, says he, who will dispatch 160 miles in the Cirque upon a wager.

Lips. ibid. p. 270.
5. There was one Philippus, a young man, a Soldier, and one of the Guard to
Alexander the Great, who on foot and armed, and with his weapons in his hand,
did attend the King; for 500 furlongs as he rode in his Chariot. Lysimachus
often profer'd him his Horse, but he would not accept him; I wonder not at the
space he measured, as that he performed it under such a weight of arms.

Bake^'s Chr. p. 256.
6. King the Henry Fifth of England, was so swift in running, that he with two
of his Lords, without Bow or other Engine, would take a wild Buck or Do in a
large Park.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 388
7. Harold, The Son of Canutus the Second, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom
of England; he was surnamed Harefoot, because he ran as swift as a Hare.

Zuing. ibid. ^. 388.
7. Ethus, King of the Scots, was of that swiftness, that he almost reached that
of Stags and Greyhounds; he was therefore vulgarly called Alipes, wing'd-foot;
though otherwise un^ it for Government, cowardly and a slave of pleasure.

Zuing. ibid. p. 388.
9. Starchaterus, the Suecian was a valiant Giant, excelling in strength of
body, and of incredible swiftness of foot; so that in the compass of one day he
ran out of the upper Suecia into Denmark, a journey which other men could
hardly perform, in the compass of twelve days, though on horseback.

10. The Piechi are a sort of Footmen who attend upon the Turkish Emperor,
Lips. Epist. Cent. 3. Ep. 59. p. 271.
and when there is occasion, are dispatched hither and thither, with his Orders
or other Messages: They run with such admirable swiftness, that with a little
Polaxe, and a Viol of sweet Waters in their hands, they will run from
Constantinople to Hadrianople in a day and a night, that is about 160 Roman
miles.

11. Luponus a Spaniard was of that strength and swiftness, Zuing. ibid. p. 388.
that with a Ram laid on his shoulder, he equaled any other in the Race, that
was to be found in his time.

12. Under the Emperor Leo, Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 7^. p. 343. Zuing.
vol. 2. l. 5. p. 388. Lips. Epist. Cent. 3. Ep. 59. p. 270.
who succeeded Marcian, there was a Greek named Indacus, a valiant man, and of
a wonderful footmanship; he would run faster than any other of the Athenian or
Spartan Footmen before mentioned. One might see him at parting, but he vanished
presently like lightning, seeming as if he flew over Mountains and steep
places, rather than run; he could ride more way in one day, without being
weary, than the best Post could have done with so many Horses of release, as he
could take without staying in any place; when he had made in a day much more
way than a Post could do with all his speed; the next day he returned to the
place from whence he departed the day before, and went again from thence the
next day for some other place, and never left running, nor could stay long in
any place.

13. Justin tells how the Daughter of Gargoris King of the Curetes, Justin. l.
44 p. 321. Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 75. p. 344.
having suffered her self to be defiled, was delivered of a Son called Habides;
whom the Grandfather (desirous to hide his Daughters shame) caused to be
exposed, and in a solitary place left to the mercy of the wild Beasts; but an
Hind brought him up tenderly, as if he had been a Fawn of her own; so that
being grown somewhat great, he would run swiftly like the Stags, with which he
leaped and skip'd in the Mountains: Finally, he was taken in a snare, presented
to Gargoris, and by peculiar marks upon his body known, and owned by him to be
the Son of his Daughter, who admiring the strange way of preservation, left the
Crown to him, as his Successor.

12. Polymnestor, Solin. c. 6* p. 190.
a Boy of Milesia, was set out by his Mother, to keep Goats, under a Master who
was the owner of them; while he was in this employment; he pursued a Hare in
sport, overtook and caught her, which known, he was by his Master brought to
the Olympic Games, and there as victor in the Race, gained the Crown, in the
forty and sixth Olympiad, says Bocchus.

15. The news of the defeat of the Persians by the Romans in their Country,
Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 19. p. 385. Purch. Pilg. tom. 1. l. 4. c. 4. 5.
p. 407.
was quickly brought unto the Emperor Theodosius the younger, by a man he had,
whose name was Palladius, one that had rare gifts, both outwardly in body, and
inwardly in mind; he was able in three days to ride in such Post as was to be
wondered at, unto the furthest places and bounds of the Roman and Persian
Dominions, and back again in so many days to Constantinople. Moreover, he went
with marvelous great speed throughout the World, whither soever the Emperor
sent him. So that a wise man said once of him, This fellow with his celerity,
makes the Empire of Rome, which is very wide to be narrow and strait. When the
King of Persia heard of him, he could not choose but wonder.

16. They have Casq^is or Posts in Peru, which are to carry tidings or Letters;
Purch. Plig. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 9. 2. p. 1066.
to which purpose they had Ho^ses a league and a half asunder; and running each
man to the next, they would run fifty leagues in a day and a night.

Purch. Pilgtom. 1. l. 6. c. 12. p. 798
17. The Ru^he are a Tribe of the Arabians, not rich, but in agility of Body
miraculous; and account it a shame, if one of their Footmen be vanquished by
two Horsemen; nor is any amongst them so slow, that he will not out go any the
swiftest Horse, be the journey never so long.

Plut. Moral. lib. de. Tranquil. anim. p. 154.
18. Brison was a famous runner of Races; and reputed of great swiftness; with
this man Alexder the Great contended one time for the Victory in Footmanship.
Brison, intending to please the King, seemed to saint and to lag behind, and
thereby to yield the honor of the course unto him; but the King being
advertised hereof, was mightily offended, and displeased with him about it.

Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 5. c. 5. p. 204.
19. Iphiclus, the Son of Phylacus and Clymenes. has wonderful things spoken of
his swiftness of Foot, especially by the Poet Hesiod, by whom he is said (I
suppose by an Hyperbole) to run over the Ears of standing Corn; and by
Demaracus, to be able to walk upon the Sea.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Men of Expedition in their Iourneys, and quick dispatch in
other Affairs.
THe English Ambassador had prevailed with the Turkish Sultan, to introduce
some of our Musitioners into the Seraglio, that he might hear a more excellent
sort of Music, than as yet he had been acquainted with: but they were so long
in tuning their Instruments; that whether he thought that the best they could
make, or that he would not allow himself any further leisure, up he rose and
departed. He who made such haste in his Recreations, was no doubt as enpedite
in his business, as the following in their Journeys and other Affairs.

Live. l. 37.
1. Titus Sempronius Gracchus, a smart young man, set out from Amphissa, and
with change of Horses upon the third day arrived at Pella.

Lips. Ep. Cent. 3. Ep. 59. p. 272.
2. M. Cato, with wonderful speed came from Hidruntum to Rome upon the fifth day.

3. Julius Caesar, with incredible expedition, made often such journeys, Lips.
ibid. 272.
that in his Litter he would travel at the rate of one hundred miles a day: He
came from Rome to Rhodanus, (says Plutarch) upon the eighth day; that is about
800 miles.

Lips. ibid. p. 272.
4. Icelus, the freedman of Galba, out went him far; for (as Plutarch says) to
bring his Patron the news of Nero's death, and to congratulate his arrival to
the Empire, he went from Rome, and upon the seventh day came to Clunia, which
is almost the middle of Spain.

Lips. ibid. p. 273.
5. M^thridates (says Appianus) with change of Horses measured one thousand
furlongs in one day, that is one hundred twenty five Roman miles.

Lips. ibid. p. 273.
6. Beyond him went Hambal, (as says the same Appianus) who being overthrown by
Scipio, with one in his company, came in two days and two nights to Adrumetum,
which is about three hundred seventy and five m^les, that is, in a day and a
night one hundred eighty seven miles and a half.

7. Yet was he also outstrip'd by that Messenger, Capitol.
which was sent by M^ximus to the Senate of Rome, to carry news of Maximinus
his death: He ran, says Capitolinus, with that post haste, that (changing
Horses) upon the fourth day from Aquileia he got to Rome, seven hundred ninety
seven miles, which is almost two hundred miles for day and night.

8. Tiberius Caesar, Sueton. in Tiberio p. 127. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 5. p. 146.
when his Brother Drusus lay sick in Germany, changing his Chariot Horses, only
three times, in a night and a day dispatched a Journey of two hundred miles,
and dead, he accompanied his Corpse out of Germany to Rome all the way on foot.

9. John Lepton of Kepwick, Full. Worthies, p. 231 York. Sanders. Hist. of K.
James, Anno 1606. p. 333. Fayths. Annalist. p. 201.
in the County of York Equite, one of the Grooms of the privy Chamber to King
James, undertook for a wager to ride six days together betwixt York and London,
being sevenscore and ten miles, and he performed it accordingly to the greater
praise of his strength in acting, then his discretion in undertaking it. He
first set forth from Aldersgate, May the 20 th. being Monday, Anno Dom. 1606.
and accomplished his journey every day before it was dark. After he had
finished his Journey at York to the admiration of all men, Monday the 27 th. of
the same Month, he went from York, and came to the Court at Greenwich to his
Majesty upon Tuesday, in as fresh and cheerful a manner, as when he first began.

10. In the year 1619. the 17 th. of July of King James his Reign, Baker's Chr.
p. 605. Stowe's Chr. p. 1032.
one Bernard Calvert of Andover rode from St. Georges Church in Southwark to
Dover, from thence passed by Barge to Callice in France, and from thence
returned back to St. Georges Church the same day; setting out about three a
clock in the morning, and returned about eight a clock in the evening fresh and
lusty.

11. Osterly House in Middlesex was built in the Park by Sir Thomas Gresham,
Full. Worthies, p. 177 Middlesex.
who there magnificently entertained and lodged Q. Elizabeth; her Majesty found
fault with the Court of this House as too great, affirming that it would appear
more handsome, if divided with a Wall in the middle. What does Sir Thomas, but
in the night time sends for Workmen to London, (Money commands all things) who
so speedily and silently apply their business, that the next morning discovered
the Court double, which the night had left single before; its questionable
whether the Queen next day was more contented with the conformity to her fancy,
or more pleased with the surprise, and sudden performance thereof.

12. Sir Thomas More was Lord Chancellor of England; Full. worthies, p. 208
209. London.
in which place he demeand himself with great integrity, and with no less
expedition. In testimony of the latter, it is recorded, that calling for the
next cause, it was returned unto him, there are no more to be heard; all suits
in that Court depending, and reading for hearing, being finally determined;
whereupon a Rythmer had this.

When More some years had Ch^nc'lor been,
No more suits did remain:
The same shall never more be seen,
Till More be there again.
13. In Fabius Vrsinus, a Child but of eleven years of age, Dr. Reynold's
Treatise of the Passions. p. 14.
there was so rare a mixture of invention and memory, that he could unto five
or six several persons at the same time dictate the words and matter of so many
several Epistles, some serious, some jocular, all of different arguments;
returning after every short period from the last to the first, and so in order,
and in the conclusion, every Epistle should be so close, proper and coherent,
as if it alone had been intended.

Danet. in the life of Comines, prefixed to his History.
14. Philip de Comines, Knight and Lord of Argenton, Privy Counselor to Lewis
the eleventh King of France, was a person of those rare and quick parts, that
he often indicted at one time to four Secretaries, several Letters of weighty
affairs, with as great facility and readiness, as if he had but one matter in
hand.

Strada. Clarks mir. c. 77. p. 349.
15. Anthony Perenot, Cardinal Granvel, was of so nimble a wit, that he
sometimes tired five Secretaries at once, with dictating Letters to them, and
that in several tongues, for he understood seven languages exactly: none of
that age surpassed him for eloquence; he was Bishop of Arras at twenty four
years of age, and had audience in the Council of Trent, for the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, where he made a quick and elegant Oration.

F^ll. Worth. p. 9. H^^shire.
16. Sir Thomas Lakes was born in the Parish of S. Michael in Southhampton, and
through several under offices, at last preferred Secretary of Estate to King
James: incredible his dexterity in dispatch, who at the same time would indite,
write, discourse more exactly than most men could severally perform them. Men
resembled him to one of the Ships Royal of Queen Elizabeth, called the
Swiftsure, such his celerity and solidity in all affairs. He fell at last (for
the faults of others) into the King's displeasure; yet even then (when outed of
his Secretaries place) King James gave him this public Eulogy in open Court,
That he was a Minister of State fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe.

Plin. l. 7. c. 25. p. 168.
17. For vigor and quickness of spirit, I take it that Caius Caesar Dictatour
went beyond all men besides: I have heard it reported of him, that he was wont
to write, to read, to indite Letters, and withal to give audience to suitors,
and hear their causes all at one time. And being employed (as it is well known)
in so great and important affairs, he ordinarily indicted Letters to four
Secretaries at once: and when he was freed from other greater business, he
would other whiles find seven of them work at one time.

18. Henricus ab Heers mentions a young man of fourteen years of age, H^^ric.
ab H^ers, obs. med. l. 1. obs. 13. p. 131.
who used to dictate to four of his School-fellows four different Verses, and
at the same time made a fifth himself. He was called the youth with the great
memory: he afterward applied himself to Physic, wherein he is a Practitioner
(says he) this year, 1630.

Spartian. p. 90.
19. It is said of Adrian the Emperor, that he used to write, dictate, hear
others discourse, and talk with others at the same time; and that he so
comprehended all public accounts, that every diligent Master of a Family
understood not so well the affairs of his own private house.

B^k^^'s Chron. p. 375. Hist. o^ life (...) death o^ Cardinal Woolsey by Mr.
Cavendi^h. c. 2.167.
20. King Henry the Seventh had occassion to send a Messenger to the Emperor
Maximilian, about a business that required haste, he thought none more ^it for
this employment, than Mr. Thomas Woolsey, then his Chaplain, he called him,
gave him his errand, and bade him make all the speed he could. Woolsey departed
from the King at Richmond about noon, and by next morning was got to Dover, and
from thence by noon next day was come to Calis, and by night was with the
Emperor, to whom declaring his message, and having a present dispatch, he rode
that night back to Calis, and the night following came to the Court at
Richmond: the next morning he presented himself before the King, who blamed him
for not being gone, the matter requiring haste. To whom Woolsey answered, That
he had been with the Emperor, dispatched the business, and showed the
Emperor's Letter. The King wondered much at his speed, bestowed presently upon
him the Deanery of Lincoln, and soon after made him his Almoner. This was the
first rise of that a^terwards great Prelate, Cardinal Woolsey.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Fatness and Vnwieldiness of some Men, and the Lightness of
the Bodies of others.
ERasmus tells us of the Gordii, Eras. in A^dag.
that whereas other Nations were used to make choice of their Kings for some
real excellency or virtue they had in them above others, these people had a
custom to advance him to the Throne of their Kingdom, who was the fattest and
most corpulent that could be found: perhaps being of a peaceable disposition of
themselves, they would have their Princes (whom they could no otherwise
restrain) to be clogged at least with Fetters of fiesh, lest they should prove
over active, and more stirring than was conducing to their quiet. I know not
what ease can be expected from him who is become a burden to himself, as some
of the following persons were.

1. Zacutus speaks of a young man who was grown to that huge thickness and
fatness, Zaeut. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 3. obs. 108. p. 416.
that he could scarce move himself, much less was he able to go or set one step
forward: he continually sat in a Chair, oftentimes he was oppressed with that
difficulty of breathing, that he seemed to be choked; he was in perpetual fear
of being suffocated, or that he should speedily die of an Apoplexy, Convulsion,
Asthma, or Syncope. How he was afterward cured by Zacutus himself, may be seen
in that observation of his cited in the Margin.

2. Polyeuctus Sphettius was a man of great corpulency: Plut. in Phocion^. p.
746. Trenchfields history improved. p. 42.
he one time made a long Oration amongst the Athenians, to persuade them to
enter into a war with King Philip of Macedon. In the speaking of which, by
reason of the heat and his own fat, he had frequent recourse to a Bottle of
Water which he had about him for that purpose. When he had ended, Phocion rose
up: And my Masters (said he) is it fit to give credit to this man concerning
the management of a war? What think you would become of him in the midst of a
Battle when his Helmet and Breast Plate were on, seeing he is in such danger of
death with the bare labor of speaking?

3. Dionysius (the Son of that Clearchus who was the first Tyrant in Heraclea)
by reason of his voluptuous life, Athenaeus l. 12. c. 12. p. 549. Ae^ian. Var.
hist. l. 9. c. 13. p. 242.
and excessive feeding, became so corpulent, that by reason of his fat he was
pressed with difficulty of breathing, and in a continual fear of suffocation;
whereupon his Physicians appointed, that as often as he fell into any profound
sleep, they should prick his sides and belly with very long and sharp Needles;
he felt nothing while they passed through the fat, but when they touched upon
the sensible flesh, then he awaked. To such as demanded Justice he gave
answers, opposing a Chest betwixt him and them, to cover all the rest of his
body, so that nothing but his face did appear without it. He died in the fifty
fifth of his age, when he had reigned thirty tree years, excelling all the
Kings his Predecessors for humanity and easiness of access.

Donat. hist. med. mirab. l. 5. c. 2. p. 274.
4. Sanctius King of Spain, Son of Ranimirus, carried such a heap of fat, that
thence he was called Crassus, being now grown a burden to himself, and having
left almost nothing untried to be quit of it. At length by the advice of Garsia
King of Navarre, he made peace with Miramoline King of Corduba, went over to
him, was honorably received, and in his Court was cured by an herb prescribed
by the Physicians of that King.

Donat. ib. p. 274.
5. Gabriel Fallopius tells, that he saw a man, who being extremely fat, his
skin was so thickened, that he lost all feeling, by reason of the over
impaction of the Nerves thereby. Cael. l. 11. c. 13. p. 502. Gyral. hist. poet.
tom. 1. Athen. l. 12. c. 13. p. 552. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 492. Aelian. hist.
l. 9. c. 14. p. 244. Athen. deip. l. 12. c. 12. p. 549, 550.


6. Philetas of Coos was an excellent Critic, and a very good Poet, in the
time of Alexander the Great, but withal he had a body of that exceeding
leanness and lightness, that he commonly wore shoes of Lead, and carried Lead
about him, lest at some time or other he should be blown away with the wind.

7. Ptolomaeus Euergetes the seventh King of Egypt, by reason of his
sensuality and luxurious life, was grown (says Possidonius) to a vast bulk,
his Belly was swollen with fat, his waste so thick, that scarce could any man
compass it with both his arms: he never came out of his Palace on foot, but he
always leaned upon a staff. His Son Alexander (who killed his Mother) was much
fatter than he, so that he was not able to walk, unless he supported himself
with two Crutches.

Athen. l. 12. c. 12. p. 550.
8. Agatharcides tells of Magan, who reigned fifty years in Cyrene, that living
in peace, and flowing in luxury, he grew to a prodigious corpulency in his
latter years, insomuch that at last he was suffocated with his own fat, which
he had gained in part by his idleness and sloth, and partly by his Epicurism,
and excessive gluttony.

Athen. l. 12. c. 13. p. 562.
9. Panaretus, the Scholar of Arcecilaus the Philosopher, was in great
estimation with Ptolomaeus Euergetes, and retained by him with an annual
stipend of twelve Talents. It Is said of this man he was exceeding lean and
slender, notwithstanding which, he never had any occasion to consult any
Physician, but passed his whole life in a most entire and perfect health.

Athen. l. 12. c. 13. p. 551.
10. Cynesias was called (by Aristophanes and others) Philyrinus, because he
girt himself round within boards of the wood Philyra, and that for this reason,
lest through his exceeding talness and slenderness he should break in the waste.

Donat. hist. mirab. l. 5. c. 2. p. 274.
11* I have seen a young Englishman, who was carried throughout all Italy, and
suffered not himself to be seen without the payment of money: he was of that
monstrous both fatness and thickness, that the Duke of Mantua and Montferat,
commanded his picture to be drawn to the life, and naked, as of a thing
altogether extraordinary.

Donat. Ibid. p. 274.
12. Vitus a Matera was a learned Philosopher and Divine, but so fat, that he
was not able to get up a pair of stairs; he breathed with great difficulty; nor
could he sleep lying along without present danger of suffocation. All this is
well known to most of the Students in Naples.

13. Alphonsus Avalus being dead, his body was opened, Kornman. de mirac. more.
p. 6. c. 23. p. 11.
and the carcass taken care of by Physicians, and dried as much as might be
with salt, and sand, and other things; yet for all this the fat of his body ran
through his Chest of Lead whereinto he was put, and larded the stones of the
Vault upon which it stood.

14. Anno 1520. there was a Noble Man born in Diethmarsia, Zuing. Theatr. Vol.
2. l. 2. p. 279.
but living sometime in the City of Stockholm in Sueden; this man was sent to
prison by the command of Christierne the Second, King of Denmark: when he came
to the prison door, such was his extreme corpulency, that they who conducted
him were not able to thrust him in at it. The Guard that went to convey him
thither were to hasten back, to assist in the torturing of some other persons;
so that being extreme angry to be thus delayed, they thrust him aside into a
corner thereabouts, and by this means the man escaped being put into prison as
was intended.

15. Pope Leo the tenth of that name, Zuin. 3. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 279.
had so mighty a Belly, and was so extremely corpulent, that to this very day,
his fatness is proverbial in Rome; so that when they would of a man that is
extraordinary well fed, they use to say of him that he is as fat as Pope Leo.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Longaevity and length of life in some persons.
HE who has but dipped into Anatomy, can easily apprehend that the life of man
hangs upon very tender filaments; considering this, with the great variety of
diseases that lie in ambush ready to surprise us, and the multitude of
accidents that we are otherwise daily liable unto, it is not the least of
wonders, that any man should have his life drawn out but to a moderate space:
Sunt quos saliva crassior male lapsa per fauces subi^^ strangulaverit, says
Seneca: Their very spittle has ended them: so little is sufficient to thrust us
out of this earthly tenement, the nearer the felicity of them that ^ollow.

1. There is a Memorial entered upon the wall of the Cathedral of Peterborough
for one, Full. Worth. p. 293. Northamptonshire.
who being Sexton thereof, interred two Queens therein, Katharine Dowager, and
Mary of Scotland, more than fifty years interceding betwixt their several
sepultures. This vivacious Sexton also buried two Generations, or the people in
that place twice over. The instance of his long life is alleged by such who
maintain, that the smelling to perfect mould made of men's consumed bodies is a
preservative of life:

2. Richa^d Chamond Esquire received at God's hand an extraordinary favor of
long life, Full. Worth* p. 211. Cor^wal. Ca^^w's survey of C^rnwal. p. 18.
in serving in the office of a Justice of Peace, almost sixty years; he saw
above ^ifty several Judges of the Western Circuit, was Uncle and great Uncle to
three hundred at the least, and saw his youngest child above forty years of age.

3. Garsias Ar^tinus lived to a hundred and four years in a continued state of
good health, and deceased without being seized with any apparent disease,
Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p. 1098.
only perceiving his strength somewhat weakened. Thus writes Petrarch of him,
to whom Garcias was great Grand^ather by the Father's side.

Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 165. V^rulam hist. life and death. p. 135.
4. A while since in Herefordshire at their Mayga^^es (says my Lord of S.
Albans) there was a Morris Dance of eight men, whose years put together, made
up eight hundred, that which was wanting of an hundred in some, superabounding
in others.

Baker's Chron. p. 502. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 166. Faith. Annal. p.
118. Full. Worth. Ha^tshire. p. 8. Sander^on's hist. Ma. Q. Scots p. 76.
V^rulam hist. life and death. p. 110.
5. I have been credibly informed, that William Pawlet Marquess of Winchester,
and Lord Treasurer of England twenty years together, (who died in the tenth
year of Queen Elizabeth) was born in the last year of Henry the Sixth: he lived
in all an hundred and six years and three quarters, and odd days, during the
Reign of nine Kings and Queens of England. He saw (says another) the children
of his children's children, to the number of an hundred and three, and died
1572.

6. Georgias Leontinus a famous Philosopher lived in health till he was an
hundred and eight years of age: and when it was asked him by what means he
attained to such a fullness of days, his answer was, by not addicting himself to
any voluptuous living.

V^^l. i^i^. p. 134.
7. Most memorable is that of Cornarus the Venetian, who being in his youth of a
sickly body, began to eat and drink first by measure to a certain weight,
thereby to recover his health, this cure turned by use into a diet, that diet
into an extraordinary long life, even of an hundred years and better, without
any decay of his senses, and with a constant enjoyment of his health.

V^ral. ibid. p. 128.
8. Hippocrates Co^s the famous Physician, lived an hundred and four years, and
approved and credited his own art by so long a life.

Hak^w. Ap^^^g. l. 3. ^. 1. 6. p. 166.
9. Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall, assures us upon his own knowledge, that
fourscore and ten years of age is ordinary there in every place, and in most
persons accompanied with an able use of the body and their senses. One Polezew
(says he) lately living, reached to one hundred and thirty. A Kinsman of his
to one hundred and twelve. One Beauchamp to one hundred and six. And in the
Parish where himself dwelt, he professed to have remembered the decease of four
within fourteen weeks space, whose years added together, made up the sum of
three hundred and forty. The same Gentleman made this Epigram or Epitaph upon
one Brawne an Irish Man, but a Cornish Beggar.

Here Brawne the quondam Beggar lies,
Who counted by his tale
Some sixscore winters and above,
Such Virtue is in Ale.
Ale was his Meat, his Drink, his Cloth,
Ale did his death deprive:
And could he still have drunk his Ale,
He had been still alive,
Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p. 1095. V^rulam hist. li^e and death. p. 101. Verulam
ib. p. 106.
10. Democritus of Abdera, a most studious and learned Philosopher, who spent
all his life in the contemplation and investigation of things, who lived in
great solitude and poverty, yet did arrive to an hundred and nine years.

11. Galeria C^piola a Player and a Dancer, was brought upon the Stage as a
Novice, in what year of her age is not known, but ninety nine years after, at
the Dedication of the Theater by Pompey the Great, she* was shown upon the
Stage again, not now for an Actress, but a wonder. Neither was this all, for
after that, in the Solemnities for the life and health of Augustus, she was
shown upon the Stage the third time.

12. Simeon the Son of Cleophas, Verulam ibid. p. 116* 117.
called the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of Jerusalem, lived an hundred and
twenty years, though he was cut short by Martyrdom. Aquila and Priscilla, first
S. Paul's Hosts, afterward his fellow laborers, lived together in a happy and
famous Wedlock at least to an hundred years a piece, for they were both alive
under Pope Christus the First.

13. William Postel a Frenchman lived to an hundred and well nigh twenty years,
Verulam ib. p. 134.
and yet the top of his beard on the upper lip was black, and not gray at all.

14. Johannes Summer-Matterus my great Grandfather by the Mother's side,
Plateri obs. l. 1. p. 233, 234.
of an ancient and honorable Family, after the hundredth year of his age,
married a wife of thirty years, by whom he had a Son, at whose wedding, which
was twenty years after, the old man was present, and lived six years after
that; so that he completed an hundred and twenty six, without complaining of
any more grievous accidents than this, that he could not prevent escapes, by
reason of wind. Six years before his death my Father his Grandchild discoursing
with him, he told him, that there were in that Diocese ten men yet left who
were more aged than himself.

15. Arganthonius was the King of the Tartessians, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14.
Herodot. l. 4. p. 67, 68. Plin. l. 7. c. 48.
and had been so for eighty years, when the Phocensians, (who were the first of
all the Greeks who opened the way into the Adriatic Sea, and visited
Tyrrhenia, Iberia and Tartessus) came to him. He lived to an hundred and twenty
years, says Herodotus.

16. In the last Taxation, Plin. l. 7. c. 29. Verul. hist. life and death. p.
108, 109, 110.
Number and Review of the eighth Region of Italy, there were found in the Roll
(says Pliny) four and fifty persons of an hundred years of age: seven and
fifty of an hundred and ten: two of an hundred five and twenty: ^our of an
hundred and thirty: as many that were of an hundred five and thirty: or an
hundred of seven and thirty years old: and last of all three men of an hundred
and forty. And this search was made in the times of Vespasian the Father and
Son.

17. Galen the great Physician, Fulgos. l. 8^ c. 14. p. 1096.
who flourished about the reign of Antoninus the Emperor, is said to have
lived one hundred and forty years. From the time of his twenty eighth year he
was never seized with any sickness, save only with the grudge of a Fever, for
one day only. The rules he observed, were, not to eat nor drink his fill, nor
to eat any thing raw, and to carry always about him some one or other perfume.

18. James Sands of Horborne in Staffordshire, Full. Worth. p. 47.
Staffordshire. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 166.
near Birmingham, lived an hundred and forty years, and his Wife one hundred
and twenty; and died about ten years past. He outlived five Leases, of twenty
one years a piece, made unto him after he was married.

19. I my self (says Sir Walter Rawleigh) knew the old Countess of Desmond of
Inchequin in Munster, Rawleigh. hist. world. l. 1. c. 5. 5. p. 166. Full.
Worth. p. 310. Northumberland.
who lived in the year 1589, and many years sin^e, who was married in Edward
the Fourth's time, and held her jointure from all the Earls of Desmond since
then, and that this is true, all the Gentlemen and Noble Men in Munster can
witness. The Lord Bacon casts up her age to be an hundred and forty at the
least, adding withal, Ter per vices dentisse, that she recovered her teeth
(after the casting them) three several times.

Full. Worth. p. 11. Shropshire. Barthol. hist. Anatom. cent. 5. hist. 28. p.
47, 48.
20. Thomas Parre, Son of John Parre, born at Alberbury in the Parish of
Winnington in Shropshire, he was born in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth,
anno 1483, at eighty years he married his first wife Jane; and in the space of
thirty two years, had but two children by her, both of them short lived, the
one lived but a Month, the other but a few years. Being aged an hundred and
twenty he fell in love with Katherine Milton, and with remarkable strength got
her with child. He lived to above one hundred and fifty years. Two months
before his death he was brought up by Thomas Earl of Arundel to Westminster: he
slept away most of his time, and is thus characterised by an eyewitness of
him. From head to heel his body had all over
A quick set, thick set, natural hairy cover.
Change of air and diet, better in it self, but worse for him, with the trouble
of many Visitants, or Spectators rather, are conceived to have accelerated his
death, which happened, Westminster, November the fifteenth, anno 1634, and was
buried in the Abbey Church there.

Fulgos. l. 8 c. 14. p. 1092, 1093.
21. Titus Fullonius of Bononia, in the Censorship of Claudius the Emperor (the
years being exactly reckoned, on purpose to prevent all fraud) was found to
have lived above one hundred and fifty years. And L. Tertulla of Arminium in
the Censorship of Vespasian was found to have lived one hundred thirty seven
years.

22, Franciscus Alvarez says, that he saw Albuna Marc. chief Bishop of
Aethiopia, Hakewell. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 165. Purch. pilg. p. 481. Barthol.
hist. Anat. cent. 5. hist. 28. p. 46. Camerar. hor. subcis. cent. 2. c. 68. p.
278. Iohnst. not. hist. 6. class. 10. c. 6. p. 342. Vincent. le le Blan^'s
Travails. tom. 1. c. 22. p. 80. Versteg. Restit. of decayed intellig. p. 323.
Baker's Chron. p. 73. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 165. Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14.
p. 1098. Verul. hist. li^e and death. p. 132. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p.
169.167. Purchase. pilgr. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 8. 2. p. 961.
being then of the age of one hundred and fifty years.

23. There came a man of Bengala to the Portugals in the East Indies, who was
three hundred thirty five years old; the aged men of the Country testified that
they had heard their Ancestors speak of his great age. Though he was not Book
learned, yet was he a speaking Chronicle of the forepassed times: his teeth had
sometimes fallen out, yet others came up in their rooms. For this his
miraculous age, the Sultan of Cambaia had allowed him a pension to live on,
which whas continued by the Portugal Governor there, when they had
dispossessed the Sultan aforesaid.

24. Johannes de temporibus, or John of times, so called because of the sundry
ages he lived in: he was Armor-bearer to the Emperor Charles the Great, by
whom he was also made Knight. Being a man of great temperance, sobriety and
contentment of mind in his condition of life, residing partly in Germany where
he was born, and partly in France, lived unto the ninth year of the Emperor
Conrade, and died at the age of three hundred and threescore and one year, anno
1128 (1146 says Fulgosus) and may well be reckoned as a miracle of nature.

25. That which is written by Monsieur Besanneera (a French Gentleman) in the
relation of Captain Laudonneireis second voyage to Florida, is very strange,
and not unworthy to be set down at large. Our men, says he, regarding the age
of their Paracoussy, or Lord of the Country, began to question with him
thereabout, whereunto he made answer, that he was the first living original
from whence five Generations were descended, showing them withal another old
man, which far exceeded him in age; and this man was his Father, who seemed
rather an Anatomy than a living body, for his Sinews, his Veins and Arteries,
his Bones and other parts appeared so clearly through his skin, that a man
might easily tell them, and discern them one from another. Also his age was so
great that the good man had lost his sight, and could not speak one only word
without exceeding great pain. Monsieur d' Ottigny having seen so strange a
sight, turned to the younger of these two old men, praying him to vouchsafe to
answer to that which he demanded touching his age, then called he a company of
Indians, and striking twice upon his thigh, and laying his hands upon two of
them, he showed by signs, that these two were his Sons: again striking upon
their thighs, he showed him others not so old, which were the children of the
two first; and thus continued he in the same manner to the fifth Generation.
But though this old man had his Father alive more old than himself, and that
both their hairs was as white as was possible, yet it was told them, that they
might yet live thirty or forty years more by the course of nature, though the
younger of them both was not less than two hundred and fifty years old.

26. Guido Bonatus an Astronomer, Fulgos. l. 8, c. 14. p. 1098.
and a man of great Learning, says, he saw a man whose name was Richard, in
the year 1223, who told him, that he was a Soldier under Charlemain, and had
now lived to the four hundredth year of his age.

27. That is a rarity which is recited by Thuanus, Iohnst. not. hist. class.
10. c. 6. p. 342.
that Emanuel Demetrius, a man of obscure birth and breeding, lived one hundred
and three years, his wife was aged ninety and nine; she had been married to him
seventy five years, the one superviv'd the other but three hours, and were both
buried together at Delph. 103.

28. In the Kingdom of Casubi the men are of good stature, Vincent. le Blanc's
Travails. tom. 1. c. 34. p. 155.
something tawny: the people in these parts live long, sometimes above an
hundred and fifty years, and they who retire behind the Mountains, live yet
longer.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the memorable old age of some, and such as have not found such
sensible decays therein as others.
THe Philosopher Cleanthes being one time reproached with his old age, I would
fain be gone, said he; but when I consider, that I am every way in health, and
well disposed either for reading or writing; then again I am contented to stay.
This man was so free from the common infirmities of Age, that he had nothing
whereof to accuse his; the like vegeteness and sufficiency, both in body and
mind, as to all sorts of Affairs, by a rare indulgence of Nature, is sometimes
granted to extremity of Age.

1. Sir Walter Raleigh, Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 166.
in his discovery of Guiana, reports that the King of Aromaia, being an hundred
and ten years old, came in a morning on foot to him from his House, which was
fourteen English miles, and returned on foot the same day.

2. Buchanan in his Scottish History, Camerar. hor. subcis. cent. 2. c. 68. p.
277. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. ^. p. 166.
toward the latter end of his first Book, speaking of the Orcades, names one
Lawrence, who dwelling in one of those Islands, married a Wife after he was one
hundred years of age and more, and that when he was sevenscore years old, he
doubted not to go a fishing alone in his little Boat, though in a rough and
Tempestuous Sea.

3. Sigismundus Polcastrus, a Physician and Philosopher at Padua, Schenck. obs.
l. 4. obs. 4. p. 539.
read there fifty years; in his old age, he buried four Sons in a short time,
at seventy years age he married again, and by this second Wife had three Sons,
the Eldest of which called Antonius, he saw dignified with a Degree in both
Laws. Jerome, another of his Sons, had his Cap set on his Head, by the hand of
his aged Father, who trembled and wept for joy; not long after which the old
man died, aged ninety four years.

Plat. obs. l. 1 p. 27^.
4. To speak nothing, faith Platerus, but what is yet fresh in memory, and
whereof there are many witnesses. My father Thomas Platerus, upon the death of
my mother, his first wife, Anno 1572. and the 73d year of his age, marrying a
second time (within the compass of ten years) he had six children by her, two
sons, and four daughters; the youngest of the daughters was born in the 81st
year of his age, two years before he died; who, if he was now alive in this
year, 1614, would be aged 115 years, and would have a Granddaughter of one
year old by Thomas his son: And which is memorable betwixt two of his sons; I
Foelix was born, Anno 1536. and Thomas, 1574. the distance betwixt us being
thirty eight years; and yet this brother of mine, to whom I might have been
Grandfather, is all gray, and seems elder than my self; possibly, because he
was gotten when my father was stricken in years.

Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 1 236. Sabellic. Exempl. l. 1. c. 7. p. 48.
5. M. Valerius Corvinus attained to the fulfilling of an hundred years; betwixt
whose first and sixth Consulship there was the distance of forty seven years,
yet was he sufficient (in respect of the entireness of his bodily strength) not
only for the most important matters of the Commonwealth, but also for the
exactest culture of his fields; a memorable example, both of a Citizen, and
Master of a Family.

6. Metellus equaled the length of his life, and in extreme age was created
Pontiffe, Val. Max. ibid. p. 238. Coel. Rhod. ^ect. Antiq. l. 19. c. 20. p.
for twenty two years he had the ordering of the Ceremonies; in all which time
his tongue never faultred in solemn prayers, nor did his hand tremble in the
offering of the sacrifices.

Melch. A. ^ dam. i^ vit. ^erm^. Med. p. 141.
7. Nicholaus Leonicenus, famous in the Age he lived, and an Illustrator of
Dioscorides: He was in the ninety sixth year of his age when Langius heard him
at Ferrara, where he had taught more than seventy years. He used to say, that
he enjoyed a green and vegete age, because he had delivered up his youth chaste
unto his man's estate.

Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 236, 237. Plin. Hist. l. 7. c. 14. p. 163. Solin. c.
4. p. 178. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 337 Sabellic. Exempl. l. 1. c. 7. p. 46.
8. Massanissa was the King of Numidia for sixty years together, and excelled
all other men, in respect of the strength, of an admirable old age; appears by
the relation of Cicero; that for no rain or cold he could be iuduc'd to cover
his head: they say of him, that for some hours together, he would continue
standing in one and the same place, not moving a foot, till he had tired young
men, who endeavored to do the like, when he was to transact any affair
sitting, he would in his Throne persist oftentimes the whole day without
turning his body on this or the otherside, for a more easeful posture: when he
was on Horseback, he would lead his Army, for the most part, both a complete
day, and the whole night also; nor would he in extreme age remit any thing of
that, which he had accustomed to do when he was young. He was also ever so able
in the matter of Venus, that after the eighty sixth year of his age, he begat a
Son, whose name was Methymnatus; and whereas his Land was waste and desert; he
left it fruitful by his continual endeavors in the cultivation of it; he lived
till he was above ninety years of age.

9. Appius Claudius Caecus, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 236.
was blind for the space of very many years; yet notwithstanding, he was
burdened with this mischance, he governed four Sons, five Daughters, very many
dependants upon him; yea, and the Commonwealth it self, with abundance of
Prudence and Magnanimity. The same person having lived so long, that he was
even tired with living; caused himself to be carried in his Sedan to the
Senate, for no other purpose than to persuade them from making a dishonorable
peace with King Pyrrhus.

10. Gorgias Leontinus, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 237. Plin. l. 7. c. 48. p.
174. Sabellic. Exemp. l. 1. c. 7. p. 47.
the Master of Isocrates, and diverse other excellent persons, was in his own
opinion a very fortunate man. For when he was in the hundred and seventh year
of his age, being asked why he would tarry so long in this life: Because, says
he, I have nothing whereof I can accuse my old age: being entered upon another
age, he neither found cause of complaint in this, nor left any in that, which
he had passed.

11. Xenophilus the Pythagorean Philosopher, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 237.
Plin. l. 7. c. 50. p.
was two years younger than the former, but not a whit inferior in respect of
his good fortune; for as Aristoxenus the Musician says, he died free of all
those incommodities that attended upon humane Life, he enjoyed a very perfect
health; and left the world when he was in the highest splendour and reputation
for a person of the most perfect and exact Learning.

12. Lemnius tells of one at Stockholm in Sweden, Camer. ^orsubcis. Cent. 2. c.
68. p. 277. Lemnlus de occult. not. Mir. l. 4. c. 24.
in the Reign of Gustavus, Father of Ericus, who at the age of one hundred
married a Wife of thirty years, and begat Children of her; and says moreover,
that this man (as there are many others in that Country) was of so fresh, and
green old age, that he scarce seemed to have reached more than ^ifty years.

13. Isocrates in the ninety fourth year of his age, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 4.
p. 337. Sabel. l. 1. c. 7. p. 47.
put forth that Book of his, which he intitles Panathena^tus; he lived fifteen
years after it, and in that extreme age of his, he was sufficient for any work
he undertook, both in Strength, and Judgment, and Memory.

14. Agesilaus, Zuin. vol. ^. l. 4. p. 337.
King of Sparta, though he had attained to a very great age, yet was often seen
to walk without Shoes on his Feet, or Coat on his Back, in Frost and Snow; and
this for no other cause than that being now an old man, he might give those
that were young an example of patience and tolerance.

15. Asclepiades the Prusian gave it out publicly, Pli^. Sab. l. 10. c. 8. p.
69. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 4 p. 337.
that no man should esteem of him as a Physician, if ever he should be sick of
any Disease whatsoever; and indeed, he credited his Art, for having lived to
old age, without alteration in his health; he at last fell headlong down a pair
of Stairs, and died of the fall.

16. Mithridates, Cael. Rhod. Ant* lect. l. 29. c. 17. p. 1365.
King of Pontus, who for forty years managed a War against the Romans, enjoyed
a prosperous health, and to the last of his life used to ride, to throw
Javelins, and on Horses disposed at several Stages rode one thousand furlongs
in one day; and also could drive a Chariot, that was drawn with sixteen Horses.

CHAP. XXXII. Of some such Persons as have renewed their Age, and grown young
again.
IT is the fiction of the Poets, that Medaea was a Witch, that she boiled men
in a Cauldron, with I know not what powerful ingredients, till such time as she
had restored the Aged unto Youth again. The truth was, that being a Prudent
Woman, by continued Exercise, and hard Labors in hot places; she restored
t^ose to health, who were soft and effeminate, and had corrupted their bodies
by idleness and sloth. Much may be done this way to preserve the body in its
useful vigor and firmness; and to prevent those Dilapidations and mines; which
an unactive life usually brings upon a man; but what is this to the following
wonderful relation?

Fuller's Worthies, p. 308, 309. Northumberland.
1. Concerning Machel Vivan, Dr. Fuller has set down a Letter sent him from
Alderman Atkins his Son thus: There is an acquaintance of mine, and a friend of
yours, who certifi'd me of your desire of being satisfied of the Truth of that
Relation I made concerning the old Minister in the North. It fortuned in my
Journey to Scotland, I lay at Alnwick in Northumberland one Sunday by the way:
and understanding from the Host of the House, where I lodged, that this
Minister lived within three miles of that place; I took my Horse after dinner,
and rode thither to hear him preach for my own satisfaction. I found him in the
Desk, where he read unto us some part of the Common Prayer, some of holy
David's Psalms, and two Chapters, one out of the Old, and the other out of the
New Testament, without the use of S^^ctacles. The Bible, out of which he read
the (...) was a very small printed Bible. He w^nt afterward into the Pulpit,
where he Prayed and Preached to us about an hour and a half; his Text was, Seek
ye the Kingdom of God, and all things shall be added unto you. In my poor
judgment, he made an excellent good Sermon, and went clearly through without
the help of any Notes. After Sermon, I went with him to his house, where I
proposed these several following Questions to him: Whether it was true, the
Book reported of him, concerning the Hair? whether or no he had a new set of
Teeth come? Whether or no his Eyesight ever failed him? And whether in any
measure he found his Strength renewed unto him? He answered me distinctly to
all these, and told me he understood the Newsbook reported his Hair to become a
dark brown again, but that is false, he took his Cap off and showed me it. It
is come again like a Child's, but rather flaxen, than either brown or gray: For
his Teeth he had three come, within these two years, not yet to their
perfection; while he bred them, he was very ill. Forty years since he could not
read the biggest print without Spectacles, and now he bl^sseth God there is no
print so small, no written hand so small, but he can read it without them: For
his strength, he think himself as strong now as he has been these twenty
years. Not long since he walked to Alnwick to dinner, and back again six North
Country miles. He is now one hundred and ten years of age, and ever since l^st
May; a hearty body, very chearful^ and stoops very much, he had five Children
after he was eighty years of years, four of them lusty Lasses, now living with
him, the other died lately; his Wife yet hardly fifty years of age; he writes
himself Machel Vivan, he is a Scottish man, born near Aberdeen; I forget the
Towns name, where he is now Pastor, he has been there fifty years.

Windsor, Sept. 28. 1657. Your assured loving Friend* Thomas Atkins.




2. To this may sitly be annexed a Letter which Plempius says he saw under the
hand of this wonderful old man himself, Francis^. Plemp. fandam. Med. Munit.
Sect. 4. c. 8. p. 120.
dated from Lesbury, October. the 19th. 1657. to one William Lialkus, a Citizen
of Antwerp, which is as follows.

Whereas you desire a true and faithful messenger should be sent from
New Castle to the Parish of Lesbury, to enquire concerning John Maklin; I gave
you to understand, that no such man was known ever to be, or has lived there
for these fifty years last past, during which time I Patrick Makel Wian have
been Minister of that Parish. Wherein I have all that time been present,
taught, and do yet continue to teach there. But that I may give you some
satisfaction, you shall understand that I was born at Whithorn in Galloway in
Scotland, in the year 1546. bred up in the University of Edinburgh, where I
commenced Master of Art, whence traveling into England, I kept School, and
sometimes preached; till in the first of King James, I was inducted into the
Church of Lesbury, where I now live. As to what concerns the change of my body,
it is now the third year since I had two new Teeth, one in my upper, and the
other in my nether Iaw, as is apparent to the touch. My sight much decayed many
years ago, is now about the hundred and tenth year of my age, become clearer;
Hair adorns my heretofore bald Skull. I was never of a fat, but a slender mean
habit of body; my diet has been and moderate, nor was I ever accustomed to
feasting and tippling, hunger is the best sauce; nor did I ever use to feed to
satie^y. All this is most certain and true, which I have seriously, though over
hastily confirmed to you under the hand of

Patrick Makel Wian Minister of Lesbury.


3. That worthy person, Barthol. Hist. Anatomic. Cent. 5. Hist. 28. p. 51.
D. Pieruccius, a Lawyer of Padua, and Host to the great Scioppius, did assure
me, that a certain German, then living in Italy, had at sixty years of age
recovered to himself, both new Teeth and black Hair, and had extended his life
to a great many years, with the only use of an extract of black Hellebore, with
Wine and Roles.

4. Alexander Benedictus tells of Victoria Fabrianensis, Donat. Hist. Med.
mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 300.
a Woman of fourscore years of Age, that then her Teeth came anew, and that
though the Hair of her Head was fallen off, yet it also came afresh.

5. Torquemada assures us, that being at Rome about the year 1531. it was
bruired throughout Italy; Hak^wels Apolog. l. 3. c. 1. 6. p. 167, 168.
that at Tarentum there lived an old man, who at the age of an hundred years,
was grown young again; he had changed his skin like unto the Snake, and had
recovered a new being; withal he was become so young and fresh, that those who
had seen him before could then scarce believe their own eyes; and having
continued above fifty yeas in this Estate, he grew at length to be so old, as
he seemed to be made of Barks of Trees; whereunto he further adds, another
story of the like Nature.

Camer. hor. sa^ris. Cent. 2. c. 68. p. 278. Hak^w. Apol. p. 168.
6. Ferdinand Lopez of Castegnede, Historiographer to the King of Portugal, in
the eighth Book of his Chronicle relates, that Nonnio de Cugne, being Viceroy
at the Indies. In the year 1536. there was a man brought unto him, as a thing
worthy of admiration; for that it was aver'd by good proofs, and sufficient
Testimony, that he was three hundred and forty years old. He remembered that he
had seen that City, wherein he dwelt unpeopled, being then when he spoke it one
of the chief Cities in all the East Indies. He had grown young again four
times, changing his white Hair, and recovering his new Teeth; when the Viceroy
did see him, he then had the Hair of his Head and Beard black; although he had
not much: and there being by chance a Physician, at the time present; the
Viceroy willed him to feel the old man's Pulse, which he found as good and as
strong, as a young man in the prime of his age. This man was born in the Realm
of Bengala, and did affirm, that he had at times near seven hundred Wives,
whereof some were dead, and some were put away. The King of Portugal being
advertised of this wonder, did often inquire, and had yearly news of him by the
Fleet, which came from thence; he lived above three hundred and seventy years.

Delrio. disquis. Magic. lib. Donat. Hist. Med. Mi^ab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 300.
7. An old Abbatess, being decrepit, suddenly became young, her monthly co^rses
returned, her rugged and wrinckled skin grew smooth, her hoary hairs became
black, and new teeth in her head, and paps swelled after the manner, as is
usual with Virgins.

Sandys in Ovid. M^tam. l. 7. p. 146.
8. The ^lesh of a Viper prepared and eaten, clari^ies the eyesight,
strengthens the sinews, corroberates the whole body; and according to
Dioscorides, procures a long and healthful age, in so much, as they are
proverbially said to have eaten a snake, who look younger than accustomed; nor
is the Wine of Vipers less sovereign. I have heard it credibly reported, by
those who were eyewitnesses, how a Gentleman, long desperately sick, was
restored by these means to health with more than accustomed vigor; his gray
hairs, whereof he had many, falling all from his head; and so continuing for
seven years after.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of such Persons as have changed their Sex.
NAture seems to be so in love with change, that she will have nothing here in
this World, to rest in a continued and constant state: Hence it is that Rivers
seek out new Channels for themselves; new Cities arise out of the ruins and
rubbish of the old; the tops of Olympus, Aetna and Parnassus do not appear so
high to us, as they did to our Forefathers: and the very Heavens themselves
look almost daily upon us with different Faces. But whether there have been
such changes in Humane Bodies, as those whereof this Chapter treats, that I
must rest upon the credit of such Authors, as have been the Relators of the
following Histories.

1. It is no Lie or Fable that Females may be turned into Males, Plin. Not.
Hist. ^l. 7. c. 4. p. 158. Sab^llic. Ex. l. 9. c. 10 p. 513.
for we have found it recorded in the Annals, that in the year when Publius
Licinius Crassus, and Caius Cussius Longinus were Consuls of Rome: there was in
Cassinum, a Maidchild, under the hand and tuition of her Parents, who became a
boy; and by the appointment of the Aruspices, was consigned to a certain Desert
Island, and thither conveyed.

2. Licinius Mutianus reports that himself saw at Angos one named Arescon,
Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 14. Sabellic. Ex. l. 9. c. 10. p. 513.
who before time had to name Arescusa, and was a Maid, but afterward in
process of time came to have a Beard, as also the parts testifying a man, and
thereupon married a Wife.

3. There was in Smyrna a Virgin called Philotis, He^w. Hierarch. l. 7. p. 478.
Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 282.
but in the same night, wherein she was married to a young man; those parts
which were inverted and concealed, began to appear, and she rose in the Morning
of a contrary Sex.

4. A marvelous thing also happened in our age, Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 187,
188. Wier. op^ra. p. 337. Koraman. de mirac. vivor. p. 44.
says Fulgosus, when Ferdinand the First was King of Naples, Ludovicus Guarna,
a Citizen of Salerne, had five Daughters, of which the two Eldest were call
Francisca and Carola, both which at fifteen years of age, found such alteration
in themselves, that they changed their Feminine Habits and Names also, the one
being called Franciscus, and the other Carolus.

5. In the Town of Erguira, Zacch. q^* Med. legal. l. 7. p. 494. Wier. op^ra.
p. 337. Schot. Med. curios. l. 1. c. 31. p. 146. Donat. Hist. mirab. l. 6. c.
2. p. 298.
distant some nine miles from Conimbra, there lived a Nobleman who had a
Daughter named Maria Pachecha, who by a like accident with the former, proving
to be a young man, changed her habit, and called her self Manuel Pachecha, who
after made a voyage into the Indies, became a valiant Soldier, attained to much
wealth and honor, and returning, married a Lady of a Noble Family; but never
attained to have Issue, and his countenance continued effeminate to the day of
his death, says Amatus Lusitanus. Consult. Medic. Cent. 2. curat. 39.

6. Strange is that, Schott. Physic. curios. l. 1. c. 31. p. 146. Heyw.
Hierarch. l. 7. p. 478.
which is related by Antonius Torquemada, not far from the City of Beneventum
in Spain, a Countryman of a mean fortune, married a Wife, who (because she was
barren) used her very roughly, insomuch, that she lead with him a very
discontented life. Whereupon one day putting on one of her Husbands Suits, to
disguise her self from knowledge; she stole out of the House, to seek out a
more peaceable fortune elsewhere. And having been in diverse services, whether
the conceit of her man's habit, or whether Nature strangely wrought in her, but
she found a notable alteration in her self; insomuch, that she who had been a
Wife, desired to perform the office of a Husband. She married a Woman in that
place, where she had retired her self. Long she kept these things close, till
in the end, one of her familiar acquaintance traveling by chance that way, and
seeing her to be so like that Woman he before knew: he demanded if she were not
Brother to such a man's Wi^e, who had forsaken her Husbands House so many years
since: to whom, upon promise of secrecy, she revealed all that you have heard
with the circumstances before rehearsed.

Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 4. p. 158.
7. I my self am an eyewitness, says Pliny, that in A^frick one Cossicius a
Citizen of Tisdri^^ turned from a woman to be a man upon her very wedding day,
and was alive at that time that I wrote this Book.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 6. p. 502 P^leg. Trallian. lib. de mirab.
8. At Laodicea in Syria there was a woman called Aeteta, who living with her
Husband, was turned into a man, and her name thereupon altered into that of
Aetetus. Marinus was then President at Athens, and Lucius Lamias and Aelianus
Vetus Consuls at Rome. Phlegon Trallianus the freed man of Adrian the Emperor,
says he saw her.

Live. Hist. l. 4.
9. Q. Fabius Maximus, and M. Claudius Marcellus being Consuls, a woman of
Spoletum became a man.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 4. p. 502.
10. It is manifest, says S. Augustine, that in part of Campania, during the
Reign of Constantine the Emperor, a Maid became a Man, and was carried to Rome.

Schenck. ibid. p. 507.
11. At Rome in the time of Alexander, a Maid upon her wedding day became a Man.

Donatus in Hist. Med. mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 297.
A woman of Cajeta that was married to a Fisherman (as Antonius Panormit^
related it to us, says Pontanus) after ^ourteen years acquaintance with her
Husband's Bed, was changed from a woman to a man. Upon which being ashamed of
her self, as one exposed to the derisions of men and women: she altered also
her course of life, and entered into a Monastery, in which he was known to us
the rest of his life. He was buried in the Church of S. Mary.

Donat. Hist. Med. mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 297. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 188.
13. There was a woman called Aemilia, married to Antonius Spentas a Citizen of
Ebulum, who after twelve years marriage became a Male, married a wife, and when
a controversy arose about the restoring of her Dowry by her Husband: Masius
Aquosa, by the command of King Ferdinand, ended the Suit; adjudging her Dowry
to be repayed unto her.

Paraeus, l. 4. c. 5. p. Schenck. obs. l. 4. obs. 6. p. 503.
14. Antonius Loqu^neus affirmed unto me (says Pareus) that he saw a man (at
Rhemes in an Inn which had a Swan ^or the sign of it, Anno Dom. 1560) who was
ever reputed a Female, to the fourteenth year of her age; at which time it fell
out, that wantoning in bed with a Maid that lay with her, the signs of a man
brake out of her; which when her Parents were informed of, by the interposition
of E^clesiastical Authority, her name was changed from Joan to John, and from
thenceforth she wore the habit of a man.

Paraeus, l. 4. c. 5. p. Schenck. l. 4 obs. 6 p. 503 Schott. Physic. curios. l.
1. c. 31. p. 145. Saudys on Ovid. Metam. l. 9. p. 184.
16. Some years since, says the same Paraeus, when I was in the rotinue of
Charles the Ninth; at Vitriac in France, there was showed me a man, called
Germanus Garui^rus, by some Germanus Maria, who before having been a Woman, was
called Maria, he was of an indifferent Stature, a square habit of Body, with a
thick and red Beard. He was taken for a Virgin unto the fifteenth year of his
age, at which time ^running after the Hogs he kept (which had gotten into the
corn) and leaping over a Ditch with great violence; it came to pass, that the
membran^ being broke, the hidden evidences of a man, suddenly descended, and
discovered themselves, not without pain. Returning to their Cottage, with tears
she complained to her Mother, that her Bowels fell out, at which Spectacle, her
Mother astonished (consulting with Physicians and Surgeons) was informed
that her Daughter was become a man. The whole matter therefore being
represented to the Cardinal Bishop of Lenuncurium, he called an assembly, where
she received the name and habit of a man.

16. I have heard the like, Schenck. obs. l. 4. obs. 6. p. 503.
says Montanus, of another Virgin, which I had related unto me by the
Illustrious Queen Elionora, Cousin German to the Emperor Charles the Fifth.

17. Anno 1574. D^^at. Hist. mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 298.
While I am writing these things (says Donatus) in the City of Spoleto, in
Vmbria, a Girl of eighteen years of age, the Daughter of one Toraccia, and
Sister to John Franciscus de Anguilo of Norcia, was changed into a man, as is
witnessed by diverse inhabitants of that place.

18. In my time (says Cuelniannus) at Corbeil, Schenck obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 6.
p. 503.
a Town of France, near unto the Sequana, there was a Girl, who for fourteen
years had been educated amongst the Maids, habited as they, and by no
difference discernible from the rest of them; yet about the time aforesaid, she
had such tostimonies about her, that pleaded she was no longer a Woman; that
she thereupon altered her Name and Apparel into those of a man. Cuelmannus
relates this upon the credit of a Physician, in a private Lecture of Anatomy,
in the presence of Cellareus and Wolphius, both eminent Physicians.

19. Phiethusa, Hipocrat. part 8. l. 6. Ep^dem. Aph^ 45. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2.
l. 2. p. 282.
heretofore the Wife of Pitheus Abdera, while she was young was very fruitful,
but her Husband being forced into exile; it ceased a long time to be with her
monthly, as it had used to be: whereupon she was seized with pains, and redness
in her joints: after which her whole Body became Manlike, all over rough and
hairy; she had also a Beard, and her voice was become more deep. We tried,
says Hipocrates, to Esseminate her again, but in a short time she died: And he
tells the like of Namysia, the Wise of Gorgippus, who also died, not long after
the same thing had befallen her.

20. But that almost surpasses all credit, Donat. Hi^t. mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p.
297.
which is told by Pontanus of a Woman, who after she had been delivered of a
Son, became a man, which yet he con^irms by the testimony of Antonius Colotius
the Vmbrian, and, says he, this fell out about the year of our Lord, 1496.

21. Empedocles of Agrigentum, Donat. ibid. p. 298. Schenck p. 503.
a stickler for the Pythagorean Philosophy, says thus of himself in
Pholastratus.

Et puer ipse fui, nec non quandoque puella.
I was both Boy and Girl at several times.
22. Ausonius tells of a Boy at Beneventum, Schenck. p. 503. Donat. ibid* p.
298.
who suddenly became a Girl, and he has it in these words.

Nec satis antiquum quod Campano in Benevento,
Vnus Epheborum Virgo repent fuit.
At Benevent (nor is it long ago,)
A youngster did unto a Virgin grow.
23. In Abas a City of Arabia, Where. his Annalss in Anno M. 3858. p. 473.
there was a certain Woman called Herais; she was the Daughter of one
Diophantus, a Macedonian, and begotten by him of an Arabian Woman: She was
married to one Samaides, after which she changed her Sex, and of a Woman became
a Man, taking upon her, her Fathers name Diophantus.

24. Antonius Di^^na, John. Choker. Fax Hist. cent. 1. c. 23.
a learned person, propounds the Question, whether a Nun being turned (...) is
obliged to become a Monk, or take (...) some Religious Order; he resolves it in
(...) ^^ive, in such words as these: There was a (...)t. Dominicks, in the City
of Vbeda; she (...) born in the Town called Sabiote, her name was ^^^^dalena
Mugnoz; the memory of her is yet fresh amongst us: This Woman in the seventh
year after she had taken upon her the profession of a Nun; was from a Woman
turned into a Man. Being hereupon expelled the Nunnery, she put on man's
clothes; a Beard grew upon her chin, and she was called Franciscus Mognoz. This
very Francis was afterward my Client; and I pleaded for him in a cause of
Rape; for a certain Woman accused him, that she was known by him by violence,
and got with Child. So that (adds he) if the like case shall fall out, seeing
the foresaid Nun (turned to a man) was turned out of the Nunnery; such person
without scruple may marry, or take Orders as he please.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the strange rigor in punishments used by several Persons and
Nations.
WHereas, amongst all the sorts of Beasts (how sierce and ravenous soever)
there is not any that uses to prey upon those of his own kind: Man, as if he
affected a brutality below that of the Beasts themselves; is not only a Wolf,
but a Devil to such as are of the same species with him. There are some men who
ever stretch their Wits for the invention of an ingenious cruelty, and who (as
if the visage of death was not sufficiently grim) study to shadow it with
unusual horrors: moding their punishments by the Council of Caligula, ita feri
ut sentiant se mori, they strive to assemble several deaths, and to bring them
so near together, that (if possible) they would give a thousand in one. How
prolifick the inventions of men have been in this kind, may be seen (in part)
by the Examples that follow.

Sandys Travels, l. 1. p. 62.
1. The Turks sometimes, even for small offenses, use to lay a man down upon his
back, hoist up his legs, and with a cudgel give him three or four hundred blows
on the Soles of his Feeet, that so the Veins which assemble there may convey
the pain to all the parts of the Body; and by this means the person so punished
is made lame.

Purch. Pilg. p. 1334. Sandys. ibid. 62, 63.
2. They have also amongst them a dreadful punishment, which is ganching; that
is, they let the Body of a Man fall from on high, upon certain Hooks, that are
^astned below, on purpose to catch hold of him; and being thus taken, they
suffer them there to hang until they die, by the anguish of their wounds, or
else more miserable famine.

Purch. ibid. p. 1334. Sandys. ibid. p. 63.
3. They have another which is yet more terrible; him whom they have designed to
this punishment, they draw over a Gibbet, and putting a small Cord about his
naked Waste, two men pulling at the two ends, they enforce him to draw up his
breath; still pulling it strait^r and straiter, till they have made him very
small; then with one blow they cut him off in the middle; that done, they clap
the upper part on an hot Iron, or Plate of Copper, that ^ears up the Veins;
whereby they keep him in sense of intolerable pain so long as they can. The
person thus used, will retain both sense and discourse till he is taken down,
and then he departs in an instant: while the upper part of the body is thus
barbarously dealt with, they throw the nether part of it to the Dogs.

4. While Sir Thomas Roe was Ambassador at the great Moguls Court, Purch. Pilg.
vol. 1. p. 557.
he saw some of his Nobles whipped (by his command) for drunkenness in this
manner: They were stripped stark naked, and had one hundred and thirty stripes a
piece, with a most terrible instrument, having four Cords, and at the ends of
each of them Irons like Spurrowels, so that each stroke made four wounds: and
when by reason of this cruelty, they lay for dead upon the ground; the Mogul
caused the standers by to kick them, and the Porters to break their staves upon
them; when they were thus mangled and bruised, they were carried out, one of
them dying in the place.

5. The Muscovites, Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. ^. p. 160.
in the Examination of Thieves, Homicides, and the like, instead of putting to
the Rack, to extort a confession, they cause cold Water to be let fall drop by
drop (from an high place) upon their bare heads; and this they look upon as a
most intolerable punishment.

6. In China, Al^^rez. Seemed. History of China, part 1. c. 28. p. 143.
they have two sorts of Racks, that of the Feet, and that of the Hands; for the
Feet they use an Instrument, called Kia Qu^n; it consists of three pieces of
wood put in one traverse, that in the middle is fixed, the other two is
moveable, between these their Feet are put, where they are squeezed and
pressed, till the Heel-bone run into the Foot: For the Hands, they use also
certain pieces of wood, they call them Teanz^; these small pieces they put
betwixt the Fingers: then they straiten them very hard, seal them round about
with Paper, and so they keep them for some space of time.

7. The punishment with Ice amongst the Northern Nations is this: Zuin. Theat.
vol. 1. l. 2. p. 199.
They digg a hold in the Ice in two places, at distance from each other, then
they tie the guilty person to a long Rope, then throw him into one of the
holes; and then under the Ice, with a swift motion, they draw him through the
Water out at the other hole.

8. A most horrible and cruel punishment is that amongst the Persians, Plut.
Parrel. in Artaxerx. p. p. 10019. Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 85. p. 403.
Fulgos. l. 9. c. 2. p. 1153 Lonicer. Theat. p. 351. Zonarae Annal. ^ont. 1.
sol. 21. Pez^l. Mel^^fic: tom. 1. p. 194.
by which Mithridates the Domestical Servant of Artaxerxes was put to death.
They take two Troughs, made on purpose so even, that the one is neither longer
nor broader than the other. He that is to be punished, is to be laid on his
back, in one of them, and then covered with the other; after which they are
both fastened together, yet so as the Feet, Hands and Head lie without them, by
holes made for that purpose; all the rest of the Body being covered and hid
within: while he thus lies, he has Meat given, as much as he will eat, and if
he will not eat, they constrain him to it by force, pricking his Eyes with
Needles; when he has eaten, they give him to drink Honey mingled with Milk, and
they pour thereof not only into his Mouth, but also upon his Face, turning him,
so that the Sun ever more strikes into his Eyes; insomuch, that his Face is
continually covered over with Flies. And for as much as he does within this
Trough all the necessities of nature, that a man eating and drinking is forced
unto, of the filth and rottenness of his excrements there are worms engendered,
which eat into his body: when they see that the miserable creature is dead,
they take off the upper trough, and find his flesh all eaten by this Vermin
even to his entrails. The forementioned Mithridates, when he had languish'd in
this misery the space of seventeen days, he died at last in grievous and
horrible torments. All this was to this great favorite at the instance of
Parysatis (the Mother of Artaxerxes) without any other reason, fave that having
drank too much (by the policy of a crafty Courtier) he was provoked to speak
too freely, and to boast of his valor absurdly.

Sutton. in Tiberio. c. 52.157. Fulgos. l. ^9. c. 2. p. 1160. Lonic^r. Theatr.
p. 352. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 2. p. 1168.
9. Tiberius Caesar invented a new kind of torment; for he caused the privy
members of some he was displeased with, to be tied fast with a Lute string, and
then forced them to immeasurable drinking, till by the extreme torture of their
retained urine they expired.

10. Otho Antonius Earl of Monsferat, and Prince of Vrbin, caused a boy of his
that waited upon him in his Chamber, to be wrapped up in Searcloths of Sulphur,
Pitch and Rosin, and so to be burnt alive in manner of a lighted torch; the
only cause he used him with this cruel severity, was, for that he neglected to
awake him at the precise hour he had appointed.

Fulgos. l. 9. i. 2. p. 1169.
11. Nicholaus Picinius, when under Duke of Milan, he besieged the City of Album
Ingaunum, he there took Valens Fogatius, and forasmuch as he was found to have
carried Letters from the Besieged, he caused his head and heels to be tied
together, till the man was thus turned in manner of a Globe, then he ordered
that he should be shot into the City from the mouth of such a Gun as the
Italians call Bricola, with a Mortar-piece; so that though the man died before
he touched the earth, yet with that high fall he had, and force of the powder,
he lost all humane form, and few of his limbs were to be gathered up, some
being lost by the way.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 199.
12. Dracula was the Prefect of the Transalpine Hungary: he is reported to have
caused the feet of such Turks as he had taken prisoners, to be flayed, and then
rubbed over with Salt, that done, he commanded Goats to be brought to lick the
Salt and raw soles of their feeet, that with the asperity and roughness of
their tongues they might increase their torments.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 2. p. 1168.
13. Mahomet, Emperor of Constantinople used extreme severity to such Captives
as he had taken, and thought their service unprofitable, through age, or other
impediment: for he caused the end of a long pole to be thrust up into their
fundament, the other end of it was fastened in the earth; thus were they raised
up on high, as it were sitting upon the upper end of the pole, being in this
state he caused meat to be reached up to them, so long as their torments would
suffer them to continue alive.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 200. Lamprid.
14. Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor, when a Notary had returned a false
Breviate of a Cause into the Emperor's Council, he caused the Nerves of all
his fingers to be cut so, that from thence forth he was never able to write.

Virgil. Aeneid, ^. 8. p. 266.
15. Such as had the misfortune to fall into the displeasure of Mezentius, were
used with a cruelty agreeable to the salvage and barbarous disposition of that
Tyrant. The best of Poets has thus described it: Mortua quinetiam jungebat
corpora vivis,
Componens manibusque manus, atque oribus ora;
Tormenti genus, and ^anie taboque fluentes
Complexu misero longa sic morte necabat.
Dead bodies to the quick he joined, and
Composing face to face, and hand to hand,
Flowing with putrid filth (strange torments) by
Embraces foul he slowly caused to die.


16. Augustus Caesar being at Supper with Vedius Pollio, Wieri opera p. 812,
813. in lib. de ira. Fulgos. l. 5. c. 1. p. 558. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 353.
Sandys T^avels. l. 4. p. 200. Xophil. p. 57. in Augusto.
it fell out that a servant of Pollio's brake a Crystal Glass, who straight
commanded he should be haled to capital punishment: and what was that? but to
throw him for food to his Lampreys, many of which he kept in a pond near his
house; the boy breaking from them that were seizing of him, ran in to Caesar,
cast himself at his feet, and besought him, not that he might not die, but that
he might not die that unheard of and cruel death, Caesar astonished at the form
of this unusual cruelty, commanded forthwith that the boy should be dismissed
his service, and be at liberty, all the Glasses of that curious workmanship to
be broken in his presence, and the Fish Pond to be filled up: For, said he, I
will take from Pollio all future occasion of falling into such precipitant
eversions of the mind, or of destroying his servant hereafter in so cruel a
manner, who, how base of birth soever, yet being a man, is of more value than
all the Glasses and Vessels of the world.

17. Lysimachus being displeased with his Friend Telesphorus the Rhodian, Wieri
opera p. 825. l. de ira.
caused his ears and nose to be cut off, and then having enclosed him in a
Cage, he fed him there as a strange and unusual creature, his maimed face
having made him lose all humane resemblance; hunger, and filth which his body
had contracted (being there left in its own dung) his exulcerated sides, by
reason of the straitness of his enclosure, these made him appear a foul and
frightful spectacle to all that looked upon him; and being thus made a monster
by his punishment, he was also deprived of all pity.

18. Attilius Regulus being prisoner at Carthage, Cam^rar. hor. subcis. cent.
2. c. 58. p. 245. Dinoth. memorabil. l. 5. p. 372, 373. Aul. Gell. noct. Attic.
l. 6. c. 4. p. 172. P^zel. mellific. hist. tom. 2. p. 47.
was by them shut up into a Dungeon, whereinto not so much as a glimpse of
light entered: a long time after he was hastily brought into the Forum, or
Market place, and laid right against the Beams of the scorching Sun, his
eyelids both the upper and the nether being turned, and tied so fast, that he
could not close them, but held his eyes staring against the Sun. The tormenters
keeping him in that case, and never suffering him to sleep, till he had ended
his days in that miserable torture. The news of his death being brought to
Rome, the Gentlemen of Carthage that were prisoners there, were by the
commandment of the Senate delivered into the hands of the Sons of Regulus, who
shut them into a press set all over with long and sharp pointed nails, where
they were never suffered to sleep, but standing and watching were forced to
recompense the loss of his life with that of their own.

19. An Irish Friar of the order of the Carmelites, in the Reign of King
Richard the Second, B^ker's Chron. p^ 202.
charged the Duke of Lancaster with heinous crimes, as that he intended to
destroy the King, and usurp the Crown, showing the time, the place, and other
circumstances of the whole plot, but the Duke, called to his answer, so cleared
himself, at least gave such colors of clearing, that the accuser was committed
to the custody of John Holland the King's half Brother, till a day appointed
for further trial. The night before which day, the said Lord Holland, and Sir
Henry Green, are said to have come to this Friar, and putting a cord about his
neck, tied the other end about his privy members, and after hanging him up from
the ground, laid a stone upon his Belly, with the weight whereof his back bone
burst asunder; ther^by putting him to a most tormenting death. An act not more
inhumane than unadvised; for though it took away the accuser, yet it made the
accusation more suspicious.

20. B^ssus was the Prefect of Bactria, under Darius King of Persia, Wieri
opera. 824. i^ l. de ira. Zonar. Annol. tom. 1. sol. 32. Sabellic. ex l. 8. c.
4. p. 438. Justin hist. l. 12. p. v 38. Usser's Annals. A.M. 3675. p. 239.
who (when his Master had fought three Battles unfortunately with Alexander)
finding him in his flight, bound him, and having mortally wounded him, left him
to the mercy of his enemy then in pursuit. The Traitor afterward fell into the
hands of Alexander, who (to make him an example to late posterity) caused the
tops of two trees (growing over against each other) to be bent down together
with a mighty force, and his limbs to be tied fast to them both, which done,
the trees upon the sudden were left at liberty, and thus the body of the
miserable wretch, upon their parting was rent in sunder, this kind of
punishment the Greeks call Disphondonem.

M. de Seres General hist o^ Frace. p. 1178, 1179. Howel's Epist. vol. 1. Ep.
18. p. 30. Howel's hist. of Lewis 13. p. 7.
21. Francis Ravillac born in Angoulesme, by profession a Lawyer was that
infamous Villain who stabbed to the heart the most illustrious Henry the
Fourth, King of France, for which he was put upon the Rack the twenty fifth of
May, and had sentence of death passed upon him the twenty seventh day, and his
execution according to it, which was on this manner: He was brought out of
prison in his shirt, with a torch of two pound weight lighted in one hand, and
the knife wherewith he had murdered the King chained to the other, and then he
was set upright in a Tumbrel or Dungcart: in this m^nner he was carried to the
Greve, where there was a strong Scaffold built. At his coming up to the
Scaffold he crossed himself, a sign that he died a Papist, then he was bound
unto an Engine of Wood, made like unto S. Andrew's Cross, which done, his hand
with the knife chained unto it was put into a Furnace, then flaming with fire
and brimstone, wherein it was in a most terrible manner consumed, at which he
cast forth horrible cries like one tormented in Hell, yet would he not confess
any thing. After which, the Executioners having made pincers red hot in the
same Furnace, they did pinch his paps, the brawns of his Arms and Thighs, the
calves of his Legs with other fleshy parts of his body, pulling out collops of
flesh, and burning them before his face, then they poured into those wounds
scalding Oil, Rosin, Pitch and Brimstone molten together: after which they did
set a hard roundel of clay upon his Navel, having a hole in the midst, into
which they poured molten lead, he roared out most horribly, yet he revealed
nothing. But to make the last act of his Tragedy equal in torments to the rest,
they caused four strong Horses to be brought to tear his body in pieces; where
being ready to suffer his last torment, he was again questioned, but would not
reveal any thing, and so died without speaking one word of God. But his Flesh
and Joints were so strongly knit together, as those four Horses could not in a
long time dismember him; but one of them fainting, a Gentleman who was present,
mounted upon a mighty strong Horse, alighted, and tied him to one of this
Wretches members, yet for all this they were constrained to cut the flesh under
his arms and thighs with a sharp Razour, by which means his body was the easier
torn in pieces, which done, the fury of the people was so great, that they
pulled his dismembered carcass out of the Executioners hands, which they
dragged up and down through the dirt; and cutting off the flesh with their
knives, the bones which remained were brought to the place of execution, and
there burnt, the ashes were scattered in the wind, being held unworthy of
earths burial. By the same sentence all his Goods were declared forfeit to the
King. It was also ordained, that the House where he had been born should be
beaten down (a recompense given to the owner thereof) and that never any other
should be built upon the ground: That within fifteen days after the publication
of the sentence by sound of Trumpet in the Town of Angoulesme, his Father and
Mother should depart the Realm, never to return again, if they did, to be
hanged without form of process, his Brethren, Sisters and other kindred were
ever forbidden even after to carry the name of Ravillac, enjoining them to take
another upon the like pains; the Substitute of the King's Attorney General
having charge to see the execution of the said sentence at his peril.

22. In the time of the Emperor Julian the Apostate, Ca^e^ar. hor. subcis.
cent. 1. c. 87. p. 407.
Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, after he had first been imprisoned in a Cave under
ground, he was afterward drawn forth and delivered to the youth of the City to
prick him with Bodkins: Finally, being anointed with Brine and Honey, and shut
in a Cage, he was therein hanged up to the Sun, that the Flies and Wasps might
eat him alive, which torment (says Suidas) he endured with invincible courage
and patience.

23. Galeacius Sforza, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 514. col. 2.
Duke of Milan, having heard the lamentation of a poor widow, over the corpse of
her Husband, who had lain unburied for three days, through the covetousness of
a Parish Priest, she having no money wherewith to purchase him a Grave, the
Duke commanded the price to be paid, the Grave to be dug, and the carcass to
be thrown upon the Priest; for he would that they should be both buried
together, the one dead, and the other alive, this was his command, and himself
took care for the execution of it accordingly.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the unusual Diseases wherewith some have been seized, and when,
and where some of them began.
THis world is a kind of great Hospital, wherein is contained a numberless
number of miserable creatures, wearied out with variety of infirmities and
diseases. Horace complains: Post ignem aetheria domo
subductum macies and nova febrium Horat car^^. l. 1. ode 3.

Terris incubuit cohors:
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Leti, corripuit gradum.
And as the impiety, luxury, and idleness of men has advanced, in the same
manner new diseases have encroached upon us, and those also accompanied with
such an unwonted malignity, and such unheard of symptoms as are sufficient to
excite the admiration of the Reader.

Zacut. Lu^it. prax. Adm. l. 3. obs. 37. p. 347.
1. In the year 1600, there was a plague which made great devastation almost
throughout all Europe, but especially in Spain. At that time I observed diverse
in a certain Village very strangely affected; for as soon as the plague had
seized them, they were suddenly deprived of all sense, their hair fell off
their heads, a livid pustule arose out at the end of their Nose, which in the
space of twenty four hours eat it all off, then were the sick taken with cold
and mortification of the extreme parts, and so presently died, not one of them
escaped.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 3. obs. 94. p. 396.
2. The Brasillans have a disease which makes great destruction amongst them,
it is called in their language Mahundo, the Portugals call it Bicho, and the
Dutch de Worm. In the first accession of the Disease, the Patient is pressed
with a spontaneous lassitude, an unusual heat in the fundament, and an
intolerable itch in those parts; if this be without a Fever, it is soon cured
with the juice of Lemmons: if neglected, the heat increases, an ulcer is bred,
from whence flows a great deal of matter; this is also curable with the juice
of Lemmons, and the juice of Tobacco; but if the ulcer through ignorance or
inadvertency be not heeded, then all medicine comes too late, the ulcer
spreads, the parts are mortified by inflammation, and (which is wonderful) all
this without Fever or Thirst, the sick are exhausted of all strength, and
falling into faintings, depart this life. A rare and strange disease, which is
observed to be only in the Western parts: and whose only Antidote is Lemmons,
and that of Tobacco.

3. The Carbuncle (which is so peculiar an evil to the Province of Narbon) came
first into Italy while L. Paulus and Quintus Marcus were Censors; Donat. hist.
medic. mirab. l. 6. c. 4. p. 308.
two consular persons, viz. Julius Rufus and Q. Lecanius Bassus died of it this
very year. It Is bred in the most private place of the body, and for the most
part under the tongue, it is a hard red pustule, black in the head of it,
sometimes livid, it swells the body, is without smart, itch, or any other
symptom besides sleep; and oppressing the patient with a heavy sleep, it sends
him out of the world in three days.

4. That Species of the Leprosy which is called Elephantiasis, came not into
Italy before the time of Pompey the Great: Donat. hist. med. mir. l. 6. c. 4.
p. 308.
it commonly began in the face, or at the Nostril, no bigger at first than a
small pease; it spreads it self all over the body, which it deforms with diverse
spots, unequal skin, and a rough scab, at last it turns black and wastes the
flesh unto the very Bones, making the Fingers and Toes in the mean time swell.
The Disease is peculiar to Egypt, and if it fall upon the King, is fatal to
the people; for Baths of humane blood are the usual and frequent remedies that
are prepared for him.

5. Albertus Krantzius tells, that at such time as Duke Godfrey of Bu^o^gn was
in the Holy War, about Niverna there was a strange kind of Disease discovered;
Krant. hist. Sax. l. 5. Donat. hist. mir. l. 6. c. 4. p. 310.
for men burnt, being touched with an invisible fire, a fire that pierced unto
the very bowels and vitals, by occasion of which, the hands of some, and the
feet of others fell off: the like was anno 1089, in the West part of Lorrain,
Gaulter. tab. chron. ^. 63^^

6. Procopi^^s speaks of a Famine amongst the Tuscans, Procop. de b^ll. Goth.
l. 2. Donat. hist. med. l. 6. c. 4. p. 310.
and thereby a Disease fell amongst them which took away many thousands: the
manner of their Disease and death he thus sets down: Having nothing to eat,
they became extenuated and pale, their skin clave to their bones; and whereas
choler too much abounded in them, the Gall overflowed and infected the body and
skin with its own tincture: at length the Disease prevailing, there was no
moisture left in the body, the skin was hard as leather that is tanned, their
visag^s were changed from livid unto black, and the men seemed like so many
quenched Torches, their countenance was stupid, and their aspect lowering like
unto those who are mad, and in this condition they died.

7. Forestus records, Forest. obs. medic. part. 3.
that in Siracuse there was an universal Disease called the Hungry Sickness, in
which people did desire continually to eat, and were never satisfied: of this
multitudes died. At last it was observed, that this disease came of Worms,
which were expelled by Bole Armoniack and Triacle.

8. Hippocrates tells of a Disease among the better sort of the Scythians,
Schenck. obs. med. l. 4. obs. 8. p. 504.
by which they become emasculated, and are called effeminate, being unable to
perform the office of Husbands, they put on the habit, and dispose themselves
into the society of women, where they handle the Distaff, etc. Hippocrates
supposes it may come from them by their too frequent and constant riding upon
Horses, by which their Hips are contracted, and they are made lame, to cure
which, they open both their veins behind the ears, and draw much blood thence,
which, says he, if any man do, he is speedily made barren.

9. That Pox which is the scourge of Whoremasters, Cites^ opusc. medic. 168.
did first break forth in anno. 1494, and from the Neapolitan Expedition was
derived unto all Europe, passing through all the Countries of it, by which
means it is called by some the French, the Spanish, the Neapolitan Pox.
Nicholaus Leoniceus without the injury of any Nation, calls it the Epid^mical
Scab. This Disease raged, during the whole year 1500, and in 1609, from new
symtoms it was called the Crystalline Scab, and was somewhat more mortal than
it had been before.

10. About anno 1530, Cites. opusc. med. p. 169. Donat. hist. medic. l. 6. c.
4. p. 309.
the Disease called the Scurvy did first infest Denmark, Norway and Lithuania
only, but now it is become deadly almost in all maritime places, especially to
Mariners, affecting them with putrefaction of the Gumbs, falling out of the
teeth, virulent ulcers of the Jaws, as stinking and noisome smell of the
breath, an oedematous tumor of the whole body, especially of the Legs and
Feet, with livid spots in the skin, which turn at last to malignant ulcers.

11. Johannes Baptista of Modena, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 350. col. 1.
at the rising of the Sun was every day seized with a vehement pain in the fore
part of his head, which pain did gradually increase till such time as the Sun
was got up to his meridian height; from that time his pain did diminish by
degrees, so that at Sunset it was quite gone.

12. When I was at Basil, says Cardan, for two years together a pestilence had
afflicted those only who were Helvetians, Schenck obs. med. l. 6. obs. 5. p.
176.
insomuch that in all that time (which is strange to relate) scarce one
Fr^nchman or Italian died of it.

13. Erasmus saw an Italian who spoke perfect Schenck. obs. l. 1. obs. 10. p.
137.
Dutch (which yet he had never learned) it was supposed he was possessed by the
Devil; but being freed of some Worms wherewith he was infested, he recovered,
not knowing that he had ever spoken Dutch.

Forestus de vitiis capitis. l. 4. Pl^t. in Sylla. p. 474, 475.
14. Forestus speak of a Gentleman of Portugal, out of whose body the Lice
swarmed so fast, that his two men did nothing else but sweep them off with
their hands; and this they did in that plenty, that they carried out Baskets
full of them. Of this loathsome disease died Sylla, Pherecides, Philip the
Second King of Spain, Acastus the Olynthian, Calisthenes, Mutius the Lawyer,
and Eunus the Author of the servile war.

15. About the year one thousand five hundred sixty, Sennert. prax. med. l. 5.
part. 2.8. p. 307. Cites. opusc. med. p. 169. Clark. mir. c. 103. p. 479.
or seventy, the Polonian Plica broke forth, which plats and twists the hair of
men and women in so terrible a manner, and so deforms their heads, that they
seem to be Gorgons. Their hair abounds with lice and matter, for they dare not
either clip it off, or disentangle it with a Comb; if any man presume to cut
off those locks, he is presently struck blind, or according to the variety of
parts in which the virulent humor is lodged, he is miserably tortured, his
bones are struck one against the other, his joints are loosed, and a convulsion
upon all the parts of his body; but if he nourish these locks and curls, though
he is strong and fleshy, yet nevertheless does he become weak, trembling and
bloodless* but if they fall off of their own accord, and thereupon the force of
the disease may have seemed to have spent it self, yet does it grow afresh upon
them; nor does it cease till it has twisted all their hair in this manner, and
filled it with nastiness and filth.

Polyd. virg. Angl. hist. l. 26. p. 561. Cites. opusc. med. (...). l. 6. c. ^.
p. 309. Baker's Chron. p. 341. Stowes Annals. p. 540. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l.
4. p. 338.
16. The Sweating Sickness in England began first in the beginning of the Reign
of Henry the Seventh, it ^eised men with a deadly Sweat all over the body, and
together with that a vehement pain and heat in the head and stomach infested
them; some in bed or up not able to endure the heat, threw off their clothes:
others in their thirst drank cold drink: and some there were who patiently
bearing both the heat and stink (for the sweat had a stinking smell) covered
themselves close, increasing their sweat, but all of them immediately, or at
least, not long after their beginning to sweat, died indifferently; so that
scarce one of an hundred of the sick recovered: the force of the Disease lasted
twenty four hours, and then (the sweating being over) they recovered; yet not
so but that many afterward relapsed and died of it. A strange mortality was
made by this Disease, for it slew so many, that Strangers wondered this Island
should be so populous as to bear and bury such incredible multitudes. Some have
observed, that no Stranger in England was touched by this Disease, yet the
English were chased with it, not only here, but in other Countries abroad,
which made them feared and avoided wheresoever they came. At last, the only
remedy found out for it was this, if it seized any while they were up, to lie
down with their clothes on, if in Bed, there to rest without rising for twenty
four hours, so covered in the mean time as not to provoke their sweating, but
to suffer it gently, and of its own accord to disti^, to take no food at all,
if able so to continue, nor any more of their accustomed (and that warm) drink
than to quench their thirst: above all, not to stir either hand or foot out of
the Bed, to cool themselves, for that was deadly to attempt.

17. It is reported by Authors worthy of credit (says Cardan) that at
Constantinople there arose a plague of a strange kind of nature, all that were
infected, Schenck. obs. med. ^. 6. obs. 3. p. 766. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 16. Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 2. c. 6. p. 51. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p.
442. Iul. Capitol. in Antonin. p. 181. Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 8. c. 12. p.
365. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 1^0.
or lay sick of it, seemed to themselves to be slain by another man, and
afflicted with this terror, they died; most of them (while sick) neither saw
nor heard, but lay as persons astonished, or Planet-struck, wholly disposses'd
of their senses and reason; and though they were in a Fever, accompanied with a
cough, yet were they cold and pale.

18. In the Reign of M. Antoninus Philosophus, and Aelius Verus, there was at
Babylon in the Temple of Apollo, a little Cabinet of Gold, which a Soldier
lighting on by chance opened, and thence breathed out such a pestilent air,
that it first infected the Parthians, then the adjacent Provinces, and crept on
to almost all the habitable world: such was the fury of that Plague, that it
destroyed almost the third part of mankind; it wasted Italy in that manner,
that the Farms, Fields and Towns were left without Inhabitants, so that they
grew up to Woods and Ruins; and almost all the military Forces were consumed
by it.

19. Gabriel Fonseca the chief Physician in Rome relates this History, Petr.
Serv^ dissertat. de ^ng^^. Armar. p. 25, 26.
a noble Nun of the illustrious Family of the Franchis, aged 27, of a hot and
dry temperament from her Birth, having formerly been variously affected, in the
Month of March, 1637, fell into such a wonderful voidance of urine, that
several times in the compass of one single day, exceeded the quantity of two
hundred pounds weight; her urine was thin, and of like consistence with water,
in which there swimmed above something like ^lakes of snow: and which was
observed equally wonderful in this profusion of water, wherein she had
continued for diverse days, she vehemently abhorred all kinds of drink: when I
persuaded her to it, lest she should wholly melt into urine, she thereupon
hated me, wept, and was angry with the Physician that attended her, for calling
me to his assistance. There was with us the excellent Benedictus Averrhinus, a
famous Physician in the City, also Io. Iacobus Baldinus a Physician of great
reputation both in the City and the World, the Physician in ordinary to the
Nunnery in Campo Martio wherein she abode; and yet this Nun in a few days after
recovered. After two Months she fell into an absolute suppression of urine,
burning with extraordinary thirst: when I then attended (by reason of the
absence of the ordinary Physician) and that she had made no water in fourteen
days: at last with the use of the Spirit of Turpentine she voided urine
copiously, with a matter in it resembling Sand and chalk.

20. The end of Maximinus the Tyrant is thus described by Eusebius: Eusebius.
Eccl. hist. l. 9. c. 10. p. 181.128. Camexa^. hor. subcis.
Having staid in the House while his Army was abroad, and hiding himself in his
privy Chambers and Closets, he was stricken throughout all his body, with a
strange and unknown Disease, so that he threw himself upon the ground
transpierced with griefs, vexed with the cruel twinge of torment, and
overwhelmed with a wolvish hunger that could never be satisfied. All his flesh
was taken with a secret fire sent from Heaven, so that as it were burnt, and
coming by little and little to be turned to ashes, there was no more any shape
of man to be seen in him, nothing being left but a carcass of bones all dry,
and as it were broiled, insomuch that they who attended him in that case, gave
out, that his body was as a sepulcher, in which stinking carcass the soul was
buried. The heat increasing within the marrow, ^his eyes fell out of his head,
so that he utterly lost his sight. Being in this miserable state, he confessed
himself taken, calling for death, and acknowledging it was the just recompense
of his fury, and insolence against Christ; he drove his soul out of that
infested den, wherein it was detained.

Joseph.
21. Antiochus, the Son of Demetrius, as he returned from Persia, was smote with
a remediless pain in his Bowels, intolerable torments in all his inward parts,
his Body breeding abundance of Worms, which issued out from the same, so that
he rotted above ground, and by reason of the intolerable stink of his putrefi'd
Body, no man could endure to come near him; nor was he himself able to endure
that noisome smell, that proceeded from him, so that he ended his life in much
misery.

Schenck. obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 10. p. 137.
22. Schenckius tells of a certain melancholy Rustic, who always when the Moon
was combust, made Verses; but the combustion being over about two days, he
uttered not one learnrd word: He tells also of a Woman, who falling into a
Disease, familiarly spoke Latin, who yet so soon as she was cured, knew not a
word of that Tongue.

23. Anno Dom. 654. in the eleventh year of Constance the Emperor, Zuin.
Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 543. col. 2 Gault. tab. Chr. p. 535.
it rained ashes; at Constantinople Fire fell from Heaven, and a most grievous
Plague followed for three Months in the Summer. A good and evil Angel did
visibly appear to all men, walking round the City; the evil Angel seemed to
carry a hunting Spear in his hand: and look how often he stroke with that upon
the Door of any man's House, by the command of the good Angel, so many Corpse
were found in that same House the day following.

Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 30. c. 4. p. 1390. Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p.
16. col. 2.
24. In the Reign of Lys^machus, the Abderitae were infected with a new and
strange Disease; the manner of it was thus: First, a violent and burning Fever
universally seized them: Upon the seventh day after, they bled at Nose very
copiously, or others of them fell into an exceeding sweat; and this was the end
of the Fever: But a ridiculous affection was left upon their minds; for they
all fell to acting of Tragedy; they thundered out lambicks loud as they could:
Especially Euripides his Andromeda, and the part of Perseus therein; so that
the City was full of these pale and extenuated Actors, crying up and down the
Streets: O Love thou tyrant over Gods and Men!
and such like. This dotage lasted till Winter, and sharp cold put an end to
it. The occasion of all was this: Archelaus, a famous Tragedian had in Summer
represented Andromedae; and in the Theater they had got the cause of their
Fever; and these representations remained in their minds after their recovery.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the different and unusual ways, by which some men have come to
their deaths.
THe Indian King of Mexico, upon the day of his Coronation, Trenchfields
History improved, p. 34.
was clothed with a Garment, all painted over with Skulls, and dead Men's
bones; those rude people intending to admonish him in his new Sovereignty of
his own Mortality; and we read of Joseph of Arimathaea, that he had his Tomb in
his Garden; certainly it was to season his pleasures there, with the
remembrance of his own frailty: it will be our Wisdom to expect death in every
place, and in every condition* seeing there is none that is privileged against
his approaches: By various accidents the Rich and Poor promiscuously perish,
and so do the Young and Old: sometimes (as it was in the race to the Sepulcher
of Christ, John overran Peter) the Young and Strong make more haste to the
Tomb, than the Aged and Weak: For the great Creator has planted us round with
death; and the ways to it are such and so many, as mock the prudence and best
foresight of the wisest amongst mortality to evade them.

1. Charles the Second, H^^l. Cos^mog. p. 253. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1333.
Zuing. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 362.
King of Navar, having wasted his spirits with voluptuousness and luxury, in
his old age, fell into a lethargy, or else a palsy; and therefore to comfort
his benumbed limbs, he was by the advice of his Physicians; sewed up in a
sheet, steeped in Aqua vitae* the Surgeon having made an end of sewing the
sheet, wanted a knife to cut off the thread, whereupon he took up the wax
candle that stood by him, to burn it off, but the flame running by the thread,
caught hold of the sheet in an instant, which according to the Nature of Aqua
vitae, burnt with such violence, that notwithstanding all endeavors, the aged
King miserably expired in the midst of the flames: This fell out, Anno 1386.

2. The Emperor Iovinian, Fulgos. l. 9* 12. p. 132^. Koram^n. de ^ir. mort. l.
6. c. 38. p. 19. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 119.
Successor to Julian the Apostate; being come to Dadastana, that bordereth on
Bythinia and Galatia, lay in a Chamber that was new plastered with Lime upon
the Walls; where his Head being surcharged with a venomous vapor (called on,
and increased by a Fire of Charcoal, made in the Room) he was found that night
stis^ed in his Bed, being in the three and thirtieth year of his age.

4. In Devonshire there is a stone called the Hanging Stones, Full. Worth. p.
247. D^vo^sh.
being one of the bound-Stones, which parts Comb-Martin, from the next
Parish. It got the name from a Thief, who having stolen a Sheep, and tied it
about his own Neck, to carry it home at his Back: he rested himself for a while
upon this Stone, which is about a foot high, until the Sheep struggling, slid
over the Stone on the other side, and so strangled the Man.

4. Dr. Andrew Perne (though very facetious) was at last heart-broken with a
Jest, Full. Worth. p. 257. Norfolk.
as I have been most credibly informed from excellent hands: He is taxed much
for altering his Religion four times in twelve years, from the last of King
Henry the Eighth, to the first of Queen Elizabeth; a Papist a Protestant, a
Papist a Protestant; but still Andrew Perne; now it fortuned he was at Court
with his Pupil Archbishop Whitgift, in a rainy afternoon, when the Queen was (I
dare not say wilfully) but really resolved to ride abroad, contrary to the
mind of her Ladies, who were on horseback (Coaches as yet being not common) to
attend her. Now one Clod, the Queens Jester, was employed by the Courtiers to
laugh the Queen out of so convenient a Journey. Heaven, says he, Madam,
disswades you, this heavenly minded man Archbishop Whitgift, and Earth
disswades you, your Fool Clod, such a lump of clay as my self; and if neither
will prevail with you, here is one that is neither Heaven nor Earth, but hangs
betwixt both; Dr. Perne and he also disswades you. Hereat the Queen and the
Courtiers laughed heartily, whilst the Doctor looked sadly; and going over with
his Grace to Lambeth, soon saw the last of his life.

(...) world, (...) c. 24.. ^. p. 503.
5. Anastasius the Emperor was slain with Lightning; so was Strabo the Father of
Pompey the Great; so was also Garus the Emperor, who succeeded Probus, whilst
he lodged with his Army upon the River Tigris.

Full Worth. p. 266. Devon^hire
6. -- Child; his Christian name is unknown, was a Gentleman the last of his
Family, being of ancient Extraction (at Plimstook in Devonshire) and had great
Possessions. It happened that he hunting in Dartmore, lost both his company and
way in a bitter snow; having killed his Horse, he crept into his bowels for
warmth; and wrote this with his blood; He that finds and brings me to my tomb,
The land at Plimstook shall be his doom.
That Night he was frozen to death, and being first found by the Monks of
Tavistock they interred him in their own Abbey; and sure it is, that the Abbot
of Tavistock got that rich Manor into his possession.

Hylen. Cosmogras. p. 931. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1329. Socrates Recles. Hist.
l. 1. c. 25. p. 250.
7. Arrius, who denied the Divinity of Christ, was sent for by the Emperor
Constantine to make recantation of his former heresies; but he first wrote out
a copy of his own opinions, which he hid in his bosom; and then writing out
the recantation expected from him, took oath that he did really mean, as he had
written; which words the Emperor reserr'd to the recantation, he to the paper
in his bosom: but God would not be so cozened, though the Emperor was; for as
he passed in triumph through the Streets of Constantinople, he drew aside into
a private house of ease, where he voided his guts into the draught, and so dyed.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1323.
8. Alexander the Elean Philosopher swimming over the River Alpheus, light with
his breast upon a sharp reed, which lay hid under the water; and received such
a wound thereby, that he died upon it.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1323.
9. Heraclius the Ephesian, fell into a Dropsy, and was thereupon advertised by
the Physicians to anoint himself all over with Cow Dung, and so to sit in the
warm Sun; his servant had left him alone, and the Dogs supposing him to be a
wild Beast, fell upon him, and killed him.

10. Milo the Crotonian, being upon his journey, beheld an Oak in the Field,
Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 270.
which some body had attempted to cleave with Wedges; conscious to himself of
his great strength he came to it, and seizing it with both his hands,
endeavored to wrest it in sunder, but the Tree (the Wedges being fallen out)
returning to it self, caught him by the hands in the cleft of it, and there
detained him to be devoured with wild Beasts, after his so many and so famous
exploits.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 270.
11. Polydamas the famous wrestler, was forced by a tempest into a cave, which
being ready to fall into ruins, by the violent and sudden incursion of the
waters; though others fled at the signs of the dangers approach; yet he alone
would remain, as one that would bear up the whole heap and weight of the
falling Earth with his shoulders; but he found it above all humane strength,
and so was crushed in pieces by it.

Iovii Elog. l. 1. p. 1^. ^i^oth. ^. 8. p. 555.
12. Attila, King of the Hunns, having married a Wife in Hungary, and upon his
Wedding Night, surcharged himself with Meat and Drink; as he slept, his Nose
fell a bleeding, and through his Mouth found the way into his Throat, by which
he was choked and killed, before any person was apprehensive of the danger.

13. Calo-Iohannes, Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1328.
Emperor of Constantinople, drew a Bow against a Boar in Cilicia, with that
strength, that he shot the Arrow through his own hand that held the Bow, the
Pile of it was dipped in poison, as it is usual in huntings, and of that wound he
dyed in a few days, and left the Empire to his Son Emanuel, Anno 1130.

14. Giachetus Geneva, Fulgos. ibid. p. 1337.
a man of great reputation amongst the Salucians, though he was stricken in
years, and had had some Children by his Wife, yet being addicted to Venus, he
privily let in a Girl at the back door; and when one night he delayed his
coming to bed longer than he was accustomed to do; after they had knock and
called in vain at his Study door, his Wife caused it to be broken open, and
there was Giachetus, and the Girl, found both dead in mutual embraces, and in a
shameful and base posture.

15. In the nineteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, Baker's C^^. p. 510. Pull.
Church Hist. l. 9. Cent. 16. p. 109. Faithful Annalist. p. 129.
at the Assize held at Oxford, July 1577. one Rowland Ienks, a Popish
Bookseller, for dispersing scandalous Pamphlets, defamatory to the Queen and
State, was arreigned and condemned; but on the sudden there arose such a damp,
that almost all present were endangered to be smothered: The Jurors dyed that
instant. Soon after dyed Sir Robert Bell, Lord Chief Baron; Sir Robert de Oly,
Sir William Babington, Mr. de Oly high Sheriff, Mr. Wearnam, Mr. Danvers, Mr.
Fettiplace, Mr. Harcourt Justices; Mr. Kerle, Mr. Nash, Mr. Greenwood, Mr.
Foster, Gentlemen of good account; Sergeant Barham, an excellent Pleader; three
hundred other persons presently sickned and dyed within the Town, and two
hundred more sickning there dyed in other places; amongst all whom there was
neither Woman nor Child.

16. Anacreon the Poet had exceeded the stated term of humane life; Val. Max.
l. 9. c. 12. p. 270.
yet while he was endeavoring to cherish the poor remainders of his strength,
by the juice of Raisins; the stone of one of them stuck so fast in his dry and
parched Throat, that it occasioned his death.

17. Pope Adrian the Fourth, Dinoth. l. 8. p. 557. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 515
being at Anagnia, thundering out excommunication and curses against the
Emperor Frederick the First, retired to a Fountain for coolness sake, out of
which he drank a little water, together with which a Fly entered his Mouth, and
so clave unto his Throat, that it could not be removed by any endeavors of the
Physicians, so that to the amazement of all men he perished thereby.

18. Tarquinius Priscus, Schenck. obs. l. 2. p. 202.
while he was at Dinner, feeding upon Fish; one of the Fish-bones stuck so
unfortunately cross his Throat, that (not being to be removed) he miserably
dyed thereby on the same night.

19. Drusus Pompeius, the Son of Claudius Caesar, by Herculanilla, Sutton.
Dinoth. l. 8. p. 555.
to whom the Daughter of Sejanus had a few days before been assured, being a
Boy, and playing; he cast up a Pear on high, to receive it again into his
mouth; but it fell so full, and descended so far into his Throat, that stoping
his breath, he was presently suffocated by it, before any help could be had.

20. Terpander was an excellent Harper, Schenck. obs. l. 2. obs. ^. p. 202.
and while he was singing to his Harp at Sparta, and opened his mouth wide, an
unhappy waggish person that stood by; threw a Fig into his Mouth so unluckily,
that he was strangled by it.

21. Lewis the Seventh, surnamed the Gross; King of France, I^ Serres. Hist.
F^ance p. 10^. Dinoth. l. ^. p. 55^.
would needs have his Eldest Son Philip crowned King in his life time, which
Philip soon after riding in the Suburbs of Paris, his Horse frigh^ed at the
sight of a Sow; threw him out of his Saddle so unhappily, that he died within
few hours after.

Schenck. l. 5 obs. 2. p. 635
22. We have seen, says Valleriola, how Ludovicus Vives, a Senator at
Mompelier, receiving but a slight and small hurt in the palm of his hand, such
as did scarce reach throw the skin to the flesh; yet thereby fell into a sudden
convulsion, and dyed the seventh day after he had received the hurt.

Schenck. p. 637.
23. We have observed Johannes Baptista, an Argentine, to dye at Padua of a hurt
received in his little Finger, says Horatius Augenius.

Schenck. l. 5 obs. 4. p. 652
24. Marcus Sobiratius of Avignion, a virtuous young man, and of great hopes;
having a slighter hurt upon the heel, than to suspect any misfortune from
thence; did yet dye of it upon the seventeenth day, after he had received it.

25. Discord arising about a year since in December, betwixt the Students and
the Servants of the Noblemen in Copenhagen; Barthol. Hist. Anatomic. Cent. 4.
Hist. 89. p. 409.
Nicholas Andreas, a Student in Divinity, though innocent entering in at the
Regent Gate, received a hurt upon three of his Fingers; a Surgeon took care of
him, and dexterously bound up his wounds: but the day following, a convulsion
took him, which every day increasing, was upon the eleventh day the death of
that learned and well disposed young man.

Barthol. ibid. Cent. 3. Hist. 42. p. 84.
26. I saw a Woman, who playing with a Boy, it so fell out, that he thrust a
Needle into her Knee, she neglected so slight a wound, but being seized with a
convulsion, she dyed upon the third day after.

Heyl. Cosmog. p. 667.
27. Frederick the first Emperor of the Germans, bathing himself in Cydnus, a
River of Cilicia of a violent course, the swiftness of the stream tripp'd up
his heels, and he not able to recover himself, was suddenly drowned.

Bakers Chr. p. 62.
28. Gerard, Archbishop of York, in the Reign of Henry the First, a man though
learned, yet of many ill parts; sleeping one day in his Garden after Dinner,
never awaked again, but was (...) found dead.

29. Pope Clement the Seventh was poisoned by the smell of an empoysoned Torch
that was born before him; Zacch. Qu^st. Med. legal. l. 2. tit. 2. p. 60.
for having received of the smoke of it into his body, he was killed by it.
Kornman. de mirac. mortuor. lib. 6. cap. 28. p. 12.

Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 12. p. 45. Heyl. Cosmog. p. 535.
30. Anno Dom. 830. Popiel the second of King Polonia, careless of matters of
State, gave over himself to all manner of dissoluteness, so that his Lords
despised him, and called him the Polonian Sardanapalus. He feared therefore
that they would set up one of his Kinsmen in his stead, so that by the advice
of his Wife, whom he ragingly loved; he feigned himself sick, and sent for all
his Uncles, Princes of Pomerania (being twenty in number to come and see him)
whom (lying in his bed) he instantly prayed, that if he chanced to dye, they
would make choice of one of his Sons to be King, which they willingly promised,
in case the Lords of the Kingdom would consent thereto. The Queen enticed them
all, one by one to drink a health to the King, as soon as they had done, they
took their leave. But they were scarce got out of the Kings Camber, before they
were seized with intolerable pains; and the corrosions of that poison,
wherewith the Queen had intermingled their draughts, and in a short time, they
all dyed. The Queen gave it out as a judgem^nt of God upon them, as having
conspired the death of the King; and prosecuting this accusation, caused their
bodies to be taken out of their graves, and cast into the Lake Goplo. But by a
miraculous transformation, an inuumerable number of Rats and Mice did rush out
of those bodies; which gathering together in crowds, went and assaulted the
King, as he was with great jolity feasting in his Palace. The Guards
endeavored to drive them away, with weapons and flames, but all in vain. The
King perplexed with this extraordinary danger, sled with his Wife and Children
into a Fortress, that is yet to be seen in that Lake of Goplo, over against a
City called Crusphitz, whither he was pursued with such a number of these
creatures, that the Land, and the Waters were covered with them, and they cried
and hissed most fearfully, they entered in at the Windows of the Fortress,
having scaled the Walls, and there they devoured the King, his Wife and
Children alive, and left nothing of them remaining, by which means all the race
of the Polonian Princes was utterly extinguished; and Pyast a Husbandman, at
the last, was elected to succeed.

31. Anno Dom. 968. Hatto the second Duke of Francoria, Camer. hor. subcis.
Cent. 2. c. 12. p. 46, 47. Heyl. Cosmog. p. 417.
surnamed Bonosus, Abbot of Fulden, was chosen Archbishop of Mentz: In his time
was a grievous dearth, and the poor being ready to starve for want of Food; he
caused great companies of them to be gathered, and put into Barns, as if there
they should receive Corn, and other relief: But he caused the Barns to be set
on fire, and the poor to be consumed therein, saying withal, That they were the
Rats that did eat up the Fruits of the Land. But not long after, an Army of
Rats, gathered themselves together (no man can tell from whence) and set upon
him so furiously, that into what place soever he retired himself, they would
come and fall upon him: If he climbed on high into Chambers; they would ascend
the wall, and enter at the windows, and other small chinks and crevises; the
more men attempted to do them away, the more furious they seemed, and the more
to increase in their number. The wretched Prelate seeing he could find no place
by Land safe for him, resolved to seek some refuge by the waters, and got into
a boat to convey himself to a Tower, in the midst of the Rhine, near a little
City, called Bingen: But the Rats threw themselves by infinite heaps into the
Rhine, and swam to the foot of the Tower, and clambering up the wall, entered
therein, and fell upon the Archbishop, gnawing and biting, and throttling and
tearing, and tugging him most miserably till he dyed. This Tower is yet to be
seen, and at this day called Rats Tower. It is also remarkable, that whiles the
Archbishop was yet alive, and in perfect health, the Rats gnawed and razed out
his name, written and painted upon many walls.

32. Sylla the Dictator had at first an inward ulcer, Plut. Parrell. p. 474. in
Sylla. Dinoth, memorab. l. 8. p. 554.
through which his flesh (having contracted corruption) was wholly turned into
lice, nor could any remedy be found for so great an evil, the shifting of
Garments, use of Baths, change of Diet, would do no good; but such a number of
Lice did perpetually issue out, together with flesh, as overcame all endeavors
to cleanse him: long did this disease afflict him, till at last in great misery
and horrible torments he ended his days.

33. Anno Dom. 1217. Henry the First was King of Spain, (...) monit. l. 2. c.
14. p. ^47.
being yet a Child, nor did he long enjoy the Kingdom; for after the second
year of his Reign, he was taken away by a sad and unexpected accident: For
while, at Valentia, he was playing in the Courtyard of the Palace with his
equals; it fortuned that a til^ fell from the house upon his head; which so
brake his skull, that he died of the wound upon the eleventh day after he
received it.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 462. Saxo. l. 10.
34. Haquinus, King of Norway, had in pitched Field overcame Haraldus, the Son
of Gunilda, who with the assistance of the Danes had invaded his Kingdom; and
while he was upon return to his Ships; there was seen a Dart (uncertain from
what hand it came) long hovering in the Air, as if it knew not where to light,
while every man was apprehensive of the danger of his own person; it at last
fell with that force upon the head of Haquinus, that it slew him in the place;
some suppose it was procured by the witchcraf of Gunilda, in revenge of her
Sons dishonor: however Haraldus, by this unhop'd for death of his enemy,
obtained the Kingdom of Norway.

Joseph. de bello Iudait. l. 7. c. 6. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 501.
35. The Romans under Titus had entered the Temple of Jerusalem; the Jews set
fire on it with a purpose to drive them thence, or consume them there; amongst
others that were distressed in the flames, was one Artorius; who having espied
below his Camrade Lucius, called to him wIth a loud voice; That he made him his
Heir of all he had, if he would stand to receive him (as he leapt down) into
his arms; he readily came and stood to receive him: Artorius was saved, but
Lucius oppressed with the fall of him, was so bruised upon the stones, that he
dyed upon it.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 515. Gilbert. Cog^. Narrat. l. 1.
36. A certain Priest that was well skilled in swimming, and groping for Fish,
had in a deep place, under the Banks light of a Perch, which to hold the
better, he put into his mouth, and so to swim back to his companions; the
Perch, with her struggling, slipped so far into his Throat, that the miserable
Priest was strangled by it, notwithanding all the endeavors his associates
could use to the contrary; sic perca Parca fuit (says my Author) thus the Fish
was his fate.

Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 79. p. 310.
37. Nicon, the Thasian Champion was dead, and a Statue erected in memory of
him, and his exploits; one of his Rivals in Honor, out of a deep hatred he had
conceived against the deceased; and being not able to reach his person, with a
club laid load upon his Statue, which being thus beaten, fell with such a
weight upon the injurious person below it, that it crushed and bruised him to
death upon the place, says Suidas.

Stradae prolus. l. 3. praelect. 4. p. p. 315.
38. We read in Strada, of a Baker in that Street of Rome, which is called
Suburra, w^o having sneez'd twenty three times in one continued breath, died
upon the twenty fourth.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1328.
39. Grimoaldus, King of the Lombards, upon the ninth day, after he had opened a
vein in his arm, by the advice of the Physicians, took a Bow into his Hand, and
shot at a Pidgeon, by which the Vein was again so suddenly and unhappily
unclosed, that it poured out so much Blood as sufficed to carry out his life
along with it.

Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 53. p. 185, 186.
40. I will shut up this Chapter with some such Examples of sudden death, as I
meet with in Pliny, and they are such as follows; two of the Caesar's, that
had been Pretors, died one at Pisa, and the other at Rome, in the Morning, as
they were putting on their Shoes. Q. Aemylius Iaepidus, as he was going out of
his Bedchamber, hit his great Toe against the Door side, and therewith died.
Caius Aufidius, going to the Senate stumbled, and died immediately. An
Ambassador of the Rhodians, who had to the admiration of all that were present,
pleaded their cause before the Senate, in the very entry of the Council-house,
as he was going forth, fell down dead, and never spoke word. Cn. Bebius
Pamphilus, who had been Praetor died suddenly, as he was asking a Boy what it
was a clock. Aulus Pompeius, as he had finished his Prayers. Iuventius Thalna,
as he was sacrificing. Servilius Pansa, as he stood at a Shop in the
Marketplace, leaning upon the shoulder of his Brother P. Pansa. Bebius the
Judge, as he was adjourning the day of ones appearance in the Court. Mr.
Terentius Corax, as he was writing Letters in the Market place. C. Julius a
Surgeon, as he was dressing the sore Eye of another. L. Manlius Torquatus, at
Supper, reaching a Cake to one of his Guests. L. Durius Valla, as he drank a
Potion of honey'd Wine. Appius Aufeius, newly come out of the Bath, and as he
supped up a rear Egg. P. Quintius Scapula, as he was at Supper in the House of
Aquilius Gallus. Decimus Saufeius the Scribe, as he was at Dinner in his own
House.

Senec. in Thyest. c. 3.
Nemo tam divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri:
Res Deus nostras celeri citatas
Turbine versat.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the dead Bodies of some great Persons, which not without
difficulty found their Graves; and of others not permitted to rest there.
THe Grave is the common House and home that is appointed for all the living;
that safe harbor, that lies open for all those Passangers, that have been
tossed upon the troubled Sea of this mortal life. Here The purpl'd Princes
stripped of all their pride,
Lie down uncrowned by the poor man's side.
Only it sometimes so falls out, that some great persons are not suffered to go
to rest, when their bed is made; and others are pulled out of those Lodgings,
whereof they had once taken a peaceable possession.

1. No sooner had the Soul of that victorious Prince, Baker's C^r. p. 44, 45.
Speed's Chr. p. 434. Full. Church Hist. l. 3. Cent. 11. p. 9.
William the Conqueror, left his Body, but that his dead Corpse was abandoned
by his Nobles and Followers, and by his meaner Servants he was dispoil'd of
Armor, Vessels, Apparel, and all Princely Furniture, his naked Body left upon
the Floor, his Funeral wholly neglected; till one Harluins, a poor Country
Knight, undertook the carriage of his Corpse to Caen in Normandy, to St.
Stephens Church, which the dead King had formerly sounded. At his entrance into
Caen, the Covent of Monks came forth to meet him; but at the same instance,
there happened a great Fire, so that as his Corpse before, so now his Hearse was
of all men forsaken, every one running to quench the Fire. That done, they
return and bear the Corpse to the Church: The Funeral Sermon being ended, and
the stone coffin set in the earth in the Chancel; as the Body was ready to be
laid therein, there stood up one Anselm Fitz-Arthur, and forbad the Burial,
alleging that that very place, was the Floor of his Fathers House, which this
dead King had violently taken from him, to build this Church upon; Therefore,
said he, I challenge this ground, and in the name of God forbid that the body
of this dispoiler be covered with the Earth of my Inheritance. They were
therefore enforced to compound with him for one hundred pounds. Now was the
Body to be laid in that stone Coffin; but the Tomb proved too little for the
Corpse, so that pressing it down to gain an entrance, the Belly not bowel'd
brake, and sent forth such an intolerable stink amongst the assistants at the
Funeral; that all the Gums and Spices fuming in their Censers, could not
relieve them; but in great amazement all of them hasted away; leaving only a
Monk or two to shuffle up the Burial, which they did in haste, and so gat them
to their Cells: Yet was not this the last of those troubles, that the Corpse of
this great Prince met with; but some years after, at such time as Caen was
taken by the French unner Chastilion 1562. his Tomb was rifled, his Bones
thrown out, and some of them, by private Soldiers, brought as far as England
again.

Full. Church Hist. l. 4. Cent. 15. p. 170. Speed's Chr. p. 661 Stowe's Survey
of London, p. ^07.
2. Katherine de V^^ois, Daughter to Charles the Sixth, King of France, Widow of
King Henry the Fifth; she was married after to, and had Issue by, Owen ap
Tudor, a Noble Welshman; her Body lies at this day unburied in a loose Coffin
at Westminister, and showed to such as desire it. It Is said it was her own
desire, that her Body should never be buried, because sensible of her fault, in
disobeying her Husband King Henry upon this occasion. There was a Prophecy
amongst the English people, that an English Prince born at Windsor should be
unfortunate, in loosing what his Father had acquired; Whereupon King Henry
forbad Queen Katherine* (being with Child) to be delivered there, but she out
of the corrupt principle of nitimur in vetitum, and affecting her Father before
her Husband, was there brought to bed of King Henry the Sixth, in whose Reign
the fair Victories, woven by his Fathers Valor, were by cowardice, carelessness,
and contentions unravelled to nothing. Yet the Story is told otherwise by
others, viz. that she was buried by her Son, King Henry the Sixth, under a fair
Tomb, and continued in her Grave some years, until King Henry the Seventh,
laying the foundation of a new Chapel, caused her Corpse to be taken up: But
why the said Henry being her great Grandchild, did not order it to be
re-in^err'd is not recorded; if not done by casualty and neglect, it is very
strange, and stranger if out of design.

Joseph. Bell. Iudaic. l. 1. c. 7. p. 570. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 14. c. 13. p.
359.
3. Aristobulus, King of the Jews, was by Cn. Pompeius sent to Rome in bonds;
afterward he was enlarged by Caesar (when he had overcome Pompey) and sent
into Syria; there by the favorites of Pompeys part, he was taken away by
poison, and for some time denied buryal in his Native Country; the dead Body
being kept preserved in Honey; till at last it was sent by Marcus Antonius to
the Jews, to be laid in the Royal Monuments of his Ancestors.

4. The great Alexander, who had attained to the height of Military Glory, died
at Babylon, Quint. Curt. l. 10. p. 3. Diodor. Sic. l. 18. p. 593 Aelian. Var.
Hist. l. 12. c. 64. p 347.
not without suspicion of poison; this great man, for whom so much of the
world, as he had conquered, was so much too little, was compelled to expect the
leisure of his mutinous Captains, till they would be so kind, as to bury him;
Seven days together, his dead Corpse lay neglected: in those heats of
Mesopotamia, greater than which are rarely to be found in any Country: At last
command was given to the Egyptians and Chaldeans to embalm the Body according
to their Art, which they did: yet was it two years before the miserable
remainders of this Hero, could be sent away toward its Funeral; then it was
received by Ptolemaeus, by him carried first to Memphis, and some years
afterward to Alexandria, where it lay, and some ages after was showed to
Augustus Caesar; after his Victory over Antonius and Cleopatra.

5. Michael Palaeologus, Emperor of Constantinople, Zuin. vol. 3. l. 10. p.
1024.
in the Council at Lions, under Pope Gregory the Twelfth, was reconciled to the
Latin Church: there in sign of his agreement, he and those that were with him,
publicly sang the Nicene Creed: By reason of which he fell into such a hatred
of the Greeks: that when he died, the Monks and Priests forbad his Body to be
buried: and his Son Andronicus, who succeeded him, though otherwise dutiful
enough, not only denied him the honor of an imperial Funeral, but scarce
allowed him that of a mean person; he only commanded a few in the night to
carry him far from the Camp, and there cover him with Earth, that the Body of
so great a person might not be torn in pieces by wild Beasts.

6. Iacobus Patius had conspired against the Medices, Zuing. Theat. vol. 3. l.
10. p. 1023.
for which he was publicly hanged, but by the permission of the Magistrates,
his dead body was laid in the Monuments of his Ancestors: but the enraged
multitude dragged it out thence, and buried it in the common Field, without the
Walls of the City; where yet they would not suffer it to rest, but in another
popular fury, they fetched it out thence, drew it naked through the City, by
the same halter wherewith he had been before hanged; and so threw it into the
River Arnus.

7. The Carcass of Pope Julius the Second was dug up, Zuin. vol. 3. l. 10.
p. 1023.
and his Ring taken from off his Finger by the Spaniards, at such time as Rome
was taken by the Army of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, which was Anno Dom.
1527.

8. Scanderbeg the most famous Prince of Epirus; Knowl's Turk. Hist. p. 403.
Barlet. Hist. of Scanderbeg, l. 12. p. 496.
died in the sixty third year of his age, upon the 17 th. of January, Anno Dom.
1466. when he had reigned about twenty four years: his dead Body was, with the
great lamentation of all men, buried in the Cathedral Church of St. Nicholas at
Lyssa, where it rested in peace; until that about nine years after the Turks
coming to the siege of Scodra, by the way took the City of Lyssa, and there
with great devotion dug up his bones, reckoning it some part of their
happiness, if they might but see or touch the same, and such as could get any
part thereof, were it never so little, caused the same to be set, some in
Silver, some in Gold to hang about their Necks, or wear upon their Bodies,
persuading themselves by the wearing thereof, to be partakers of such good
fortune and hap, as had Scanderbeg himself whilst he lived.

9. The Sepulcher of the Great Cyrus, Jacob. Capell. Hist. Sa^r. and exotic. p^
418.
King of Persia, was violated in the days of Alexander the Great, in such
manner, that his bones were displaced and thrown out, Pezel. mellis. tom. 2. p.
378.
and the Urn of Gold that was fixed in his Coffin, when it could not be wholly
pulled away, was broken off by parcels. When Alexander was informed hereof, he
caused the Magi who were entrusted with the care and keeping thereof, to be
exposed unto tortures, to make them confess the authors of so great a violation
and robbery, but they denied with great constancy that they had any hand in it,
or that they knew by whom it was done. Plutarch says that it was one Polymachus
a noble Pellean, that was guilty of so great a crime. It is said, that the
Epitaph of this mighty Monarch was to this purpose: O mortal that come hither
(for come I know thou will) know that I am Cyrus the Son of Cambyses, who
settled the Persian Empire, and ruled over Asia, and therefore envy me not this
little heap of earth, wherewith my body is covered.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of entombed Bodies, ^ow found at the opening of their
Monuments; and of the parcel Resurrection near Gran Cairo.
Vaugh. Flor. solitud. p. 137.
SUch as held the pre-existency of Souls, write of them, that when they are
commanded to enter into bodies, they are astonished, and suffer a kind of
deliquium or trance, that they hiss and murmur like to the suspirations of the
wind, complaining in such manner as this. Miserable wretches in what have we so
foully trespassed; what offense so heinous, and worthy of so horrible a
punishment have we committed, as to be shut up, and imprisoned for it in these
moist and cold carcases? That thereupon they comforted themselves with the
thoughts of the bodies dissolution, and petitioned before their captivity that
their enlargement might be hastened, through the fall and corruption of their
prisons. I insist not upon the truth of these matters, but pretend only to show
in what manner these shells of mortality have been found after the bird has
been fled: and that some bodies have made far less haste to putrefaction than
others; whether from any peculiarity in their texture, or preservative virtue
in their conditure, let others examine.

Fulgos. lib. 1. c. 6. p. 177, 178. Lo^ic^r. Theatr. p. 233. Zonar. Annal. l.
3. G^^lter. tab. chro^. p. 569.
1. At such time as Constantine reigned together with Irene his Mother, there
was found in an ancient Sepulcher in Constantinople, a body with a plate of
Gold upon the breast of it, and therein thus engraven, In Christum credo qui ex
Maria Virgin nascetur: O Sol, Imperantibus Constantino and Irene iterum me
videbis: that is, I believe in that Christ who shall be born of Mary a Virgin:
O Sun, thou shall see me again, when Constantine and Irene shall come to reign.
When this Inscription had been publicly read, the body was restored to the
same place where it had been formerly buried.

Baker's Chron. p. 360.
2. In the tenth year of Henry the Seventh, at the digging of a new foundation
in the Church of S. Mary Hill in London, there was then found and taken up the
body of Alice Hackney, she had been buried in that Church an hundred and
seventy five years before, yet was she then found whole of skin, and the joints
of her Arms pliable, her Corpse was kept above ground four days without any
annoyance, exposed to the view of as many as would behold it, and then
recommitted to the earth.

3. In the Reign of King James, at Astley in Warwick shire upon the fall of the
Church, Faithful Annalist. p. 224.225.
there was taken-up the Corpse of Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorset, who was there
buried the tenth of October, 1530, in the twenty second year of King Henry the
Eighth, and albeit he had lain seventy eight years in this Bed of corruption,
yet his eyes, hair, flesh, nails and joints remained in manner as if he had
been but newly buried.

4. Robert Braybrook born at a Village in Northamptonshire, Fullers Worthies.
p. 284. Northamptonshire.
was consecrated Bishop of London, Ian. 5. 1381. he was after that Chancellor
of England for six Months, he died anno 1404. and was buried under a Marble
Stone in the Chapel of S. Mary in the Cathedral of S. Paul, London, yet was
the body of this Bishop lately taken up and found firm, as to skin, hair,
joints, nails, etc. For upon that fierce and fatal fire in London, Sept. 2.
1666. which turned so much of Paul's into rubbish, when part of the floor fell
into S. Faiths, this dead person was shaken out of his Dormitory, where he had
lain and slept so unchanged as you have heard no less than two hundred sixty
and two years. His body was exposed to the view of all sorts of people for
diverse days; and some thousands did behold and poise it in their arms, till by
special order it was reinterred.

5. At the taking down of the most ancient Church of S. Peter in Rome (to make
way for that new and most magnificent one since erected in its stead) there was
found the body of Pope Boniface the Eighth, Zacch. Quaest. medico legal^ l. 4.
lit. 1. quaest. 10. p. 239. Zacch. ib. p. 239.
all whole, and in no part diminished.

6. Some years since at the repairs of the Church of S. Caecilia beyond the
River Tiber, there was found the body of a certain Cardinal, an English man,
who had been buried there three hundred years before, yet was it every way
entire, not the least part of it perished, as they report who both saw and
handled it.

7. Not long since at Bononia, Zacch. ib. p. 239.
in the Church of S. Dominick, there was found the body of Alexander Tartagnus
(a Lawyer at Imola) which was perfectly entire, and no way decayed, although it
had liad lain there from his decease above one hundred and fifty years.

8. Pausanias has the History of a Soldier whose body was found with wounds
fresh, Pausan. in Eliacis. l. 54 ad finem.
and apparent upon it, although it had been buried sixty two Olympiads, that
is, no less than two hundred forty eight years.

9. In the Reign of King Henry the Second, Baker's chron. p. 85. Stowes Annals.
p. 55. Cardan. de varietat. l. 8. c. 40. Kornman. de mirac. mort. l. 3.^.1. p.
2. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 516.
anno 1089, the Bones of King Arthur and his wife Guenevor were found in the
Vale of Avalon, under an hollow Oak, fifteen foot under ground, the hair of the
said Guenevor being then whole and fresh, of a color yellow, but as soon as it
was touched it fell to powder, as Fabian relates: this was more than six
hundred years after his death; his Shin-bone set by the Leg of a tall man,
reached above his Knee the breadth of three Fingers. Hieronymus Cardanus tells
of his Father, that after he had been twenty years buried, and they then had
occasion to open his monument, they found that in all that time there was
nothing of his flesh consumed, save only his lips, and that but at the end of
them, and also his eyes were somewhat wasted.

11. Kornmannus tells, that in Valentia a City of Spain, there was found the
body of Adonizam, the servant of King Solomon, Kornman. de mirac. ^ort. l. 8.
c. 26. p. 17. Zacch. Qu. medic. leg. l. 4. tit. 1. qu. 10. p. 239.
together with his Epitaph in Hebrew: it appeared that he had lain buried above
two thousand years, yet was he found uncorrupted, so excellent a way of
conditure, a rich embalming of the dead were those skilled in, who lived in the
Eastern Countries. He also mentions the body of Cleopatra, which had remained
undamaged for an hundred and twenty five Olympiads, viz. 500 years, as appears
by the Letter of Heraclius the Emperor to Sophocles the Philosopher. I
remember not to have read any thing like this amongst the Romans; unless of the
body, as some say, Cael. Antiq. lect. l. 3. c. 24. p. 120.
of Tulliola the Daughter of Cicero, which was found entire and uncorrupted,
after (as some have computed it) one thousand and three hundred years.

Camerar. ^or. subcis. cent. 1. c. 11. p. 75. Iohnst. not. hist. class. 10. c.
6. p. 343.
12. I have often seen in a well known place of Germany (says Camerarius) a
young Gentleman's Tomb, who was buried in a Chapel where his predecessors
lay. He was the fairest young man of his time, and being troubled with a
grievous sickness in the flower of his age, his Friends could never get so much
of him, as to suffer himself to be represented in sculpture or Picture to serve
for posterity, only this (through their importunity) he agreed unto, that after
he should be dead, and some days in the ground, they should open his Grave, and
cause him to be represented as they then found him. They kept promise with him,
and found that the worms had half gnawn his face, and that about the midriff
and the backbone there were many Serpents. Upon this they caused the
Spectacle, such as they found it, to be cut in stone, which is yet at this
present to be seen among the armed Statues of the Ancestors of this young
Gentleman. So true (it seems) is that of Ecclus. 10.12. When a man dies he is
the heritage of Serpents, Beasts and Worms.

Of Bodies dead engender Worms, of Worms a rotten stink:
And then as horrible a state, as mind of man can think.
Fuller's Worthies. p. 320. Essex.
13. To this may be annexed the ensuing Relation, written by the pen of Mr.
Thomas Smyth, of Sewarstone in the Parish of Waltham Abbey, a discreet person,
not long since deceased. It so fell out, that I served Sir Edward Denny
(toward the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory) who
lived in the Abbey of Waltham cross in the County of Essex, which at that time
lay in ruinous heaps. And then Sir Edward began slowly now and then to make
even, and re-edifie some of that Chaos. In doing whereof Tomkins his Gardener
came to discover (among other things) a fair marblestone the cover of a Tomb
hewed out in hard stone. This cover with some help he removed from off the
Tomb, which having done, there appeared to the Gardener, and Mr. Baker Minister
of the Town (who died long since) and to my self, and Mr. Henry Knagge (Sir
Edward's Bailiff) the anatomy of a man lying in the Tomb aforesaid, all the
bones remaining, bone to his bone, not one bone dislocated: in observation
whereof we wondered to see the bones still remaining in such due order, and no
dust or other silth besides them to be seen in the Tomb. We could not conceive
that it had been an Anatomy of bones only, laid at first in the Tomb, yet if it
had been the carcass of a It is generally conceived the body of King Harold.
man, what became of his flesh and entrails? For (as I have said before) the
Tomb was all clean of filth and dust besides the bones. This when we had well
observed, I told them, that if they did but touch any part thereof, that all
would fall asunder; for I had only heard somewhat formerly of the like
accident. Trial was made, and so it came to pass. For my own part I am
persuaded, that as the flesh of this Anatomy to us became invisible, so
likewise would the bones have been in some longer continuance of time. Oh what
is man then which vanishes th^^ away like unto smoke or vapor, and is no more
seen? Whosoever thou art that shall read this pa^^^ge, thou may find cause of
humility su^^^c^ent.

^4. It Is said, Za^ch. qu^est. mid. leg. l. 4. t^t. 1. q. 10. p. 235.
that in the Isles of Arron in the C^nnachlio Sea: the dead bodies of men do
not putrefie, but exposed to the air remain uncorrupted; so that by this means
the survivers come to know their Grandfathers, great Grandfathers, great great
Grandfathers, and a long order of their dead Ancestors, to their great
admiration. Kornman. de mirac. mortuor. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 5.

15. The body of Alexander the Great lay for seven days together in a hot
Country unburied, Curt.
and altogether uncorrupted.

16. We know some, says Alexander Benedictus, Schenck. obs. medic. l. 6. obs.
3. p. 769.
who have been laid in their Graves half alive, and some noble persons have
been disposed into their Sepulchers, whose life has lain hid in the secret
repositories of the heart. One great Lady was thus entombed, who was after
found dead indeed; but sitting, and removed from her place, as one that had
returned to life amongst the carcases of the dead: she had pulled off the hair
of her head, and had torn her breast with her nails, signs too apparent of what
had passed, and that she had long in vain called for help, while alone in the
society of the dead.

17. Alexander Gi^aynerius speaking of the old and great City of Kiovia near
the Borysthenes, Camera^. hor. sub^is. cent. 2. c. 70. p. 283.
there are, says he, certain subterranean Caverns, extended to a great length
and breadth within ground; here are diverse ancient Sepulchers, and the bodies
of certain illustrious Russians, these, though they have lain there time out of
mind, yet do they appear entire. There are the bodies of two Princes in their
own Country habit, as they used to walk when alive, and these are so fresh and
whole as if they had but newly lain there. They lie in a Cave unburied, and by
the Russian Monks are showed unto Strangers.

18. Laurentius Mullerus tells us also, Camerar. ib. p. 283.
that in this City there is a Temple with admirable Vaults, in which diverse
bodies are kept uncorrupted, as if they were boiled, not livid and black, but
with a fresh and lively color of the skin: the tradition is that they are the
bodies of some Martyrs, and that the Tartars in their incursions presume not to
touch them, because it has proved dangerous to them heretofore to endeavor it.
He also remembers, that in a vaulted Chapel there is to be seen the body of a
woman, wrapped in a thin and transparen^ ^heet, and so entire, that the yellow
hair and all the members of it will abide the touch. It Is said to be the body
of the Martyr Barbara.

19. Such as write the History of the West Indies tell us, Camerar. ib. p. 283,
284.
that many of that Countrymen upon the high Mountains (at a certain time of
the year) are found as it were congealed and dead, the bodies of these persons
are firm, without corruption, inward or outward, and so remain. D. Paludanus
(an excellent Physician, and a studious collector of exotic rarities) told me
that at his house he had two such Indians most entire, that they had no ill
savor, that they were not lurid with a pale and dead color, but that to the
beholders afar off their skin seemed reddish, and that in all other things
(motion only excepted) they were like to the living. He said that it came to
pass by the blowing of the South Wind, which has such a power to stupe^ie and
congeal, and that in open places it often befalls the Indians (in respect of
their bodies) if they find not out places where to secure themselves. This
saithful witness occasions me to give the more credit to Cornelius Witslietus,
when he tells that in the mountainous parts of the Provinces of Chil, there
blows a wind that proves dangerous, not in respect of its vehemence, but its
notable subtilty. Heretofore the first Discoverers of this Country having on
foot got over the high mountains, came to this place, but now by reason of
dangerous wind or air, they dispatch the voyage by Sea. The breath of this wind
is so hurtful, that it oppresses the vital heat in the Bowels, kills the
passenger immediately, hurts not the dead body in the least, but preserves it
free from corruption and putrefaction. They say that Almagro in his return
back, which was five months from his coming, found diverse of his Soldiers
together with their Horses dead with cold, that they were fresh and whole, and
so also their Horses, both in such posture as they were when they were alive at
the instant of their congelation.

20. Camerarius tells of a Kinsman of his, a person of Honor, Camerar. hor.
sabcis. cent. 1. c. 73. p. 340. Kornman. de mirac. mor^^rd. 2. c. 38. p. 28.
who, though he had not seen, yet had heard by many of the truth of that which
follows, and that at Cairo and in other places in Egypt it is held as a solemn
thing and common, also for my better satisfaction he showed me a Book Printed
long before at Venice, containing the Description of diverse Voyages made by
Venetian Ambassadors to the Princes of the Northern Asia, into Aethiopia, and
to other Countries. Amongst the rest was a discourse out of which I have taken
some words toward the end, the sense whereof is this: Anno 1540, upon the
twenty fifth of March, many Christians accompanied with certain Janissaries,
went from Cairo to a little barren Mountain, about half a league off: it was in
times past assigned for the burial of the dead: in this place there meet
ordinarily every year an incredible multitude of persons to see the dead bodies
there interred, coming out (as it were) of their Graves and Sepulchers. This
begins the Thursday, and lasts till the Saturday, and then all vanishes
away. Then may you see Bodies wrapped in their clothes after the old fashion:
but they see them not either standing or walking, but only the arms or the
thighs, or some other part of the body which you may touch; if you go farther
off, and presently come forward again, you shall find these arms or limbs
appearing more out of the ground, and the more you change places, the more
diverse and eminent these motions are seen. At the same ^^^e many Tents are
erected about this Mountain; for both whole and sick that come thither in great
Troops believe verily, that whosoever washes himself the night before the
Friday, with a certain water drawn out of a pond thereby, has a remedy ^o
recover or maintain health. This is the report of the Venetian: besides which
we have also the relation of a Jacobin of Vlm named Foelix, who has traveled
in those Quarters of the Levant, and has published a Book in the Almain
Tongue, of what he saw in Palestine and Egypt, wherein he makes the same
Relation.

This Parcel Resurrection of Legs and Arms, Mr. Greg. in his Notes and
Observations. p. 130, 131. H^yl. Cos^. l. 4. p. 924. Sandy's Relat. l. 2. p.
127.
etc. uses to be seen and believed upon Good Friday, and the Eve of that,
says Mr. Gregory, and then adds out of Simon Goulartius, from the relation of
one Stephen du Plais an eyewitness, and a man of very good and sober note in
his acknowledgment. And he told me moreover that he had (and others had done so
too) touched diverse of these rising members. And as he was once so doing upon
the hairy head of a child, a man of Cairo cried out aloud, Kali, kali ante
materasde, that is to say, Hold, hold, you know not what you do.

21. In the year 1448, Hect. Bo^th^ l. 18. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 567.
in the ruins of an old Wall of that beautiful Church at Dumferlin in
Scotland, there was found the body of a young man in a Coffin of Lead, wrapped
up in Silk; it preserved the natural color, and was not in the least manner
corrupted, though it was believed to be the body of the Son of King Malcolme
the Third, by the Lady Margaret.

22. The body of Albertus Magnus was taken out of his Sepulcher, Crantz.
Metrop. l. 3. c. 42. and 48. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 566.
to be interred in the midst of the Chancel in a new built Tomb for that
purpose: it was two hundred years from the time wherein he had been first
buried; yet was he found entire, without any kind of deformation, unless it was
this, that his jaw seemed to be somewhat fallen. I know not whether this is
imputable to the Divine Power, or to the virtue of those things wherewith he
was embalmed, but I saw the thing I speak of with these eyes of mine, and I
testify by this writing the truth of the Relation.

23. At the opening of the Sepulcher of Charles Martel, Iohnst. na^. ^ist.
class. 10. c. 6. p. 343.
there was no part of his body to be found therein; but instead thereof a
Serpent was found in the place. Vid. Kornman. de mirac. mortuorum, lib. 4. cap.
86. p. 35.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of such Persons as have returned to life after they have been
believed to be dead.
WHen a Bird has once broken from her Cage, and has tasted the sweetness of
the air, and which is more, of the pleasure of society and liberty, it is not an
easy thing to allure her back to the place of her former restraint. And it is
as hard to conceive, that a Soul which has once found it self in a state of
enlargement, should willingly return any more into the strait and uneasy
prison of the Body. But it seems (by what follows) that there are certain laws
on the other side of death, to which it must obey, Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 155.
Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 52. p. 184. Zacch. qu. med. leg. l. 4. hist. 1. qu.
11. p. 241. Kornman. de mirac. mortuor. part 2. c. 27. p. 22.
by virtue of which we read of so many morsels cast up again which death seemed
to have swallowed quite down.

1. That is wonderful which befell to two Brother Knights of Rome, the elder of
them was named Corfidius, who being in the repute of all men dead, the tables
of his last will and testament were recited, in which he had made his Brother
the Heir of all he had: But in the midst of the Funeral preparations, he rose
with great cheerfulness upon his Legs, and said, That he had been with his
Brother, who had recommended the care of his Daughter unto him, and had also
showed him where he had hid a great quantity of Gold under ground, wherewith he
should defray his Funeral Expenses. While he was speaking in this manner to the
admiration of all that were present, there came a messenger with the news of
his Brother's death; and the Gold was also found in the very place as he had
said.

Plut. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. p. 155. Kornman. mirac. mortuor. part. 2. c. 31.
p. 24.
2. Plutarch in his Book de anima, writes of one Enarchus, who being accounted,
and left for dead by the Physicians, not long after returned to life,
affirming, that those spirits who had withdrawn him from this life, were
severely reproved by their Chief; for that through their mistake they had
brought him instead of Nicauda the Tanner, who the same day and hour (being
sick of a Fever) died in his Bed. Besides this, as a testimony of his return to
life, he told Plutarch (who was then sick) that he should speedily recover of
that disease, as indeed he did.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 157. Kor^man. de mirac.mort. l. 2. c. 32. p. 24.
3. A like case with the former is set down by Gregorius thus: There was, says
he, one Reparatus a Roman, who being stiff and cold was given over by his
Relations, as one who undoubtedly dead, when soon after he returned to life,
and sent to the Shrine of S. Laurence in Rome, such as should enquire
concerning Tiburtius the Priest there, if any thing had newly befallen him. In
the mean time while the messenger was gone, he told them that were with him,
that he had seen that Tiburtius tormented in Hell with terrible flames. The
messenger he had sent returned with this news, that Tiburtius was that very
hour departed this life, and soon after Reparatus himself died.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 158.
4. Stephanus a Roman, a person of great virtue, and very wealthy, went to
Canstantinople about the dispatch of some Affairs he had there, where he died.
And for as much as the day was far spent, and inclining toward Evening, so
that preparations for his Funeral could not be conveniently made in that short
time, he was therefore laid out, and kept in the house till the morrow, at which
time he arose from the dead, and said, that he was brought before a certain
Judge, where he heard them loudly reprehended and rated, by whom he was thither
brought; for that the Judge had given them order not to bring him, but one
Stephanus a Blacksmith, who was one of his Neighbors: they sent therefore to
that Blacksmith, and it was found that he died in that very hour. And this,
says Gregorius, I have heard related by the mouth of Stephanus himself.

Fulgos. ib. p* 159. Kornman. de mirac. mort. l. 2. c. 33. p. 25.
4. Near unto this is that which S. Augustine says was seen by himself in the
person of one Curina: this man lived in a Village near unto Hippo in Africa,
where S. Augustine was Bishop, ^alling into a grievous sickness, he was reputed
by almost all persons as dead, having lost all his senses, and receiving no
kind of nourishment, when he had lain some days in this posture, that which
detained his Friends from the burial of him was, that some of them thought some
little breath was yet in his Nostrils: but when these also were now of the mind
that he was departed, on the sudden he opened his eyes, and bade them send
speedily to Curina a Smith and his Neighbor to see how he did, and when word
was brought back that he was newly dead, he told them that he was brought
before a Judge who sharply rebuked the spirits that had brought him instead of
the other Curina; that thereupon he was restored to life, that in this ecstasy
he had seen Paradise, and many other things he related; amongst others, that h^
was admonished to be baptized by S. Augustine at Hippo, being therefore
restored to his health, he did as he was advised.

6. While Narses was in Italy there was a great Plague in Rome, Fulg^^ib. p.
160.
whereof in the house of Valerianus the Advocate, a young man fell sick, he was
his Shepherd, and a Liburnian by Nation; and when he was supposed to be dead,
he straight returned to himself, and calling his Master to him, told him that
he had really been in Heaven, and had there understood how many, and who they
were that should die out of his House in that great plague; and having named
them, told his Master that he should survive his servants. To confirm the truth
of what he said, he added that he had learned all kind of Tongues: and in the
same hour discoursed with his Master in Greek, he also made trial with others
that were skilled in other languages, whereas before he only understood the
Latin. When he had lived thus two days, he grew into a Frenzy, and striving to
bite his own hands, he died: as many as (as by name) he had said should die,
followed him soon after, but his Master remained free from infection, according
as he had predicted.

7. Everardus Ambula, Fulgos.ib. l. 1. c. 6. p. 160.
a German Knight, fell sick in Germany in the time of Pope Innocent the Third,
and when he had lain for some time as one dead, returning to himself, he said,
that his Soul was carried by evil spirits into the City of Jerusalem* thence
into the Camp of Saladine (who then reigned in Egypt) from thence it was
conveyed to Lombardy, where in a certain Wood he had spoken with a German
Friend of his: lastly, he was brought to the City of Rome, the site, the form
of places and Buildings of which, together with the features of diverse Princes
there, he most exactly described as they were: whereas this is matter of
admiration, yet that increases the wonder, that he with whom he said he did
converse in the Wood, affirmed that he had there at the same time and hour
discoursed with this Everardus according as he had declared.

8. Acilius Aviola was concluded dead both by his Domestics and Physicians;
Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 52. p. 184. Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 29.
accordingly he was laid out upon the ground for some time, and then carried
forth to his Funeral Fire; but as soon as the flames began to seize his body,
he cried out that he was alive, imploring the assistance of his Schoolmaster,
who was the only person that had tarried by him, but it was too late, for
encompassed with flames, he was dead before he could be succored.

9. Lucius Lamias had been Praetor, Valor. Max* l. 1. c. 8. p. 30.
and being departed this life, he was carried (after the Roman manner) to be
burnt, being surrounded with flames, he cried out that he lived, but in vain,
for he could not be withdrawn from his Fate.

10. Plato tells of Erus Armenius, Plat. de r^^ub. l. 10. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6.
p. 155. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 555. Kor^man. de mirac. mort. l. 2. c.
28. p. 23.
how he was slain in Battle amongst many other: when they came to take up the
dead bodies upon the tenth day after, they found, that though all the other
carcases were putrid, this of his was entire and uncorrupted, they therefore
carried it home, that it might have the just and due Funeral Rites performed to
it; two days they kept it at home in that state, and on the twelfth day he was
carried out to the Funeral Pile, and being ready to be laid upon it, he
returned to life, to the admiration of all that were present: he declared
several strange and prodigious things, which he had seen and known, during all
that time that he had remained in the state of the dead.

11. One of the Noble Family of the Tatoricdi, Zuing. T^eatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p.
564.
being seized with the Plague in Burgundy, was supposed to die thereof, was put
into a Cof^^n to be carried to the Sepulchers of his Ancestors, which were
distant from that place, some four German miles: Night coming on, the Corpse was
disposed into a Barn, and there attended by some Rusticks: These perceived a
great quantity of fresh Blood to drain through the chinks of the Coffin;
whereupon they opened it, and found that the Body was wounded by a Nail, that
was driven into the shoulder through the Coffin, and that the wound was much
torn by the jogging of the Chariot he was carried in: but withal, they
discovered that the natural heat had not left his breast. They took him out,
laid him before the fire; he recovered as out of a deep sleep, ignorant of all
that had passed: He afterward married a Wife, by whom he had a Daughter;
married afterward to Huldericus a Psirt: from his Daughter came Sigismundus a
Psirt; chief Pastor of St. Mary's Church in Basil.

CHAP. XL. Of such who after death have concerned themselves with the affairs
of their Friends and Relations.
THe Platonists speak of some Souls, that after they are departed from their
bodies, they have yet a strange hankering after them: whereupon it is that they
haunt the dormitories of the dead, and keep about the places where their bodies
lie interred, and are therefore called by the Philosophers Body-lovers. I know
not under what restraints souls are, when once separate from their bodies, nor
what privileges some of them have above others; but if the following relations
are true, some of these here spoken of, have been as mindful of their Friends
and Families, as others were affected to the bodies, they had before deserted.

Gregor. de repub. l. 21. c. 4. 9. p. 772. Delrio disq. mag. l. 2. Quaest. 26.
5. p. 202, 203. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 4. p. 92. Lavater. de spectris, part 1. c. 15.
p. 65. He^w. Hi^rarch. l. 9. p. 602.
Ludovicus Adolisius, Lord of Immola, sent a Secretary of his upon earnest
business to Ferrara; in which journey, he was met by one on Horseback, attired
like an Hunts-man, with an Hawk upon his fist, who saluted him by his name, and
desired him, to entreat his Son Lodowick, to meet him in that very place, the
next day, at the same hour, to whom he would discover certain things of no mean
consequence, which much concerned him, and his estate. The Secretary returning
and revealing this to his Lord, at first he would scarce give credit to his
report, and jealous withal, that it might be some train laid to entrap his
life, he sent another in his stead; to whom the same Spirit appeared in the
shape aforesaid, and seemed much to lament his Sons dis^idence; to whom if he
had come in person, he would have related strange things, which threatened his
Estate, and the means how to prevent them: Yet desired him to recommend him to
his Son, and tell him, that after twenty two years, one month and one day
prefixed, he should loose the government of that City, which he then possessed,
and so he vanished. It happened just at the same time the spirit had predicted
(notwithstanding his great care and providence) that Philip Duke of Milain, the
same night besieged the City, and by the help of the ice (it being then a great
Frost past the Moat, and with scaling Ladders, scaled the Wall; surpised the
City, and took Lodowick Prisoner. He was in League with Philip, and therefore
feared no harm from him.

2. Two wealthy Merchants; Delrio. disq. mag. l. 2. Quaest. 26. 5. p. 202.
Greg. de Repub. l. 21. c. 4. 9. p. 772.
traveling through the Taurine Hills into France, upon the way met with a man
of more than Humane Stature; who thus said to him: Salute my Brother Lewis
Sforza, and deliver him this Letter from me: They were amazed, and asking who
he was? he told them, that he was Galeacius Sforza, and immediately vanished
out of sight. They made haste to Milain, and delivered the Dukes Letter,
wherein was thus written: O, O, O Lewis, take heed to thy self, for the
Venetians and French will unite to thy ruin, and to deprive thy Posterity of
their Estate. But if thou will deliver me 3000 Guilders, I will endeavor that
the Spirits being reconciled, thy unhappy fate may be averted; and this I hope
to perform, if thou shall not refuse what I have requested: Farewell. The
Subscription was: The Soul of Galeacius thy Brother. This was laughed at by
most as a fiction, but not long after, the Duke was dispossessed of his
Government, and taken Prisoner by Lewis the Twelfth, King of France. Thus far
Bernard Arulnus, in first Section, of the History of Milain, who also was an
eye witness of what has passed.

3. Caesar Baronius tells that there was an entire friendship betwixt Michael
Mercatus the Elder, Baron. A^t. nal. tom. 5. Anno 412. Delrio disquisit. mag.
l. 2. qu. 26. p. 203. Dr. More in Immortal. Soul, l. 2* c. 16. p. 132.
and Marsilius Ficinus; and this friendship was the stronger betwixt them, by
reason of a mutual agreement in their studies, and an addictedness to the
Doctrines of Plato. It fell out that these two discoursed together (as they
used) of the state of man after death, according to Plato's opinions, (and
there is extant a Learned Epistle of Marsilius to Michael Mercatus, upon the
same subject) but when their disputation and discourse was drawn out somewhat
long: They shut it up with this firm agreement, That which soever of them two
should first depart out of this life (if it might be) should ascertain the
survivor of the state of the other Life, and whether the Soul be immortal or
not. This agreement being made, and mutually sworn unto, they departed. In a
short time it fell out, that while Michael Mercatus, was one Morning early at
his Study, upon the sudden he heard the noise of a Horse upon the gallop: and
then stoping at his door, withal he heard the voice of Marsilius his friend,
crying to him, O Michael! O Michael, those thing are true, they are true.
Michael wondering to hear his friends voice, rose up, and opening the Casement,
he saw the backside of him, whom he had heard, in white, and gallopping away
upon a white Horse: He called after him, Marsilius, Marsilius; and followed him
with his Eye. But he soon vanished out of sight. He amazed at this
extraordinary accident, very solicitously enquired, if any thing had happened
to Marsilius (who then lived at Florence, where he also breathed his last) and
he found upon strict enquiry, that he dyed at that very time, wherein he was
thus heard and seen by him.

4. We read in the life of John Chrysostom of Basiliscus, I^ vita Chrysostom. pe^
E^asm. p. 7. c. 2. Lavat. de spectris, part 1. c. 13 p. 61.
the Bishop of the City Comana, (the same who with Lucianus a Priest of
Antioch, suffered Martyrdom under Maximianus the Emperor) that he appeared to
St. Chrysostom in his exile, and said, Brother John, be of good heart and
courage, for to morrow we shall be together: Also that before this, he had
appeared to the Priest of that Church, and said, Prepare a place for our
Brother John, for he is to come presently: And that these things were true, was
afterward con^irm'd by the event.

Treas. Ancient and Modern times, l. 4. c. 21. p. 346, 347.
5. Charles the Eighth, King of France, invaded the Kingdom of Naples, Alphonso
was then King of it; and howsoever before, he bragged what he would do; yet when
the French were in Italy, and came so far as Rome, he took such a fright, that
he cried out every night, he heard the Frenchmen coming, and that the very
Trees and Stones cried France. And as Guicciardine affirms (who was not a man
either easily to believe, or rashly write Fables) it was credibly and
constantly reported, that the Spirit of Ferdinand his Father, appeared to one
that had been his Physician, and bad him tell his Son Alphonso from him, that
he should not be able to resist the Frenchmen; for God had ordained, that his
Progeny should, (after many great afflictions) be deprived of their Kingdom,
for the multitude and great enormity of their sins: and especially for that he
had done (by the persuasion of Alphonso) himself in the Church of St. Leander
in Chaiae, near to Naples, whereof he told not the particulars; the success was
that Alphonso (terrified waking and sleeping with the representations of such
Noblemen as he had caused secretly to be murdered in prison) resigned his Crown
to his Son Ferdinando; and ran away into Sicily, in such haste that importuned
by his Mother-in-Law, to stay for her only three days; he told her, that if she
would not go presently with him, he would leave her; and that if any sought to
stay him, he would cast himself headlong out of the window. His Son Ferdinand
having assembled all his forces, durst make no resistance, but fled before the
French from place to place, till at length almost all his Subjects forsook him,
and rebelled against him; whereupon he fled also into Sicily, and within a
while dyed there: So Charles conquered the whole Kingdom; his Soldiers having
not had occasion so much as to put on their armor all the Voyage.

Niceph. l. 8. c. 23. p. 344 Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 565.
6. Mus^nius and Chrysanthius, both Bishops; died in the time of the Nicene
Council; before such time as all present had subscribed to the Articles of
Faith then agreed unto. The rest of the Bishops, went to their Sepulchers, and
desiring there subscription also, as if they were alive, they left the Schedule
of Subscription at their Tombs; when after it was found, that the dead persons
had in a miraculous manner subscribed their names in this manner. Chrysanthius
and Musonius, who were consenting with the Fathers in the sacred Ecumenical
Synod of Nice, though translated in respect of the Body: yet with our own hands
we have subscribed to this Schedule.

Kornman. de mirac. Mortuor. part 2. c. 15. p. 15. Russia. Eccles. Hist. l. 1
c. 5. p. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 12. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. p. 63.
7. Sp^ridion, Bishop of Cyprus had a Daughter called Irene, with whom a friend
of his had left certain Ornaments of a great value; which she being over
careful of, hid under the earth, and shortly after dyed. In some time after,
came he who had entrusted her; and finding that she was dead; demanded his
goods at the hands of the Father, both with entreaties and threats. Spiridion
that knew not what to do in the case, and saw that the man's loss was become his
calamity; went to the Tomb of his Daughter, beseeching God that he would show
something of promised Resurrection before the time, nor was he deceived in his
hopes, for his Daughter Irene appeared to him, and having declared in what
place she had disposed of the man's goods, she vanished away.

CHAP. XLI. Of the strange ways, by which Murders have been discovered.
WIlliam the Norman built a fair Monastery, Malmesb. ^. 174. Rog. Hoved. Anno
1070 (...). ad Monastic. Anglic. fol. 12.
where he wan the Garland of England: and in the Synod held Anno 1070. at
Winchester; King William being present, as also the Legates of Pope Alexander,
it was by that Synod decreed amongst other things; that whoever was conscious
to himself, that he had slain a man in that great Battle, should do penance for
one whole year, and as many years as he had slain men, and should redeem his
Soul, either by building a Church, or by establishing a perpetual allowance to
some Church already built; so great a crime did they esteem the sheding of
Humane Blood, though (as they suppose) in a just War. Sure I am that God
Almighty as well to declare his detestation of that crimson sin of murder, as
to beget and retain in us a horror thereof; has most vigorously employed his
providence, by strange and miraculous ways, to bring to light deeds of
darkness; and to drag the bloody Authors of them out of their greatest
privacies and concealment unto condign punishments: It were an infinite thing
to trace the several footsteeps of Divine Providence in this matter: It will be
sufficient to produce some Examples, wherein we shall find enough to make us
adore at once the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice of God.

1. Iulianus Malacava, Petr. Servius in dissertat. de ung. ar^ar. p. 37, 38.
a Blacksmith by Profession, was vehemently in love with a certain Maid; and
not knowing any other way to obtain his desires, besides that of Marriage with
his beloved, began to think how he might compass the death of his Wife, he
accomplished his divellish design with a Halter; and strangled his Wife, who
was then big with child; the third day after, the Woman was found dead; her
Husband was gone into the Country, and of all others was the least suspected;
the Child in the mean time was taken out of the Womb of the dead Mother, and
laid by; but at the entrance of the cruel Father, the dead Child bled fresh at
the Nose: This was upon the third of the Nones of February, 1632. At the sight
of this blood the Magistrare entered into some suspicion of the Murderer, he
sent him to prison, and laid him in irons: when he came upon further
examination, he confessed the whole as it was: and was deservedly executed the
twelfth of the Kalends of December 1633. this History was sent me from the
public Records of Caesena; for an unquestionable truth.

2. Parthenius, B^ard's T^eatre of Gods Judgments, l. 2. c. 10. p. 285
Treasurer to Theodobert, King of France, had traitorously slain an especial
friend of his, called Ausanius, together with his Wife Papianilla, when no man
accused, or so much as suspected him thereof, he detected himself in this
strange manner: As he slept in his bed, he suddenly roared out, crying for
help, or else he perished; and being demanded what he ailed; he half asleep
answered, That his friend Ausanius and his Wife, whom he had murdered long
before, did now summon him to answer it before the Tribunal of God. Upon this
confession, he was apprehended, and after due examination stoned to death:
Thus, though all witnesses fail, yet the murderers own conscience is sufficient
to betray him.

Beard's Theat. l. 2. c. 11. p. 295 296.
3. Anno Dom. 867. Lothbroke, of the Blood Royal of Denmark, and Father to
Humbar and Hubba, entered with his Hawk into a Cock-boat alone, and by tempest
was driven upon the coast of Norfolk in England: where being found, he was
detained and presented to Edmund, at that time King of the East Angles. The
King entain'd him at his Court, and perceiving his singular dexterity and
activity in Hawking and Hunting, bare him an especial favor: By this means he
fell into the envy of Berick, the Kings Faulconer; who one day, as they hunted
together, privily murdered, and threw him into a bush. It was not long ever he
was missed at Court; when no tidings could be heard of him, his Dog, who had
continued in the Wood with the Corpse of his Master, till Famine forced him
thence, at sundry times came to Court, and fawned on the King; so that the King
suspecting some ill matter, at length followed the trace of the Hound, and was
led by him to the place where Lothbroke lay; inquisition was made, and by
circumstance of words, and other suspicions, Berick the Kings Faulconer, was
supposed to be his murderer: The King commanded him to be set alone in the
same Boat of Lothbroke's, and so committed to the mercy of the Sea; by the
working of which he was carried to the same Coast of Denmark, from whence
Lothbroke came: the Boat was well known, and he examined by torments; to save
himself, he said he was slain by King Edmund: And this was the first occasion
of the Danes arrival in this Land.

Beard's Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 2. c. 11. p. 299.
4. Luther tells a story of a certain Almain, who in his Travel fell amongst
Thieves, and they about to cut his Throat; the poor man espied a ^light of
Crows, and said, O Crows, I take you for my witnesses, and revengers of my
death: About two or three days after, these Thieves drinking together at an
Inn, a company of Crows came and lighted upon the top of the House; at this the
Thieves began to laugh, and said one of them, Look yonder are they who must
avenge his death, whom we lately slew: The Tapster over heard, he declares it
to the Magistrate, who caused them to be apprehended, and upon their
disagreeing speeches, and contrary answers, urged them so far, that they
confessed the truth, and received their deserved punishment.

Beard's Theater, l. 2. c. 11. p. 302 Clarks mirror. c. 86. p. 381.
5. In Leicastershire, not far from Lutterworth, a Miller had murdered one in
his Mill, and privily buried him in a ground hard by: This Miller removed into
another Country, and there lived a long space; till at last, guided by the
providence of God, for the manifestation of his Justice, he returned unto that
place, to visit some of his Friends: While he was there, the Miller, who now
had the Mill, had occasion to dig deep in the ground, where he found the
carcass of a man: This known, the Lord put it into their hearts, to remember a
Neighbor of theirs, who twenty years before was suddenly missed, and since
that time not heard of; and bethinking themselves who was then Miller of that
Mill; behold he was there ready in the Town, not having been there for many
years before: This man was suspected, and thereupon examined, and without much
ado confessed the fact, and was accordingly executed.

6. In the second year of King James his Reign, Baker's Chr. p. 614.
a strange accident happened to the terror of all bloody Murderers; which was
this: One Anne Waters, enticed by a Lover of hers, consented to have her
Husband strangled, and buried under the Dunghill in a Cow-house: whereupon the
man being missing by his Neighbors, and the Wife making show of wondering what
was become of him. It pleased God, that one of the Inhabitants of the Town,
dreamed one night that his Neighbor Waters was strangled and buried under the
Dunghill in a Cow-house; and upon declaring of his dream, search being made by
the Constable, the dead body was found, as he had dreamed; and whereupon the
Wife was apprehended, and upon examination confessing the fact, was burnt: And
now what hope can Murderers have of being concealed, when they are subjected
to be discovered by any man's dream?

7. Bessus the Paeonian, Dinoth. de rebus and factis Mem. l. 8. p. 584. Plut.
de sera numinis vindctia Fitzherb. ol. Relig. and Policy, part 1. c. 26. p. 26.
p. 262.
and a Captain, had privily slain his Father; but being at a Dinner at a
certain time, he rose up hastily, and with his Spear began to break a Nest of
Swallows, that was made on the outside of the House, and to kill the young
ones; they who were present disliking the action, reproved him for being so
fierce in a matter of nothing; when he with a troubled mind replied, Do you
call it a thing of nothing? Do ye not hear how they falsely accuse me of killing
my Father? This being declared to the Judges, gave occasion to them of
Inquiring into the death of the old man: And Bessus being found guilty by his
own confession, was put to death in such manner, as the Law allotted to a
Paricide.

8. A Merchant of Lucca, Clark's Mirroir. c. 86. p. 381. Pasquier* Beard's
Theater of God's Judgments, l. 2. c. 11. p. 300.
traveling to Roan in Normandy, was in the way murdered by a Frenchman his
Servant, and thrown amougst the Vines. As the fact was doing, comes by a blind
man lead by a Dog (as it is usual in that case) and hearing one groan, asked who
it was? The murderer answered, That it was a sick man easing himself; the
blind man thus deluded, the vilain with his Masters Money, and Bills of
Exchange, sets up a Shop at Roan. In the mean time the Merchant was expected at
Lucca, and when he came not, a Messenger was dispatched to seek him; who after
much inquiry, heard at an Inn, that six Months before, a Luquois Merchant
lodged there, and was going toward Paris. But the Messenger hearing nothing of
him there, began to suspect that he was murdered, and made his complaint to
the Parliament at Roan, who caused inquiry to be made, if any about that time
had set up a new Shop, and finding that the man aforesaid had, they caused him
to be arrested; but he upon examination denied the fact, till the dead Corpse
was heard of; and the blind man also hearing of this inquiry, informed what he
had heard about that place, where the Corpse was found, and what he was
answered, saying withal, that he knew the voice from any others. Many Prisoners
therefore were ordered to speak the same words to the blind man, together with
the Murderer: But amongst them all he owned his voice; whereupon the vilain
possessed with abundance of horror, confessed the act, and was deservedly
executed.

9. Anno 1551. at Paris, Beard's Theater. l. 2. c. 11. p. 310
a certain young Woman was brained by a Man with a Hammer, near unto St.
Opportunes Church, as she was going to midnight Mass, and all her Rings and
Jewels taken from her. This Hammer being left with the Corpse, was known to be a
poor Smiths there by, who thereupon being suspected of the Murder, was put to
such torture, as utterly deprived him of the use of his Limbs, whereby to get
his living, so that reduced to extreme poverty, he ended his life in great
misery. All this while, which was the space of twenty years the Murderer
remained unknown, and the memory of the murder seemed to be buried with the
dead woman in her grave. But mark the Justice of God: One John Flaming,
Sergeant of the Subsidies at Paris, being at St. L^ups, a Village by
Montmorency, chanced at Supper to say he had left his Wife at home sick, and no
body with her but a little Boy; there was an old man then present named
Monstier, and a Son-in-Law of his, who immediately went that night away; at ten
in the Morning came to Flaming's House, with each of them a basket of Cherries,
and a Green-Goose, as if presents from the Husband, they were let in by the
boy, whom they presently murdered, yet not so, but the woman heard his cry, and
therefore locked fast the Chamber Door, and cried for help out at the Window;
the Neighhours ran in, took these two villains, one in the Funnel of a Chimney,
and the other in a Well in the Cellar, with nothing but his Nose above Water.
These two being condemned, and brought to the place of Execution, Monstier
desired to speak with the Smiths Widow, of whom he asked forgiveness,
confessing he had stolen from him his Hammer, and had therewith killed the
Woman at St. Opportunes: Thus the Smiths innocence was detected, and the
Murderer found out after twenty years from the commitment.

Beard's Theater, l. 2. c. 11. p. 305
10. A Murderer at Tubing betrayed his murder by his own sighs, which were so
deep and incessant in grief, not of his fact, but of his small booty, that
being but asked the question, he confessed the crime, and underwent worthy
punishment.

Fabrit. Montan. de Providentia, p. 45, ^6.
11. At Tiguri, a certain vagabond Rogue, in the night had killed his companion,
that lay with him in a Barn; and having first removed the dead Corpse somewhat
out of sight, fled betimes in the Morning, toward Eglisavium, a Town under the
government of the Tigurines. But the Master of the Barn, having in the Morning
found the signs of a murder, soon after found also the dead body. In the mean
time the Murderer was got far upon his way, yet by the noise of Crows and Jays,
which followed and assaulted him; he was taken notice of by some Reapers, then
in the Field, who were somewhat terrified at the novelty of so unusual a thing.
The Murderer for all this holds on his way, and now might he seem to be out of
danger, when there came such as were ordered to make pursuit after him: who
enquire of the Reapers, if any man had passed by that way? who tell them they
had seen none, besides one only fellow, who as he passed, was ever and anon,
molested with the Crows and Jays, that they thence did conjecture he was some
villain, and that if they made haste, they might undoubtedly take him. The
wretch was soon after seized by them, and broken upon the Wheel, at his
execution with sighs and prayers, I heard him acknowledge the providence of
God, a clear instance of which he had received in so unusual a detection of
himself.

12. Anno 1611. Some of the English Ambassadors men entered into a quarrel with
some of the Iamoglans, Knowl^'s^. Tar^. History, 1311.
of the next Seraglio, in which Tumult one of the Ambassadors men threw a
stone, and smote a Iamoglan on the forehead, that he dyed in a few hours. The
A^a of the Seraglio complained hereof to the Grand Vizier, who presently sent
the sub-Bassa of Galatia to make inquiry of the fact. The Ambassador went
himself to the Seraglio, and sent for his men which had been in the quarrel,
and willed the Turks to design the man which had thrown the stone, who all with
one shout ran upon one Simon Dibbins, a man that was newly come from Candia,
where he had served the Venetians, and was now entertained into the Ambassadors
service. This Simon was not he that threw the stone, yet the Turks would have
none but him, on him they laid hands and dragged him away. The Ambassador
enterpos'd, but in vain; the English offered great sums for his life, but the
Turks would have blood for blood: The day of execution being appointed, the
Ambassador sent his Chaplain to the Prison, to prepare him for death, who
examining him how he had formerly lived, he confessed that some few years
before he had in England killed a man, for which he had sled to Candia, from
whence he came to Constantinople, where he was now to suffer for that which he
did not: the just Judgment of God thus pursuing him, he was hanged at the
Ambassadors Gates.

13. Henry Renzovius, Beard's ^^. Theater, l. ^. p. 304.
Lieutenant to the King of Denmark in the Dukedom of Holsatia, in a Letter of
his to David Chytreus writes thus: A Traveller was found murdered in the
Highway, near to Itzehow in Denmark; and because the murderer was unknown, the
Magistrates of the place caused one of the hands of him that was slain to be
cut off, and hung up by a string on the top of the room in the Town Prison;
about ten years after the Murderer coming upon some occasion into the Prison,
the hand that had been a long time dry, began to drop Blood upon the Table that
stood underneath it; which the Jailer beholding stayed the fellow, and
advertised the Magistrates of it, and examining him, the Murderer giving glory
to God, confessed his fact, and submitted himself to the rigor of the Law,
which was inflicted on him, as he well deserved.

14. Smyth and Gurney, Clark's Mirroir. c. 104. p. 500*
two Watermen of Gravesend, were some years since hired by a Grasier, to carry
him down to Tilbury Hope, for he intended to go to a certain Fair in Essex to
buy Cattle: These villains perceiving he had Money, conspired to take away his
life, and accordingly, as they went, one of them cut his Throat, and the other
taking his Money, threw him overboard. This murder was concealed diverse
years, but this Summer 1656. those Murderers, as they were drinking together
fell out, and one of them in his passion, accused the other of murder, and he
again accused him; upon which being apprehended and examined, they confessed
the fact, were condemned at Maidstone Aslizes, and are hanged in chains at
Gravesend.

15. Anno 1656. Lonicer. T^ta^. p. 436.
A Woman in Westphalia, being near the time of her travel, went to the next
village, to confess her self, in her confession she told the Priest, she had
newly found a purse ^ull of Money, and therefore desired him, that he would
speak of it publicly, that it might be restored to the right owner. The Priest
told her it was sent to her from Heaven, that she should reserve it to her self
and enjoy it; the woman thus informed, kept the Purse to her self. In her
return home, she was to pass through a Grove, into which she was no sooner come,
but the pains of Travel came upon her: In the mean time a Noble Person, who had
lost the Purse, rode up to her, and demanded, if she had not found one; she
beseeches him, That for the Love of God, he would ride to the next Village for
some woman to assist her in her labor, and that she would restore him the
Purse he sought after: the Nobleman rode as fast as he could, to call some
woman. In which time of his absence, came the wicked Priest, cuts off the
woman's head, and seises upon the purse. The Nobleman returning with the women,
are witnesses of this Tragical Spectacle; but who had done it was unknown. It
was a time when the Snow lay thick upon the ground; and finding some footsteps,
he pursued them, till he overtook the Priest, whom he seized and found his
purse upon him; he tied him therefore to the tail of his Horse, and so dragged
him to the Magistrate to be punished: his sentence was to be thrown into a
Caldron of boiling Oil, which was accordingly executed on January 20. 1656.

Clark's Mirroir. 6.86. p. 380. Plut. Morals. p. 962. Solin. c. 20. p. 275.
16. A Soldier in the Army of King Pyrrhus being slain; a Dog which he had,
could by no means be enticed from the dead body; but the King passing by, he
fawned upon him, as it were, craving help at his hands: whereupon the King
caused all his Army to march by in order; and when the Murderers came, the Dog
slew fiercely upon them, and then fawned upon the King: those Soldiers being
hereupon examined, confessed the fact, and were hanged.

Lonicer. Theat. p. 284.
17. A Locksmith, young and given to luxury, killed both his Parents with
Pistols, out of a desire to enjoy their Money and Estate; having committed this
horrible murder, he went presently to a Cobbler, and there bought him a pair of
Shoes; leaving behind his old and torn one, which the Cobler's Boy threw under
his seat, which he sat upon. Some hours after the door of the house, where the
slain were, was commanded by the Magistrate to be opened, where were ^ound the
dead bodies; which the son so lively lamented, that no man had the least
suspicion of him to be the author of so great a villainy: But it fell out by
accident, that the Cobbler had observed some spots of blood upon the Shoes left
with him; and it was noted, that the son had more Money about him than he used
to have; the Magistrates moved with these things, put the man into prison, who
soon confessed the fact, and received the punishment, worthy of his crime. This
was (by the relation of Luther) at Regimont in Borussia. Anno 1450.

Lonicer. Th^at. p. 586.
18. In Mets, a City of Lorain, the Executioner of the City, in the night and
absence of the Master, got privily into the Cellar of a Merchants House; where
he first slew the Maid, who was sent by her Mistress to fetch some Wine; in the
same manner he slew the Mistress, who wondering at her Maids stay, came to see
what was the reason: This done, he fell to rifling Chests and Cabinets. The
Merchant (upon his return) finding the horrible murder and plunder of his
House, with a soul full of trouble and grief complains to the Senate; and when
there were diverse discourses about the murder, the Executioner had also put
himself in the Court with the crowd, and murmured out such words as these: That
seeing there had been frequent brawls betwixt the Merchant and his Wife, there
was no doubt, but he was the author of that Tragedy in his House; and, said he,
were he in my hands, I would soon extort as much from him. By these, and the
like words, it came to pass, that the Merchant was cast into prison, and being
in a most cruel manner tortured by this Executioner (though innocent) confessed
himself the murderer, and so was condemned to a horrible death, which he
suffered accordingly. Now was the Executioner secure, and seemed to be freed of
all danger; when the wakeful Justice of God discovered his villainy: For he
wanting Money, had pawned a Silver Bowl to a Jew; who finding upon it the Coat
of Arms of the Merchant, newly executed, sent it to the Magistrate, and with
notice that the Merchants Coat was upon it. Whereupon the Executioner was
immediately cast into Prison, and examined by torture how he came by that Cup:
he there confessed all, as it had been done by him, and that he was the only
murderer: Thus the innocence of the Merchant was discovered, and the
Executioner had the due punishment of his wickedness.

19. Ibycus the Poet, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 464. col. 2 Fitzherb. of
Relig. and Polic. part 1 c. 35. p. 441.
was set upon by Thieves in hope of prey; and seeing their Knives at his
Throat, he called to some Cranes, which he saw then flying over his head, that
they would revenge his death: These Murderers afterward sitting in the
Marketplace; a Flock of Cranes again flew over them, upon which, says one of
them, Behold the revengers of Ibycus. This saying was caught up by some
present, they were suspected of his murder, examined by torture, confessed the
fact, and were executed.

20. Certain Gentlemen in Denmark, Beard's Theat. l. 2. c. 11. p. 303*
being on an Evening together in a Stove, fell out amongst themselves, and from
words fell to blows, the Candles being put out, in this blind fray, one of them
was stabbed by a Poynard. Now the Deed-doer was unknown by reason of the number,
although the Gentleman accused a Pursevant of the Kings for it, who was one of
them in the Stove: Christernus the Second, then King, to find out the Homicide,
caused them all to come together in the Stove, and standing round about the
dead Corpse, he commanded that they should, one after another, lay their right
hand on the slain Gentleman's naked breast, swearing they had not killed him. The
Gentlemen did so, and no sign appeared to witness against them; the Pursevant
only remained, who (condemned before in his own conscience) went first of all,
and kissed the dead man's ^eet, but as soon as he laid his hand on his breast,
the blood gushed forth in great abundance, both out of his Wound and Nostrils,
so that urged by this evident accusation, he confessed the murder, and by the
Kings own sentence, was immediately beheaded. Hereupon arose that practice
(which is now ordinary in many places) of finding out unknown murders, which by
the admirable Power of God, are for the most part revealed, either by the
bleeding of the Corpse, or the opening of its Eye, or some other extraordinary
sign, as daily experience teaches.

21. Sir Walter Smyth of Shirford in Warwickshire, Dugdale Antiq. Warw.
illustrat^d, p. 37, 38.
being grown an aged man, at the death of his Wife, considered of a Marriage
^or Richard his Son and Heir, then at man's estate; to that end made his mind
known to Mr. Thomas Chetwin of Ingestre in Staffordshire, who entertaining the
motion in the behalf of Dorothy his Daughter, was contented to give 500 l. with
her: But no sooner had the old Knight seen the young Lady, but he became a
Suitor for himself, pro^ering 500 l. for her, besides as good a Jointure as she
should have by his Son; had the match gone forward; this so wrought upon
Chetwin, that he effectually persuaded his Daughter, and the Marriage ensued
accordingly: It was not long ever her affections wandering, she gave
entertainment to one William Robinson of Drayton Basset, a Gentleman of twenty
two years of age: And being impatient of all that might hinder her full
enjoyment of him; she contrived how to be rid of her Husband. Having corrupted
her waiting Gentlewoman, and a Groom of the Stable, she resolved by their help,
and the assistance of Robinson to strangle him in his bed; and though Robinson
came not the designed night, she no whit staggered in her resolutions; for
watching her Husband till he was fallen a sleep, she called in her accomplices;
and casting a long Towel about his neck, caused the Groom to lie upon him, to
keep him from struggling: whilst her self and the Maid straining the Towel,
stopped his breath. Having thus dispatched the work, they carried him into
another room, where a Close Stool was placed, upon which they set him. An hour
after the Maid and Groom were got silently away: to palliate the business, she
made an outcry in the house, wringing her hands, pulling her hair, and weeping
extremely; pretending that missing him some time out of bed, she went to see
what the matter was, and found him in that posture. By these feigned shows of
sorrow, she prevented all suspicion of his violent death; and not long after
went to London, setting so high a value upon her Beauty, that Robinson became
neglected. But within two years following, this woeful deed of darkness was
brought to light in this manner. The Groom before mentioned, was entertained
with Mr. Richard Smyth, Son and Heir to the murdered Knight, and attending him
to Coventry, with diverse other Servants, became so sensible of his villainy,
when he was in his cups, that out of good nature, he took his Master aside, and
upon his knees besought his forgiveness, for acting in the murder of his
Father, declaring all the circumstances thereof. Whereupon Mr. Smyth discreetly
gave him good words; but wished some others he trusted, to have an eye to him,
that he might not escape; when he had slept, and better considered what might
be the issue thereof. Notwithstanding which direction, he fled away with his
Masters best Horse; and hasting presently into Wales, attempted to go beyond
Sea; but being hindered by contrary winds, after three essays to lanch out, was
so happily pursued by Mr. Smyth, who spared no cost in sending to several
Ports, that he was found out and brought prisoner to Warwick; as was also the
Lady and her Gentlewoman, all of them with great boldness denying the fact: and
the Groom most impudently charging Mr. Smyth, with endeavor of corrupting to
accuse the Lady (his Mother-in-law) falsely, to the end he might get her
Jointure; but upon his arreignment (smitten with the apprehension of his guilt)
he publicly acknowledged it, and stoutly justified what he had so said to be
true, to the face of the Lady, and her Maid, who at first with much seeming
confidence pleaded their innocence; till at length, seeing the particular
circumstances thus discovered, they both confessed the fact; for which having
judgment to die, the Lady was burnt at a stake, near the Hermitage on Woolvey
Heath (toward the side of Shirford Lordship) where the Country people, to this
day, show the place; and the Groom with the Maid suffered death at Warwick.
This was about the third year of Queen Mary's Reign, it being May the 15.1
Mariae that Sir Walters murder so happened.

The end of the First Book of the Wonders of the Little World.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Imagination or Fantasy, and the force of it in some persons,
when depraved by melancholy, or otherwise.
IMagination the work of Fancy, says Dr. Fuller, oftentimes produces real
effects, and this he confirms by a pleasanter instance than some of these that
follow.

Fuller*
1. A Gentleman had lead a company of children into the Fields beyond their
wonted walk, and they being now weary, cried to him to carry them. The
Gentleman not able to carry them all, relieved himself with this device, he
said he would provide them Horses to ride home with, and furnished himself and
them with Geldings out of the next Hedge: the success was (says my Author)
that mounted fancy put metal into their Legs, and they came cheerfully home.

Zacut. Lusit. prax. adm. l. 1. obs. 44. p. 34.
2. There was one who fell into a vain imagination that he was perpetually
frozen; and therefore in the very Dog Days continually sat near the Fire,
crying out that he should never be warm, unless his whole body should be set on
fire: and whereas by stealth he would cast himself into the fire, he was bound
in chains in a seat near the fire, where he sat night and day, not able to
sleep by reason of this foolish fancy: when all the counsels of his Friends
were in vain, I took this course for his cure, I wrapped him in Sheepskins from
head to foot, the wool was upon them, which I had well wetted with Aqua Vitae;
and thus dressed, I set him at once all on fire; he burnt thus for half an
hour, when dancing and leaping, he cried out he was now well, and rather too
hot,: by this means his former fancy vanished, and he in a few days was
perfectly well.

Z^cut. Lusit. prax. adm. l. 1. obs. 45. p. 35, 36.
3. A Noble Person in Portugal fell into this melancholy imagination, that he
continually cried out, God would never pardon his sins. In this agony he
continued pensive, and wasted away, various prescriptions in Physic were used
to no purpose, as also all kinds of Divertisements and other means. At last we
made use of this Artifice, his Chamber door being locked, about midnight at the
Roof of his Chamber (we had stripped off the tile for that purpose) there
appeared an artificial Angel, having a drawn Sword in his right, and a lighted
torch in his left hand, who called him by his name, he straight rose from his
Bed, and adored the Angel, which he saw clothed in white, and of a beautiful
aspect, he listened attentively to the Angel, who told him all his sins were
forgiven, and so extinguished his Torch and said no more. The poor man
overjoyed, knocked with great violence at the door, raises the House, tells
them all that had passed; and as soon as it was day, sent for his Physicians,
and relates al^^^ them, who congratulated his felicity, calling him a righteous
person. He soon after fell to his meat, slept quietly, performed all the
offices of a sound man, and from thence forth never felt any thing of his
former indisposition.

4. Anno Dom. 1610. attending upon my Prince at Prague, Additam. ad Domatum,
per Hostium. l. 7. c. 3. p. 664, 665.
as his Physician, it fell out, that upon the eighteenth of July there was born
a boy, whose Liver, Intestines, Stomach, Spleen, with a great part of the
Mesentery, hung out all naked below his Navel. He lived but a few hours, and
then with misery enough exchanged that life for death which he had newly begun.
If any demand the reason of so monstrous a deformity, he shall find no other
than the imagination of the Mother, who being asked by Doctor Major and my
self, whether happily she had not given some occasion to such a Birth, she
answered with tears, that three Months before her delivery, she was constrained
by some Soldiers to be present at the killing of a Calf, at the opening of it
she felt an extraordinary motion in her self, when she saw how the bowels came
tumbling down from the Belly.

5. In the same City of Prague, Addit. ad Donat. p^r Host. l. 7. c. 3. p. 667.
much about the same time there was the like, if not a greater miracle of
nature: a woman was delivered of a Son, who was born with his foreskin cut and
inverted; and this came to pass through the vehement imagination of the Mother,
who three weeks before she fell in travel, had listened very attentively to a
Guest in her House, who discoursed, and exactly described the manner of the
Jewish Circumcision, at one of which he had that morning been present. I may be
an eyewitness of this, for I was brought by Kepler the great Mathematician, to
behold that Boy who was then two years of age.

6. Gulielmus Fabricius relates a notable History to this purpose; Id. ibid. p.
668.
thus, Anno 1600, an honest Matron in Roll near the Lemane Lak^, at the
beginning of the second month from her conception, chanced to pass by the Image
of a Crucifix, and looking over curiously and intentively upon the broken and
distorted Legs of the Thief that hung on the left side, she was therewith so
moved and affected, that at the end of her time she was delivered of a Girl who
was deformed in her right Leg, after the same manner as she had beheld in the
Thief.

7. There was an excellent Painter, Nich. Tulpii observe. med. l. 1. c. 18. p.
37.
who having been for some time infested with black choler, fell into this
strange and false imagination, he verily believed that all the Bones of his
Body were become so flexible and soft, that they might as easily be crushed
together, and folded one within another as a piece of Wax: his mind having
received this impression, he kept himself in his Bed a whole Winter together,
fearing if he should rise, that the misfortune which he feared would certainly
befall him. He was afterward cured of his conceit by the arti^ice of his
Physician, as is (...) down at large in the same Chapter.

Roderic. Fon^eca de sanitat. t^^nda. c. 24. p. 95.
8. Rodericus Fonseca tells of one, who being sick of a burning Fever, pointing
from his Bed with his Finger to the Floor of the Chamber, he besought them that
stood near him, that they would suffer him to swim a while in that Lake: the
Physician agreed to it, and he walking carefully about, said, that now the
water was as high as his Knees, straight it was come to his Loins, and soon
after it reached as high as his Throat: this done, (behold the force and
strength of imagination) he said he was very well, and so indeed it fell out.

Schenck. obs. med. l. 4. obs. 1. p. 544.
9. A certain woman being very big (according to usual computation) did reckon
with her Neighbors, that she should come about the Feast of the Epiphany, or
of the three Kings: some therefore told her by way of allusion, that she should
be delivered of three Kings: Pray God grant it, said she. At her time therefore
she was delivered of three Male Children, one of which was of the color of an
Ethiopian, as one of those three Kings are commonly painted. This story, says
Gemma, I thought meet to set down, because it was seen at Lovaine, and is
confirmed by sufficient testimony.

10. Another woman was delivered of a Child all hairy and rough, Schenck. ib.
p. 543. Paraeus l. 24. c. 7.
having too intentively looked upon the picture of John Baptist, as he is
ordinarily painted in his Garments of Camels hair.

11. Anno 1638. at Leyden a woman of the meaner sort, Barthol. hist. Anatom.
C^nt. 3. hist. 44. p. 210.
who lived near the Church of S. Peter, was delivered of a Child well shaped in
every respect, but had the head of a Cat. Imagination was that which had given
occasion for this Monster; for while she was big she was frighted exceedingly
with a Cat which was gotten into her Bed.

12. A very ingenio^s Physician has diverse times related to me, Mr. Boyl's ^xp.
philos. ^xp. 11. p. 151.
that being called to a young Lady, he found, that though she much complained
of health, yet there appeared so little cause either in her body, or her
condition, to guess that she did any more than fancy her self sick, that
scrupling to give her Physic, he persuaded her Friends rather to divert her
mind by little journeys of pleasure* In one of which, going to S. Winifred's
Well, this Lady who was a Catholic, and devout in her Religion, and a pretty
while in the water to perform some Devotions, and had had occasion to fix her
eyes very attentively upon the red Pebble Stones* which in a scattered order
made up a good part o^ those that appeared through the water, and a while after
growing big, she was delivered of a Child, whose white skin was copiously
speckled with spots of the color and bigness of thos^ stones: and though now
this Child has lived already several years, yet she still retains them.

13. In England there was one that would not piss, lest all the blood in his
body should pass that way, Barthol. hist. Anatom. cent. 1. hist. 79. p. p. 115.
he had therefore tied up for some days that passage he was so much in fear of,
whereupon there was such a tumor, that had not his Brother loosed the Bonds,
he had certainly died: Samuel Collins an English man, and Doctor of Physic, my
intimate friend at Montpelier, saw, and was well acquainted with this
melancholy man.

14. One was persuaded that his Nose was grown to that prodigious length and
greatne^^, that he thought he carried along with him, as it were the trunck of
an Elephant, Schenck. obs. med. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 124. Barthol. hist. Anat.
cent. 1. hist. 79. p. 114. L^mn. de complex. l. 2. c. 6.
which was always a great hindrance to him, so that ever and anon he thought it
swam in his dish. A Physician was sent for, who understanding his Disease,
dexterously and without discovery, holds a long stuffed thing to his Nostrils,
and then snatching up a Razour, and taking up some part of the ^lesh, he whipped
off this counterfeit Nose, and then with a soporiferous potion and wholesome
Diet he completed his cure.

15. There was one who thought his Buttocks were made of Glass, Schenck. l. 1.
obs. 1. p. 124. Barthol. hist. Anat. cent. 1. hist. 79. p. 114. L^mn. de
complex. l. 2. c. 6. Montan. consil. 23. Schenck. obs. med. l. 1. p. 124.
so that all that he did he performed standing, fearing, that if he should sit
down, he should break his Buttocks, and that the Fragments of the Glass should
fly hither and thither.

16. Montanus tells of one who thought all the superficies of the world was
made of Glass, thin and transparent, and that underneath there lay a multitude
of Serpents, that he lay in his Bed as in an Island, whence if he should
presume to venture, that then he should break the Glass, and so falling amongst
the Serpents, he should speedily be devoured; and therefore to prevent that
mishap, he was resolved not to stir from the Island of his Bed.

17. I have seen a woman, Trallian. l. 1. c. 16. Schenck. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 123.
says Trallianus, who was possessed with this fancy, she carried her middle
finger always bent, supposing, that thereon she carried the whole world: she
also wept, fearing, that if at any time she unbent her finger, that then the
whole worlds Fabric would fall into Ruins.

18. Thrasilaus the Son of Pythodorus, Athenaems deipnos. l. 12. c. ult. p.
554. Sc^enck. obs. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 123. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 18.
who was seized with that kind of madness, that he verily thought, that all the
Ships which put to shore upon the Pyraeum were his own, he would therefore
number them, dismiss them, and when they returned, receive them with that joy,
as if he was the Master of all their Cargo. Of such as were wracked he enquired
not at all, but such as came safe he wonderfully rejoiced at, and in this
pleasure did he pass his life. But when his Brother returned from Sicily, he
caught and committed this pleasant person to the care of Physicians, by whom he
was cured: yet affirming that he never lived so happily and pleasingly, as
being altogether freed of trouble, and yet in the mean time enjoyed many
pleasures.

19. A young man troubled with Hypochondriack melancholy had a strong
imagination that he was dead, Heywood's Hierarchy* p. 551.
and did not only abstain from meat and drink, but importuned his Parents that
he might be carried unto his Grave, and buried before his ^lesh was quite
putrefied. By the counsel of Physicians he was wrapped in a winding sheet, laid
upon a Bier, and so carried upon men's Shoulders toward the Church. But upon
the way two or three pleasant Fellows (suborned to that purpose) meeting the
Hearse, demanded aloud of them that followed it, whose body it was that was
there coffined, and carried to burial. They said it was a young man's, and told
them his name. Surely, replied one of them, the world is well rid of him, for
he was a man of a very bad and vicious life, and his Friends have cause to
rejoice that he has rather ended his days thus, than at the Gallows. The young
man hearing this, and vexed to be thus injured, rowsed himself upon the Bier,
and told them that they were wicked men to do him that wrong which he had never
deserved, that if he was alive, as he is not, he would teach them to speak
better of the dead. But they proceeding to deprave him, and to give him much
more disgraceful and reproachful language, he not able longer to endure it,
leaped from the Hearse, and fell about their ears with such rage and fury, that
he ceased not buffeting with them till he was quite wearied; and by this his
violent agitation the humors of his body altered, he awakened as out of a
sleep or trance, and being brought home, and com^orted with wholesome diet, he
within a few days recovered both his pristine health, strength and
understanding.

Limn. de co^pl^x. l. 2.^6. Sc^enck l. 1. (...). 1. p. 124.
20. In our memory, says Lemnius, a noble person fell into this fancy, that he
verily believed he was dead, and had departed out of this life, insomuch that
when his Friends and Familiars besought him to ^at, or urged him with threats,
he still refused all, saying it was in vain to the dead. But when they doubted
not but that this obstinacy would prove his death, and this being the seventh
day from whence he had continued it, they bethought themselves of this device.
They brought into his room, which on purpose was made dark, some personated
fellows wrapp^d in their sheets, and such grave clothes as the dead have, these
bringing in meat and drink began liberally to treat themselves. The sick man
sees this, and asks them who they are, and what about? They told him they were
dead persons. What then, said he, do the dead eat? Yes, yes, say they, and if
you will sit down with us you shall find it so. Straight he springs from o^t
his Bed, and falls too with the rest: Supper ^nded, he ^alls into a sleep, by
virtue o^ a liquor given him for that purpose. Nor are such persons restored by
any thing sooner than sleep.

21. A noble woman, though both her Husband and her self were white, (...). l.
4. obs. 1. p. 54^. P^^^^s. l. 2. p. 7.
was yet delivered of a child of the color of an Ethiopian, whom, when she
was like to suffer as an Adulteress, Hippocrates is said to have delivered, by
explaining the causes of such things, and by showing the picture of an Aethiop
in the Chamber where she and her Husband lay, and with which, it seemed, the
^ancy of the woman had been strongly affected.

22. Horace tells of a Noble Argive, who in an empty Theater believed he saw
and heard I know not what rare Tragedians. (...). l. 2. Dr. R^^ol^'s Treati^e
of pa^^in^s. c. ^1. p. 213.
But that being cured by the care of his Friends, he complained that they had
extorted from him a mos^ delightful pleasure, and had taken from him a grateful
error of his mind.

-- Fuit hand ign^bilis Argis, etc. says the Poet.
Who, though he heard rare Tragedies of Wit,
And in an empty Theater did sit,
And give applause, in other things expressed
All well, good Neighbor, kind man to his Guest,
A courteous Husband, and one who would not
Be raging mad at the breaking of a pot.
Knew h^w to shun a pr^cipice, had wit
To 'scape a Well, and p^ss an open pit.
This man recovered by the helps of art
And care of Friends, used sadly to complain
Friends, I Am not saved by this your love, but slain:
Robbed of that sweet delight I then did find
In the so grateful error of my mind.
Sir Kenelm Digby his Treatise o^ Bodies. ^. 38. p. 329.
23. There was a Lady, a Kinswoman of mine, who used much to wear black patches
upon her face, as was the ^ashion amongst young women, which I to put her from,
used to tell her in jest, that the next child she should go with, whiles the
solicitude and care of those patches were so strong in her fancy, should come
into the world with a great black spot in the midst of its forehead, and this
apprehension was so lively in her imagination at (...) time she proved with
child, that her Daughter was born marked just as the Mother had fancied, which
there are at hand witnesses enough to confirm, but none more pregnant than the
young Lady her self, upon whom the mark is yet remaining.

24. Pisander a Rhodian Historian, Caelius Rhodig. Antiq. lect. l. 17. c. 2. p.
765. Girald. hist. Poet. Dialog. 3.
labored under such a melancholy fancy, that he was in continual fears lest he
should meet his own Ghost, for he verily believed even while he was alive that
his soul had deserted his body. Such another person as this was in Ferrara,
says Giraldus, who could by no means be persuaded by Nicholaus Leonicenus his
Physician, that it was impossible ^or bodies to walk up and down without their
souls, he approved of such reasons as was propounded, granting all the
premises, but ever when they went about to infer the conclusion, he would then
cry out he denied the whole of it.

25. Menedemus a Cynick Philosopher fell into that degree of melancholy, La^^t.
l. 2. c. 18.
that he went up and down in the dress of a fury, saying, he was sent as a
messenger from Hell, to bring the Devils an account of the sins of all Mortals.

CHAP. II. Of the Comprehensiveness and Fidelity of the Memories of some Men.
NExt unto that of Reason, man is not endowed with a choicer and more necessary
faculty than that of memory, the treasury and safe repository of all the Arts
and Sciences, of all the Axioms and Rules which we have heaped up, and with
great study, labor, and long experience laid together, for the better conduct
and Government of life in this our mortal state. It is confessed it is a
delicate and frailer part of the soul, and first of all others that receives
the injurious impressions of age: yet how long it has been retained in some in
its wonted vigor, how heightened and improved in others, see in the following
instances.

1. Avicenna an excellent Physician and Philosopher, Zuing. Theat. vol. 1. l.
1. p. 34.
read over the Books of Aristotle's Metaphysics forty times, and thereby so
fixed them in his memory, that he was able to repeat them without Book.

2. Anthony Wallens by the help of the art of memory in six months space
learned by heart the whole Epitome of Pagnine, Clarks marrow of Eccles. hist.
with such excellent success, that thereby he was enabled well to interpret any
place of the holy Scriptures, and to give a reason for it.

3. Mr. Humphrey Burton a Gentleman of good worth in the City of Coventry,
being at this time of my writing this, viz. Sept. 10. 167^. of the age of
eighty and three, besides his many and other accomplishments, can by the
strength and firmness of his memory give the sum of any Chapter in the New
Testament, and of the Chapters in diverse Books of the Old Testament in a Latin
Distich with as much readiness, and as little hesitation as if he had directly
read them out of a Book: I my self have frequently put him to the trial,
wherein though I have observed no order, but named h^^e a Chapter at the
beginning, then one toward the end, then again returned to the middle, and so
on purpose prevented any assistance he might have from an orderly succession
and dependence, yet could I no sooner name the Chapter and Book whereof I
desired the account, but he was ready with his Distich.

Plin. l. 7. c. 24. p. 168. Solin. c. 7. p. 195.
4. Cineas the Ambassador of King Pyrrhus, the very next day that he came to
Rome, both knew, and al^o saluted by their names all the Senate, and the whole
order of the Gentlemen in Rome.

5. Franciscus Cardulus a learned man, was able to write two pages entire which
any other man should read, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
in the same order he read them; or if any of the company had rather he would
repeat them backwards.

6. I have heard it from one who was present at the discourse, Iani Nicii
pinacothec. 2. Imag. 1. p. 2.
that in the presence of a Prince of Germany, when mention was made of Tacitus,
that Iustus Lipsius did then say, that he had the Golden Volume so firm and
entire in his memory, that nothing had ever slipped him therein, he challenged
any to make a trial of what he said: And go to, said he, set one here with a
Poynard, and if in repeating of Tacitus all over, I shall miss but in one word
let him stab me, and I will freely open my Breast or Throat for him to strike
at.

Quenstedt. dialog. de patria viror. illust. p. 486.
7. The Works of Homer are his Iliads and Odysses, the former consists of twenty
four Books, and so also the latter. His Iliads has in it thirty one thousand
six hundred and seventy Verses, and I suppose his Odysses has no less, and yet
it is said of Josephus Scaliger, that in one and twenty days he committed all
Homer to his memory.

8. Antonius the Egyptian Eremite, without any knowledge of Letters, Zuing.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 33.
yet by the frequent hearing of them read, had the whole body of the Scriptures
without book, and by diligent thinking of them, did well understand them, says
S. Augustine in his Prologue to his first Book de Doctrina Christiana.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
9. Hortensius, who for his Eloquence was called the King of Causes: of him
Cicero writing to Brutus, There was, says he, in that man such a memory, as I
have not known a greater in any. It Is said of him, that sitting on a time in
the place where things were exposed to public sale for a whole day together,
he recited in order all the things that were sold there, their price and the
names of the Buyers; and by the account taken of them, it appeared that he had
not been deceived in any of them. Cicero comparing him with Lucullus* says
Hortensius his memory was the greater for words, but that of Lucullus for
things.

10. Lucius Lucullus a great Captain and Philosopher, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p.
24.
by an admirable strength of memory was able to give so ready an account of all
affairs at home and abroad, as if he had had them all at once presented before
his eyes.

11. Pompeius Gariglianus, a Canon of the Church of Capua, Iani Nicii pinacoth.
prima. p. 69.
was of so great a memory, as I remember not to have known his like: he was so
well and thoroughly known in all Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates, Galen,
Themistius, Thomas Aquinas and others, that as an admirable instance of his
memory, he would upon occasion not only repeat their sentences but the very
words themselves.

12. Age, says Seneca, hat done me many injuries, and deprived me of many
things I once had, Senec. controv. l. 1. in procem. Murit. variar. lect. l. 3.
c. 1. p. 53^ Heyl. Cosm. p. 244. Cael. Antiq. lect. l. 10. c. 15. p. 456.
it has dulled the sight of my eyes, blunted the sense of hearing, and
slackened my Nerves. Amongst the rest I have mentioned before is the memory, a
thing that is the most tender and frail of all the parts of the soul, and which
is first sensible of the assaults of age: that heretofore this did so flourish
in me, as not only served me for use, but might even pass for a miracle, I
cannot deny; for I could repeat two thousand names in the same order as they
were spoken, and when as many as were Scholars to my Master, brought each of
them several Verses to him, so that the number of them amounted to more than
two hundred, beginning at the last I could recite them orderly unto the first:
nor was my memory only apt to receive such things as I would commit to it, but
was also a faithful preserver of all that I had entrusted it with.

13. Lippus Brandolinus in his Book of the condition of humane life, Zuing.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
reports of Laurentius Bonincontrius, that at eighty years of age he had so
perfect and entire a memory, that he could remember all that had happened to
him when he was a Boy, and all that he had read in his youth, and could recite
them in such a manner, that you would think he had seen or read them but that
very day.

14. Aeneas Sylvius in his History of the council of Basil (at which himself
was present) tells of one Ludovicus Pontanus of Spoleto a Lawyer by profession,
Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6. 1. p. 226.
who died of the pestilence at that Council at thirty years of age, that he
could recite not the titles only, but the entire bodies of the Laws, Being,
says he, for vastness and fastness of memory not inferior to any of the
Ancients.

15. Fumianus Strada in his first Book of Academical Prolusions, Strada prol^s.
acad. l. 1. prolus. 1. p. 7. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6. 1. p. 225.
speaking of Franciscus Suarez, He has, says he, so strong a memory, that he
has S. Augustine (the most copious and various of the Fathers) ready by heart,
alleging every where, as occasion presents it self, fully and faithfully his
sentences, and which is very strange, his words: nay, if he be demanded any
thing touching any passage in any of his Volumes (which of themselves are
almost enough to fill a Library) I my self have seen him instantly showing and
pointing with his finger to the place and page in which he disputed of that
matter.

16. Dr. Raynolds excelled this way, to the astonishment of all that were
inwardly acquainted with him, Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6. 1. p. 226.
not only for S. Augustine's Works, but also all Classical Authors; so that it
might be truly said of him, that which has been applied to others, that he was
a living Library, or a third University. Upon occasion of some Writings which
passed to and fro betwixt him and Dr. Gentilis, then our Professor of the
Civil Laws, he publicly confessed, that he thought Dr. Raynolds had read, and
did remember more of those Laws than himself, though it were his Profession.

17. Carmidas a Grecian, Plin. l. 7. c. 24. p. 168.
or Carneades as Cicero and Quintilian call him, was of so singular a memory,
that he was able to repeat by heart the contents of most Books in a whole
Library, as if he had read the same immediately out of the Books themselves.

18. Portius Latro had so firm a memory by nature, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 3^.
Seneca. l. 1.
and that so fortified by art, it was at once so capacious and tenacious, that
he needed not to read over again what he had written, it sufficed that he had
once wrote it, and though he did that with great speed, yet did he in that time
get it by heart. Whatsoever he had entrusted with his memory in this kind could
never be erased, whatsoever he had once pronounced without Book, he still
remembered. Enjoying the happiness of such a Memory, he needed not the
assistance of Books; he gloried that he wrote down all in his mind, and what he
had there written, he ever had in such readiness, that he never stumbled at the
calling to mind of any one word. He spoke as if he had read out of a Book: if
any man proposed the name of any great General (such a Memory had he as to
History) that immediately he could recount all that he had done, and would
relate his exploits in such a manner (not as if he repeated what he had before
read) but as if he read what he had newly written.

Clark's Mirroir. c. 81. p. 356.
19. The Memory of the famous Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, was raised by Art and
Industry to the highest pitch of Humane Possibility; for he could readily
repeat any thing that he had penned after once reading of it. And therefore
usually at the ringing of the Bell, he began to commit his Sermons to heart,
and kept what he learned so ^irmly, that he used to say: That if he were to
make a Speech premeditated, before a thousand Auditors, shouting or fighting
all the while, yet could he say whatsoever he had provided to speak. Many
barbarous and hard names out of a Calendar, and forty strange words Welsh,
Irish, etc. after once reading, or twice at the most, and short meditation, he
could repeat both forwards and backwards, without any hesitation. Sir Francis
Bacon, reading to him only the last clauses of ten lines in Erasmus his
Paraphrase in a confused and dismembered manner, he after a small pa^se
rehearsed all those broken parcels of sentences the right way, and the contrary
without stumbling.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 33.
20. Petrarch speaks of a certain Soldier, a friend of his, and his companion in
many a Journey, that he had such a Memory, that though he was afflicted with
public and private calamities (which are wont either to destroy, or at least
to disturb and weaken the Memory) he could yet faithfully retain all that he
had seen or heard, even to the observation also of the time and place, wherein
the thing was said or done, he was most desirous of. And those things, which he
had heard many times before, if they were again spoken of, and that any thing
was added or diminished, he was able to correct it. By which means it came to
pass, that while he was present, Petrarch was the more cautious and circumspect
in speaking.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 35.
21. Jerome of Prague (the same that was burnt alive in the Council of
Constance, had (it appears) a most admirable Memory; whereof Poggius in his
Epistle to Leonardus Aretinus, produces this as an argument; that after he had
been three hundred and forty days in the bottom of a stinking and dark Tower,
in a place where he not only could not read, but not so much as see; yet did he
allege the Testimonies of so many of the Learned, and Wisest persons in
favor of his Tenets; cited so many of the Fathers of the Church, as might have
su^^iced, and been more than enough, if all that time he had been intent upon his
study, without the least molestation or disturbance.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
22. Nepotianus, cousin to Heliodorus the Bishop, by his Sister, was of that
notable Memory, that in disputations and familiar conference, if any man cited
a Testimony, he could straight know from whence it was, as suppose this was
Tertullians, this Cyprians, that from Lactanti^s, etc. to conclude, with
continual reading he made his bosom the Library of Christ.

23. Theodorus Metochites, Gregoras. l. 7. p. 30. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
who in the Reign of Andronicus Paleologus, was an eminent person, by the
excellency of the Memory, had attained to the very height of Learning. If you
asked him of any thing that was new, or of Antiquity, he would so recount it,
as if he recited it out of some Book; so that in his discourses, there was
little need of Books, for he was a living Library, and, as it were, an Oracle,
where a man might know all that he had desired.

24. Christopherus Longolius, had such a Memory, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 35.
that scarce any continuance of time was able to remove those things from his
mind, which he had once fixed there. Being often asked of many different
things, concerning which he had read nothing of many years; yet would he answer
with as much readiness to each of them, as if he had read them but that very
day. If at any time a discourse chanced to be of such things as were treated on
by diverse and different Authors, when the things were the same, yet would he so
distinguish of them in his discourse, reciting every Author in his own words;
that he seemed to speak them not by heart, whereby mistakes may arise; but as
if he had read them out of the Books themselves: When he did this often, he so
raised the admiration of Auditors, that they thought he made use of some
Artifice, and not of his natural Memory.

25. In Padua, Muret. Variar. lect. l. 3 c. 1. p. 54, 55. Petr. Serve. de
Unguent. Armario, p. 63. Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 35.
near unto me, dwelt a young man of Corsica of good birth, and sent thither to
study the Civil Law. In the study of which, he had spent some years with that
diligence and attention, that there was now raised amongst us a great opinion
of his Learning. He came often, almost every day to my house, and there going a
report, that he attained to an Art of Memory, by assistance of which he was
able to perform that, which another could not believe unless he beheld it. When
I heard this, I had a desire to behold these wonderful things, as one that am
not very credulous of such matters as come by hearsay. I therefore desired him
to give me some such kind of instance of his Art, as he should think fit. He
told me he would do it, when I pleased. Immediately, then said I; and when he
refused not, all we who were present went into the next room; there did I
dictate Latin, Greek and Barbarous names, some significant, others not, so
many, and so different, having not the least dependence one upon the other,
that I was weary with dictating, the Boy with writing what I dictated, and all
the rest with hearing, and expectation of the issue. We thus diversely wearied,
he alone called for more. But when I my self said it was fit to observe some
measure; and that I should be abundantly satisfied, if he could but recite me
the one half of those, I had caused already to be set down. He fixing his eyes
upon the ground, (with great expectation on our part) after a short pause began
to speak. In brief, to our amazement, he repeated all we had wrote in the very
same order they were set down, without scarce a stop or any hesitation: and
then beginning at the last, recited them all backwards to the first; then so as
that he would name only the first, third, fifth, and in that order repeat all:
and indeed, in what order we pleased, without the least error. Afterward when
I was more familiar with him, (having often tried him, and yet never found him
speaking otherwise than the truth) he told me once (and certainly he was no
boaster) that he could repeat in that manner 36000 names, and which was yet the
most strange, things stuck in his Memory, that he would say (with little ado)
he could repeat any thing he had instrusted with it a year after. For my own
part, I made trial of him after many days, and found he said true. He taught
Franciscus M^linus, a young Patrician of Venice, and who had but a weak Memory,
in the compass of but seven days, wherein he had learned of him, to repeat five
hundred names with ease, and in what order he pleased.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
26. Francis, King of France, excelled well nigh all those of his time, in the
firmness and readiness of his Memory, what every particular Province ought to
contribute, what Ways and what Rivers were most convenient for their passage;
out of what Winter Quarters a party of Horse might be most speedily drawn, all
these, and the like matters, even concerning the remotest Cities, he did
comprehend with that singular Wit and Memory; that the Nobles, who were
improved in those affairs, by daily and constant employments, thought he held
them in his Memory; as if they lay there in an Index.

CHAP. III. Of the Sight and the vigor of that sense in some, and how depraved
in others.
IN Cilicia, near unto the Town of Cescus, there is (says M. Varro) a Fountain
that has the name of Nus; the Waters whereof have this admirable quality, that
they render the Senses of all such as taste of them; more exquisite and
subtle. It may be suspected that some of those, who are mentioned in the
following Examples, had cleared their eyes, with the Waters of this Fountain;
or some other of the like quality, thereby attaining to a quick-sightedness,
not inferior to that of the Lynx it self.

Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 82. p. 310. Iohnst. Not. Hist. cl. 10. c. 7.
p. 346.
1. There was not many years since a Spaniard called Lopes at Gades, who from an
high Mountain, called Calpe, would see all over the opposite strait, out of
Europe unto the Affrican shore, the passage from whence (as Cleonardus
witnesses) is no less than three or four hours sail in a calm Sea, he could
from the top of this Mountain discern, all that was doing in that far distant
Haven, or upon the Land near unto it, and did discover it, so that by the
industry of this notable spy; they of Gades did oftentimes avoid those designs,
which the Pirates had upon them. This was told me by a person of great Honor
and Dignity; who there received it from himself, in the presence of others: and
amongst other things, he said of him, that his Eyebrows had hair upon them of
an extraordinary length.

Plin. l. 7. c. 21. p. 167. Solin. c. 6. p. 191.
2. We find incredible examples of the quickness of eyesight in Histories:
Cicero has recorded that the whole Poem of Homer, called his Iliads, was
written in a membrane, or piece of Parchment, in so small a Character, that the
whole was to be couched, and enclosed within the compass of a Nut-shell.

3. The same Writer makes mention of one that could see and discern out right
135 miles; Plin. Ibid. p. 167. Val. Max. l. c. 8. p. 32. Soli^. c. 6. p. 191.
Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 11. c. 13. p. 285.
and (says he) Marcus Varro names the man, calling him Strabo: Of whom he
further adds, that during the Carthaginian War, he was wont to stand and watch
upon Lilybaeum, a Promontory in Sicily, to discover the Enemies Fleet, loosing
out of the Haven of Carthage, and was able at that distance to count and
declare, the very just number of their Ships.

4. Tiberius the Emperor had eyes of an extraordinary bigness; Sueton. in ejus
vita, c. 6^. p. 160. Zuing. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 230. Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
and those such (which is the wonder) that could see, even in the night and
darkness; but it was so, only for a small time, at the first opening of them,
after sleep, by degrees they a^terwards grew dull, and he could see no more
than others.

5. Josephus Scaliger (in the life of his Father) writes both of him and
himself, Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 8* p. 31.
that both of them having bluish eyes, they could sometimes see in the night,
as well as we can in the twilight, and that this continued with him from his
childhood, to the twenty third year of his age.

6. Even in our age (says Pierius) I have heard Marcus Antonius Sabellicus
(while he studied Greek with us) affirm of himself, Camer. ibid. p. 30.
that as often as he was waked in the night, he was able, for some time, very
clearly to discern the Books, and all other furniture of the Chamber where he
lay.

7. Hieronymus Cardanus, Zuing. vol* 2. l. 5. p. 293.
in the beginning of his youth, had that in common with Tiberius and the rest,
that he could see in the dark as soon as he waked, all that was in the room,
but soon after, all that ability did desert him, he says the cause was the heat
of the brain, the subtilty of the spirits, and the force of imagination.

8. Caelius having related (out of Pliny) the History of Tiberius, Cael. Rhod.
Antiq. lect. l. 15. c. 2. p. 668.
his seeing in the dark; says moreover, that the same thing had sometimes
happened to himself, calling God to witness, that he spoke nothing but the
truth.

9. Gellius writes, Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 81. p. 310. Gell. Noct.
Attic. l. 9. c. 4. p.
that in the remotest parts of the Country of Albania; the Inhabitants there do
grow bald in their childhood; and that they can see much more clearly in the
night, than in the day; for the brightness of the day dissipates, or rebates
the edge of their sight.

10. Fabritius ab Aquapendente, Barthol. de luce homin. l. 1. c. 14. p. 107.
relates the History of a man of Pisa, who had such a constitution of the eye,
that he could see very well in the night: but either not at all, or else very
obscurely in the day.

11. Sophronius in his Book of Spirits, Barthol. ibid. p. 107
tells of Iulianus a Monk, that for the space of seventy years, he never
lighted nor had a Candle; who, nevertheless was used to read Books throughout,
in the darkness of the night.

12. Ascl^piodorus, Ibid. p. 10^*
the Philosopher, and Scholar of Proclus, was able in the thickest of the
darkness, to discern of and know them that stood by him; and also used then to
read Books; as Photius in his Bibliothica witnesses of him.

13. The Illustrious Count Gaspar Scioppius, Barthol. ibid. p. 107, 108.
the honor of his age, assured me, for a certain truth, that Io. Mich.
Pierruccius, a person of known abilities in Padua, when he was young, used in
the night time to compose very elegant Verses, and write them down exactly, by
that light which issued out of his own eyes.

14. An excellent and very discreet person was relating to me, Mr. Boyles Hist.
of Colors, c. 2. 6. p. 1^*
that some time since, whilst she was talking with some other Ladies, upon a
sudden, all the objects she look upon, appeared to her died with unsual
colors, some of one kind, and some of another, but all so bright and vivid,
that she should have been as much delighted, as surprised with them; but that
finding the Apparition to continue, she feared it portended some very great
alteration, as to her health; as indeed the day after, she was assaulted with
such violence, by Hysterical, and Hypochondriacal distempers, as both made her
rave for some days, and gave her during that time, a bastard palsy.

Mr. Boyls^ Hist. of Col^^s, c. 2. 7. p. 14.
15. Being a while since in a Town, where the Plague had made great havoc, and
enquiring of an ingenious man (that was so bold, as without scruple to visit
those that were sick of it) about the odd symptoms of a disease, that had swept
away so many there. He told me that he was able to tell diverse patients, to
whom he was called before they took their beds, or had any evident symptoms of
the Plague, that they were indeed infected, upon peculiar observations: that
being asked, they would tell him, that the neighboring objects, and
particularly his clothes appeared to them beauti^i'd, with most glorious
colors, like those of the Rain bow, oftentimes succeeding one another. And
this he affirmed, to be one of the usual, as well as early symptoms, by which
this odd Pestilence disclosed it self; and when I asked how long the Patients
were wonted to be thus affected, he answered, that it was (most commonly) for
about a day.

Mr. B^yle, ibid* c. 2. 8. p. 19.
16. I know a Lady of unquestionable veracity, who having lately by a desperate
fall, received several hurts, and particularly a considerable one upon a part
of her face, near her eye, had her sight so troubled and disordered, that as
she has more than once related to me; not only when the next Morning, one of
her servants came to her bedside, to ask how she did, his clothes appeared
adorned with such variety of colors, that she was sain presently to command
him to withdraw; but the Images in her Hangings, did for many days after appear
to her (if the room were not extraordinarily darkened) embelished with several
offensively vivid colors, which no body else could see in them. And when I
enquired whether or no white objects did not appear to her adorned with more
luminous colors than others: and whether she saw not some, which she could not
now describe, to any whose eyes had never been distempered? She answered me,
That sometimes she thought she saw colors, so new and glorious, that they were
of a peculiar kind, and such as she could not describe, by their likeness to
any, she had beheld before or since; and that white did so disorder her sight,
that if several days after her fall, she looked upon the inside of a Book, she
fancied she there saw colors, like those of the Rainbow; and even when she
thought her self pretty well recovered, and made bold to leave her Chamber; the
coming into a place where Walls and Cieling were whited over, made those
objects appear to her, with such glorious and dazzling colors, as much offended
her sight, and made her repent her venturousness: and she added, that the
dis^emper of her eyes, lasted no less than five or six weeks, though since that
she has been able to read and write much, without finding the least
inconvenience in so doing.

CHAP. IV. Of the Sense of Hearing, and the quickness or dullness of it in
diverse men.
MR. Peacham speaks of a great Lady here in England, Peach. compl. Gentlm. c.
11. p. 96.
whose cheek would rise up in a blister at the tenderest touch of a Rose: It is
no easy matter to assign the true reason of so strange an Antipathy; nor can I
tell whether it was the exquisiteness of the Sense, or some peculiarity in the
contexture of the Ear, or otherwise that occasioned some sort of sounds to be
so unpleasant, (and even intolerable) to some more than others.

1. Wenceslaus the Third, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 421.
King of Bohemia, was not able to endure the noise of Bells when they were
rung: so that at the first sound of them, he used to stop both his Ears with
his Hands, by reason of which, when he came to Prague, they were constrained to
abstain from ringing, especially the bigger Bells.

2. Petrus Carrera, Zuin. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 424.
a Spaniard and Governor of Guleta in Africa, could not bear the smell of
Gunpowder, nor endure the report of great Guns; so that as often as they were to
be discharged upon the enemy, he ran into subterranean caverns, and vaulted
places under the ground, stopping up both his ears with pieces of silk: by
which means the taking of the City, was made the more easy to Sinan Bassa,
which fell out Anno 1574.

3. When Sybeni in Italy was destroyed, the noise of that Battle was heard by
them (upon the same day that it was fought) who then were spectators of the
Olympic Games in Greece. Sabellic. Ex. l. 10. c. 9. p. 484.


4. Those who live near unto the place where Nilus has its fall (and where
that impetuous River rushes headlong, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 421.
from the high and steep Rocks) have their ears so beaten upon with continual
noise, that they utterly loose their hearing, or rather hereby they are brought
to that pass, that without any trouble they are able to bear those sounds,
which are intolerable to other men, nor can they hear, unless they are called
upon with extreme loudness and vehemence. The same thing we may daily observe
does befall Millers, and such men as continually live within the noise of a
Water-Mill.

5. Histiaeus, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 382.
the Milesian Tyrant, with his men was left by Darius to defend a Bridge upon
Ister, against the Scythians in his absence, for he was gone upward into the
Country; Histiaeus had cut off some part of it, to secure himself and his party
against the Darts of the Scythians; and so lay off from it with his Ships; when
therefore Darius returned, and found him nor his Ships there, he commanded an
Egyptian with a loud voice to call Histiaeus, who was the first of all others
that heard the call, and that at the first sound of his name, whether it was
that he was more watchful and intentive than others, or that he was more sharp
and acute in his hearing than the rest; but so it was, that he immediately
returned at the summons, and joining his Ships to the Bridge, where it was
broken, he thereby delivered Darius out of the hands of the Scythians, who were
in quest and pursuit of him.

CHAP. V. Of the Sense of Feeling, the delicacy of it in some, and its
abolition in others, also what Virtue has been found in the touch of some
Persons.
WHereas, in the other senses, men are very much excelled, and discernibly
surpassed by the bruit Beasts; yet the judgment of touch, is noted to be more
accurate in us, than in most other Creatures. It is true, that this sense is
the most abject and inferior of all other, as perceiving nothing, but what is
conjoined to it, nor that neither, but by a medium, that is intrinsic; and
therefore some will not think it matter of much commendation, that we are so
perfect in this, when so comparatively dull in all other senses: Howsoever that
be, methinks I cannot but extremely admire the Histories of those persons,
wherein this sense has discovered it self in its uttermost excellency.

Mr. Boil. Hist. colors, p. 42, 43, etc.
1. Meeting casually with the deserved famous Dr. I. Finch, extraordinary
Anatomist to the now Great Duke of Tuscany; and inquiring what might be the
chief rarity he had seen in his late return out of Italy into England: He told
me it was a man of Maestricht in the Low Countries, who at certain times, can
discern and distinguish colors, by the touch with his finger. I proposed
diverse scruples particularly, whether the Doctor had taken care to bind a
Napkin or Handkerchief over his Eyes so carefully, as to be sure he could make
no use of his sight, though he had but counterfeited the want of it. To which I
added diverse other questions to satisfy my self, whether there were any
likelihood of collusion or other tricks. But I ^ound that the judicious Doctor
having gone far out of his way, purposely to satisfy himself, and his learned
Prince about this wonder; had been very watchful and circumspect to keep
himself from being imposed upon; and that he might not, through any mistake, in
point of memory, misinform me: he did me the favor at my request, to look the
notes he had written, for his own, and his Princes information: The sum of
which Memorial was this: That having been in^orm'd at Utrecht, that there lived
one some miles distant from Maestricht, who could distinguish colors by the
touch: When he came to the last named Town, he sent a messenger for him, and
having examined him, he was told upon enquiry these particulars: That the man's
name was John Vermaesen, at that time about thirty three years of age, that
when he was but two years old, he had the Small Pox, which rendered him
absolutely blind; that at this present he is an Organist, and serves that
office in a public Quire. That the Doctor discoursing with him over night, he
affirmed, he could distinguish colors by the touch, but that he could not do
it, unless he were fasting; any quantity of drink taking from him that
exquisiteness of Touch, which is requisite to so nice a sensation; that
hereupon the Doctor provided against the next Morning seven pieces of Ribbon,
of these seven colors; Black, White, Red, Blew, Green, Yellow, and Gray: but
as for mingled colors, this Vermaesen would not undertake to discern them,
though if offered, he would tell that they were mixed. That to discern the
color of the Ribbon, he places it betwixt the thumb and forefinger; but his
most exquisite perception was in his thumb, and much better in his right thumb,
than in the left. That after the blind man had four or five times told the
Doctor the several colors (though blinded with a Napkin) the Doctor found he
was twice mistaken, for he called the White Black, and the Red Blew; but still
he (before his error) would lay them by in pairs; saying, That though he could
easily distinguish them from all others, yet those two pairs were not easily
distinguished amongst themselves: Whereupon the Doctor desired to be told by
him, what kind of discrimination, he had of colors by his touch: To which he
gave a reply: That all the difference was, more or less, asperity: For, says
he, Black feels as if you were feeling needles points, or some harsh sand; and
Red feels very smooth: That the Doctor having desired him to tell him in order
the difference of colors to his touch: he did as follows:

Black and White are most asperous, or unequal of all colors, and so like that
it is hard to distinguish them; but Black is the most rough of the two: Green is
the next in asperity; Gray next to Green in asperity; Yellow is the fifth in
degree of asperity: Red and Blew are so like, that they are as hard to
distinguish as Black and White but Red is somewhat more asperous than Blew: So
that Red has the sixth plaec, and Blew the seventh in asperity.



2. I know there are many will esteem it a fabulous and feigned thing, Pet.
Servius de unguent. Armario, p. 59, 60, etc.
and I my self should blush to set down the following History in writing to the
World, were it not now well known to all that are in Rome. Johannes Gambassius
Volaterranus from his first youth for twenty years together wrought as a
Statuary, and made Statues with great fame and reputation to himself. Soon
after he fell stark blind, and for ten years entire lay idle, and never worked,
yet daily revolving in his mind to find out a way, whereby he might recall, and
retain that glory he had gained in the framing of Statues. He therefore so
supplied the want of his Eyes, with the vigor of his mind, that he attempted a
deed unheard of in the Memory of all ages: He undertook to frame of Clay, the
Effigies of Cosmo the Great Duke of Hetruria and Tuscany, taking for his
Pattern a Marble Statue of the same Cosmo, which he diligently felt and
handled. He made it so lively and like, that all men were amazed at this new
Miracle of Art. Excited therefore with the excellency of the Work, and the
acclamations and applause of such as had beheld it, he came to Rome in that
ample Theater, to present a specimen of his Art. It was anno 1636. where first
he framed the Statue of Pope Urban the Eight, to such an exact resemblance of
him, as was to the admiration of all men, and presented it to Urban himself. He
afterward made the Statues of Duke Braccianus, of Gualdus and diverse others.
When he lay sick near St. Onuphrius, and I then his Physician, he often
promised me his workmanship in my own, which I utterly refused, that my s^ight
service should not be rewarded with so over great a recompense: When most men
were amazed at this Miracle, and suspected that he was not blind; he was
commanded to work in a dark Chamber, wherein he was locked up, where he
finished diverse pieces unto a perfect likeness, lively and strangely expressing
the proper beauty of every face, the particular kind, the grave, affable,
cheerful or sad, as indeed they were; and to speak it in a word, he expressed
them almost speaking, and the hidden manners in their lineaments, and thereby
convinced all men of the excellency of his Art. This was asserted-by many Noble
Persons, who were eye witnesses: and that before Philippus Saracenus, the
public Notary; and so consigned over to public Record, that future ages
thence might not want occasion to give credit to this Miracle.

Barthol. Hist. Anat. Cent. 3. Hist. 44. p. 87. K^ck^rm. in Physic.
3. It is credibly reported of Count Mansfeld, that although he was blind, yet
he could by his touch alone, discern the difference betwixt the colors of
white and black, and say which was the one, and which the other.

Iohnst. Not. Hist. Clas. 10. c. 5. p. 334.
4. We read of a Preacher in Germany, who was blind from his Nativity; yet it
seems he carried a pair of eyes in his hands: for he was able to choose the
fairest of three Sisters by his touch only, having successively taken them by
the hand.

Trenchfeld. History improved, p. 96.
5. Dr. Harvy affirms the heart (though the Fountain of life life) to be without
feeling, which he proves by a Gentleman he had seen; who by an impostumation,
had a hole in his side, through which not only the Systole and Diastole of the
Heart might be discerned, but the Heart it self touched with the finger, which
yet the Gentleman affirmed that he felt not.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 278.
6. Dionysius, the Son of Clearchus the Tyrant of Heraclea, through idleness and
high feeding, had attained to an immeasurable fatness and corpulency; by reason
of which he also slept so soundly, that it was difficult to wake him. His
Physicians therefore took this course with him, they had certain sharp Needles
and Bodkins, and these they thrust into diverse parts of his Body; but till the
point of them had passed the fat, he remained without any feeling at all; but
touching the flesh next under the fat, he would thereupon awake.

7. There was a Servant in the College of Physiciany in London, Sir Kentlme
Digby his Treatise of Bodies, c. 32 p. 282.
whom the Learned Harvey (one of his Masters) had told me, was exceeding strong
to labor, and very able to carry any necessary burden, and to remove things
dexterously according to the occasion; and yet he was so void of feeling, that
he used to grind his hands against the walls, and against course lumber, when
he was emply'd to rummage any, insomuch that they would run with blood, through
grating of the skin, without his feeling of what occasioned it; by which it
appears, that some have the motion of the Limbs entire, and no ways prejudiced,
but have had no feeling at all, quite over their whole case of skin and flesh.

Barthol. Hist. Anat. Cent. 4. Hist. 82. p. 401.
8. A young man had utterly lost his senses of taste and touch; nor was he any
time troubled with hunger, yet eat to preserve his life, and walked with
Crutches, because he could not tell where his feet were.

Barthol. ibid. p. 401.
9. Dr. London, my ancient friend, knew a Maid in England, otherwise of good
health, that had no sense of burnings in her Neck; she would suffer a Needle to
be run into her Forehead, or into the ^lesh of her Fingers near the Nails, and
yet without any kind of sense of pain.

10. An Observation was imparted a while since, Mr. Boyl's Experiment.
Philosoph. part 2. Essay 3. p 72, 73.
by that excellent and experienced Lithotomist, Mr. Hollier, who told me that
amongst the many Patients, sent to be cured in a great Hospital (whereof he is
one of the Surgeons) there was a Maid of about eighteen years of age, who
without the loss of motion, had so lost the sense of feeling in the external
parts of the Body, that when he had for trials sake pinned her Handkerchief to
her bare Neck, she went up and down with it so pinned, without having sense of
what he had done to her. He added, that this Maid having remained a great while
in the Hospital without being cured, Dr. Harvey out of curiosity, visited her
sometimes, and suspecting her strange distemper, to be chiefly Uterine, and
curable only by Hymeneal exercises; he advised her Parents (who sent her not
thither out of poverty) to take her home, and provide her a Husband, by whom in
effect she was according to his Prognostic, and to many men's wonder cured of
that strange disease.

11. Anno 1563. Treasury of Ancient and Modern times, l. 7. c. 37. p. 705, 706,
etc.
Upon St. Andrews day, in the presence of Monsieur (brother to King Charles)
afterward Henry the Third King of France; Monsieur de Humiere, made report of
the following History; the sum of his relation I have thus contracted. In
Piccardy, in the Forest of Arden, certain Gentlemen undertook a hunting of
Wolves; amongst others they slew a She-wolf; that was followed by a young
infant; aged about seven years, stark naked, of a strange complexion, with fair
curled Hair, who seeing the Wolf dead; ran fiercely at them; he was beset and
taken; the Nails of his Hands and Feet bowed inward; he spoke nothing, but sent
out an inarticulate sound. They brought him thence to a Gentleman's House, not
far off, where they put iron Manacles upon his Hands and Feet; in the end, by
being long kept fasting, they had brought him to a tameness, and in seven
months, had taught him to speak. He was afterward by circumstance of time, and
six Fingers he had on one hand, known to be the Child of a Woman; who stealing
wood, was pursued by Officers; and in her fright left her Child, then about
nine Months age, which, as is supposed, was carried away by the She-wolf,
aforesaid, and by her nourished to the time of his taking: when his Guardians
had got much Money by showing him from place to place, he afterward was a
Herdsman of Sheep and other Beasts for seven years: In all which time Wolves
never made any attempt on the Herds and Flocks committed to his chage, though
he kept great store of Oxen, Kine, Calves, Horses, Mares, Sheep and Poultry.
This was well observed by neighboring Villages; and that they might
participate of this benefit, they drove their Herds and Flocks where he kept
his, and desired him but to stroke his hands upon them, which he would do, with
some of his phlegm or spittle upon them: after which done (let others
conjecture as they please) for the space of fifteen days, Dogs of the greatest
fierceness, nor any Wolves would by any urgency touch them. By this means he
got great store of Money; for he would have a double Trunois (the value of two
pence in that Country) for every Beast he so laid his Hands on, or stroked
their Ea^s. But as all things have a certain period; so when he had attained to
past fourteen years of age, this virtue which he had, left him; himself
observed that the Wolves would not come so near him as before, but keep aloof
off, as being fearful of him: It was possibly from the change of his complexion
and temperature through so long alteration from his woolvish diet, which was
raw flesh, etc. his gain by this means ^aild; and he went to the Wars, where he
proved brave, bold and valiant; at length fell to be a Thief, excelling all
others in craft and subtilty: he was slain, Anno 1572. by the followers to the
Duke of Alva, though he sold his life at a dear rate.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sense of Tasting; how exquisite in some, and utterly lost in
others.
THere have been many Epicures, and belly Gods, who have compassed the
Mountains, beset the Rivers, searched the Lakes, dived into the very Seas
themselves; and all to gratify their taste and palate: Lucan could not choose
but admire these kind of persons, and their luxury; when he says; -- O prodiga
rerum
Luxuries nunquam parvi contenta paratu,
Et quaesitarum terra, pelagoque ciborum
Ambitiosa fames, and lautae gloria mensae!
And yet the most exquisite Sense ever dwells with temperance.

The life of Father Paul p. 57.
1. Father Paul Sarpi, a person of rare and exquisite Learning, and upon that
chosen account by the Republic of Venice, as a person fit to be consulted with
in all the emergencies of State; in which he faithfully served them seventeen
years: of this excellent Friar, it is thus set down by the Author of his Life,
viz. The Father had his senses the most subtle, and of the greatest vivacity
that were possible to be found in any, especially his eye, being of a most
quick and sharp sight; his taste most perfect, whereby he was able to discern
things that were almost insensible: But in compounded meats it was a wonder how
quickly he was able to distinguish, either the benefit or the danger,
discerning infallibly the one from the other; whereof when there was occasion,
and that he knew by certain evidence and reasons, that it concerned him to have
a care to prevent poisoning; he would not only seem to have the least dislike,
or suspicion of any thing, a^ one that knew by proof, that these are
miraculously preserved that are in Gods protection; but besides, that in his
Meat, Ibid. p. 183.
the exquisiteness of his Sense would give him notice; and in his Drink, where
the greatest danger lay, he held a more watchful care: he died in the 71 year
of his age, and in the year of our Lord, 1622.

2. It is the ordinary practice of some Hermits in the Deserts, Sir Kenelme
Digbyes Treatise of bodies, chap. 34. p. 295.
by their taste or smell, presently to inform themselves, whether the Herbs,
and Roots, and Fruits they met with all, were good or hurtful for them, though
they never before had trial of them.

3. William of Nassan, Prince of Orange, having received a wound in the Neck,
Camer. hor. subcis. Cent. 3. c. 59. p. 215.
is said by Persons worthy of credit, to have lost all manner of Taste; whereas
it is held by such, as are skilled in the secrets of Nature, that no man is
found to be without that sense; but it seems they may be deceived, at least.

4. Cardanus says, Schenck. obs. l. 1. obs. 2. p. 179.
he knew Augustus Corbetas, a Patrician of their City, who had no taste at all,
he was sensible of smells, but not of tastes; he could smell Pepper, but could
not taste it; and so of diverse other things.

5. One that was vulgarly called John Kropsfhans was also without taste,
Schenck. obs l. 1. obs. 2. p. 182.
as also destitute of any articulate sound. At the Nuptials of Iodocus Huserus
the Consul, I made, says Schenkius, this experiment of him. Of the refuse of
the second course, there was made up for him such a Bolus as this; a quantity
of Salt, Wall-nuts, Cheese, the shells and skins of Apples, and roasted
Chestnuts, together with bits of Coals, fetched from the Hearth in his sight:
These made up with Wine, I saw put into his Mouth, and so far was he from being
offended therewith, that he made signs for another of the same; a certain and
sure instance that he had no taste.

6. The sight of Lazarus, Columb. Anatom. l. 15. p. 486. Barthol. Hist. Anat.
Cent. 5. Hist. 66. p. 136. Schot. Phys. curios. l. 3. c. 12. p. 460 461.
who was vulgarly called the Glass eater, did affect me with much wonder, says
Columbus. The Man was known to all Venice and Ferrara. He had no taste at all
while he lived, he found no pleasure at all in eating, nor was any thing
unpleasant to him; he could not distinguish betwixt insipid and bitter, sweet
and fat, or salt and sharp things. He eat Glass and Stones, Wood, and living
Creatures; Coals and Fishes while they were yet alive; he eat Clay, linen and
woollen Clothes; Hay and Stubble, and in a word, any thing that either Man, or
other Creatures feed upon: When dead, he was dissected by Columbus, who found
that the fourth conjugation of Nerves, which in other men (for their tastes
sake) is drawn out long, in this Lazarus did not bend it self toward the
Palate, or the tongue; but was turned back toward the hinder part of the head.

7. Sennertus tells, Mr. Boyl's Exp. Philos. part 2. Essay. 3. p. 85. Sennert.
prax.
that in the end of the year 1632. Johannes Nesterus, an eminent Physician, and
his great friend informed him, that there lived at that time in the
neighborhood, and belonging to a Nobleman of those parts, a certain Lorrainer,
whom he also called Claudius, somewhat low and slender, and about fifty eight
years of age. This man says he, loathes nothing that stinks, or that is
otherwise unpleasant; he has been often seen to chew and swallow Glass,
Stones, Wood, Bones, the feet of Hares, and other Animals, together with hair,
linen and woollen Cloth; Fishes and other Animals, nay, even Metals and
Dishes, and pieces of Tinn; besides which he devours, Sewet and Tallow Candles,
the shells of Cockles, and the Dungs of Animals, especially of Oxen, even hot,
and as soon as it is voided. He drinks the Urine of others, mixed with Wine or
Beer* he eats Hay, Straw, Stubble, and lately he swallowed down two living
mice, which for half an hour continued biting at the bottom of his Stomach. And
to be short, whatsoever is offered him by any Noble Persons, it goes down with
him without more ado, upon the smallest reward. Insomuch, that within a few
days, he has promised to eat a whole Calf raw, together with the skin and
hair. Among diverse others, I my self am a witness to the truth of these things.
To this and the following part of the Letter, Sennertus adds that not having
(during some years) heard any thing concerning this Claudius; he sent about
four years after to the same Physician Dr. Nesterus, to enquire what was become
of him, and that the Dr. sent him back a Letter from the Minister of the Church
of that place, by way of confirmation of all the formerly mentioned
particulars, and answered himself, that the Lorrainer whom he had long hoped to
dissect, was yet alive, and did yet devour all the things mentioned in his
former Letter, but not so frequently as before, his teeth being grown somewhat
blunter by age, that he was no longer able to break Bones and Metals.

Rodoric. Fons^^. de hom. excrem. c. 14. p. 115.
8. Rodericus Fonseca tells, that in a Plague which fell out at Lisbon, there
was a certain unlearned person that went up and down to make trial of such as
were in Fevers, whether they were seized with the Plague or not, and he did it
on this manner: in the beginning and first insult of the Disease, he required
to have their Urine, that he might taste of it, where he discerned a kind of
sweetness to be left upon his Palate, he pronounced of that person that he was
visited, if otherwise he would say, that the Fever was not pestilential, and
(as it appears) his taste was very true to him, for it was observed to succeed
with the Patient according to his prognostic.

CHAP. VII. Of the sense of Smelling: the curiosity of it in some, and how hurt
or lost in others.
BY some one or other of the Beasts man is excelled and surpassed in every of
the Senses; but in this of Smelling by the most of them. It is true, we may
better spare this (at least in the perfection of it) than any of the four
other; notwithstanding which there are manifold uses of it, as in other things;
so for the recreation of the spirits, and the preservation of life.

1. That is wonderful which is reported of the Indians, Ross. Arcan. microcosm.
p. 103.
that at the first coming of the Spaniards thither, the Natives could smell
Gunpowder at a distance, after the manner of our Crows, and thereby knew if
there were any that carried Guns near unto them.

Camerar. hor. s^b^is. cent. 3. c. 80. p. 304.
2. There was one Hamar who was a Guide to a Caravan (as it is vulgarly called)
that is, Iohnst. not. hist. cl. 10. c. 5. p. 334.
a multitude of men upon their journey, these wandered to and fro in the Lybian
Sands, and whereas he (through disease or other accident) wanted his sight,
there being no other who knew the way in those solitudes, he undertook the
conduct of that almost despairing company. He went first upon his Camel, and at
every miles end he caused the fresh sand, such as had any footsteps impressed
upon it, to be reached up to him, and by the wonderful sagacity of his smell,
when they had now wandered (yet further in that sandy and barren wilderness) at
least forty Italian miles, he then told them that they were not far from an
inhabited place. At first no man believed this prediction of his, in regard
they knew by Astronomical Instruments, that they were four hundred and eighty
miles distant from Egypt, and feared they had rather gone backward than
forwards: but when in this fear they had journyed more than three days, they
beheld three Castles inhabited, and before unknown to any man. The inhabitants
were almost utterly unarmed, who perceiving the Caravan (as an unaccustomed
sight) they made haste to shut up their Gates, and prepare for defense, denying
them water, which was the only thing they sought. After a light conflict, the
Castles were easily taken, where having provided themselves of water, they
again set forwards. This Story is set down by Leo Affricanus, from whom I have
translated this out of the Italian Tongue, says Camerarius.

3. There was one born in some Village of the Country of Liege; Sir Kenelm
Digby's Treatise of Bodies. c. 27. p. 247.248.
and therefore amongst Strangers he is known by the name of John of Liege (I
have been informed of this story by several, whom I dare confidently believe,
that have had it from his own mouth, and have questioned him with great
curiosity particularly about it) when he was a little boy, there being wars in
the Country, the Village of whence he was, had notice of some unruly scattered
Troops that were coming to pillage them, which made all the people to ^lie
hastily, to hide themselves in the Woods that joined upon the Forest of
Ardenne, there they lay till they understood that the Soldiers had fired the
Town, and quit it. Then all returned home, excepting this Boy, whose fears had
made him run further into the Wood than any of the rest, and afterward
apprehended that every body he saw through the Thickets, and every voice he
heard, was the Soldiers. Being thus hid from his Parents, and sought for some
days in vain, they returned without him, and he lived many years in the Woods,
feeding upon Roots, and wild Fruits, and Mast. He said, that after he had been
some time in this wild habitation, he could by the smell judge of the taste of
any thing that was to be eaten, and that he could at a great distance wind by
his Nose where wholesome Fruits and Roots did grow. In this state he continued
shunning men with as great a fear as when he first ran away, until in a very
sharp Winter, necessity brought him to that confidence, that leaving the wild
places of the Forest, he would in the Evening steal amongst the Cattle that
were fothered, especially Swine, and thence gleaned wherewithal to sustain his
miserable life, he was espied naked, and all overgrown with hair, and being
believed to be a Satyr, wait was laid to apprehend him, but he winded them as
far off as any Beast could do. At length they took the wind of him so
advantageously, that they catched him in a snare. At his first living with
other people, a woman took compassion of him (seeing he could call for nothing)
and supplied his wants; to her he applied himself in all his occurrents, and if
she were gone abroad in the Fields, or to any other Village, he would hunt her
out presently by his scent, in such sort as Dogs use to do that are taught to
h^nt dry foot. This man within a little while after he came to good keeping and
full feeding, that acuteness of smelling left him, which formerly governed him
in his tasting. I imagine he is yet alive to tell a better story of himself
than I have done; for I have from them who saw him but a few years agone, that
he was an able strong man, and likely to live yet a good while longer.

4. Of another man I can speak assuredly my self, Sir Kenelm Digby. ib. c. 27.
p. 248.
who being of a very temperate, or rather, spare diet, could likewise perfectly
discern by his smell, the qualities of whatsoever was afterward to pass the
examination of his taste, even to his Bread and Beer.

5. Cardanus confesses of himself, that he had always some smell or other in
his Nose, Card. de varietat. rer.l. 8. c. 34.. Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c.
39. p. 571. Barthol. hist. anat. cent. 4. hist. 91. p. 413, 414.
as one while of Frankincense, straight of Brimstone, and soon after of other
things: he says the cause of it was the exquisite subtlety of his sense, the
thinness of his skin, and the tenuity of his humors.

6. That did always seem a wonderful thing to me, nor do I know the certain
cause of it, why some men can smell things that smell well, but stinking things
will not touch upon their sense, nor are they able to perceive them. Such a
strange property as this is known to be in my honored Uncle Mr. Iacobus
Fi^chius the senior Regius Professor of Physic in our University.

Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c. 33. p. 570.
7. I know a woman, says Schottus, who throughout the whole time of her life,
never had any such smell as to perceive the odor of any one thing whatsoever.

Barthol. hist. anat. cent. 4. hist. 91. p. 413.
8. Christopherus Heersard an Apothecary, an industrious and skillful person in
his employment, told me not long since, that by reason of his too frequent use
of Camphire, preparing and handling it in his Shop, he had utterly deprived
himself of his smell; and that from thenceforth he must resolve to want that
sense, all his other being left entire unto him.

Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 2. p. 156. Cael. antiq. lect. l. 14. c. 21.
9. In the utmost marches of India Eastward, about the source and head of the
River Ganges, there is a Nation called the Astomes, for that they have no
mouths, all hairy over the whole body, yet clothed with the soft Cotton and
Down that come from the Leaves of Trees. They live only by the air, and
smelling to sweet odours, which they draw in at their Nostrils. No meat nor
drink they take, only pleasant savours from diverse and sundry Roots, Flowers
and wild Fruits growing in the Woods they entertain; and those they use to
carry about with them when they take any far journey, because they would not
miss their smelling; and yet if the scent be any thing strong and stinking,
they are soon therewith overcome, and die.

Lemn. occul. l. 2. c. 9. Iohnst. not. hist. cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.
10. At Antwerp a Countryman coming into a Perfumer's Shop, presently fell down
into a swoon, but was speedily recovered, and brought to himself, by rubbing
his Face and Nose all over with Horsedung.

Iohnst. not. hist cl. 10. c. 7. p. 347.^
11. Strabo reports, that such amongst the Sabeans as are stupefied by the
extraordinary and overcoming sweetness of the Spices, Gums and other smells
they converse with, are refreshed by the fume of Bitumen, and by the Beard of a
Goat burnt under their Noses.

Burton's melanch. part. 1.^ 3. p. 184.
12. Where melancholy prevails, it frequently corrupts the senses. When Lewis
the Eleventh was thus affected, he had a conceit that every thing did stink
about him, so that all the odoriferous Perfumes they could get would not ease
him, but still he smelled a filthy stink.

Burton's melanch. part. 1. 3. p. 184.
13. A melancholy French Poet, says Laurentius, being sick of a Fever, and
troubled with extraordinary watching, by his Physicians was appointed to use
Vnguentum Populeum to anoint his Temples withal: but he so distasted the smell
of it, that for many years after all that came near him he imagined to scent of
it, and would let no man talk with him but aloof of, nor would he wear any new
Clothes, because he thought still that they smelled of it, in all other things
he was wise and discreet, and would discourse sensibly but only in this one
thing.

Sandy's Ovid. Met. l. 7. p. 149.
14. Nasty savours suddenly strike to the brain, poison the spirits, and
oftentimes prove deadly: lamentably experienced at the Solemn Assizes at Oxford
(so called of that sad event) when B^ll and Barham the Judges, the High
Sheriff, and most of the Justices of the Bench were killed by the stench of the
Prisoners.

15. Ioannes Echitus a Physician and Herbarist, Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ. mid.
p. 72.
had an equal temper of Body; but upon the least occasion by smelling of any
thing that had a hot scent, he found that his brain was thereby grievously
affected; and which is wonderful, the smell of a Red Rose would immediately
provoke him to sneezing. Cronenburgius did ascribe this accident to the hot
temperature of the Brain, the rarity of the odor, and certain subtle particles
of the Rose, proceeding from the heat and bitterness thereof, together with a
kind of astringency going along with it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Passion of Love, and the effects of it in diverse Persons.
THey have Trunks in India called Sampatans, through which they shoot Arrows so
envenomed, that if they prick the skin, it is very dangerous, but if they draw
blood, it is irrecoverably deadly. Those Arrows that are shot by Cupid, are
much of the same nature, they disquiet with the least touches of them; but
where they have made deeper impressions, unhappy are those souls that are
tormented with the tyrannies of that little God whom the Poet so well describes.

-- Ferus and Cupido
Semper ardentes acuens sagittas
Cote cruenta.
Fierce Love, who always whets his burning Darts
On bloody Whetstones, for to thril our hearts.
1. Eurialus Count of Augusta, Marcel. Donat. hist. medic. mi. rab. l. 1. c.
13. p. 187. Bonfin. rer. ^^garic. l. l. 3. decad. 3. p. 204. Paraei. m^dul.
prophan. hist. tom. 2. p. 63.
was a young man of extraordinary Beauty, and during the stay of the Emperor
S^^^mund, King of Bohemia and Hungary at Sienna, he cast his eye upon Lucretia
a Virgin of that place, and at first ^ight fell vehemently in love with her:
the Virgin also (whom in respect of her admirable form they called commonly the
second Venus) was no less surprised than himself at the same instant. In a
short time they became better acquainted; but at the Emperor's removal thence
to Rome, when Eurialus was compelled to leave his Lady behind him, she not able
to endure his absence, died under the impatience of it. Eurialus at the hearing
of her death though (somewhat supported by the counsels and consolations of his
Friends) he was contented to live, yet from the news of her death to the last
day of his life was he never known to laugh.

2. Leander was a young man of Abydos, and was deeply in love with Hero a
beautiful Virgin of Sestos; these two Towns were opposite to each other, and
the narrow Sea of the Hellespont lay betwixt them. Leander used diverse nights
to swim over the Hellespont to his Love, while she held up a Torch from a Tower
to be his direction in the night; but though this practice continued long, yet
at length Leander adventuring to perform the same one night when the Sea was
rough, and the waves high, was unfortunately drowned. His dead body was cast up
at Sestos, where Hero from her Tower beheld it, but she not able to outlive so
great a loss, cast her self headlong from the top of it into the Sea, and there
perished.

Ovid. Metam. l. 4. Z^i^g. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 461.
3. Pyramus a young man of Babylon, was exceedingly in love with Thisbe the
Daughter of one that lived the very next house to his Father; nor was he less
beloved by her: both Parents had discerned it, and for some reasons kept them
both up so straightly, that they were not suffered so much as to speak to each
other. At last they found opportunity of discourse through the chink of a Wall
betwixt them, and appointed to meet together in a certain place without the
City: Thisbe came first to the place appointed, but being terrified by a
Lioness that passed by, she sled into a Cave near thereabouts, and in her
slight had lost her Veil, which the Lioness tumbled to and fro with her bloody
mouth, and so left it: soon after Pyramus also came to the same place, and
there finding the Veil, which she used to wear, all bloody, he overhastily
concluded that she was torn in pieces by some wild Beast, and therefore slew
himself with his Sword under a Mulberry Tree, which was the place of their
mutual agreement. Thisbe, when she thought the Lioness was gone past, left her
Cave with an earnest desire to meet her Lover, but finding him slain, overcome
with grief and desire, she fell upon the same Sword, and died with him.

4. Plutarch says it was a custom remaining unto to his days, ^^asm. Adag. p.
49. Plut. de vi^tut. mulitr. p. 531.
that Wives would wish so to be beloved by their Husbands as Pieri^ was by
Phrygius. This wis^ had its rise from the following History. Of those Ionians
that planted themselves in Miletum, some raised sedition against the Sons of
Nel^us, and seated themselves in Myo. These received diverse injuries from the
Milesians, who warred upon them for their defection, but not so sharply as to
exclude all commerce, but upon some Festivals the women had liberty to come
from Myo to Miletum. Pythes was one of the Revolters, and understanding that a
Feast was to be kept in Miletum to Diana, he sent his Wife and Daughter Pieria,
to obtain leave that he might be present at it. Now of all the Sons of Nelcus,
^hrygius was the most most powerful, he being enflamed with the love of Pieria,
thought of nothing more than doing something that would be acceptable to her:
and when she had said nothing could be more grateful to her, than to procure
her liberty of coming often to Miletum in the company of many Virgins: he
understood by that speech that peace was desired, and friendship sought with
the Milesians, he therefore concluded the war; and thence was it that the names
of these two Lovers were so dear to both people.

C^^s. H^l. (...). 2. M^^. 12. p. 403. Lips. (...) l. 2. c. 12. p. 303, 304.
Z^ing. Ta^atr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 748.
5. Eginaraus was Secretary of State to Charlemaign, and having placed his
affections much higher than his condition admitted, made love to one of his
Daughters, who seeing this man of a brave spirit, and a Grace suitable, thought
not him too low for her whom merit had so eminently raised above his birth: she
affected him, and gave him too free access to her person, so far as to suffer
him to have recourse unto her to laugh and sport in her Chamber on Evenings,
which ought to have been kept as a Sanctuary where Relics are preserved. It
happened on a Winters night, Eginardus (ever hastening his approaches, and
being negligent in his returns) had somewhat too much slackened his departure:
in the mean time a Snow had fallen, which troubled them both, when he thought
to go out, he feared to be known by his feet, and the Lady was unwilling that
such prints of steps should be found at her door. They being much perplexed,
Love which takes the Diadem of Majesty from Queens, made her do an act for a
Lover, very unusual for the Daughter of one of the greatest men upon earth; she
took the Gentleman upon her Shoulders, and carried him all the length of the
Court to his Chamber, he never setting foot to the ground, that so the next day
no impression might be seen of his footing. It fell out that Charlemain watched
at his Study this night, and hearing a noise, opened the window, and perceived
this pretty prank, at which he could not tell, whether he were best to be
angry, or to laugh. The next day in a great Assembly of Lords, and in the
presence of his Daughter and Eginardus, he asked what punishment that servant
might seeem worthy of, who made use of a King's Daughter as of a Mule, and
caused himself to be carried on her Shoulders in the midst of Winter, through
Night, Snow, and all the sharpness of the Seasons; every one gave his opinion,
and not one but condemned that insolent man to death. The Princess and
Secretary changed color, thinking nothing remained for them but to be fleyed
alive. But the Emperor looking on his Secretary with a smooth brow, said,
Eginardus, had thou loved the Princess my Daughter, thou ought to have
come to her Father the disposer of her liberty; thou art worthy of death, and I
give thee two lives at this present, take thy fair Portress in marriage, fear
God, and love one another. These Lovers thought they were in an instant drawn
out of the depth of Hell to ascend to Heaven.

6. There was amongst the Grecians a company of Soldiers consisting of three
hundred, Plut. in paral. in P^lopid. Clark's mirror. c. 56. p. 232.
that was called the holy Band, erected by Gorgidas, and chosen out of such as
heartily loved one another, whereby it came to pass that they could never be
broken or overcome; for their love and hearty affection would not suffer them
to forsake one another what danger soever came. But at the Battle of Cheronaea
they were all slain, after the Fight King Philip taking view of the dead
bodies, staid in that place where all these three hundred men lay slain, thrust
through with Pikes on their Breasts, whereat he much wondered, and being told
that it was the Lovers Band, he fell a weeping; saying, Woe be to them that
think these men did or suffered any evil or dishonest thing.

7. Under the seventh Persecution, Theodora a Christian Virgin was condemned to
the Stews, Lonicer. Theatr. 7. 420. Clark's mirror. c. 56. p. 230.
where her chastity was to be a prey to all comers: the sentence being
executed, and she carried thither, diverse wanton young men were ready to press
into the House, but one of her Lovers, called Didymus, putting on a Soldiers
habit, said he would have the first turn, and ranted so high that the other
gave him way. He went in to her, persuaded her to change Garments with him, and
so she in the Soldiers habit escaped. Didymus being found a man was carried
before the President, to whom he confessed the whole matter, and so was
condemned. Theodora hearing of it, thinking to excuse him, came and presented
her self as the guilty party, desiring that she might die, and the other be
excused; but the merciless Judge caused them both to be put to death.

8. Gobrias a Captain, when he had espied Rodanthe a fair Captive Maid,
Burton's melanch. part. 3. 2. p. 475, 476.
he fell upon his knees before Mystilus the General, with tears, vows, and all
the Rhetoric he could, by the scars he had formerly received, the good
services he had done, or whatsoever else was dear unto him, he besought his
General, that he might have the fair prisoner to his Wife, Virtutis suae
spolium, as a reward of his Valor; moreover he would forgive to him all his
Arrears: I ask, said he, no part of the Booty, no other thing but Rodanthe to
be my Wife, and when he could not compass her by fair means, he fell to
treachery, force and villainy; and at last set his life at stake to accomplish
his desire.

CHAP. IX. Of the extreme Hatred in some persons toward others.
AS amongst the kinds of living creatures, there are certain enmities and
dissentions, whereof there is no apparent reason to be given. As of that
betwixt the Spider and the Serpent, the Ant and Wesel, the Trochilus and Eagle,
and the like: so amongst men implacable hatreds are conceived many times upon
undiscernible, more upon unjustifiable grounds.

Chetwind's hist. collect. cent. 3. p. 90.
1. Calvin was so odious to the Papists, that they would not name him. Hence in
their Spanish expurgatory Index, p. 204. they give this direction, Let the name
of Calvin be suppressed, and instead of it put Studiosus quidam. And one of
their Proselytes went from Mentz to Rome to change his Christian name of
Calvinus into the adopted one of Baronius.

Raleigh hist. part. 1. l. 5. c. 3. 2. p. 362, 363. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 370.
Val. Max. l. 9. c. 3. p. 255.
2. A deadly Hatred it was which Hannibal bare to the Romans, and a private and
hereditary desire that carried him violently against them. For his Father
Amilcar at a Sacrifice he made a little before his journey into Spain, had
solemnly bound him by oath to pursue them with an immortal hatred, and as soon
as he should be grown up to be a man, to work them all the mischief he was
able. Hannibal was th^n about nine years of age, when his Father caused him to
lay his hand upon the Altar, and to make this oath* so that it was no marvel if
the impression was strong in him.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 3. p. 174.
3. The people of Rome when they saw that Appius Claudius the younger was chosen
Consul by the Senate with Titus Quintus Capitolinus, moved with that huge
hatred they had ever born to the Appian Family, and withal angry, they departed
out of the place of Assembly, that they might not behold any of that Family to
ascend unto honor.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 3. p. 1186. Lonicer. Theatr.p. 369. Wieri opera. p. 829, 830.
l. de ira. Bishop Reynold's Tr^atise of the passions. c. 15. p. 152.
4. Who can declare sufficiently the mighty hatred which Pope Bonifac^ the
Eighth bare toward the Gibelline Faction? It is the custom, that upon
Ashwednesday the Pope sprinkles some Ashes upon the heads of the chief Prelates
in the Church; and at the doing of it to use this saying, Remember thou art
Ashes, and that into Ashes thou shall return: when therefore the forementioned
Pope came to perform this to Porchetus Spinola Archbishop of Genoa, and
suspected him to be a favourer of the Gib^llines, he cast the Ashes not on his
head, but into his eyes, perversely changing the usual form of words into these,
Remember thou art a Gibelline, and that with the Gibellines thou shall return
to Ashes.

5. When Sigismund Marquess of Brandenburgh had obtained the Kingdom of Hungary
in right of his Wife, Fulgos.l. 9* c. 3. p. 1189.
it then appeared what a mortal hatred there was betwixt the Hungarians and
Bohemians: for when Sigismund commanded Stephanus Konth, (and with him twenty
more Hungarian Knights) to be taken and brought before him in Chains, as
persons that had declined the obedience they owed him; not one of all these
would name or honor him in the least as their King; and before either they or
their servants would change their minds, they were desirous to lose their
heads. Amongst the servants was Chiotza the Page of Stephanus, who sadly
bewailed the death of his Master; and whereas by reason of his tender age the
King made him diverse promises; and to comfort him, told him, that he would make
him as a servant about his own person: Chiotza with a troubled countenance, and
in terms that testified at once both anger and hatred, replied that he would
never subject himself to the service of a Bohemian Swine, and in this obstinacy
of mind he died.

6. Cato the Censor bare such a hatred to the Female Sex, Cause. Holy Court.
part. 3. p. 297.
that it was his common saying, that if the world was without women, the
conversation of men would not be exempt from the company of the Gods.

7. Melanion was a person of the same mind, Erasin. Adag. p. 613.
who in a perfect hatred to them all at once betook himself to solitude,
attended upon with his Dog only: he followed the chase of wild Beasts over
Mountains, and through Woods; nor could ever be persuaded to return home so
long as he lived; so that he gave occasion to the Proverb, Chaster than
Melanion.

8. Hyppolitus was also of the same complexion, as he expresses himself in
Euripides and Seneca: if you will have a taste of his language, that in Seneca
sounds to this purpose, -- I hate, fly, curse, detest them all:
Called Reason, Nature, Madness, as you please;
In a true hatred of them there is some ease.
First shall the water kindly dwell with fire,
Dread Syrtis be the Mariners desire:
Out of the West shall be the break of day,
And rabid Wolves with tender Lambkins play,
Before a woman gain my conquered mind,
To quit this hatred, and to grow more kind.


9. Timon the Athenian had the surname of Manhater, Erasm. Adag. p. 70.
Sabellic. exempl. l. 2. c. 2. p. 64. Bishop Reynold's Treatise of passions. c.
13. p. 130. Patit. de Regno. l. 8. tit. 17. p. 530.
he was once very rich, but through his liberality and overgreat bounty, was
reduced to extreme poverty; in which condition he had large experience of the
malice and ingratitude of such as he had formerly been helpful to; he therefore
fell into a vehement hatred of all mankind: was glad of their misfortunes, and
promoted the ruin of all men as far as he might with his own safety. When the
people in honor of Alcibindes attended on him home, as they used when he had
obtained a cause; Timon would not as he was wont to others, turn aside out of
the way, but meet him on purpose, and say, Go on my Son, and prosper, for thou
shall one day plague all these with some signal calamity. He built him a House
in the Fields, that he might shun the converse of men. He admitted to him only
one Apemantus, (a person much of his own humor) and he saying to him, Is not
this a fine Supper, It would, said he, be much better if thou were absent. This
Timon gave order that his Sepulcher should be set behind a dunghill: and this to
be his Epitaph: Hic sum post vitam miseramque inopemque sepultus
Nomen non quaeras, dii te Lector male perdant.
Here now I lie, after my wretched fall:
Ask not my name, the Gods destroy you all.


Patrit. de Regno, l. 8. tit. 17. p. 550. L^^t. l. 1. p. p. 28.
Mison, was of like manners with Timon, and had his name from the hatred he had
to all men; when ever he was conversant amongst men, he was always sad* but
when he was in any solitude, or place by himself, he was then used to laugh and
rejoice: being once asked, why he laughed, when no body was present; for that
very reason said he.

Erasm. Adag. 551.
11. Vatinius was sharply declaimed against by M. Tullius Cicero, and thereby
such a discovery was made of his crimes, that lodged him so deep in the hatred
of the people of Rome, that afterward to express a deadly and vehement hatred
indeed, it became proverbial to say a Vatinian hatred.

L^mprid.
12. Alexander Severus the Emperor had such a hatred to unjust Judges; that if
he had casually m^t any such; he was suddenly surpised with a vomiting at the
very sight of them.

Z^ing. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 241.
13. The Emperor Nerva did so abominate the shedding of blood; that when the
people desired him to yield up the murderers of Domitian to a just execution:
he was far affected with it, that he was immediately taken with a vomiting and
looseness.

Z^ing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 63.
14. Vl^dislaus Locticus, King of Polonia, after a battle wherein his Army had
made great slaughter of the adverse party; went to view the dead as they lay in
the Field. He there saw Florianus Sharus a Knight, lie weakened with many
wounds, with his face upward, and with his hands keeping in his bowels, lest
they should issue out from his belly at his wound: How great is the torment of
this man, said the King: Sharus replied, The torment of that man is greater,
who has an ill neighbor that dwells in the same Village with him: as I, says
he, can witness upon my own experience. Well, says the King, if thou recover
of thy wound, I will ease thee of thy ill neighbor; as indeed he afterward
did; for he turned out the person complained of, and gave the whole Village to
Sharus.

Fulgos. l. 9. c. 3. p. 1182
15. Gualterus, Earl of Brenne, had married the Eldest Daughter of T^ncred, King
of Sicily; and as Heir of the Kingdom went with four hundred Horse; by help of
these, and a mavelous felicity, he had recovered a great part of it: when at
last he was overcame and taken by Thebaldus Germanus, at the City Sarna: Upon
the third day after he was offered by the Victor his liberty and restoration
to the Kingdom, in case he would confirm to Thebaldus, what he was possessed of
therein: But he in an inconceiveable hatred to him, that had made him his
Prisoner; replied, That he should ever scorn to receive those, and greater
proffers from so base a hand as his. Thebaldus had reason to resent this
affront, and therefore told him, he would make him repent his so great
insolence: At which Gualterus inflamed with a greater fury; tare of his cloths
and brake the ligatures of his wounds; crying out, that he would live no
longer, since he was fallen into the hands of such a man that treated him with
threats; upon which he tare open the lips of his wounds, and thrust his hands
into his Intestines: so that when he resolvedly refused all food and ways of
cure, he forcibly drove out his furious Soul from his Body, and lest only one
Daughter behind him, who might have been happier, had she not had a breast to
her Father.

CHAP. X. Of Fear, and the strange effects of it, also of panick fears.
THe Spartans would not consecrate to the Gods any of those spoils, which they
had taken from the Enemy; they thought they were unfit presents ^or them, and
no convenient sight for their own Children, because they were things plucked
off from them, who suffered themselves to be taken through fear. The meaning
was, they looked upon the fearful man, as neither pleasing to God, nor
profitable to Man; the truth is an habitual coward, is a man of no price: but
withal there are certain times, wherein the worthiest of men have found their
courage to desert them, and upon some occasions more than others.

1. Augustus Caesar was somewhat over timorous of Thunder and Lightning,
Sutton. p. 111. in Augusto.
so that he always, and every where, carried with him the skin of a Sea-calf,
as a remedy: And upon suspicion of approaching tempest, would retreat into
some ground or vaulted place, as having been formerly affrighted by
extraordinary flashes of Lightning in a nights journey of his.

2. Caius Caligula, Sutton. p. 195. in Caligula^.
who otherwise was a great contemner of the gods, yet would wink at the least
Thunder and Lightning, and cover his head; if there chanced to be greater and
louder, he would then leap out of his bed, and run to hide himself under it.

3. Philippus Vicecomes, was of so very timorous and a fearful Nature, Zuin.
Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94.
that upon the hearing of any indifferent Thunder, he would tremble and shake
with fear, and as a person in distraction run up and down to seek out some
subterranean hiding place.

4. Pope Alexander the third being in France; Zuin. ibid. p. 94.
and performing divine Offices upon Good Friday, upon the sudden there was a
horrible darkness; and while the Reader was upon the Passion of Christ, and was
speaking of those words: It is finished, there fell such a stupendous
Lightning, and such a terrible crack of Thunder followed that Alexander leaving
the Altar, and the Reader deserting the Passion, all that were present ran out
of the place, consulting their own safety by flight.

5. Archelaus, Cael. Rhod. ^ect. Antiq. l. 7. c. 28. p. 326.
King of Macedon, being ignorant of the effects of Natural Causes; when once
there happened an Eclipse of the Sun, as one overcome and astonished with fear,
he caused his Palace to be hastily shut up; and (as it was the usual custom in
cases of extreme mourning and sadness) he caused the hair of his Sons head to
be cut off.

6. Diomedes was the Steward of Augustus the Emperor, Sutton. p. 95. in
Augusto.
as they two were on a time walking out together, on the sudden there brake
loose a wild Boar, who took his way directly toward them: here the Steward in
the fear he was in, gat behind the Emperor, and interposed him betwixt the
danger and himself. Augustus, though in great hazard, yet knowing it was more
his fear than his malice, resented it no farther than to jest with him upon it.

7. At the time when Caius Caligula was slain, Claudius Caesar, Joseph. Antiq.
Iud. l. 19. c. 2. p.
seeing all was full of sedition and slaughter, thrust himself into a hole, in
a by corner to hide himself, though he had no cause to be apprehensive of
danger, besides the illustriousness of his Birth; being thus found, he was
drawn out by the Soldiers, for no other purpose than to make him Emperor: he
besought their mercy, as supposing all they said to be nothing else but a cruel
mockery; but they (when through fear and dread of death, he was not able to go)
took him up upon their shoulders, carried him to the Camp, and proclaimed him
Emperor.

Schenck. obs. l. 1. obs. 3. p. 78.
8. Fulgos Argelatus, by the terrible noise that was made by an Earthquake, was
so affrighted, that his fear drove him into madness, and his madness unto
death, for he cast himself headlong from the upper part of his house, and so
died.

Plut. Paral. p. 706. in Alexandre.
9. Cassander, the Son of Antipater came to Alexander the Great at Babylon,
where finding himself not so welcome, by reason of some suspicions the King had
conceived of his treachery; he was seized with such a terror at this suspicion
of his, that in the following times having obtained the Kingdom of Macedon, and
made himself Lord of Greece, walking at Delphos, and there viewing the Statues,
he cast his eye upon that of Alexander the Great; at which sight he conceived
such horror, that he trembled all over, and had much ado to recover himself
from under the power of that agony.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94.
10. The Emperor Maximilian the First, being taken by the people of Bruges, and
diverse of the Citizens, who took his part slain; Nicholaus de Helst, formerly a
prisoner, together with diverse others had the sentence of death passed upon
him; and being now laid down to receive* the stroke of the Sword: The people
suddenly cried out, Mercy; he was pardoned as to his life, but the paleness his
face had contracted, by reason of his fear of his approaching death, continued
with him, from that time forth, to the last day of his life.

Zacchiae qu. Medicol^g. l. 3. tit. 2. p. 154. Maldonat. in Luc. 22. v. 44.
11. We are told by Zacchias, of a young man of Belgia, who, says he, not many
years since was condemned to be burnt: it was observed of him, (by as many as
would) that through the extremity of fear, he sweat blood; and Maldonate tells
the like of one at Paris, who having received the sentence of death, (for a
crime by him committed) sweat blood out of several parts of the body.

12. Being about four or six years since, in the County of Cork, Mr Boyles Exp.
Philos. c. 14. p. 246 247.
there was an Irish Captain, a man of middle age and stature, who coming with
some of his followers to render himself to the Lord Broghil (who then commanded
the English forces in those parts) upon a public offer of pardon to the Irish,
that would lay down arms: he was casually in a suspicious place, met with by a
party of the English, and intercepted: the Lord Broghil being then absent; he
was so apprehensive of being put to death before his return, that that anxiety
of mind quickly changed the color of his hair in a peculiar manner, not
uniformly changed; but here and there certain peculiar tusts and locks of it,
whose bases might be about an inch in diameter, were suddenly turned white all
over, the rest of his hair (whereof the Irish use to wear good store) retaining
its former reddish color.

13. Don Diego Osorius, Shot. Phys. curios. l. 3. c. 16. p. 478. Donat. Hist.
med. mir. l. 1 c. 1. p. 1. Schenck. obs. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 2.
a Spaniard of a Noble Family, being in love with a young Lady of the Court,
had prevailed with her ^or a private conference under the shady boughs of a
Tree, that grew within the Gardens of the King of Spain: but by the unfortunate
barking of a little Dog, their privacy was betrayed, the young Gentleman seized
by some of the Kings Guard, and imprisoned. It was capital to be found in that
place, and therefore he was condemned to dye. He was so terrified at the
hearing of his sentence, that one and the same night saw the same person young,
and all turned gray, as in age. The Jailer moved at the sight, related the
accident to King Ferdinand, as a Prodigy, who thereupon pardoned him, saying he
had been sufficiently punished for his fault, seeing he had exchanged the
flower of his Youth into the too early hoary hairs of age.

14. There was a young Nobleman in the Emperors Court, Schenck. obs. l. 1.
obs. 1. p. 2. L^mn. de. complex. l. ^ c. 2. p.
that had violated the chastity of a young Lady there; though by the small
resistance she made, she seemed to give a tacit consent; yet he was cast into
prison, on the morrow after to lose his head. He passed that night in such
fearful apprehensions of death, that on the morrow Caesar sitting on the
Tribunal, he appeared so unlike himself, that he was known to none that were
present, no not the Emperor himself. All the comeliness and beauty of his face
was vanished; his countenance was grown like to that of a carcass, his hair and
beard turned gray; and in all respects so changed, that the Emperor suspected
some counterfeit was substituted in his room. He caused him therefore to be
examined, if he were the same; and trial to be made, if his hair and beard were
not thus changed by application of some Medicine to them: But finding nothing
so, astonished with the countenance and vilage of the man, and thereby moved to
pity and mercy; he gave him his pardon, for the fault he had committed.

15. The like hap^ed to the Father of Martinus Delrio (being then a Boy of
scarce fifteen years of age.) while he lay sick on his bed; Schenck. obs* l. 1.
obs. 1. p. 3.
and heard all the Physicians despairing of his life; what with watching, and
the fear of death, all the hair of his head turned gray in the compass of one
night.

16. Apollonia, Schenck. obs. l. 1. obs. 4. p. 121.
the Wife of Schenckius, being about 40 years of age; and near the time of her
delivery, was exceedingly frighted with the cry of fire at midnight, and
beholding the flames not far off, she presently complained of an extraordinary
commotion of the Infant in her Womb, she went to bed and slept; but ever long,
was taken with a strange and horrible kind of convulsion, of which she died
within twelve hours after her fright.

17. A Religious Woman falling into the hands of rude Soldiers, Schenck. ibid.
l. 3. p. 399.
and they with drawn Swords threatening to kill her, was seized with such an
extreme fear, that the blood brake out from all the open passages of her body;
and so being become bloodless, in the sight of the Enemies, she speedily died
amongst them.

18. The Persian Navy being in the heat of fight, near to the City of Michael,
there went a rumor amongst them, Dinoth. Memorab. l. 6. p. 415.
without any certain Author, that the Land Army under Mardonius, was overthrown
in Boeotia; whereupon such a sudden fear and consternation of mind seized them,
that they were neither able to ^ight, nor to fly; so that being prepared for
neither, they were every man taken or slain.

(...). Hist. l. 44. p. 559.
19. As Perseus, King of Macedon, was washing before Supper, word was brought
him, that the enemy was near at hand, upon which he was so possessed, and
astonished with fear, that suddenly leaping from his Throne, without expecting
the sight of the Enemy; he cried he was overcome, and betook himself to slight,
whereas unless he had been infatuated, he might have shut up the Romans, and
compelled them to fight at a very great disadvantage.

20. Miltiades, with only ten thousand Athenians, and a thousand Plateans. set
upon 300000 of the Persians; Dinoth. l. 6. p. 415.
when there were such terrible noises in the Air, and such Specter appeared,
that struck such fear into the Persians, as casting off all hope of the
Victory, they betook themselves to a shameful ^light; so that all the forces of
Miltiades had to do, was to pursue and slay them.

Dinoth. Memorab. l. 6. p. 416.
21. Rhadagisus with 200000 Goths descended into Italy, devoting the blood of
all the Roman Stock to his Gods; they wanting sufficient strength to encounter
him, in great fear kept themselves close within the Walls of the City; when a
panick fear from Heaven fell upon the Army of Rhadagisus; so that he leading
them into the Mountains of Fesulae, they were consumed with famine and thirst,
and overcome without battle; the greatest part of them were taken, bound and
sold for a crown a man, and soon after died in the hands of them that bought
them.

Dinoth. ibid. p. 416.
22. Heraclianus had a design to seize upon the Roman Empire; to which purpose
with a Navy of 4000 and 70 Ships, which he had prepared in Africa, he set sail
for Rome, landed and marched on with his Army; but supposing that by his
celerity he had prevented the news of his coming, and contrary to his
expectation, finding the Romans prepared to receive him; he took thereupon such
a fear, that turning his back, and getting into the first Ship that chance
offered, with that alone he sailed to Carthage, where he was slain by his
Soldiery.

Dinoth. l. 6. p. 417.
23. Jerusalem being taken by the Christians, and Godfry of Bullen, made King of
it, the Souldan of Egypt had prepared a great Army, either to besiege it, or
fight the Christians: who perceiving them unable to cope with so great a power;
with great earnestness besought the assistance of Almighty God: and then full
of courage went to meet the enemy. The Barbarians seeing them approach and come
on so courageously; who they thought would not have the confidence, so much as
to look them in the face, astonished with a sudden fear, they never so much as
thought of fighting, but running on headlong in a disordered flight: they were
slain by the Christians, as so many beasts, to the number of an hundred
thousand.

Co^i^es. Dinoth. l. 6. p. 417.
24. At Granson, the Burgundian Army consisting of 40000, was to fight the
Swissers, consisting of scarce 2000, and finding the Swissers to begin the
battle with great courage and alacrity, they in the front began leisurely to
retire, toward the Camp. Those in the rear seeing them in the retreat, and
suspecting they were beaten, straight fled out of the Field, and so great and
sudden a consternation, and fear fell upon them, that notwithstanding all the
Commanders could say, they strove who should be the foremost, leaving the rich
and wealthy spoil of the Camp to the Enemy.

25. Johannes Capistranus was appointed Judge by King Ladislaus, Lonicer.
Theat. p. 585.
and by his command to examine a certain Earl accused of Treason, by tortures:
having convicted him, he condemned him to lose his head; as also the Son of the
Earl, by the Kings order, had the same sentence, but yet with this purpose
only; that stricken with fear, he should betray some of his Fathers counsels,
if possibly he had been partaker of them: but if he was found innocent, that
then he should be spared. They were therefore both lead to the place of
Execution, where when the Son had seen his Father beheaded, and verily believed
he was destined to the same punishment, seized with an extraordinary fear, he
fell down dead; with whose unexpected fate, the Judge was so vehemently
affected, that according to the superstition of that age, leaving a secular
life, he betook himself to a Monastery.

26. I will close up this Chapter with a pleasant History, Heyl. Cosmog. p. 245.
yet such as will serve well to inform us how dreadful the Lords of the
Inquisition are to the poor Spaniards. One of these Inquisitors, desiring to
eat some Pears that grew in a poor man's Orchard, not far from him, sent for the
man to come and speak with him. This message put the poor man in such a fright,
that he fell sick immediately upon it, and kept his bed. But being informed,
that his Pears were the only cause of his sending for; he caused his Tree to be
presently cut down, and carried with all the Pears on it to the Inquisitors
House; and being afterward demanded the reason of that his unhusbandly action;
he protested that he would not keep that thing about him, which should give an
occasion for any of their Lordships to send for him any more.

CHAP. XI. Of the Passion of Anger, and the strange effects of it in some Men.
THis headstrong and impetuous Affection of the mind is well described by some
of the Ancients to be a short madness; for whereas other passions do impel,
this does use to precipitate us; others though we cannot resist, yet we may
stand under them; but this, as a mighty and irresistible torrent, bears all the
powers of our minds before it: A disease it is, that wheresoever it prevails,
is no less dangerous than deforming to us, not only does it swell the sace,
in^lame the blood; and as the Poet has it -- a bloody fierceness makes
The eyes to glow like a Gorgonian Snakes.
But withal, like the mischievous evil Spirit in the Gospel, that threw the
possessed now into the fire, and then into the Water; it casts us into all kind
of dangers, and frequently hurries us into to the Chambers of death it self, as
appears by some of the following Examples.

Plat. obs. Med. l. 1. p. 50.
1. Being called in November 1604. to the House of a certain Prefect, says
Platerus, to couch a Cataract, that was grown in the eye of his Wife, the
Prefect was informed, that his Maid had that night lain with a Miller; causing
her therefore to be fetched home, and catching her by the hair of the head, he
threw her to the ground, kicked her, and fell into so great passion, that being
presently seized with difficulty of breathing, and a trembling, there was more
need to look after him than his Wife. Before any Medicine was administered, he
was advised by a Surgeon to open a Vein, but to no purpose,; his want of
breath, trembling, and prostration of the spirits continuing, he dyed within
two days after.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 16.
2. Charles the Sixth, King of France, being highly displeased with the Duke of
Britain, upon some sinister suspicions, was so bent upon revenge, that
unmindful of all other things, his passion suffered him not to eat or sleep: He
would not hear the Dukes Ambassadors that came to declare his innocence: But
upon the fifth of the Kalends of June, anno 1392. he set forth with his forces
out of a City of the Caenomans, contrary to the advice of his Commanders and
Physicians about high noon, in a hot sultry day, with a light hat upon his
head. He leaped upon his Horse, and bad them follow him that loved him: He had
scarce gone a mile from the City, when his mind was unseated, and he in a fu^y
drew his Sword, slew some, and wounded others that attended him; till such
time, as wearied and spent with thus laying about him, he fell from his Horse,
he was taken up and carried back in the arms of men, into the City for dead:
where after many days, when at first he neither knew himself, nor any about
him, he began by degrees to recover; but his mind was not so well restored, but
that ever and anon he had symptoms of a relapse; and at several intervals
betrayed his distemper, so that the Government of the Kingdom was committed to
his Uncles.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 90.
3. Malachus, a Poet in Syracuse, had such fits of immoderate choler and anger,
as took away the use of his Reason; yet was he then most able in the composure
of Verses, when he was thus made frantic by his passion.

4. Lucius Sylla, burning with anger at Puteoli, because Granius, Val. Max. l.
9. c. 3. p. 254. Wieri opera, p. 795, 796. l. de Ira. Lonicer. Theat. p. 370.
the chief of that Colony delayed to send in for the repairs of the Capitol,
that Money which was promised by the Decurions, by an over great concitation of
the Mind, and the impetuousness of an immoderate Voice, he was taken with a
convulsion in the breast, and so vomited up his soul mixed with blood and
threats, being at that time entering upon the sixtieth year of his age, yet not
consumed by that, but perishing by a madness, that was nourished by the
miseries of Rome.

5. Into what extremes some men have been transported by passion, Wieri opera,
p. 801. ibid. Beard's Theat. l. 1. c. 23. p. 144.
the example of Pope Julius the Third is too Illustrious; he at dinner time had
commanded a roasted Peacock to be set by for him till supper, as being much
delighted with that sort of meat: Being at supper, he called for it once and
again; but it being before eaten up by the Cooks, could not be set on the
Table: Whereupon he fell into so violent a passion for this delay, that at
length he brake out into this blasphemous (...), that he would have that
Peacock, Al (...) Iddio, that is, in despite of God: And when those of his
attendants that stood about him, entreated he would not be so far moved for so
slight a thing as a Peacock; he to defend his former blasphemy by a greater, in
a mighty passion demanded, why he who was so great a Lord upon Earth, might not
be angry for a Peacock, when God himself was in such a fury, for one only
inconsiderable Apple eaten in Paradise, that he would the whole Posterity of
the first man should suffer so deeply for it?

6. Theodosius the Elder, Theodoret. l. 6. c. 81. p. 310. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3.
p. 121. Zuing. vol. 4. l. 1. p. 91.
though otherwise a most pious Prince, was yet very subject to the transports
of anger, nor was he able to bridle his passion: So that at Thessalonica, upon
a seditious tumult, in the Theater, he gave order to his Soldiers, and they
killed no less than seven thousand of the Citizens: Upon which St. Ambrose the
Bishop of Milain, would not suffer him to enter the Church, till he had showed
the manifest signs of an unfeigned repentance.

7. The Emperor Nerva, Donat. Hist. med. l. 3. c. 13. p. 188.
who was otherwise of a weak stomach, and often cast up his meat, which he had
newly eaten; fell into a huge passion with one whose name was Regulus, and
while he was in a high tone thundering against him, was taken with sweats, fell
into a fever, and so dyed in the sixty eighth year of his age.

7. The Sarmatian Ambassadors cast themselves at the feet of the Emperor
Valentinian the First, Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 495. Pezel. Mellific. Hist. tom.
2. p. 277.
imploring peace; he observing the meanness of their apparel, demanded if all
their Nation were such as they: who replied, It was their custom to send to him
such as were the most noble and best accoutred amongst them* When he in a rage
cried out, It was his misfortune, that while he Reigned, such a sordid Nation
as theirs could not be content with their own limits; and then as one struck
with a dart, he lost both his voice and strength; and in a deadly sweat fell
down to the Earth: he was taken up, and carried into his Chamber; where seized
with a violent Hick-up, and gnashing of Teeth he dyed, December, anno 375. in
the fifty fifth year of his age, and the twelfth of his Empire.

9. Victor Pisanus, the Venetian Admiral, famous for his exploits, Zuing. vol.
2. l. 7. p. 495.
understanding that his Vice Admiral through cowardice had suffered ten Ships
of the Genoeses, to escape out of the Sipontine Haven; fell into such a
passion, as put him immediately into a Fever whereof he dyed.

10. Clitus was a person whom Alexander held very dear, Wieri opera, p. 823.
Justin. Hist. l. 12. p. 139.
as being the Son of his Nurse, and one who had been educated together with
himself: He had saved the life of Alexander, at the battle near the River
Granicus, and was by him made the Prefect of a Province; but he could not
flatter, and detesting the effeminacy of the Persians, at a Feast with the
King, he spoke with the liberty of a Macedonian. Alexander transported with
anger, slew him with his own hands; though when the heat was over, he was
difficultly restrained from killing himself, for that fault which his sudden
fury had incited him to commit.

11. Caelius the Orator was certainly the most passionate person of all other
Mortals: Wieri opera, p. 828. Bruson. Facetiar. l. 3. c. 19. p. 213
for having asked his Client diverse questions, and he agreeing with him in all
things he questioned about; in a great heat he cried out in open Court, Say
something contrary to me, that so we may be two. A man of a harsh temper! how
could he possibly endure an injury, who was not able to bear obsequiousness it
self?

12. The Emperor Commodus in a heat of passion caused the Keeper of his Bath
to be thrown into a burning Furnace, ^ieri opera, p. 828.
^or no other reason, but that entering into the Bath, he found it somewhat too
warm for him.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 496.
13. Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary being spent with the pains of the Gout,
and taken with a Palsy in both his Legs, lay at Vienna, and one Palm Sunday
enquiring for some fresh Figs of Italy for the second course, finding that they
were already eaten up by the Courtiers, he fell into such a rage as brought him
into an Apoplexy, whereof he died the day following, in the forty seventh year
o^ his age, and the year of our Lord, 1490.

Don^t. hist. m^d^mir. l. 3. c. 13. p. 188.
14. Anno 1418, W^nceslaus King of Bohemia, being highly incensed against his
Cup Bearer, for that knowing of a tumult raised by the Hussites in Prague
(under Zis^a their Leader) he had concealed it, drew his Dagger with intention
to stab him. The Nobles attending laid hold on the King, took away his Dagger,
that he might not pollute his Royal Hands with the blood of his servant. While
he was thus in their hands, the King through extreme anger fell into an
Apoplexy, whereof he died in a ^ew days.

D^^^t. l. 3. c. 13. p. 187.
15. Muccius Fortia had from his birth an impediment in his speech, such as that
not without great di^^iculty, he could deliver his mind, till one time being in
an extreme passion, he was so moved, and labored with that earnestness to
speak, that from thenceforth he spoke with far greater freedom.

F^lgos. l. 9. c. 3. p. 1179, 118^.
16. In that War which the Goths waged with Belisarius, there was one of the
Soldiers in the Regiment of Constantine, a military Tribune, who had forcibly
taken a Sword of great value from a Roman Youth: Belisarius sharply reproved
Constantine, that he suffered things to be done with that insolence by the
Soldiers under his command, threatening him withal, in case the Sword was not
speedily found out, and restored* Constantine resented this in so heinous a
manner, that in the greatness of his rage (not considering either the Dignity
of his General, or the hazard of his own life) he drew out his Dagger,
intending to sheath it in the Breast of Belisarius; but he was immediately laid
hold upon, and presently hanged.

Wi^ri opera, p. 83 ^^ l. de i^^i. Sabellii ex l. 9. c. 11. p. 527.
17. It is the custom in Rome, that upon Ashwednesday the Pope sprinkle ashes
upon the heads of the Prelates, saying, Remember thou art but Ashes, and into
Ashes thou shall return: Pope Boniface the Eighth, who was an utter enemy to
the Gibelline Faction, being to do this, and coming to Porchetus Spinola the
Archbishop of Genoa, who was supposed to be of that party: instead of casting
the Ashes upon his head, in great anger he threw them into his eyes, and thus
inverted the usual words, Remember that thou art a Gibelline, and that with the
Gibellines thou shall return to Ashes.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 3. p. 1173.
18. Valerius Publicola, upon the expulsion of the Tarquines from Rome, expected
that he should have been elected Colleague with Brutus in the Consulship; but
when he found that Lucretius Collatinus was preferred before him, he conceived
such an indignation thereat, that he made resignation of all the honors which
he had before that time received: he quitted the dignity of a Senator, gave
over patronizing any causes, and renounced all sorts of Clients; nor
thenceforth would he exercise any public office in the Commonwealth.

19. This one strange thing is reported of Scanderbeg the King of Epirus, that
whenever he he was upon the point ready to charge the Enemy, Barlet. hist. o^
Scanderbeg. l. 8. p. 296, 297.
and likewise in the heat and ^ury of the Fight, besides other unusual changes
and appearances of change and alteration in his countenance, his nether lip
would commonly cleave asunder, and yield forth great abundance of blood. A
thing oftentimes marked and observed of him, not only in his Martial Actions
and Exploits, but even in his civil A^^airs, whenever his choler did abound,
and that his anger did exceed its ordinary bounds.

20. Carolus de Gontault Duke of Byron, Kornman. de mirac. (...). l. 3. c. 59.
p. 25.
a Peer and Marshal of France, and Governor of Burgundy, was found the Chief
of those that had conspired the death of the King Henry the Fourth: and
thereupon anno 1602, had sentence of death passed upon him, to have his head
struck off at the Bastille in Paris. This man, as he was a person of a most
invincible spirit, would not suffer his hands to be bound, he bade the
Executioner not come near him till he called, otherwise he would strangle him
with his hands. While he was upon his Knees praying, the Headsman severed his
Head from his Shoulders, and it was observed that the face looked fiercely, the
tongue moved, and a thick and bluish vapor like a smoke went out together
with his blood, all tokens of a vehement anger and passion which he at that
time was in.

21. Pyrrho was so exceedingly prone to anger and extreme passion, Bruson.
sac^^iar. l. 3. c. 19. p. 218.
that one time when the Cook had provoked him, he followed him with the Spit
and Meat upon it as far as the Market place, to beat him therewith. Another
time being at Elis, and his Scholars having incensed him, by asking him over
many questions, he threw off his Gown, and swam over the River Alpheus, that
being on the other side he might be free from that disturbance which their
importunity had given him.

22. Philagrus a Cilician, Bruson. sacetiar. l. 3. c. 19. p. 218.
the Scholar of Lollianus, and a Sophist, was of that angry and passionate
temper, that he gave one of his Scholars a blow upon the ^ace when he was
asleep. So untractable was the disposition of this man, when one asked him why
he would not marry that he might have children, Because, said he, I am never
pleased, no, not with my self.

23. Marcius Sabinus came to live at Rome at such time as Numa Pompilius was
elected King thereof, Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 3. p. 1173.
when Numa was dead he hoped to be chosen by the people to succeed him; but
finding that Hostilius was preferred before him, he resented the matter with
that passion and indignation that his life growing irksome unto him, he laid
violent hands upon himself, and so went discontented out of the world. Of what
a strange fury was this man possessed? What flames, what ruins, what slaughter
and bloodshed of the Roman people can we imagine could satisfy! the anger and
revenge of this man? who when he was able to do nothing against the people of
Rome, proceeded so sharply and so bitterly against himself, as to resolve not
to live at all, because (according to his mind) he might not live a King.

CHAP. XII. Of such as have been seized with an extraordinary Joy, and what
has followed thereupon.
THe Egyptian Temples they say were wonderful beautiful and fair in the
Frontispiece, but foul and filthy in the more inward Apartments of them. So
this affection of Joy, which seems outwardly so pleasant upon us in the marks
of it, and which furnishes our hearts with so much of pleasure and delight,
proves fatal to us in the excesses of it, and serves us much after the manner
of Ivy, which seems to adorn the Tree whereunto it cleaves, but indeed
sucketh out, and steals away the sap thereof.

Bak^r's Chron. p. 515. Godw. in Hen. 8. p. 104. Clark's mir. c. 104. p. 497.
Stow's Annals. p. 583.
1. About the three and thirtieth year of King Henry the Eighth, Arthur
Plantagenet Viscount Lisle, base Son to King Edward the Fourth, having been
imprisoned upon suspicion of a practice for betraying of Calice to the French,
whilst he was the King's Lieutenant there, was now found innocent of the fact;
and thereupon, the King to make him some reparation for his disgrace, sent him
a Ring, and a very gracious message by Sir Thomas Wriothesly his Secretary;
whereat the said Viscount took so great joy, that the night following, of that
very joy he died. So deadly a thing is any passion, even Joy it self, if it be
extreme.

2. Pope Julius the Second, receiving a message of Auxiliary Forces that were
coming to him from the King of Spain, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 84.
to make an end of the Ferrarian war, was so exceedingly rejoiced at it, that
he was presently left by a Fever that had held him for some time.

3. Some years since (I speak it to my grief) I knew Franciscus Casalinus,
Epi^han. Ferdinand. casus med. hist. 49. p. 148.
who was my dear and learned Scholar in Logic, who through an immoderate
laughter (not able to contain himself in it) fell into a spitting of blood (the
Veins of his Breast being opened) from thence into a consumption, whereof he
died.

Paulus Iovius in Elog. l. 6. p. 344. Donat. hist. mirab. l. 3. c. 13. p. 186.
Knowl's Turk. hist. p. 550.
4. In our time anno 1544, Sinam C^^^utus Iudaeus a notable Pirate, being at
Arsinoe a Port upon the Red Sea, preparing to war upon the Portugal by order of
Solomon Emperor o^ the Turks, he there had a message to inform him, that his
Son Selechus at the taking of Tunis was made a Slave, redeemed by Haradienus
Barbarossa, made the Admiral of seven Vessels, and with them was put into
Alexandria, purposing ere long to be with him. The old man was seized with so
sudden and great a joy at the news of the unexpected liberty and preferment of
his Son at once, that he immediately fainted, and at the arrival of his Son,
died in his embraces.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 82. Cardan de subtilit.
5. Galeacius de Rubeis a Citizen of Bononia, and a Blacksmith, when as he
supposed that he had first found out the screw which was long before invented
by A^chimedes, out of an excess of Joy fell mad. I have seen him, says Cardan,
busying himself about that Engine, and a while after deserted of his reason.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 269. (...). l. 7. p. 2^9.
6. Philemon a Comic Poet, being grown old, and beholding an Ass eating up some
Figs that a Boy had laid down; when the Boy returned, Go now, said he, and
fetch the Ass some drink: the old man was so tickled with the fancy of that
jest, that he died laughing. In the same manner, and much upon the same
occasion died Chrysippus.

7. A certain Musician, Plut. p. 638. in Pompelo. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 83.
together with his Daughter Stratonica, sang at a Feast before Mithridates King
of Asia and Pontus; the King en^^amed with the love of Stratonica, led her out
immediately to his Bed. The old man taking it heavily that the King had not so
much as taken notice of him. But when he awaked in the morning, and saw the
Tables in his house covered with Vessels of Silver and Gold, a number of
Servants, Boys and E^nuchs attending upon him, that offered him rich Garments,
and a Horse gallantly trapped standing at the door, as 'twas usual for the
King's Friends, he would fain have sled out of his House, supposing that all
this was but in mockery of him. The servants retained him, told him that the
large inheritance of a rich man lately dead was conferred upon him by the King,
that these were but as the first fruits of his rising fortune. Being at last
hardly won to give any credit to them, he put on the Purple Robe, mounted the
Horse, and as he was carried through the City, cried out All these are mine,
and to as many as derided him, This is no wonder, said he, but that (not able
to digest so great a joy) I do not throw stones at all that I meet.

8. Marcus Crassus the Grandfather of him that was slain in Parthia, when he
once saw an Ass eating of Thistles, was so delighted with that sight, that he
is reported that once to have laughed, whereas they write of him, that he was
never seen to have laughed in his whole life before; and thereupon had the
surname of Agelastus.

9. Artaxerxes King of Persia received the banished Themistocles with great
humanity, Plut. p. 126. in Themistocle.
and though he had done him so much mischief, was so overjoyed that he was come
to his Court, that he congratulated his own good fortune with his Friends, he
sacrificed to the Gods; afterward made a Royal Feast, and for extreme joy in
the night and in his sleep he was heard to cry out thrice, I have Themistocles
the Athenian.

10. Zeuxis Heracleotes the most excellent Painter of his age, Stradae proluf.
Acad. l. 3. prael. 4. p. 315. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 18. p. 174.
had drawn out in colors upon a Tablet an old woman, which he had expressed to
the life; when he had finished the piece, he set himself to consider of his
work, as it is usual for Artists to do; he was delighted with that ridiculous
aspect which he had framed: and while he intentively viewed that short, dry,
toothless, bloodless thing, with hollow eyes, hanging cheeks, her chin bearing
out, and her mouth bending inwards, her Nose fallen, and flowing at the end of
it, he fell into a sudden laughter, and that so violent, that his breath
failing, he died upon the place.

11. Diagoras the Rhodian had three young men to his Sons, Gell. noct. Attic.
l. 3. c. 15. p. 108. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 289.
all which he saw victorious in several masteries at the Olympic Games in one
and the same day, and publicly crowned; his Sons came and embraced their aged
Father, and each of them placed his wreath upon his head, at all which the old
man was so overjoyed, that overcome with an excess of delight, he sank down in
theiir Arms, and died.

Ptolomaeus Philometor had overcome Alexander King of Syria in Battle, Zuing.
vol. 2. l. 7. p. 492. Joseph. l. 13. c. 8. p.
but withal himself was so grievously wo^nded in that Fight, that for four days
together he lay without any manner of sense; when he was come to himself he was
presented with the head of Alexander, sent him by Zabdi^l the Arabian, which
when he had looked upon with a great deal of Joy, he himself immediately
expired.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 269. Lonic. Theatr. p. 289.
13. Sophocles the Son of Theophilus a Tragic Poet, died at ninety years of
age, after he had obtained nineteen Victories. They say that when he acted his
last Tragedy, and had gained the Palm, he was seized with so extraordinary a
joy, that he died in the midst of the congratulations of his Friends.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 492^
14. Pope Leo the Tenth, being certainly informed that Millain was recovered,
and the French ejected, through overmuch joy at the news he fell into a Fever
and died of it.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 492.
15. Anno 825, upon the death of the Duke of Spoleto, Lotharius the Emperor put
Adelardus Count of the Palace in his stead: and whereas he died of a Fever
within five months after his arrival, it pleased the Emperor to confer that
Dignity upon Mauringus Earl of Brixia, who was then famous for his Justice; the
Earl was no sooner certified of his new Dignity, but that he took his Bed, and
by his overmuch joy prevented the honor that was intended him, for he died
within a few days.

Plin. l. 7. c. 32. Laert. l. 1. p. 18.
16. Chilon the Lacedemonian, and the same who was reputed one of the seven wise
men of Greece, died at Pisa, says Hermippus, embracing a Son of his that was
newly returned victorious from the Olympic Games.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1324. Gell. noct. Act. l. 3. c. 15. p. 108.
17. Philippides a Comic Poet in Athens, being arrived to a great age, when in
the contest and trial of Poets, he (beyond all his hope) had the victory
adjudged to him, not able to bear that great joy it excited in him, he suddenly
fell down and died.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 268.
18. M. Iuventius Thalna Colleague of Tiberius Gracchus the Consul, being
sacrificing in Corsica, which he had newly subdued and subjected, he there
received Letters from Rome, that the Senate had decreed him supplications; he
read these Letters with great intentness, and a mist coming before his eyes, he
fell down to the ground stark dead before the fire as he sat. Now what can we
think but that he died with an excess of joy? See here a man fit to be trusted
with the raising of Numantia or Carthage.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 267, 268.
19. When the Romans were overcome by Hannibal at the Battle of Thrasymene, and
that the news of that calamity was brought to Rome, the anxious and solicitous
multitude ^locked to the Gates, as well men as women, to hear what became of
their Friends: various were the affections of enquirers according as they were
certified of the life or death of their Relations; but both the sorrow and joy
of the women exceeded that of the men. Here it was, that one woman meeting at
the Gate with her Son in safety, whom she had given up for dead, died in his
Arms as she embraced him. Another hearing, (though falsely) that her Son was
slain, kept her self within doors in great sorrow and perplexity, when
unexpectedly she saw him come in, this first sight of him made her joys swell
up to that height as to overtop life it self, Cause. H^^y Court. ^om. 3. Max.
19. p. 439. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 15. p. 108. Plut. de virtutib. malier.
p. 253. Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 12. p. 1324.
for she fell down and died.

20. Polycrite was an honorable Lady of the Island of Maxos, when her City was
besieged by the Ethreans, and menaced with all the calamities might be expected
from a Siege, she was entreated by the prime men thereof to undertake an
Embassage for the pacifying of troubles, which she willingly did, and being one
of the most beautiful women of her time, and a very good speaker, she had so
much power upon the Prince Diognetes, the General in this Siege, that she
disposed his heart to what she pleased, in such sort, that going forth in the
fear and confusion of all the people, she returned with peace and assurance of
quiet. This made them all to come out, to receive her at the City Gates with
loud acclamations: some throwing Flowers, others Garlands, and all rendering
thanks to her as their Sovereign Preserveress. She apprehended so much joy
therewith, that in the very instant she expired in her honors at the City
Gate: and instead of being carried to the Throne, was brought to her Tomb, with
the infinite sorrow of all her Country.

21. Cardanus in his fifth Book of Wisdom gives an instance of the danger of
this passion when it exceeds its due bounds, Burton's melanch. part. 1. 2. p.
117.
in a Smith of Millain, a Fellow Citizen of his, one Galeus de Rubeis, who
being highly commended for refinding of an instrument, called the Coclea,
heretofore made use of by Archimedes, out of extreme joy ran mad.

22. Wolfius relates of a Country Fellow, Burton's melanch. part. 1. 2. p. 182.
called Brunsellius, who being by chance at a Sermon, saw a woman fall off from
a Form half asleep, at which object most of the company laughed; but he for his
part was so much moved, that for three whole days after he did nothing but
laugh, by which means he was much weakened, and continued in an infirm state of
body for a long time after.

23. Archidamus the Spartan King, Xenoph. hist. Graec. l. 7. p. 620. Magiri
Polymnem. p. 1075.
being victorious, as soon as he had erected a Trophy, he immediately sent home
Demoteles to certify the greatness of the victory, in which, though there was
a very considerable number of the enemy slain, there fell not so much as one
man of the Spartans: When they of Sparta heard this, it is said of them, that
first Agesilaus and the ancient Ephori, and then all the body of the people
fell a weeping. So far are tears in common the expressions both of Joy and
Sorrow.

24. Ptolomeus Philadelphus had received the sacred Volumes of the Law of God,
Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 12. c. 2. p. 405.
newly brought out of Iudaea; and while he held them with great reverence in
his hands, praising God upon that account; all that were present made a joyful
acclamation, and the King himself was so joyed thereat, that he brake out into
tears. Nature (as it seems) having so ordered it, that the expressions of
sorrow should also be the followers of extraordinary Joys.

25. When Philip King of Macedon was overcome, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 8. p. 123.
Live. l. 33. p. 400.
and that all Greece was assembled to behold the Isthmian Games, T. Q.
Flaminius having caused silence to be made by the sound of the Trumpet, he
commanded these words to be proclaimed by the mouth of the Crier: The Senate
and people of Rome and Titus Quinctius Flaminius their General do give liberty
and immunity to all the Cities of Greece that were under the jurisdiction of
King Philip. At the hearing of this there was first a confounded silence
amongst the people, as if they had heard nothing. The Crier having repeated the
same words, they set up such a strong and universal shout of Joy, that it is
certain that the Birds that flew over their heads fell down amazed amongst
them. Livy says that the joy was greater than the minds of men were able to
comprehend; so that they scarce believed what they heard; they gazed upon one
another as if they thought themselves deluded by a dream. And the Games
afterward were so neglected, that no man's either mind or eye was intent upon
them. So far had this one joy preoccupied the sense of all other pleasures.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Passion of Grief, and how it has acted upon some men.
Cause. Treat. of passions. p. 55.
WHilst the great Genius of Physic, Hippocrates, drove away maladies by his
precepts, and almost snatched bodies out of the hands of death, one Antiphon
arose in Greece, who envious of his Glory, promised to do upon Souls, what the
other did on mortal members, and proposed the sublime invention which Plutarch
calls the Art of curing all Sadnesses, where we may truly say, he used more
vanity, promises and ostent of words, than he wrought effects. Certainly it
were to be wished that all ages which are abundant in miseries, should likewise
produce great comforts to sweeten the acerbities of humane life. Another Helena
were needful to mingle the divine drug of Nepenthe in the meat of so many
afflicted persons as the world affords; but as the expectation is vain, so
there are some sorrows that fall with that impetuous force upon souls, and
withal with that sudden surprisal, that they let in death to anticipate all the
hopes of recovery.

Knowl's Turk. hist. p. 706. Donat. hist. med. mirab. l. 3. c. 13. p. 187.
1. When the Turks came to raise the Siege of Buda, there was amongst the German
Captains a Nobleman called Ecckius Rayschachius; whose Son, a valiant young
Gentleman, having got out of the Army without his Father's knowledge, bare
himself so gallantly in sight against the Enemy in the sight of his Father, and
of the Army, that he was highly commended of all men, and especially of his
Father, who knew him not at all; yet before he could clear himself he was
compassed in by the Enemy, and valiantly fighting, slain. Rayschachichius
exceedingly moved with the death of so brave a man, ignorant how near it
touched himself, turning about to the other Captains, said, This worthy
Gentleman, whatsoever he be, is worthy of eternal commendation, and to be most
honorably buried by the whole Army. As the rest of the Captains were with like
compassion approving his speech, the dead body of the unfortunate Son rescued,
was presented to the most miserable Father, which caused all them that were
present to shed tears; but such a sudden and inward grief surprised the aged
Father, and struck so to his heart, that after he had stood a while speechless,
with his eyes set in his head, he suddenly fell down dead.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. p. 269. Herodot. tit. Homer. p. 572.
2. Homer had sailed out of Chios to Io, with a purpose to visit Athens: here it
was, that being old, he fell sick, and so remained upon the shore, where there
landed certain Fishermen, whom he asked if they had taken any thing? They
replied, what we caught, we left behind us; and what we could not catch we have
brought with us: meaning that when they could not catch any Fish, they had
lowsed themselves upon the Shore, killing what they took, and carrying with
them such as they could not find. When Homer was not able to solve this Riddle,
it is reported that he died with grief of mind. Yet Herodotus denies it, saying
that the Fishermenn themselves explained their Aenigma, and that Homer died of
sickness and disease.

3. Excessive was the sorrow of King Richard the Second, Fuller's holy State,
l. 1. c. 10. p. 22.
beseeming him neither as a King, Man or Christian, who so fervently loved Anna
of Bohemia his Queen, that when she died at Sheane in Sur^ey, he both cursed
the place, and also out of madness overthrew the whole House.

4. Vvipertus elected Bishop of Raceburg, Kornman. de mirac. vivor. p. 61.
Donat. hist. med. ^irab. l. 1. c. 1. p. 1.
went to Rome to receive the confirmation thereof from the Pope, where ^inding
himself neglected and rejected by him, upon the account of his youth; the next
night for very grief, and too near an apprehension thereof, all the Hair of his
Head was turned gray, whereupon he was received.

5. Hostratus the Friar resented that Book so ill, Bu^ton's mela^ch. part 1. 2.
p. 92.
which Reuclinus had writ against him under the name of Epistolae obscurorum
virorum, and took it so very much to the heart, that for grief he made himself
away.

6. Alexander a Prince of a most invincible courage, Plut. in Alex. p. 704.
Burton's melanch. part 1. 2. p 135. Q. Cart. Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. p. 384.
Justin. l. 12. p. 147.
after the death of his dear Ephestion, lay three days together upon the
ground, with an obstinate resolution to die with him, and thereupon would
neither eat, drink nor sleep, such was the excess of his grief, that he
commanded Battlements of Houses to be pulled down, Mules and Horses to have
their Manes shorn off, some thousands of common Soldiers to be slain, to attend
him in the other world, and the whole Nation of the Cusseans to be rooted out.

7. At Nancy in Lorrain, Burt. melan. part 1. 2. p. 156.
when Claudia Valesia (the Dukes Wife, and Sister to Henry the Second King of
France) deceased, the Temples for forty days were all shut up, no Prayers nor
Masses said, but only in the Room where she was. The Senators were all covered
with Mourning Blacks, and for a twelve Months space throughout the City, they
were forbid to sing or dance.

8. Roger that rich Bishop of Salisbury (the same that built the De Vizes,
Burton's melanch. part 1. 2. p. 156.
and diverse other strong Castles in this Kingdom) being spoiled of his Goods,
and thrown out of all his Castles, was so swallowed up with overmuch grief,
that he ran mad, and spoke and did he knew not what.

9. Upon Thursday the twenty fourth of March, Stowes Annals. p. 815.
1602, about two of the Clock in the Morning deceased Queen Elizabeth, at her
Manor of Richmond in Surrey, she then being aged seventy years, of which she
had reigned forty four, five Months and odd days. Her Corpse were privily
conveyed to White Hall, and there remained till the twenty eight of April
following, and was then buried at Westminster; at which time the City of
Westminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in the
Streets, Houses, Windows, Leads and Gutters, that came to see the Obsequie: and
when they beheld her Statue lying in Royal Robes, with a Crown upon the Head,
there was such a general sighing, groaning and weeping, as the like has not
been seen or known in the memory of man; neither does any History mention any
people, time or state, to make the like lamentation for the death of their
Sovereign.

10. Secundus the Philosopher had been many years absent from home, Kornman. de
mirac. mortuor. l. 4. c. 113. p. 47.
so that he was unknown to the Family by face, and upon his return he was very
desirous to make some experiment of the chastity of his Mother, he courted her
as a strange^; and so far prevailed that he was admitted to her Bed, where he
revealed to her who he was; at the hearing of which the Mother was so overborn
with shame and grief, that she gave up the Ghost.

11. Peter Alvarado the Governor of Guatimala married the Lady Beatrice Della
Culva, and he being dead by a mischance, P^rch. ^ilg. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 14. 1.
p. 1005.
his Wife abandoned her self to all the excesses of grief, and not only painted
her House with sorrows, black Livery, and abstained from meat and sleep, but in
a mad impiety said, God could now do her no greater evil. Soon after, anno
1582, happened an extraordinary inundation of waters, which on the sudden first
assailed the Governor's House, and caused this impotent and impatient Lady,
now to bethink her self of her devotion, and betake her to her Chapel, with
eleven of her Maids, where leaping on the Altar, and clasping about an Image,
the force of the water ruined the Chapel, and she with her Maids found their
death therein.

Speed's hist. p. 4^3. Chetwind. hist. collect. cent. 7. p. 205.
12. Gormo Father of one C^nute slain before Dublin, so exceedingly loved this
Son of his, that he swear to kill him that brought him news of his death, which
when Thira his Mother heard, she used this way to make it known to him, she
prepared Mourning Apparel, and laid aside all Princely State, which the old man
perceiving, he concluded his Son dead, and with excessive grief that he
conceived thereat, he speedily ended his days.

Chetwind. hist. c^llect. cent. 2. p. 49.
13. Cardanus relates of a man in Milan, who in sixty years having never been
without the Walls of the City; yet when the Duke hearing thereof, sent him a
peremptory command never to go out of the Gates during life: he that before had
no inclination to do so, died of very grief to be denied the liberty of doing
it.

Speed's hist. p. 379.
14. King E^helstan being jealous of Edwin his Brother, caused him to be put
into a little Pinnace, without tackling or Oars, one only Page accompanying of
him, that his death might be imputed to the Waves: the young Prince overcome
with the grief of this his Brother's unkindness, cast himself overboard
headlong into the Sea.

Speed's hist. p. 856.
15. When Queen Mary was informed of the loss of Calis in France, she was so
affected therewith, that she took no pleasure in any thing. She would often
say, that the loss of Calis was written in her heart, and might there be read
when her body should be opened: and indeed the grief she took thereupon
shortened her days; so that she but a while outlived that news that was so
unacceptable to her.

G^ab on. ^ol 2. p. 575.
16. Margaret, Daughter to James the Fourth King of Scotland, married to L^wis
the Dauphin of France, was of so nasty a complexion and stinking breath, that
her Husband after the first night loathed her company, for grief of which she
soon after died.

T^enchfield. hist. improved, p. 89.
17. Charles Duke of Burgundy being discomfited at the Battle of Nancy, passing
over a River, was overthrown by his Horse, and in that estate was assaulted by
a Gentleman, of whom he craved quarter, but the Gentleman being deaf, slew him
immediately: yet afterward when he knew whom he had slain, he died within few
days of grief and melancholy.

Knowl's T^rk ^ist. p. 919.
18. A^urath the sixth Emperor of the Turks at his first ascent to the Throne,
to free himself of Competitors, caused his five Brethren, Mustapha, Solomon,
Abd^lla, Osman, and Tzihanger to be all strangled in his presence. The Mother
of Solomon pierced through with the cruel death of her young Son, as a woman
overcome with grief and sorrow, struck her self to the heart with a Dagger, and
so died.

Knowl's hist. p. 330.
19. Amurath the Second having long lain before the Walls of Croja, and
assaulted it in vain, and being no way able either by force or ^lattery to
bring Scanderbeg to terms of submission or agreement, angry that his Presents
and Propositions were refused, he resolved to make a terrible assault upon
Croja from all Quarters, but this by the Christian Valor proving greater loss
to him than before: not able to behold the endless slaughter of his men, he
gave over the assault, and returned into his Camp as if he had been a man half
frantic, or distract of his wits; and there sat down in his Tent all that day
full of melancholy passions, sometimes violently pulling his hoary Beard and
white Locks, complaining of his hard and disastrous fortune, that he had lived
so long to see those days of disgrace, wherein all his ^ormer Glory and
triumphant Victories were obscured by one base Town of Epirus. His Bassas and
grave Counselors by long discourses sought to comfort him, but dark and heavy
conceits had so overwhelmed the melancholy old Tyrant, that nothing could
content his wayward mind, or revive his dying spirits; so that the little
remainder of natural heat which was left in his aged body, now oppressed and
almost extinguished with melancholy conceits, and his body it self dried up
with sorrow, he became sick for pure grief. Feeling his sickness daily to
increase, so that he could not longer live, lying upon a Pallet in his
Pavilion, he sadly complained to his Bassas, that the destinies had blemished
all the former course of his life with such an obscure death. That he who had
so often repressed the fury of the Hungarians, and almost brought to naught the
pride of the Grecians, together with their name, should now be enforced to give
up the Ghost, under the Walls of an obscure Castle (as he termed it) and that
in the sight of his contemptible enemy. Shortly after he became speechless, and
striving with the pangs of death half a day, he then expired. This was anno
1450, when he had lived eighty five years, and thereof reigned thirty.

20. Franciscus Foscarus, Folgus. Ex^ l. 5. c. 3. p. 616.
according to the manner of Venice, was elected Duke thereof, during his life,
and long did he govern that Republic with great prudence and justice; he had
also increased their Dominion in a small time, by the addition of Brixia,
Bergomum, Crema and Ravenna. When he was now arrived to the eighty fourth year
of his age, and the thirty fourth of his Dukedom, they accused his decrepit age
as a mighty impediment to the right administration of their Affairs, and
thereupon compelled him to depart from his Ducal Dignity, and give way to
another. This open and unreasonable injury struck the old man with so vehement
a grief, that he died thereof in a day or two.

CHAP. XIV. Of Desire, and what have been the Wishes of some Men, for
themselves, or upon their Enemies.
WE read of the Athenians, Reynold's T^eat. pass. c.
that they set up a Pillar, wherein they published him to be an Enemy of their
City who should bring Gold out of Media, as an instrument to corrupt them. If
once we see better things, we are wont not only to desire them, but to be
discontented with what we had before of our own. However, the greatest of men
have a wish or two to make; as appears by what follows.

Busbeq. Epist. 4. p. 236.
1. Solomon Emperor of the Turks, is said to have wished three things for
himself: That he might live to see the Mosque or Temple finished, which he had
begun in a glorious and most sumptuous manner; That he might finish the Repairs
of the ancient Aquaeducts, that thereby Constantinople might have a plentiful
and easy supply of water; And that he might get the City of Vienna into his
power. The two former he lived to see, but not himself the Master of Vienna,
which he used to call by no other name than his Infamy and Reproach.

2. The Emperor Hadrian being angry with the Egyptians, Busbeq. Epist. 3. p.
98.
wrote thus in a Letter of his, I wish nothing more to befall them, than that
^hey may feed upon their own Pullets, which how they hatch is a shame to speak.
Alluding to their way of hatching Chickens in Gran Cairo by putrefied Dung in a
Furnace.

S. Augustine used to wish, that he might have seen three things, Ciles^i.
opus. med. p. 121.
which were, Rome in its Glory, the Apostle Paul in the Pulpit; and Christ
Jesus in the Flesh.

Plut.
4. Eudoxus wished to know the nature of the Sun, upon that condition that he
should afterward be burnt to death in the body of it.

A. Gell. noct. l. 19. c. 2. p. 503. Heidseld. in sphing. c. 21, p. 507.
5. Philoxenus, whether he was a Glutton, as some say, or a Musician, as others,
is said to have wished his Neck as long as that of a Crane; that so he might
swallow his meat with the more delight, or send out his Notes with greater
variety, and more pleasing sound; although it is a question, whether if he had
had his wish, it would have helped him in either.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 187.
6. The Spartans wished to their Enemies, that they might be seized with an
humor of building, keep a Race of Horses, and that their Wives might be false
to their Beds.

7. The Cretans when they wished the worst might befall their worst Enemies,
Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2. p. 194.
that they could possibly wish to them, used to wish them this, that they might
be delighted with some evil custom.

Clark's mirror. c. 77. p. 349.
8. When King James came first to the public Library at Oxford, seeing the
little Chains wherewith the Books were fastened to their places, wished, that
if ever it should be his destiny to be made a prisoner, that Library might be
his prison, those Books his Fellow Prisoners, and those Chains his Fetters.

Herbert's Trav. l. 2. p. 213.
9. Cashan is a lovely City in Persia, extremely hot when the Sun is in Cancer;
but Scorpio rages there in no less violence (not that in the Zodiac) but real
stinging Scorpions, which in great numbers engender here. It is a little
Serpent, a finger long, but of great terror in the sting, inflaming such as
they prick with their inflamed Arrow so highly, that some die, none avoid
madness a whole day: and from hence grows that much used Persian Wish, or Curse
to them they are incensed against, May a Scorpion of Cashan sting thee.

Plut. in Alex. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 154.
10. Alexander the Great, when he had got into the Ocean with his Navy, he came
to an Island which he called Scillustis, others Psiltusis; where having landed,
he viewed as he could the Seacoasts, and considered the nature of that Sea;
which done, he sacrificed to the Gods, and prayed, That no mortal man after him
might ever pass further that way than he himself had done, and so returned back.

11. Pyrrhus the King of Epirus, Cael. Rhod. l. 7. c. 84. p. 318.
who next after Alexander the Great, was the most skilled in all military
Affairs; when he went to the Temples of the Gods to offer Sacrifices, it was
observed of him, that he never importuned the Gods about a more spacious
Empire, or a signal Victory over h^s Enemies; no nor about any increase of his
Glory, Riches, or any such thing, whereof most mortal men are so excessively
desirous: but all he asked of the Gods, was, that they would grant him good
health, as if in the enjoyment of this all other things would succeed the
better. And indeed, though Fortune should pour out all her Bounties into our
Bosoms, yet if health be absent, nothing of all these can much please or
delight us.

12. Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury, Syms. Chapter hist. l. 2. cent. 11. p.
357.
a man of great Learning, and in high favor with William the Conqueror; (as
Ranulphus writes of him) often wished to conclude his life either by a Fever
or Dysentery, because in these sicknesses the use of a man's tongue often
continues to the last breath. Having enjoyed his Prelacy nineteen years, he
died in the third year of King Rufus, and of a Fever as as he desired.

13. Critias, who was one of the thirty Tyrants in Athens, Plut. in Cimon. 484.
is said by himself to have wished for himself.

Divitias Scopadum, prolixe facta Cimonis,
Spartani palmas fortis Agesilai.
The Wealth of Scopas, Heart as Cimon's free,
And Great Agesilaus victory.
14. C. Caligula was one that was desirous of nothing so much as doing that
which was thought impossible to be done; Sutton. l. 4. c. 37. p. 187.
and therefore laid the foundations of Palaces on Piles where the Sea was most
raging and deep; he hewed Rocks of most hard Flint and Ragstones, Plains he
raised even with Mountains, and by digging down the tops of Hills, he levelled
them to an equality with the Plains. All these with incredible celerity, as
punishing the neglect or sloth of his Workmen with no less than death.

15. Augustus Caesar, Sueton. l. 2. c. 99. p. 118, 119.
as often as he heard of any person that had departed this life quietly, and
without those painful pangs that are usual toward death, his manner was to
pray unto the Gods, and desire of them, that he and his might have the like
Euthanasia; that was the word he used, by which he meant an easy passage, or
quiet death: and indeed he had that for which he had so often wished. For upon
the day wherein he died, enquiring often if there was yet any stir or tumult
abroad as touching him; he called for a Glass, and commanded the hair of his
head to be combed, and his jaws to be composed and set right, which did hang,
and were ready to fall for weakness. Then having admitted his Friends to come
to him, he asked them whether they thought he had acted well in this interlude
of life: and withal added this as a Plaudite, Now clap your hands, and all with
joy shout out. After this he dismissed them all; and whiles he questioned with
some that were new come from the City, concerning the Daughter of Drusus then
sick, suddenly amongst the kisses of Livia, and in these words he gave up the
Ghost, Live mindful of our wedlock, Livia, and so farewell.

16. Albertus Magnus five years before his death desired of God, Ch^^wind's
hist. collect. cent. 3. p. 88.
that he might forget all that he had learned in the studies of humanity, and
profane Authors; that he might give up himself entirely to devotion, and the
practice of piety.

The Lord Cords a French Commander, G^aston. ^ol. 2. p. 882.
so sore longed to gain Calice from the English, that he would commonly wish,
that he might lie seven years in Hell, so that Calis were in the possession of
the French.

^abian. ^ist. p. 216.
18. Aelfred King of the West Saxons, being naturally inclined ^o incontinency,
desired that God would send him such a Disease as might repress and hinder his
lust, but not unsit him for the managing the Affairs of his Kingdom: and he
accordingly had the Disease called the Ficus, the Hemorrhoids or Piles.

Pe^^l. melli^^. tom. 1. p. 48.
19. When Darius was informed that Sardis was set on ^ire by the Ionians and
Athenians, he contemned the Ionians, because he thought he might easily be
revenged of their Rebellion: but he called ^or a Bow, and shot up an Arrow
toward Heaven, and in so doing, O Jupiter, said he, grant it may come to pass,
that I may be avenged of the Atheninians. And so mortal a hatred did he
conceive against them, that whenever he sat down to eat, he had one of those
that ministered unto him, who was ordered to say, My Lord, remember the
Athenians.

Pe^^l. m^llto^. 2. p. 127.
20. When Augustus Caesar was fifty four years of age, he is said to have prayed
to the Gods, that he might have the valor of Scipio, the favor of Pompey, and
the fortune of Caius Caesar, Which, said he, is the overcomer in all great
matters.

CHAP. XII. Of Hope, how great some have entertained, and how some have been
disappointed in theirs.
THe Poet Hesiod tells us, that the miseries and calamities of mankind were
included in a great Tun, that Pandora took off the Lid of it, sent them abroad,
and they spread themselves in great quantities over all Lands and Seas: but
that at this time Hope only did remain behind, and slew not all abroad,
But undernea^h the upmost Brim and Ledge it still abode.
And this is that which is our principal Antidote, which keeps our hearts from
bursting under the pressure of evils; and that slattering mirror that gives us
a prospect of I know not what greater good.

^lut. in Al^xandro, p. 672. Falgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 7. p. 4^3.
1. When Alexander was resolved upon his Expedition into Persia, he parted his
Patrimony in Macedonia amongst his Friends: to one he gave a Field, to another
a Village, to a third a Town, and to a ^ourth a Port, and when on this manner
he had distributed his Revenues, and consigned them over to several persons by
Patent: What is it, O King, (said Perdiceas) that you have reserved for your
self? My Hopes, replied Alexander. Of those hopes then, said he, we who are
your followers will also be partak^rs. And thereupon refused that which the
King had before assured un^o him: and his example therein was followed by
diverse there present.

2. A certain Rhodian, (...). Apoth. l. 8. p. 171.
for his over freedom in speech, was cast by a Tyrant into a Cage, and there
kept up as a wild Beast, to his great pain and shame at once: for his Hands
were cut off, his Nostrils slit, and his Face deformed by several wounds upon
it. In this his extremity he was advised by some of his Friends, to shorten his
life by a voluntary abstinence from all food. But he rejected their counsel
with great indignation; and told them, while a man is alive, all things are to
be hoped for by him.

3 Aristippus a Socratick Philosopher, by shipwreck was cast upon the Rhodian
Shore, Laert. in Aristippo.
having lost all that he had, walking alone upon the Shore, he found certain
Geometrical Figures that were traced upon the Sands, upon sight of which he
returned to his company, and required them (with a cheerful countenance) to
hope the best: For, said he, even here I have met with the footsteps of men.

C. Marius was a man of obscure Parentage and Birth, Plut. Apot^ Reg. etc. p.
436.
and having merited commendation in military affairs, he purposed by that way
to advance himself in the State and Republic. And first he sought for the
place of the Aedileship; but he soon perceived that his hope in that matter was
altogeger frustrate. He therefore petitioned sor the minor Aedileship upon the
same day; but though he was refused in that also, yet he laid not his hope
aside, but was so far from despairing, that he gave out that for all this he
hoped to appear one day the chief and principal person in all that great City.
The same person being driven out of the City by Sylla, proscribed, and his head
set to sale for a great sum of money, when he being now in his sixth
Consulship, was compelled to wander up and down from place to place in great
hazards, and almost continual perils: he at this time chie^ly supported himself
with the hope he had in a kind of Oracle he had received, that told him he
should be Consul the seventh time. Nor did this hope of his prove in vain; for
by a strange turn of fortune in his Affairs, he was again received into the
City, and elected Consul therein.

5. C. Julius Caesar the Dictator, Zuing. T^eatr. vol. 11. l. 4. p. 2603.
after the Civil Wars were ended, had great things in his design, and which he
hoped to accomplish: he intended to make war with the Parthians, and hoped to
overcome; this done, his purpose was through Hircania, by the Caspian Sea and
Mount Caucasus, and by the way of Pontus to invade the Scythians; then having
conquered all the Nations about Germany, and Germany it self, to return through
France into Italy; and so to leave the Roman Empire on all sides surrounded
with the Sea. In the mean time while preparation was made for this Expidition,
he endeavored to dig through the Corinthian Isthmus. After this he had
determined to receive the Rivers Anien and Tiber in vast Ditches, and turning
them toward Circeium, to bring them near Tarracina into the Sea, that there
might be thence a secure and ready passage for Merchants to the City. Besides
this, he hoped to drain the Fens and Marish Grounds in Nomentana, and
thereabouts, and make them firm lands and pasture, capable of receiving many
thousands of Husbandmen; and withal, to make Havens in the Sea nearest to the
City, by framing Moles, to cleanse the foul and hazardous Shores of Ostia, and
to make Ports and Block-Houses and places of receipt of so great a number of
Ships as he thought might ply thereabouts.

Reynold's Treat. Passion. c. 18. p. 188.
6. The melancholy Searchers after the Philosophers Stone, never dote so much
upon their project, as then when it has deluded them; and never slatter
themselves with stronger hopes to be enriched by their art, than when it has
brought them unto Beggary.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Scoffing and Scornful Dispositions of some men, and how they
have been rewarded.
Trenchf. hist. improved. p. 24.
AT Boghar, a City of the Zagathian Tartars, there is a River which causes to
them that drink thereof a Worm in the Leg, which if not pulled out, or pared
away, procures a certain death to him that has it. The intemperate use of the
Tongue (though it be but a little member) has been, and ever will be the
occasion of drawing down danger and death upon the heads of inconsiderate
persons. Some men dig their Graves with their tongues, as effectually as others
do with their Teeth; and which is worst of all, not only their own, but others
also; while the petulant speeches and provocations of one man have involved
thousands in a destiny as undeserved as unexpected.

Speed's hist. p. 432. Baker's Chron. p. 44. Cause. Holy Court, Treat. of the
Passions, p. 118. Laeti compend. in period. German. c. 9.. 1. p. 254.
1. King William the First of England, when he was in years was very corpulent,
and by that means much distempered in his body. Once he had retired himself to
Roan in Normandy; upon that occasion the French King hearing of his Sickness,
scoffingly said, That he lay in Childbed of his great Belly: which so incensed
King William, that he swore by God's Resurrection and his Brightness (his usual
Oath) that as soon as he should be Churched of that Child, he would offer a
thousand Lights in France. And indeed he performed it; for he entered France in
Arms, and set many Towns and Corn Fields in fire.

Baker's Chron. p. 243. Speed's hist. p. 640.
2. Henry the Fifth King of England had sent his Ambassadors to France to
demand the surrender of that Crown; and to signify, that if he was denied, he
would endeavor to regain it by Fire and Sword. It Is said, that about that time
the Dauphin (who in the King of France's sickness managed the State) sent to
King Henry a Tun of Tennis Balls, in derision of this youth, as fitter to play
with them, than to manage Arms: which King Henry took in such scorn, that he
promised with an Oath it should not be long ere he would toss such Iron Balls
amongst them, that the best in France should not be able to hold a Racket to
return them. Nor was he worse than his word, as the Histories of that time do
manifest at large.

Plut. Zuing. Theatr. l. 4. vol. 2. p. 341.
3. Antigonus, a potent King of Macedonia, had lost one of his eyes: it fell out
on a time that Theocritus the Chian, was by some dragged along that he might
come before the King; his Friends, to comfort him, told him that no doubt but
he would experience the King's clemency and mercy, as soon as he should come
before his eyes: What then, said he, you tell me it is impossible I should be
saved; alluding to the King's misfortune. Antigonus being informed of this his
bitter, as well as unseasonable scoff, caused him to be slain, although he had
before sworn he would spare him.

4. Narses the Eunuch was of the Bedchamber to Justinius the Emperor; Zuing.
l. 4. vol. 2. p. 355. Burton's Melanch. part 1. 2. p. 143, 144. Heylen's Cosm.
p. 64.
and from a Seller of Paper and Books arrived to the honor to succeed the
famous Belisarius in the place of Generalissimo, after he had renowned himself
by a thousand gallant actions: at last, whether through envy or his ill
fortune, or the accusation of the people, he fell into the hatred of the
Emperor Justinius and his Empress, insomuch that the Emperor sent him Letters
full of disgrace and reproach; advising him also therein, that he should return
to the Spindle and Distaff. Narses was so incensed hereat, that he swore he
would weave them such a Web, as that they should not easily undo again: and
thereupon to revenge the injury he conceived to be done him, he called in the
Lombards to the invasion of the Roman Territories, which they had been long
desirous of, but had hitherto been restrained by himself; and was the occasion
of many miseries.

5. When the Flemmings revolted from Philip de Valois, Causs. in Treat. of the
Passions. p. 118.
they out of derision called him the found King, and advanced a great Cock on
their principal Standard; the device whereof, was, that when he should crow,
the found King should enter into their City. This so exasperated the great
courage of Philip, that he waged them war, gave them Battle, and defeated them
with such fury, that Froysard assures us, that of a huge Army of Rebels there
was not one left, who became not a Victime of his vengeance.

6. When Romulus had set up some part of the Walls of Rome, Lonicer* Theat. p.
365.
his Brother Remus in derision of his Brother's Works, and the lowness of those
his Fortifications, leaped over them: whereat Romulus was so incensed, that he
made his life the price of that which he supposed so great an insolence.

9. P. Scipio Nasica, Val. Max^ l. 7. c. 5. p. 204.
the same who being Consul decreed a war against Iugurth, who with most holy
hands received Mother Idaea passing from the Phrygian Seats to our Altars; who
oppressed both many and pestilent Seditions with the strength of his authority;
who for diverse years was the Prince of the Senate: this man when he was young
was a petitioner for the office of the Edileship, and as the manner of the
Candidates is, griping the hand of one who had hardened it with labor in the
Country, he jestingly asked him if he was accustomed to walk upon his Feet:
this scoff being heard by them that stood near, was carried amongst the people,
and was the cause of Scipio's repulse; for all the Rural Tribes judging they
were upbraided with poverty by him, discharged their anger upon him, in
refusing to give him their Votes.

8. Tigranes King of Armenia came against Lucullus with so great Forces,
Xiphil. in Pompeio. p. 1.
that when he saw the Romans marching up: by way of scorn and derision he said
to them about him, that if they came to make war they were to few, if as
Ambassadors they were to many; yet those few Romans so distressed him, and his
numerous Army, that he was glad to cut off his Tiara, and cast it away, lest
thereby he should be known in his flight: it was found by a Soldier, and
brought to Lucullus, who soon after took Tigranocer^a it self from him.

9. Monica afterward the Mother of S. Augustine, Full^r's Holy State. l. 1. c.
2. p. 5.
in her younger years began by degrees to sip and drink Wine; lesser draughts
by wedges widening her Throat for greater, till at last she could fetch off her
whole ones. Now it happened that a young Maid, formerly her partner in potting,
fell at variance with her, (and as malice when she shoots draws her Arrow to
the head) called her Toss-pot and Drunkard; whereupon Monica reformed her self,
and turned temperate. Thus bitter Taunts and Scoffs sometimes make wholesome
Physic; and the malice of Enemies performs the office of good will.

Camerar. oper. subcis. c^^^. 1. c. 48. p. 218.
10. A Roman Legate returning out of Asia, was carried in his Litter, and being
so met upon the way by a Herdsman of Venusina, the poor man ignorant who it was
that was so carried, asked by way of jest, if they carried a dead man? The
Legate was so offended herewith; that causing the Litter to be set down, he
made his servants with the Thongs wherewith his Litter was fastened, to beat
the fellow in such manner that he died under their hands.

B^rton's M^lanch. p ^t 1. 2. p. 143.
11. Vladislaus the Second King of Poland, and Peter Dunius Earl of Shrine,
having been late a hunting, were enforced to lodge in a poor Cottage. When they
went to Bed, Vladislaus told the Earl in jest, that his Lady lay softer with
the Abbot of Shrine, than they were this night likely to lie. The Earl not able
to contain, replied, Et tua cum Dabesso, And so does your Queen with Dabessus:
a a gallant young man in the Court whom Christina the Queen loved. Tetigit id
dictum Principis animum: These words struck so deep into the very heart of the
King, that for many months after he was extreme pensive and thoughtful: but
they were the Earl's utter undoing; for when Christina heard of it she
persecuted him to death.

S^^^on. l. 4. c. 56. p. 198, 199.
12. Cassius Cherea was the Tribune of the Pretorian Cohort under Caius
Caligula; and he being now far stepped into years, Caius was wont to flout and
frump in most opprobrious terms, scoffing at him as if he was a wanton and
effemi^ate person; so that when he came to him for the Watch Word, he would one
while give him Priapus, and at another, Venus. If at any time he came to him to
give him thanks, he would offer him his hand to kiss, framed and fashioned in
an obscene manner. These and other indignities were the occasion that Cassius
was the Foreman in that conspiracy against him which brought him his death, and
was the man who gave him the first blow upon the Neck with his Sword, which was
followed by Sabinus and others, till they had made an end of him with thirty
wounds.

Paraei hist. in. d^l. tom. 1. p. 394. Hi^odiand. 4. p. 223.
13. The Citizens of Alexandria, when the Emperor Bassi^nus Caracalla came
amongst them, taunted both him and his Mother-in-law Iulia with diverse stouting
and reproachful words; amongst others they called him Oedipus, and his Mother
they said was Iocasta; bitterly alluding to the incestuous marriage he had
made. The Emperor was extremely exasperated herewith: so that pretending he
would raise a Legion of Soldiers from amongst the Youth and Citizens of their
City, he set upon a mighty number of them; and his Soldiers slew the unarmed
Citizens with so great a cruelty, that the River Nilus was discolored with the
blood of them.

(...). 2. p. 273, 274.
14. Julian the Apostate took away the Revenues from the Churches, that so
neither the Teachers nor the taught might be provided for, adding also this
bitter and sarcastical scoff, that hereby he had better fitted the Christians
for the Kingdom of Heaven, since the Galilean their Master (so he called
Christ) had taught them, That bl^ssed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven. But the Justi^e of God soon repayd him; for not long after, wounded
by an unknown hand, he threw up his blood toward Heaven, saying, Vicisti
Galileae, O Galilean thou have overcome me.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Envious Nature and Disposition of some men.
PLutarch compares envious persons to cupping Glasses, which ever draw the
worst humors of the body to them: they are like unto Flies, which resort only
to the raw and corrupt parts of the body; or if they light on a sound part,
never leave blowing upon it till they have disposed it to putrefaction. When
Momus could find no fault with the face in the picture of Venus, he picked a
quarrel with her Slippers: and so these malevolent persons, when they cannot
blame the substance, will yet represent the circumstances of men's best actions
with prejudice. This black shadow is still observed to wait upon those that
have been the most illustrious for virtue, or remarkable for some kind of
perfection, and to excel in either has been made a crime unpardonable.

1. Cambyses King of Persia seeing his Brother Smerdis draw a stronger Bow than
any of the Soldiers in his Army was able to do, Herodot. l. 3. p. 137.
Sabes^ic. ^x. l. 9. c. 2. p. 479.
was so enflamed with Envy against him, that he caused him to be slain.

2. In the Reign of Tiberius Caesar there was a Portico at Rome that bowed
outward on one side very much; Xiphil. p. 85. in Tiberio. Magir. Polymn^m. 260.
a certain Architect undertook to set it right and straight: he underprop'd it
every way on the upper part, and bound it about with thick clothes, and the
skins and sleeces of Sheep, and then with the help of many Engines and a
multitude of hands, he restored it to its former uprightness, contrary to the
opinion of all men. Tiberius admired the fact, and envied the man; so that
though he gave him money, he caused his name to be unremembred in the Annals,
and afterward banished him the City. This famous Artificer afterward
presented himself in the presence of Tiberius, with a Glass he had privily
about him; and while he implored the pardon of Tiberius, he threw the Glass
against the Ground, which bruised and crushed together, but not broke, he
straight put again into its first form, hoping by this act to have gained his
good favor and Grace. But Tiberius his Envy with this also increased; so that
he caused him forthwith to be slain, adding that if this art of Malleable Glass
should be practiced, it would make Gold and Silver but cheap and inconsiderable
things; nor would he suffer his name to be put into the Records.

3. Maximianus the Tyrant, Causs. H. C. tom. 1. l. 2. p. 55.
through envy of the honors conferred on Constantine, and attributed to him by
the people, he contributed all that a desperate envy could invent, and a great
virtue surmount. He first made him a General of an Army, which he sent against
the Sarmatians (a people extremely furious) supposing he there should lose his
life. The young Prince went thither, returned victorious, leading along with
him the Barbarian King in Chains. It is added, that this direful Prince
(excited by a most ardent frenzy) in his return from this Battle, engaged him
in a perilous Encounter with a Lion, which he purposely had caused to be let
loose upon him. But Constantine victorious over Lions as well as men, slew this
fell Beast with his own hand, and impressed an incomparable opinion in the
minds of his Soldiers, which easily gave him passage to the Throne by the same
degrees which were prepared for his ruin.

4. Alexander the Great both envied and hated Perdiccas because he was warlike,
Aelian. va. hist. l. 12. c. 16. p. 310.
Lysimachus because he was skillful in the arts of a General, Seleucus because
he was of great courage; he was offended with the liberality of Antigonus, the
Imperial Dignity and Authority of Attalus, and the prosperous felicity and good
fortune of Ptolemaeus.

Diodor. Sic. Bibl. l. 17. p. 371, 372.
5. Alexander the Great being recovered of a wound he had received, made a great
feast for his Friends, amongst which was Coragus a Macedonian, a man of great
strength, and renowned for his valor, who being heated with wine challenged
Dioxippus the Athenian, a Wrestler, and who had been crowned for many
Victories: it was accepted, and the King himself appointed the day; many
thousands were met, and the two Champions came to the place, Alexander himself,
and the Macedonians with their Countryman, and the Grecians with their
Dioxippus naked, and armed only with a Club; Coragus armed at all points, being
at some distance from his Enemy, threw a Javelin at him, which the other nimbly
declined, then he sought to wound him with a long Spear, which the other brake
in pieces with his Club; hereupon he drew his Sword, but his nimble and strong
adversary leaped upon him, threw him to the ground, set his foot upon his Neck,
advanced his Club, and looked on the Spectators, as enquiring if he should
strike, when Alexander commanded to spare him: so the day ended with great
glory to Dioxippus. But the King departed, and from that day forward his mind
was alienated from the Victor; he fell also into the envy of the Court, and all
the Macedonians; who at a Feast privily put a gold Cup under his Seat, made a
feigned and public enquiry after it, and then pretended to find it with him, a
Concourse was about him, and the man afflicted with shame departed. When he
came to his Inn he sent a Letter to Alexander by his Friends, wherein he
related his innocence, and showed the envious Villainy had been used to him: and
that done, slew himself. Alexander upon notice of it lamented him dead; whom he
himself as well as others had envied while alive.

Lonicer. Theatr. p. 365. Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 15. p. 382.
6. H^^atia of Alexandria, the Daughter of Theon the Philosopher, had made such
progress in Learni^g, that she excelled all the Philosophers of her time, and
not only succeeded in the School of Plato, but also explained the Precepts and
Aphorisms of all sorts of Philosophers; so that a mighty confluence was made to
her by all such as were desirous to improve themselves in Philosophy: she came
into the knowledge and Courts of Princes, where ^he behaved her self with
singular modesty, and doubted not to present herself in public amongst the
assemblies of men, where by reason of her gravity and temperance of mind she
received by all sorts. Till at last the long suppressed flames of Envy began to
break forth, a number of malevolent and hot brained men, whereof Petrus of the
Church of Cesarea was the Leader, seized upon her in her return home, pull her
out of her Coach, carry her to the forementioned Church, where having stripped
her of her Clothes, they tare her flesh with sharp shells till she died, then
they pulled her in pieces, and carried her torn Limbs unto a place called
Cynaros, where they were burned. This deed was no small matter of infamy to
Cyrillus the Bishop, and to the whole Church of Alexandria.

7. Plato and Xenophon were contemporaries, Sabell. Ex. l. 6. c. 9.360.
both of them conversant in the same Studies of Socratick Wisdom, both eminent
persons in their time; but supposed not to be very clear of this malignant
humor of envy; in regard that though each of them did write much, and were
otherwise known to one another; yet they neither of them have so much as
mentioned the other in their writing.

8. Theodosius the younger was desirous to enlarge the City of Constantinople;
Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 123.
and to that purpose to take down a great part of the Wall, he committed the
management of this work to Cyrus the Prefect of the City, who with great
industry and celerity built up the Chersaean Wall that reached from Sea to Sea,
within the compass of sixty days. The people of the City who were well pleased
with the Work, and the Prefect's Expedition therein: cried aloud, Constantine
built it; and Cyrus had rebuilt it, For this only reason Cyrus became so hated,
suspected and envied by the Emperor, that he caused him unwillingly to be
shaven, and enter into Orders; and he was afterward Bishop of Smyrna.

9. Caius Caligula the Emperor was so possessed with that evil spirit of envy,
Sueton. l. 4. c. 35. p. 185.
that he took from the noblest personages in Rome, their ancient characters of
Honor, and Badges of their Houses: from Torquatus the Chain or Collar; from
Cincinnatus the curled Lock of Hair: and from Cn. Pompeius (an illustrious
person) the surname of Great, belonging to his Family. As for King Ptolemaeus
(when he had both sent for him out of his Realm, and also honorably
entertained him) he caused him to be slain on the sudden, for no other cause
but that as he entered into the Theater to behold the Shows and Games there
exhibited, he perceived him to have turned the eyes of all the people upon him
with the resplendent brightness of his purple Gown. All such as were handsome,
and had a thick head of Hair grown out unto a comely length, as they came in
his way he disfigured, causing them to be shaved on the hinder part of their
Heads. Esius Proculus (for his exceeding tall and portly personage, surnamed
Colosseros) he caused suddenly to be pulled down from the Scaffold where he
sat into the Lists, and matched with a Sword-Fencer, and afterward with one
armed at all points; and when he was victorious in both, he commanded him to be
pinnioned, and dressed in tattered clothes, to be led through the Streets, and
showed to the women, and at last to have his Throat cut. To conclude, there was
none of so base and abject a condition, nor of so mean estate, whose advantages
and good parts he did not deprave and malign.

10. We read of a rich man in Quintilian, Burton's melanch. part 1. 2. p. 94.
Quint^l. declam. 13.
that was possessed with this evil disease to that strange height and degree,
that he is said to have poisoned the Flowers in his Garden, for this end, that
his Neighbor's Bees might get no more Honey there.

11. When Richard the First, Burt^n's melanch. part 1. 2. p. 86.
and Philip of France were Fellow Soldiers together at the Siege of Acon in the
Holy Land; and Richard had approved himself to be the more valiant man,
insomuch that all men's eyes were fixed upon him, it so galled the heart of King
Philip, that he was scarce able to bear the Glory of King Richard, but cavilled
at all his proceedings, and fell at length to open defiance; nor could he
contain any longer, but out of very envy hasting home, he invaded his
Territories, and professed open war.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Modesty* and the Shame-faced Nature of some Men and Women.
PLutarch in his Book upon this argument has an excellent Similitude: That as
Thistles though noxious things in themselves, are usually signs of an excellent
ground wherein they grow: so Shamefacedness, though many times a weakness, and
betrayer of the mind, is yet generally an argument of a Soul ingenuously and
virtuously inclined. We may collect as much from many of the following
Examples; and pity those whose fate had been kinder, if their Faces had not
been altogether so tender.

1. A young Gentlewoman of Iapan being on her knees at the end of a Table,
Mandelslo's Travels, l. 2. p. 190. Vareni descriptio Regni Iaponiae, c. 14. p.
45.
wating on her Master in the Apartment of the Women; and overreaching her self
to take a Flagon that stood a little too far from her, she chanced to break
wind backwards, which she was so much ashamed of, that putting her Garment over
her head, she would by no means show her face after; but with an enraged
violence taking one of her Nibbles of her Breasts into her mouth, she bit it
off with such fury, that she died in the place.

Mandelslo's Travels. ib. Vareni descriptio Regni Iaponiae. ib.
2. In the same Country, anno 1639, there was a great Lord, who having had an
exact search made for all the young handsome Damsels in his Province to be
disposed into his Ladies service: amongst the rest there was one brought him
whom he was so taken with, that he made her his Concubine. She was the Daughter
of a poor Soldier's widow, who hoping to make her some advantage of her
Daughters good fortune, wrote her a large Letter, wherein she expressed her
necessitous condition, and how she was forced to sue to her for relief. While
the Daughter was reading this Letter, her Lord comes into the Room, when she
being ashamed to discover her Mother's poverty, endeavors to hide the Letter
from him, yet could she not convey it away so, but that he perceived it. The
disorder he observed in her countenance made him suspect something of design;
so that he pressed her to show him the Letter: but the more importunate he was,
the more unwilling was she to satisfy him. And perceiving there was no way to
avoid it, she thrust it into her mouth with such precipitation, that thinking
to swallow it down, it choked her. This so incensed the Lord, that he
immediately commanded her Throat to be cut, whereby they only discovered the
Mother's poverty, and the Daughter's innocence. He was so moved thereat, that
he could not forbear expressing it by tears; and it being not in his power to
make any other demonstration of his affection to the deceased, he sent for the
Mother, who was maintained amongst his other Ladies, at the time we spoke of,
with all imaginable respect.

3. In the speech which Cyrus made to his Sons a little before his death,
Xenoph. l. 8.
we read this, If any of you, says he, desire to take me by the hand, or to
see my eyes, let him come so long as I breath: but after I am dead, and shall
be covered, I require you my Sons, that my body be not uncovered, nor looked
upon by you or any other person.

4. Lucius Crassus, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 113.
when according to the custom of all Candidates, he was compelled to go about
the Forum, as a Suppliant to the people, he could never be brought to do it in
the presence of Q. Scaevola, a grave wise man and his Father-in-law; and
therefore he besought him to leave him, while he was about a foolish business,
having more reverence to his Dignity and presence, than he had respect to his
white Gown; in which was the custom for them to appear, who were suitors to the
people for any office in the Commonwealth.

5. Johannes Baptista Lignamineus Bishop of Concordia, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p.
88.
being sent by his Brother Francis Bishop of Ferrara to Venice, was present at
that Feast, whereat the Duke entertains the whole Nobility four times a year:
here it was, that out of modesty retaining too long the burden of his Belly, he
fell into a grievous disease, of which he also died, and was buried at Ferrara.

6. Ambassadors were sent to Rome from the Cities of Greece, Fulgos. l. 8. c.
1. p. 944.
to complain of injuries done them by Philip King of Macedon; and when the
Affair was discussed in the Senate betwixt Demetrius the Son of Philip and the
Ambassadors: forasmuch as Demetrius seemed to have no way of defense for so
many defaults as were objected against his Father with truth enough, as also
because out of Shamefacedness he exceedingly blushed; the Senate of Rome moved
with the Modesty of Demetrius, acquitted both him and his Father of the
Accusations.

7. Certain Fishermen of Coos drawing up their Nets, Plut. paral. p. 80. in
Solon. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 1. p. 100.
some Milesian Strangers agreed with them for their Draught, whatsoever it
should prove: it fell out that they drew up a Table of Gold, whereupon a
contest grew betwixt the Fishermen and the Buyers: and at last improved into a
War betwixt both the Cities, in favor of their Citizens. At last it was
resolved to consult the Oracle of Apollo, who answered they should send the
Table to that man whom they thought the wisest; whereupon it was sent to Thales
the Milesian: Thales sent it to Bias, saying he was wiser than himself; Bias
sent it to another as wiser than he, and so it was posted from one to one, till
such time as it returned to Thales again, who at length sent it from Miletum to
Thebes to be consecrate to the Ismenian Apollo.

8. The Emperor Maximilian, Camerar. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 33. p. 160.
Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 374. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 15. c. 10. p. 400.
Causs. H.C. tom. 1. l. 2. p. 42, 43. Schenck. obs. med. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 137.
Polyen. l. 3. Stratag. Purch. pilg. l. 5. c. 17. p. 379.
the first of that name, forbade expressly that his naked body should be seen
after he was dead. He was the modestest of all Mortals; none of his servants
ever saw him obey the necessity of nature, nor but few Physicians his Urine.

9. The Milesian Virgins were in times past taken with a strange Distemper, of
which the cause could not then be found out; for all of them had a desire of
death, and a furious itch of strangling themselves: many finished their days
this way in private: neither the prayers nor tears of their Parents, or the
consolation of their Friends prevailed any thing; but being more subtle and
witty than those that were set to observe them, they daily thus died by their
own hands. It was therefore thought that this dreadful thing came to pass by
the express will of the Gods, and was therefore greater than could be provided
against by humane industry. Till at last, according to the advice of a wise
man, the Council set forth this Edict, That every such Virgin, as from
thenceforth should lay violent hands upon her self, should, dead, as she was,
be carried stark naked along the Marketplace. By which means not only they
were restrained from killing themselves, but also their desire of dying was
utterly extinguished. A strange thing, that those who trembled not at death,
the most formidable of all things, should yet (though an innate modesty) not be
able to conceive in their minds, much l^ss endure a wrong and reproach to that
modesty, though dead.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 89. Olaus magnus in l. 5. c. 18. p. 99.
10. Alvilda the beaut^ful Daughter of Suiardus King of the Goths, is said to be
of so great modesty, that usually covering her face with her Veil, she suffered
it not to be s^en of any man.

Baker's Chron. p. 287.
11. King Henry the Sixth of England was so modest, that when in a Christmas, a
show of women was presented before him with their naked Breasts laid out, he
presently departed, saying, Fie, fie, for shame;
Forsooth you be to blame.


Val. Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 113.
12. One of the Athenians of decrepit Age came into the Theater at Athens, to
behold the Plays; and when none of the Citizens received him into any Seat, by
chance he came by the place where sat the Lacedemonian Ambassadors; who
(moved with the age of the man, in reverence to his years and hoary hairs) rose
up, and placed him in an honorable Seat amongst them; which when the people
beheld, with a loud applause approved the modesty of another City. At which it
is reported, that one of the Ambassadors should say, It appears that the
Athenians do understand what is ^it to be done, but withal they neglect the
doing of it.

Laert. l. 2. p. 60, 61. Plin. l. 7. c. 53, p. 185. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 12. p.
1325.
13. Diodorus Cronus, abiding in the Court of Ptolemaeus Soter, had some Logic
Questions and Fallacies propounded to him by Stilpon, which when he could not
answer upon the sudden, the King reproached him both for that and other things;
he then also heard himself called Cronus by way of jeer and abuse; whereupon he
rose from the Feast: and when he had wrote an Oration upon that question
whereat he had been most stumbled, he died through an excess of modesty and
shame.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 112.
14, C. Terentius Varro had almost ruined the Republic by his rash Fight with
Hannibal at Cannas; but the same man when his Dictatorship was proffered him
both by the Senate and people, did absolutely refuse it: by the modesty of
which act of his he seemed to redeem his former miscarriage, and caused men to
transfer that calamity to the anger of the Gods; but to impute his modesty to
himself.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 113.
15. C. Julius Caesar assaulted in the Senate by many Swords; and having
received by the hands of the Parricides twenty three wounds upon his body; yet
even in death it self had a respect to modesty, for he pulled down his Gown on
both sides with his hand, that so he might fall the more decently.

Fulgo^. l. 4. c. 5. p. 514.
16. Cassander gave command for the slaying of Olympias the Mother of Alexander
the Great, which so soon as the Executioner had acquainted her with, she took
special care so to wrap up her self in her clothes, that when she should fall
no part of her body might be ^een uncovered, but what did become the modesty of
a Matron. And thus died the Wife of Panthcus the Lacedemonian, when ordered to
be slain by ^tol^maeus King of Egypt.

17. Michael Emperor of Constantinople, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 5. p. 515.
having been ever victorious in war, yet being once beaten in Battle by the
Bulgarians, was so exceedingly ashamed of that his disgrace, that in mere
modesty he resigned up the Empire, and b^took himself to a private and solitary
life for the remainder of his days.

18. That was a modesty worthy of eternal praise in Godfrey of Bulloign:
Fulgos. l. 4. c. 5. p. 52^.
by the universal consent of the whole Army he was saluted King of Jerusalem,
upon the taking of it out of the hands of the Saracens; there was also brought
him a Crown of Gold, sparkling with Jewels to set upon his head, but he put it
by, saying, it was most unsit for him who was a mortal man, a servant and a
sinner to be there crowned with Gems and Gold, where Christ the Son of God, who
made Heaven and Earth, was crowned with Thorns.

19. M. Scaurus was the Light and Glory of his Country, Val. Max. l. 5. c. 8.
p. 15^.
he (at such time as the Cimbrians had beat the Romans at the River Athesis,
and that his Son was amongst them, who ^led toward the City) sent his Son this
word, that he should much more willingly meet with his Bones after he had been
killed in Fight, than to see him guilty of such horrible cowardice in flight.
And therefore that if he had any kind of modesty remaining in him, degenerate
Son as he was, he should shun the sight of his displeased Father: for the
memory of his own youth did admonish him what a kind of Son M. Scaurus should
esteem of, or despise. Upon this news from the Father, the Son's modesty was
such, that not presuming to show himself in his sight, he was constrained to be
more valiant against himself, than the Enemy, and slew himself with his own
Sword.

20. Cornelius a Senator, Senec. de con^tant. C^^s^. H. C. tom. 1. l. 1. p. 47,
48.
shed many tears in a full Senate when Corbulo called him bald Ostridge: Seneca
admireth that such a man, who in all things else had showed himself so most
courageously opposite against other injuries, lost his constancy for one
ridiculous saying, which might have been smothered in laughter: but this blow
was rather given him by imagination, and a deep app^e^ension of shame, than by
the tongue of his Enemy.

21. Archytas did ever preserve a singular modesty in his speech, Aelian. var.
hist. l. 14. c. 19. p. 406.
as well as in all other his behavior, he shunned all kind of obscenity in
words; and when there was a necessity sometimes of speaking more absurdly, he
was ever silent, he wrote upon the Wall what should have been said; but he
himself could never be persuaded to pronounce it.

22. We read of diverse who (through modesty and fear) when they were to speak
publicly, Donat. hist. mirab l. 3. c. 13. p. 188.
have been so disappointed, that they were fain to hold their tongues. Thus
Cicero writes of Curio, that being to plead in a cause before the Senate, he
utterly forgot what to say. Also Theophrastus being to speak before the people
of Athens, was on the sudden so deprived of memory, that he remained silent.
The same happened to the famous Demosthenes in the presence of King Philip: to
Herodes A^ticus before M. Amonius, and to Lysias the Sophist, being to make an
Oration to Severus the Emperor. Nor are we ignorant that the like misfortune
has befallen diverse excellent persons in our times: and amongst others to
Bartholomaeus Sozzinus, who went from Rome in the name of Pope Alexander, to
congratulate the Republic of Siena, but was not able to speak what he had
premeditated.

Causs. Treat. of passions, p. 82.
23. Martia Daughter of Varro was one of the rarest wits in her time, was
skillful in all Arts; but in Painting she had a peculiar excellency,
notwithstanding which, she could never be drawn to paint a man naked, lest she
might offend against the rules of Modesty.

Burton's melanch. part. 1. 2. p. 92, 93.
24. A grave and learned Minister and Ordinary Preacher at Alcmar in Holland,
was one day as he walked in the Fields for his recreation, suddenly taken with
a Lask, or Looseness, and thereupon compelled to retire to the next Ditch: but
being surprised at unawares by some Gentlewomen of his Parish, wandering that
way, he was so abashed that he did never after show his head in public, or
come into the Pulpit, but pined away with melancholy.

CHAP. XIX. Of Impudence, and the Shameless Behavior of diverse Persons.
AS many are deterred from some kind of praiseworthy Actions, through a
natural Modesty and Bashfulness that attends them: so on the other side some
persons of evil inclinations are by the same means restrained from dishonest
and unseemly things. but when once the Soul is deserted of this Guardian, and
(as I may call it) a kind of Tutelar Angel to it, there is nothing so uncomely
or justly reprovable, but the man of a Brazen Forehead will adventure upon.

Full. hist. of Univ. of Cambridge, p. 64.
1. This year 1407, says Doctor Fuller, a strange accident (if true) happened;
take it as an Oxford Antiquary is pleased to relate it to us: One John
Argentine a Scholar of Oxferd came, and challenged the whole University of
Cambridge to dispute with him, What his fortune in this immodest attempt was,
is not remembered, nor himself after found advanced, either in Church or
Commonwealth. Also in 1531, and the twenty fourth of King Henry the Eight,
came two Oxford men, George Threckmorton and John Aschwell to Cambridge,
challenging all that University to dispute with them on these Questions, Id.
ibid. p. 105.
An Ius Civil sit praestantius Medicina?
An Mulier morti condemnata, and bis suspensa,
ruptis laqueis, tertio suspendi debeat?
Five Cambridge-men undertook the Disputation, viz. John Redman, Nicolas
Ridley, John Rokesby, Elizaeus Price and Grissith Tregarn, repairing to the
School, these Disputants so pressed Throckmorton, that finding him to fail,
they followed their advantage, and would never suffer him to recover himself.
Wherefore Aschwell his partner, who was to answer on the second Question,
declined it, by dissembling himself sick; who, had he not been sick of a
conceited soul, had never come thither on that occasion.

H^^^t's T^^^els, p. 172.
2. A Sultan's Wife, (or Concubine if you please to ^all her) having ^ed too
high, in a lust^ul Bravado petitioned the King (that was Sha Abbas) of Persia
for help; her good man proving too weak to conquer her, a dangerous Impudence!
the King finds it to reflect upon himself, old at that time, and Master of four
thousand Concubines: he promises her a present satisfaction; he calls his
Physicians, and when Phlebotomy was held too mean a remedy, they give an
Assinego an opiate lustful potion, which enrages the Beast, who by a forced
connection basely glutted her, and withal deprived her of her life.

3. Philip Melancthon had given unto him many pieces of ancient Coin in Silver
and Gold, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 89.
diverse of which he used to part with to such as came to view them. One time he
had got together a great heap of them, which for the Impression, inscriptions
and Images were most pleasing to him* These he showed to a Foreigner that came
to visit him, and perceiving that he was much delighted with the contemplation
and sight of them, he bade him choose out one or two of those he was most taken
with, and did most chiefly desire: I desire them all, said the Stranger. Now
although Philip was offended with so immodest and impudent a desire, yet he
parted with them all, that he might satisfy the covetousness of a Shameless
Spectator.

C. Caligula the Roman Emperor did increase the immanity of his Actions,
Sueton. l. 4. *29. p. 182.
by the atrocity of his words. He used to say that there was nothing in his
nature that he did so much approve of, and for which he esteemed himself so
praiseworthy, as his Shamelesness.

5. The Mosynaei, Diodor. Sicul. l. 14.
a people in Pontus, used to lie with their women in the broad and open sight
of the day, and in the presence of as many as would make themselves the
Spectators of such a Scene of Immodesty.

6. C. Fimbria was a man of a profligate Boldness and Impudence, Zuing. Theatr.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 89.
and ready upon all occasions for any mischievous design. He slew Crassus: and
in the Funerals of Caius Marius, he procured that Q. Scaevola, a worthy and
most religious person, should be wounded; and when he understood that the
weapon had not made a deep entrance into his body, he appointed him a day
wherein he would accuse him before the people. All men admired whereof he would
accuse the Chief Priest, and the most worthy Citizen amongst them, expecting to
hear his crime, he said he accused him that he had not received the whole Sword
into his body.

7. It was concluded by Richard the Third (then Protector) and his Council,
Stowes Annals, p. 453, 454.
that Doctor Shaw should in a Sermon at Pauls-Cross signify to the people,
that neither King Edward himself, nor the Duke of Clarence were lawfully
begotten, nor the children of the Duke of York but begotten in adultery upon
the Duchess their Mother. And also that the Lady Lucy was verily the Wife of
King Edward, and so the Prince and the rest of the King's Children were all
Bastards. Accordingly this shameless Doctor next Sunday took for his Text,
Bastard Slips shall not take deep root: and thence proceeded as he was
directed. It was also ordered, that the Protector should come in as by
accident, when he was to say these words following, But the Lord Protector, the
very noble Prince, the special pattern of Knightly Prowess, as well in all
Princely Behavior, as in the lineaments and favor of his visage represents
the very face of the noble Duke his Father: this is the Father's own figure,
this is his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the very sure
undoubted Image, the plain express likeness of that noble Duke. But it fell
out, that through overmuch haste he had spoken all this before the Protector
came in; yet beholding him coming, he suddenly left the matter in hand, and
without any deduction thereto, out of all order and frame he began to repeat
those words again: This is the very noble Prince; and soon. But the people were
so far from crying King Richard, that they stood as if they had been turned
into stones, for wonder of this shameful Sermon. But the Preacher that had so
little shame at the present, had enough of it after; for Sermon ended, he gate
him home, and never after durst look out, but kept him out of sight like an
Owl: and enquiring of an old Friend what people talked of him, he was answered,
that every mouth spoke him much shame; which so struck him to the heart, that
within few days after he withered and consumed away.

Heidfeld. in Sphin 3. c. 34. p. 849.
8. The Argive women fell into a general madness; the men in this extremity sent
to Melampus a Physician, desiring that he would undertake the cure of that
strange Disease: the Physician said he would undertake the cure, but withal
demanded one half of the Kingdom for himself, as soon as he had completed it.
The Argives refused these hard conditions; but the Frenzy of their Wives
continuing, they again sent unto him; but then this impudent Physician blushed
not to require of them over and besides, a third part of the Kingdom for his
Brother; which insolent terms they were constrained to yield to in this their
perplexity.

Pezel. mellific. hist. tom. 2. p. 200, 201.
9. L. Antoninus Commodus the Emperor was of that impudent and shameless
Behavior, that he doubted not to sit and drink in the very Senate House, and
in presence of the Senators clothed in women's apparel, and renouncing his own
name, he called himself Hercules, and the Son of Jupiter.

Gull. Malmsb. p. 163.
10. Walter, Bishop of Hereford, in the days of William the Conqueror,
attempting to force the chastity of a woman (who being a Sempstross, was out of
pretense of cutting out work brought up into his Chamber) was by her with her
Scissars thrust into the Belly, with which he died.

Luther. colloq. men's. p. 151.
11. Luther relates, that Carolastad was promoted Doctor of Divinity eight years
before he had any of the Bible; and that afterward conferring the degree of
Doctor on one at Wittenburg, he made this speech, Here I stand and do promote
this man; and I know I do not rightly therein, and that thereby I do commit a
mortal sin; but I do it for the gain of two Gilders, which I get by him.

Bruson. facetiar. l. 3. c. 57. p. 255.
12. Demochares came with others as the Athenian Ambassador to King Philip of
Macedon, who gave them a gracious audience: and at the conclusion thereof, Tell
me, said the King, you Athenian Ambassadors, wherein it is that I may gratify
the Athenians? Demochares, who had an insolent tongue, immediately replied, If,
said he, thou will hang thy self. Philip over-passed so great an impudence; and
having dismissed him, he said to the rest, You may tell the Athenians, that
they are much the prouder persons who cannot forbear to speak such things, than
they who can patiently receive them.

Plut. Moral. l. de p. 167.
13. There was one, who being of that mind, that there was nothing so honest as
to crave and receive, begged of Archelaus King of Macedon (as he sat at
Supper) that Cup of Gold, out of which the King himself drank; the King called
unto his Page that waited on his Trencher, and commanded him to give the said
Cup unto Euripides who sat at the Board, and withal casting his eye wistly
upon the impudent person who had craved it: As for you, Sir, said he, you are
worthy for your asking to go without, but Euripides deserves to have, though
he asks not.

CHAP. XX. Of Jealousy, and how strangely some have been affected with it.
BOnaventure sitting at a Table, and looking exceeding earnestly upon a
beautiful woman there present, was asked by her Husband why he so gazed? He
answered, that he admired at the excellency of the Creator, by contemplating
the beauty of the creature; and that if mortals were so amiable, how lovely
should we be at the Resurrection? This was an example, says Boschier, that was
rather to be admired than imitated, suitable to the Golden Age, and not this
present Iron Age of the World, wherein Jealousy may be compared to the Indian
Arrows, so envenomed, that if they prick the skin it is very dangerous, but if
they draw blod, it is irrecoverably deadly: the first motions that arise from
this Root of Bitterness have their evil effects; but where the Disease is
improved, it empoysons all our comforts, and throws us headlong into the most
tragical resolutions.

1. Iustina was the fairest and most beautiful Lady of her time that was to be
found in the whole City of Rome; Camerar. oper subcis. l. 1. c. 53. p. 236.
she was married to a rich man, but hair-brained and furious as might be; he
suspected her to have small care of her honor, upon no other ground than that
he beheld her so excellent, and so perfectly beautiful. One day as she stooped
down to pull off her Shoe, the cruel Wretch seized with a furious fit of
Jealousy, and discovering her wonderful white Neck all open, suddenly drew his
Sword, and at one blow severed it from her Shoulders.

2. Jane Queen of Spain, Camerar. oper. subcis. cent. 2. c. 34. p. 146.
Burton's melanch. part 3. 3. p. 555.
Mother to the Emperor Charles the Fifth and Ferdinand, was so extremely
jealous of King Philip her Husband, that she suffered him to be in no rest or
quiet, but incessantly so afflicted him, that it was concluded she shortened
his days, and withal brought her self to that weakness of mind, that she lost
all judgment to discern of any matters that were propounded to her.

3. Phanus had a Wife whose virtue he held somewhat suspected, Erasm. Adag. p.
363. I. Rovis. Te^t. officia l. 5. c. 61. p. 609. Bruson. facetiar. l. 4. c. 1.
p. 259
and to prevent her Adulteries, he caused the Gate of his House to be so made,
that at the opening thereof it should make a great noise, with which it could
not be opened: but the unchaste woman received an Adulterer into her Bosom, by
untiling the Roof of the House, which being known to the Neighbors, it became
Proverbial, The Gate of Phanus; so true is that, where jealousy closes one
door, it opens two.

4. Johannes Fagubiensis was by nature exceeding jealous, Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 81.
and he found out a ^ubtlety most worthy of a jealous Coxcomb, for he caused
himself to be gelded, with this design, that if from thenceforth his Wife
should conceive, she might be palpably convinced of her dishonesty.

5. When Xerxes had been shamefully beaten by the Greeks, Rawleigh's hist.
world, part 1. l. 3. c. 6. 11. p. 63. H^rodot. l. 9. p. 553. Din. th. memorab.
l. 5. p. 371.
he lay at Sardis, and there gave himself over to the love of the Wife of his
own Brother Masistes, but ^uffering a repulse by her virtue, married his own
Son Darius to the Daughter of this woman called Artaynta, hoping by that means
to find occasion of such Familiarities as might work his desire. But whether
the Mother did still reject him, or the Beauty of the Daughter allure him, he
soon after fell in love with his own Son's Wife. This young Lady having once
desired the King to give her the Garment which he then wore, being wrought by
his own Wife, caused the Queen Amestris to be jealous of her Husband's
conversation with her, which she imputed not so much to the beauty of the
Daughter, as to the subtlety of the Mother, against whom thereupon she
conceived an extreme hatred. Therefore at a Royal Feast when the custom was
that the King should grant her request, she craved that the wife of Masistes
might be given to her disposal; the barbarous King granted what she desired,
and sending for his Brother, persuaded him to put away the Wife he now had, and
to take one of his Daughters in her stead. Masistes refused, and after his
being reviled and threatened by Xerxes, he returned home, where he found his
Wife most butcherly mangled by Amestris the Queen, who had caused her Nose,
Lips, Ears, Tongue and Breasts to be cut off, and cast unto the Dogs.

Cael. Rhod. Antiq. ^ect. l. 18. c. 18. p. 848. Plut. in Themistocle. p. 125.
6. Of all the Barbarians the Persians are said to be most jealous, keeping up
with great strickness, not only their Wives, but also their Concubines and
Slaves; so that if they go abroad, they are carried in a close Litter. This was
not unknown to Themistocles; so that by this means he was safely and
unperceived conveyed to the Persian Court, through the midst of the Persians
themselves, to whom he had been so deadly an Enemy.

Lon. Theatr. p. 483, 484.
7. A rich man of Basil fell into a cruel jealousy of his Wife, a virtuous
person, upon this slight occasion, he had thrown off a pair of silk Garters,
because they were grown old, and as he thought, no longer fit for his wear, his
Wife took them up, and in his presence gave them to a servant who chanced then
to be present. The servant thankfully received them, and fitted them to his
Legs. Upon which the jealous Husband thought all that was ill of his Wife, and
the Devil increasing his unjust suspicion, upon a Sunday while the rest of his
Family were at Church, he rushes upon his Wif^ with his drawn Sword, accuses
her of Adultery, and without hearing her reply, immediately slew her. The
murder was scarce committed, when repenting of what he had done, he was seized
with such extremity of sorrow, that he grew weary of his life; he therefore
wrote down in a schedule, that by the instigation of Satan, moved with false
suspicions, he had murdered his innocent Wife, and having tied this Note to his
Left Arm, he threw himself headlong from the top of his House into the Street,
by which ^all he died.

Knowl's Turk. hist. p. 557.
8. Ionuses a great Bassa of the Turks, upon an overthrow of the Christians,
beheld amongst other Captives then taken the Lady Manto, a most beautiful
Greek, as much surpassing all other the companions of her misfortune in
loveliness, as the Sun does the lesser Stars. Ionuses with this one view was
himself taken prisoner, and finding her outward perfections no less graced with
inward virtues, and her honorable mind answerable to her rare ^eatures: he
took her to his Wife, honoring her far above all the rest of his Wives and
Concubines; and she again in all dutiful Loyalty, seeking to please him: for a
space she lived in all worldly felicity and bliss, not much inferior to one of
the great Sultanesses. But not long after, the Bassa more amorous of her person
than secured in her virtues; and aster the manner of sensual men, still fearing
lest that which so much pleased himself, gave no less contentment to others
also, began to have her in distrust, although he saw no great cause more than
his own conceit, not grounded upon any her evil demeanor, but upon the excess
of his own liking, which mad humor of it self still more and more increasing
in him, he became so froward and imperious, that nothing she could say or do
could now so please to content him, but he still thought some one or other to
be partakers with him. Thus he tormented himself and her with his own
passionate distrust: until at length the fair Lady grieved to see her self thus
without cause suspected, and wearied with the insolent pride of her peevish
Husband, determined secretly to depart from him, and so return again into her
own Country. Her purpose she discovered to one of her Eunuchs, to whom she had
also delivered certain Letters, to be by him conveyed unto such of her Friends,
whose help she was to use in her intended slight. These Letters the false
Eunuch opened, and so for the more clear manifestration of the matter,
delivered them unto the Bassa his Master, who therewith enraged, and calling
her unto him, forthwith in his fury with a Dagger stabbed her to the heart, and
slew her, and so together with the death of his love, cured himself of so
tormenting a jealousy.

9. Leontius an Athenian Philosopher had a Daughter called Athenais, Lips.
monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 51. Causs. H. C. part 1. l. 5. p. 145, 146. Zonah. Annal.
tom. 3. p. 124. Pezel. mellific. hist. tom. 5. p. 292.
of admirable beauty, and a singular wit; the Father with a secret presage of
her good fortune, had left his whole estate, and at his death only bequeathed
to her an hundred Crowns; saying that her fortune would be sufficient for her.
Upon this occasion she falls out with them, and was thereupon by them forced to
Constantinople. Then it was that she insinuated her self, and commended her
cause to Pulcheria the Emperor's Sister, whom she so much pleased, that
hearing she was a Virgin, she caused her to be baptized, named her Eudoxia, and
married her to her Brother Theodosius, the Emperor, with whom she could do all
things. This was her ascent, now hear her fall: Upon the day of Epiphany, as
the Emperor returned from Church with great pomp and magnificence, a certain
Countryman, a Stranger, brake through the press, accosteth Theodosius (who was
of most easy access) and presented him with an Apple of an extraordinary size,
esteemed at that time a rare fruit; the Emperor receives it gratefully, and
commanded to give the good man presently to the value of an hundred and fifty
Crowns. As soon as he was returned to the Palace, he goes to visit the Empress,
and full of joy gave her the fair present for a great rarity. The good Empress
having understood that Paulinus a great Favorite of Theodosius kept his Bed
sick of the Gout, to please and comfort him, had sent him the Apple, not
mentioning from whom she had received it. Paulinus was seized with so great a
joy, at such a favor from a person so eminent, that the contentment he
received, charmed at that time the pain of his Gout. He so admired this goodly
fruit, that he judged it worthy of Imperial Hands, and forthwith he sent it to
the Emperor, excusing himself through his indisposition, that he was not
himself the messenger. Theodosius knew the Apple which he had very lately put
into the Empress's hands, whereupon a furious jealousy began to lay hold on
his gentle spirit; he instantly sends for Eudoxia, and to sound her heart,
demanded what was become of the ^air Apple he had given her. The poor Princess
was overtaken, something appeared on the brow of her Husband, whereby she
perceived tha^ his ^air Soul was not in its ordinary situation, she therefore
declined entreaty, and thinking to underprop her innocen^y with a lie, said she
had eaten the Apple. The Emperor urged her upon this answer; she who already
was involved, tumbled her self further into the snare, and that she might not
seem a Liar, swear by the life and health of her Husband, she had eaten it. He
to convince her of this impudence, drew the fatal Fruit out of his Cabinet. The
Empress at the sight of it turned pale, and was so confounded, she had not
courage e^ough to speak one only word. Theodosius retireth in an instant with
his heart drenched in Gall and Bitterness; the poor Eudoxia on the other side
pours her self into tears, without comfort. The Prince Paulinus, who knew
nothing of that which passed, was that night put to death, without any form of
process. When the Empress understood of his sudden and unexpected death, she
then well saw that the Emperor was tainted with the venom of most cruel
jealousy. Eudoxia was removed from council and manage of affairs, deprived of
the Imperial Bed, and so went a voyage to Palestine to satisfy her Devotion.

10. Theodebert King of France married Deutera, she was a Widow before, Fulgos.
Ex. l. 5. c. 8. p. 656, 657.
and had by her former Husband a most beautiful Daughter, which she took along
with her. It was not long ere the Queen suspected that her Daughter had stolen
the heart of her Husband from her; and although there was no such thing, yet so
strong was her jealousy, that her maternal affection gave place to it, and
without admitting of any leisure, wherein a discovery of the truth might be
made, she caused the young Lady to be slain.

11. Hippocrates the Physician had a smack of this disease; Hippocrat. Epist.
ad Dionys. Ep. Burton's melanch. part. 3. 3. p. 546.
for when he was to go from home as far as Abdera, and some other remote Cities
of Greece, he wrote to his Friend Dionysius to oversee his Wife in his absence,
although she lived in his House with her Father and Mother, who he knew would
have a care of her; yet that would not satisfy his j^alousie, he would have
his especial Friend Dionysius to dwell in his House with her all the time of
his peregrination, and to observe her behavior, how she carried her self in
her Husband's absence, and that she did not lust after other men; for a woman
had need to have an Overseer (says he) to keep her honest, they are bad by
nature, and lightly given, and if not curbed in time, as an unpruned tree, they
will be full of wild Branches, and degenerate on the sudden.

Textor. offic. l. 5. c. 61. p. 669.
12. Procris having a jealous suspicion of her Husband Cephalus, that he was
enflamed with the love of some other woman, followed him into the Woods and
Fields where he went a hunting, she hid her self in a Bush, that she might
privily observe what her Husband did; and stirring in the Bush where she was,
Cephalus supposing it was some wild Beast, shot an Arrow into it, and slew her.

Pezel. melli^ic. hist. tom. 2. p. 267.
13. Constantine the Great, by his first Wife Minervina had a Son named Crispus,
a Prince endowed with all requisite accomplishments both of body and mind; too
nearly were these his perfections observed by the amorous eye of Faustina the
Empress, and his Mother in law, for she solicited him to comply with her
amors; but he in a just detestation of so foul a crime, showed himself
insensible of all her al^urements, whereupon the incensed Empress a^cused him
to her Husband, as one that sought to unde^min^ her chastity. The Emperor
transported with the j^alousie he had conceived against his Son, command^d the
innoc^nt Prince to be slain; without admitting him so much as audience whereas
he might clear himself. Afterward coming to understand in what manner both
himself and his Son had been betrayed by his Wife, he also caused her to be put
to death.

14. Cardinal Hypolito d' Este pulled out the eyes of his own Brother Iulio in
a pang of j^alousie, Sandys. i^ Ovid. metam. l. 2. p. 43.
and because there was such a sweetness in them, as he perceived was
over-pleasing in the eyes of his Mistress.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Commiseration, Pity and Compassion of some men to others in
time of their Adversity.
IT is reported of S. Augustine, that he could not refrain himself from tears,
when he read in Virgil of the loves and death of Queen Dido, although he knew
well, that the whole story was but a fiction which the Poet had devised of his
own Brain. Certainly the most generous persons are soonest stirred to a
sympathy with others in their sufferings, and the calamity or fall of their
Enemies, are wont to leave upon them none of the lightest impressions.

1. When Alexander the Great found Darius murdered by his own servants, Q.
C^rtii hist. l. 6. c. 13. p. 144.
though he was his Enemy, yet could he not refrain from weeping; and putting
off his own Coat, he covered the body of Darius with it, and clothing him with
Royal Ornaments, he sent him to his Mother Sisigambris, to be interred amongst
his Ancestors in a Royal manner.

2. Nero the Emperor in the first five years of his Reign was comparable even
with Augustus himself, Su^ton. l. 6. c. 10. p. 237.
especially in Princely Pity and Compassion, insomuch as being requested to set
his hand to a writ for the execution of a Malefactor: Quam vellem me nescire
literas! said he, how do I wish that I could neither write or read!

3. Camillus with the Roman Army, Plut. in Camillo. p. 131.
after ten years siege, took the City of Veiae in Italy by storm, and when
Camillus from the top of the Castle saw the infinite Riches which the Soldiers
took by plundering the City, he brake out into tears for very pity, to behold
what miseries the Inhabitants had wilfully brought upon themselves.

4. Flavius Vespasianus the Emperor was of so merciful and compassionate a
disposition, Su^ton. l. 10. c. 15. p. 313.
that he never rejoiced at the death of any, though his enemies: Etiam justis
suppliciis ingemuit, he used to sigh and weep when any were condemned by him
for their faults, though never so justly.

5. Lucullus the Roman General, Plut in Lucullo. p. 503, 504. Sabelli^. l. 4.
En. 6. p. 304.
pursuing Mithridates, came to the rich and stately City of Amisus, where
Callimachus was Governor under Mithridates. Callimachus seeing he could not
hold out, set the City on fire and fled: Lucullus would fain have quenched the
fire, but could not by force or fair words prevail with the Soldiers to do it:
Lucullus entering the City the next morning, and beholding the great desolation
and deformed ruins which the ^i^e had made, he burst out into tears, and
turning to his F^iends, said, That he had often thought Sylla happy, in that
when he d^sired ^o s^^e the City of Athens, the Gods had granted him his
desire. But, said he, whereas I desired to have saved this City of Amisus;
fortune by disappointing my purpose and design, has brought me to the
disreputation of Mummius, who caused the burning of the City of Corinth.

Plut. in Marcello, p. 308. Sabellic. l. 4. En. 5. p. 104.
6. M. Marcellus the Consul shed tears at his entrance of the City of Syracuse,
which he had newly taken, not so much for joy that he had performed so glorious
an exploit, as for many things which recurred to his thoughts, enough to excite
his compassion to so great and splendid a City, which was speedily to be
converted into ashes. He called to mind the famous victories which they of
Syracuse had gained over the Athenians by Sea and Land, how they had broke in
pieces the Attick Navy, overthrown two famous Generals, and routed their
numerous Armies: he recalled to his memory the Wars that Syracuse had had with
Carthage, the power that Dionysius the Father and Son had sometime enjoyed:
then he thought of Hiero a King, who not long before reigned there, who was the
most faithful of all their Allies unto the Romans, and highly honored by them:
now to think that a City once so famous, at this time so rich, should on the
sudden have all its Buildings and Furniture for peace and war consumed: this
drew tears from his eyes.

Ammian. Marc^ll. p. 71. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 116, 117.
7. Iulianus the Emperor departed from Constantinople against the Persians with
a mighty Equipage; and passing over the Bosphorus from Chalcedon, he passed on
to Nicomedia. He deeply sighed and wept at his entrance into this City, calling
to mind, that heretofore he had been brought up in the Palace of this City, at
that time large in the circumference, and sumptuous in the Buildings, but now
at this time miserably wasted and shaken in pieces by the fury of an Earthquake
that had lately been therein.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 117.
8. Solomon the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks, when he had taken Rhodes,
after he had received the great Master with as much humanity as could be
expected from an Enemy, he dismissed him; and when he was gone from him: I pity
(said he) the miserable old man; and it grieves me to see him (being thr^wn out
of his own house) to depart thus sorrowfully from us.

Plut. Apothegm. Reg. etc. p. 424.
9. Agesilaus the King of Sparta being informed that in a great Battle near
Corinth few of the Spartans were fallen, but very many of the Corinthians and
Athenians, and the rest of the Confederat^s were there slain. The King made no
sign of joy to appear for so great a victory; but with a deep sigh, Poor
Greece, said he, who have lost in Civil Wars so many Soldiers, that were they
all alive, were enough to subdue all the Barbarians round about us.

Sabellic. l. 9. ^n. 5. p. 410. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 239.
10. Publius Scipio Africanus, when he saw Carthage quite overthrown, he wept
much, and being mindful of the mutability of humane affairs, with tears he
repeated that of Homer: Iamque dies aderint quo concidat Hioningens,
Et Priamus Priamique ruat plebs armi potentis.
And time shall come when stately Troy shall fall
With warlike Priam and his people all.
Polybius as it fortuned at that time stood by him, his Guide and companion in
his Studies, and he enquired if he had any peculiar respect to any thing in
those Verses: Yes, said he, I mean it of Rome, concerning which I cannot choose
but be solicitous, as often as I think of the inconsistency of all humane affairs.

11. Titus Vespasianus at the overthrow of Jerusalem, Joseph. bell. Iud. l. 7.
c. 14. p. 721.
and the memory of its former Glory, could not abstain from shedding tears,
cursing the perverseness and obstinacy of the seditious Jews, who had compelled
him against his will to lay in ruins so great a City, and so famous a Temple
as there was.

12. C. Pompeius in one of his Consulships, at the Dedication of the Temple of
Venus, Plin. l. 8. c. 7. p.
exhibited in the Theater twenty Elephants in fight, encountered by diverse
Getulian Archers. The Elephants seeing there was no way for slight, began to
move the compassion of the people with such unspeakable signs and lamentation,
that the people were so moved with it, that they all rose up, departed the
Theater, bestowing many curses upon Pompey in lieu of this his Bounty and
Magnificence.

CHAP. XXII. Of the deep Dissimulation and Hypocrisy of some men.
MAud the Empress being besieged by the Forces of King Stephen in Oxford, there
happened to fall a great snow, the Empress took the advantage hereof, and by
arraying her self and her followers in white, she made her escape thence. There
are but too many that walk in white till their ends be attained, make show of
much simplicity, friendship and virtue, for no other purpose than to train men
within the compass of their privy snares: then off goes the Angel that the
Devil may appear.

1. Caius Julius Caesar was a great dissembler; for whereas he pretended to be
a mighty lover and admirer of Cn. Pompeius, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 146.
he did not only not love him, but withal he privily sought to render him
odious to the people, by reason of the multitude of his honors. When Cicero
had several times taunted and reproached him, he never so much as made answer
to him, that he might not seem to be offended with him in the least; but
privately he stirred up Clodius against him, by whose means he got him banished
from Rome. And this was a quality ever inherent in Caesar, that if any man had
created him any trouble, he would seem out of greatness of mind to despise him,
but then he would be revenged of him by others. The same person as soon as he
heard that Pompey was sled into Egypt, he also pursued him thither, certainly
for no other end, but that in case he could any way get him in his power, he
might make sure of him. And yet this man as soon as he saw the head of Pompeius
brought unto him, shed tears, and said, It is the Victory and not the Revenge
that pleases me.

2. Charles the Ninth of France was well practiced in this art; Clark's mir. c.
35. p. 121.
^or a little before the massacre at Paris, when he had invited the Admiral
Coligni thither, he was honorably entertained by the King who called him
Father, protested he would be ruled by his counsel; and often averred that he
loved him, etc. Yet shortly after he caused him to be basely murdered, and
unworthily insulted over him after his death.

Clark's mit. c, 41. p. 145.
3. Richard Duke of Gloucester was so cunning a Dissembler, that he would
accompany most familiarly, and jest pleasantly with such as he hated in his
heart, and would pretend to refuse even the Kingdom it self, when proffered,
whereas he had used all means to compass it, and resolved to gain it at what
rate soever.

Su^ton. l. 3. c. 24. p. 137.
4. Tiberius the Emperor was also well skilled herein: when Augustus was dead,
though he immediately possessed himself of the supreme command, acted as a
Prince, and assured the Soldiers to himself, yet with a most impudent mind he
refused the Government, when his Friends requested him to take it upon him, he
sharply took them up, telling them, that they knew not how great a Monster
Empire was. When the whole Senate entreated him, and fell at his feet: thereby
to move him to accept it, he gave them ambiguous answers, and with his crafty
ways of delay he left them in suspense: insomuch that some grew out of patience
to be thus dallied with; and one in the Throng cried out, Let him take it, or
leave it. Another told him to his face, that others did slowly perform what
they had promised; but he on the other side did slowly promise that which he
would perform. At last, as if he had been compelled and enforced, and
complaining, that a miserable and burdensome servitude was imposed upon him, he
accepted of the Empire, and yet no otherwise than as a man that pretended he
would some time or other lay it down again. His own words were, Till I come
unto that time when you shall think it meet to allow some rest and ease unto my
old age.

The end of the Second Book of the Wonders of the Little World.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the early appearance of Virtue, Learning, Greatness of Spirit, and
Subtlety in some young Persons.
URaba in Peru is of so rich a soil, that the Seeds of Cucumbers and Melons
sown, will bear ripe fruits in twenty eight days after: (...) hist. improved.
p. 50.
the Seeds of Virtue arrive to a mavelous improvement in the souls of some in
a short time, in comparison of what they do in others. Indeed those persons who
have been most remarkable in any sort of Virtue, have been observed to give
some early specimen and instance of it in their youth: and a man that had
considered of the dawning and first break, might easily predict an illustrious
day to succeed thereupon.

1. Aemilius Lepidus, while yet a youth, did put himself into the Army, Val.
Max. l. 3. c. 1. p. 64.
where he slew an enemy, and saved the life of a Citizen of Rome, of which
memorable act of his Rom^'s Senate left a sufficient witness, when they decr^ed
his young statue should be placed in the Capitol, girt in an honorable Vest,
for they thought him ripe enough for honor who was already so forwardly
advanced in virtue.

Val. Max. l. 3. ^. 1. p. 64. Li^s. Monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 2^^, etc.
2. M. Cato in his childhood bewrayed a certain greatness of spirit: he was
educated in the house of Drusus his Uncle, where the Latin Ambassadors were
assembled about the procuring of the freedom of the City for their people: Q.
Popedius the chief of them was Drusus his Guest, and he asked the young C^to if
he would intercede with his Uncle in their behalf: who with a constant look
told him he would not do it. He asked him again and again, but he persisted in
his denial: he therefore takes him up into a high part of the House, and
threatens to throw him down thence, unless he would promise to assist them: but
neither so could he prevail with him; whereupon turning to his companions, We
may be glad, said he, that this Merchant is so young; for had he been a
Senator, we might have despaired of any success in our suit.

3. When Alcibiades was but yet a child, he gave ins^^n^e of that natural
subtlety, ^
for which he was afterward so remarkable in Athens; ^or coming to his Un^le
P^ricles, and ^inding him sitting somewhat sad in a retiring Room, he asked him
the cause of his trouble; who told him he had been employed by the City in some
public Buildings, in which he had expended such sums of money as he knew no^
well how to give account of: You should therefore, said he, think of a way to
prevent your (...) c^ll^d to accou^^. And thus that great and wise (...) being
d^stitute of counsel himself, made me of this which was given him by a child*
for he involved Athens in a foreign War, by which means they were not at
leisure to consider of accounts.

4. Themistocles in his childhood and boyage bewrayed a quick spirit, Plut.
paral. p. 112. in Themistocle,
and understanding beyond his years, and a propensity toward great matters; he
used not to play amongst his equals, but they found him employing that time in
framing Accusatory or Defensive Orations for this and that other of his
Schoolfellows. And therefore his Master, was used to say, My Son, thou will be
nothing indifferent, but either a great Glory or Plague to thy Country. For
even then he was not much affected with Moral Precepts, or matters of
accomplishment for urbanity; but what concerned providence and the management
of affairs that he chiefly delighted in, and addicted himself to the knowledge
of; beyond what could be expected from his youth.

5. Richard Carew Esquire was bred a Gentleman Commoner at Oxford, Full. Worth.
p. 205. Cornwall.
where being but fourteen years old, and yet three years standing in the
University, he was called out to dispute ex tempore before the Earls of
Leicester and Warwick with the matchless Sir Philip Sydney.

-- Ask you the end of this contest?
They neither had the better, both the best.
6. Thucydides being yet a Boy, while he heard Herodotus reciting his Histories
in the Olympicks, Camerar. oper. sub^is. cent. 2. c. 26. p. 105.
is said to have wept exceedingly, which when Herodotus had observed, he
congratulated the happiness of Olorus his Father, advising him, that he would
use great diligence in the education of his Son; and indeed he afterward
proved one of the best Historians that ever Greece had.

7. Astyages King of the Medes, Herodot. l. 1. p. 47, 48, 49. Fulgos. l. 3. c.
1. p. 205. (...). tom. 1. l. 4. c. 2. p. 394
frighted by a dream, caused Cyrus (the Son of his Daughter Mandane) as soon as
born to be delivered to Harpa^us with a charge to make him away. He delivers
him to the Herd^man of Astyages with the same charge; but the Herdsman's wife
newly delivered of a dead child, and taken with the young Cyrus, kept him
instead of her own, and buried the other instead of him. When Cyrus was grown
up to ten years of age, playing amongst the young Lads in the Country, he was
by them chos^n to be their King, appointed them to their several O^^ices; some
for Builders, some for Guards, Cou^tiers, Messengers and the like. One of those
Boys that played with them was the Son of A^^embaris a Noble Person amongs^ the
M^des, who not obeying the commands of this new King; Cyrus commanded him to be
seized by the rest of the Boys, and that done, he bestowed many stripes upon
him. The Lad being let go, complained to his Father, and he to Astyages; for
showing him the bruised Shoulders of his Son; Is it thus, O King, said he, that
we are treated by the Son of thy Herdsman and slave? Astyages sent for the
Herdsman and his Son; and then looking upon Cyrus, How dare thou, said he,
being the Son of such a Father as this, treat in such sort the Son of a
principal person about me? Sir, said he, I have done to him nothing but what
was fit; for the Country Lads, (one of which he was) chose me their King in
play, because I seemed the most worthy of the place; but when all others obeyed
my commands, he only regarded not what I said, for this he was punished, and if
thereupon I have merited to suffer any thing, I am here ready to do it. While
the Boy spoke this, Astyages began to take some knowledge of him: the figure of
his ^ace, his generous deportment, the time of Cyrus his exposition, agreeing
with the age of this Boy, he concluded he was the same, which he soon after
made the Herdsman to confess. But being told by the Magi, that now the danger
was over; for having played the King in sport, they believed it was all that
his dream did intend. So he was sent into Persia to his Father; not long after
he caused the Persians to revolt, overcame Astyages his Grandfather, and
transferred the Empire of the Medes to the Persians.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. ^. 3. p. 228.
8. Thomas Aquinas, when he went to School, was by nature addicted to silence;
and was also somewhat more fat than the rest of his Fellow-Scholars, whereupon
they usually called him the dumb Ox; but his Master having made experiment of
his wit in some little Disputations, and finding to what his silence tended:
This dumb Ox, said he, will shortly set up such a lowing, that all the world
will admire the sound of it.

Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 4. p. Fulgos. l. 3. c. 1. p. 297.
9. Origines Adamantius being a young boy would often ask his Father Leonidas
about the mystical sense of the Scriptures; insomuch that his Father was
constrained to withdraw him from so over early a wisdom. Also when his Father
was in prison for the sake of Christ, and that by reason of his tender age (for
he was but seventeen) and the strict custody of his Mother, he could not be
companion with him in his Martyrdom; he then wrote to him, that he should not
through the love of his children be turned from the true faith in Christ, even
in that age discovering how undaunted a Preacher Christianity would afterward
have of him.

Fulgos. l. 3. c. 1. p. 268.
10. Grimoaldus a young noble Lombard was taken with diverse others at Forum
Iulii by Cacanus King of the Avares, and contrary to sworn conditions was lead
to death; perceiving the perfididiousness of the Barbarians, in the midst of
the tumult and slaughter, he with his two Brothers brake from amongst them, but
he being but a very youth, was soon overtaken by the pursuer, was retaken by a
Horseman, and again by him led to death. But he observing his time, drew his
little Sword, slew his Guardian, overtook his Brethren, and got safe away. By
this his incredible boldness, he showed with what spirit and wisdom he would
after both gain, and govern the Kingdom of Lombardy.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 177. Erasm. Adag.
11. Q. Hortensius spoke his first Oration in the Forum at Rome when he was but
nineteen years of age, the then Consuls were L. Crassus and Q. Scaevola, his
eloquence had then the approbation of the whole people of Rome, and which is
more, of the Consuls themselves, who were more judicious than all the rest.
What he had so well begun in his early youth, he afterward so perfected in his
maturer age, that he was justly reputed the best Orator of his time, and
perhaps never excelled by any but his own Pupil M. Tullius Cicero.

12. Alexander gave manifest presages of his future greatness, while he was yet
in his first youth: when a Horse called Bucephalus, of extraordinary
fierceness, Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 1. p. 293. Z^^ar. A^nal. tom. 1. fol. 31.
Sabellic. Ex. l. 1. c. 4. p. 26.
was brought to King Philip, and that no man was found that durst bestride him,
young Alexander chanced at that time to come to his Father, and with great
importunity obtained leave to mount him, whom he rode with that art, and
managed with such singular skill in his full cariere and curvetting, that when
he descended, his Father Philip embracing him, with tears said, Son, seek out a
greater Kingdom, for that I shall leave thee will be but too little for thee.
The greatness of his mind he had before discovered; for when he was a Boy at
School, and that there he was told of a victory his Father had newly obtained:
If, said he sighing, my Father conquer all, what will be left for me? when they
that stood by replied, That all these would be for him. I little esteem, said
he; of a great and large Empire, when I shall be deprived of all means for the
gaining of Glory.

13. Herod the first, Fulgos. l. 3. c. 1. p. 296.
Son of Antipater, Prefect of Galilee, when he was not above fifteen years of
age, contrary to the manner of those of his age, left the School, and put
himself into Arms; wherein the first proof he gave of himself, was, that he set
upon Ezekias the Captain of an Army of Thieves, who molested all Syria, and not
only routed his Forces, but slew the Leader himself, showing by this beginning,
that (except in cruelty) he would prove nothing inferior to any of the Kings
his Predecessors.

15. C. Martius Coriolanus in the Latin War which was made for the restitution
of Ta^quinius to his Kingdom, Fulgos. l. 3. c. 1. p. 294.
showed an admirable boldness, though then very young; for beholdi^g now a
Citizen of Rome beaten down, and now ready to be slain by the Enemy, he ran
into his assistance, and gave him life by the death of him that pressed so
eagerly upon him; for which act of valor the Dictator put a Civick Crown upon
his young H^ad, an honor that persons of a mature age and great virtue did
rarely attain unto. He afterward proved a person of incomparable valor and
military virtue.

15. Adeodatus the Son of S. Augustine; Causs. H. C. part 2. 10. p. 198.
before he was fifteen years of age, was of so prodigious a wit, that his
Father says of him, Horrori mihi erat istud ingenium, he could not think of it
but with astonishment; for already at that age he surpassed many great and
learned men: he also verified the saying of Sages, Ingenium nimis mature magnum
non est vitale: such early sparkling wits are not for any long continuance upon
earth; for he lived but a few years.

16. C. Cassius when very young, Sabellic. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 19.
hearing Faustus the Son of Sylla magnifying the tyranny that his Father
exercised in Rome, was so moved at it, that he gave him a blow upon the face in
public; the matter was so heinous, that both it and the persons came before
Pompey the great, wh^re, though in so great a presence the young C^ssius was ^o
far from being terrified, that on the contrary he cried thus out to his
Adversary, Go to, Faustus, said he, repeat again those words wherewith I was
before so far provoked by thee, that I may now also strike thee a second time.
By this action he gave a notable instance, how jealous he would afterward
prove of the Roman Liberty; for it was he who with Brutus conspired against
Julius Caesar, and slew him as the invader of it; and after died with the
reputation of being Romanorum ul^imus; the last true Roman.

Ioh^st. not. hist. cl. 10. c. 6. p. 354.
15. Ianus Drusus that famous Scholar had a Son so singular, that from fifteen
years old to twenty, when he died, he wrote excellent Commentaries on the
Proverbs and other Books, that were not unacceptable amongst the Learned that
looked upon them.

Speed's hist. p. 380.
18. Edburg the eighth Daughter of King Edward, in her childhood had her
disposition tried, and her course of life disposed by her Father in this
manner, he laid before her gorgeous Apparel and rich Jewels in one end of a
Chamber, and the New Testament and Books of Princely Instructions in another,
wishing her to make her choice of which she liked; she presently took up the
Books, and he her in his Arms, and kissing her said, Go in God's name whither
he has called thee: and thereupon placed her in a Monastery at Winchester,
where she virtuously spent her whole life after.

Graston. vol. 2. p. 530.
19. Lewis Duke of Orleance was owner of the Castle at Crucy, his Constable was
the Lord of Cawny, whose Wife the Duke's Paramour had a child, not certain
which was the Father; whereupon Cawny and his Wife being dead, a controversy
arose, the next of kin to Cawny claiming the Inheritance, which was four
thousand Crowns per annum. This controversy depending in the Parliament of
Paris, the child then eight years old, though both instructed by his Mother's
Friends to save his Mother's credit, and to enjoy so ample an inheritance
himself, as Cawny's Child: yet being asked, answered openly to the Judges, My
heart gives me, and my noble courage tells me, that I am the Son of the
noble Duke of Orleance, more glad am I to be his Bastard with a mean living,
than to be the lawful Son of that cowardly Cuckold Cawny with his thousand
Crowns inheritance. The next of kin had the estate, and the young Duke of
Orleance took him into his Family, who after proved a most valiant and
fortunate Warrior against the English, in the days of Henry the Sixth, and is
commonly called the Bastard of Orleance.

Melch. Adam. in vit. Medic. G^rmanor. p. 6.
20. Theodoricus Meschede a German Physician had a Son of the same name, who at
the age of fifiteen years surpassed in Eloquence and Learning many of those who
had gained to themselves fame and reputation thereby. He wrote to Trithemius
and other learned men of that age almost numberless Epistles, upon diverse
subjects, with that Accuracy and Ciceronian Eloquence, that for his wit,
dexterity and promptitude in writing and disputation he became the wonder and
admiration of those he had any conversation with.

CHAP. II. Of such as having been extreme Wild and Prodigal, or Debauched in
their Youth, have afterward proved excellent Persons.
THose Bodies are usually the most healthful that break out in their youth; and
many times the Souls of some men prove the ^ounder, for having vented
themselves in their younger days. Commonly none are greater enemies to Vice,
than such as formerly have been the slaves of it, and have been so fortunate as
to break their Chain, and recover their liberty. A certain blackness in the
Cradle has been observed to give beginning and rise unto the most perfect
Beauties; and there are no sort of men that have shined with greater Glory in
the world, than such whose first days have been sullied and a little overcast.

1. Themistocles, Aelian. var. hist. l. 2. c. 12. p. 47. Val. Max. l. 6. c. 9.
p. 185. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 666.
by reason of the Luxury and Debauchery of his life, was cast off, and disowned
by his Father: his Mother over-grieved with the villainies he frequently
committed, finished her life with an Halter: notwithstanding all which, this
man proved afterward the most noble person of all the Grecian Blood, and was
the interposed pledge of hope or despair to all Europe and Asia. Patrit. lib.
de Reipub. instit. 4. tit. 6. p. 208.

2. C. Valerius Flaccus (in the time of the second Punick War) began his youth
in a most profuse kind of luxury: Val. Max. l. 6. c. 9. p. 182.
afterward he was created Flamine by P. Licinius the chief Pontiff, that in
that employment he might find an easier recess from such vices as he was
infected with, addressing his mind therefore to the care of Ceremonies and
sacred things, he made Religion his Guide to Frugality: and in process of time
showed himself as great an example of Sanctity and Modesty, as before he had
been of Luxury and Prodigality.

3. Nicholas West was born at Putney in Surrey, Full. Worth. p. 81. Surrey.
bred first at Eaton, then at Kings College in Cambridge, where when a youth he
was a Rakehel in grain; for something crossing him in the College, he could
find no other way to work his revenge, than by secret setting on fire the
Master's Lodgings, part whereof he burnt to the ground. Immediately after this
little Herostratus lest the College, lived for a time in the Country,
debauched enough for his conversation. But he seasonably retrenched his
wildness, turned hard Student, became an excell^nt Scholar, and most able
Statesman, and after smaller promotions was at last made Bishop of Ely, and
often employed in foreign Embassies. Now if it had been possible, he would have
quenched the fire he kindled in the College with his own tears, and in
expression of his penitence, became a worthy Bene^actor to the House, and
rebuilt the Master's Lodgings firm and fair from the ground. No Bishop in
England was better attended with Menial Servants, Val. Max. l. 6. c. 9. p. 185.
Lon. Theatr. p. 666. Laert. l. 4. p. 100. Pat. de Reip. inst. l. 4. tit. 6. p.
209.
or kept a more bountiful House, which made his death so lamented anno 1533.

3. Polemo was a youth of Athens, of that wretched Debauchery, that he was not
only delighted in vice, but also in the very infamy of it. Returning once from
a Feast after Sunrise, and seeing the Gate of Xenocrates the Philosopher open,
full of Wine, as he was, smeared with Ointments, a Garland on his head, and
clothed with a loose and transparent Garm^nt, he enters the School, at that
time thronged with a number of learned men, not content with so uncivil an
entrance, he also sat down on purpose to affront a singular eloquence, and
most prudent precepts with his drunken follies. His coming had occasioned all
that were present to be angry, only Xenocrates retaining the same gravity in
his countenance, and dismissing his present Theme, b^gan to discourse of
Modesty and Temperance, which he presented so lively before him, that Polemo
affected therewith, first laid aside the Crown from his head, soon after drew
his arm within his Cloak, changed that Festival Merriment that appeared in his
face; and at last cast off all his Luxury. By that one Oration the young man
received so great a cure, that of a most licentious person he became one of the
greatest Philophers of his time.

Fulgos. l. 6. c. 9. p. 804.
5. Fabius Gurges was born of a Noble Family in Rome, and left with a very
plentiful estate by his Father; but he spent all in the riots of his first
youth, which he left many brands upon, and occasioned then to himself the
surname of Gurges. But afterward relinquishing the unbridled lusts of his
first age, he arrived to that temperance that he was thought worthy by the
people of Rome to have the office of Censorship committed to him, and no man
more fit than he to inspect the manners of the City.

Sueton. l. 11. c. 7. p. 321.
6. Titus Vespasianus while he was young, and before he came to the Empire, gave
just causes of censure for his cruel, covetous, riotous and lustful way of
living; insomuch that men reputed, and also reported him to be another Nero.
But having arrived to the Empire, he made himself conspicuous for the contrary
virtues. His Feasts were moderate, his Friends select and choice persons,
necessary members of the Commonwealth: his former minions he endured not so
much as to look upon: Queen Berenice whom he was known to love too well, he
sent away from Rome: from no Citizen did he take any thing by violence: and
from the Goods of Aliens he abstained, if ever any did; and yet was he
inferior to none of his Predecessors in Magnificence and Bounty: when he took
upon him the supreme Pontificate, he protested it was only upon this account,
that he would keep his hands pure and innocent from the blood of any, wherein
he made good his word: and in all things he demeaned himself with that
integrity and innocence, that he was worthily styled, Delitiae humani generis,
the very darling of mankind.

Plut. in Lacon. p. 453.
7. Agis, while yet a youth, was brought up in all kind of delights that such of
his age are used to be affected with; but as soon as ever he was come to be
King of Sparta, though yet but a young man, with an incredible change of mind
and manners: he renounced all the pleasures of his former life, and bent his
mind wholly unto this, to recall Sparta unto its pri^tine frugality, that was
extremely debauched and corrupted with the manners of the Greeks and
Barbarians. This honest endeavor of his proved the occasion of his death.

Plut. in Cimone. p. 480, 481.
8. Cimon the Son of Miltiades in his youth was infamous amongst his people for
his disorderly life and excesses in drinking; and they looked upon him as
resembling in his di^position his Grandfather Cimon, who by reason of his
stupidity was called Coalemus, (that is) the Sot. Stesimbrotus says of him,
that he was neither skilled in Music, nor instructed in any other liberal
Science, and far removed from the Attick Acumen and smartness of wit. Some say
he had too private familiarity with his Sister Elpenice: and others, that he
publicly married her, and lived with her as his wife; besides his being deeply
in love with Aristeria and Mnestra, etc. yet this man was afterward so
improved, that a singular generosity and sincerity appeared in his manners, and
merited to have this as part of his just praise, that whereas he was no whit
inferior to Miltiades in valor, nor to Themistocles in prudence, he was more
innocent than both of them. He was not in the least below either of them in the
Art Military; but in his administration in time of peace he exceedingly
surpassed them both.

9. Thomas Sackvil, Ll'oyds Stat. Worth. p. 677, 678.
afterward Lord Buckhurst, was bred in Oxford, took the degree of Barister in
the Temple,, afterward traveled into foreign parts, was detained a time
prisoner at Rome; when his liberty was procured for his return into England, he
possessed the v^st inheritance left him by his Father, whereof in a short time
by his magnificent prodigality he spent the greatest part, till he seasonably
began to spare, growing near to the bottom of his estate. The story goes, that
this young Gentleman coming to an Alderman of London, who had gained great
pennyworths by his former purchases of him, was made (being now in the wane of
his wealth) to wait the coming down of the Alderman so long, that his generous
humor being sensible of the incivility of such attendance, resolved to be no
more beholding to wealthy pride, and presently turned a thrifty improver of the
remainder of his estate. Others make him the Convert of Queen Elizabeth, who by
her frequent admonitions diverted the torrent of his profusion: indeed she
would not know him till he began to know himself; and then heaped places of
honor and trust upon him, creating him Baron of Buckhurst in Sussex, anno Dom.
1566, sent him Ambassador into France, 1571, into the Low Countries, 1576; made
him Knight of the Order of the Garter, 1589, Treasurer of England, 1599: he was
also Chancellor of the University of Oxford. Thus having made amends to his
House for his misspent time, both in increase of estate and honor, being
created Earl of Dorset by King James, he died April. 19, 1608.

10. Henry the Fifth, Speed. hist. p. 637.
while Prince, was extremely wild, the companion of riotous persons, and did
many things to the grief of the King his Father, as well as to the injury of
himself, in his reputation with the subject; but no sooner was he come to the
Crown, but the first thing that he did was to banish all his old companions ten
miles from his Court and presence, and reformed himself in that manner, that he
became a most worthy and victorious King, as perhaps ever reigned in England.

11. S. Augustine in his younger time was a Manichee, and of incontinent life;
Che^wind. hi^t. coll^c^. cent. 1. p. 19.
he reports of himself that he prayed for continency, but was not willing to be
heard too soon; for, says he, I had rather have my lust satisfied than
extinguished: But being afterward converted by the Ministry of S. Ambrose, he
proved a most excellent person as well in Learning, as in all sorts of Virtues.

12. The Ancients in old time attributed unto King Cecrops a double nature and
form, Plut. Mor. l. de sera numia. vindicta. 54^.
and that upon this ground, not for that (as some said) of a good, clement and
gracious Prince, be became a rigorous, fell and cruel Tyrant; but on the
contrary, because (having been at first and in his youth perverse, passionate
and terrible) he proved afterward a mild and gentle Lord.

Plut. Mor. de (...) number. ^ir. p. 543. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1. p. 319.
13. Gelon and Hiero in Sicily, and Pisistratus the Son of Hippocrates were all
Usurpers, and such as attained to their Tyrannical Dominion, by violent and
indirect means, yet they used the same virtuously, and howsoever they attained
the Sovereign Command, and for some time in their younger years managed it
injuriously enough, yet they grew in time to be good Governors, loving and
profitable to the Commonwealth, and likewise beloved and dear unto their
Subjects; for some of them having brought in, and established excellent Laws in
their Country, and causing their Subjects to be industrious and painful in
tilling the ground, made them to be civil, sober, and discreet; whereas before
they were noted for a tatling, playful and idle sort of people.

Plut. Mor. l. de sera number. vir. p. 543. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1. p.
139.
14. Lydiades was a Tyrant in the City of Megalapolis but in the midst of his
usurped Dominion, he repented of his Tyranny, and making conscience thereof, he
detested that wrongful oppression wherein he had held his Subjects, in such
sort, that he restored his Citizens to their ancient Laws and Liberties; yea,
and a^terwards died gloriously, fighting manfully in the Field, against the
enemy in defense of his Country.

Petr. Greg. de repub. l. 8. c. 1. p. 319.
15. Ceno Valchius King of the Western Saxons in the beginning of his Reign was
an impious and debauched Prince, whereupon he was expelled from his Kingdom and
Government; but at last being become a reformed man, he was readmitted to his
former command, and he then ruled his Kingdom with great prudence, justice and
moderation.

Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1. p. 319.
16. Offa King of the Mercians in the first flower of his age was immeasurable
in his desires of acquiring wealth, extreme ambitious of enlarging his
Territories, and highly delighted with the art of War and Military Discipline,
he was also all this while a contemner of all moral virtue; but when he came to
be of maturer and riper years, he became famous and renowned for the integrity
and modesty of his manners, and the singular innocence of his life.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 21. l. 4. p. 3876.
17. Johannes Picus Mirandula visited the most famous Universities of France and
Italy, and was so great a Proficient, that while as yet he had no Beard he was
reputed a perfect Philosopher and Divine. Being ambitious and desirous of
Glory, he went to Rome, where he proposed nine hundred Questions in all Arts
and Sciences, to dispute upon which he challenged all the Scholars of all
Nations, with a new kind of liberality promising to defray the charges of any
such as should come from remote parts to dispute with him at Rome. He stayed at
Rome upon this occasion a whole year. In the mean time there wanted not some
that privily detracted from him, and gave out that thirteen of his Questions
were heretical: so that he was constrained to set forth an Apology; and while
he studied to excuse himself of errors that were falsely objected to him, he
fell into others that were greater and worse; for he entangled himself in the
love of fair, rich and noble women; and at last was so engaged in quarrels upon
this account, that he thought it high time to forsake those youthful vanities;
whereupon he threw into the fire his Books of Love which he had writ both in
the Latin and Hetruscan Languages; and relinquishing the Dreams of profane
Philosophy, he wholly devoted himself to the study of the sacred and holy
Scriptures.

CHAP. III. Of punctual observation in matters of Religion, and the great
regard some men have had to it.
THe Athenians consulted the Oracle of Apollo, demanding what Rites they should
make use of in matters of their Religion. The answer was, the Rites of their
Ancestors. Returning thither again, they said the manner of their Forefathers
had been often changed: they therefore enquired what custom they should make
choice of in so great a variety. Apollo replied the best. This constancy and
strictness of the Heathens had been ^ighly commendable, had their Devotions
been better directed. In the mean time they shame us by being more zealous in
their Superstition, than we are in the true Religion. Sabell. Ex. l. 4. c. 2.
p. 182.


1. Paulus Aemilius being about to give Battle to Perses King of Macedon, at
the first Break of Day made a Sacrifice to Hercules, and no good presage being
to be drawn from thence, he proceeded to slay in that manner diverse others, and
ceased not, till in the one and twentieth he found some signs of his good
success, which done, he marched against his enemy, and obtained the victory.
Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. p. 8.


2. So much was Religion in Reputation with the Senate of Rome, that as the
learned Varro writes unto ^^. Pompeius, as often as the Consul did call the
Senate together, the first thing propounded, was such as pertained to Religion;
nor was there any cause so pressing, or that required the most speedy dispatch,
that was caused to suffer an alteration in this custom of theirs. Val. Max. l.
1. c. 1. p. 3.


3. Posthumous the Consul was to go to manage the war in Africa, being at the
same time also the Flamen of Mars, but Metellus the then Chief Pontiff, would
not suffer him to depart the City, but set a Fine upon his head, in case he
should stir thence. Then was it that the supreme Authority in Rome gave way to
Religion, they concluding that Posthumous could not safely commit himself to
Martial Employment, Lips. Monit. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 9. M. Hurault. of Discourse.
part 1. c. 14. p. 119.
while he deserted the Ceremonies of Mars.

4. When Antiochus Soter had besieged Jerusalem, at such time as the Feast of
Tabernacles was to be celebrated, and the people of that City had besought him
for a truce of seven days, that they might securely attend upon that Solemnity,
he not only granted, but faithfully performed it, and over and besides caused a
Bull with gilded Horns, together with Incense and Perfumes, and diverse Vessels
of Gold to be conveyed to the Gates, and delivered into the hands of the
Priests, and desired they might be offered unto God. The Jews moved with this
unexpected Benignity, yielded themselves and theirs to Antiochus.

5. When Jerusalem was besieged by Pompey the Great, Joseph. Jew War. l. 1. c.
5. p. 567.
upon the day of their Sabbath, though the Jews saw the Romans busied in their
preparations to assault them, though they had advanced their Ensigns upon the
Walls, though they had entered the City, and slew indifferently all they met,
yet did this people make no resistance, but performed their usual Sacrifices as
in a time of peace, and upon no account could be drawn to violate the rest of
their Sabbath, though for the preservation of their lives and estates.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Plut. in M. Marcello. p. 300.
6. While Sulpitius was sacrificing, it chanced that his Mitre fell from his
head, and that was thought reason sufficient to deprive him of his Priesthood.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Plut. in Marcello. p. 300.
7. P. Claelius Siculus, M. Cornelius Cethegus and C. Claudius^ in several times
and different Wars were commanded and compelled to resign their Flaminship;
upon this only reason, that they had not placed the Bowels of the Sacrifice
upon the Altars of the Gods, with a becoming reverence and devotion.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Plut. in Marcello. p. 300.
8. Tiberius Gracchus sent Letters out of his Province to the College of the
Augures, in which he signified, that while he read the Books which pertain'd to
the sacred matters of the people, he had observed that the Tent shook in the
Consular Assembly: this being related by the Augurs to the Senate; by their
orders C. Figulus returned from France, and Scipio Nasica from Corsica to Rome,
where both of them resigned their Consulships.

Plut. in Camillo. p. 139. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. M. Hurault. Discourse.
part 1. c. 14. p. 118.
9. When Brennus had beaten the Romans near Rome it self, and that all was in
tumul^ and disorder, expecting the Conqueror at the Gates, many ^ed out of the
City with all they had: Lucius Albinus or Alvanius as others, a Plebeian, was
carrying out in a Wagon his Wise, little Children and such Goods as his haste
would permit; but when he saw the Vestal Virgins on foot, all weary and tired,
carrying the sacred Relics in their Laps, he straight took down his Wife and
Children and all that he had, and caused the Vestals to ascend the Wagon, with
all they fled with, that they might recover a certain City in Greece, whither
they intended, bearing so great a reverence to Religion, that in respect of
that he had to the safety of his Goods, or the life of him and his Family.

10. Numa Pompilius being upon a time told that his Enemies were in Arms, Plut.
in Numa p. 70.
and coming against him: At ego rem divinam facio: But I, says he, am
sacri^icing to the Gods: he would not surcease his Devotions, though the Enemy
was at the Gates.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 33. Lips. Ex. l. ^. c.
2. p. 10.
11. When the Capitol in Rome was besieged by the Gauls, Caius Fabius Dorso,
lest he should omit a certain day, wherein customary Sacrifices were appointed
to be offered, not at all terrified with the greatness of the danger, passed
openly through the Camp of the Besiegers, carrying with him in his hands the
consecrated Vessels to the Quirinal Hill; nor did the Barbarians oppose him; so
that having solemnly performed all, he returned in safety to the Capitol.

Val, Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 8.
12. Diomedon one of those ten Captains who at Arginusa in one and the same
Fight had gained a Victory for the Athenians, and a sentence of death upon
themseves: when he was now led forth to an undeserved punishment, he said
nothing but this, that he requested them to take care that the vows he had made
for the safety of the Army might be religiously performed.

13. In the Reign of Honorius the Emperor, by the persidiousness o^ S^ilic^n,
Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 20. M. H^ralt. disco^r^. part 1. c. 14. p. 120.
Alaricus King of the Goths was brought into Italy with a mighty Army, he set
upon Rome it self, and took it; and though he was a man of Blood, both by
nature and custom, yet such a reverence he had to Religion, that before he
would permit his Soldiers the plunder of the City, by sound of Trumpet he
caused his Edict to be proclaimed, that as well the Goods as Lives of all those
should be safe, that had retreated unto any of the Churches that were
consecrate to the memory of the Apostles.

14. Marcellus in his fifth Consul^hip having taken Clastidium and Syracuse,
Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4.
had vowed to build a Temple to Honor and Virtue, but was forbid the
performance of it by the College of the Chief Priests, they affirming that one
Temple was not rightly to be consecrated to two Deities; for if any Prodigy
should fall out in that Temple, it could could not be known which of the
Deities they should prepare to appease. Upon this Remonstrance of the Chief
Priests, it was ordered, that Marcellus in distinct Temples should erect the
Statues of Honor and Virtue; nor was the authority of that illustrious person,
by which he might have done his pleasure, nor his double erection of two
Temples instead of one any impediment, but that all due observation and respect
was paid to Religion.

15. Tarquinius King of the Romans commanded M. Tullius, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
p. 5.
one of the Duumviri to be sown up in a Sack, and so cast into Tyber, for that
being corrupted with money, he had delivered to Petronius Sabinus a ^ook to be
transcribed, wherein was contained the secrets of Religion.

16. Pausanias the King of Sparta, Herodot. l. 9. p. 536. Lips. Monit. l. 1. c.
2. p. 29.
(and at that time the General of all Greece) in that famous Battle of Platea,
where all the Grecian safety was disputed, when the Enemy drew on, and provoked
him, he restrained and kept in his Soldiers, till such time as the Gods being
consulted by Sacri^ice, had given encouragement to begin the Fight. This was
somewhat long in the performance; so that in the mean time, the Enemy
interpreting this delay as an instance of fear, began to pres, hard upon him,
so that many of the Greeks fell, yet would he not suffer in this extremity a
single Javelin to be thrown against them, but multiplying the Sacrifices, he at
last lift up his hands to Heaven, and prayed, That if the Fates had determined
that the Grecians should not overcome, yet at least it might please the Gods,
that they might not die unrevenged, nor without performing some famous and
memorable exploit upon their Enemies. He was heard, and stra^ght the Fowels of
the Sacrifice promised him success; he marched out, and obtained the Victory;
but what a Soul was that? how fixed and earnest in the holy Rites of his
Country? that choose rather to be but^hered and slain, than to draw a Sword
while the Gods seemed unwilling.

17. The Egyptians worshipped Dogs, Lips Monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 10.
the Indian Rat, the Cat, Hawk, Wolf and Crocod^le, as their Gods, and observe
them with that kind of Religion and Veneration, that if any man whatsoever,
knowingly, or otherwise, killed any of these, it was death to him without
mercy; as a Roman Citizen found to his cost, in the time of Diodorus Siculus,
who writes and vouches himself as a spectator and witness of what follows. At
such time, says he, as Ptolemeus, (whom the Romans afterward restored to his
Kingdom) was first of all styled the Associate and Friend of the Senate and
people of Rome, there was a public rejoicing, and a mighty concourse of
people. Here it fell out, that in a great crowd, amongst the rest were Romans,
and with them a Soldier, who by chance, and not willingly, had killed a Cat,
straight there was a cry, a sudden fury and tumult arose, to pacify which, not
the ignorance of the miserable wretch, not any reverence of the Roman Name, not
the command of the King himself, who had sent the chiefest of his Noble; to
appease it: none of all these booted the poor man, but that forthwith he was
pulled in pieces by a thousand hands; so that nothing of him was left, either
to bury or to burn.

Falgos. Ex. l. 1. c. p. 9.
18. Vespasianus the Emperor returning out of the East, when he found the City
of Rome exceedingly disfigured by Civil Wars; he began the restoration of it,
with the repairs of the sacred Buildings, and the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus, wherein he betook himself to the work: He carried timber upon his
own Back, he wrought in the Foundations with his own hands: not conceiving that
he any way injured the Majesty of an Emperor, by putting his hand to a work
that concerned the worship of the Gods.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 10.
The Christians were about to build a Chapel in Rome, wherein to perform
service to Almighty God; but they were complained of, and the ground challenged
by certain ^nholders in that City. M. Haraults dis^ourses. part 1. c. 14. p.
118.119.
The matter was brought before the Emperor Alexander Severus; who thus
determined: The things, said he, that concern the Gods, are to be preferred
before the concerns of man; and therefore let it be f^ee ^or the Christians to
build their Chapel to their God, who though he be unknown to us at Rome, ought
nevertheless to have honor done unto him, if but for this respect alone, that
he bears the name of a God.

Fulg^s. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 15.
So great a Reverence to Religion, had the Aethiop^an Kings, to the time of
Ptolemy King of Egypt, that whenever the Priests of Jupiter (who is
worshipped in M^roe) declared to any of them, that h^s life was hateful to the
Gods; He immediately put an end to his days: Nor was there any of them found to
have had a more tender regard to the safety of his own life, than he had
reverence to Religion: till King A^g^nes, who lest the Priests should tell him
he should dye, began with themselves, put them all to death first, and thereby
abolished the custom.

Lips. Monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 30.
There was a mighty famine in Egypt, so that all kind of Food failing them,
they betook themselves to feeding upon man's flesh; when in the mean time they
spared Dogs, Cats, Wolves, Hawks, etc. Which they worshipped as their Gods; and
not only forbore to lay hands upon them; but also fed them, and that doubtless
with Man's Flesh also.

Lips. M^nit. l. 1. c. 3. l. 30.
There was a Brazen Statue of Saturn at Carthage, with Hands somewhat lifted up:
The Statue it self was open, hollow, and bending toward the earth, a Man or
Youth was solemnly laid upon these Arms, and thence he was straight tumbled
down headlong into a burning Furnace, that was flaming underneath. This burning
alive was bestowed upon that God yearly upon a set day, and at other times
also, ever with multiplied Victims, especially in ^ase of any great Calamity
that should befall the City: Accordingly upon the slaughter they received by
Agathocles; they made a decree, (I tremble to speak it) to offer up two hundred
of their noblest youth in this manner to Saturn: And who would believe it,
there were as many more who freely offered themselves to the same death.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 1. p 21.
The Soldiers of Alaricus the Goth, at the sacking of Rome, while as yet they
breathed after slaughter and spoil: It chanced that some sacred Virgins came
amongst the Ranks of them, M H^r^^lts dis^^^rs^s, part 1. c. 14. p. 120.
carrying Vessels of Gold upon their heads uncovered: They so soon as they were
informed, that both the Persons and the Plate were consecrate in honor of the
Apostles; su^^ered both to pass through them untouched.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 17.
The Emperor Constantine being present at the Council of Chalcedon; did their
sit below all the Priests: and when the Writings were brought to him, that
contained their mutual accusations, and the charges that they had drawn up one
against athe others, he folded them all up in his Lap, and committed them all
unread to the fire, saying: that the Priests as so many Deities, were set over
men for the better Government of them, and that therefore he would reserve the
Judgment of them entirely to God himself.

Metellus was the chief Priest of the Temple of Vesta, Sabel. Ex. l. 5. c. 1.
p. 248.
and when through some misadventure it had taken fire, he with others being
busied in carrying out the Statues of the Gods with the consecrated Vessels and
such like, the Flames increasing upon them; the high Priest was thereby
deprived of both his Eyes: which the Senate of Rome did so highly approve of,
as an action of Religious Gallantry, that as a testimony thereof, they allowed
that Metellus should as often as he pleased, be carried in a Charito the Senate
House: An honor which was granted to none before him.

Cyprian Euchovius a Spanish Chorographer, Burtons Melanch. Ep. to the Reader.
p. 46.
above all other Cities of Spain, commends Barcino, in which there was no
Beggar, no man poor, etc. but all rich and in good estate, and he gives the
reason: They were more Religious and more truly devout than the rest of their
Neighbors.

Pontius Pilate being sent by Tiberius to be Governor over the Jews, Joseph
Jewish Wars. l. 2. c. 7. p. 617.
caused in the Night time the Statue of Caesar to be brought into Jerusalem
covered, which thing within three days after caused a great Tumult amongst the
Jews, for they who beheld it were astonished and moved, as though now the law
of their Country were profaned, for they hold it not lawful for any picture or
Image to be brought into the City. At their lamentation who were in the City,
there were gathered together a great multitude out of the Fields adjoining, and
they went presently to Pilate then at Cesarea, beseeching him earnestly that
the Images might be taken away out of Jerusalem, and that the Law of their
Country might remain inviolate. When Pilate denied their suit, they prostrated
themselves before his house; and there remained lying upon their faces for five
days and nights never moving: Afterward Pilate sitting in his Tribunal, was
very careful to call the Jews together before him; as though there he would
have given them an answer, when upon the sudden a company of Armed Soldiers
(for so it was provided) compassed the Jews about with a Triple Rank. The Jews
were hereat amazed, seeing that which they expected not: Then Pilate told them,
that except they would receive the Images of Caesar, he would kill them all:
and to that end made a sign unto the Soldiers, to draw their Swords. The Jews
as though they had agreed thereto, fell all down at once, and offered their
naked Necks to the stroke of the Sword: crying out that they would rather lose
their lives, than suffer their Religion to be profaned. Then Pilate admiring
their constancy, and the strictness of that people in their Religion, presently
commanded the Statua's to be taken out of the City of Jerusalem.

When King Ethelred and his Brother Alfred had encountered the Danes a whole
day, Malmsbury p. 23.
being parted by the Night, early the next morning the Battle was renewed, and
Alfred engaged in fight with the Danes, sent to his Brother to speed him to
their help: but he being in his Tent at his Devotions, refused to come till he
had ended: Having finished, he entered the Battle, relieved the staggering Host;
and had a glorious Victory over his Enemies.

Fulco Earl of Anjou, Guil. Malmsbury p. 25.
in his old Age minding the welfare of his Soul, according to the Religion of
those days; went in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and having bound his Servants by
oath to do what he should require, was by them drawn naked to Christ's
Sepulcher: The Pagans looking on, while one drew him with a wooden yoke put
about his Neck, the other whipped him on the naked Back, he in the mean time
saying, Receive O Lord a miserable perjured and run away Servant, vouchsafe to
receive my Soul O Lord Christ.

Joseph Antiq. l. 14. c. 8. p. 355.
30. Pompey having taken Jerusalem entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and
although he found a Table of Gold, a sacred Candlestick, a number of other
Vessels and odoriferous drugs in great quantity, and two thousand Talents of
Silver, yet he touched nothing thereof, through the Reverence he bore to God,
but caused the Temple to be purged, and commanded the Sacrifices to be offered
according to the Law.

Otho. Mel. Ioc. Seria p. 250.
31. When the Duke of Saaony made great preparations for war against a Pious and
Devout Bishop of Magdeburg: The Bishop not regarding his defense, applied
himself to his Episcopal function, in the visiting and the Well Governing of
his Church, Ch^tw. hist. collect. cent. 14. p. 442.
and when it was told him that the Duke was upon his March against him: He
replied I will take care of the Reformation of my Churches, and leave unto God
the care of my Safety. The Duke had a Spy in the City, who hearing of this
answer of the Bishops, gave his Master a speedy account thereof: The Duke
having received this Information, did thereupon dismiss his Army, surceased
from his expedition, saying he would not fight against him, who had God to
fight for him.

Plut. in Fadio p.
32. Hannibal having given a great overthrow to the Romans, and slain the Consul
Flaminius, the people were extremely perplexed, and chose Fabius Maximus
Dictator, Clarks mir. c. 96. p. 451.
who to lay a good foundation for his Government, began with the service of the
Gods: Declaring to the People that the loss they had received, came through the
rashness and wilful negligence of their General, who made no reckoning of the
Gods and Religion, and therefore he persuaded them to appease the Gods and to
serve and honor them: And he himself in presence of the people made a solemn
vow; that he would sacrifice unto the Gods all the increase and fruits, that
should fall the next year, of Sheep, Sows, Milch-kine, and of Goats throughout
Italy.

CHAP. IV. Of the Veracity of some Persons, and their great Love to Truth: and
hatred of Flattery and Falsehood.
Peach. Compl. Gentlm. c. 15. p. 208.
THe Persians and Indians had a Law, that whosoever had been thrice convicted of
speaking untruth, should upon Pain of death never speak word more all his life
after: And Plato says it is only allowed to Physicians to lie, for the comfort
of the Sick that are under their custody and care. But all other men are
obliged to a severe and strict observance of truth, notwithstanding which there
has been so great a scarcity of the true Lovers of it, that

1. It is said of Augustus Caesar, Cause. H* C. tom. 1. l. 2. p. 45.
that after a long inquiry into all the parts of his Empire; he found but one
man who was accounted never to have told lie: For which cause he was deemed
capable and worthy to be the chief Sacrificer in the Temple of Truth.

2. Epaminondas the Theban General, was so great a Lover of Truth, Heyw.
Hierarc 6 y. l. 5. p. 294.
that he was ever exceeding careful lest his tongue should in the least digress
from it, even then when he was most in sport.

3. Heraclides in his History of the Abbot Idur, Heyw. ib. p. 294
speaks of him as a person exremely devoted to Truth, and gives him this
threefold commendation: That he was never known to tell a Lie, that he was
never heard to speak ill of any man, and lastly, that he used not to speak at
all but when necessity required.

4. Cornelius Nepos remembers of Titus Pomponius Atticus, Heidfeld Sphinx c.
24. p. 674.
a Knight of Rome, and familiar friend to M. Cicero, that he was never known to
speak an untruth, neither (but with great impatience) to hear any Related.
Heyw. ib. p. 294.
His uprightness was so apparent that not only private men made suit to him,
that they might commit their whole Estates to his trust, but even the Senate
themselves besought him that he would take the management of diverse Offices
into his charge.

5. Xenocrates the Philosopher, La^rt. vit. Phil. l. 4. p. 97, 98.
was known to be a man of that fidelity and truth in speaking, that whereas no
man's Testimony might be taken in any cause but upon oath: Heidf. Sphinx c. 24.
p. 673.
yet the Athenians amongst whom he lived, gave to him alone this privilege,
that his evidence should be lawful and good without being sworn.

6. The Duke of Ossura, Howels Ep. vol. 1.. 2. Ep. 22. p. 37.
as he passed by Barcelona, having got leave of Grace to release some Slaves,
he went aboard the Cape Gally, and passing through the churms of Slave, he
asksd diverse of them what their offenses were, every one excused himself, one
saying that he was put in out of malice, another by Bribery of the Judge, but
all of them unjustly: Amongst the rest there was one little sturdy black man,
and the Duke asking him what he was in for; Sir, said he, I cannot deny but I
am justly put in here, for I wanted Money, and so took a Purse hard by
Sarragona, to keep me from starving. The Duke, with a little Staff he had in
his hand, gave him two or three Blows upon the Shoulders, saying, you Rogue,
what do you amongst so many honest innocent men, get you gone out of their
company: So he was freed, and the rest remained still in statis quo prius, to
tug at the Oar.

7. The Emperor Constantius had besieged Beneventum, Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 8.
p. 425.
when Romualdus the Duke thereof, dispatched Geswaldus privily away, unto
Grimoaldus the King of Lombardy the Dukes Father, to desire him to come with an
Army unto the assistance of his Son. He had prevailed in his Embassy, and was
by Grimoaldus sent away before, to let his Son know that he was coming with
some Troops to his Aid. But in his return by misfortune he fell amongst the
Enemies, who being informed of the Auxiliary forces that were upon the march,
hoped to have Beneventum yielded to them before their Arrival; if they could
make Romualdus to despair of his Succors: To this purpose having enjoined
Geswaldus to speak their sense, they led him to the Walls, but when he came
thither he declared the whole truth to the besieged, and gave them to
understand, that e're long Grimoaldus would be with them with a considerable
Army. This cost Geswaldus his Life. and the Imperialists raised their Siege the
next day after.

Cambd. (...), p. 228.
8. King L^dislaus was a great Lover of Truth, and therefore amongst his
Courtiers, when any of them praised any deed of his, or quality that was in
him, if he perceived that they said nothing but the truth, he would let it pass
by uncontrolled: But when he saw that a gloss was set upon it for his praise,
of their own making; he would say with some heat, I pray thee Good Fellow, when
thou say Grace, never bring in Gloria Patri, without a Sicut erat: If thou
make any report of an Act of mine, report it as it was and no otherwise: And
lift me not up with Lies for I love it not.

Lloyd his State worthies p. 201.
It is written of our Henry the Fifth, that he had something of Caesar in him;
which Alexander the Great had not; that he would not be drunk. And something of
Alexander the Great that Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered.

Lloyd State worthies p. 201.202.
10. One who was designed for an Agent, waited upon the knowing and experienced
Lord Went-worth, for some direction in his conduct and carriage, to whom he
thus delivered himself. To secure your self and serve your Country, you must at
all times and upon all occasions speak truth: For, says he, you will never be
believed, and by this means your truth will both secure your self if you be
questioned, and put those you deal with who will still hunt counter, to a loss
in all their disquisitions and undertakings.

S^et. l. 3. c. 27. p. 139.
11. The Emperor Tiberius had such an aversion to flatteries, that he suffered
no Senator to come to his Litter: neither to wait upon him nor so much as about
business. When a Consular person came to him to app^ase his displeasure, and
sought to embrace his Knees, he fled from him with that earnestness, that he
fell all along upon his face, when in common discourse or in any set oration,
ought was said of him that was complemental, he would interrupt the person,
reprehend him, and immediately alter the form of his words, when one called him
Lord, he commanded he should no more name him by way of reproach: One saying
his Sacred employments, and another that he went to the Senate, he being the
Author; he compell^d both to alter their expressions, for Author to say
Perswader, and for Sacred to say Laborious.

C^^tw. hist. collect. cent. 1. p. 17.
12. Pambo came to a Learned Man, and desired him to teach him some Psalm, he
began to read unto him the thirty ninth, and the first Verse, which is: I said
I will look to my ways, that I offend not with my Tongue. Pambo shut the Book
and took his leave saying he would go learn that point: And having absented
himself for some Months, he was demanded by his Teacher, when he would go
forward: he answered that he had not yet learned his old Lesson, to sp^ak in
such a manner as not to offend with his Tongue.

Luther Collo ^. mensal. p. 11.
13. Albertus Bishop of Me^tz, reading by chance in the Bible, one of his
Council coming in, asked him what his Highness did with that Book? The
Archbishop answered, I know not what this Book is, but sure I am that all that
is written therein is quite against us.

Cl^rks mir. c. 53 p. 212.
When Aristobulus the Historian presented to Alexander the Great, a Book that he
had wrote of his glorious Achievements* wherein he had flatteringly made him
greater than he was. Alexander after he had read the Book, threw it into the
River Hydaspis, and told the Author, that it were a good deed to throw him
after it. The same Prince did also chase a certain Philosopher out of his
presence, because he had long lived with him, and yet never reproved him for
any of his vices or faults.

Paraei hist. medull. tom. 2 p. 124
15. Maximilianus the first Emperor of that name, look how desirous he was to
be famous to posterity, for his noble Actions and Achievements, so much was he
also avers^ and afraid to be praised to his face. When therefore on a time
diverse eloquent and learned men did highly extol him, with immediate Praises in
their Panegyricks, he commanded Cuspinianus to return them an answer, ex
tempore, and withal take heed (said he) that you praise me not, for a man's own
Praises from his own Mouth carry but an evil savor with them.

16. Cato the younger charged Muraena and indicted him in open Court for
Popularity and Ambition, Plut. Moral. l. de c. and inimici util. p. 250.
declaring against him that he sought indirectly to gain the peoples favor,
and their voices to be chosen Consul: Now as he went up and down to Collect
Arguments and Proofs thereof, according to the manner and cu^tom of the Romans,
he was attended upon by certain persons who followed him in the behalf of the
Defendant, to observe what was done for his better instruction in the process
and suit commenced. These men would oftentimes be in hand with Cato, and ask
him whether he would to day search for ought or negotiate any thing in the
matter and cause concerning Muraena? If he said no, such credit and trust they
reposed in the veracity and truth of the man, that they would rest in that
answer and go their ways. A singular proof this was of the reputation he had
gained, and the great and good opinion men had conceived of him, concerning his
Love to Truth.

17. Euricius Cordus a German Physician has this honor done to his memory: M.
Adam. in vit. Germ. medic. p. 25.
It is said of him that no man was more addicted to truth than he, or rather no
man was more vehemently studious of it, none could be found who was a worser
hater of ing and falsehood, he could dissemble nothing nor bear that wherewith
he was offended, which was the cause of his gaining the displeasure o^ some
persons, who might have been helpful to him if he would but have sought their
favor, and continued himself therein by his obsequiousness: Thus much is
declared in his Epigrams, and he says, it of himself.

Blandire nescis ac verum Cord tacere,
Et mirare tuos displicuisse libros?
Thou can not flatter, but the truth do tell,
What wonder is it thy Books then do not sell.
Paulus Lutherus Son to Martin Luther, Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ. Med. p. 341.
was Physician to Ioachimus the Second Elector of Brandenbuog, and then to
Augustus Duke of Saxony Elector; It is said of him, that he was vere (...), a
lover of liberty and freedom of Speech; far from ^lattery and assentation, and
in all points like unto that Rhesus in Euripides who says of himself, Talis
sum et ego, rectam s^rmonum
Viam secans, nec sum duplex vir.
Such a one am I that rightly can
Divide my Speech, yet am no double man.
The virtues of this Luther were many and great, yet I know not any wherein he
more deservedly is to be praised, than for this honest freedom of speaking,
wherein he mightily resembled his Father.

19. When I lived at Vtricht in the Low Countries, Peach. Comp. Gentlm. c. 1.
p. 5.
the Reply of that valiant Gentleman Colonel Edmonds was much spoken of: There
came a Countryman of his out of Sco^land, who desiring to be entertained by
him, told him that my Lord his Father and such Knights and Gentlemen, his
Cousin and Kinsmen were in good health. Colonel Edmonds (turning to his friends
then by) Gentlemen, said he, believe not one word he says: My Father is but a
poor Baker in Edinburg, and works hard for his living, whom this Knave would
make a Lord, to curry favor with me, and make you believe that I am a great
man born, when there is no such matter.

CHAP. V. Of such as have been great Lovers and Promoters of Peace.
THere is a certain Fish which Aelian in his History calls the Adonis of the
Sea: Cause. H. C. in Treat. of passions. p. 38.
because it lives so innocently that it touches no living thing strictly
preserving peace with all the offspring of the Ocean; which is the cause it is
beloved and courted as the true darling of the Waters: If the frantic world
has had any darlings, they are certainly such as have been clad in Steel; the
destroyers of Cities, the suckers of humane blood, and such as have imprinted
the deepest scars upon the face of the Universe. These are the men it has
Crowned with Laurels, advanced to Thrones, and ^latter'd with the misbecoming
Titles of Heroes and Gods, while the Sons of peace are remitted to the cold
entertainment of their own virtues. Notwithstanding which there have ever been
some, who have found so many Heavenly Beauties in the face of Peace, that they
have been contented to love that sweet Virgin for her self, and to Court her
without the consideration of any additional Dowry.

Dinoth. memor. 2. l. p. 76.
1. The In^abitants of the Island Borneo, not far from the Moluccas, live in
such detestation of war, and are so great Lovers of peace, that they hold their
King in no other veneration than that of a God, so long as he studies to
preserve them in peace: but if he discover inclinations to war, they never
leave till he is fallen in Battle under the Arms of his Enemies. So soon as he
is slain they set upon the Enemy with all imaginable fierceness, as Men that
fight for their liberty, and such a King as will be a greater Lover of peace.
Nor was there ever any King known amongst them, that was the perswader and
Author of a war, but he was deserted by them, and suffered to fall under the
Sword of the Enemy.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 40.
2. Datanes the Persian being employed in the besieging of Sinope, received
Letters from the King commanding him to desist from the Siege: Having read the
Letter he adored it, and made gratulatory sacrifices as if he had received
mighty favors from his Master: and so taking Ship in the very next Night he
departed.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 40.
3. The Emperor Leo who succeeded Martianus, having given to Eulogius the
Philosopher a quantity of Corn, one of his Eunuchs told him, that such kind of
largess was more fitly bestowed upon his Soldiers. I would to God (said the
Emperor) that the state of my Reign was such, that I could bestow all the
stipends of my Soldiers upon such as are learned.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 213.
4. Constantinus the Emperor observing some differences amongst the Fathers of
the Church, called the Nicene Council, Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 2. p. 42.
at which also hmself was present: At this time diverse little Books were
brought to him, containing their mutual complaints, and accusations of one
another: All which he received as one that intended to read and take cognizance
of them all: But when he found that he had received as many as were intended to
be offered: he bound them up in one bundle, and protesting that he had not so
much as looked into any one of them, he burnt them all in the sight of the
Fathers, giving them moreover a serious exhortation to peace, and a Cordial
Agreement amongst themselvrs.

5. It is noted of Phocion a most excellent Captain of the Athenians, Plut. in
Phocion. p.
that although for his military ability and success, he was chosen forty and
five times General of their Armies by universal approbation, Fitz. Rel. and
pol. p. ^^ 1. c. 14. p. 126.
yet he himself did ever persuade them to peace.

6. At Fez in Africa they have neither Lawyers nor Advocates, Bartons mel. Ep.
to the Read. p. 49.
but if there be any controversies amongst them, both parties Plaintiff and
Defendant, came to their Alsakins or Chief Judge, and at once without any
further appeals or pitiful delays, the Cause is heard and ended.

It is reported of Caesar to his great commendation, Rogers penit. citizen. p.
70.
that after the defeat of Pompey, he had in his custody a Castle, wherein he
found diverse Letters, written by most of the Nobles in Rome under their own
hands, sufficient evidence to condemn them; but he burnt them all, that no
Monument might remain of a future grudge, and that no man might be driven to
extremities, or to break the peace through any apprehension that he lived
suspected, and should therefore be hated.

8. James King of Arragon, was a great enemy to contentions and contentious
Lawyers, Clarks mir. c. 76. p. 343.
insomuch as having heard many complaints against Semenus Rada a great Lawyer,
who by his Quirks and Wiles, had been injurious as well as troublesome to many,
he banished him his Kingdom, as a man that was not to be endured to live in a
place, to the Peace of which he was so great an enemy.

9. I read of the Sister of Edward the Third, Trench^ield. hist. improved. p.
67.
King of England, and married to David King of the Scots, that she was
familiarly called Jane make peace, both for her earnest and successful
endeavors therein.

10. In old time the Month of March was the first Month amongst the Romans,
Plut. moral. l. dequ. Romans qm. 19. p. 856.
but afterward they made January tha first: the reason of which is thus rendered
by some. Romulus being a Martial Prince and one that loved Feats of War and
Arms, and reputed the Son of Mars: he set before all the Months that which
carried the Name of his Father: But Numa who succeeded him immediately was a
man of peace, and endeavored to draw the hearts and minds of his Subjects and
Citizens from War to Agriculture, so he gave the prerogative of the first place
unto January, and honored Ianus most: as one who had been more given to
politic and peaceable Government, and to the husbandry of Ground, than to the
exercise of War and Arms.

11. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say, Clarks mir. c. 92. p. 413.
that he overcame Envy and Evil will more by patience and peaceableness, than
by pertinacy and stubbornness: And his private Estate he so managed, that he
never sued any man, neither did ever any man sue him, whereby he lived and dyed
with glory.

12. Numa Pompilius instituted the Priests or Heralds called Feciales, Clarks
mir. c. 93. p. 415.
whose office was to preserve peace between the Romans and their Neighboring
Nations; and if any quarrels did arise, they were to pacifi^ them by reason,
and not suffer them to come to violence till all hope of peace was past; and if
these Feciales did not consent to the Wars, neither King nor people had it in
their power to undertake them.

13. Heraclitus was brought by the earnest prayers and entreaties of his
Citizens, Cael. Antiq. l^ct. l. 13. c. 5 p. 5^ 5.
that he would bring forth some sentence of his concerning Peace, Unity and
Concord: Heraclitus got up into the Desk or Pulpit, where he called for a cup
of sair water, which he sprinkled a little bran or meal upon, then he put into
it a little Glacon, which is a sort of herb, and so supped it off. This done,
without speaking one word, he departed, leaving the more prudent and wiser sort
of people to collect from thence, that if they would cease from immoderate
expenses and costly matters, and betake themselves to such things as were cheap
and easy to be had, that this was a sure way wherein the lovers of peace and
concord might attain unto their desires.

Eras^n. Apo^^ l. 6. Lang. Polyanth. p. 872.
14. Otho the Emperor when he saw that he must either lay down the Empire, or
else maintain himself in the possession thereof by the blood and slaughter of a
number of Citizens, he determined with himself to die a voluntary death. When
his Friends and Soldiers desir^d him that he would not so soon begin to despair
of the ^vent of the War he replied, That his li^e to him was not of that value,
as to occasion a Civil War for the def^nce of it. Who can choose but admire that
such a spirit as this should be found in a Heathen Prince, and he too not above
thirty years of age?

Panormit. de vebus gestis Alphons. Lang. Polyanth. p. 872.
15. Alphonsus made use of Ludovicus Podius for the most part as his Ambassador
in Italy, as having found him a person of singular diligence and fidelity; when
therefore this his Ambassador gave him to understand, that he might easily
extort two hundred thousand Crowns for that peace which he was to grant to the
Florentines and Venetians. This noble and most generous Prince made him this
return, That his manner was to give peace, and not to sell it.

16. Servius Sulpitius was an Heathen Lawyer, but an excellent person: Clark's
mir. c. 77. p. 344.
it is said of him, that Ad facilitatem aequitatemque omnia tulit, neque
constituore litium actiones, quam controversias tollere maluit: He respected
equity and peace in all that he did, and always sought rather to compose
differences than to multiply Suits of Law.

Plut. in Sertorio. p. Clark's mir. c. 34. p. 118.
11. Sertorius the more he prospered and prevailed in his Wars in Spain, the
more importunate he was with Metellas and Pompey (the Roman Generals that came
against him) that laying down Arms, they would give him leave to live in peace,
and to return into Italy again, professing, he preferred a private life there
before the Government of many Cities.

CHAP. VI. Of the signal Love that some men have showed to their Country.
JOhn the Second, King of Portugal, who for the nobleness of his mind was
worthy of a greater Kingdom: when he heard there was a Bird called a Peli^an,
that tears and gashes her Breast with her Bill, that with her own blood (thus
shed) she might restore her young ones to life, that were le^t as dead by the
bitings of Serpents. This excellent Prince took care that the figure of this
Bird in this action of hers should be added to other his Royal Devices, that he
might hereby show, that he was ready upon occasion to part with his own blood
for the welfare and preservation of his people and Country. Pity it is to
conceal their names whose minds have been (in this matter) as pious and
Princely as his, not doubting to redeem the lives of their Fellow-Citizens, at
the price of their own.

1. The Town of Calis during the Reign of Philip de Valois, Hakew. Apol. l. 4.
c. 11. 7. p. 455. M. Harault. his polit. and martial Discourses. c. 10. p. 72.
De Serves General Hist of France. p. 174. Sa. Daniel's collat. of the hist. of
England. l. 2. p. 240.
being brought to those straits, that now there was no more hope left, either
of Succors or Victuals, John Lord of Vienna who there ^ommanded for the King,
began to treat about the surrender of it, desiring only that they might give it
up with the safety of their lives and Goods. Which conditions being offered to
Edward King of England, who by the space of eleven months had straightly besieged
it: he being exceedingly enraged, that so small a Town should alone stand out
against him so long; and withal calling to mind that they had often galled his
Subjects by Sea, was so far from accepting their petition, that contrariwise he
resolved to put them all to the Sword, had he not been diverted from that
resolution by some sage Counselors then about him, who told him, that for
having been faithful and loyal Subjects to their Sovereign, they deserved not
to be so sharply dealt with. Whereupon Edward changing his first purpose into
some more clemency, promised to receive them to mercy, conditionally. that six
of the principal Townsmen should present him the Keys of the Town bare-headed
and barefooted, and with Halters about their Necks, their lives being to be
left to his disposition: whereof the Governor being advertised, he presently
gets him into the Market place, commanding the Bell to be tolled for the
conventing of the people; whom being assembled, he acquainted with the Articles
which he had received touching the yielding up of the Town, and the assurance
of their lives, which could not be granted but with the death of six of the
chief of them: with this news they were exceedingly cast down and perplexed:
when on the sudden there rises up one of their own company, called Stephen S.
Peter, one of the richest and most sufficient men of the Town, who thus spoke
aloud, Sir, I thank God for the Goods he has bestowed upon me, but more, that
he has given me this present opportunity, to make it known that I prize the
lives of my Countrymen and Fellow-Burgesses above mine own. At the hearing of
which speech and sight of his forwardness, one John Daire and four others after
him made the like offers, not without a great abundance of prayers and tears
from the common people, who saw them so freely and readily sacrifice all their
particular respects for the Weal of the public. And instantly without more
ado, they address themselves to the King of England with the Keys of the Town,
with none other hope but of death, to which (though they held themselves
assured thereof) they went as cheerfully as if they had been going to a
Wedding: yet it pleasing God to turn the heart of the English King, at the
instance of the Queen, and some of the Lords, they were all sent back again
safe and sound.

Rawleigh's hist. World. l. 2. c. 17. 10. p. 420. Heylen's Cosmog. p. 589. Lon.
Theatr. p. 315. Justin. hist. l. 2. p. 38.
2. When the Grecians of Doris (a Region between Phocis and the Mountain Oeta)
sought counsel from the Oracle for their success in the Wars against the
Athenians: it was answered, that then undoubtedly they should prevail, and
become Lords of that State, when they could obtain any victory against them,
and yet preserve the Athenian King living. Codrus the then King of Athens (by
some intelligence) being informed of this answer, withdrew himself from his own
Forces, and putting on the habit of a common Soldier, entered the Camp of the
Dorians, and killing the first he encountered, was himself forthwith cut in
pieces, falling a willing sacrifice to preserve the liberty of his Country.

Plut. paral. p. Lips. monit. l. 1.7. p. 98.
3. Cleomenes King of Sparta being distressed by his Enemy Antigonus King of
Macedon, sent unto Ptolomey King of Egypt for help, who promised it upon
condition, to have his Mother and Child in pledge. Cleomenes was a long time
ashamed to make his Mother acquainted with these conditions, went oftentimes on
purpose to let her understand it, but when he came he had not the heart to
break it to her; she suspecting, asked his Friends if her Son had not something
to say to her, whereupon he brake the matter with her: when she heard it, she
laughing said, How comes it to pass thou have concealed it so long? Come, come,
put me straight into a Ship, and send me whether thou will, that this body of
mine may do some good unto my Country before crooked age consume it without
profit. Cratesiclea, for so was her name, being ready to depart, took Cleomenes
into the Temple of Neptune, embracing and kissing him, and perceiving that his
heart yearn'd for sorrow of her departure: O King of Sparta, said she, let no
man see for shame when we come out of the Temple, that we have wept, and
dishonored Sparta. Whilst she was with Ptolomey, the Achaians sought to make
peace with Cleomenes, but he durst not because of his pledges which were with
King Ptolomey, which she hearing of, wrote to him that he should not spare to
do any thing that might conduce to the honor or safety of his Country, though
without the consent of King Ptolomey, for fear of an old woman and a young boy.

Fulgos. l. 5. c. 6. p. 638. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 43.
4. Sylla having overcome Marius in Battle, commanded all the Citizens of
Praeneste to be slain, excepting one only that was his intimate Friend; but he
hearing the bloody sentence pronounced against the rest, stepped forth, and
said, That he scorned to live by his favor who was the destroyer of his
Country; and so went amongst the rest who were to be slain.

Plut. paral. p. 127, 128. in Themistocle.
5. Theomistocles the Athenian General, after his many famous Exploits was
banished the Country, and sought after to be slain; he chose therefore to put
himself rather into the power of the Persian King his Enemy, than to expose
himself to the malice of his Fellow Citizens. He was by him received with great
joy; insomuch that the King in the midst of his sleep was heard to cry out
thrice aloud, I have with me Themistocles the Ath^nian. He also did him great
honor, for he allotted him three Cities ^or his Table provisions, and two
others for the Furniture of his Wardrobe and Bed. While he remained in that
Court with such Splendor and Dignity, the Egyptians rebelled, encouraged and
also assisted by the Athenians. The Grecian Navy was come as far Cyprus and
Cilicia; and Cimon the Athenian Admiral rode Master at Sea. This caused the
Persian King to levy Soldiers, and appoint Commanders to repress them. He also
sent Letters to Themistocles, then at Magnesia, importing that he had given him
the supreme command in that affair, that he should now be mindful of his
promise to him, and undertake this War against Greece. But Themistocles was no
way moved with anger against his ungrateful Countrymen, nor incited to the War
with them, by the gift of all this honor and power; for having sacrificed, he
called then about him his Friends, and having embraced them, he drank Bulls
blood, or (as others say) a strong poison, and so chose rather to shut up his
own life, than to be an instrument of evil to that Country of his, which yet
had deserved so ill at his hands. Thus died Themistocles in the sixty fi^th
year of his age, most of which time he had spent in the management of the
Republic at home, or as the chief Commander abroad.

6. The Norvegians going out of their own Country upon any account whatsoever,
Zuing. vol. l. 1. p. 43.
as soon as they return, and set their first foot upon that earth, they fall
prostrate upon the ground, and signing themselves with the Cross, they kiss the
earth, And O thou more Christian Land (cry they) than all the rest of the
world! so highly do they admire their own Country and its worship with a
contempt of all others.

7. In the year three hundred ninety three from the Building of Rome, Live.
hist. l. 7. p. 122. Lon. Theatr. p. 312. P. Orosi^ hist. l. 3. c. 5. p. 79.
Zonar. Annal. tom. 2. p. 62.
whether by Earthquake or other m^ans is uncertain; but the Forum at Rome
opened, and almost half of it was fallen in, to a very strange depth, great
quantities of earth was thrown into it, but in vain, for it could not be filled
up. The Soothsayers therefore were consulted with, who pronounced that the
Romans should devote unto that place whatsoever it was, wherein they most
excelled. Then Martius Curtius (a person of admirable valor) affirming that
the Romans had nothing besides Arms and Virtue wherein they excelled, he
devoted himself for the safety of his Country, and so armed on Horseback, and
his Horse well accoutred, he rode into the gaping Gulf, which soon after
closed it self upon him.

8. The Tartars in their invasion of China were prosperous on all sides,
Martin. de billo Tartarico. p. 281.
and had set down themselves before the Walls of the renowned and vast City of
Hangchen, the Metropolis of the Province of Chekiang, where the Emperor
Lovangus was enclosed. Lovangus his Soldiers refused to fight till they had
received their arrears, which yet at this time he was not able to pay them. It
was upon this occasion that (his heart not able to such a desolation of the
City and his Subjects as he foresaw) he gave such an illustrio^s example of his
humanity and tenderness to his people, as Europe scarce ever saw; for he
mounted upon the City Walls, and calling to the Tartarian General, upon his
knees he begged the lives of his people: Spare not me, said he, I shall
willingly be the Victime of my Subjects. And having said this, he presently
went out to the Tartars Army, and was by them taken. By which means this noble
City was conserved, though with the destruction of the mutinous Army: ^or the
Tartars caused the City to shut the Gates against them till they had cut in
pieces all that were without, and then entered triumphantly into it, not using
any force or violence to any.

Herodot. l. 7. p. 424, 425.
9. Darius the Son o^ Hystaspis had sent Ambassadors to Sparta to demand of them
Earth and Water, as a token of their subjection to him: they took their
Ambassadors, and cast some of them headlong into a Dungeon, others into pits,
and bade them thence take the Earth and Water they came for. After which, when
they had no prosperous sacrifices, and that for a long time, weary of these
calamities, they met in a full assembly, and proposed if any would die for the
good of Sparta. Then Sperthies the Son of Aneristus, and Balis the Son of
Nicolaus, (of birth, and equal estate with the best) freely offered themselves
to undergo such punishment as Xerxes the Son of Darius (then his Successor)
should inflict for the death of his Ambassadors. The Spartans sent them away
as persons hastening toward their death, being come to Sus^, they were
admitted the presence of Xerxes, where first they refused to adore him, and
then told him, that the Spartans had sent them to suffer death in lieu of those
Ambassadors whom they had put to death at Sparta, Xerxes replied that he would
not deal as the Spartans had done, who by killing Ambassadors had confounded
the Laws of all Nations; that he would not do what he had upbraided them with;
nor would he by their death absolve the Spartans from their guilt.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 43.
10. John King of Bohemia was so great a Lover o^ Lucenberg his own Country,
that oftentimes he laid aside the care of his Kingdoms Affairs, and went
thither, to the great indignation of his Nobility. Besides this; he had
thoughts of changing Bohemia with the Emperor Ludovicus for the Dukedom of
Bavaria, ^or no other purpose but that he might be the nearer to Lucenburgh.

11. A Spartan woman had five Sons in a Battle that was fought near unto the
City, Plut. in Laconi^. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 154.
and seeing one that came thence, she asked him how affairs went? All your five
Sons are slain, said he. Unhappy wretch, replied the woman, I ask thee not of
of their concerns, but of that of my Country. As to that all is well, said the
Soldier. Then, said she, let them mourn that are miserable; for my part I
esteem my self happy in the prosperity of my Country.

Plut. paral. p. 323. in Aristide.
12. Aristides the Athenian going into Banishment, lift up his eyes to Heaven,
and with conjoined hands prayed, that the Gods would so prosper the affairs of
the Athenians, that Aristides might never more come into their minds: for in
times of adversity the people is wont to have recourse to some or other
excellent person, which also fell out in his case; for in the third year of his
exile, Xerxes came with his whole power into Greece, and then Aristides was
recalled to receive an important command.

Zuing. Th^atr. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 256.
13. When Charle's the Seventh, King of France, marched toward Naples, they of
the City of Florence did set open their Gates to him, as supposing they should
thereupon receive the less damage by him in their City and Territories
adjoining: But the King being entered with his Army, demanded the Government of
the City, and a sum of money to ransom their Liberties and Estates. In this
strait ^our of the principal Citizens were appointed to transact and manage
this affair with the King's Ministers, amongst these was Petrus Caponis, who
(having heard the rigorous terms of their composition, recited and read by the
King's principal Secretary) was so moved, that in the sight and presence of the
King, he snatched the paper out of his hands, tore it in pieces, And now, cried
he, sound you your Trumpets, and we will ring our Bells. Charles astonished at
the resolution of the man, desisted from his design, and thereupon it passed as
a Proverbial Speech, Gallum a Capo victum fuisse.

13. P. Valerius Poplicola had a proud and sumptuous Palace in the Velia, Plu.
in Poplicol. p. 102.
seated on high, near the Forum, and had a fair prospect into all parts of the
City, the ascent of it was narrow, and not easy of access; and he being
Consul, when he descended from his House with his Litters and Attendance, the
people said it represented the proud pomp of a King, and the countenance of one
that had a design upon their liberty. Valerius was told this by his Friends,
and no way offended with the jealousy of the people, though causeless; while
it was yet night, having hired a number of Smiths, Carpenters and others, he in
one night pulled down that stately Palace of his, and subverted it to the very
Foundations; himself and Family abiding with his Friends.

CHAP. VII. Of the singular Love of some Husbands to their Wives.
FRom the Nuptial Sacrifices of old, the Gall was to be taken away, and cast
upon the ground, to signify, that betwixt the young couple there should be
nothing of bitterness or discontent, but that instead thereof sweetness and
love should fill up the whole space of their lives. We shall find in the
following instances, not only the Gall taken away, but some such affectionate
Husbands, and such proficients of this lesson of love, that they may seem to
have improved it to the uttermost heights.

1. Darius the last King of the Persians, supposing that his Wife Statira was
slain by Alexander, Plut. in paral. p. 682. in Alexan.
filled all the Camp with lamentations and outcries; O, Alexander, said he,
whom of thy Relations have I done to death, that thou should thus retaliate
my severities: thou have hated me without any provocation on my part: but
suppose thou have justice on thy side, should thou manage the war against
Women? Thus he bewailed the supposed death of his Wife; but as soon as he heard
she was not only preserved alive, but also treated by Alexander with the
highest Honor, he then prayed the Gods to render Alexander fortunate in all
things, though he was his Enemy.

2. M. Antonius the Triumvir being come to Laodicea, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l.
1. p. 50. Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. fol. 41. Joseph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 5. p. 399.
sent for Herod King of the Jews to answer what should be objected against him,
concerning the death of Aristobulus the High Priest and his Brother-in-law,
whom (while he was swimming) he caused to be drowned under pretense of sport.
Herod not trusting much to the goodness of his cause, committing the Government
of his Kingdom to Joseph his Uncle, privily gave him order, that if Antonius
should adjudge his offense to be capital, that forthwith he should kill
Mariamne his Wife; for that as he said he had such an affection to her, that if
any should fortune to be the possessor of her Beauties (though it was after his
death) yet should he conceive himself injured thereby; affirming also, that
this affair had befallen him through the beauty of his Wife, the fame of which
had long since come to the ears of Antonius. This commandment was made known by
Joseph to the Queen her self, who afterward upbraided her Husband with it, and
thereby occasioned the death of Joseph, and of her self also under pretext of
adultery with him. Herod had impotent desires of her even after she was dead;
he often called upon her name, and frequently betook himself to uncomely
lamentations: he invented all the delight he could, he feasted and drank
liberally, and yet to small purpose, he therefore left off the care of his
Kingdom, and was so overcome with his grief, that he often commanded his
servants to call Mariamne, as if she had been still alive, his grief
increasing, he exiled himself into solitudes under pretense of hunting, where
continuing to afflict himself, he fell into a grievous disease, and when
recovered of it, he became so fell and cruel, that for slight causes he was
apt to in^lict death.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p. 114. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 50. Sabell. Ex.
l. 3. c. 5. p. 145.
3. Titus Gracchus loved his Wife Cornelia with that fervency, that when two
Snakes were by chance found in his House, and that the Augurs had pronounced
that they should not suffer them both to escape, but that one of them should be
killed: affirming also, that if the Male was let go, Cornelia should die first;
on the other side, that Gracchus should first expire, if the Female was
dismissed: Dismiss then the Female, said he, that so Cornelia may survive me,
who am at this time the elder. It so fell out, that he died soon after, leaving
behind him many Sons; so entirely beloved by the Mother, and the memory of her
Husband so dear to her, that she refused the proffered marriage with Ptolemy
King of Egypt. The buried ashes of her Husband it seemed lay so cold at her
heart, that the Splendor of a Diadem, and all the pomp of a rich and proffered
Kingdom were not able so to warm it, as to make it capable of receiving the
impression of a new Love.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p. 114.
4. C. Plautius Numida a Senator, having heard of the death of his Wife, and not
able to bear the weight of so great a grief, thrust his Sword into his Breast,
but by the sudden coming in of his servants, he was prevented from finishing
his design, and his wound was bound up by them; nevertheless, as soon as he
found opportunity according to his desire, he tore off his plasters, opened
the lips of his wound with his own hand, and let forth a Soul that was
unwilling to stay in the body, after that of his Wives had forsaken hers.

5. Caligula the Emperor had Caesonia to Wife, and though she was not of
remarkable beauty, Sueton. in Calig. p. 180.
nor of a just but declining age; though by another Husband she was already the
Mother of three Daughters, yet being one of prodigious both luxury and
lasciviousness, he loved her with that ardency and constancy, that he often
showed her to the Soldiers riding by him in her Armor, and to his Friends even
naked. The day she was brought to bed he made her his Wife, professing that he
was at once her Husband, and the Father of a child by her. The child which was
named Iulia Drusilla was by his order carried about to all the Temples of the
Gods, at last he laid it down in the lap of Minerva, and commended the child to
her education and instruction, nor did he conclude the child to be his by any
more certain sign than this, that even in her infancy she had a cruelty so
natural, that she would fly upon the faces and eyes of such children as played
with her with her Fingers and Nails.

6. Philip, surnamed the Good, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 388. Clark's mir.
c. 65. p. 291.
the first author of that G^eatness whereunto the House of Burgundy did arrive,
was about twenty three years of age, when his Father John Duke of Burgundy was
slain by the villainy and perfidiousness of Charles the Dauphin. Being informed
of that unwelcome news, full of grief and anger as he was, he hasts into the
Chamber of his Wife (she was the Dauphin's Sister) O, said he, my Michalea, thy
Brother has murdered my Father. She who was a true lover of her Husband
straight brake out into cries and tears; and fearing (not in vain) that this
accident would prove the occasion of a breach, she lamented as one that refused
all comfort; when her Husband used all kind of words to cheer up her spirits:
Thou shall be no less dear unto me, said he, for this fault, which (though near
related) is yet none of thine; and therefore take courage and comfort thy self
in a Husband that will be faithful and constant to thee for ever. He performed
what he said, he lived with her three years, treating her always with his
accustomed love, and the same respects: and although the very sight of her did
daily renew the memory of that wicked act of her Brother; and though (which is
more) she was barren, a sufficient cause of divorce amongst Princes; yet he
would not that any thing but death should dissolve the matrimonial Bond that
was betwixt them.

7. M. Plautius by the command of the Senate was to bring back a Navy of sixty
Ships of the Confederates into Asia, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p, 115.
he put on shore at Tarentum; thither had Orestilla his Wife followed him, and
there (overcome with a disease) she departed this life. Plautius having ordered
all things for the celebration of the Funeral, she was laid upon the Pile to be
burnt, as the Roman manner was; the last offices to be performed, were to
anoint the dead body, and to give it a Valedictory Kiss; but betwixt these the
grieved Husband fell upon his own Sword and died. His Friends took him up in
his Gown and Shoes as he was, and laying his body by that of his Wives, burnt
them both together. The Sepulcher of these two is yet to be seen at Tarentum,
and is called the Tomb of the two Lovers.

8. Dominicus Catalusius was the Prince of Lesbos, Lon. Theatr. p. 462. Fulgos.
l. 4. c. 6. p. 526.
and is worthy of eternal memory for the entire love which he bare to his Wife:
she fell into a grievous Leprosy, which made her appear more like unto a
rotten carcass, than a living body. Her Husband not fearing in the least to be
in^ected with the contagion, nor frighted with her horrible aspects, nor
distasted with the loathsome smells sent forth by her ^ilthy Ulcers, never
forbade her either his Board or Bed; but the true love he had toward her
turned all those things to him into security and pleasure.

9. One of the Neapolitans (pity his name as well as Country is not remembered)
being busily employed in a Field near the Sea, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 6. p. 526, 527.
Burt. melan. part 3. 3. p. 535.
and his Wife at some distance from him, the woman was seized upon by some
Moorish Pirates, who came on shore to prey upon all they could find. Upon his
return not finding his Wi^e, and perceiving a Ship that lay at anchor not far
off, conjecturing the matter as it was, he threw himself into the Sea, and swam
up to the Ship; when calling to the Captain, he told him that he was therefore
come because he must needs follow his Wife. He feared not the Barbarism of the
Enemies of the Christian Faith, nor the miseries those Slaves endure that are
thrust into places where they must tug at the Oar, his love overcame all these.
The Moors were full of admiration at the carriage of the man, for they had seen
some of his Countrymen rather choose death than to endure so hard a loss of
their liberty, and at their return they told the whole of this Story to the
King of Tunis; who moved with the Relation of so great a love, gave him and his
Wife their freedom, and the man was made by his command, one of the Soldiers of
his Life Guard.

10. Gratianus the Emperor was so great and known a Lover of his Wife, Ch^^w.
hist. collect. c^at. 4. p. 112. Imper. hist. p. 344.
that his enemies had hereby an occasion administered to them to ensnare his
life, which was on this manner. Maximus the Usurper ca^sed a Report to be
^pread, that the Empress with certain Troops was come to see her Husband and to
go with him into Italy, and sent a messenger with counterfeit Letters to the
Emperor, to give him advice thereof. After this he sent one Andragathius a
subtle Captain, to the end he should put himself into a Horse Litter with some
chosen Soldiers, and go to meet the Emperor, (feigning himself to be the
Empress) and so to surprise and kill him. The cunning Champion performed his
business, for at Lions in France the Emperor came forth to meet his Wife, and
coming to the Horse-Litter was taken and killed.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 7. p. 888.
11. Ferdinand King of Spain, married Elizabeth the Sister of Ferdinand Son of
John King of Arragon, Great were the virtues of this admirable Princess,
whereby she gained so much upon the heart of her Husband, a valiant and
fortunate Prince, that he admitted her to an equal share in the Government of
the Kingdom with himself: wherein they lived with such mutual agreement; as the
like has not been known amongst any of the Kings and Queens of that Country.
There was nothing done in the affairs of State, but what was debated, ordained,
and subscribed by both: The Kingdom of Spain was a name common to them both,
Ambassadors were sent abroad in both their names, Armies and Soldiers were
levied and formed in both their names, and so was the whole wars, and all civil
affairs, that King Ferdinand did not challenge to himself an authority in any
thing or in any respect, greater than that whereunto he had admitted this his
beloved Wife.

Bajazet the first, after the great victory obtained against him by Tamberlain,
Rica^t his present state of the Ottoman Empire. l. 2. c. 21. p. 155.
to his other great misfortunes and disgraces, had this one added, of having
his beautiful Wife Despina whom he dearly loved, to fall into the hands of the
Conqueror, whose ignominious and undecent treatment, before the eyes of her
Husband, was a matter of more dishonor and sorrow, than all the rest of his
afflictions, for when he beheld this, he resolved to live no longer, but
knocked out his Brains against the iron bars of that Cage wherein he was
enclosed.

Ae^ian var. hist. l. 12. c. ^7. p. 334.
13. Dion was driven from Sicily into Exile by Dionysius, but his Wife
Aristomache was detained, and by him was compelled to marry with Polycrates,
one of his beloved Courtiers: Dion afrerwards returned, took Syracuse, and
expelled Dionysius: his Sister Arete came and spoke to him, his Wife
Aristomache stood behind her, but conscious to her self in what manner she had
wronged his Bed, shame would not permit her to speak. His Sister Arete then
pleaded her cause, and told her Brother that what his Wife had done, she was
enforced to by necessity, and the Command of Dionysius; whereupon the kind
Husband received her to his House as before.

Zuing. Tueatr. vol. 18. l. 2. p. 3330.
Meleager challenged to himself the chief glory and honor of slaying the
Calidonian Boar, but this being denied him, he sat in his Chamber so angry and
discontented; Camer. hist. medit. cent. 1. c. 17. p. 231.
that when the Curetes were assaulting the City where he lived, he would not
stir out to lend his Citizens the least of his assistance. The Elders,
Magistrates, the chief of the City and the Priests came to him with their
humble supplications, but he would not move, they propounded a great reward, he
despised at once both it and them. His Father Oenaeus came to him, and
embracing his knees sought to make him relent but all in vain: His Mother came
and tried all ways but was refused, his Sisters and his most familiar friends
were sent to him, and begged he would not forsake them in their last extremity:
but neither this way was his fierce mind to be wrought upon. In the mean time
the enemy had broken into the City, and then came his wife Cleopatra trembling:
O my dearest Love, said she, help us or we are lost: the Enemy is already
entered. The Hero was moved with this voice alone, and roused himself at the
apprehension of the danger of his beloved Wife: He armed himself, went forth,
and left not till he had repulsed the Enemy, and put the City in its wonted
safety and security.

CHAP. VIII. Of the singular Love of some Wives to their Husbands.
THough the Female be the weaker Sex, yet some have so superseded the fidelity
of their nature, by an incredible strength of affection: that being born up
with that they have oftentimes performed as great things, as we could expect
from the courage and constancy of the most generous amongst men. They have
despised death let it appear to them in what shape it would; and made all sorts
of difficulties give way before the force of that invincible Love which seemed
proud to show it self most strong, in the greatest extremity of their Husbands.

1. The Prince of the Province of Fingo in the Empire of Iapan, Mandelsio's
Travels. l. 2. p. 190.
hearing that a Gentleman of the Country had a very beautiful woman to his
Wife, got him dispatched: and having sent for the widow some days after her
Husbands death, Varenij descriptio Regni Iaponiae, c. 14. p. 44.
acquainted her with his desires: She told him she had much reason to think her
self happy, in being honored with the friendship of so great a Prince, yet she
was resolved to bite off her Tongue and murder her self, if he proffered her
any violence: But if he would grant her the favor to spend one Month in
bewailing her Husband, and then give her the liberty to make an entertainment
for the Relations of the deceased, to take her leave of them, he should find
how much she was his servant, and how far she would comply with his Affections.
It was easily granted, a very great dinner was provided, whither came all the
kindred of the deceased: the Gentlewoman perceiving the Prince began to be warm
in his wine, in hopes of enjoying her promise; she desired liberty to withdraw
into an adjoining Gallery to take the Air, but as soon as she was come into it,
she cast her self headlong down in the presence of the Prince, and all her dead
Husbands Relations.

2. Cedrenus observes in his History, that Constantine the Ninth, exercising
tyranny as well in matters of Love as within his Empire, Ca^s. H.C. in Treat.
of Pass^ms.. 4. p. 8.
caused the Roman Argyropulus to be sought out, and commanded him to repudiate
his Wife whom he had lawfully married, to take his daughter on condition that
he would make him Caesar, and associate him with himself in his dignity: But if
he condescended not to his will, he threatened to pull out his eyes, and to make
him all the days of his life miserable. The Lady who was present, seeing her
Husband involved in all the perplexities that might be, and ignorant what
answer to give unto the Emperor. Ah Sir, said she, I see you are much hindered
in a brave way if it only rest in your Wife that you be not great and happy, I
freely deprive my self of all, yea of your company, (which is more precious to
me than all the Empires of the world) rather than prejudice your fortune: For
know I love you better than my self. And saying this she cut o^f her hair, and
voluntarily entered into a Monastery, which the other was willing enough to
suffer, preferring Ambition before Love; a matter very ordinary amongst great
ones.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 51. p. 228.
3. The Emperor Conrad the Third, besieged Guelphus Duke of Bavaria, in the
City of Wensberg in Germany: the Women perceiving that the Town could not
possibly hold out long, petitioned the Emperor that they might depart, only
with so much as each of them could carry on their Backs; Lonicer. Theatr. p.
465.
which the Emperor condescended to, expecting they would have laden
themselves with Silver and Gold, David Chytrei. Chronol. p. 51.
etc. But they came all forth with every one her Husband on her back, whereat
the Emperor was so moved that he wept, received the Duke into his favor, gave
all the men their lives, and extolled the women with deserved praises. Bodinus
says, that Laurentius Medices was restored to his health, by the only reading
of this Story, when he had long in vain expected it from the endeavors of his
Physicians.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 51. p. 229.
4. Hota was the Wife of Rahi Benxamut a valiant Captain, and of great
reputation amongst the Alarbes, she had been bravely rescued out of the hands
of the Portugals (who were carrying her away Prisoner, Lips. Monit. l. 2. c.
17. p. 385.
) by the exceeding courage and valor of Benxamut her Husband. She showed her
thankfulness to him by the ready performances of all the o^^ices of love and
duty: Some time after Benxamut was slain in a con^lict, and Hota performed her
Husbands Funeral Obsequies with infinite lamentations, laid his Body in a
stately Tomb, and then for Nine days together she would neither eat nor drink,
whereof she died, and was buried (as she had ordained in her last Will) by the
side of her beloved Husband. Of her I may say as Sir Henry Wotton wrote upon
Sir Albert Mortons Lady: He first deceased; She for a few days tried
To live without him, liked it not and died.


Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 51. p. 225.
5. Arria the Wife of Cecinna Paetus, understanding that her Husband was
condemned to dye, and that he was permitted to choose what manner of death liked
him best: she went to him and having exhorted him to depart this life
courageously, Plin. Ep. l. 3. p. 76.
and bidding him farewell, gave her self a stab into the Breast with a Knife she
had hid for that purpose under her Clothes: Fulgos. l. 4. c. 6. p. 523.
Then drawing the Knife out of the wound and reaching it to Paetus, Zuing.
T^^atr vol. 1. l. 1. p. 49.
she said, Vulnus quod feci Paete non dolet, sed quod tu facies: The wound I
have made P^etus, smarts not; but that only which thou art about to give thy
self. Whereupon Martial has an Epigram to this purpose.

When Arria to her Husband gave the Knife, Martial Epigr. l. Epig.

Which made the wound whereby she lost her Life:
This wound dear Paetus, grieves me not, quoth she,
But that which thou must give thy self grieves me.
6. King Edward the First while Prince, Baker's Chron. p. 137.
warred in the Holy Land, where he rescued the great City of Acon, from being
surrendered to the Souldan; after which one Anzazim, Cambd. Remains. p. 207.
a desperate Sarazen (who had often been employed to him from the General^
being one time upon pretense of some secret message, admitted alone into his
Chamber, he with an empoyson'd Knife gave him three wounds in the Body, Speeds
hist. p. 552.
two in the Arm and one near the Arm-Pit, which were thought to be mortal, and
had perhaps been so, if out of unspeakable love the Lady Elianor his Wife, had
not sucked out the poison of his wounds with her mouth, and thereby effected a
cure, which otherwise had been incurable. Thus it is no wonder that Love should
do wonders, seeing it is it self a wonder.

7. Sulpitia was the Wife of Lentulus, Val. Max. l. 6. c. 7. p. 179.
a person proscribed by the Trium-Virate in Rome, he being fled into Sicily,
Lonicer. Theatr. p. 464.
she was narrowly watched by Iulia her Mother, lest she should follow her
Husband thither; but she disguising her self in the habit of a Servant, taking
with her two maids and as many men; by a secret flight she got thither, not
refusing to be proscribed her self, to approve her fidelity and Love to her
Husband.

8. Artemisia the Queen of Caria, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p. 115.
bare so true a love to her Husband Ma^solus, that when he was dead she
prepared his Funeral in a sumptuous manner, she sent for the chiefest and most
eloquent Orators out of all Greece, Lonicer. Theatr. p. 465.
to speak Orations in his Praise upon the chief day of the solemnity. When the
Body was burnt, she had the Ashes carefully preserved, Ussers Annals. I. p. 436.
and by degrees (in her drink) she took down those last remainders of her
Husband into her own body, and as a further testimony of her Love to his
Memory, she built him a Sepulcher with such magnificence, A. Gell. l. 10. c.
18. p. 194.
that it was numbered amongst the seven wonders of the World.

9. Learchus by poison cut off Archelaus King of the Cyrenians, Fulgos. l. 9.
c. 10. p. 1284.
and his friend, and seized upon his Kingdom in hopes of enjoying his Queen
Eryxona, She pretending not to be displeased with the proposals, invited
Learchus to come alone in the night and confer with her about it: Zuing.
Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 48.
who in the strength of his affection and fearing nothing of treachery; went
unaccompanied to her Palace, where he was slain by two whom Eryxona had there
hid for that purpose, and his body she caused to be thrown out at the Window.

10. Camma the Wife of Sinatus the Priestess of Diana, Fulgos. l. 9. c. 10. p.
1285.
was a person of most rare beauty and no less virtue: Erasinorix to enjoy her
had treacherously slain her Husband, Lonicer. Theatr. p. 465.
he had often attempted in vain to persuade her to his embraces, by fair
speeches and gifts, and she fearing he would add force to these, feigned her
self to be overcome with his importunity. To the Temple they went, Polyen. l. 8.
and standing before the Altar (as the custom was) the new Bride drank a Cup of
Wine in a Golden Vial to the Bridegroom, which he received and drank off with
great pleasure: which done, falling on her Knees with a loud voice, she said: I
thank thee O Venerable Diana, that thou have granted me in thy Temple, to
revenge the blood of my Husband, which was shed for my sake: Which said she
fell down and dyed. Now did Erasinorix perceive the Wine he had drank was
poisoned, nor was it long after e're he himself as another Sacrifice fell dead
at the foot of the Altar.

Fulgos. l. 4. c. 6. p 524.
11. Pandocrus was one of the Captains of the Men of War under Iacobus King of
Persia, who was the Son of Vsun Cass^n: Zuing. T^^atr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 49.
this man had a most beautiful young Lady to his Wife (though not above sixteen
years of Age) by whom he was most entirely beloved. He having rebelled against
his Sovereign, she long besought him that he would not enter Battle with his
Enemies, but when he would not agree to her in that, she then entreated that at
least he would kill her before the Fight, that so she might not be compelled to
outlive him: when he had also denied her in this, he gave Battle wherein he
was overcome and slain, and his Wife being taken, was by the King bestowed upon
one of his Captains: When therefore he would take her to Wife, she long opposed
his intentions, and when at last she perceived he went about to gain that by
force which he could not by entreaty, she requested some time wherein to
deliberate upon the matter: It was granted, and when she had sent him a Note,
wherein she had written; No man shall ever say, that the Wife of Pandoerus did
long survive him; she fell upon a Sword and dyed.

Plut. p^ral. in Agi^e and Cleombrot. p. 802.
12. Leonidas King of Sparta had married his Daughter Chelonis to Cleombrotus,
afterward he fell out with him and would have slain him: Chelonis taking her
two little Sons, went to her Husband, earnestly begging his life of her angry
Father, telling him that if he proceeded to kill her Husband, Clarks mir. c.
65. p. 292.
she would first kill her self: and pitifully complaining, she laid her face
upon Cleombrotus his head, and casting her swollen and blubbered eyes upon the
standers by, Leonidas was moved to pity, and commanded Cleombrotus to get him
thence into Exile, withal praying his daughter for his sake, to remain with him
and not to forsake her Father who did so dearly love her, as for her sake alone
to save the forfeit life of her Husband: But she by no means would yield to his
request, but rising up with her Husband, she gave him one of his Sons, and
taking the other in her owns Arms, she voluntarily went with him into
Banishment.

13. Portia the Daughter of Cato, and Wife of Marcus Brutus, Lips. Monit. l. 1.
c. 7.. 5. p. 105.
when she conjectured by the sleepless and disturbed Nights of her Husband,
that he had conceived some great thing in his mind, and concealed it from her
in suspicion of her weakness; Lonicer. Theatr. p. 463.
She (to give her Husband an instance of her constancy and secrecy) made her
self a deep wound in her Thigh with a Razor, there followed a stream of Blood,
Debility, and a Fever. When Brutus came home, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p. 115.
sad at so unexpected an accident, she causing all to withdraw, Sit down
Husband, said ^he, I have something that is serious to discourse with you: When
I married you I came to your house as a Wife, not as a Mistress or Whore, nor
only as a companion of your Bed and Board, but of all prosperous and adverse
things: I am Cato's daughter, and reckon you that I am of that blood. What
then? do I complain of you? Not at all, if I look at other matters, conjugal
Solemnities, good will, and this external love, but I look higher, and would
have your friendship also; and that is the only grief of my mind which torments
me, that you have my fidelity in suspicion: For wherefore should you dissemble?
Do I not perceive the care you are in? that there is some secret and great
enterprise you are in agitation about? Why do you conceal it from me? If I can
lend you no assistance, expect some comfort at least from me: For as to my
secrecy I am able to engage; Consider not the rest of my Sex, I say again that
I am the daughter of Cato, and I add thereunto that I am the Wife of Brutus:
either nature (being from such a Father) or conversation with such a Husband,
will render me constant and invincible against all that is to be feared. Why do
I multiply words, I my self have made experiment of my self, and see this wound
which of my own accord I have given my self, that I might know whether I could
undergo with courage any grief and torments: I can believe it, I am able to
bear them, to despise them, and I can dye Brutus with and for my Husband. If
therefore you are about any thing that is just and honorable, and worthy of us
both, conceal it no longer. Brutus admiring the greatness of her mind, and
surprised with the discovery of such an affection, lift up his hands for joy:
And, O all ye Powers above, said he, be ye favorable and propitious to my
desires, and make me a Husband that is worthy of Portia. Then he recited in
order to her the conspiracy against Caesar, and who they were that were
concerned therein. She was so far from being affrighted therewith, or deterring
him from it, that she encouraged him to proceed: But the day they were to
perform the enterprise, being in fear for Brutus she swooned, and was scarcely
recovered by him: At the last Brutus being overcome and slain at Philippi; she
determined to dye, and when her friends being ever with her, deprived her of
the oppurtunity and means, she at last snatched the burning coals with her
hands out of the fire, and thrusting them into her mouth, she kept them there
till she was choked.

14. In the Reign of Vespasian, Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 379.
there was a rebellion in Gaul; the chief Leader of which was Julius Sabinus,
the Gauls being reduced, the Captain was sought after to be punished: But he
had hid himself in a Vault or Cave which was the monument of his Grandfather,
he caused a report to be spread of his death, as if he had voluntarily poisoned
himself, and the better to persuade men of the truth of it, he caused his house
to be set on fire, as if his Body had therein been Burnt. He had a Wife whose
name was Eponina, she knew nothing of his safety, but bewailed his death with
inconsolable tears, there were only two of his freed men who were privy to it,
who pitying their Lady, (who was determined to dye, and in order thereunto had
now abstained from all manner of food for three days together) declared her
purpose to her Husband, and besought him to save her that loved him so well: It
was granted, and she was told that her Sabinus lived, she came to him where
they lived with secrecy and undiscovered for the space of nine years together:
She conceived and brought forth Children in that solitary mansion. At last the
place of their Abode came to be known; they were taken and brought to Rome,
where Vespasian commanded they should be slain: Eponina producing and showing
her Children, Behold O Caesar, said she, such as I have brought forth and
brought up in a Monument, that thou might have more suppliants for our
lives: Cruel Vespasian that could not be moved with such words as these. Well
they were both led to death, and Eponina joyfully dyed with her Husband, who
had been before buried with him for so many years together.

15. Eumenes burying the dead, Diodor. Sicul. l. 19. p. 626, 627.
that had fallen in the Battle of Gabine against Antigonus; amongst others,
there was found the Body of Ceteas, the Captain of those Troops that had come
out of India. This man had two Wives who accompanied him in the Wars, one which
he had newly married, and another which he had married a few years before, but
both of them bare an entire love to him, for whereas the Laws of India require
that one Wife shall be burnt with her dead Husband; both these proffered
themselves to death, and strove with that ambition, as if it was some glorious
prize they sought after. Before such Captains as were appointed their Judges,
the younger pleaded that the other was with child; and that therefore she could
not have the benefit of that Law. The elder pleaded that whereas she was before
the other in years, it was also fit that she should be before her in honor;
since it was customary in other things, that the elder should have place. The
Judges when they understood by Midwives that the elder was with child, passed
judgment that the younger should be burnt, which done, she that had lost the
cause departed, rending her Diadem, and tearing her hair as if some grievous
calamity had befallen her. The other all joy at her victory, went to the
Funeral Fire magnificently dressed up by her Friends, led along by her Kindred,
as if to her Nuptials, they all the way singing Hymns in her praises; when she
drew near the fire, taking off her Ornaments, she delivered them to her Friends
and Servants as tokens of remembrance, they were a multitude Rings with variety
of precious Stones, Chains and Stars of Gold, etc. this done, she was by her
Brother placed upon the combustible matter by the side of her Husband; and
after the Army had thrice compassed the Funeral Pile, fire was put to it, and
she without a word of complaint finished her life in the flames.

Lud. viv. de Christian. Haemina. l. 2. p. 360. Camerar. oper. subcis. cent. 1.
c. 51. p. 226.
16. Clara Cervenda was one of the most beautiful and fairest Virgins in all
Bruges; she was married to Bernard Valdaura, at that time above forty four
years of age. The first night after her marriage she found that her Husbands
Thighs were rolled and wrapped with Clouts, and that he was a man very sore and
sickly; for all which she loved him not a whit the less. Not long after
Valdaura fell so sick, that all the Physicians despaired of his life: then did
she so attend upon him, that in six weeks space she put not off her clothes,
only for shift, nor rested above an hour (or two at the most) in a night, and
that in her clothes. This Disease was a venomous Relic of the Pox; and the
Physicians counseled Clara not to touch the sick man, or come near him; and so
also did her Kindred and Neighbors. All which moved her not, but having taken
order for that which concerned the benefit of his Soul, she provided him all
things that might tend to the health of his body; she made him Broths and
Juleps, she changed his Sheets and Clouts, although by reason of a continual
looseness and many sores about him, his body never left running with matter and
filth, so that he never had any clean part about him. All the day she rested
not, the strength of her love supporting the delicacy of her body; by this good
means Valdaura escaped that danger. After this, by reason of a sharp and hot
Rheum falling from his Brain, the Gristle within his Nose began to be eaten
away; wherefore the Physicians appointed a certain powder to be blown up softly
into his Nose at certain times with a Quill; no body could be found to take
such a loathsome service in hand, because of the stench that came from him; but
Clara did it cheerfully, and when his Cheeks and Chin were all covered over
with Scabs, Wheals and Scales, so as no Barber could or would shave him, she
with her little Scissars played the Barber, and made him a deft Beard. From
this Sickness he fell into another, which lasted seven years, during which
time, with incredible diligence she made ready his meat, put in his Tents, laid
on his Plasters, dressed and bound up his Thighs, all rotten with Scabs and
Ulcers, his Breath was such that none durst come near by ten paces, and abide
by it, which yet she protested was sweet to her. This long sickness, and the
nourishing and medicining of a body oppressed by so many Diseases, was a great
matter in a House that had no Rents or Profits coming in, and where Trade had
ceased of a long time, and consequently the gain: she therefore to furnish
expenses, sold her Precious Jewels, her Gold Chains, her rich Carcanets, her
Garments of great value, a Cupboard of Plate, not caring for any thing so her
Husband was relieved, and contenting her self with little, so he wanted
nothing. Thus Valdaura lingered on a life by the help of his Wife, within a
rotten body, or rather within a Grave for twenty years together, in which time
she had eight children by him, yet neither she nor they had so much as a Scab,
Wheal or Pimple in any part of their bodies. Valdaura died an old man, for
whose death his Wife Clara made such mourning, as they who knew her well, say
never woman did for any Husband. When some instead of comforting her, told her,
God had done much in taking him away, and that they therefore came to
congratulate with her, she detested their speeches, wishing for her Husband
again, in exchange of five children, and though she was yet both young and
lusty, and sought to by many, she resolved not to marry; saying, she should
never meet with any whom she could like so well as her dear Bernard Valdaura.

CHAP. IX. Of the Indulgence and great Love of some Parents to their Children.
THat natural affection which we bear toward them that proceed from us, we
have in common with other creatures. The Poet has expressed it in the most
cruel of all other Beasts. -- The Tiger which most thirsts for blood, Reynold's
Treat. of the pas. c. 10. p. 86.

Seeing her self robbed of her tender Brood,
Lies down lamenting in her Scythian Den,
And licks the prints where her lost whelps had lain.
Only this affection reigns with greater power in the Souls of some than
others; and the effects of it have been such as cannot but detain us with some
pleasure in the perusal of them.

1. Charles the Great was so great a Lover of his Sons and Daughters, Zuing.
Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 57.
that he never dined or supped without them; he went no whither upon any
journey, but he took them along with him: and when he was asked why he did not
marry his Daughters, and send his children abroad to see the world, his reply
was, That he was not able to bear their absence. Bruson. Ex. l. 6. c. 4. p.
346. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 56. Sabellic. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p. 140.


2. Nero Domitius the Son of Domitius Aenobarbus and Agrippina, by the subtlety
of his Mother obtained the Empire. She once enquired of the Chaldeans if her
Son should reign: they told her, that they had found he should, but that withal
he should be the death of his Mother: Occidat modo imperet, said she; let him
kill me, provided he live to be Emperor. And she had her wish.

Sabellic. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p. 137.
3. Solon was a person famous throughout all Grecce, as having given Laws to the
Athenians, being in his Travels came to Miletum to converse with Thales who was
one of the seven wise men of Greece: these two walking together upon the Market
place, one comes to Solon, and told him that his Son was dead; a^flicted with
this unexpected as well as unwelcome news, he fell to tearing of his Beard,
Hair and Clothes, and fouling of his face in the dust, immediately a mighty
con^lux of people was about him, whom he entertained with howlings and tears
when he had lain long upon the ground, and delivered himself up to all manner
of expressions of grief, unworthy the person he sustained, so renowned for
gravity and wisdom, Thales bade him be of good courage, for the whole was but a
contrivance of his, who by this artifice had desired to make experiment whether
it was convenient for a wise man to marry, and have children, as he had pressed
them to do; bur that now he was sufficiently satisfied it was no way
conducible, seeing he perceived that the loss of a child might occasion a
person famous for wisdom to discover all the signs of a mad man.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 7. p. 152. Sab^llic. Ex. l. 3. c. 1. p. 138. Plut. in
Demetrio p. 906. Bruson. sac^t. l. 9. c. 4. p. 346.
4. Seleucus King of Syria was informed by Erasistratus his Physician, that his
Son Antiochus his languishment proceeded from a vehement love he had taken to
the Queen Stratonice his beautiful and beloved Wife, and that his modest
suppression of this secret (which he had found out by his art) was like to cost
the life of the young Prince. The tender and indulgent Father resigned her up
unto his Son, by a mavelous example overcoming himself to consult the life
and contentment of his Son.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 56. Lud. Viv. de veritat. sid. l. 2.
5. M. Tullius Cicero was so great a Lover of his Daughter Tulliola, that when
she was dead he labored with great anxiety and his utmost endeavor to
consecrate her memory to posterity; he says he would take care, that (by all
the monuments of the most excellent wits both of Greek and Latin) she would be
reputed a Goddess: how solicitously does he write to Atticus, that a piece of
ground should be purchased in some eminent place wherein he might cause a
Temple to be erected and dedicated to Tulliola? He also wrote two Books
concerning the death of his Daughter; wherein it is probable, that he made use
of all that riches of wit and eloquence wherein he was so great a master, to
persuade the people that Tulliola was a Goddess.

Fulgos. l. 5. c. 6. p. 647.
6. The elder Cato was never so taken up with employment in any a^^air
whatsoever, but that he would always be present at the washing of his Son Cato,
who was but newly born, and when he came to such age as to be capable of
Learning, he would not suffer him to have any other Master besides himself.
Being advised to resign up his Son to the Tutorage of some learned servant, he
said he could not bear it, that a servant should pull his Son by the ears; nor
that his Son should be indebted for his Learning and Education to any besides
himself.

Plut. in Ag^silao. p. 610.
7. Agesilaus was above measure indulgent to his children; the Spartans
reproached him, that for love of his Son Archidamus, he had concerned himself
so far as to impede a just judgment; and by his intercession for the
Malefactors, had involved the City in the guilt of being injurious to Greece,
He used also at home to ride upon the Hobbyhorse with his little children; and
being once by a friend of his found so doing, he entreated him not to discover
that act of his to any man, till such time as he himself was become the Father
of Children.

8. Antigonus resented not the Debauches, Plut. in Demetrio. p. 897.
Luxury, and drunken Bouts of his Son Demetrius, to which that Prince (in times
of peace) was overmuch addicted, though in time of war he carried himself with
much sobriety. When the public fame went that Demetrius was highly enamoured
of Lamia the Courtisan, and that at his return from abroad he kissed his
Father: What, said Antigonus, you think you are kissing of Lamia. Another time
when he had spent many days in drinking, and pretended he was much troubled
with Rheum: I have heard as much, said Antigonus, but is it Thasian or Chian
Rheum? Having heard that his Son was ill, he went to visit him, and met with a
beautiful Boy at the door, being entered the Chamber, and sat down, he felt of
his pulse; and when Demetrius said that his Fever had newly left him: Not
unlike, Son, said he, for I met it going out at the door just as I came hither.
Thus gently he dealt with him in all these his miscarriages, in consideration
of diverse other excellent qualities he was master of.

9. Syrophanes, Parch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 4. p. 734.
a rich Egyptian, so doted on a Son of his yet living, that he kept the Image
of him in his House; and if it so fell out that any of the servants had
displeased their Master, thither they were to fly as to a Sanctuary, and
adorning that Image with Flowers and Garlands, they that way recovered the
favor of their Master.

10. Artobarzanes resigned the Kingdom of Cappadocia to his Son in the presence
of Pompey the Great: Val. Max. l. 5. c. l. p. 152.
the Father had ascended the Tribunal of Pompey, and was invited to sit with
him in the Curule Seat; but as soon as he observed his Son to sit with the
Secretary in a lower place than his fortune deserved, he could not endure to
see him placed below himself, but descending from his Seat, he placed the
Diadem upon his Sons head, and bade him go and sit in that place from whence he
was lately risen; tears fell from the eyes of the young man, his body trembled,
the Diadem fell from his head, nor could he endure to go thither where he was
commanded. And which is almost beyond all credit, he was glad who gave up his
Crown, and he was sorrowful to whom it was given: nor had this glorious strife
come to any end, unless Pompeys authority had joined it self to the Father's
will; for he pronounced the Son a King, commanded him to take the Diadem, and
compelled him to sit with him in the Curule Seat.

11. Mahomet the Second, Knowl's Turk. hist. p. 337, 338.
first Emperor of the Turks, was no sooner possessed of his Father's Throne,
but as a young Tyrant forgetting the Laws of Nature, was presently in person
himself about to have murdered with his own hands his youngest Brother, then
but eighteen months old, begotten on the fair Daughter of Sponderbeius, which
unnatural part Moses one of his Bassas, and a man greatly in his savor,
perceiving, requested him not to embrue his own hands in the blood of his
Brother, but rather to commit the execution thereof to some other, which thing
Mahomet commanded him (the author of that counsel) forthwith to do: so Moses
taking the Child from the Nurse, strangled it, with pouring water down the
throat thereof. The young Lady understanding of the death of her child (as a
woman whom fury had made past fear) came, and in her rage reviled the Tyrant to
his House, shamefully upbraiding him for his inhumane cruelty: when Mahomet to
appease her fury, requested her to be content, for that it stood with the
policy of his State, and willed her, for her better contentment: to ask
whatsoever she pleased, and she should forthwith have it. But she desiring
nothing more but in some sort to be revenged, desired to have Moses the
Executioner of her Son delivered unto her bound, which when she had obtained,
she presently struck him into the Breast with a knife, (crying in vain upon his
unthankful Master for help) and proceeding in her cruel execution, cut an hole
in his right side, and by piecemeal cut out his Liver, and cast it to the Dogs
to eat; to that extremity did she resent the death of her beloved Son.

Clark's mirror. c. 87. p. 400.
12. Scilunus had eighty Sons, and when he lay upon his Deathbed he called them
all before him, and presented them with a Bundle or Sheaf of Arrows, and bade
each of them try whether with all his strength he was able to break that Sheaf,
they all of them having attempted it in vain, he then drew out a single arrow,
and bade one of them break that, which he easily did, intimating to them
thereby, that unity and compacted strength is the bond which preserves Families
and Kingdoms, which bond if it be once broken, all runs quickly into ruins.

13. Monica the Mother of S. Austin, while her Son was a Manichee, Clark's mir.
c. 90. p. 402.
and addicted overmuch to a life of sensuality and voluptuousness, out of her
dear and tender affection to him, ceased not to make continual prayers with
abundance of tears in his behalf: which occasioned S. Ambrose one time to
comfort her with these words, Impossible est ut filius tantarum Lachrymarum
periret: It Is impossible that a Son of so many prayers and tears should
miscarry.

14. Octavius Balbus was proscribed by the Triumvirate, whereupon he fled away,
Bruson. fac. l. 5. c. 4. p. 347.
and was now got out of danger; when hearing that his Son was slain by them, he
returned of his own accord, and offered his Throat to the Executioners.

Bruson. fac. l. 5. c. 4. p. 347.
15. Cesetius was importuned by Caesar to renounce and expel from his House one
of his Sons, who in the time of his Tribuneship, had given him matter of
offense: the old man was so great a lover of his children, that he boldly told
him, that he should sooner deprive him of all his children at once by violence,
than he should persuade him to send one of them away with any mark of his
displeasure.

Bruson. fac. l. 5. c. 4. p. 348.
16. Pericles, though he had buried his Sister and diverse others of his near
Relations; yet bare all this with great constancy and an unbroken mind. But
when his Son Paraclus died, though he endeavored with all his might to digest
so great a grief, and to suppress any appearance thereof, yet he was not able
to do it, but burst out into tears and lamentations, crying out, The Gods
preserve to me the poor and little Camillus, the only Son I have now left unto
me.

Langii Polyanth. p. 848.
17. Aegeus stood upon a high Rock, whence he might see a great way upon the
Sea, in expectation of the return of his Son Theseus from Creet, having made
him promise at his departure, that if all things went well with him, at his
return his Ship should be set forth with Sails and Streamers of white color,
to express the joyfulness of his return. The old man after his long watching,
at last did discern the Ship making homewards, but it seems they had forgot to
advance the White Colors, as they had promised; when therefore Aegeus saw
nothing but black, concluding that his Son had miscarried in his journey, and
was dead, not able to endure the grief he had conceived hereof, he threw
himself headlong into the Sea, from the top of the Rock whereon he stood, and
so died.

18. Gordianus the Elder, Langii Polyanth. p. 848.
the Proconsul of Africa, was made choice of by them of Africa, and the
Soldiers in his Army, to be their Emperor, against the cruelty of the
Maximini; but as soon as he understood that his Son was slain by the Maximines,
he was not able to support himself under the great weight of his grief, but
hanged himself in his own Bedchamber.

19. Socrates one day was surprised by Alcibiades, Aelian. var. hist. l. 13. p.
309. Langii Polyanth. p. 847.
childishly sporting with his Son Lamproclus; and when he was sufficiently
derided by Alcibiades upon that account; You have not, said he, such reason as
you imagine, to laugh so profusely at a Father playing with his child, seeing
you know nothing of that affection which Parents have to their children;
contain your self then till you come to be a Father your self, when perhaps you
will be found as ridiculous as I now seem to you to be.

CHAP. X. Of the Reverence and Piety of some Children to their Parents.
UPon a Marble Chair in Scone, where the Kings of Scotland were used to be
Crowned; and which King Edward the First caused to be carried to Westminster,
was written this Distich. Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inveniant lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Unless unalterable fate do feign,
Where e're they find this Stone the Scots shall reign.
We may say it, and perhaps with more assurance, that where ever we find that
Piety and Reverence that is due to Parents, there is a kind of earnest given of
a worthy and prosperous person; for having this way entitled himself to the
promise of God, whatsoever become of the Fates it shall be surely performed to
him, as may be seen in diverse of the following examples.

1 Boleslaus the fourth King of Poland had the picture of his Father, Causs.
H.C. tom. 1. l. 1. p. 5.
which he carried hanging about his Neck in a Plate of Gold; and when he was to
speak, or do any thing of importance, he took this picture, and kissing it,
used to say, Dear Father, I wish I may not do any thing remisly, or unworthy of
thy name.

2. Pomponius Atticus making the Funeral Oration at the death of his Mother,
Plut. in vita Attici p. Fuller. H.S. l. 1. c. 6. p. 15.
protested, that having lived with her sixty and seven years, he was never
reconciled to her; because, added he, in all that time there never happened the
least jar betwixt us that needed reconciliation.

3. The Emperor of China on certain days of the year, Alvarez. hist. of China.
part. 1. c. 29. p. 150. Herbert's trav. l* 3. p. 339.
visits his Mother, who is seated on a Throne, and four times on his feet,
and four times on his knees he makes her a profound reverence, bowing his head
even to the ground. The same custom is also observed through the greatest part
of the Empire; and if it chance that any one is negligent or deficient in this
duty to his Parents, he is complained of to the Magistrates, who punish such
offenders very severely. But generally no people express more filial respect
and duty than they.

B^ker's Cirm. p. 406. Fuller. H.S. l. 1. c. 6. p. 13.
4. Sir Thomas Moore being Lord Chancellor of England, at the same time that
his Father was a Judge of the King's Bench, he would always at his going to
Westminster go first to the King's Bench, and ask his Father blessing before he
went to sit in the Chancery.

Zuing. T^eatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 56.
5. Alexander the Great sent his Mother Olympias many Royal Presents out of the
Asian Spoils; but withal forbade her to intermeddle with State affairs, or to
challenge to her self such offices as appertained to the Governor. Olympias
expostulated these things very sharply with him, which yet he easily endured.
But upon a certain time when he had received long Letters from Antipater,
filled with complaints against her: Antipater, said he, does not know that one
single tear of my Mother is able to blot out six hundred of his Epistles.

Ca^ss. H*C. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 113. L^n. Theatr. p. 272. S^lin. c. 11. p. 225.
Ca^^rar. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 86. p. 401.
6. There happened in Sicily (as it has often) an eruption of Aetna, now called
Mount Gibel, it murmurs, burns, belches up flames, and throws out its fiery
entrails, making all the world to fly from it. It happened then that in this
violent and horrible breach of ^^ames (every one flying and carrying away what
they had most precious with them) two Sons, the one called Anapias, the other
Amphinomus, careful of the wealth and goods of their Houses, reflected on their
Father and Mother, both very old, who could not save themselves from the fire
by flight: And where shall we, said they, find a more precious treasure than
those who begat us? The one took up his Father on his Shoulders, the other his
Mother, and so made passage through the flames. It is an admirable thing, that
God in the consideration of this piety, though Pagans, did a miracle, for the
monuments of all Antiquity witness, that the devouring flames staid at this
spectacle, and the fire wasting and broiling all about them, the way only
through which these two good Sons passed, was tapestryed with fresh verdure,
and called afterward by posterity the Field of the Pious, in memory of this
Accident.

Plut. in Artax^^. p. 10^1. Lon. Theatr. p. 276. Fulgos. l. 5. c. 4. p. 618.
7. Artaxerxes the First, King of Persia, was a fervent lover of Statyra his
wife, and though he knew, that by the fraud of his Mother Parysatis she had
been empoysoned and murdered, yet piety to his Mother overcame his conjugal
affection; and he so dissembled the injury of his Mother, that he not only
spoke nothing of revenging her wickedness; but which is more strange, he never
gave the least sign of his being offended, by any alteration of his countenance
toward her, unless in this, that desiring to go to Babylon, he gave her leave,
and said, that he would not see Babylon while she lived.

Z^n^r. Annal. tom. 2. p. 86. Niphil. in Augusto. p. 6^.
8. Q. Cicero Brother of Marcus, being proscribed, and sought after to be slain
by the Triumvirate, was hid by his Son, who for that cause was hurried to
torments; but by no punishments or tortures could he be forced to betray his
Father. The Father moved with the piety and constancy of the Son, of his own
accord offered himself to death, lest for his sake they should determine with
utmost severity against his Son.

9. Epaminondas the Theban General, being asked what was the most pleasant
thing that had happened to him throughout his whole life; Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 84.
replied it was this, that he had carried away the Leuctrian Victory, his
Father and Mother being both alive. Plut. in M. Coriolan. p. 215.

10. There were three Brothers, Lon. Theatr. p. 278.
who upon the death of the King their Father, fell out amongst themselves,
about succession in the Kingdom, at last they agreed to stand to the judgment
and determination of a Neighbor King, to whom they fully referred the matter.
He therefore commanded the dead body of the Father to be fetched out of his
monument, and ordered that each of them should shoot an arrow at his heart, and
he that hit it, or came the nearest to it should succeed. The elder shot first,
and his arrow passed through the Throat of his Father: the second Brother shot
his Father into the Breast, but yet missed the heart. The youngest detesting
this wickedness, I had rather, said he, yield all to my Brothers, and utterly
resign up all my pretenses to the Kingdom, than to treat the body of my Father
with this contumely. This saying of his considered, the King passed sentence,
that he alone was worthy of the Kingdom, as having given evidence how much he
excelled his Brothers in virtue, by the piety he had showed to the dead body of
his Father.

11. Caius Flaminius being a Tribune of the people, Val. Max. l. 5. c. 4. p.
142.
had promulged a Law about the division of the Fields of Gallia, man by man;
the Senate unwilling it should pass, opposed it, but he resisted both their
entreaties and threats. They told him they would raise an Army against him, in
case he should not desist from his intentions: notwithstanding all which,
unaffrighted he ascends the Pulpit, and being now ready with all the people
about him, by their suffrages to have it pass into a Law; his own Father came
and laid hands upon him, enjoining him to come down: he broken with this
private command, descended from the Pulpit, and was not so much as reproached
with the least murmur of the people whom he had forsaken; but the whole
assembly seemed to approve this his piety to his Parent, although so much to
their own prejudice.

12. The Praetor had sentenced to death a woman of good Birth for a capital
crime, Sabell. Ex. l. 3. c. 6. p. 151. Solin. c. 7. p. 198. Val. Max. l. 5. c.
4. p. 143. Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 36. p. 174.
and had consigned her over to the Triumvir to be killed in prison. The Jailer
that received her, moved with compassion, did not presently strangle her, but
besides permitted her Daughter to come often to her, though first diligently
searched, lest she should convey in any sustenance to her, the Jailer expecting
that she should die of famine. When therefore diverse days had passed, wondering
within himself what it might be that occasioned her to live so long, he one day
set himself to observe her Daughter with greater curiosity, and then discovered
how with the Milk in her Breasts she allayed the famine of her Mother. The news
of this strange spectacle of the Daughter suckling her Mother, was by him
carried to the Triumvir, by the Triumvir to the Praetor, from the Praetor it was
brought to the judgment of the Consul, who pardoned the woman as to the
sentence of death passed upon her, and to preserve the memory of that fact,
where her prison stood they caused an Altar to be erected to piety.

13. Nicholaus Damascenus assures us, Causs. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 111.
that the Pisidians used to present the First Fruits of all the Viands of a
Feast to their Fathers and Mothers, esteeming it an unworthy thing to take a
plentiful refection without due honors first done to the authors of life.

14. Martius Coriolanus having well deserved of the Commonwealth, was yet
unjustly condemned, whereupon he sled to the Volsci, at that time in Arms
against Rome, followed with an Army of these, Zon. Annal. tom. 2. s. 59. Val.
Max. l. 5. c. 4. p. 141. Lon. Theatr. p. 278. Live. Hist. l. 2. p. 34. Plut. in
M. Coriolan. p. 230, 231.
he straight rendered himself very formidable to the Romans. Ambassadors were
sent to appease him, but to no purpose: the Priests met him with entreaties in
their Pontisical Vestments, but were also returned without effect: The Senate
was astonished, the people trembled, as well the men as the women, bewailed the
destruction that was now sure to ^all upon them. Then Volumnia the Mother of
Corolianus, taking Velumnia his wife along with her and also his Children, went
to the Camp of the Volsci, whom as soon as the Son saw, as one that was (an
entire Lover of his Mother, he made have to embrace her: She angrily said,
first let me know, (before I suffer my self to be embraced by you) whether I am
come to a Son or an Enemy, and whether I am a Captive or a Mother in your Camp?
and much she said after this manner with tears in her eyes: He moved with the
tears of his Mother, Wife and Children, embracing his Mother; You have
conquered, said he, and my Country has overcome my just anger, prevailed with
by her entreaties, in whose womb I was conceived, and so he freed the Roman
fields, and the Romans themselves, from the sight and fear of those enemies he
had led against them. Livy calls Veluria the Mother, and Volumnia the Wife of
Corolianus.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 4. p. 142.
15. Marcus Cotta upon that very day that he came to age, and was permitted to
take upon him the Virile Gown, forthwith as soon as he descended from the
Capitol, he accused C. Carbo by whom his Father had been condemned, and having
proved him guilty had him condemned. Thus happily and by a gallant action he
began his manhood, and gave proof of his eloquence and wit.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. p. 142. Lon. Theatr. p. 275.
16. M. Pomponius Tribune of the people, accused L. Manlius the Son of Aulus,
who had been Dictator; for that he had added a few days wherein he continued
his Dictatorship, as also for that he had banished his Son Titus from the
society of men; and commanded him to live in the Country: which when the young
man heard he got to Rome by break of day, and to the house of Pomponius. It was
told him that Manlius was there, and he supposing the angry young man had
brought him something against his Father, rose from his bed, and putting all
out of the Room sent for the young man to him: But he (as soon as entered) drew
his Sword, and swore he would kill him immediately, unless he would give him
oath that he would cease to accuse his Father. Pomponius compelled by this
terror gave his oath, assembled the people, and then told them upon what
account it was requsite for him to desist from his accusation. Piety to mild
Parents is commendable, but Manlius in this his action so much the more, that
having a severe Parent, he had no invitation from his indulgence, but only from
his natural affection to hazard himself in his behalf.

Lon. Theatr. p. 273.
In the Civil Wars betwixt Octavianus and Antonius, as it often falls out, that
Fathers and Sons and Brothers and Brothers take contrary parts; so in that last
Battle at Actium, where Octavianus was the Victor, when the Prisoners (as the
custom is) were counted up; Metellus was brought to Octavianus, whose face
(though much changed by anxiety and a Prison) was known to Metellus his Son;
who had been on the contrary part: With Tears therefore he runs into the
embraces of his Father, and then turning to Octavianus; This thy enemy (said
he) has deserved death, but I am worthy of some reward for the service I have
done thee: I therefore beseech thee instead of that which is owing me, that
thou would preserve this man, and cause me to be killed in his stead.
Octavianus moved with this piety, (though a great enemy) gave unto the Son the
life of the Father.

18. Demetrius the King of Asia and Macedonia, Sabel. Exempl. l. 1. c. 5. p.
24. Fulgos. l. 5. c. 4. p. ^ 17. Plut. in Demetrio. p. 914, 915.
was taken Prisoner in battle by Seleucus King of Syria; Antigonus his Son was
the quiet Possessor of the Kingdom, yet did he change the Royal Purple into a
mourning habit, and in continual tears sent abroad his Ambassadors to the
neighboring Kings; that they would interpose in his Fathers behalf for the
obtaining of his liberty. He also sent to Seleucus and promised him the Kingdom
and himself as a hostage, if he would free his Father from Prison. After he
knew that his Father was dead, he set forth a great Navy, and went forth to
receive the body of the deceased, which by Seleucus was sent toward Macedonia:
He received it with such mournful solemnity, and so many tears; as turned all
men into wonder and compassion. Antigonus stood in the Poop of a great Ship,
(built for that purpose) clothed in black, bewailing his dead Father: The
ashes were enclosed in a Golden Urn, over which he stood a continual and
disconsolate spectator. He caused to be ^ung the virtues and noble
Achievements of the deceased Prince, with voices formed to piety and
lamentation. The Rowers also in the Galleys so ordered the strokes of their
Oars, that they kept time with the mournful voices of the other. In this manner
the Navy came near to Corinth, so that the Rocks and Shores themselves seemed
to be moved unto mourning.

19. Opius a Citizen of Rome, Fulgos. l. 5. c. 4. p. 620. Cel. Rhod. l. 11. c.
17. p. 507.
was proscribed by the Trium-Virate, and whereas he was infeebled by old Age;
and had a Son who might without danger have remained at home; yet the Son chose
rather with the hazard of his own life, to deliver his Father out of the
present danger he was in. He therefore took him upon his Shoulders, and with
great labor carried him out of the City, where he lay concealed under the
habit of a Beggar: At last, he got with him safe into Sicily, where Sextus
Pompeius received all the Proscribed. It was not long e're (for this singular
piety he had showed to his father) the people of Rome were moved to recall him,
and restore him to his Country; where upon his return he was by them also
created Aedile, in which magistracy, when through the seizure of his goods he
had not wherewithal to set forth the public plays; that he might not want the
accustomed honor, the Artificers for the Theater gave him their work gratis,
and that nothing might be lacking for the furniture of the Plays, the whole
people of Rome threw him in so largely; that not only there was sufficient
preparation for all things, but also he was thereby exceedingly enriched, and
highly commended for his piety.

20. Miltiades for an expedition he had not so advisedly undertaken against
Parus, Sabel. l. 3. c. 6. p. 74. Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. p. 55. Justin. hist.
l. 2. p. 52.
and wherein he had been unfortunate, was condemned by the Athenians in a fine
of fifty Talents; which mighty sum when he was not able to pay, and was dead in
Prison of a wound in his Thigh received in that ^oyage, and therefore was
denied Burial; his Son Cimon, doubted not to resign himself voluntarily into
Prison, till himself had made payment of the debt. But Cimon himself being not
able to make satisfaction; it happened that Callias one of the richest men in
the City, married Elpenice his Sister, who paid the fine of Miltiades now
become Cimons, by which means Cimon being set free, received at once the great
glory and reward of his piety to his Father.

21. Darius invaded Scythia with all the forces of his Empire, Val. Max* l. 5.
c. 4. p. 144.
the Scythians retreated by little and little, till they came to the uttermost
deserts of Asia, Darius sent his Ambassadors to them, to demand what end they
intended to make of their flying, and where it was that they would begin to
fight. They returned him for answer, that they had no Cities, nor cultivated
fields, for which they should give him battle, but when once he was come to the
place of their fathers monuments, he should then understand after what manner
the Scythians did use to fight, so great a reverence had even that barbarous
Nation to their dead Ancestors.

Sa^ell. Exem^l. l. 1. c. 4. p. 24.
22. When Scipio the Consul fought unprosperously with Hannibal at the River
Ticinum; and was sore wounded, his Son Scipio (afterward called Affricanus the
Elder) though he was scarce out of the years of his Childhood; yet did he
deliver his father by his seasonable valorous interposition: Neither did the
infirmity of his Age, nor his want of experience in military affairs, nor the
unhappy event of an unfortunate Battle so appal him, (enough to do it to an old
Soldier) but that he deserved a double and illustrious Crown, for having at
once saved a Father and a General.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 5. p. 42, 43.
23. No man saw a gilded Statue, neither in the City of Rome nor throughout all
Italy, before such time as M. Acilius Glabrio a Knight, placed one in the
Temple of Piety to the honor of his Father, The Son himself dedicated that
Temple in the Consulship of P. Cornelius Lentulus, and M. Bebius Tamphilus; for
that his father had obtained his desire, and had overcome Antiochus at the
straits of Thermopolae.

Cambd. Remains. p. 205. Speeds hist. p. 554. Clarks mir. c. 23. p. 75.
24. When Edward the First heard of the death of his only Son; he took it
grievously as a Father but patiently as a wise man, but when he under stood
shortly after of the death of King Henry the Third his Father, he was wholly
dejected and comfortless: Whereat when Charles King of Sicily (with whom he
then sojourned in his return from the holy Land) greatly marvelled; he
satisfied him with this, God may send me more Sons, but the death of a father
is irrecoverable.

Che^w. hist. collect. cent. 5. p. 137.
25. In the time of Pedro the cruel, there was a Citizen of e^ghty years old
condemned by him to death; a Son of his of eighteen years age, offered
willingly to be put to death to excuse the old man his Father, which the cruel
Tyrant (instead of pardoning him for his rare piety) accepted of, and put him
to death accordingly.

Aelian var. hist. l. 3. c. 22. p. 117, 118.
26. When the City of Troy was taken, the Greeks did as became gallant men; for
pitying the misfortune of their Captives, they caused it to be proclaimed, that
every free Citizen had liberty to take away along with him any one thing that
he desired. Aeneas therefore neglecting all other things, carried out with him
his household Gods: The Grecians delighted with the piety of the man, gave him a
further permission to carry out with him any one other thing from his House;
whereupon he took upon his Shoulders his Father, who was grown old and
decrepit, and carried him forth: The Grecians were not lightly affected with
this sight, and deed of his, and thereupon gave him all that was his,
confessing that nature it sel^ would not suffer them to be enemies, but friends
to such as preserved so great piety toward the Gods, and so great a Reverence
to their Parents.

Plut. in Sertorio. p. 580. Clarks mir. c. 23. p. 78.
27. Sertorius that Gallant Roman was a great lover of his Mother, in so much
that being General in Spain, he desired that he might have liberty to come home
from so noble and gainful an employment, that he might enjoy her company: and
when afterward he heard of her death, he was so smitten to the heart with that
unwelcome tidings, that little wanted but that he had dyed by reason of his
excessive sorrow: For he lay seven days altogether upon the ground, in all
which time he never gave his Soldiers the watchword, nor would suffer himself
to be seen by any of his most familiar friends.

28. ^The Emperor Decimus had a purpose and ^arnest desire to set the Crown
upon the head of his Son Decius, Val. Max. l. 4. cap. Langij Polyanth. p. 848.
but he utterly refused it saying: I fear lest being made an Emperor; I should
forget that I am a Son, I had rather be no Emperor and a dutiful Son, than an
Emperor and such a Son as has forsaken his due obedience: Let then my Father
bear the Rule, and let this be my Empire to obey with all humility, whatsoever
he shall command me. By this means the solemnity was put off, and the young man
was not crowned, unless you will say that his signal piety toward his Parent,
was a more glorious Crown to him than that which consisted of Gold and Jewels.

CHAP. XI. Of the singular Love of some Brethren to each other.
IT is not only a rare thing to see Brethren to live together in a mutual love
and agreement with each other: but withal it is observed that when they have
fallen out, they have managed their enmities and Animosities with greater
rancour and bitterness, than if they had been the greatest strangers to each
other in the world. On the other side, where this fraternal Love has rightly
seated it self in the Soul, it has used to show it self in as great a reality
and fervency as any other sort of Love whatsoever.

1. Lucius Lucullus a Senator of Rome, Fulgos. l. 5. c. 5. p. 628.
though he was elder than his Brother Marcus, yet had so great a Love to him;
that (though the Roman custom was otherwise) he could never be persuaded to
stand for any place of Magistracy, till his Brother was at a lawful age to
enter upon one also: This was understood by the people, who therefore created
them both Aediles in their absence.

2. There was a report though a false one, Fulgos. l. 5, c. 5. p. 627. Burtons
mel. part. 3.. 3. p. 564. Plut. in Reg. Apotheg. p.
that Eumenes King of Asia, was slain by the fraud of Perseus; his Brother
Attalus upon the news, seized upon the Diadem, and married the Wife of his
Brother, but being informed of Eumenes his return he went forth to meet him,
not without apprehensions of fear, in regard of what he had done in his
absence. Eumenes made no show of his displeasure, only whispered him in the
ear, that before he married another man's wife, he should be sure her Husband
was dead. This was all, and not long after dying, though by his Wife he had a
Son of his own, yet he left the Kingdom to his Brother, together with the Queen
his Wife. Attalus on the other side, that he might not be surpassed in
Brotherly love, though he had many children by his own wife, yet he educated
that Son she had by Eumenes to the hope of the Kingdom, and when he came of
sufficient age, freely resigned up all to him, and lived a private life many
years after.

3. When the Emperor Augustus had taken Adiatoriges a Prince of Cappadocia
together with his wife and children in war; Fulgos. ^x. l. c. 5. p. 630. H^yw.
hist. of women. l. 7. p. 323. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 58.
and had led them to Rome in Triumph, he gave order that the Father and the
elder of the Brothers should be slain. The designed Ministers of this execution
were come to the place of restraint, to this unfortunate family, and there
enquiring which of the Brethren was the eldest, there arose a vehement and
earnest contention, betwixt the two young Princes, each of them affirming
himself to be the Elder, that by his death he might preserve the life of the
other: when they had long continued in this pious emulation, the Mother at last
not without difficulty, prevailed with her Son Dyetentus, that he would permit
his younger Brother to dye in his stead, as hoping that by him she might most
probably be sustained. Augustus was at length certified of this great example
of brotherly Love, and not only lamented that act of his severity, but gave an
honorable support to the Mother and her surviving Son, by some called Clitatus.

Sabell. ex. l. 3. c. 7. p. 155. Heyw. hist. of women. l. 7. p. 326. Fulgos.
ex. l. 5. c. 5. p. 629.
4. Darius King of the Persians, extremely provoked by crimes of an
extraordinary nature, had pronounced a sentence of death, upon Ithaphernes; his
Children, and the whole Family of them at once. The wife of Ithaphernes went to
the Kings Palace, and there all in tears was so loud in her mournful
lamentations, that her cries coming to the Kings ear, moved him in such manner
to compassion, that the King sent her word, that with her own he gave her the
life of any single person whom she would make choice of among the condemned:
The woman begged the life of her Brother, Darius wondered that she should rather
ask his life, than that of her Husband or any of her children, and therefore
asked her the reason: who replied that since her Father was dead, she could
never hope for a brother more if she should loose this, but that her self being
but young as yet, might hope for another Husband and other children. Darius was
moved with this answer, and being himself repleat with brotherly love as well
as prudence, he gave her also the life of her eldest Son.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 58. Egnat. l. 5. c. 5. p. 319.
5. Bernardus Iustitianus the Venetian had three Sons, who the Father being
dead, were educated by the Mother, so great and mutual a love there was betwixt
these three, that there was nothing more admirable in the City, nor more
frequently discoursed of: Laurentius was one of these, and although he had put
himself into a Monastery, yet this different choice of life hindered nothing of
the true affection between them: But though Marcus was an eminent Senator, and
Leonardus an excellent Orator, and of singular skill in the Latin and Greek
learning; yet both went almost daily to the Monastery to dine and sup with
their Brother.

6. In the division of the Norman Empire, Robert promised to his Brother Roger
the half of Calabria and all Sicily, L. Remy his Civil Considerat. c. 70. p.
180.
but when it came to sharing and dividing, Robert would give him nothing in
Calabria but Meto and Squillacci, and bad him to purchase the Realm which he
already began to possess, meaning Sicily, and in the end resolved (as
Artaxander wrote to Darius) that as the world could not endure two Suns, so one
Realm could not endure two Sovereign Lords. Roger being much displeased
herewith, made war upon him, and after many adventures having taken him
prisoner; in a Castle where Robert was unwisely entered in the habit of a
Peasant, with a purpose to bring it to his own devotion, Roger of a Brotherly
love and pity, not only saved his life, but also restored him to his estate,
which by right of war and being Prisoner he had lost.

7. Anno 1585. I. H^ighe^. Lins. Cho^ens voyages. l. 1. c. 92. p. 147.
The Portugal Ship called S. Iago, was cast away upon the Shallows near to S.
Lawrence, and toward the Coast of Mosambique, here it was that diverse persons
had leapt into the great Boat to save their lives, and finding that it was over
burdened they chose a Captain, whom they swore to obey, who caused them to
cast lots, and such as the lot light upon to be cast over board. There was one
of those that in Portugal are called new Christians, he being allotted to be
cast over board into the Sea, had a younger Brother in the same Boat that
suddenly rose up, and desired the Captain that he would pardon and make free
his Brother, and let him supply his place: Saying, My Brother is elder and of
better knowledge in the world than I, therefore more fit to live in the world,
and to help my Sisters and Friends in their need, so that I had rather dye for
him than live without him. At which request they remitted the elder Brother,
and threw the younger at his own request into the Sea: who swum at least six
hours after the Boat: And although they held up their hands with naked Swords,
willing him that he should not once come to touch the Boat; yet laying hold
thereon and having his hand half cut in two, he would not let go, so that in
the end they were constrained to take him in again. Both these Brethren I knew,
and have been in company with them.

8. Titus Vespasian the Emperor; Fulgos. Exemp. l. 5. c. 5. p. 632.
bare such a brotherly Love toward Domitian, that although he knew he spoke
irreverently of him, and that he had solicited the Army to rebel against him,
yet he never treated him with the less love or respect for all this, nor would
endure that others should, but called him his Copartner and successor in the
Empire, sometimes when they were alone together, he besought him not only with
earnest entreaties, but with tears too, that he would bear the same fraternal
love toward him, as he should ever find from him.

9. Heliodorus the Britain had afterward the Surname of Pius upon this
occasion, Fulgos. Exemp. l. 5. c. 5. p. 634.
the People provoked with the cruelty and Avarice of Archigallus, had deposed
him, and raised Heliodorus to the Throne of his Brother. One time when the King
went a hunting, he accidently met with his Brother Archigallus in the Wood,
whose altered Visage and ragged Clothes gave sufficient evidence of his
afflicted condition. As soon as the King knew him, though he was not ignorant
how he had sought his restoration both by force and fraud, yet he lovingly
embraced him, and caused him privately to be conveyed into the City. The King
pretended he was sick, and giving forth that he would dispose of the affairs of
his Realm, by his last Will and Testament; he called his Nobles together. He
then signified that he would confer in private, with each of them singly, and
as every man entered his Chamber, he caused him to be laid hold on; threatening
him with death if he would not consent to the sparing of his Brother; and that
he should resign the Throne and Kingdom to him. Having by this means gained an
Universal Assent, he then opened the business in presence of them all together.
so Archigallus was restored to the Kingdom, and he dying in few years,
Heliodorus succeeded him with equal justice and glory.

10. Rare and memorable was the Love that was betwixt the Vitellij, Fulgos.
Exemp. l. 5. c. 5. p. 635.
they were named Johannes, Camillus, Paulus, and Vitellozius, these sour were
the Sons of Nicolaus Vitellius, a principal person in the City of Tisernas; to
whom while he lived they performed all due obedience. He dead, all the rest
were always, and in all things obedient to the commands of their elder Brother;
and although for the greatness of their military virtue, they were all in high
reputation amongst them that bear Arms; and were Leaders of Armies in Italy,
and were hired with great stipends to assist on this or the other side; yea,
though they were all married, and had attained the name of their Father, yet
were they not affected with the least ambition amongst themselves; nor was
there ever any breach of love betwixt them. When the eldest of them died, the
other yielded the power of command to him that was next in age: in all things
else they were alike, in such manner, that it is a difficult thing to find such
another example of Brotherly Love and Concord.

Pl^t. in Cat^ ^^. p. 764.
11. While Cato Vticensis was yet a child, when any asked him whom he loved
best, he would say his Brother Caepio; and when asked who in the second or
third place was beloved by him, he would continue to say Caepio, till they
desisted to enquire any further. When he grew up, he gave many and manifest
confirmations of the great love he bore to this Brother of his; for at twenty
years of age he never supped without Caepio, never went any journey, nor so
much as walked into the Marketplace without him. Indeed whereas the other made
use of Unguents, Cato refused them, and in all other things led a severe and
rigid life. When Caepio was once commended for his frugality and moderate way
of living, he confessed he was such, compared with some others: But, said he,
when I compare my life with that of Cato, methinks I differ not at all from
Sippius, that was one famous in the City for luxury and effeminate life. But
when Caepio passing into Asia was deceased at Aenus in Thrace; Cato (then a
Tribune coming out of Thessalonica) seemed to bear this blow with a weaker mind
than became a Philosopher, he embraced the Corpse, and made so great
lamentation, as showed the excess of his grief, so did the cost he was at in
his Funeral, the choice odours and precious Garments that he burnt with the
Corpse, and the monument he erected for him in the Forum at Aenus, framed of
polished Thasian Marble, wherein he expended eight Talents. The neighboring
Cities and great persons thereabouts sent him in many things to help on the
magnificence of that Funeral, of all which (refusing the money sent him) he
took nothing but perfumes and other ornaments, the just price of which he sent
unto the senders of them. And whereas the estate of Caepio was to be divided
betwixt him and the Daughter of his Brother, in the partition thereof they
required nothing to be allowed him, in respect of the Funeral Expenses.

12. There was a Soldier in the Camp of Cn* Pompeius, V^l. Max. l. 5. c. 5. p.
146.
who in the war with Sertorius, perceiving a Soldier on the other side to press
hard upon him, he fought with him hand to hand, and having slain him, he went
about to strip him of his arms: here it was that he found it was his Brother
who had fallen under him; which, when he discerned, having long and much
reproached the Gods, for their gift of so impious a victory to him, he carried
his dead Brother into the Camp, and having covered the body with a precious
Garment, he laid the Corpse upon the Funeral Pile, and put fire to it, which
done, he immediately drew the same Sword wherewith he had slain his Brother, he
thrust it into his Breast, and so falling prostrate upon the dead Body of his
Brother, they were both burned together.

13. Tiberius being at Ticinum, Val. Max. 5. c. 5. p. 146.
and hearing that his Brother Drusus lay sick in Germany, he immediately put
himself upon a hasty journey to give him a visit, he passed the Alps and the
Rhine, and changing his Horse night and day he traveled outright two hundred
miles, with only A^tabagius in his company as his guide. Drusus, though at that
time laboring for life, (informed of his coming) commanded his Legions with
their Ensigns to march forth and meet him: and to salute him by the Title of
Imperator. He ordered a Pretorial Tent to be erected for him on the right hand
of his own, and gave him the Consular and Imperial Name: at the same time
yielding his honor to his Brother, and his body to death.

14. Scipio Africanus, though he held a most entire friendship with Laelius,
Val. Max. l. 5. c. 5^ p. 145.
yet he earnestly implored the Senate not to transfer the Province to him that
fell by lot unto his Brother, promising that he would go with L. Scipio his
Brother into Asia, in quality of his Legate. This he the elder did for the
younger, the valiant for the weak, one excelling in glory, for the other who as
yet was without name, being greater in his subjection, than his Brother was in
his command.

15. Leopoldus Duke of Austria, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 58.
when his Brother Frederick was taken prisoner by Lewis of Bavaria (his
Competitor) turned every stone to gain him his liberty; he consulted a
Magician, to free him by help of the Devil: and when Frederick had refused to
have his freedom by such detestable means, he wrought means to gain the Pope
and the King of France to intercede in his Brother's behalf: and when he saw
that the Bavarian would not be moved either with entreaties or presents, he
entered into League with the Pope and the King of France against that Lewis that
detained his Brother in prison.

16. Great was the love of Timoleon the Corinthian to his Brother; Fulgos. l.
5. c. 5. p. 629.
for when in a Battle with the Argives he saw his Brother fall down dead with
the wounds he had received, he leaped over the dead body of his Brother, and
with his Shield he protected the body as it lay; and though in this enterprise
he was sore wounded himself, yet would he not retreat into any place of safety
till such time as he had seen the dead body of his Brother carried off from the
Field.

CHAP. XII. Of the singular Love of some Servants to their Masters.
WE do not look for Figs from Thorns, nor to gather Grapes from the tops of
Thistles; nor can we expect any thing from men that live under the continued
frowns of the world, and whose Souls are humbled by bondage and servitude, but
what is agreeable to their abject condition, want of education and converse:
yet as we have sometimes seen Apes in Silk, and men in Rags, and that a Jewel
of great value may casually be found upon a Dunghill, so we may sometimes read
of such eminent fidelity and virtue in men of base degree and low estate, that
fortune may seem to have treated them injuriously, that did not allot them as
great advantages as the Masters they lived under.

Sabellic. l. 3. c. 8. p. 161.
1. Publius Catienus Philotimus was left by his Master the Heir of his whole
Estate, yet did he resolv^ to die with him, and therefore cast himself alive
into that Funeral Fire which was prepared to burn the dead body of his Master.

Justin. hist. l. 18. p. 193. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 722. Patric. de
Regno. l. 1. tit. 11. p. 48, 49.
2. The Tyrians having maintained long Wars against the Persians, were much
weakened thereby, which occasioned their Slaves (being many in number) to rise
up against their Masters, whom they put all to the Sword, together with their
children, and then seized upon their Houses, together with their Wives, whom
they married. Only one of these Slaves being more merciful than the rest,
spared his Master Straton and his Son, and hid them. The Slaves having thus got
possession of all, consulted together to choose a King, and agreed that he that
could first discern the Sun at his Rising, should be King. Whereupon this
forementioned Slave consulted with his Master about the business; who advised
him, when others looked into the East, that he should look into the West: and
accordingly when they were all assembled in the Fields, and every man's eyes
were fixed upon the East, he only looked Westward, for which he was well
scoffed at by his companions: but presently he espied the Sunbeams shining
upon the high Towers and Chimneys in the City, and so challenged the Kingdom.
His companions would needs know who taught him this wit, at last he told them;
whereupon fetching out old Straton, they gave him not only his life, but
elected him their King, who having once been a Master, and free born, they
thought was fittest to rule all the rest that was Slaves.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 4. p. 301.
3. Grimoaldus Duke of Benevento was invited by Gondibert King of the Lombards
to assist him against Partharis his Brother, he came accordingly, and having
ejected the one, he slew the other Brother he came to defend, and so made
himself King of Lombardy; and when he knew that Partharis was retreated to
Cacanus Duke of Bavaria, he wrought so that he was expelled from thence.
Partharis not knowing whither to betake himself in safety, comes as a
suppliant, and commits himself to the faith of Grimoaldus. But he observing
that numbers of the Ticinensians flocked daily to visit him; and fearing lest
by the favor of the people, he should some time or other recover the Kingdom,
not regarding his Oath, he resolved to make him away, and that he might perform
it with less noise and tumult, he intended first to make him drunk, and then
send his Guards to cut his Throat, while he lay buried in wine and sleep. This
counsel of his was not so privately carried, but that it came to the ear of
Partharis, he therefore commands his Cup Bearer to give him water all along
instead of Wine (knowing then he could not indulge his Genius) lest his
troubled head should prove unmindful of the danger he was in; nor could he
abstain altogether from drinking, lest Grimoaldus his spies should discover
that he had intimation of his intentions. The better therefore to color the
matter after large drinking, he caused himself to be carried by his servants
into his Chamber, as to sleep out his debauch. There he consults Hunnulphus his
most faithful Servant, who thought it not safe to go forth, since the servants
of Grimoaldus stood watching at the Gate. But in regard necessity compelled,
and that there was no other way of escape, he orders it thus, he covers his
head and shoulders with the skin of a Bear, which was there by chance, after
the manner of a Rustic, and lays upon his back a mattress, as if he was a
Porter to carry it away, and then with good blows of a Cudgel, drive him out of
the Chamber: by this artifice he passes unknown through the Guards, and
accompanied with one servant got safe into France. When about Midnight the
Guards came to kill Partharis, they were opposed by Hunnulphus, who besought
them not to disturb the rest of his Master, now sleeping, but to suffer him to
sleep out his large compotation he had that night; twice they were thus put
back, but the third time they broke by force into the Chamber, and not finding
Partharis, whom they had determined to kill, they enquire of Hunnulphus what
was become of him, who told them plainly he was fled, and confessed that he was
himself conscious to his slight. Grimoaldus admiring his fidelity, who, to save
his Master, had cast himself into such manifest danger of his life, freed him
from the punishment that all cried he was worthy of, with many promises,
alluring him, that from thenceforth he would change Masters, and serve him with
the like fidelity, as he had done the former.

4. The Babylonians sought to recover their liberty, Herodot. l. 3. p. 223.
Heylen's Cousin. p. 785. Justin. hist. l. 1. p. 26. Petr. Greg. l. 13. c. 1. 1.
6. p. 508. Rawleigh. hist. world. l. 3. c. 5. 2. p. 39. Dinoth. memorab. l. 4.
p. 316.
and to shake off the Persian Yoke, whereof Darius being advertised, prepared
an Army to recover that City and State revolted, but ^inding the same a
difficult work, he used the service of Zopyrus, who for the love he bare
Darius, did cut off his own Ears and Nose, and with other wounds fresh
bleeding, he seemed to fly to the Babylonians for succor, to whom he accused
the cruelty of Darius, who for having given him advice, to give over the Siege
of their City, had in this sort dismembered and deformed him; whereupon the
Babylonians gave him that credit, as they trusted him with the disposition and
commandment of their greatest Forces, which when Zopyrus had obtained, after
some colorable overthrows given to the Persians upon sally, he delivered the
City into Darius his hand, who had lain before it twenty months, and used to
say, that he had rather have Zopyrus unhurt than twenty Babylons besides that
he had gained.

5. M. Antonius an excellent Orator, Val. Max. l. 6. c. 8. p. 169. Li^s.
monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 331.
being accused of incest, his servant (the witness deposing that he carried the
Lanthorn before his Master when he went to commit this Villainy) was
apprehended; and to extort a confession from him he was torn with Scourges, set
upon the Rack, burnt with hot irons, all which notwithstanding he would not let
fall a word whereby he might injure the fame or life of his Master, although he
knew him guilty.

6. There was a Citizen of Rome condemned by the proscription of the
Triumvirate, Xiphil. in Augusto. p. 27. Dinoth. l. 4. p. 293.
who in fear of his life had fled and hid himself in a Cave of the Earth: one
of his servants observed the approach of them that were sent to murder him; and
having thereupon advised him to retire to the lowest and most secret part of
the Cave, he himself put on his Master's Gown, pretending to the pursuers, that
he was the person whom they sought after, being desirous to save the life of
his Patron, with the loss of his own. But one of his Fellow Servants betrayed
him in this officious design, so the Master was fetched out of his hiding
place, and slain. When this was known to the people of Rome, they would not be
satisfied till the betrayer of his Master was crucified, and he that attempted
to save him was set at liberty.

The servant of Vrbinius Panopion knowing that the Soldiers commissioned to
kill his Master were come to his Hou^e in Reatina, changed clothes with him,
Val. Max. l. 6. c. 8. p. 180. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 131.332. Dinoth. l. 4. p.
300.
and having put his Ring upon his Finger, he sent him out at a postern door,
but went himself to the Chamber, and threw himself upon the Bed, where he was
slain in his Masters stead. Panopion by this means escaped: and afterward,
when the times would permit it, erected a noble monument with a due inscription
in memory of the true fidelity of so good a servant.

Val. Max. l. 6. c. 8. p. 181. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13.332.
8. Antistius Restio was proscribed by the Triumvirate, and while all his
Dom^stick Servants were busied about the plunder and pillage of his House, he
conveyed himself away in the midst of night with what privacy he could; his
departure was observed by a servant of his, whom not long before he had cast
into Bonds, and branded his face with infamous characters; this man traced his
wandering footsteps with such diligence, that he overtook him, and bare him
company in his ^light; and at such time as the other were scrambling for his
Goods, all his care was to save his life, by whom he had been so severely used;
and though it might seem enough that he should forget what had passed, he used
all his art to preserve his Patron; for having heard that pursuers were at
hand, he conveyed away his Master, and having erected a Funeral Pile, and set
fire to it, he s^ew a poor old man that passed that way, and cast him upon it.
When the Soldiers were come, and asked where was Antistius: pointing to the
fire, he said, he was there burning, to make him amends for that cruelty he had
used him with. The Soldiers that saw how deep he was stigmatized, thought it
was probable enough, believed him; and by this means Antistius obtained his
safety.

9. Cornutus having hid himself, was no less wittily and faithfully preserved
by his Servants in those difficult days of Marius and Sylla; Pl^t. in Mario. p.
431.
for they having found the body of a man, set ^ire about it; and being asked of
such as were sent out to kill their Master, what they were about? with an
officious lie they told them they were performing the last offices for their
dead Master, who, hearing this, sought no further after him.

Dinoth. l. 4. p. 300.
10. Caepio was adjudged to death for conspiring against the life of Augustus
Caesar, but his Servant in the night carried him in a Chest out of the City,
and brought him by Night-Journies from Ostia to the Laurentine Fields, to his
Father's Villa or House of Pleasure. Afterward, to be at the further distance
from danger, they took Ship, but being by force of a tempest driven upon the
Coast of Naples, and the servant laid hold on, and brought before the
Centurion; yet could he not be persuaded either by Bribes or Threats to make
any discovery of his Master.

Dinoth. l. 4. p. 248, 249.
11. Aesopus the freed man of Demosthenes; being conscious of the adultery his
Master had committed with Iulia, and being exposed to the wrack, bare the
tortures thereof a long time with invincible patience; nor by any menaces of
pain could he be wrought upon to betray his Master, choosing rather to endure
all things, than to bring his life or reputation into question.

Lips. monit. l. 2. ^. 13. p. 131. Sa^^ll. Ex. l. 3. c. 8. p. 160. Live. hist.
l. 21. p. 190. Val. M^x. l. 3. c. 3. p. 78.
12. Hasdrubal managed the War of the Carthaginians in Spain, and what by force
and fraud had made himself the Master of most of it; but having slain a certain
Noble Man of Spain, a servant of his, a Frenchman by birth, was not able to
endure it, but determined with himself to revenge the death of his Lord, though
at the price of his own li^e. Whereupon he assaulted Hasdrubal, and slew him,
he was taken in the fact, tormented, and fastened to a Cross; but in the midst
of all his pains he bore a countenance that showed more of joy than of grief,
as one that was well satis^ied that he was secure in his premeditated revenge.

13. Menenius was in the number of those that were proscribed by the
Triumvirate; Fulgos. Ex. l. 6. c. 8. p. 797.
and when a servant of his perceived that his Master's House was enclosed with
a company of Soldiers that came to kill him, he caused himself to be put into a
Litter wherein his Master was used to be carried, and ordered some other of his
Fellow Servants to bear him forth in it. The Soldiers supposing that it was
Menenius himself, slew him there; whereupon looking no further, his Master clad
in a servile habit, had the means and opportunity to escape into Sicily, where
he was in safety under the protection of Pompeius.

14. The Hungarians had conspired against Sigismund King of Hungary and
Bohemia, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 215.
but the plot being discovered, the principal persons were all taken, brought
to Buda, and there beheaded. Stephanus Contus was the chief of these
Conspirators, who having thereupon lost his head, Chioka his Esquire lamented
the death of his Lord with such outcries, that the King took notice of him, and
said unto him, I am now become thy Lord and Master, and it is in my power to do
thee much more good than can be expected from that headless Trunk. To whom the
young man replied, I will never be the servant of a Bohemian Hog, and I had
rather be torn into a thousand pieces, than to desert a Master of so great a
Magnanimity, as all the Bohemians together are not able to equal. And thereupon
he voluntarily laid down his head upon the Block, and had it severed from his
Shoulders, that he might no longer survive his Master.

15. These are instances of such servants as no considerations whatsoever could
move to disloyalty, Commentaries of Messire Bluize de Montluc. l. 7. p. 395.
or infidelity toward their Master: such examples as these are few and rare,
whereas the world is full of those of the contrary: and because I know nothing
more pleasant wherewithal to shut up this Chapter, I will set down the story of
one that was not altogether of ^o virtuous a humor as the forementioned; and
it is this, Lewis the Twelfth going to Bayonne, lay in a Village called
Esperon, which is nearer to Bayonne than Bordeaux. Now upon the great Road
betwixt these two places, the Bailiff had built a very noble House; the King
thought it very strange, that in a Country so bare and barren as that was, and
amongst Downs and Sands that would bear nothing, this Bailiff should build so
fine a House: and at Supper was speaking of it to the Chamberlain of his
Household: who made answer that the Bailiff was a rich man, which the King not
knowing how to believe, considering the wretched Country his House was seated
in, he immediately sent for him, and said unto him these words, Come on,
Bailiff, and tell me why you did not build your fine House in some place where
the Country was good and fertile. Sir, answered the Bailiff, I was born in this
Country, and find it very good for me. Are you so rich, said the King, as they
tell me you are? I am not poor, replied the other, I have (blessed be God)
wherewithal to live. The King then asked him how it was possible he should grow
so rich in so pitiful a barren Country. Why very easily, replied the Bailiff.
Tell me which way then, said the King. Marry, Sir, replied the other, because I
have ever had more care to do my own business than that of my Masters, or my
Neighbors. The Devil refuse me, said the King, (for that was always his oath)
thy reason is very good; for doing so, and rising betimes, thou could not
choose but thrive.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Faithfulness of some men to their engagement; and trust
reposed in them.
THe Syrians were looked upon as men of no faith, not fit to be trusted by any
man, and that besides their curiosity in keeping their Gardens they had scarce
any thing in them that was commendable. The Greeks also labored under this
imputation of being as false as they were luxurious and voluptuous: It is
strange that those who were so covetous after all other kinds of improvement in
learning and knowledge, should, in the mean time neglect that which sets a
fuller value upon man, than a thousand other accomplishments: I mean his
fidelity to his promise and trust.

Mandelslo's Travels. l. 2. p. 197.
1. Those of Iapan are very punctual in the performance of what they have
promised those who desire their protection or assistance: For no Iaponese but
will promise it any one that desires it of him, and spend his life for the
person who has desired him to do it, and this without any consideration of his
family or the misery whereto his Wife and Children may be thereby reduced;
hence it comes that it is never seen a malefactor will betray or discover his
accomplices: But on the contrary there are infinite examples of such who have
chosen rather to dye with the greatest torment imaginable, than bring their
accomplices into any inconvenience by their confession.

2. Micithus Servant to Anaxilaus Tyrant of the Rhegini was left by his dying
Master to govern his Kingdom and children, Waterhouses discourses. p. 220.
during their minority. In the time of this his Viceroy-ship, he behaved
himself with that clemency and justice, that the people saw themselves governed
by a person of quality neither unmeet to rule nor too mean for the place; yet
when his children were come to age, he resigned over his power into their
hands, and therewithal the treasures by his providence he had heaped up;
accounting himself but their steward. As for his part he was content with a
small pittance, with which he retired to Olympia, and there lived very
privately but with great content, respect, and serenity.

Fulgos. l. 6. c. 5. p. 772. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 4. p. 185. Camer. oper.
subscisiv. cent. 1. c. 22. p. 154.
3. Henry King of Arragon and Sicily was deceased, and left John his Son a child
of twenty two months age behind him, entrusted to the care and fidelity of
Ferdinand, the Brother of the deceased King, and Uncle to the Infant. He was a
man of great virtue and merit, and therefore the eyes of the nobles and people
were upon him, and not only in private discourses, but in the public assembly,
he had the general voice and mutual consent to be chosen King of Arragon. But
he was deaf to these proffers, alleged the right of his infant Nephew, and the
custom of the Country, which they were bound the rather to maintain, by how
much the weaker the young Prince was to do it. He could not prevail, yet the
assembly was adjourned for that time: They meet again in hopes that having had
time to consider of it, he would now accept it, who not ignorant of their
purpose, had caused the little Child to be clothed in Royal Robes, and having
hid him under his Garment, went and sat in the Assembly. There Paralus Master
of the Horse, by common consent did again ask him, Whom, O Ferdinand, is it
your pleasure to have declared our King? He with a sharp look and tone replied,
Whom but John the Son of my Brother? and withal took forth the Child from under
his Robe, and lifting him upon his shoulders cried out, God save King John:
commanded the Banners to be displayed, cast himself first to the ground before
him, and then all the rest moved by his example, did the like.

4. King John had left Hubert Burgh Governor of Dover Castle, Bak. Chron. p.
110.
and when King Lewis of France came to take the Town, and found it difficult to
be taken by force, he sent to Hubert whose Brother Thomas he had taken Prisoner
a little before, that unless he would surrender the Castle, he should presently
see his Brother Thomas put to death with exquisite torments before his eyes:
But this threatening moved not Hub^rt at all, who more regarded his own loyalty
than his Brothers life. Then Prince Lewis sent again offering him a great sum
of money, neither did this move him, but he kept his loyalty as inexpugnable as
his Castle.

5. Boges the Persian was besieged in the City Etona by Cimon Son of Miltiades,
Herodot. l. 7. p. 417. Dinoth. memorab. l. 4. p. 298.
the General of the Athenians, and when he was proffered safely to depart into
Asia upon delivery of the City, he constantly refused it, lest he should be
thought unfaithful to his Prince. Being therefore resolved he bore all the
inconveniences of a Siege, till his provisions being now almost utterly spent,
and seeing there was no way to break forth, he made a great fire, and cast
himself and his whole Family into the Flames of it, concluding he had not
sufficiently acquitted himself of his trust to his Prince, unless he also laid
down his life in his cause.

6. Licungzus the conductor of the Rebel Thieves had seized the Empire of
China, Martin. in Bello Tartaric. p. 277.
taken the Metropolis Peking, and upon the death of the Emperor, had seated
himself in the Imperial Throne. He displaced and imprisoned what great officers
he pleased. Amongst the rest was one Us a venerable person, whose Son
Vsangu^jus lead the Army of China in the confines of Leatung against the
Tartars. The Tyrant threatened this old man with a cruel death, if by his
paternal power he did not reduce him with his whole Army to the acknowledgment
of his power, promising great rewards to them both, if he should prevail,
wherefore the poor old man wrote thus to his Son: Know my Son, that the
Emperor Zunchinius, and the whole Family of Taimingus are perished: the
Heavens have cast the fortune of it upon Licungzus, we must observe the times,
and by making a virtue of necessity avoid his Tyranny and experience his
liberality. He promises to thee a Royal dignity, if with the Army thou submit
to his Dominion, and acknowledge him as Emperor, my life depends upon thy
answer: Consider what thou owe to him that gave thee life. To this his Son
Vsanguincus returned, He that is not faithful to his Sovereign, will never be
so to me, and if you forget your duty and ^idelity to our Emperor, no man will
blame me if I forget my duty and obedience to such a Father? I will rather dye
than serve a Thief: and immediately sent an Ambassador to call in their aid, to
subdue this usurper of the Empire.

7. Gelon the Tyrant of Sicilia, Herodot. l. 7. p. 437, 438.
as soon as he heard the Persians under Xerxes had passed the Hellespont, sent
Cadmus the Son of Scythes (who had before been the Tyrant of Coos and
voluntarily resigned it) to Coos with three Ships, a mighty Sum of money, and
instructed with a pleasing Embassy, giving him in charge to observe which way
the victory should fall, that if the Persian should prevail, he should then
deliver him the Money, and earth and water for such places as were under the
dominion of Gelon, but if the Greeks proved victorious, he should return back
with the money. This Cadmus although it was in his power to have perverted this
vast sum to his own use, yet would he not do it, but after the Greeks had
obtained a Naval Victory, he returned back into Sicily, and restored all the
money.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 108.
8. Sanctius King of Castile, had taken Tariffa from the Moors: but was doubtful
of keeping it, by reason both of the Neighborhood of the enemy, and the great
cost it would put him to, there was with him at that time Alphonsus Peresius
Guzman, a noble and rich person, a great man both in peace and war; he of his
own accord offered to take the care of it, and to be at part of the charge
himself, and the King in the mean time might attend other affairs. A while
after the Kings Brother John revolted to the Moors, and with Forces of theirs
suddenly sat down before Tariffa; the besieged feared him not, but relied upon
their own and their Governors valor, only one thing unhappily fell out the
Son and only Son of Alphonsus was casually taken, by them in the fields, him
they showed before the Walls, and threatened to put him to a cruel death, unless
they speedily yielded the Town: the hearts of all men were moved, only that of
Alphonsus, who cried with a loud voice, that had they a hundred of his Sons in
their power, he should not thereupon depart with his Faith and Loyalty: And
says he Since you are so thirsty of blood, there is a Sword for you; throwing
his own over the wall to them; away he went, and prepared himself to go to
dinner, when upon the sudden there was a confused noise and cry that recalled
him; he again repairs to the wall, and asking the reason of their amazement,
they told him that his Son had been done to death with barbarous cruelty. Was
it that then, said he, I thought the City had been taken by the Enemy: and so
with his former tranquillity returned to his Wife and his Dinner: The Enemies
astonished at the greatness of his Spirit, departed without any further attempt
upon the place.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 324.
9. Flectius a noble man was made Governor of the City and Castle of Conimbra
in Portugal; by King Sanctius, Anno 1243. This Sanctius was too much swayed by
his Wise Mencia, and over addicted to some Court Minions, by reason of which
there was a conspiracy of the Nobles against him, and the matter was so far
gone that they had got leave of Pope Innocent, to translate the Government of
the Kingdom to Alphonsus the Brother of Sanctius: Hereupon followed a War, the
minds of most men were alienated from their natural Prince, but Flectius was
still constant enduring the Siege, and arms of Alphonsus and the whole Nation;
nor could he any way be swayed till he heard that Sanctius was dead in
Banishment at Toletum; ^or whom now should he fight, or preserve his faith,
they advised him therefore to ^ollow fortune, yield himself, and not to change
a just praise for the Title of a desperado and a madman. Flectius heard but
believed them not, he therefore begged leave of Alphonsus that he himself might
go to Toletum; and satisfy himself. It was granted, and he there found that
the King was indeed dead and buried, and therefore that he might as well be
free in his own conscience as in the opinion of men; he opened the Sepulcher,
and with sighs and tears he delivers the very keys of Conimbra into the Kings
hands; with those words: As long O King, as I did judge thee to be alive, I
endured all extremi^ies: I fed upon Skins and Leather, and quenched my thirst
with Urine. I quieted or repressed the minds of the C^tizens that were
enclining to Sedition, and whatsoever could be expected from a faithful man,
and one sworn to thy interest, that I performed and persisted in: Only one
thing remains, that having delivered the Keys of the City to thine own hands, I
may return freed of my oath, and to tell the Citizens their King is dead; God
send thee well ia another and a better Kingdom. This said he departed,
acknowledged Alphonsus for his Lawful Prince and was ever faithful to him.

10. When the Portugals came first into the East Indies, Lips. monit. l. 2. c.
13. p. 325, 326.
the King of Cochin called Trimumpara, made Peace and a League of Amity with
them: Soon after there was a conspiracy against a new and suspected Nation,
especially the King of Calecut who was rich and strong in Soldiers, he drew his
forces and friends together, and sent to him of Cochin in the first place, that
he would deliver up those few Portugals and himself from ^ault, and all them
from fear. But he replied that he would lose all rather than falsify his
Faith. When any of his subjects persuaded him to yield them up; he said he
esteemed them worse enemies than the King of Calecut; for he did endeavor to
take away only his Kingdom or Life, but they would take from him the choicest
virtues: That his life was a short and definite space, but the brand of
perfidiousness would remain for ever. In the mean time the King of Calecut wars
with him, overcomes, drives him from his Kingdom, and enforces his retreat unto
an Island not far off: In his flight he took no greater care for any thing,
then to preserve those few Portugals, nay when thrust out though his enemy
offered him his Kingdom again, upon condition he would surrender them; he
constantly refused it and said that his Kingdom and Scepter might be taken from
him but not his faith.

11. Sextus Pompeius had seized upon Sicilia and Sardinia, Lips. monit. l. 2.
c. 13. p. 317, 318. Xiphil. in Augusto. 9.35.
and made a hot war upon the Trium-Virate and people of Rome, and having
pressed them with want and scarcity, had reduced them to treat with him of
peace: Octavi^nus Caesar therefore and Antonius, met him about Misenum with
their Land Forces, he being drawn thither with his Fleet: Being agreed upon the
terms, the Captains must mutually entertain one another, and the first lot fell
upon Sextus, who received them in his Ship, there they supped and discoursed
with all freedom and mirth; when M^nas the freed man of Sextus, and Admiral of
the Navy, came and thus whispered Sextus in the Ear; Will thou, said he, that I
s^all cut the Cables, put off the Ship, and make thee Lord not only of Sicily
and Sardinia, but of the whole World it self. He said it and it was easy to do
it, there was only a Bridge which joined the Ship and Shore together, and that
removed, the other fell in, and who could hinder or oppose the design, and upon
those two whom he had in his hand, all the Roman welfare relied, but Sextus
valued his faith given: And, said he, thou Menas perhaps ought to have done
it, and unknown to me: But since they are here let us think no more of it, for
Perjury is none of my property.

12. Fabius had agreed with Hannibal for the exchange of Captives, Plut. p.
178. in Fa^io.
and he that had the most in number, should receive money for the overplus.
Fabius certifies the Senate of this agreement, and that Hannibal having two
hundred and forty more Captives, the money might be sent to reduce them. The
Senate refused it, and withal twitted Fabius, that he had not done rightly and
orderly, nor for the honor of the Republic to endeavor to free those men
whose Cowardice had made them the prey of their enemies. Fabius took patiently
this anger of the Senate, but when he had not money and purposed not to deceive
Hannibal, he sent his Son to Rome, with command to sell his Lands and to return
with the money to the Camp. He did so, and speedily came back, he sent Hannibal
the money and received the Prisoners, many of whom would afterward have repaid
him, but he freely forgave them.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 1. p. 43.
13. Guy Earl of Flanders and his Son, were freed from Prison by Philip the fair
King of France, upon their says given, that in case they could not return the
Flemings to their obedience who rebelled, and with the English molested Philip;
that then they should reuurn themselves to their wonted durance. They were not
able to effect the one, and therefore performed the other, and in that prison
Guy shortly after dyed.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 321.
14. Ferdinand the first King of Spain, left three Sons behind him, Sanctius,
Alphonsus, and Garcius; amongst whom he had also divided his Kingdoms; but they
lived not long in mutual peace, for soon after the death of their Father,
Sanctius who was of a fierce and violent disposition made war upon his Brother
Alphonsus; overcame, und took him Prisoner, and thrust him into a Monastery;
constrained Religion lasts not long, and therefore he privily deserted his
Cloister, and in company with Petrus Ansurius an Earl, he fled for protection
to Almenon King of Toledo. He was a Moor, and an enemy to the others Religion,
but there had been friendship and peace betwixt him and Ferdinand, the Father
of this distressed Prince, and upon this account he chose to commit himself
unto his faith, and was cheerfully received by him: Long he had not been with
him, when in the presence of the King, the hair of this Prince was observed to
stand up an end in such manner, that being several times stroked down with the
hand they still continued in their upright posture. The Moorish Southsayers
interpreted this to be a prodigy of evil abodement, and told the King that this
was the man that should be advanced to the Throne of Toledo; and thereupon
persuaded to put him to death. The King would not do it, but preferred his
faith given to the fear he might apprehend, and thought it sufficient to make
him swear, that during his life he should not invade his Kingdom. A while after
King Sanctius was slain by Conspirators at Zamora, and his Sister Vrrata, being
well affected to this her Brother, sent him a messenger with letters to invite
him to the Kingdom, advising him by some craft and with celerity, to quit the
borders of the Barbarians where he was. Alphonsus bearing a grateful mind,
would not relinquish his Patron in this manner, but coming to Alm^^on
acquainted him with the matter; And now, said he, noble Prince, complete your
Royal savours to me, by sending me to my Kingdom: That as I have hitherto had
my li^e, I may also have my Scepter of your generosity. The King embraced him
and wished him all happiness; But, said he, you had lost both Life and Crown,
if with an ungrateful mind you had fled without my privity: for I knew of the
death of Sanctius, and sil^ntly I awaited wha^ course you would take, and had
disposed upon the way, such as should have returned you back from your ^light,
had it been attempted: But no more of this, all I shall require of you is, that
during life you shall be a true friend to me, and my elder Son Hissemus; and so
sent him away with money and an honorable retinue. This Alphonsus did
afterward take the City and Kingdom of Toledo; but it was after the death of
Almenon and his Son.

15. John the first King of France, Lips. moni^. l. 2. c. 13. p. 330. Fulgos.
Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 44.
was overthrown in battle, and made prisoner by Edward the black Prince, and
afterward brought over into England. Here he remained four years, and was then
suffered to return unto France upon certain conditions: which if he could make
his Subjects submit to he should be free, if otherwise, he gave his faith to
return: He could not prevail to make them accept of the hard terms that were
proffered: whereupon he returned into England and there dyed.

16. Renatus Duke of Berry and Lorrain, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 44.
was taken in Battle by the Soldiers of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and was set at
liberty upon this condition, that as often as he should be summoned he should
return himself into the power of the Duke; while he was thus at liberty, it
fell out that upon the death of his Brother Lewis King of Naples, he was called
to succeed him in that Kingdom; and at this time it was that the Duke of
Burgundy demanded his return according to his oath: Renatus well understood
that this came to pass by the means of Alphonsus of Arragon; who gaped after
Naples, and he was also proffered by Eugenius the fourth to be dispensed with
in his oath; notwithstanding all which he determined to keep his faith
inviolate, and so returned to the Duke, by him he was put in safe custody, yet
at last he was again set at liberty, but not before such time as that through
this his constrained delay, the enemy had secured the Kingdom to himself.

17. Anta^f King of some part of Ireland, Speeds hist. p. 381.
warring against King Ethelstan, disguised himself like a Harper and came into
Ethelstans Tent, whence being gone, a Soldier that knew him discovered it to
the King, who being offended with the Soldier for not declaring it sooner, the
Soldier made this answer. I once served Antaff under his^ pay as a Soldier, and
gave him the same faith I now give you, if then I should betray him what trust
could your Grace repose in my truth: Let him therefore dye but not by my
treachery, and let your care remove your Royal self from danger, remove your
Tent from the place where it stands, lest at unawares he assail you; which the
King did, and a Bishop pitching in the same place, was that night with all his
retinue* slain by Antaff, hoping to have surprised the King, and believing he
had slain him because he himself knew his Tent stood in that place.

CHAP. XIV. Of the exact Obedience which some have yielded to their Superiors.
WHen Metellus had dis-inherited his Sons, they chose rather to have no sha^e
in his estate, than to admit of any disputation about the sorce of his will,
and some have freely parted with liberty and life it self, when eith^r has come
unto competition with the commandment of their Superiors.

1. Tiribasus was a stout and valiant man, Plut. de superstitione, p. 264.
when therefore some Persians came to lay hold on him, he drew his Cymiter and
manfully defended himself, his aggressors thereupon fearing to be worsted by
him; cried out, That what they did was by the Kings command: Tiribasus no
sooner heard this, but he threw away his weapon, and gave his hands to be bound
by them.

Lithgows Travels. part 5. p. 202.
2. The great Bassa of Aleppo, who was also an Emir or Hereditary Prince, the
year before my coming thither had revolted from his Emperor, and fighting the
Bassas of Damascus and Carahemen, overcame them, the year following, and in my
being there the Grand Signior sent from Constantinople a Chiaus and two
Janissaries in Embassage to him. When they came to Aleppo the Bassa was in his
own Country of Mesopotamia, the Messengers made haste after him, but in their
journey they met him coming to Aleppo, accompanied with his two Sons and five
hundred Horsemen; upon the Highway they delivered their message, where he
stood still and heard them. The proffer of Sultan Achmet was that if he would
acknowledge his Rebellion, and for that Treason committed send him his Head,
his eldest Son should both inherit his Possessions and Bassa-ship of Aleppo;
that otherwise he would come with great Forces in all expedition, and in his
own person would extirpate him and all his from the face of the earth. At the
hearing of which the Bassa knowing he was not able to resist the invincible
Army of his Master and his own person, he dismounted from His Horse, and went
to counsel with his Sons and nearest Friends, where he and they concluded it
was best for him to die, being an old man, to save his race undestroyed, and to
preserve his Son in his Authority and Inheritance. This done, the Bassa went to
prayer, and taking his leave of them all, kneeled down on his knees, where the
Chiaus struck off his Head, putting it into a Box to carry with him to
Constantinople, the dead Corpse was carried to Aleppo, and honorably buried:
for I was an eyewitness to that Funeral Feast.

3. No Monarch had ever the Glory of being so exactly obeyed, Lord Girassi
hist. Masa^iel. Englished by F. Howel. p. 58, and 92, Ia^i Nic^i pinacoth^c. 3.
p. 305, etc.
as was that poor Fisher-boy in Naples, vulgarly called Masaniello, he ordered
that all men should go without Cloaks, Gowns, wide Cassocks, or such like,
which was universally obeyed, not only of the common sort, but the Nobility,
all Churchmen and Religious Orders, the two Cardinals, Filomarino and
Trivultio, the Apostolical Nuncio and all the Bishops in that City. He
commanded that all women of what degree or quality soever, should go without
their Farthingales, and that when they went abroad they should tuck their
Petticoats somewhat high, that no Arms might be carried by them, it was also
obeyed. He commanded that all Cavaliers should deliver their Arms, as also all
noble persons, to the hands of such Officers as he should send with commission
to receive them; it was done. He had at his beck an hundred and fifty thousand
men; and in the presence of the Viceroy of Naples, he bade them cry out, Let
God live, let the holy Virgin of Carmine live, let the King of Spain live; live
Filomarino and the Duke of Arcos, with the most faithful peopl^^ Naples. The
people followed him in every (...); and at last he ended with, Let the ill
(...) die: which they also ecchoed. This was his first proof: he made a second
upon the people, putting his finger to his mouth, there was a profound
universal silence, that scarce a man was known to breath. For a last proof of
his authority, and the peoples obedience, he commanded with a loud voice (out
of the Balcony wherein he was) that every soul there present, under pain of
Rebellion and death, should retire from the place wherein they then stood;
which was punctually and presently obeyed, not one remaining behind, as if they
had all vanished away: so that the Viceroy was amazed at such a ready and
mavelous obedience. If he said, bring me the head of such a one, or let such
a Palace be burnt, and the House of such an one be plundered, or any other the
least thing commanded, at the very instant, without any doubts or replies, it
was put in execution. All this was at Naples in the year of our Lord, 1647, and
in the Month of July.

4. Thienkius the Emperor of China had advanced an Eunuch, Martin. Bell.
Tartataric.. p. 272.
called Gueio, to such height and power, that he styled him by the name of
Father, and passed the absolute and Sovereign Command into his hands; so that
persons of greatest eminency were put to death by his orders for smallest
matters: it was enough if they could not bow themselves to flatter and fawn
upon him. Zunchinius succeeded in the Empire, his Brother being dead without
issue, and he having resolved the destruction of this over-potent Eunuch, sent
him an order to go visit the Tombs of his Ancestors, to consider if any of
those ancient Monuments wanted reparation. He had not gone far upon his
Journey, but there was presented to him by order from the Emperor a Box of
Silver gilt, with a Halter of Silk folded up in it, by which he understood he
was commanded to hang himself, which he accordingly did.

5. Amongst the Persians before the Palace there perpetually stands a seat of
Iron with three feet: Coel. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 18. c. 18. p. 848.
is it so fall out, that the King is more than ordinarily displeased with any
Persian, he may not fly to any Temple or other Sanctuary; but standing at this
Tripos of the King's, he is there to expect his sentence, and oftentimes at the
distance of some days, the King sends one to put an end to his fearful
expectation, by taking away his life.

6. In that part of Syria which the Persians once held, Camerar. oper. subcis.
cent. 2. c. 7. p. 23, 24. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 1. p. 26. Nicet. de Imp. Isaac.
Angel. l. 2. p. 45. Vincent le Blanc's Travels. tom. 1. c. 7. p. 20. Petr.
Greg. de Repub. l. 20. c. 1. p. 748.
there is a people called Assassines, or as Nicetas calls them Chasians, these
are wont so to reverence and observe the commands of their Prince, that they
perform them with all readiness and alacrity, how dangerous or difficult soever
the execution of them be. At the first sign or intimation by gesture of their
King, they will immediately cast themselves headlong from Rocks and Towers,
leap into the Waves, throw themselves into the fire, or being sent by him to
kill any such Prince whose death he desires, they set themselves about it,
despising all the tortures they must endure after they have performed the
murder or discovery of their intention. When once Henry Earl of Campania
passed from Antioch toward Tyrus, having obtained a safe conduct, the Prince
of this people, called V^tus, gave him a strange assurance of his people's
obedience; for he showed him several persons standing upon the top of a high
Tower, one of these he called out by name, who no sooner understood his
command, but without any delay he cast himself down from thence in their sight,
and broken in pieces with the fall, he immediately died. The King would have
called out others to the like trial, and was difficultly diverted from his
designs by the earnest entreaties of the Earl, who was astonished with wonder
and horror of the experiment. The S^lsidas of the S^quimar of Arabia the
Happy, perform the same at their Prince's command.

When Hannibal made war against the Romans in Italy, Sabell. Ex. l. 6. c. 8. p.
353.
he at that time had under his Standards Carthaginians, Numidians* M^ors,
Spaniards, Baleares, Gauls, Ligurians, and a number of Italian people, and yet
the General was of that authority amongst them, that though his Army consisted
of so many and different Nations, and that the War was drawn out into so long a
continuance, and that there was such variety of events therein, yet in all that
time there was never known that there was any stir, tumult or sedition moved
amongst them.

I. Huighen Linschoten's Voyages. l. 2. p. 221.
8. The Inhabitants of those Islands that lie over against the Coast of Florida,
are in great subjection to their Lords and Masters, in such manner, as that if
they should command them to throw themselves headlong from off a high Hill, or
do any other thing whatsoever, they will not refuse to do it, whatsoever danger
there may be in the performance; not once asking wherefore they should do it,
but only because their Master commands it.

I. Huigh. Linschot. oy. l. 2. p. 290.
9. Instead of Crowns and Scepters, the Ornaments of the Kings of Peru, whereby
they show their Majesty, are these, They wear certain Tassels of Red Wool,
bound about their Heads, hanging down upon their Shoulders, almost covering
their eyes, whereat there hang other Threads, which they use when they will
have any thing done or executed. They give that Thread unto one of their Lords
that attend upon them; by this token they command in all their Provinces* and
the King has done whatsoever he does desire. At the sight of this Thread, his
pleasure is by his Subjects with so great diligence and dutiful obedience
fulfilled, that the like is not known in any place of the world: for if (by
this way) he chance to command that a whole Province shall be clean destroyed,
and utterly lest desolate, both of men and all living creatures whatsoever,
both young and old, it is done. If he send but one of his Servants to execute
the severest of his commands, although he send no other power or aid of men,
nor other commission, than one of the Threads of his Quispel; it is sufficient;
and they willingly yield themselves to all dangers, even to death and
destruction.

Heid^eld. Sphing. c. 31. p. 819.
10. Xerxes flying out of Greece, the Ship or Boat was so over-pressed with the
numbers of such as were got within her, that a Tempest arising, they were all
brought to the hazard of their lives: here it was that Xerxes bespake them in
this manner, Since upon you, O Persians, depends the safety of your King, let
me now understand how far you take your selves to be concerned therein. He had
no sooner spoken these words, but that having first adored him, most of them
leaped into the Sea, and by their death freed their King of his present danger.

CHAP. XV. Of the Generosity of some Persons, and the Noble Actions by them
performed.
AS amongst those Starry Lights wherewith the arched Roof of Heaven is
beautified and bespangled: there are some more conspicuous for their
extraordinary brightness and luster, and draw the eyes of men with greater
admiration toward them, so amongst the race of mankind there are some found to
shine with that advantage in point of Generosity and true Nobleness of Mind,
above the common Standard of Humaniry* that we fix our eyes with equal wonder
and delight upon those actions which we know to be the effects whereof the
vulgar are incapable.

1. Cardinal Petrus Damianus relates, Causs. H. C. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 91.
how being a Student at Faenza, one told him of an act of Charity and
Generosity that happened, of which he made more account than of all the Wonders
of the World; it was this, a man whose eyes another had most traitorously
pulled out, was by this accident confined in a Monastery, where he lived an
unspotted life, performing all offices of charity according to the ability of
his body. It fell out, this cruel creature who had done this mischievous act
sickened of a languishing malady, and was enforced to be carried to that same
place where he was whom he had bereaved of sight; his heart said within him he
could never endure him, but for revenge would put out his eyes: on the contrary
the blind man made earnest suit to have the charge of him, as if he had sought
some great fortune from the hand of a Prince: he prevailed, and was deputed to
the service of the sick man, and he dedicated to him all the functions of his
body, except the eyes which the other had pulled out, Notwithstanding, says
the Cardinal, he wanted not eyes, you would say the blind man was all Eyes, all
Arms, all Hands, all Heart, to attend the sick man, so much consideration,
vigor, diligence and affection he used.

2. In the Cathedral Church of Roan in Normandy is the Sepulcher of John Duke
of Bedford, H^yl. Cos^. p. 192.
and Regent of France for King Henry the Sixth, an envious Courtier persuaded
Charles the Eighth to deface it, God forbid, said he, that I should wrong him,
being dead, whom living, all the power of France was not able to withstand:
adding withal, that he deserved a better Monument than the English had bestowed
upon him.

3. Conrade succeeding Henry in the Empire, Fulgos. l. 6. c. 5. p. 776.
by this Henry Wenceslaus the Duke of Poland was overcome in Battle, and made a
Tributary of the Empire, he afterward rebelled, and took upon him the Title of
a King, to whom succeeded Mysias in both the Kingdom and contumacy toward the
Empire: Conrade therefore by the help of his Brother had enforced him to quit
Poland, and fly to Vlrick Duke of Bohemia, who at that time was also an Enemy
to the Empire. Vlrick despising all the Laws of Hospitality, gives Conrade to
understand, that in case he would compound the difference betwixt them two, he
would send him Mysias as his prisoner, to dispose of him as he should think
meet. The Generous Emperor so abhorred this Villainy, that immediately he sent
an express to Mysias to let him know the danger he was in. By this action
(wherein so much of true Nobility did appear) Mysias who before had not yielded
to Conrade his Arms, was perfectly subdued. He goes to the Emperor, lays his
Crown at his foot, and submits to the payment of the former Tribute.

4. Dromichetes King of the Getes had overcome in Battle, Wieri oper. p. 839.
l. de ira. Fulgos. l. 5. c. 1. p. 563, 564.
and also taken prisoner, King Lysimachus, who had causelessly and unprovoked
invaded him, yet though he had such just occasion to have dealt severely with
him, over-passing the injury he had received by his assault, he familiarly (as
other Kings their treasures) showed him the poverty of himself and his people,
saying that he was very well contented therewith. That done, he gave him his
liberty, and presented him with such gifts as he could, and withal at parting
gave him this counsel, that for the future he should not make war upon such
people, the conquest of whom would yield him no profit, but rather use them as
Friends.

Lon. Theatr. p. 325. Plut. paral. in Pyrrho. p. 396. Zonar. Ann. tom. 2. p.
65. Pezel. Mellisic. hist. to 4.2. p. 46. Aeli^n. var. hist. l. 12. c. 33^ p.
322.
5. When Pyrrhus King of Epirus warred upon the Romans, the King's Physician
called Nicias, sent a Letter to Fabricius the Roman Consul and General,
promising him therein to poison Pyrrhus. Fabritius, detesting to be rid of his
Enemy in so base a way, and desirous that the treacherous servant might meet
with his due reward, sent back the Letter to Pyrrhus himself, withal advising
him to take heed to himself; for that as it seemed he was but an ill Judge of
his Friends or Enemies. The King having found out the Treason, hanged up his
Physician, as he well deserved, and sent back all the Prisoners to Fabritius
without ransom: but the generous Consul would not receive them in that manner,
but sent him an equal number of his which he had formerly taken.

Alvarez. hist. of China. part 1. c. 22. p. 109.
6. One of the Emperors of China going his progress, met with a certain company
leading away some other prisoners, he caused his Coach to stop, and enquired
what the matter was, which as soon as he understood, he fell into a passionate
weeping. They who accompanied him began to comfort him, and said one amongst
them, Sir, in a Commonwealth there must be chastisements, it cannot be
avoided; so have the former Kings your Predecessors commanded it to be, so have
the Laws ordained it, so does the Governmet of the State require it. The
Emperor replied, I weep not to see these men prisoners, nor to see them
chastised; I know very well, that the good without rewards are not encouraged;
and without chastisument the wicked are not retained; that correction is as
necessary to the Government of a Kingdom, as Bread is for the nourishment and
sustenance thereof: but I weep because my time is not so happy as that of old
was, when the virtues of the Princes were such, that they served as a Bridle to
the people, and their example was sufficient to restrain the whole Kingdom.

Fulgos. l. 6. c. 5. p. 775.
7. Alphonsus the Twelfth, King of Spain, was driven out of his Kingdom by his
Son Sancius, and reduced to those Straights, that he was enforced to offer to
pawn his Crown to Abenyuza the King of Morocco, for a great sum of money. But
Abenyuza, as a noble and most generous Prince, hearing of Alphonsus his
extremity, sent first his Ambassadors to endeavor a reconcilement, betwixt the
Father and the Son, that not succeeding, he not only assisted him with moneys,
but also with a great Army, and with his own treasure at his own cost he
reinstated him in a great part of his Kingdom. That which renders this action,
the more truly generous, is, that neither diversity of Religion, nor the memory
of those Wars that had long and bitterly been waged betwixt this Alphonsus and
him could hinder him from lending him both men and money, from venturing his
own person in his behalf, crossing the Seas in favor of him, and exposing
himself to foreign Nations, and diverse hazards in an affair whereof he could
expect no profit to himself.

Knowls Turk. hist. p. 217.
8. The Bassa of Natolia leading a parcel of Turks, as the Forerunners of
Bajazet's Army, was entrapped by an ambush of the Prince Ciarcan, most of his
Soldiers cut in pieces, himself taken prisoner, and sent to Tamerlane, he
demanded the reason why Bajazet showed such contempt of his Army, which he
should find strong enough to abate his p^ide. The Bassa replied, that his Lord
was the Sun upon earth, which could endure no equal, that he was astonished to
see how he had enterprised so dangerous a journey to hinder the fortune of his
Lord, and that he committed great ^olly in going about to resist the same: I
am, said Tamerlane, sent from Heaven to punish his rashness, and to confound
his pride. Then changing his discourse, he asked if his Master did come
resolved to bid him Battle: Assure your self, said he, there is nothing more he
desires: and would to God I might acknowledge your goodness in giving me leave
to assist my Lord at that Battle. Good leave have thou, said Tamerlane, go thy
ways, and tell thy Lord, that thou have seen me, and that in the Battle he
shall find me on Horseback, where he shall see a Green Ensign displayed. And so
gave the Bassa both his liberty and a fair Horse well furnished, although he
well knew he was shortly to use both against himself.

9. There was amongst the Hugonots Faction one John Poltrot Sieur de Mereborne
of a Noble Family near Angoulesme, Davilas ^ist. of Civ. War. of France. l. 3.
p. 176, 177.
this man lay in wait for the life of Francis Duke of Guise; and upon the
twenty fourth of February 1563 performed his wicked intention; for the Duke
being against Orleance, retired that Evening una^med to his Lodging, Poltrot
mounted on a swift G^nnet, discharged a Gun at him, laden with three Bullets,
which all three hit him on the right Shoulder, and passing through the body, so
wounded him, that he died on the third day after his hurt. But the proceedings
of the Queen Mother were much different; for when soon after this a Hugonot
Captain commonly called La Motte, having offered himself to find a means to
kill Andelot, she causing him to be apprehended by her Guards, sent him bound
to the same Andelot, that he might punish him as he pleased himself, and surely
there are few examples of the like generous actions in any of our modern
stories.

10. The Emperor of China called Vamlie, Alvarez. Seemed. hist. China. part. 1.
c. 22. p. p. 114.
had no child by his Lawful Empress; but had two Sons, one by a Maid of Honor,
which was the eldest, and another young Son by one of the Queens his
Concubines. This Son he loved very much, and by reason of the particular
affection he bore him, he would by all means leave him the Kingdom, saying,
that by reason he had no Sons by his Empress, the succession was not of right
to any of the rest, but that it belonged to him to elect whom he pleased; and
because the elder was the Son of a Servant, he chose rather to leave the
Kingdom to the other. But for all this the great Officers of the Court did most
stoutly oppose him, saying, that since he had commerce with that servant, she
was ennobled by a superior Law, and that her Son being the eldest, ought not to
lose the Rights and Privileges of his Birth. The King notwithstanding persisted
in his intentions, and the rest to oppose them, whereupon many were by the
King's orders thrust out of their places, others left them of their own accords
and having let down the Ensigns of their Dignity, hung the^ at the Gate of the
Palace, and departed to their own Homes, despising at once the Honor, Profit,
Dignity and Revenue of their place, only for the defense of Reason, and the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the preservation of a just right of a youth
that wanted protection. The King at length, though a more potent than himself,
had seldom sat on the Throne, was yet enforced (besides his custom) to hold a
Royal Audience, and taking his eldest Son (now as Prince) he placed him next
behind him, and showing him to the Mandarines, he recommends unto them the care
of the public peace and quiet without doors, assuring them that all was quiet
in the Palace, and that Thai Cham (that was the name of the Prince) should
succeed him in the Kingdom, as in effect it fell out.

Alvarez. hist. China part. 1. c. 29. p. 147.
11. The Daughters of the Emperors of China, have their Palaces in the City of
Pekin, one of the domestic Servants of one of those Princesses, had committed
sundry insolences, and amongst those one such crime as deserved death. The
Mandarines much desired to apprehend him, but in the Palace they could not, and
he never went abroad but when he waited on his Princess. At length, a Mandarine
resolved to take him by any means he could, and therefore when the Princess
went next abroad, he with his men set himself before the Coaches, made them
stop, and then presently laid hands on that man and carried him away. The
Princess resenting the affront that was done her, returned presently to the
Palace full of indignation, and was so transported with choler, that (not
staying the Kings return from the Audience, where he then was) she went thither
in person to complain. The Mandarine was presently sent for, who had put
himself in readiness supposing he should be called: He presented himself before
the King, who sharply reproved him. He answered, Sir, I have done nothing but
that which your Majesty commands, and your Law ordains: But you ought
(replied the King) to have sought some other time and opportunity. I have
sought it long enough (answered the Mandarine) but I should never have found
it: At least, said the King, ask my Daughter pardon and bow your head. Where
there is no fault, said the other, there is no need of pardon, neither will I
ask pardon for having discharged my office. Then the King commanded two
Mandarines, that by force they should bow down his head to the ground, but he
by strength kept up himself so stiff, that it was not possible for them to do
it; so that the King sent him away, and a few days after gave order he should
have a better office, bestowed upon him, being well pleased with his integrity,
and generous zeal to Justice.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 328.
12. The Turks had taken the City of Buda in Hungary, the Inhabitants being fled
out of it for fear: But the Castle was guarded by German Soldiers under the
command of Thomas Nadast the Governor, these Germans also affrighted began to
confer with the enemy about the surrender of the Castle, which Nadast not
enduring being full of courage and constancy, he brake off their conference and
commanded the Guns to be planted against the enemy, these cowards converting
their minds to villainy, laid hands upon their Captain, bound him, while he
threatened in vain, and having conditioned for the safety of their lives and
goods yield up the Castle: when the Turks were entered and found Nadast in
Bonds; they related all to their Emperor, as they had heard it from him: who
was so incensed with their persidious cowardice, that he immediately sent out
his Janissaries after them to cut them all in pieces: as for Nadast, he freed
him of his bonds; caused him to be brought into his presence, highly commended
him, invited him with a liberal stipend to serve on his side, and when he
refused honorably dismissed him.

Cause. Treatise of the passions. p. 78.
13. Papinianus was the honor of Lawyers, and to this great man it was to whom
the Emperor Severus dying, recommended his two Sons with the government of the
Empire, but the impious Caracalla having embrew'd his hands in the blood of his
Brother Ge^a, was desirous that this excellent person should set some color by
his eloquence before the Senate and people upon an action so barbarous, to
which proposal of (...) freely made answer, it was more easy to commit a
patricide, than to justify it, uttering this truth to the prejudice of his
head, which this wretched Prince caused to be cut off.

14. The Father of Lycurgus being slain in a popular tumult, Plut. p. 40. in
Lycurgo. Cause. H. C. tom. 1. l. 1. p. 3.
the Kingdom of Sparta descended to Polydecta the elder Brother: but he soon
after dying, it came in all men's opinion to Lycurgus, and he reigned till such
time as it was known that the wife of his Brother was with child. This once
clearly discovered, he declared that the Kingdom did appertain to the Son of
Polydecta, in case his Wife should be delivered of a Male Child, in the mean
time he administered the Kingdom in the quality of Protector. But the Lady
privately sent to Lycurgus offering him to cause an abortion, in case that he
thereby receiving the Kingdom, would also receive her as his Wife: He though
detesting the impiety of the woman, yet rejected not her offer; but as one that
approved and accepted the condition, represented to her that by no means she
should endanger the state of her body, by any such harsh medicaments as that
case would require, but that as soon as she was safely delivered, it should be
his care to see that the Child should be made away. By this means he fairly
drew on the woman, even to the time of her Travel, which as soon as he was
informed of, he ordered persons to be present, together with a Guard attending
there with this precept, that in case she should be delivered of a Girl, they
should leave it with the women, but if otherwise they should by all means
forthwith convey it to himself. It so fell out that as he sat at Supper with
the Nobles, she was delivered of a Male Child, and the Boy was brought to him
where he then was. As soon as he received him, he said to them that were
present, O ye Spartans, there is a King born to us; and so placed him in the
Throne of the Kingdom, he gave him the name of C^arilaus, because all persons
received him with greatest expressions of joy, and highest admiration of the
justice and greatness of his mind, that with so true a generosity had preserved
and yielded up the Kingdom to his Nephew.

15. Titus Pomponius Atticus a Patrician of Rome, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 545.
would contribute nothing amongst those of his rank, to Brutus and Cassius in
their war upon Augustus, but after that Brutus was forcibly driven from Rome,
he sent him one hundred thousand Sesterces for a present, and took care that he
should be furnished with as many more in Epirus, contrary to the custom o^ most
other men; while Brutus was fortunate he gave him no assistance, but after he
was expelled and labored under adverse fortune, he administered to his wants
with a bounty to be wondered at.

16. Tancred the Norman was in Syria with Boemund his Uncle Prince of Antioch,
Fulg^s. l. 6. c. 5. p. 772, 773. Platin. de vit^s Pontif. p. 185.
it fortuned that Boemund was taken Prisoner in a fight with the Infidels:
Three Years Tancred governed his principality in his behalf, in which time
having enlarged his Territories, and augmented his Treasure with a great sum,
he ransomed his Uncle, and resigned up all into his hands. Fulgos. l. ^6. c. 5.
p. 771.


17. Ferdinand King of Leon, by the instigation of some slanderous Informers,
was brought to make war upon Pontius Count of Minerba, (an old friend of his
Fathers) and had already taken diverse places from him: Sanctius the Third (King
of Castile) and Brother to Ferdinand, being informed hereof, gathered a mighty
Army, and marched out with them against his Brother. Ferdinand that least of
any thing expected any such matter, and terrified with the coming of so sudden
and unlooked for an Enemy; mounting his Horse, with a few of his followers,
came into the Camp of his Brother, and told him he put himself into his hands,
to deal with him as he saw good, (as one whose only hope it was this way to
preserve his Kingdom to himself) but Sanctius that was a just King and a good
Brother, despising all the proffers he made him, told him that he had not taken
up arms, for any desire he had to wrest his Kingdom out of his hands, and annex
it to his own, but his sole design was that whatever had been taken away from
Count Pontius should be restored him, seeing he had been a great friend to
their common Parent, and had most valorously assisted him against the Moors.
This was gladly yielded to by Ferdinand, and as soon as it was done Sanctius
returned to his own Territories.

Curia politiae. by M. Scudery. p. 66.
18. Emanuel the first King of Portugal, levied a most puissant Army with a
design to pass into Africa, where victory seemed to attend him, when as being
upon his march and just ready to transport his Army over those straits which
divide Spain and Mauritania, the Venetians dispatch Ambassadors to entreat
succors from him as their Ally against the Turk, who had now declared war
against them. This generous Prince resolutely suspended his hopes of conquest,
to assist his ancient friends, suddenly altered his design, and sent his Army
entirely to them, deferring his enterprise upon Algiers to another season.

Curia politiae by M. Scudery. p. 20.
19. The Venetians had leagued themselves with the Turks against the Hungarians,
they aided them to the ruin of that Kingdom, and reduced that Country almost
to a desolation, and having been the cause of the death of two of their Kings,
of which the great Hunniades was the last, yet notwithstanding seeing
themselves afterward all in flames by the Turks their Allies: They sent
Ambassadors to Hungary, to implore succors from the famous Matthias Corvinus,
Son to Hunniades; who after he had afforded them an honorable Audience, and
reproached them with their unworthy and hateful proceedings, did yet grant them
the succors which they had sought at his hands.

Fulgos. ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 5^^.
20. Renatus Duke of Lorrain, with fire and sword was driven out of his Dukedom
by Charles the last Duke of Burgundy; afterward by the help of the Swissers,
he overcame and slew in Battle him from whom he had received so great a
calamity* With great industry he sought out the body of Charles amongst the
multitude of the slain, not to savage upon his Corpse, or to expose it to
mockery, but to bury it, as he did at S. Georges in the Town of Nancy, he and
his whole Court followed it in mourning, with as many Priests and Torches as
could be procured, discovering as many signs of grief at the funeral of his
enemy, as if it had been that of his own Father.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Frugality and Thriftiness of some men in their Apparel,
Furniture and other things.
THe Kings of India used to dry the bodies of their Ancestors which done they
caused them to be hung up at the Roof of their Palace in precious Cords, they
adorned them with Gold and Jewels of all sorts, and so preserved them with a
care and reverence, little short of veneration it self, of the like ridiculous
superstition are they guilty, who make over-careful and costly provisions for
those bodies of theirs which will ere long be breathless and stinking
carcasses. They are usually souls of an over delicate and voluptuous
constitution and temper, that are so delighted with this kind of luxury,
whereas the most worthy men and persons of the greatest improvements by reason
and experience, have expressed such a moderation herein as may almost seem a
kind of carelessness and neglect of themselves.

1. Of Lewis the Eleventh, Clarks mir. c. 57. p. 232.
King of France, there is found in the Chamber of Accounts, Anno 1461. Two
Shillings for Fustian to new Sleeve his Majesty's old Doublet, and Three
Halfpence for Liquor to grease his Boots. I choose rather to call it his
Frugality than Covetousness, in as much as no man was more liberal of his Coin
than himself where occasion did require, as Comine who wrote his History, and
was also of his Council, does frequently witness.

2. Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, was very frugal especially once
being to make a Royal Entrance into the City of Millain, Lips. monit. polit. l.
2. c. 15. p. 359, 360. Clarks mir. c. 57. p. 233.
there was great preparation for his entertainment, the Houses and Streets were
beautified and adorned: The Citizens dressed in their richest Ornaments, a
golden Canopy was prepared to be carried over his head, and great expectation
there was to see a great and glorious Emperor: But when he entered the City he
came in a plain Black Cloth Cloak, with an old Hat on his Head, so that they
who saw him, not believing their eyes, asked which was he, laughing at
themselves for being so deceived in their expectations.

3. The meanness of the Emperor Augustus his furniture and household stuff,
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 15. p. 355. Drexel. oper. l. 3. c. 8. p. 424.
does appear to this day, in the Beds and Tables that are left, the most of
which are scarce so costly as those of a private person: It is said he used not
to lie in any bed, but such as was low and moderately covered, and for his
wearing Apparel, it was rarely any other than such as was home spun, and such
as was made up by his Wife, Sister, Daughter, and Grandchildren.

4. Though the Ornament of the Body is almost a peculiarity to the Female Sex,
Sabelli. Exempl. l. 2. c. 8. p. 104.
yet not only one woman but the whole family of the Sarrani in Rome, were
observed not to make use of any Linen at all, rejecting it as too soft and
effeminate.

5. The Emperor Rodulphus did not at all differ from a private person in his
habit, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 15. p. 357, 358.
and being at Mentz, he walked out one morning alone, the Air was cold and
piercing, and therefore having observed a fire in a Bakers shop, he boldly went
in and began to warm himself: But the woman of the house judging of him only by
his Apparel, after she had treated him with more than a sufficiency of ill
language, began so to threaten him with scalding water, that he was constrained
to depart: Nor was he only thus meanly accoutred upon ordinary days, but even
in that great solemnity, when O^tocarus being overcome (thethen King of
Bohemia) was received by him to pay him homage upon his knees. The King of
Bohemia came with a splendid retinue, his Attendants and their Horses shone
with Jewels, Gold and Silk, and when the Emperor was advised by his Nobles, to
appear in his Imperial Robes, No, said he, the King of Bohemia has often
laughed at my Gray Coat, and now my Gray Coat shall laugh at him.

Drexil. oper. l. 3. c. 8. p. 424.
6. Alexander the Great in his habit and culture of body, little differed from a
private person and when one day after much labor and sweat, he was about to
bath himself in the River Cydnus, he undressed himself in the sight of his
Army, esteeming it a piece of gallantry to show that he was content with such
apparel as was cheap, and easily procurable.

Herberts Travels. l. 2. p. 170.
7. Mr. Herbert tells that at the public audience of the Lord Ambassador, upon
two or three white silken shags, sat the Potshaw or Emperor of Persia, Abbas:
who though he was more beloved at home, more famous abroad, more formidable to
his enemies than any of his predecessors; was found at that time in a plain red
Callico Coat, quilted with Cotton; as if he should have said we might see his
dignity consisted in his parts and prudence, not to steal respect by borrowed
colors or rich embroideries. His Turbant was white and hungy, his Wast was
girded with a Thong of Leather, and his Courtiers were but ordinarily attired.

Plut. in Caton. major. p. 338.
8. Plutarch relates of Marcus Cato the elder, that he never put on a garment
that cost him more than an hundred pence, he drank in his Praetor and
Consulship, the same Wine that laborers use to drink of, and when he would
treat himself with an unusual magnificence, he would fetch his Supper from the
Market, that cost him thirty halfpence. He soon disposed of a painted
Babylonish Garment, that was left him by inheritance; he bought no Slave at
above one thousand five hundred pence, as one that cared not for them that were
tender and handsome, but sought for such as were strong, able to work, and to
look after his Horses and Herds. He used to say, that nothing which is
superfluous can be had at a small rate; and that for his part he accounted that
dear of a halfpenny, whereof he had no need.

Plut. moral. in Sympostac. l. 6. p. 729.
9. Plato being minded to draw Timotheus the Son of Conon. from sumptuous Feasts
and superfluous Banquets, (which great Captains commonly make) invited him one
day to a Supper in the Academy, which was Philosophical indeed and Frugal,
where the Table was not furnished with those Viands which might distemper the
body with feverous heats and in^lammations, but there was such a supper upon
which ordinarily there follow kind and quiet sleeps, such fancies also as
engender few dreams and those short; and (in a word) where the sleeps do
testify a great calmness and tranquillity of the body. The morrow after his
Guest Timotheus perceiving the difference between these suppers and the other;
said: That they who supped with Plato overnight, found the pleasure and comfort
thereof the next day.

10. Ptolemaeus the Son of Lagus King of Egypt, both supped and also took his
bed for the most part in his friends houses, Plut. mor^l. l. de Apoth. Reg.
etc. p. 414.
and if at any time he invited them to supper, he used their furniture, for he
would send unto them to borrow their Vessels, their Boards, Carpets, and
Table-Cloths, for that he had never about him any more than was suf^icient for
the service of his own person, and he wa^ wont to say that to enrich others
seemed to him more Regal than to enrich himself.

11. This is certain that our Ancestors in old time so much hated and abhorred
all excessive delicacy, Plut. moral. in l. de Isid. and Osyr. p. 1290.
super^luous and costly delights, and voluptuous pleasures, that within the
Temple of the City of Thebes in Egypt, there stood a Square Column or Pillar,
wherein were engraven certain curses and execrations against their King M^nis,
who was the first that turned and averted the Egyptians, quite from their
simple and frugal manner of life, without money, without sumptuous fare and
chargeable delights. It is said also that Technatis the Father of Bocchoraeus
in an expedition against the Arabians, (when it chanced that his carriages were
far behind, and came not in due time to the place where he encamped) was
content to make his Supper of whatsoever he could get, and so to take up with a
small and very simple pittance, yea and after Supper, to lie upon a course and
homely Pallet, where he slept all night very soundly, without so much as once
awaking; whereupon he ever after loved sobriety of life and frugality, and
cursed the forementioned King Minis: which malediction of his being by the
Priests of that time approved, he caused to be engraven upon the Pillar
abovesaid.

12. The Thacians as they lived in a Country that abounded with all things,
Langii polyanth. p. 460.
especially with good wine, so they were a people somewhat too much addicted to
Luxury: When Agesilaus marched with his Army through their Country* The
Thacians in honor of him sent him a present of Meal, Geese, Cakes made of
honey, and diverse other things o^ great price, together with junkets and
variety of sweet meats, of all these Agesilaus only accepted of the Meal,
commanding that all the rest should be carried back again by those who had
brought them: But when they importuned him with earnest entreaties that he
would be pleased to accept of them; he commanded that all those things should
be distributed and divided amongst the Helotes, that is a sort of Slaves
belonging to the Lacedaemonians: When some asked the reason of that action of
his, he told them that such kind of delicates were unseemly for men, who were
addicted to the study of virtue and valor, and that those things which
ensnared servile natures and dispositions, should be kept far off from men of
freedom, and liberal education.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Hospitality of some men, and their free Entertainment of
Strangers.
Amongst the Goths and Sucons it is entered amongst their principal laws, that
they shall maintain hospitality amongst themselves, and be free in the
entertainment of Strangers, that it should be reputed a great crime to deny
lodging to a Traveller; and that whosoever was convicted (by sit witnesses) to
have denied it thrice, should have his House burnt down to the ground, that he
might be justly deprived of his own House, who had inhumanely denied the use of
it to another. By virtue of this Law this people are accounted the most
hospitable of all others in Europe, and had we had the like amongst us, the
Hospitality of the English had not given its last groan in Kent, as Doctor
Fuller says it did. But proceed we to our Examples.

Sabell. Ex. l. 7. c. 6. p. 394. Plut. in Cimone. p. 484.
1. Lychas the Lacedemonnian was famous for his Munificence this way, whose
constant custom it was to entertain all those that came to try masteries in
Sparta: if they were Strangers his House was their Inn, while they were
desirous to stay; and when they would not, they were civilly dismissed by him.

Sabell. Ex. l. 7. c. 6. p. 394. Plut. p. 117. in Themist.
2. In the War of the Medians upon the Athenians, when for fear of the Enemy
their Wives and Children were fled out of their Country, the Troezenii received
them into their City, where they were provided for upon the public account,
and withal set forth an edict, that the children had liberty to take and gather
any sort of fruit, whence they would, without fear of any punishment to ensue
thereupon.

B.^ S^otw. hist. chapter of Scotland. l. 2. p. 56, 57.
3. Henry Wardlaw Presentor of Glascow, being at Avignion at the decease o^
Thomas Stewart Archbishop of S. Andrews, was provided thereto by Pope Benedict
the Thirteenth: of this man's great Hospitality take this instance; The Masters
of his House complained of the great numbers that resorted to him for
entertainment, and desiring that for the cas^ of the Servants he would
condescend to make a Bill of Household, that they might know who were to be
served. He condescended, and when his Secretary was called to set down the
names of the Household, being asked whom he would first name, he answered Fife
and Angus (these are two large Countries, containing millions of people) his
servants hearing this, gave over their purpose of retrenching his Family, for
they saw he would have no man refused that came to his House.

Zuing. vol. 1 l. 2. p. 179.
4. In Italy and Spain, whether you go to view the Temples, Castles, Magazines,
Buildings, or any other thing in this kind: if you depart from the House of
your Friend where you first lodged, if you give any money as a Gratuity to the
Watchmen, Workmen, or any other servant of your Friends, you shall depart an
enemy instead of a Friend: for so great is their Magnanimity and Hospitality,
that they are exceeding desirous and ambitious to do all good offices ^or a
stranger gratis, and if at any time they receive any thing, it is by
enforcement, and with a great deal of reluctance.

Herberts tra^^ls. l. 3. p. 316. Linschot voyages. l. 1. c. 17. p. 29.
5. Patania (of old Perimula) is at this day a well known City in the Bengalan
Gulf, situate in the midst of those two famous Ports Malacca and Syam: the
people here are exceeding hospitable to such strangers, as from desire of
Novelty or Gain reside amongst them; neither do they enquire of what Co^ntry
they be, what their business, nor Religion. The men of Note transcend in
courtesy; for at any man's arrival they blush not to proffer their Daughters or
Nieces to be their Bed-fellows; yea, to accompany them at Bed and Board during
their stay: the price of such a favor not equalling so high a complement, but
were it less, in my opinion is too much for such Panders and Prostitutes. At
the end o^ the prefixed time the woman returns home well pleased, so far from
shame or loss, that they rather account her honored, and more fit for
preferment.

6. The Lucanians have a Law amongst them, Eccl. Rhod. l. 19. c. 26. p. 916.
Aelian. var. hist. l. 4. cap. 1. p. 139.
to this purpose, that no man shall refuse the entertainment of a Stranger that
comes to him after the Sun is set with a purpose to lodge with him, and that if
he do, he shall submit to a certain Fine, and be declared guilty of
Inhospitality, which they look upon as a very great crime.

7. At Tednest a City of Morocco such respect is had to strangers, Purch.
pilgr. tom. 1. l. 11. c. 11.. 1. p. 785.
that if a Merchant come thither, and has no acquaintance, the Gentlemen of
the City cast lots who shall be his Host, and they use him kindly, looking only
for some present at his departure, in token of his thankfulness. And if he be a
mean person, he may choose his Host without any recompense at all expected from
him.

8. Tesegdelt is another City of the same Kingdom, Purch. pilgr. tom. 1. l. 11.
c. 11.. 1. p. 785.
where a Guard is set at the Gates, not so much to keep out Enemies, as to
entertain Strangers. At the first coming of a Stranger they ask him if he have
any Friends in the City, if not, by the custom of the place they must see to
provide him entertainment upon free cost.

9. Edward Earl of De^by, Lloyd in his state worthies. p. 548.
was famous for a spreading Charity and his great Hospitality; his provision
native, rather plentiful than various, solid than dainty, that cost him less,
and contented his Guests more; his Table constant and even, where all were
welcome, and none invited: his Hall was full most commonly, his Gates always.
The one with the honest Gentry and Yeomanry who were his retainers in love and
observance, bringing good stomachs to his Table, and resolved hearts for his
service. The other with the aged, maimed, industrious poor, whose craving was
prevented with doles, and expectation with bounty: the first being provided
with meat, the second with money, and the third with employment. In a word Mr.
Cambden observes, that Hospitality lies buried since 1572 in this Earls Grave,
whence may that divine power raise it, who shall raise him, but before the last
Resurrection. Neither was he munificent upon other men's charge; for once a
Month he looked into his Incomes, and once a Week to his Disbursements, that
none should wrong him, or be wronged by him. The Earl of Derby he would say
shall keep his own House: wherefore it is an observation of him and the second
Duke of Norfolk, that when they were buried, not a Tradesman could demand the
paym^nt of a Groat they owed him; nor a Neighbor the restitution of a penny
wherein they had wronged him.

16. Conradus Gesnerus, Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ. medic. p. 160.
by the Writer of his life has this given him as a part of his character, that
his House was ever open to all sorts of Strangers, but especially to learned
men, many whereof daily repaired to him, some to see and be acquainted with
him, others to behold something that was rare and worthy of their sight in his
keeping: for his House was replenished with great abundance of such things, he
had the Carcases of almost all exotic living creatures, or else the ^igures of
them represented in colors to the life; he had a Nursery of very many plants,
and those unknown in our Countries in his Garden, more he preserved dried in
his Boxes, he had also no despicable treasure of Gems, Metals and fossible
things. None of these did he keep secret to himself, but he willingly showed
them to as many as came to him that were studious in the things of nature, and
learnedly and sweetly would he discourse of the nature and efficacy and virtues
of them: for whereas nature had made him liberal and bountiful, though he did
not abound in Gold and Riches, yet he liberally and willingly did impart what
was in his power, and drawn out of the treasures of Learning and Experience;
for whereas he had many secrets in Physic imparted by the best Physicians of
Germany, France and Italy, and many others which he himself had found out, and
experimented with great success, of which had he been sordid and covetous he
might have made a large increase to his private estate; yet all these he either
published for the common use and good, or else communicated to such Friends as
desired them of him.

Plut. moral. l. 4. Symposiac. p. 707.
11. Galepsus is a Town in Euboea, where there be natural hot Baths, it is a
proper seat fitted by nature for sundry honest pleasures; so that it is reputed
the public Hostelry of all Greece, there is plenty of Fowl, Fish and Venison.
The Town flourishes most in the midst of Spring, in respect of the mighty
concourse of people there is at that time, who converse familiarly one with
another, and mutually feast together, taking the benefit of the great
affluence, and abundance of all sorts of provisions that are there. But
whenever Callistratus the Professor of Rhetoric is at home, his house is
open to all Strangers, hardly may a man sup any where else than at his own
house, for he is a man so full of courtesy and hospitality, that it is no
easy matter to resist the importunity he uses in the invitation of Strangers:
Amongst other persons of ancient times, he seems to imitate Cimon, making it
his whole and only pleasure to feast many in his house, and to receive and
entertain Strangers and those from all parts.

Plut. moral. de Symposiac. l. 4. p. 707.
12. It is written of Celeus, that he was the first man who delighted to
assemble to his House, a number of honorable persons and of good mark, which
assembly he called Prytanaeum.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Blameless and Innocent Life of some Persons.
If Man alone is a wonder, the good and virtuous man must certainly be a double
one: he is such a rarity, that Diogenes thought a Candle and Lanthorn in the
broad of day, scarce a sufficient light to make his discovery by, when he went
up and down in quest of such a one. Vir bonus cito nec fieri, nec intelligi
potest: nam ille alter fortasse tanquam Phoenix, Anno quingentessimo nascitur:
A good man is neither quickly made nor easily understood, for like the Phoenix
of Arabia, there is possibly one of them born in the space of some five hundred
years. This was the opinion of Seneca, and since the world is so seldom
enriched with these Jewels, the Reader will the less wonder at that poverty of
instances, that is to be met with in Writers, and may do well to have in
greater veneration the virtues of those illustrious persons, which he is here
presented with.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 97. p.
1. Camerarius mentions an Inscription upon a Tombstone in Rome, near the place
of the Jews in these words.

Iulia B. Prisca vixit Annos XXVI. Nihil unquam peccavit nisi quod mortua est.
i. e.

In this only she did amiss, that she died.

2. M. Portius Cato the Elder, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 92. Plin. Not. hist.
l. 7. c. 27. p. 170. Solin. c. 7. p. 196.
lived with that integrity, that though he was fifty times accused, was yet so
many times adjudged innocent, nor did he obtain this by favor or wealth, but
against the favor and riches of almost the whole City. His honesty and
severity had raised him up very many enemies, and much of Envy, for he spared
no man nor was a friend to any who was not so to the Commonwealth. At last
being accused in his old age, he required and obtained that Tiberius*
Sempronius Gracchut, one of the chiefest of his enemies, should be appointed
for his Judge, but even he acquitted him, and gave sentence that he was
innocent, through this his confident action he ever after lived both in great
glory and equal security.

3. It is said of King Henry the Sixth of England, Bak. Chron. p. 287.
that he had one immunity peculiar, that no man could ever be revenged of him,
seeing he never offered a man an injury: Once for all let his Confessor be
heard speak, who in Ten years Confession never found that he had done or said
an^ thing, for which he might justly be enjoined penance.

4. When the Corpse of Thomas Howard second Duke of Norfolk, Mavers sun. monum.
p. 839. Clarks mir. c. 74. p. 324.
was carried to be interred in the Abbey of Thetford, Anno 1524. No person could
demand of him one Groat for debt, or restitution for any injury done by him.

5. Aristophon the Athenian was used to boast amongst his Citizens of this,
Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 5. p. 765.
that whereas he had been ninety five times cited and accused before the
Tribunal of Justice, yet he had ever been absolved and pronounced innocent, in
every of those Trials.

6. Julius Drusus a Tribune of the people had a house, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1.
l. 2. p. 133. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 6. p. 88.
that in many places lay open to the eyes of the Neighborhood, there came a
workman to him, and told him that at the price of five Talents, he would so
alter it, that it should not be liable to that inconvenience. I will give thee
Ten Talents, said he, if thou can make my house perspicuous in every Room of
it, that so all the City may behold after what manner I lead my life. For he
was a man of great temperance and moderation: Lipsius calls him Livius Drusus,
and relates the story in somewhat a different manner, though to the same
purpose.

7. Aristides was the most just and honest person amongst all the Greeks, Lips.
monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 90.
and by reason of the glory and Name he had gained was in danger of a Ten Years
Exile, which from the manner of the suffrage, the Greeks call Ostracism: While
they were now giving in their voices, and he himself was present standing in
the Crowd and Throng of the People; there came one to him, who (not able to
write himself) desired him (being next to him) that he would write the Name of
Aristides in his Shell, viz. him that he would have condemned and banished. Do
you know him then, said Aristides, or has he any way injured you? Neither, said
the other, but this is that which vexes me, and therefore I would he were
condemned, because I hear him called up and down Aristides the just or honest.
Aristides took his Shell, and wrote his name in it as he had desired.

8. Scipio Nasica was judged once by the Senate of Rome, Plin. not. hist. l. 7.
c. 34. p. 173.
(and each of those Senators were sworn to speak without passion or affection)
to be the best and honestest man that ever was from the beginning of the world;
Solin. c. 7. p. 196.
yet this same man as upright and innocent as he was, through the ingratitude
of the people, was not suffered to dye in his own Country; besides he had a
repulse from them when he sued for a dignity.

Niphil. p. 6.
9. M. Cato the younger was the admirer or flatterer of no mortal: he frequently
opposed Pompey ^earing his greatness, for he esteemed the Commonwealth, more
dearly than any other person or thing: he was suspicious and jealous of any
thing that was beyond measure, as dreading an excess of power in any upon the
score of the Republic. He sided with the people in any thing for their
advantage, and would freely deliver his opinion in things that were just, let
the hazard and danger of doing it be as great as it would.

Co^l. Rhod. l. 14. c. 3. p. 631.
10. Asclepiodorus went on Pilgrimage from the City of Athens into Syria, and
visited most Cities as he went along: This he undertook for this only purpose,
that he might observe the manners of men and their way of life. His journey
being ended he said, that in all his perambulation he had not met with more
than three men, that lived with modesty and according to the Rules of Honesty
and Justice. These three were Ilapius a Philosopher in Antioch, Mares of
Laodicea, the honestest man of that Age, and Domninus the Philosopher, so that
it should seem Heraclitus had reason for his Tears, who is said to weep as often
as he came abroad, in consideration of so many thousands of evil livers as he
beheld about him.

Coel. Rhod. l. 19. c. 26. p. 916.
11. Biblius (as we read of him) was a man of that integrity and singular
abstinence, in respect of what was another right, that if he casually light
upon any thing as he passed upon the way, he would depart without offering to
take it up: saying It was a kind of blossom of injustice, to seize upon what
was so sound. Agreeable to which practice of his was that Law of Stagira, Quod
non posuisti ne tollas, Take not that up which you never laid down.

^^^ll. Poll. (...). Rhod. l. 21. c. 11. p. ^78. Pezel. Melli^^c. hist. om. 2.
p. 229.
12. When the Senate of Rome was in debate about the Election of a Censour, and
that Valerianus was in nomination; Trebellius Pollio writes, that the Universal
Acclamation of the Senators was; The life of Valerianus is a Censourship, let
him be the judge of us all, who is better than all of us: let him judge of the
Senate who cannot be charged with any crime, let him pass sentence upon our
life, against whom nothing is to be objected. Valerianus was almost a Censour
from his Cradle, Valerianus is a Censour in his whole life. A prudent Senator,
modest, grave, a friend to good men, an enemy to Tyrants, an enemy to the
vicious, but a greater unto vice. We receive this man for our Censour, him we
will all imitate, he is the most noble amongst us, the best in blood, of
exemplary life, of excellent learning, of choice manners, and the example of
Antiquity. This was a glorious Character of a man given by so honorable an
assembly, and yet to see after what manner virtue is sometimes afflicted in the
world; it is remembered of so great a person, that having attained to the
Empire, he was unfortunately taken by Sapores King of Persia, and made his
Footstool.

P^zel. mellis^^. hist. tom. 2. p. 277.
13. Upon the death of Julian the Emperor, by the unanimous consent of the
Army, Salustius the Prefect of the Praetorian Soldiers was elected, but he
excused himself, pretending his Age and the infirmities of his body, so that
Iovinia^^us was thereupon chosen: when he also was dead, by the means of this
Salustius Valentinianus, a Tribune was elected as Emperor, of this Salustius
the Prefect, Suidas says, that he was a person of that integrity that when
Valentinian was Emperor, he commanded any that had ever received any injury
from him, that they should go to the Emperor to complain of him, but there was
no man found that had any such complaint to prefer against him.

14. Richard the Second King of England was deposed, Daniels ^ist. continued l.
3. p. 52.
and Henry Bullinbrook Crowned King in his stead, it was also enacted in
Parliament, that the inheritance of the Crown and Realm of England, should be
united, and remain in the person of King Henry and in the heirs of his Body
lawfully begotten, a motion was likewise made in the same Parliament, what
should be done with the deposed King. Then it was that Thomas Merks Bishop of
Carlisle, showed at once his great loyalty and integrity, he rose up, and with
extraordinary freedom and constancy, he made an honest and learned Oration,
wherein by Scripture reason and other Arguments, he stoutly maintained the
right of his deposed Sovereign, resolutely opposed the usurpation of his
Supplanter, concluding that the Parliament had neither power nor policy to
depose King Richard, or in his place to elect Duke Henry, and howsoever this
first cost the good Prelate a Prison, and then the loss of his life; yet the
memory of so gallant an action shall never dye, so long as fidelity and loyalty
shall have any respect amongst men.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Choicest Instances of the most entire friendship.
THe Ancients had a most excellent Emblem whereby they used to express a true
and sincere Friendship, Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 3. c. 53. p. 187.
they pictured it in the shape of a young man, very fair, bare-headed, meanly
attired; on the outside of his Garment was written VIVERE ET MORI, to live and
die; and in his Forehead AESTATE ET HYEME, In Summer and Winter: his Breast was
open, so that his Heart might be seen, and with his Finger he pointed to his
Heart, where was written PROPE LONG, Far and Near. But such faithful Friends
(says Bishop Morton) are in this age all (for the most part) gone in
Pilgrimage, and their return is uncertain, we must therefore for the present be
content to borrow instances from the Histories of former Ages.

1. One Mesippus relates in Lucian, how that he one day seeing a man comely,
Cause. Treat. of passions. Ereat. 4.. 4. p. 47.
and of eminent condition passing along in a Coach with a woman extremely
unhandsome, he was much amazed, and said he could not understand why a man of
prime quality, and so brave a presence, should be seen to stir abroad in the
company of a Monster. Hereupon one that followed the Coach, over-hearing him,
said, Sir, you seem to wonder at what you now see; but if I tell you the causes
and and circumstances thereof, you will much more admire. Know this Gentleman
whom you see in the Coach is called Zenothemis, and born in the City of
Marseilles, where he heretofore contracted a firm amity with a Neighbor of his
named Menecrates, who was at that time one of the chief men of the City, as
well in wealth as Dignities. But as all things in the world are exposed to the
inconstancy of fortune: it happened, that (as it is thought) having given a
false sentence he was degraded of honor, and all his Goods were confiscated,
every man avoided him as a Monster in this change of Fortune, but Zenothemis
his good friend, as if he had loved miseries not men, more esteemed him in his
adversity than he had done in prosperity, and bringing him to his house, showed
him huge treasures, conjured him to share them with him, since such were the
Laws of Amity, the other weeping for joy to see himself thus entertained in
such sharp necessities; said he was not so apprehensive of the want of worldly
wealth, as of the burden he had in a Daughter ripe for marriage, and willing
enough, but blemished with many deformities. She was, says the History, but
half a woman, a body misshapen, limping and blear-eyed, a Face disfigured, and
besides she had the Falling Sickness, with horrible Convulsions. Nevertheless,
this noble heart said unto him, trouble not your self about the marriage of
your Daughter, for I will be her Husband. The other astonished at such
goodness, God forbid, said he, that I should lay such a burden upon you. No,
no, replied the other, she shall be mine. And instantly he married her, making
great Feasts at the Nuptials; being married, he honors her with much regard,
and makes it his Glory to show her in the best company as a Trophy of his
Friendship. In the end she brought him a Son, who restored his Grandfather to
his Estate, and was the honor of his Family.

Camerar. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 97. p. 455.
2. At Rome, says Camerarius, there are to be be seen these Verses engraven
about an Urn.

D. D. S.
Vrna brevis geminum, quamvis tenet ista cadaver;
Attamen in Coelo spiritus unus adest;
Viximus unanimes Luciusque and Flavius, idem
Sensus, amor, studium, vita duobus erat.
Though both our ashes this Vrn does enclose,
Yet as one Soul in Heaven we repose:
Lucius and Flavius living were one mind,
One will, love, and to one course inclined.
3. Damon and Pythias two Pythagorean Philosophers had betwixt them so firm a
friendship, Lon. Theatr. p. 521. Clark's mir. c. 56. p. 230. Val. Max. l. 4. c.
7. p.
that when Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse had resolved the death of one of
them, and that he only besought he might have liberty first to go home, and set
his affairs in order; the other doubted not to be surety in the mean time to
the Tyrant for his return. The Tyrant granted it, intent upon what this new and
strange action would come to in the event: a day had passed and he came not,
then all began to condemn the rashness of the surety; but he told them he
doubted not of the constancy of his Friend. At the same hour as was agreed with
Dionysius came he that was condemned, thereby freeing the other. The Tyrant
admiring the courage and fidelity of them both, remitted the punishment, and
entreated that he himself might be admitted as a third person into the society
of ^o admirable a Friendship.

4. Pylades and Orestes were famous of old for their friendship, Lon. Theatr.
p. 423.
Orestes being very desirous to ease himself of that grief, which he had
conceived for the death of his Mother^ consulted the Oracle, and understood
thereby that he should forthwith take the way to the Temple of Diana, in the
Country of Taurica, thither he went in the company of Pylades his friend: Now
it was the cruel custom of Thoas the then King of that Country, to put to death
every Tenth Stranger, that came into his Dominions. This unfortunate Lot fell
upon Orestes, the King at last asked which was that Orestes, Pylades readily
stepped forth, and told him he was the man who had that name: Orestes denied
it, he again affirmed, so that the King was in doubt which of them he should
kill.

5. Eudamidas the Corinthian, Lucian. in To^ari. Lon. Theatr. p. 425.
had Aretae^s the Corinthian, and Charixenus the Sycionian for his friends,
they were both rich whereas he was exceeding poor: he departing this life left
a will, (ridiculous perhaps to some) wherein was thus written. I give and
bequeath to Aretaeus, my Mother to be kept and fostered in her Old Age, as also
my Daughter to Charixenus, to be married with a Dowry as great as he can
afferd, but if any thing in the mean time fall out to any of these men, my Will
is that the other shall perform that which he should have done had he lived.
This Testament being read, they who knew the poverty of Eudamidas, but not his
friendship with these men, accounted of it all as mere jest and sport, no man
that was present but departed laughing at the Legacies which Aretaeus and
Charixenus were to receive. But those whose the Bequests were, as soon as they
heard of it, came forthwith acknowledging and ratifying what was commanded in
the Will: Charixenus died within five days after* Aretaeus his excellent
Successor took upon him borh the one and the others charge, kept the Mother of
Eudamidas, and soon as might be disposed of his Daughter in marriage, of five
Talents which his estate amounted to, two of them he gave in Dowry with his own
Daughter, and two more with the Daughter of his Friend, and would needs have
their Nuptials solemnized in one and the same day.

6. Alexander the Great was so true a Lover of Ephestion, Aelian. var. hist. l.
7. c. 8. p. 203. Lon. Theatr. p. 426. Zonar. Ann. tom. 1. p. 33. Sabell. Ex. l.
10. c. 15. p. 599.
that in his life time he had him always near him, made him acquainted with the
nearest and weightiest of his secrets, and when he was dead bewailed him with
inconsolable tears; he hanged up Glaucus his Physician, for being absent when
he took that which hastened his end. In token of heavy Mourning he caused the
Battlements of City Walls to be pulled down, and the Manes of Mules and Horses
to be cut off; he bestowed ten thousand Talents upon his Funerals, and that he
might not want Attendants to wait upon him in the other world, he caused some
thousands of men to be slain, even the whole Cussean Nation at once.

7. Pelopidas and Epaminondas were singularly noted, Plut. paral. p. 279. in
Pelopid. Fulgos. l. 4. c. 7. p. 528. Clark's mir. c. 56. p.
and commended for the perfect love and friendship that was ever inviolably
kept betwixt them to the day of their deaths. They went both together to
Mantinea, in assistance of the Lacedaemonians then in league with the Thebans,
their place in Battle fell near together, for they were appointed to oppose the
Arcadians and to fight on foot, It fell out that the Spartan wing wherein they
were was enforced to retreat, and some ^led outright, but those two gallant
young spirits were resolved to prefer death before slight, and so standing
close together, with great courage they sustained the many enemies that came
upon them, till such time as Pelopidas having received seven dangerous wounds,
fell upon a heap of dead bodies. Here it was that the brave Epaminondas (though
he thought he was slain) stepped before him, defended his body and armor, with
invincible courage and resolution, at last he was thrust through the Breast
with a Pike, and receiving a deep wound with a Sword on his Arm, he was ready
to sink, when Agesipolis King of Sparta came in with the other wing, and saved
the lives of these incomparable friends.

Plut. paral. p. 1007. in Bruto. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 319. Dinoth.
memorab. l. 4. p. 317. Fulgos. l. 4. c. 7. p. 528. Lon. Theatr. 422.
8. Lucilius was one of the friends of Brutus, and a good man, he (when Brutus
was overthrown at Philippi) perceiving a Troop of the Barbarians careless in
the pursuit of others, but with loose Reins following hard after Brutus,
resolved to take off their eagerness with the hazard of his own life, and being
left somewhat behind, he told them that he was Brutus: They gave the more
credit to him, because he desired to be presented to Anthony, as if he feared
Caesar, and reposed some confidence in the other. They glad of their prize, and
extolling their good fortune led him away, and it being toward evening, they
sent before certain of their company to carry the news to Anthony. With great
joy he hastens to meet them, as many others did to see Brutus, some pitying his
misfortune, others thinking him unworthy of glory, that for desire of life he
would suffer himself to be made the prey of Barbarians. When they drew nigh,
Anthony made a halt, as doubting in what manner he should receive Brutus, but
Lucilius being brought before him, with an undaunted mind thus spoke: No man,
Antonius, has taken M. Brutus, nor shall ever any enemy take him, the Gods are
more just than to permit fortune to trample upon so much virtue, he will be
found to be alive, or at least dead in such a manner as is worthy of him: But
it is I that have imposed upon your Soldiers, and I am here ready to undergo all
the severity I shall be adjudged to for it. All that were present were
astonished, Antonius turning to them that had brought him, You are displeased
fellow Soldiers, said he, because you suppose you are deceived, but make
account with your selves that you have met with a more precious prize, than
that which ye sought after: For whilst you sought for an enemy you have brought
me a friend; I am not r^solved what I should do with Brutus alive, but I had
rather obtain such friends than enemies. Having so said he embraced Lucilius,
and then committed him to one of his familiars, and afterward found him upon
all occasions, as firm and faithful to himself as he had been to Brutus.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 7. p. 118.
9. Lucius Rheginus being then Tribune of the people, Quintus Servilius Caepio
was by public authority cast into Prison, for it seemed that by his default
the Roman Army was overthrown by the Cimbrians and Teutones, Lucius had a
strict friendship with him, and therefore not only freed him from prison, but
was also a companion of his flight, and thereby thrust himself into a
banishment, which he could not hope should be other than perpetual.

10. Titus Voluminous a Gentleman of Rome, was the friend of Marcus Lucullus,
who was slain by the command of M. Antonius, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 7. p. 119.
for that he had followed the party of Brutus and Cassius, and though he had a
sufficient time to provide for himself by flight; yet he remained by the body
of his dead friend, and lamented him with such abundance of sighs and tears,
that particular notice was taken of him by the Officers: They therefore dragged
him to Antotonius; into whose sight and presence he was no sooner come, but,
Command me Sir, said he, to be forthwith carried to the Body of Lucullus, and
to be there slain, for I ought not to su^vive him, since I was the only person
who p^rswaded him to take that unfortunate sid^. He easily prevailed with
Antonius to grant his request, he was therefore led to the place he desired,
where when he came he kissed the right hand of Lucullus, took up his head that
was cut off, and put it into his Bosom, and then stretched out his own neck, to
receive the blow of the Executioner.

11. Great was the confidence which M. Vlpius Trajanus the Emperor had in his
friend Surra: Fulgos. l. 4, c. 7. p. 533.
it was told him one morning, that Surra had conspired against him, he in the
evening of the same day, uninvited went to his house, attended only by two
persons, he stayed and supped with him, would needs be trimmed by his Barber,
consulted his Physician about a disease in his eyes, and caused him to look
upon them. That night he was again told of the conspiracy, he smiling said, He
had that day made trial of the matter, and that if Surra had any evil design he
had put himself into his powor: so that remaining without suspicion of his
friendship, not long after he made him Tribune, and the custom being to deliver
a naked Sword to the Tribune, he gave him one, saying: I give you this to
defend me if I Rule well, if otherwise to kill me.

12. I think no former histories of the Grecians or Romans, Hakew. Apolog. l.
4. c. 10.. 5. p. 439.
can afford such another example of faithful and constant friendship, as that
betwixt Barbadicus and Tarrisanus two Gentlemen of Venice, fully and lively
expressed in this inscription, as I find it Printed at Venice, and allowed by
Authority, Anno 1627.

Nicholai Barbadici, and Marci Tarrisani Philophilia.

Regina Adriae, Orbis miraculum, intemerata Virgo, propria virtute gravida
tandem peperit, at quidnam? miraculum seipsa majus. Monstra vitio carentia.

Barbadicum et Tarrisanum gemellos, quorum duo corpora unanimat anima, Pylades
et Orestes transeant inter fabulas, et quicquid Graecia mendax audet in
historia. Commorientes deliria sunt Poetarum somniantium, at isti unanimes
digni quos operi intentus suo De^s respiciat. Magna ingeniorum disparitas.
Major Geniorum Paritas.

Non Major unus, nec melior alter iidem et non iidem, ipsi nec ipsi sunt,
pereuntem Barbadicum servat Tarrisanus, perditum Tarrisanum redimit Barbadicus.
Auri hic sanguinis ille prodigus.

De uno Tarrisano sollicitus Barbadicus, conjugis, liberorum, nepotum postponit
curam, uni Barbadico ut placeat Tarrisanus, veneri, aleaeque (deliciis suis)
valedicit: vitam dedit huic ille, animam hic illi; utrique debetur Coelum.
Philomachiam istam vidit Adria, stupet Orbis, admirabitur posteritas. Cum duo
certarent Victor uterque fuit.

This example was held so strange, that first Giacomo S. Caglia one of the
principal Citizens in Venice, published a narration thereof in Italian, Anno
1627. and since Alexander de Gattis a Churchman of that City, has out of
Italian translated it into Latin, and Printed it in the year following in
Venice, the historical Argument of De Gattis take thus: Nicholaus Barbadicus
and M. Trivisanus two Patricians of Venice, of great reputation in respect of
their own virtues, the splendor of their families, and the dignities and
offices they had honorably born in the Commonwealth. Those two illustrious
persons from their youth had contracted a friendship with each other, a solid
and most entire one it was, carried on all along with the mutual performance of
of good Offices: At last it fell out that Trivisanus, through extraordinary
domestic expenses, charges in journeys, indulgence of such pleasures as are
common with the more generous sort of youth, and also by reason of some losses
he had sustained at dice, and other casualties of humane life; he was reduced
to a condition most unworthy of his birth and blood. His debts being grown
greater than his fortunes, he was deserted (even by his own Brethren) when he
was received into the house of his only friend Barbadicus, a noble and very
rich person, he had before lent him four thousand ducats gratis, which debt he
forgave him as soon as he entered his house, he also paid for him two thousand
more which he had contracted with others, and after this by an extraordinary
and irrevocable act of his own, he made him Overseer and Administrator of all
his goods moveable and immovable, in such manner that he might dispose of them
at his pleasure: Nor was Barbadicus satisfied with this, but that he might
provide for the profit of his friend in case he should dye, he leaves it in his
will that though he had a Wife and Brother, yet Trivisanus should be his sole
Executor, that he should have sole power of disposing his Daughters in
marriage, nor should at any time be compelled to render an account of his
trust, or of any thing pertaining to that estate: He also bequeathed him a
legacy large as his estate would permit, without apparent prejudice to the
fortunes of his Children. Barbadicus was moved to do all this, for that he
perceived Trivisanus as soon as he had entered his house, (by a singular modesty
of mind) of a prodigal of his own estate, become sparing of another, and from
that moment had left off all gaming and other such pleasures of youth, he had
also betaken himself to the company and converse of learned and wise men, and
by addicting himself to the perusal and study of the best Authors, had showed
him that he would answer his liberality with sincerity, uprightness, and
unblameable fidelity, which fidelity Barbadicus had often before and also since
this liberality of his, experienced in him his beloved and most constant
friend, when he alone defended the life and honor of Barbadicus in his
greatest straits and worst dangers as well open as concealed, so that he openly
professes to owe the safety of them both to Trivisanus. The whole City knows
how he supported the innocence of his friend, in the false and devilish
calumnies that were raised upon him, and would not desert him in the worst of
his fortunes, though he was slandered for taking his part. While he did this he
not only interrupted the course of his preferments to the chiefest places of
honor in his Country, unto which (to the amazement of all men) he was in a
most hopeful way: But he also forfeited and lost those opportunities. It is
also well known to all men that he contracted great and dangerous enmities
(with some that had before time been his companions) upon the sole score of this
friend of his. He despised all that extrinsick honor which depends upon the
opinion of the brutish multitude, and at the last also exposed his own life to
frequent and manifest hazards, as also he would yet do in any such occasion as
should require it, and whereas Trivisanus has lived many years, and is yet
alive through this incomparable expression of a grateful mind in Barbadicus, he
lives with great splendor and in great Authority. He is merciful to the
afflicted, courteous to his friends, and is especially a most worthy Patron of
all those that are virtuous. He is honorably esteemed by the daughters of his
friend in such manner, as if he were their own Father, he is also cheerfully
received by his Wife, and truly honored by her as her Brother, as well because
she is not ignorant of his merits in respect of her Husband, as also for his
excellent Temper, and such other uncommon qualities as render him worthy the
love and admiration of all men.

13. In the time of the proscription by the Trium-Virate at Rome, Fulgos. l. 4.
c. 7. p. 529.
there was threatened a grievous punishment to any person, that should conceal
or any way assist one that was proscribed, on the other side great rewards
promised the discoverers of them. Marcus Varro the Philosopher was in the list
of the proscribed; at which time Calenus his dear friend concealed him some
time in his house, and though Antonius came often thither to walk, yet was he
never affrighted or changed his mind, though he daily saw men punished or
rewarded, according to the Edicts set forth.

CHAP. XX. Of the Grateful Disposition of some Persons, and what Returns they
have made of Benefits Received.
THis of Gratitude is justly held to be the Mother of all other virtues, seeing
that from this one Fountain those many Rivulets arise; as that of Reverence and
due respect unto our Masters and Governors, that of Friendship amongst men,
Love to our Country, Piety to our Parents, and Religion toward God himself. As
therefore the ungrateful are every where hated; as being under the suspicion of
every vice; on the contrary, grateful persons are in the estimation of all men,
having by their Gratitude put in a kind of security, that they are not without
some measure of every other sort of virtue.

1. Sir William Fitzwilliams the Elder, Full. worthies. p. 298.
Northamptonshire. Stowes surv. Land. p. 89.
being a Merchant Tailor, and Servant sometime to Cardinal Woolsey, was chosen
Alderman of Broadstreet Ward in London, Anno 1506. Going afterward to dwell at
Milton in Northamptonshire, in the fall of the Cardinal his former Master, he
gave him kind entertainment there at his House in the Country, for which being
called before the King, and demanded how he durst entertain so great an enemy
to the State? His answer was, That he had not contemptuously or wilfully done
it, but only because he had been his Master, and partly the means of his
greatest fortunes. The King was so well pleased with his answer, that saying
himself had few such Servants, immediately Knighted him, and afterward made
him one of his Privy Council.

2. Thyreus (or as Curtius calls him) Thriotes was one of the Eunuchs to
Statira, Plut. paral. p. 682. in Alexandro. I. Curtii. hist. l. 4. p. 87.
Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2 p. 174.
the Wife of Darius, and taken at the same time with her by Alexander the
Great: When she was dead in Travail he stole out of the Camp, went to Darius,
and told him of the death of his Wife, perceiving that he resented not her
death so passionately, as he feared that her chastity together with that of his
Sister and Daughters, had been violated by Alexander. Thyreus with horrible
oaths asserted the chastity of Alexander, then Darius turning to his friends
with his hands lift up to Heaven; O ye Gods of my Country (said he) and
Presidents of Kingdoms, I beseech you in the first place that the fortune of
Persia may recover its former Grandeur, that I may leave it in the same
splendour I received it, that I may render unto Alexander all that he has
performed in my adverse estate, unto my dearest pledges. But if that fatal time
is come, wherein by the envy of the Gods there is a decreed revolution to pass
upon us, and that the Kingdom of Persia must be overthrown, then I beg of you
that no other amongst mortal men besides Alexander, may sit in the Throne of
Cyrus.

3. Ptolemaeus King of Egypt, having overcome Demetrius Poliorcetes in Battle,
Plut. in Demetrio p. 895. Diodor. sicul. l. 19. Justin. hist. l. 15. p. 172,
173. P^zel. mellific. tom. 1. p. 424.
and made himself Master of all his carriages, he sent back to Demetrius his
Royal Tent, with all the wealth he had taken, and also such Captives as were of
the best account with him, sending him word withal, that the contention betwixt
them was not for Riches but Glory. When Demetrius had returned him thanks he
added that he earnes^ly besought the Gods, that they would speedily enable him
to return him equal kindness, for that he had received o^ him. Not long after
when Ptolemy had sent C^ll^s his General, with an Army against him, he was
overthrown and taken by Demetrius, who sent both him and all the rest of the
Captives as a Present to P^^lemy.

Fulgos. l. 5. c. 2. p. 589. Cause. H. C. tom. 2. p. 353. Joseph Anti^. l. 18.
c. 8. p. 475.
4. Agrippa accused by Eu^yches his Coachman of some words against Tib^^ius, was
by his order seized and put to the Chain before the Palace Gate; with other
Criminals brought thither. It was hot Weather, and he extreme thirsty, seeing
therefore Thaumastus a Servant of C^ligula's pass by, with a Pitcher of Water,
he called him, and entreated that he might drink, which the other presented
with much courtesy. When he had drank, assure thy self, said he, I will one
day pay thee well for this Glass of Water thou have given me; If I get out of
this Captivity, I will make thee great. Tiberius died soon after, he was freed
by the favor of Caligula, and by the same favor made King of Judea; here it
was that he remembered Thaumastus, rewarding him with the place of Comptro^ler
of his house, such power has a slight good turn, well placed, upon a generous
Soul.

H^r^dot. l. 3. p. 217. Lon. Theatr. p. 326. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 2. p. 134.
Aelian. var. hist. l. 4. c. 5. p. 144.
5. Darius the Son of H^staspes, being one of the Guard to Cambyses in his
Expedition against Ae^ypt, a Man then of no extraordinary condition, seeing
Syloson, the Brother of Polycrates, walking in the Market place of Memphis, in
a glittering Cloak; he went to him, and as one taken with the garment, desired
to buy it of him. Syloson perceiving he was very desirous of it, told him he
would not sell it him for any Money: but said he, I will give it you on this
condition; that you never part with it to any other; Darius received it. In
process of time, Cambyses being dead, and the Magi overcome, by the seven
Princes, Darius was made King, Syloson hearing this comes to Susa, sat in the
entrance of the Palace, saying he was one that had deserved well of the King,
this was told to Darius, who wondering who it was he should be obliged to,
commanded he should be admitted. Syloson was asked by an interpreter, who he
was, and what he had done for the King? He tells the matter about the Cloak,
and says, he was the Person who gave it. O thou most Generous amongst Men, said
Darius, art thou he then who when I had no power, gave me that, which though
small in it self, was yet as acceptable to me then, as greater things would be
to me now? know I will reward thee with such a huge quantity of Gold and
Silver, that it shall never repent thee thou wast liberal to Darius, the Son of
Hystaspes. O King, said Syloson, give me neither Gold nor Silver, but when thou
have freed my Country of Samos, which is now held by a Servant of my dead
Brother Polycrates; give me that without slaughter or Plunder. Darius hearing
this, sent an Army under the conduct of Otanes, one of the seven Princes of
Persia, commanding him that he should do for Syloson as he had desired.

6. Rodericus Davalus was Lieutenant General of the Horse in Spain, Lips.
monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 334.
Anno Dom. 423. together with some others, he was accused of High Treason, of
writing Letters to Josephus King of the Moors; as one that intended the
betraying of his Country into his hands. Diverse Copies of these Letters were
produced, and the whole affair debated at the Council Table: In the crime of
his Master was involved Alearus Nunnius Ferrerius born at Corduba, and Steward
of Davalus his house. But he stoutly defending himself and his Master, ceased
not till he had showed that the Letters were counterfeit, and that the Author
of them was Johannes Garsias, of which he was convicted and condemned. He got
himself clear off, b^t the other great Persons were condemned to perpetual
banishment. Here Ferrerius to support his Master in his wants, sold all those
goods of his, which he had got in the service and by the bounty of his Master;
and having thereby made up the sum of 8000. Crowns, he disposed it into Wicker
Bottles, loaded an Ass with it, and causing his own Son to be meanly attired,
to drive the Ass, he sent it all privily to his Master Davalus; A Person
certainly well worthy of being remembered by that Illustrious Nation; and in his
Posterity too, in case any of them be yet extant.

7. The only Daughter of Peter Martyr, Clarks mirr. c. 59. p. 236. Fullers hol.
state. l. 2. c. 11. p. 86.
through the Riot and Prodigality of her debauched Husband, being brought to
extreme poverty; the Senate of Zurich (out of a grateful remembrance of her
Father's worth) supported her with a bountiful maintenance so long as she lived.

8. M. Minutius, Plut. paral. p. in Fabio. Zuing. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 180. Val.
Max. l. 5. c. 2. p. 133. Sabellic. exempl. l. 7. c. 1. p. 366.
Master of the Horse, by his insolence and temerity, had lead his Army against
Annibal into great distress; where it was likely to be cut in pieces, but by
the seasonable assistance of Q. Fabius, the then Dictator, he was preserved.
Returning into his Camp, he confessed his Error, commanded the Ensigns to be
taken up, and the whole Army to follow them; he marches into the Camp of the
Dictator, and through it the ready way to Fabius his Tent, to the wonder and
amazement of all Men. Fabius came out to meet him, then he causes the Ensigns
to be stuck down, himself with a loud voice called Fabius his Father, his Army
called the other Soldiers their Patrons, and silence being commanded: You have
this day Dictator, said Minutius, obtained a double Victory by your Prowess
upon the Enemy, by your Prudence and Humanity upon your Colleague, by the one
you have saved us, and by the there instructed us, so that we who were
ignominiously conquered by Hannibal; are Honorably and Profitably overcome by
you. Since therefore I know no other Name that is more venerable; I call you an
indulgent Father, although this benefit I have from you is greater, then that
of my Parent, for to him I do only owe my life, but to you I am indebted both
^or my own, and also for that of all these. This said, he embraced Fabius, and
kissed him; the like might be observed through the whole Army, for they
received each other with mutual embraces and kisses; so that the whole Camp was
all joy, and such as found no other way, to express it self but by tears.

Clarks mirr. c. 59. p. 236.
9. On the Townhouse of Geneva, upon a marble Table, is written in Letters of
Gold thus,

Post Tenebras Lux.

Quum Anno Dom. 1535. profligata Romana Anti-Christi Tyrannide, abrogatisque
ejus superstitionibus, Sacro-Sancta Christi Religio hic in suam puritatem;
Ecclesia in meliorem ordinem singulari Dei beneficio reposita, and simul pulsis
fugatisque hostibus urbs ipsa in suam libertatem, non sine insigni miraculo,
restituta fuerit. Senatus populusque Genevensis Monumentum hoc perpetuae
memoriae causa fieri atque hoc loco erigi curavit, quo suam erga Deum
gratitudinem, apud Posteros testatam f^cerit. In English thus. After Darkness
Light.

Whereas Anno Dom. 1535. The Roman Tyranny of Antichrist was ejected, his
Superstitions abolished, the Holy Religion of Christ restored here in its
proper purity; the Church by the singular goodness of God put into better
order, the Enemy overcome and put to slight, and the City it self by a
remarkable miracle, did then obtain its former liberty and freedom. The Senate
and People of Geneva, have caused this Monument (in perpetual Memory thereof)
to be made and erected in this place, as also to leave a Testimony of their
thankfulness to God and Posterity. 10. In the time of the second Punick War,
when Fulvius besieged Capua, Val. Max. l. 5. c. 2. p. 132 133.
there were two Women of Campania that were resolute in their good wishes to
the Romans: These were Vestia Opidia, a Matron, and Mistress of a Family; and
Cluvia Facula, a common prostitute. The one of these did daily sacrifice for
the good fortune of their Army, and the other ceased not to carry Provisions to
such of ours as were made Prisoners amongst them. When therefore Capua was
taken, these two had their liberty and goods restored, by special order of the
Senate of Rome, and not only so, but sent them a promise, to grant what reward
they should desire. It is much, that in so great and public a Joy, the Fathers
had leisure to thank two poor Women of mean condition, but it was more, ^or
them to make it a special part of their business, and that by their own motion.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 2. p. 133.
11. Q. Fabius Maximus, was the Person that saved the Roman State from being
overwhelmed with the Torrent of Hannibal; and had fortunately served the
Commonwealth, in five several Consul-ships: When therefore he was dead: the
Roman people not unmindful of his good service: did strive who should
contribute most Money, to render the pomp of his Funeral more glorious, and
that he might be interred with the greater magnificence.

12. There was in Florence a Merchant whose name was Francis Frescobald, of a
noble Family and liberal mind, who through a prosperous success in his affairs,
was grown up to an abundance of Wealth. While he was at Flor^nce, a young Man
presented himself to him asking his Alms for God's sake. Hackw. Apol. l. 4. c.
10.. 5. p. 436. Clarks mirr. Eccles. hist. part. 2. l. 1. p* 42.
Frescobald beheld the ragged stripling, and in despite of his Tatters,
reading in his countenance some significations of virtue, was moved with pity,
demanded his Country and Name. I am, said he, of England; my Name is Thomas
Cromwell; my Father (meaning his Father-in-law) is a poor Man a Cloth-shearer.
I am strayed from my Country, and am now come into Italy with the Camp of
Frenchmen that were overthrown at Ga^ylion, where I was Page to a Footman,
carrying after him his Pike and Burganet. Frescobald partly in pity of his
State, and partly in love to the English Nation, amongst whom he had received
some civilities, took him into his house, made him his guest, and at his
departure gave him a Horse, new Apparel, and sixteen Ducats of Gold in his
Purse. Cromwell rendering him hearty thanks, returned into his Country; where
in Process of time, he became in such favor with King Henry the Eight, that he
raised him to the Dignity of being Lord High Chancellor of England. In the
mean time, Frescobald by great and successive losses was become poor, but
remembering that some English Merchants owed him fifteen thousand Ducats, he
came to ^^ndon to seek after it, not thinking of what had passed betwixt
Cromwell and him. But traveling earnestly about his business, he accidentally
met with the Lord Chancellor as he was riding to the Court. As soon as the
Lord Chancellor saw him, he thought he should be the Merchant of Florence of
whose liberality he had tasted in times past: immediately he alights, embraces
him, and with a broken voice scarce refraining tears, he demanded if he were
not Francis Frescobald the Florentine? Yes Sir, said he, and your humble
Servant. My Servant, said Cromwell, no, as you have not been my Servant in times
past, so will I not now account you other than my great and especial friend,
assuring you that I have just reason to be sorry, that you knowing what I am,
(or at least what I should be) would not let me understand of your Arrival in
this Land: Had I known it I should certainly have paid part of that debt which
I confess I ow you, but thanks be to God that I have yet time. W^ll Sir, in
conclusion you are heartily welcome, but having now weighty affairs in my
Princes cause, you must hold me excused that I can no longer tarry with you:
Therefore at this time I take my leave, desiring you with the faithful mind of
a friend, that you forget not to dine with me this day at my house. Frescobald
wonders who this Lord should be, at last after some pause he remembers him for
the same he had relieved at Florence, he therefore repairs to his house not a
little joyed: and walking in the base Court attended his return. He came soon
after, and was no sooner dismounted, but he again embraced him with so friendly
a countenance, as the Lord Admiral and other Nobles then in his company much
marvelled at. He turning back and holding Frescobald by the hand; Do you not
wonder my Lords, said he, that I seem so glad of this man? This is he by whose
means I have achieved this my present degree, and therewith recounted to them
all that had passed between them. Then holding him still by the hand, he led
him to the Chamber where he dined, and seated him next himself. The Lords
departed, he would know what occasion had brought him to London, Frescobald in
few words truly opened his cause to him: To which Cromwell returned, Things
already past, Mr. Frescobald, can by no power or policy of man be recalled, yet
is not your sorrow so peculiar to your self, but that by the bond of mutual
love I am to bear a part therein, and that in this your distress, you may
receive some consolation: It is fit I should repay some portion of that debt,
wherein I stand bound to you; as it is the part of a thankful man to do: and I
further promise you in the word of a true friend, that during this life and
state of mine, I will not fail to to do for you wherein my authority may
prevail: Then taking him by the hand he led him into a Chamber, and commanded
all to depart, he locked the door, then opening a Coffer he first took out
sixteen Ducats, and delivering them to Frescobald; My friend, said he, here is
your money you lent me at my departure from Florence, here are other ten you
bestowed in mine Apparel, with Ten more you disbursed for the Horse I rode
upon: But considering you are a Merchant it seems to me not honest to return
your money, without some consideration for the long detaining of it. Take you
therefore these four Bags in every of which is four hundred Ducats, to receive
and enjoy from the hand of your assured friend, which the modesty of Frescobald
would have refused, but the other forced them upon him. This done he caused him
to give him the names of all his debtors, and the sums they owed: The Schedule
he delivered to one of his Servants, with charge to search out the men, if
within any part of the Realm, and straightly to charge them to make payment
within fifteen days, or else to abide the hazard of his displeasure. The
Servant so well performed the command of his Master, that in very short time
the whole Sum was paid in: During all this time Frescobald lodged in the Lord
Chancellors house, who gave him the entertainment he deserved, and oftentimes
moved him to abide in England, offering him the Loan of sixty thousand Ducats
for the space o^ four years, if he would continue and make his bank at London:
But he desi^ed to return into his own Country, which he did with the great
favor o^ the Lord Cromwell, and there richly arrived, but he enjoyed his wealth
but a small time, for in the first year of his return he dyed.

13. Franciscus Dandalus was sent Ambassador from the Venetians to Pope
Clement, Sa^^ll. ^xe^pl. l. 7. c. 1. p. 365.
into France where he then was, to deprecate his anger, and to take off the
public ignominy which he was resolved to ^xpose them to: long did he lie in
Chains prostrate at the Popes Table in mourning and great humility, before he
could any way appease that indignation which the Pope had conceived against his
People, at the last he returned well acquit of his cha^^e, when such was the
gratitude of his fellow Citizens, that by a mighty and universal consent, they
elected him Duke of Venice, that he who but la^^ly had been in such despicable
state for his Cou^tri^s sake, might now be beheld as conspicuous on the other
side in Gold and Purple.

Sabell. Ex. l. 7. c. 1. p. 367.
14. Antonius Mu^a was Physician to Augustus Caesar, and being one time
delivered by him from a dis^ase, that was believed would prove deadly to him,
the people of Rome were so joyed with the unexpected recovery of their Prince,
that to express their gratitude to his Physician, they passed a decree, that
his Statue should be erected and placed next unto that of Aesculapius.

S^^ell. Ex. l. ^. ^. p. 367.
15. Hippocrates the Physician perceiving the Plague from Illyricum to begin to
grow upon the parts adjacent, sent some of his Scholars into diverse Cities of
Greece, to assist and to administer to such as were seized with it, upon which
in token of their gratitude, they decreed to him the same honor which they had
had used to give to Hercules.

S^bell. Ex. l. 7. c 1. p. 365.
16. Iunius Brutus did notably revenge the Rape done upon Lucretia, by one of
the Tarquins, with the expulsion of them all, and delivering Rome from the
bondage of their Tyranny, when therefore this grand Patron of Feminine Chastity
was dead, the Roman Matrons lamented the death of him in mourning for a year
entire.

17. A War was commenced betwixt the Athenians and the Dorians, Iustini. hist.
l. 2. p. 38.
these last consulting the Oracle, were told they should carry the victory
unless they killed the King of the Athenians, they there fore gave charge to
their Soldiers concerning the safety of the King. Codrus was at that time King
of the Athenians, who having understood the answer of the Ora^le, in Love to
his Country he disguised himself in mean Apparel, and entered the enemies Camp
with a sithe upon his Shoulder, with this he wounded one of the Soldiers by
whom he was immediately slain. The body of the King being known, the Dorians
departed without fighting, and the Athenians in gratitude to their Prince, who
had devoted his life for the common safety, would never after suffer themselves
to be ruled by a King; doing their departed Prince this honor, that they
declared they thought no man worthy to succeed him.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Meekness, Humanity, Clemency and Mercy of some Men.
THe abundant Trade, pleasant Situation, and other considerable advantages did
occasion one to say of Ormus a City in Persia. Si Terrarum Orbis quaqua patet
annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret.
If all the World were made into a Ring,
Ormus the Gemm and grace thereof should bring.
And were I to set the Crown upon some one particular virtue, amongst all those
that have been conspicuous in man; I know none that I should be more prone to
favor than that of mercy, and I must confess I was well pleased when I read
what follows.

1. Photius the learned Patriarch of Constantinople, Cause. H.C. in the treatise
of passions.. 1. p. 2.
observes in his Bibliotheke, a wonderful judgment given in the City of
Athens: He says the Senate of the Areopagites being assembled together in a
Mountain, without any Roof but Heaven; the Senators perceived a Bird of prey
which pursued a little Sparrow, that came to save it self in the bosom of one
of their Company: This man who naturally was harsh threw it from him so
roughly, that he killed it; whereat the Court was offended, and a decree was
made by which he was condemned and banished from the Senate: Where the
Judicious observe, that this company which was at that time one of the gravest
in the world, did it not for the care they had to make a law concerning
Sparrows, but it was to show that clemency and merciful inclination, was a
virtue so necessary in a State, that a man destitute of it was not worthy to
hold any place in Government, he having (as it were) renounced humanity.

2. Agesilaus the Spartan was of that humanity and clemency, Sabell. Ex. l. 6.
c. 4. p. 331.
toward those whom he had overcome in Battle, that he often gave public
admonitions to his Soldiers, that they should not treat their Prisoners with
insolence, but should consider that those who were thus subdued and reduced to
this condition were men; and when any of these at the removal of his Camp were
left behind by his Soldiers as unable to follow through sickness or age, he
took care to order some persons to receive and take care of them, lest being
destitute of all assistance they should perish with hunger, or become a prey to
the wild Beasts.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 12. p. 302. Su^ton. ^ieri oper. l. de ira p. 837.
Fulgos. ex, 5. c. 1. p. 565. Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 2. p. 425.
3. Titus Vespasian the Emperor was deservedly called the Darling of Mankind,
he professed that he thereupon took upon him the supreme Pontisicate, that in
so high a Priesthood he might be obliged to keep his hands pure from the blood
of all men; which he also performed: and says Suetonius, from that time forth
he never was the Author of or consenting to the death of any man, although
sometimes there were offered him just causes of revenge, but he still used to
say, he had rather perish himself than be the ruin of another. When two
Patricians stood convicted of high Treason, and affectation of the Empire, he
thought it sufficient to admonish them in words, to desist such designs, that
Princes were ordained by sat, that if they would any other thing of him, they
might ask it and have it. Soon after the Mother of one of them living far off,
lest she should be a^^righted with some sad news, he sent his own Posts to
inform her of the danger and safety of her Son. Though his Brother Domitian did
manifestly conspire against him; yet he did him no harm, nor lessened him in
any thing, but dealt with him by entreaties, that he would bear him a friendly
mind, and after all nominated him his colleague and successor in the Empire:
But all this goodness wrought little with this unnatural Brother, for soon
after he was empoysoned by him, to the great loss of all mankind.

Socrates Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 21. p. 38^.
4. Acacius Bishop of Amada was renowned and much spoken of for a notable work
of mercy which he wrought in those days, when the Romans had taken seven
thousand Persian Captives at the winning of Azaz^na, and to the grief of the
Persian King would not restore them, but kept them in such condition that they
were almost all starved for want of food. Acacius lamented their estate and
condition, called his Clergy together, and said thus unto them: Our God has no
need either of Dishes or Cups, for he neither eats nor drinks, wherefore
seeing the Church has many precious things both of Gold and Silver, bestowed
of the free will and liberality of the faithful: It is requisite that the
Captive Soldiers should be therewith redeemed and delivered out of Prison and
Bondage, and that they also perishing with Famine, should with some part
thereof be refreshed and relieved. This said, he commanded the Vessels and
gifts to be melted, made money thereof, and sent the whole price partly to
redeem Captives out of Prison, and partly to relieve them that they perished
not with famine. Lastly, he gave the Persians necessary provisions for their
voyage, and sent them back to their King: This notable act of the Renowned
Acacius, brought the King of Persia into great admiration, that the Romans
should endeavor to vanquish their enemies by both ways, viz. wars and
well-doing, whereupon he greatly desired the sight of Acacius, and Theodosius
the Emperor commanded the Bishop to gratify the King therein.

5. When Pericles the noble Athenian lay a dying, the better sort of the
Citizens and his Friends that sat about him, were discoursing amongst
themselves of those virtues wherein he excelled, his riches and eloquence,
Plut. in Pericl. p. 173. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 12. p. 290. Falgos. ^x. l. 5. c.
1. p. 570.
his famous exploits, the number of his victories, as having erected Nine
Trophies while he had the command of the City. These things they were
recounting amongst themselves, as supposing that he no longer understood them,
but was now become senseless. Pericles heard all that had passed, and I wonder,
said he, that you so celebrate those deeds of mine, in which Fortune does
challenge a part, and which are common to other Leaders, and yet in the mean
time pass over with silence, that which is the greatest and most excellent of
them all: namely, that none of my Fellow Citizens have ever put on mourning
through my means. And indeed it was worthy of high commendation, that he
retained so much of humanity and clemency in the midst of so many bitter
enmities he was perpetually exercised with, and that he had never showed
himself implacable to any enemy whatsoever, in so great a power as he so long
together had enjoyed.

6. One Guydomer a Viscount, Bak. Chron. p. 95, 96 97. Heyl. Cosmogr. p. 208.
Martins Chron. p. 49. Full. chapter hist. l. 3. cent. 12. p. 45. Stows Aun^ p. 163.
having found a great treasure in the dominions of Richard the First surnamed
C^ur de Lion; for ^ear of the King fled to a Town of the King of France for his
safeguard. Thither Richard pursued him, but the Town denied him entrance, going
therefore about the Walls, to ^ind out the fittest places to assa^lt it, one
Bertram de Gurdon, or as others call him Peter Basile, shot at him with an
empoysoned Arrow from a strong Bow, and therewith gave him a wound in his Arm,
(in the Eye says Fuller) which neglected at first and suffered to rankle, or
as others say handled by an unskilful Surgeon in four days brought him to
his end. Finding himself past hope of recovery, he caused the party that had
wounded him to be brought before him, who being asked what had moved him to do
this fact? Answered, that King Richard had killed his Father, and two of his
Brothers with his own hand, and therefore he would do it if it were to do
again. Upon this insolent answer, every one looked that the King should have
adjudged him to some terrible punishment, when contrary to their expectations
in a high degree of clemency, he not only freely forgave him, but gave special
charge he should be set at liberty, and that no man should presume to do him
the least hurt, commanding besides to give him an hundred shillings to bear him
away. This was done Anno 1199. in the ninth year of this Kings Reign, and the
forty fourth of his Age. Dying he bequeathed his heart to Roan, his body to be
buried at Fount Everard, and his Bowels at Chalons, (or as others) at Carlisle
in England.

7. Charilaus the King of Sparta was of so mild and gentle a disposition, Plut.
in Lycurgo p. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 91.
that Archelaus his associate in the Kingdom, used to say to those that spoke
high in the commendation of the young man; How is it possible that Charilaus
should be a good man seeing he is not able to be severe, even against those
that are wicked.

8. Q. Fabius Maximus was of that meek and mild disposition throughout his
whole life, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 91.
that he was commonly called the Lamb.

9. Augustus Caesar walking abroad with Diomedes his freedman, Su^ton. l. 2. c.
67. p. 95. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 2. p. 299. Fulgos. l. 5. c. 1. p. 558.
a wild Boar had broken the place of his restraint, and seemed to run directly
toward Augustus: The freedman in whom at that time there was more of fear than
of prudence, consulting his own safety, took hold of the Emperor and placed
him before himself, for which yet Augustus never discovered any sign of anger,
or offense that he had taken. He also managed the Commonwealth with that
clemency and mercy, that when in the Theater it was recited, O Dominum aquum
and bonum, O Gracious and Good Governor, all the people turned their eyes upon
him, and gave him their applause both with word and gesture.

Lips. monit. lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 295.
10. C. Julius Caesar was not more famous for his valor in overcoming his
enemies, than he is for his clemency, wherein at once he overcame both them and
himself: Cornelius Phagita one of the bloody emissaries of Sylla, in the civil
dissentions betwixt him and Marius, industriously hunted out Caesar (as one of
the Marian party) from all his lurking holes, at last took him, and was
difficultly persuaded to let him escape at the price of two Talents, when the
times changed and that it was in his power to be severely revenged of this man,
yet he never did him the least harm, as one that could not be angry at the
Winds when the Tempest was over. L. Domitius an old and sharp enemy of his,
held Corsinium against him with thirty Cohorts, there were also with him very
many Senators, Knights of Rome, and the flower or strength of the Pompeian
party, Caesar besieged the Town, and the Soldiers talked of rendering both the
Town and themselves to Caesar, Domitius despairing of any mercy, commanded a
Servant Physician of his to bring him a cup of poison, the Physician that knew
he would repent it, upon the appearence of Caesar's clemency, gave him instead
of poison a soporiferous potion. The Town being surrendered, Caesar called all
the more honorable persons to his Camp, spoke civily to them, and having
exhorted them to peaceable and quiet Counsels, sent them away in safety with
whatsoever was theirs. When Domitius heard of this, he repented of the poison
he supposed he had taken, but being freed of that fear by his Physician, he
went out unto Caesar who gave him his life, liberty, and estate. In the Battle
of Pharsalia as he rode to and fro, he cried Spare the Citizens, nor was any
killed but such only as continued to make resistance: After the Battle he gave
leave to every man of his own side, to save one of the contrary, and at last by
his edict, gave leave to all whom he had not yet pardoned, to return in peace
unto Italy: to their estates, honors, and commands. When he heard of the death
of Pompey himself by the villainy o^ others, so far was he from insultation
thereat, that he brake out into tears, and prosecuted his murderers with
slaughter and blood.

Lips. monit. lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 306.
11. Lewis the Twelfth the next Heir to the Crown of France was eagerly
persecuted by Charles the Eight the then King, as one who was displeased that
he had no issue of his own, and so far was he pressed by him, that at last he
was shut up in Prison, with little hope of his life, most of the Nobles and
people, embracing the present times, declared themselves against the
unfortunate. But Charles dying on the sudden Lewis ascended to the Throne, to
the amazement of many who now began to change their countenance and speech, and
sought to insinuate themselves into the good grace and favor of the new
Prince: Some also who had been constant to him in his adversity, began now to
lift up their heads high; amongst these one with great con^idence came to the
King, and begged the Estate of a Citizen of Orleance, who in that sad time, had
showed himself to be one of the sharpest enemies of Lewis. Here it was that the
King with a Royal mind made him this Reply; Ask something else of me, said he,
and I will show that I have respect unto your merits; but of this say no more;
for the King of France does not concern himself in the injuries of the Duke of
Orleance; this was his Title before he came to the Crown, and withal he
declared that he would have the same Counselors and Guards, as the dead King
had, in the same Honor, and with the same Salaries.

12. Sigismund the First, Zunig. Theatr. vol. 1. lib. 1. p. 92.
King of Poland, did so contemn the private injuries, slanderous reproaches,
and evil speeches of insolent men, that he never thought them worthy of
Revenge; nor was he known for that cause alone, to be afterward the straiter
handed to such kind of men, in respect of Beneficence, and Princely Liberality.

13. Hadrianus the Emperor, Lips. monit. lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 307.
while he was a private man, had one that in diverse occasions had showed
himself his Enemy. This man when the other was arrived to the Imperial Dignity,
presents himself before him, in a trembling posture, and scarce able to bring
forth words wherein to implore his pardon: The Emperor immediately upon the
sight of him, said unto him, Evasisti, thou have escaped me. As if he had said,
thou had been undone if we had equally contended; but I being now thy
Superior do surceass, and choose rather to show my Power, by Clemency than
Revenge.

14. Alphonsus King of Naples and Sicily was all Goodness and Mercy. Lips.
monit. lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 308.
He had besieged the City of Cajeta, that had insolently rebelled against him,
and it was evident, that the City was straightened for want of necessary
Provisions: themselves did confess as much, for they put forth all their Old
Men, Women and Children, and such as were unserviceable, and shut their Gates
upon them. The King's Council advised, that they should not be permitted to
pass, but should be forced back again into the City, by which means he should
speedily become the Master of it. The King pitying the distressed multitude,
suffered them to depart; though he knew it would occasion the protraction of
the Seige. But when he could not take the City; some were so bold as to tell
him that it had been his own in case he had not dealt in this manner; but said
the King, I value the safety of so many persons at the rate of an hundred
Cajeta's. Yet he was not long without that neither, for the Citizens moved with
so great a virtue, and repenting themselves of their disloyalty, yielded it to
him of their own accord. Antonius Caldora, was also one of the most powerful,
and obstinate Enemies of the Realm of Naples; but being in a great Battle
overthrown and made prisoner, all men persuaded the King to rid his hands of so
insolent a person, and so dangerous to the Kingdom: Alphonsus was he alone that
opposed it, and not only gave him his Life, but also restored him to his
forfeited Estate; he also gave back unto his Wife, all his Plate, precious
Furniture and Household stuff, that were fallen into his hands, only reserving
to himself one Vessel of Crystal. These were the Deeds of this Illustrious
Prince, whereunto his Speeches were also agreeable. For being asked: why he was
thus favorable to all men, even to those that were evil: Because, says he,
Good men are won by Justice, and the Bad by Clemency; and when some of his
Ministers complained of his Lenity; and said it was more than became a Prince;
what then, said he, would you have Lions and Bears to reign over you? For
Clemency is the property of men, as cruelty is that of the wild beasts. Nor did
he say other then what is the truth, for the greater a man is, (and as I may
say) the more he is a man, the more prone and inclinable will he be to this
virtue, which is therefore called Humanity.

15. M. Antonius the Philosopher, Fulgos. Ex. lib. 5. cap. 1. p. 566.
and Emperor excelled other men in this excellent virtue; as he manifestly
showed, in that glorious action of his toward Avidius Cassius, and his Family,
who had rebelled against him in Egypt. For whereas the Senate, did bitterly
prosecute Avidius, and all his Relations; Antonius as if they had been his
Friends, did always appear as an ^ntercessor in their behalf. Nothing can
represent him herein so much unto the life, as to recite part of that Oration:
which upon this occasion, was made by him in the Senate, to this purpose. As
for what concerns the Cassian Rebellion, I beseech you, Conscript Fathers; that
laying aside the severity of your Censure; you will preserve mine and your own
Clemency. Neither let any man be slain by the Senate, nor let any man suffer
that is a Senator. Let not the blood of any Patrician be spilt; let the
banished return; Exiles be restored to their Estates; and I heartily wish, that
I could restore them that are already dead, unto life again. In an Emperor I
could never approve of the revenge of his own injuries; which howsoever it may
be oftentimes just: yet for the most part (if not always) it appears to be
sharp. You shall therefore pardon the Children, Son in Law, and Wife of Avidius
Cassius. But why do I say pardon them, since there is none of them that has
done amiss? Let them live therefore, and let them know that they live in
security under Marcus. Let them live in the enjoyment of their Patrimony, and
in the possession of their Garments, and Gold, and Silver; and let them be not
only rich, but safe. Let them have the freedom to transport themselves, into
all places as they please; that throughout the whole world, and in the sight of
all people; they may bear along with them, the true and unquestionable instance
of yours and my clemency. Neither, O ye Conscript Fathers, is this any
remarkable clemency; to pardon the Children and Wives of the Rebellious: I
therefore desire you, that you would free at once, all Senators and Knights of
Rome, that are under accusation; not only from death and banishment: but also
from fear and hatred, from infamy and injury. Allow thus much to my present
times, that in these conspiracies, framed for the erection of Tyranny; the
blood of those that fell in the tumult it self may suffice, and that the
punishment may proceed no further. This Oration was so pleasing to the Senate,
and populacy of Rome, that they extolled the Clemency of Marcus with in^inite
praises.

Fulgos. Ex. lib. 5. cap. 1. p. 568.
16. Some young men had publicly reproached the Wife of Pisistratus the
Athenian Tyrant; the next day sensible of their error, in great fear, they
presented themselves before him, and with tears implored his pardon. He without
any motion to anger or revenge, made them this answer. Hereafter demean your
selves more modestly; although my Wife did not (as you suppose) go out of the
doors yesterday. By this saying of no less prudence than humanity, he covered
at once both the error of the young men, and the disgrace that was done to his
Wife.

H^yw. Hierarch. lib. 8. p. 538.
17. After what manner compassion and mercy does sometimes meet with unexpected
rewards: me thinks is pretily represented, by V^sinus Velius; and I will close
up this Chapter with his Verses that are thus Englished.

A Fisher angling in a Brook
With a strong Line and ba^ted Hook,
When he for his wished Prey did pull,
It happn'd he brought up a Skull
Of one before drowned; which impressed
A pious motion in his breast.
Thinks he since I such leisure have,
Upon it I Will bestow a Grave:
For what did unto it befall,
May chance to any of us all.
He takes it, wraps it in his coat,
And bears it to a place remote
To bury it, and then digs deep,
Because the Earth it safe should keep.
And lo! in digging he espies
Where a great heap of treasure lies.
The Gods do never prove ingrate
To such as others commiserate.
CHAP. XXII. Of the light and gentle Revenges some have taken upon others.
EXcellent was the advice that was given to the Romans by the Ambassadors of
some Cities in Hetruria, that since they were men, they would not resent any
thing beyond humane nature, and that in mortal bodies they would not carry
immortal feuds. Light injuries are made none by a not regarding; which with a
purfuing revenge, grow both to height, and burden; and live to mischieve us,
when they might die to secure us. It is Princely to disdain a wrong; and they
say Princes, when Ambassadors have offered Indecencies, use not to chide; but
deny them Audience; as if Silence were the way Royal to revenge a wrong; thus
the upper Region is the most composed; Age the wisest ever, rage the least: and
it was the Maxim of a Great Lord, that discontent is the greatest weakness of a
generous Soul; while it is so intent upon its unhappiness that it forgets its
remedies. Gentle revenges of abuses; you may see as ^ollows.

1. Diogenes the Grammarian was wont to dispute every Seventh day at Rhodes,
Su^ton. in Tiberio. p. 141.
and when Tiberius then a private man, came to hear him upon a day wherein he
was not accustomed to read, he admitted him not, but sent his servant to him,
to let him know, that he should expect the seventh day, wherein there would be
opportunity, both for him and others to see and hear him. When Tiberius came to
be Emperor of Rome, this man amongst others came to salute him; Tiberius having
observed him at the gate, sent one to let him know; that at present he could
not speak with him; and that he should come to him again at seven years end.

2. A certain Jeweller had sold the Wife of Galienus the Emperor, Trebell.
Follio. p. Wieri opera. p. 838. lib. de ira. Dinoth. lib. 4. p. 329.
counterfeit and glass Gems for true ones: The Empress being told of the
cousenage, requested that he might have due punishment. The Emperor, having
heard the complaint of his Wife, commands the man to be dragged from his
presence, with this Sentence, that he should be exposed to a Lion, to be torn
in pieces. But whiles the Impostor fearfully and the people greedily expect,
that some fierce and terrible Lion, should be let out of his Den to devour him;
the head of a man only appears from the Den, and it was a Crier who by the
Emperor's Order, proclaimed these words. He has played the cheat, and now he it
cheated himself.

3. When Alceus the Poet, L^ri. Val. Man. lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 100. D^^oth. lib.
4. cap. 328, 329.
with a bitter hatred had used all the advantages of his wit, against Pittacus
the Mytelenian: Pittacus having afterward obtained the Sovereignty, by the
consent of the City contented himself to let him understand by a Messenger,
that he had suffi^ient power, to make himself an amends with his ruin.

Wieri. opera. p. 833. lib. de ira. Dinoth. mem^rab. lib. 4. p. 327.
4. Artaxerxes King of Persia, when Alcides Sampson, did every where abuse him
with words behind his back: caused one to tell him; that indeed he had the
liberty impudently to reproach and slander him, but that the King, besides the
liberty of speech which he had assumed to himself, had also the power to take
off his head for so doing; contenting himself with this mild and gentle
admonition, to reprove both the rashness of Alcides, and to show his own power
and clemency.

Dinoth. lib. 4. p. 328. Plut. moral. lib. de ira co^ibend. p. 124, 125.
5. Philemon the Comoedian had scurrilously derided Magas the prefect of
Paretonium in the public Theater; objecting his unskilfulness, and what not,
not long after by Tempest he was cast upon the Shore where Magas was Governor;
who being speedily advertized of his arrival, presently caused him to be
apprehended; and gave Sentence upon him to lose his head: he was brought to the
Scaffold, his Neck laid out on the Block, which the Executioner by private
order, gently touched with his Sword; and so let him go unh^rt. Magas sent
after him some Jackstones and Cockals such as boys play with, and only gave him
to understand it was in his power to have punished his scurrility as it did
deserve.

Dinoth. lib. 4. p. 328. ^^l. Man. lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 294. C^esar de bello
ci^ili.
6. M. Bibulus a man of Eminent Authority, while he abode in the Province of
Syria, had two Sons slain by the Soldiers of Gabinius, for whose death he
exceedingly mourned. Queen Cleopatra of Egypt, to assuage his grief, (...) him
bound those that had slain his Sons: that he might take of them such reveng as
he thought sit. He very joyfully received this good office, but commanded them
untouched to be returned back to Cleopatra; thinking it revenge enough, that he
had the Enemies of his blood in his power.

Dinoth. lib. 4. p. 330.
7. Sophia Augusta the Wife of Justinius the younger, had conspired against
Tiberius the Emperor to advance Iustinianus the Nephew of Justinius to the Greek
Empire, and in the absence of Tiberius had called him to her for that purpose:
but he having notice of the business, hasted to Constantinople; and by his
presence quite spoiled the Plot. He caused Augusta to be apprehended, took from
her her Treasure, displaced such Officers about her, whose counsel he knew she
used, and appointed others in their places, yet left her an abundant
maintenance. This done he called Iustinianus before him, and contenting himself
sharply to reprove him, he afterward (unpunished) permitted him to go at his
liberty where he pleased.

Lips. monit. lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 302.
8. Flavius Vespasianus, in the Reign of Nero was forbid the Court, from whence
he departed in great fear; at that time there came to him one of the Courtiers,
who gave him harsh language, and withal driving him thence, commanded him to go
to Morbovia, when Vespasianus had afterward attained the Empire; this same man
in terrible apprehensions of death, presented himself before him, begging his
life; the Emperor revenged himself only with a Jest, and in his own former
words commanded him also to go to Morbovia.

Sueton. in Tiberio. p. 140.
9. Tiberius Caesar, when the Rhodians had wrote a Letter to him, and in the
latter end of it had not prayed for his health, he sent for their Ambassadors,
as if he had resolved to in^lict some pu^nishment upon them; as soon as they
came he caused them to add to their Letter the good wishes which were wanting,
and without any further feverity dismissed them.

10. Certain persons of Chios, Plut. Aelian. var. hist. lib. 2. cap. 15. p. 95.
Zunig. vol. 1. lib. 2. p. 201.
being strangers in Sparta; after supper not only disgorged themselves by
vomit, but also in a beastly manner defiled the very Seats of the Ephori: great
diligence was used to ^ind out the Authors of so heinous a crime, being (in
case they were Citizens) to suffer a condign punishment, when at last it was
found they were of Chios; the Ephori caused public Proclamation to be made,
that the Chians had liberty to leave behind them the tokens of their
intemperance; and further, there was nothing decreed against them: by Aelian
they are called Clazomenians.

13. Amilcar the brave General of the Carthaginians had fought diverse battles
with desirable fortune, Poliaen. lib. 5. Zuing. vol. 1. lib. 2. p. 201.
after which he was looked upon with the eyes of Envy, and being accused as if
he went about to establish the sole Sovereignty in himself; he was put to
death, his Brother Giscon was forced into Exile, and all his Goods con^iscate:
After which, the Carthaginians made use of several Generals; but finding
themselves to be shamefully beaten, and reduced to an extreme hazard of
servitude; they recalled Giscon from his banishment, and having entrusted him
with the Supreme Command in all Military Affairs they put into his hands all
his and his Brothers Enemies to be disposed of, and punished at his pleasure.
Giscon caused them all to be bound, and in the sight of the people commanded
them all to lie prostrate on the Ground, which done with a quick foot he passed
over them all three times, treading upon each of their necks: I have now, said
he, a sufficient revenge for the murder of my Brother; upon which he freely
dismissed them all; saying, I have not rendered evil for evil, but good for
evil.

12. The Civil Law, Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 5. p. 43.
for many Ages together lay concealed amongst the Ceremonies and Mysteries of
the Gods, known only to the Chief Priests. Ca. Flavius, the Son of a Freed man
and a Scribe, (being to the great indignation of the Nobility made Edile
Curule) divulged the Maxims of it, and made it common almost to the whole
Forum. When therefore Flavius came once to visit his Colleague in his Sickness,
he found the Chamber filled with the Nobility, none of which would vouchsafe to
proffer him a Seat amongst them; whereupon he commanded his Chair of State to
be brought him, and sat down therein; this way revenging at once his injured
Honor, and the Contempt that was showed to his Person.

13. When the Duke of Alva was in Brussells, Howels Epist. vol. 1. 4. Ep. 26.
p. 132.
about the beginning of the Tumults in the Netherlands, he had sat down before
Hulst in Flanders, and there was a Provost Marshal in his Army who was a
Favorite of his, and the Provost had put some to death by secret Commission
from the Duke. There was one Captain Bolea in the Army, who was an intimate
Friend of the Provosts; and one Evening late, he went to the Captains Tent, and
brought with him a Con^essor, and an Executioner as it was his custom. He told
the Captain he was come to execute his Excellencies Commission, and Martial Law
upon him. The Captain started up suddenly, his hair standing at an end, and
being struck with amazement, asked him, Wherein have I offended the Duke. The
Provost answered, Sir, I am not to expostulate the business with you, but to
execute my Commission; therefore I pray prepare your self, for there is your
Ghostly Father and Executioner. So he fell on his knees before the Priest, and
having done, the Hangman going to put the Halter about his Neck, the Provost
threw it away, and breaking into a laughter, told him there was no such thing,
and that he had done this to try his courage, how he would bear the terror of
death. The Captain looked ghastly upon him, and said; Then Sir, get you out of
my Tent, for you have done me a very ill office. The next Morning the said
Captain Bolea; though a young man of about thirty, had his hair all turned
gray, to the admiration of all the World, and the Duke of Alva himself, who
questioned him about it; but he would confess nothing. The next year the Duke
was revoked, and in his journey to the Court of Spain, he was to pass by
Sarragossa, and this Captain Bolea and the Provost went along with him as his
Domestics. The Duke being to repose some days in Saragossa; the young old
Captain Bolea told him, that there was a thing in that Town worthy to be seen
by his Excellency; which was a Casa de loco, a Bedlam-house; for there was not
the like in Christendom: Well, said the Duke, go and tell the Warden, I will be
there to morrow in the Afternoon. The Captain having obtained this, went to the
Warden and told him the Duke's intention, and that the chief occasion that
moved him to it, was that he had an unruly Provost about him, who was subject
oftentimes to fits of Frenzy; and because he wishes him well, he had tried
diverse means to cure him, but all world not do, therefore he would try whether
keeping him close in Bedlam for some days would do him any good. The next day
the Duke came with a rus^ling Train of Captains after him, amongst whom was the
said Provost very shining brave, being entered into the house about the Duke's
Person: Captain Bolea told the Warden, pointing at the Provost, that is the man:
so he took him aside into a dark Lobby, where he had placed some of his men,
who muffled him in his Cloak, seized upon his Sword, and so hurried him down
into a Dungeon. My Provost had lain there two nights and a day; and afterward
it happened, that a Gentleman coming out of curiosity to see the house, peeped
into a small grate where the Provost was. The Provost conjured him as he was a
Christian to go and tell the Duke of Alva his Provost was there clapped up, nor
could he imagine why. The Gentleman did his Errand, and the Duke being
astonished, sent for the Warden with his Prisoner: So he brought the Provost in
cuerpo, full of Straws and Feathers, madman like before the Duke. Who at the
sight of him breaking into laughter, asked the Warden why he had made him
Prisoner? Sir, said the Warden, it was by virtue of your Excellencies
Commission brought me by Captain Bolea. Bolea stepped forth, and told the Duke;
Sir, you have asked me often, how these hairs of mine grew so suddenly gray: I
have not revealed it to any soul breathing; but now I Will tell your Excellency,
and so fell a relating the passage in Flanders; and Sir, I have been ever since
beating my brains how to get an equal revenge of him, for making me old before
my time. The Duke was so well pleased with the Story and the wittiness of the
revenge, that he made them both Friends, and the Gentleman who told me this
Passage, said, that the said Captain Bolea is now alive, so that he could not
be les^ than ninety years of Age.

C^^twind. histor. collect. cent. 1. p. 15.
14. Thrasippus was present at a great Feast in the house of Pisistratus the
Athenian Tyrant, where he fell into intemperate Speeches, and not only reviled
Pisistratus, but spit in his face: Yet went he the next Morning betimes to the
house of Thrasippus, and contenting himself to let him know what he had done;
he not only entreated him not to kill himself, but forgave and still used him
as his Friend.

The Pope that he might congratulate Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, Ch^twinds
hist. collect. cent. 12. p. 359.
for the great zeal against the Lutherans, sent him his Letters of Thanks, and
withal the Picture of the Virgin, with Christ in her Arms, being Michael Angelo
his most curious Masterpiece. The Messenger in his Journey fell sick, and
lighting upon a Merchant of Lucca, who pretended himself a retainer to the
Cardinal, delivers the Pope's Letter and Present to him, to convey to the
Cardinal, who undertook it. This Merchant was a bitter Enemy to the Cardinal
for diverse injuries from him received, and therefore determined at this time to
have upon him at least a moderate and bloodless revenge. Being therefore
arrived at Paris, he gets a Limner (who also owed ill will to the Cardinal) to
draw a Picture of equal bigness: in which in stead of the Virgin Mary, were
portracted the Cardinal, the Queen his Niece, the Queen Mother, and the Duke of
Guise his Wife, all stark naked, their Arms about his Neck, and their Legs
twisted in his. This being put in the Case of the other, with the Pope's
Letters, were delivered to one of the Cardinal's Secretaries, while he was with
the King in Council. At his return, the Cardinal (having read the Letter)
reserved the opening of the Case till the next day, where having invited those
Ladies, and many Nobles, and Cardinals, they found themselves miserably
deceived, disappointed, and exceedingly confounded and ashamed.

An Astrologer predicted the death of King Henry the Seventh such a Year;
Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 12. p. 327.
the King sent for him, and asked if he could tell Fortunes? He said yes. The
King then asked if he did not forsee some eminent danger that much about that
time should hang over his own head? He said no. Then said the King, thou art a
foolish Figure-caster, and I ammore skilful than thou; for as soon as I saw
thee, I instantly prophesied thou should be in prison before night, which
thou shall find true, and sent him thither. He had not been long in custody,
but the King sent for him again to know if he could cast a Figure, to know how
long he should be in prison? He still answered no. Then said the King, thou art
an illiterate fellow, that can not foretell either good or bad that shall
befall thy self; therefore I will conclude thou can not tell of mine, and so
set him at liberty.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Sobriety and Temperance of some Men in their Meat and
Drink, and other things.
WHen Leotychidas was asked the reason why the Spartans did use to eat and
drink most sparingly? It is (said he) because we had rather consult for others,
than that others should do so for us. Tartly implying that luxurious and
intemperate men were utterly indisposed and unfit for Counsel, and that
Temperance and Sobriety are wont to be the proper Parents of the most wholesome
advice: Indeed all other Virtues are obscured by the want of this as both the
body and mind are wonderfully improved by it, which is the reason why so many
great persons have made choice of it for their Achates.

Drexel. oper. l. 3. c. 8.. 1. p. 424.
1. Carus the Roman Emperor was upon his expedition into Persia, who being
arrived upon the Consines of Armenia, there came Ambassadors to him from the
enemy, they expected not a speedy admittance to his presence, but after a day
or two to be presented to him by some of the Nobles about him: But he informed
of their coming, caused them to be brought before him. When they came they
found this great Emperor at his dinner in the open field, lying upon the grass
with a number of Soldiers about him, nothing of Gold or Silver to be seen:
Carus himself was in a plain purple Cloak, and the feast that was prepared for
him, was only a kind of ancient black broth, and therein a piece of salted
Hogsslesh, to which he also invited the Ambassadors.

Suet. l. 2. c. 76. p. 102. Drexel. oper. tom. 2. p. 794.
2. Augustus Caesar the Master of the World, was a person of a very sparing
diet; and as abstemious in his drinking, he would feed of course bread and
small fishes, Cheese made of Cows milk, and the same pressed with the hand,
green Figgs and the like: He drank not above a Sextant at once, and but thrice
at one Supper, his Supper consisted mostly of three, and when he desired to
exceed but of six dishes, he delighted most in Rhetian Wine; and seldom drunk
he in the day time, but instead of drink he took a sop of bread soaked in cold
water, or a slice of Cucumber, or a young Lettuce head, or else some new
gathered sharp and tart Apple, that had a kind of winish liquor in it. Thus
lived this great person after a fashion, that some Cobblers and Botchers would
almost be loath to be obliged unto.

Dr^x^l. oper. to ^. 2. p. 794. L^^sius Hygiastic. c. 4.. 25. p. 86.
3. Ludovicus Cornarius a Venetian and a learned man, wrote a book of the
benefit of a sober life, and produces himself as a testimony hereof, saying:
Unto the fortieth year of my Age, I was continually vexed with variety of
infirmities, I was sick at Stomach of a Fever, a Plurisie, and lay ill of the
Oout: At last this man by the persuasion of Physicians, took up a way of living
with such temperance, that in the space of one year he was freed almost of all
his diseases: In the seventieth year of his Age he had a ^all, whereby he brake
his Arm and his Leg, so that upon the Third day nothing but death was expected,
yet he recovered without Physic, for his abstinence was to him instead of all
other means, and that was it which hindered a recurrency of malignant humors to
the parts affected. In the eighty third year of his Age, he was so sound and
cheerful, so vegete, and so entire in his strength, that he could climb hills,
leap upon his horse from the even ground, write Comedies, and do most of those
things he used to do when he was young: If you ask how much meat and drink this
man took, his daily allowance for bread and all manner of other ^ood was twelve
ounces, and his drink for a day was fourteen ounces: This was his usual measure
and the said Coraraius did seriously affirm, that if he chanced to exceed but a
few ounces, he was thereby ap^ to relapse into his former diseases. All this he
has set down of himself in writing, and it is a^^^xed to the book of Leonardus
Lessius, a Physician, which was Printed at Amsterdam, Anno Dom. 1631.

D^^xel. oper. (...). 2. d^ (...). part. 1. c. 11.. 8 p. 7^6.
4. Philippus Nerius at Nineteen years of Age, made it a law to himself, that he
would refresh his body but once a day, and that only with bread and water, and
sometimes he would abstain even from these cold delights unto the third day:
Being made Priest his manner was to eat some small thing in the morning, and
then abstain till Supper which never consisted of more than two poched Eggs, or
instead of these some pulse or herbs. He would not suffer more dishes than one
to be set upon his Table, he seldom eat of Flesh or Fish, and of white Meats he
never tasted; his Wine was little and that much diluted with water, and which
is most wonderful, he never seemed to be delighted with one dish more than
another.

5. Cardinal Carolus Borromaeus was of that abstinence, Drexel. oper. tom. 2.
l. de I^jun. et Abstin. part. 1. c. 11.. 8. p. 796.
that he kept a daily fast with bread and water, Sundays and Holy Days only
excepted; and this manner of life he continued till his death: He kept even
festivals with that frugality, that he usually fed upon Pulse, Apples or Herbs.
Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, sent to him not only to advise but to command him
to moderate these rigours: But the Cardinal wrote back to him that he was most
ready to obey, but that withal he had learned by experience, that his spare
eating was conducting to health, and that it was subservient to the drying up
of that Phlegm and humors, wherewith his body did abound: whereupon the Pope
left him to his pleasure. He persisted therein therefore with so rigid a
constancy, that even in the heat of Summer, and when he had drawn out his
labors beyond his accustomed time, he would not indulge himself so far as to
taste of a little wine, nor allow his thirst so much as a drop of water.

6. The Egyptian Kings fed upon simple diet, Lon. Theatr. p. 654. Diod. Sicul.
nor was any thing brought to their Tables besides a Calf and a Goose, for Wine
they had a stated measure, such as would neither fill the belly nor intoxicate
the head, and their whole life was managed with that modesty and sobriety, that
a man would think it was not ordered by a Lawgiver, but a most skilful
Physician for the preservation of health.

7. Cato the younger, Fulgos. ex. l. 4. c. 3. p 486. Lon. Theatr. p. 656.
marching with his Army through the hot sands of Lybia, when by the burning
heats of the Sun and their own labor, they were pressed with an immoderate
thirst, a Soldier brought him his Helmet full of water, (which he had
difficultly found) that he might quench his thirst with it: But Cato poured out
the water in the sight of all his Army, and seeing he had not enough for them
all, he would not taste it alone. By this example of his temperance and
tolerance, he taught his Soldiers the better to endure their hardship.

8. When Pausanias had overcome Mardonius in Battle, Herodot. l. 9. p. 106.
Camer. oper. cent. 1. c. 79. p. 365. Lon. Theatr. p. 655.
and beheld the splendid Utensils and Vessels of Gold and Silver belonging to
the Barbarian, he commanded the Bakers and Cooks, etc. to prepare him such a
Supper as they used to do for Mardonius, which when they had done, and
Pausanias had viewed the Beds of Gold and Silver, the Tables, Dishes, and other
magnificent preparations to his amazement; he then ordered his own servants to
prepare him such a Supper as was usual in Sparta, which was a course repast
with their black broth and the like: When they had done it and the difference
appeared to be very strange; he then sent for the Grecian Commanders, and
showed them both Suppers: And laughing, O ye Greeks, said he, I have called you
together for this purpose, that I might show you the madness of the Median
General, who when he lived such a life as this, must needs come to invade us
who eat after this homely and mean manner.

9. Alphonsus the Elder King of Sicily, had suddenly drawn out his forces to
oppose the passage of Iacobus Caudolus over the River Vulturnus; he had forced
his Troops back again, Fulgos. ex. l. 4. c. 3. p. 501 Lon. Theatr. p. 658.
but being necessitated to stay there all day, with his Army unrefreshed; A
Soldier toward evening brought him a piece of Bread, a Radish, and a piece of
Cheese, a mighty Present at that time: But Alphonsus commending the Soldiers
liberality refused his offer, and said it was not seemly for him to feast,
while his Army fasted.

Speeds hist. p. 265. Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 7. p. 187.
10. Julian the Emperor, first a Deacon, then a wretched Apostate, yet was
otherwise highly to be commended for his many good qualities; so temperate,
that he never had any war with his Belly, so chaste, that after the death of his
Wife, he never regarded women, and would not see the Persian Captive Ladies,
nor suffer Cooks nor Barbers in his Army, as being Ministers of intemperance.
As for Stage Plays, he never but once a year permitted them in his Court, and
then he says of himself, that he was more like to one that detested, than one
that was a spectator of them.

11. Agesilaus King of Sparta was sent for into Egypt to assist that King
against his enemiess, Clarks mirr. c. 113. p. 557.
at his arrival all the Kings great Captains, Nobles, and an infinite number of
people went to see him, but that which they chiefly wondered at, was (when they
saw presents brought him to assure his welcome) that he took only the coursest
fare, and as for their persumes, con^ections, and other delicacies, he prayed
them to give those dainty things to the Heliots his Slaves.

Plut. morol. l. de Lacon. Apoth^g. p. 467.
12. Sous was besieged by the Clitorians and so distressed for Water, that he
offered to surrender all those lands he had conquered from them, in case he and
all his Army might drink at a Fountain near hand. The Clitorians agreed to it,
he then assembled his men and declared to them, that if there were any amongst
them that would abstain from drinking, he would surrender all his Sovereign
power into his hands, but there was not one that could contain or forbear but
he alone, who went last to the Spring; where he only cooled and besprinkled his
body without with it, in the pres^nce of his enemies, by which evasion he
refused to deliver up the lands, saying, That all of them did not drink.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Affability and Humility of diverse great Persons.
SUch advice as this is given to great persons by Seneca the Tragoedian. When
Fortune does us most caress,
And higher still advance,
Then should we most our selves suppress,
As subject unto chance.
Certainly the greatest examples of Courtesy and Humility have been found
amongst them that have been truly great, and as the Sun is then slowest of
motion, when it is highest in the Zodiac, so these virtues are wont to
accompany them of the most worth, and the greatest condes^ension and
self-denial is still found with most power, and the best merit.

1. Alexander the Great being in Asia, M. Harrault disc. of policy, etc. l. 2.
c. 5. p. 243.
was surprised with a sore Tempest and cold on the sudden, insomuch that diverse
about him fainted by reason of the extremity of it: He found a simple Soldier
of Macedonia in this condition, fainted and almost utterly starved, whom he
caused to be carried into his Tent, and set by the fire in his Chair Royal. The
warmth of the fire brought the Soldier to himself again, and then perceiving in
what manner he sat; he started up astonished to excuse himself to the King:
But Alexander with a smiling Countenance said unto him, Know thou not my
Soldier, that you Macedonians live after another sort under your King, than the
Persians do under theirs, for unto them it is death to sit in the Kings Chair,
but unto thee it has been life.

2. Alphonsus the most Potent King of Arragon, Lon. Theatr^ p. 628.
Naples, and Sicily, as he passed through Campania lighted by accident of a
Muletter, whose Mule overladen with Corn stuck in the Mire, nor was he able
with all his strength to deliver her thence. The Mulletter besought all that
passed by to assist him, but in vain: At last the King himself dismounts from
his Horse, and was so good a help to the poor man, that he freed his Beast.
When he knew it was the King falling on his knees he begged his pardon, the
King with words of courtesy dismissed him. This may seem to be a thing of
small moment, yet hereby several people of Campania, became reconciled to the
King.

3. It is reported by Gualter Mapes an old Historiographer of ours, Burtons
melanch. part. 2.. 3. p. 307. Speeds hist.
(who lived four hundred years since) that King Edward the first, and Leoline
Prince of Wales, being at an interview near Aust upon Severn in Glocestershire,
and the Prince being sent for but refusing to come, the King would needs go
over to him: Which Leoline perceiving went up to the Arms in water, and laying
hold on the Kings Boat, would have carried the King out upon his Shoulders
adding, that his humi^ity and wisdom had triumphed over his pride and folly,
and thereupon was reconciled to him, and did his homage.

4. St. Nilamon dyed with terror as they bare him to the Throne of a Bishop,
Cous. H.C. tom. 2.. 10. p. 177.
for which so many other pine away with ambition; and while he thought himself
unworthy, and fearing to loose his innocence, in an over-strong apprehension of
both, he departed this life.

5. Peter of Alexandria, Cause. H.C. tom. 2.. 10. p. 177.
being the lawful Successor of St. Mark, would yet never be persuaded to mount
his Chair, but contented himself to sit the residue of his days upon the
footstool until after his death, the people in veneration of his virtue, having
attired him in his pontifical habit, did carry his body to the seat, which he
never had possessed.

6. Rudolphus Austriacus, Lips. mon^^. l. 1. c. 2. p. 17.
Anno 1273. was Earl of Hapsburg, one day he went out a hunting with some of
his followers, it rained that day and the way was dirty and uneven, when he
chanced to encounter a Priest, who was bearing on foot the sacred host, unto a
sick man thereabouts, as the last comfort he was capable of. The Earl was moved
with this sight, and with some passion dismounting from his horse, What, said
he, shall I be carried on horseback, while he that carries my Savior walks on
foot? It is certainly an uncomely if not a profane thing, and therefor take
this horse and get up. It was his command as well as entreaty, whereupon the
Priest obeyed: The humble Earl in the mean time followed to the house of the
sick on foot, and uncovered, and in the same manner accompanied him back from
thence to his own house^ The Priest astonished at the humility of so great a
person, and inspired from above, gave him his blessing at parting, and withal
predicted the possession of the Empire to him and his posterity, which fell out
accordingly.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 85.
7. Elizabetha was the Daughter of the King of Hungary, and married to Lewis the
Lantgrave of Thurengia; yet in the midst of riches and abundance, she affected
poverty and humility; sometimes when she remained at home with her maids, she
put on the meanest Apparel; saying, that she would never use any other ornament
whenever the good and merciful Lord should put her into a condition, wherein
she might more freely dispose of her self. When she went to Church her manner
was to place her self amongst the poorer ^ort of women: After the death of her
Husband she undertook a Pilgrimage, wherein she gave to the poor and
necessitous all that came to her hands to dispose of, she built an Hospital,
and therein made her self an attendant upon the sick and the poor, and when by
her Father she was recalled into Hungary, she refused to go, preferring this
manner of life before the enjoyment of a Kingdom.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 86.
8. It was observed of St. Bernard of Claraval, that certain bright Rays did
seem to proceed from his eyes, and this judgment was made of it, that he
therefore had such a glory in his eyes, for that he never looked upon any whom
he did not judge to be better than himself. If he saw a man in vile habit, he
would say to himself, this man bears his poverty with greater patience than you
Bernard? and beholding one in more costly attire he would say, Perhaps under
these ^ine clothes there is a better man, than Bernard is in his course
raiment. Thus a true and holy humility was the constant Collyrium that this
devout person made use of.

Fullers holy war. l. 2. c. 2. p. 44. Loeti. Comp. hist. univers. period. Germ.
c. 9.. 1. p. 253. Iovij Elog. l. 1. p. 27.
9. When Robert the Norman had refused the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Princes
proceeded to make a second choice, and that they might know the nature of the
Princes the better, their servants were examined upon oath, to confess their
Masters faults. The Servants of Godfrey of Bouillon, protested their Masters
only ^ault was this, that when Mattins were done, he would stay so long in the
Church to know of the Priest the meaning of every Image and Picture, that
Dinner at home was spoiled by his long tarrying. All admired hereat that this
man's worst vice should be so great a virtue, and unanimously chose him their
King. He accepted the place but refused the solemnity thereof, saying, that he
would not wear a Crown of Gold there, where the Savior of Mankind had worn a
Crown of Thorns.

Lloyds state worthies. p. 438.
10. Upon the death of Pope Paul the Third; the Cardinals being divided about
the Election, the imperial part which was the greatest, gave their voice for
Cardinal Pool, which being told him he disabled himself, and wished them to
choose one that might be most for the Glory of God and good of the Church. Upon
this stop some that were no friends to Pool, and perhaps looked for the place
themselves if he were put off, laid many things to his charge, amongst other
that he was not without suspicion of Lutheranism, nor without blemish of
incontinence, but he cleared himself so handsomely, that he was now more
importan'd to take the place than before, and therefore one night the Cardinals
came to him being in bed, and sent him in word, that they came to adore him, (a
circumstance of the new Popes honor) but he being awaked out of his sleep, and
acquainted with it; made answer, That this was not a work of darkness, and
therefore required them to forbear till next day and then do as God should put
it into their minds, But the Italian Cardinals attributing this his humility to
a kind of stupidity and sloth in Pool, looked no more after him, but the next
day chose Cardinal Montanus Pope; who was afterward named Julius the Third: I
have read of many that would have been Popes but could not, I write this man
one, that could have been Pope but would not.

11. Vlpius Trajanus the Emperor, Pezel. melli. sic. hist. tom. 2. p. 191.
Imperial hist. p. 144.
was a person of that rare affability and humility, that when his Soldiers were
wounded in any Battle, he himself would go from Tent to Tent to visit and take
care of them, and when swaths and other clothes were wanting wherewithal to
bind up their wounds, he did not spare his own Linen, but tare them in pieces
to make things necessary for the wounds of his Soldiers: And being reproved for
his too much familiarity with his subjects; he answered, that he desired to be
such an Emperor to his subjects, as he would wish if he himself was a private
man.

CHAP. XXV. Of Counsel, and the Wisdom of some men therein.
NO man (they say) is wise at all hours, at least there are some hours wherein
few are wise enough to give such counsel to themselves, as the present
emergency of their affairs may require. Being dulled by calamity our inventions
are too barren to yield us the means of our safety, or else by precipitancy or
partiality, we are apt to miscarry in the conduct of our own business. In this
case a cordial friend is of singular use, and if wise as well as faithful, may
stand us in as much stead as if the Oracle of Apollo was yet in being to be
consulted with.

1. A certain Chaquen that is a Visiter of a Province in China, Alvarez. S^medo
hist. of China. part. 1. c. 4. p. 28.
(one of the most important employments in the Kingdom) receiving of his
visits, after a few days were over, shut up his Gates, and refused to admit any
further their visits or business, pretending for his excuse that he was sick.
This being divulged, a certain Mandarine a friend of his, began to be much
troubled at it, and with much ado obtained leave to speak with him. Being
admitted, he gave him notice of the discontent in the City, by reason that
businesses were not dispatched, the other put him off with the same excuse of
his sickness. I see no signs of it, replied his friend, but if your Lordship
will be pleased to tell me the true cause, I will serve you in it to the utmost
of my power, conformable to that affection I bear you in my heart. Know then,
replied the Visiter, they have stolen the Kings Seal out of the Cabinet where it
used to be kept, leaving it locked as if it had not been touched, so that if I
would give audience I have not wherewithal to seal dispatches: If I discover my
negligence in the loss of the Seal, I shall as you know loose both my
Government and my life. Well perceived the Mandarine, how terrible the cause of
his retirement was, but presently making use of the quickness of his wit, asked
him if he had never an enemy in that City. He answered yes, and that it was the
chief Officer in the City, that is the Chief or Governor, who of a long time
had born him a secret grudge: Away then, quoth the Mandarine, in great have,
let your Lordship command that all your goods of worth be removed into the
innermost part of the Palace, let them set fire on the empty part, and call out
for help to quench it: To which the Governor must of necessity repair with the
first, it being one of the principal duties of his office. As soon as you see
him amongst the people, call out aloud to him, and consign to him the Cabinet
thus shut as it is, that it may be secured in his possession from the danger of
the fire, for if it be he who has caused the Seal to be stolen, he will put it
in its place again when he restores you the Cabinet, if it be not he your
Lordship shall lay the fault on him for having so ill kept it, and so you shall
not only be freed of this danger, but also revenged of your enemy. The Visiter
followed his Counsel; and it succeeded so well that the next morning after the
night this fire was, the Governor brought him the Seal in the Cabinet, both of
them concealing each others fault, equally complying for the safety of both.

Fullers worthies. p. 161. in Cambridgshire.
2. Edwaerd Norgate was very judicious in Pictures, for which purpose he was
employed into Italy, to purchase some of the choicer for the Earl of Arundel.
Returning by Marsellis be missed the money he expected, and being there
unknowing of, or unknown to any; he was observed by a French Gentleman to walk
in the Ex^hange, as I may call it of that City, many hours, every Morning and
Evening with swift feet and sad face forwards and backwards. To him the Civil
Mounsieur addressed himself, desiring to know the cause of his discontent, and
if it came within the compass of his power, he promised to help him with his
best advice. Norgate communicated his condition, to whom the other replied;
Take I pray my counsel, I have taken notice of your walking more than twenty
miles a day, in one furlong upwards and downwards, and what is spent in
needless going and returning, if laid out in progressive motion, would bring
you into your own Country. I will suit you if so pleased with a light habit,
and furnish you with competent money for a footman: Norgate very cheerfully
consented and footed it (being accommodated accordingly) through the body of
France being more than five hundred English miles, and so leisurely, with ease,
sa^ety and health returned into England. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 9. p. 271.
Knowls Turk^hist. p. 207.


3. Bajazet the first, when he had heard of the frauds and injuries of his
Cadies (so they call the Turkish Judges) being exceedingly moved, commanded
them all before him at Neapolis; his intention was to enclose them all in a
house, cause it to be set on fire, and so to consume them altogether therein.
This was not unknown to Haly Bassa, a prudent Counselor of his: who therefore
sought and found out a way to appease him. Bajazet had an Ethiopick Boy,
talkative and lepid, in whom he took great delight: Haly having instructed him
in what he should say, sent him in to the Prince in a habit more gay than was
usual with him. What Is the matter said, Bajazet, that thou art thus gallant
contrary to thy custom? I am, said he, departing from thee to the Emperor of
Constantinople. To him that is our enemy, said the Prince, what will thou do
there? I go, said he, to invite thence some old Monks and Religious Persons to
do justice amongst us; since you will have all your Cadies to be slain. But my
little Ethiop, said he, are they skilled in our Laws? Here Haly seasonably put
in; They are not my Lord. Why therefore do you cut off those that are? Why
then, said he, do they judge unjustly and corruptly? I will discover to my Lord
the cause of it said Haly; These our Judges have no stipend allowed them out of
the Public; they therefore take some little rewards of some private persons;
amend this and you have reformed them. The Counsel pleased Bujazet, he gave
them their lives, and commissioned Haly to appoint what was fit for them, who
decreed, and it afterward remained in force; That every such person as had an
Inheritance of so many thousand aspers, should out of every thousand allow
twenty to his Cadie, and that for the instruments of marriage and such
contracts he should have other twenty, so their poverty was helped, and justice
duly administered. Lon. Theatr. p. 373. Wi^ri. opera. p. 851. l. de ira.


4. Athenodorus the Philosopher, was a familiar friend to Augustus the Roman
Emperor, and being stricken in years desired his dismission from the Court: It
was granted him at last but not without much importunity, when therefore he
came to take his leave, he left this good Counsel with the Emperor his Lord,
that before he said or did any thing of more than usual importance, he should
repeat to himself the twenty four Letters of the Greek Alphabet, this pause he
prescribed as a remedy against precipitate and overhasty resolutions, which
serve only to make way for a vain and too late Repentance.

5. It was the wise Counsel of Pythagoras, Wieri opera. p. 851.
Dig not up Fire with a Sword; that is, Provoke not a person already swollen with
anger, by petulant and evil speeches.

6. Two young men of Syracuse were so great friends, Fitzh^rb. of Pol. and
Relig. part. 1. c. 7. p. 56.
that one of them being to go abroad recommended unto the other the care of his
Concubine; the Guardian in the others absence, overcome with love and lust
abused his charge; in revenge whereof his friend at his return corrupted the
others wife, by which means there grew a great quarrel betwixt them, and the
matter coming to the notice of the Senate, a wise Senator gave Counsel to
banish them both, lest their private quarrel might breed some public sedition:
But his Counsel was neglected; whereupon it followed that the friends of the
young men ranging themselves on either side, made within a while such a tumult
and civil war within the City, that the whole state was overthrown thereby.

7. When Francis the first King of France, was to march with his Army into
Italy, Clarks mirr. l. 54. p. 217.
he consulted with his Captains how to lead them over the Alps, whether this
way or that way? At which time Amaril his Fool sprang out of a corner where he
sat unseen, and advised them rather to take care which way they should bring
their Army back out of Italy again: It Is easy for one to interest himself in
quarrels* but hard to be disengaged from them when once in.

8. The Senate of Rome were met together in Council, Sab^ll. Ex. l. 4. c. 8. p.
113. Coel. Antiq. sect. l. 27. c. 1. p. 1239.
where they had a long and difficult debate about what should be done with the
City of Carthage Cato the elder gave his opinion that it should be utterly
subverted and destroyed, that so Rome might be set in safety, and many of the
Fathers agreed with him therein: Scipio Nasica then stood up; And, said he,
those that are so passionately bent upon the destruction of Carthage, let them
look to it lest the people of Rome being freed from the fear of a Rival and
Enemy abroad, they do not then fall into civil discords, which will be a far
worse evil than the former. This prudent person foresaw what peace and plenty
might do amongst them to the corruption of their manners, for want of the
exercise of their virtue, and that thereupon would follow the worst of evils,
nor was he at all mistaken in his opinion.

9. Three young men having long exercised themselves in Piracy, had thereby
gotten together a great sum of Money, and then retired themselves to a City
where they might live with greater both honesty and safety, I. Text. Feriar.
Hoegerranar. c. 39. p. 182. Polychronic. fol. 111.
and seeing they could not agree about the parting of that in the getting of
which they had been mutually concerned, by common consent they put it into the
hands of a Banker, conditioning with him by writing, that he should not deliver
out one penny thereof, unless in the presence of all three: Soon after one of
the three more crafty than the other, persuaded the rest that it was the safest
way to build a house; and buy some Land which should be common with them;
whereupon they gave order that their whole money should be in readiness upon
their demand, and one day when they were all Riding out upon Pleasure; their
crafty Companion told them that fifty ducats was requisite for the building of
their house, which they bad him receive of the Banker, and as they rode by gave
order to the Banker to deliver him what he demanded, they rode on, and he
demanded and received their whole sum, and laying it on his horse rode quite
away with it. They threaten the Banker to sue him for their lost money, as
delivered in their absence: He in this strait advised with Gellius Aretinus a
Lawyer and a witty man, who gave him this Counsel; to acknowledge that he has
the money and was ready to repay it according to their written agreement, that
is, in the presence of all three, wishing them to bring with them the third man
and they should receive it: But as they heard no more of their Companion, so
neither did he of his Suit.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Subtilty and Prudence of some men in the Investigation and
Discovery of things; and their determinations about them.
IT was the saying of one who was none of the meanest Philosophers, that Truth
always lies at the bottom of a deep Pit; and that if we will enjoy it, we must
be at the pains to draw it up from thence. Quickness of Apprehension and
maturity of Judgment are instead of the Cord and Pulley whereby this exploit is
performed; add to these a kind of sineness and felicity, by which some men have
prevailed to bring her to the light, when she has (as to others) lain reserved
and concealed.

Lon. Theatr. p. 834.
1. A certain Judge in Spain, when a murder was committed, and diverse that were
suspected of it brought before him, who yet all of them denied it; he caused
all of them to bare their breasts, and laid his hand upon their hearts, when
having found that the heart of one of them had greater trembling and
palpitation than any of the rest, making thence a conjecture by his discerning
Spirit; Thou, said he, art the Author of this murder. The other conscious to
himself of the crime, immediately confessed it, and was accordingly led to a
deserved punishment.

(...). oper. (...) 1. c. 10. p. 71.
2. Camerarius tells out of Cedrenus, how the Queen of Saba when she saw that
Solomon had expounded all her hardest Riddles, caused one day, certain young
Boys and Girls, apparelled all alike to be brought and set before the King,
(none being able by their faces and looks to discern the one Sex from the
other) to the end that therein she might have further trial of King Solomon's
wisdom, he knowing the Queens intent presently made some water to be brought in
a great Basin, bidding them all to wash their faces, by this device he easily
discerned the Males from the Females, for the Boys rubbed their faces hard and
lustily, but the Girls being shame faced, did scarce touch theirs with their
fingers ends.

3. The Emperor Galba (when two persons contended: Suet. l. 7. c. 7. p. 274.
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 9. p. 259.
about the propriety of an Ox, and that the plea was so doubtful on both sides,
that no man could determine to which of them the Ox did of right belong) did
then order that the Ox in question should be led to a pond of water, (where he
had before time used to drink) with his eyes blindfolded, and decreed that his
cover being taken off, to which of the two men's houses he should first betake
himself, that person should be adjudg'd and received as his rightful owner.

4. Rodolphus Austriacus the Emperor, Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 9. p. 259, 260.
was at Norimberg intent upon the public affairs of the Empire, when as a
Merchant presented himself before him, imploring his Justice upon an Innkeeper
well known, who as he said had cheated him of two hundred marks in Silver,
which having deposited in his hands, he had impudently denied the receipt of
such Sum, and withal did most injuriously detain it. The Emperor demanded what
evidence he had of the truth of what he had spoken, who replied (as it is usual
in such cases) that he had none other besides himself: The Emperor therefore
considering the thing, apprehended that some subtilty must be used to find out
the truth of the business, he enquires what manner of bag it was wherein he
pretended the money was delivered: He describes the shape, color, and other
particularities of it: The Emperor commands him to withdraw into the next
Room, and there to attend. It was his purpose to send for the Innkeeper, but
fortune disposed it otherwise and more commodiously, for the chief men of the
City as 'ts usual, came to present and wait upon the Emperor, amongst whom was
this fraudulent host. The Emperor knew him before, and (as he was very
courteous) in a jesting way said to him, You have a handsome Hat, pray give it
me and let us change. The other was proud of the honor, and readily presented
the Hat: The Emperor retired a while, as if he was called off by public
business, and sends a trusty and well known Inhabitant of the same City to the
Wife of the Innkeeper with order he should say, Your Husband desires you would
send him such a Bag of money, for he has special occasion for it, and by this
token that this is his Hat. The woman delivers it without scruple, and he
returns with it to the Emperor, who then calling the Merchant shows him the
Bag, and asks if he knew it, the man owns it with joy; the Emperor then calls
in the Host, And, says he, this man complains of you, and accuses you of
persidiousness, what say you? The other boldly told him that his Accuser lied
or was mad* that he neither has nor ever had any business with him: The
Emperor produces the bags, at the sight of which the Host is confounded, his
confidence and tongue fail him, he therefore confessed the whole, the Merchant
received his money, the Host together with the infamy, a considerable damage;
(for besides restitution the Emperor fined him a good round Sum) Rodolphus was
extolled for it, and the fame of this action spread it self through all Germany.

5. A Roman Lady left Widow by the death of her Husband, had a Son born of this
Marriage, secretly stolen from her, and in servitude bred up in another
Province: Causin. Holy Court Tom. ^. 4. p. 285.
where being grown up to a young Man, he had notice that he was Son of such a
Lady in Rome, and the place of he^ abo^e, which caused him to make a Voyage to
Rome with a purpose to make himself known to her, which he did by evident
token^, so that the Mother received him in her house, with joy and tears for
the recovery of her loss: she was at this time betrothed to a Man, who had
often promised her Marriage, yet never accomplished it; and this Lover was then
absent detained by urgent affairs far from Rome. At the end of thirty days he
returned, and ^inding this new guest in her house, demanded who he was; she
freely answered he was her Son: But he plainly told her, that if she sent not
away this found child from her lodging, never should she have any share in his
affection. The unhappy Creature surpised with love, to serve his passion,
renounceth her own entrails, and banishes him from her house: The young Man in
so great necessity of his affairs, hastens to require Justice of King
Theodorick; who sent for the Lady, who stoutly denied all the pretensions of
this young Man, saying he was an ungrateful Impostor, who not content to have
r^ceived the Charities of a poor Creature, in her house, would needs challenge
the Inheritance of Children. The Son on the other side wept bitterly, gave
assurance she had acknowledged him for her own, very lively representing all
the proofs which passion and interest put into his mouth. The King sounded all
passages to enter into the heart of the Lady, and asked her whether she were
not resolved to marry again; she answered, that if she met with a Man suitable
to her, she would do what God should inspire her. The King replied, behold him
here, since you have lodged this guest thirty days in your house, and have
acknowledged him so freely, what is the cause why you may not marry him, she
answered, he had not any means, and that she her self was well worth a thousand
Crowns, which was a great riches in those times. Well, said Theodorick, I will
give this young Man as much for his Marriage, on this condition that you shall
marry him, she much amazed, began to wax pale, blush, and tremble, seeking to
excuse her self, but faultering in her speech. The King to affright her more,
swore deeply she should marry him presently or tell the lawful cause of
impediment. The poor Woman condemned by the voice of Nature, which cried in her
heart, and having horror of the crime proposed to her, cast her self at the
King's feet, with tears, confessing her loves dissimulation and mishap. Then
this great Prince taking the word from her; Are not you a miserable Woman, said
he, to renounce your own blood for a Villain, who has deceived you, get you to
your house, forsake those fond affections, and live in the condition of a good
Widow, taking unto you such support from your Son, as he by Nature ought to
a^ford you.

Baker's Chr. p. 590.501. St^w's Annals p. 863.
6. About the third year of King James, a strange fanc^ possessed the brai^s of
a p^ofessed Physician, one Richard Haidock of New College in Oxford; who
pretended to Preach at night in his sleep, in such sort, that though he were
called aloud, or stirred and pulled by the hands or feet, yet would he make no
show of either hearing or feeling, and this he did often in the presence of
many Honorable Persons that came to hear him, so as within a short time his
Fame was spread through the Land, by the name of the sleeping Preacher. At
length the King commanded him to be brought to the Court, where His Majesty
King James, sat up the most part of a night to attend the event, when at last
Haidock* making a show to be a sleep, began to Pray, then taking a Text, made
his Division, applying it to his purpose, for in his Preaching, his use was to
inveigh against the Pope, against the Cross in Baptism, and against the last
Canons of the Church of England, and having ended his Sermon, seemed to
continue sleeping, His Majesty having well observed the manner of his carriage,
after a few days, called the said Haidock before him, and in conference with
him (as indeed he had an admirable sagacity in the discovery of fictions) made
him confess that all that he did was but imposture, and thereupon to fall upon
his knees and ask forgiveness, which the King granted upon condition, that in
all places he should openly acknowledge his offense, because many were brought
into a belief, that his nightly Preaching, was either by Inspiration or by
Vision.

7. Josephus relates, there was a young Jew bred at Sydon with the freed Man of
a Roman Citizen, Joseph. Ant. l. 17. c. 14. p. 460.
who having some resemblance of Alexander the Son of Herod, whom the Father had
cruelly put to death; feigned he was the same Alexander, saying, Lips. Monit.
l. 2. c. 5. p. 191. Causin. Holy Court Tom. 2. Max. 11. p. 398. Zonar. Annal
Tom. 1. p. 45.
those to whom Herod had recommended this barbarous execution, conceived such
horror at it, that they resolved to save him, and to conceal him till after
the death of his Father, in which time he remained at Sydon, and now was come
as from the Gates of death, to demand his right, as being the indubitate and
lawful Heir of the Kingdom. This Impostor had gained a subtle fellow, a Servant
of Herod's Household, who taught him all the particulars of the Court, the
people embraced this false Alexander as a Man returned back from the other
World. When he saw himself strong in Credit and Coin, he was so confident as to
go to Rome, to question the Crown against Herod's other Sons. He presented
himself before Augustus Caesar, the distributer of Crowns, beseeching him to
pity a fortune, so wretched, and a poor King, who threw himself at his feet, as
the Sanctuary of Justice and Mercy: Every one seemed already to favor him, but
Augustus a Monarch very penetrating, perceived this Man tasted not of a Prince,
for taking him by the hand he found his skin rough, as having exercised servile
labors: Hereupon the Emperor drew him aside, saying, content thy self to have
hitherto abused all the World; but know thou art now before Augustus, I will
pardon thee on condition thou discover the truth of this matter, but if thou
lie in any point thou art utterly lost. The Man was so amazed with the luster
of such Majesty, that prostrating himself at his feet, he began to confess all
the Imposture: Which done, the Emperor perceiving he was none of the most
daring Impostures saved his life, but condemned him to the Galleys. The Tutor
of this Counterfeit being observed by the Emperor to be of a spirit more
crasty, and accustomed to evil practices, was ordered speedily to be put to
death.

8. Hiero King of the Syracusians in Sicilia, Treasur. of Times l. 7. c. 17. p.
667.
had caused to be made a Crown of Gold of a wonderful weight, to be offered as
a Tribute to the gods for his good success in the War. In the making whereof
the Goldsmith fraudulently took out a certain portion of Gold and put in
Silver; so that there was nothing abated of the full weight, although much of
the value diminished. This came at length to be spoken of, the King was much
moved, and being desirous to try the truth without breaking of the Crown,
proposed the doubt to Archimedes, unto whose wit nothing seemed unpossible. He
could not presently answer it, but hoped to devise some policy to detect the
fraud. Musing therefore upon it, as he chanced to enter a Bath full of Water;
he observed that as his body entered the Bath, the Water did run over: Whereupon
his ready Wit from small effects, collecting greater matters, conceived by and
by a way of solution to the King's Question; and therefore rejoicing
exceedingly, forgot that he was naked, and so ran home, crying as he ran, I
have found it, I have found it. He then caused two massy pieces, one of Gold,
and another of Silver, to be prepared of the same weight that the Crown was
made of; and considering that Gold is heavyer of Nature then Silver: therefore
Gold of like weight with Silver must needs take up less room, by reason of its
more compact and solid substance. He was assured that putting the mass of Gold
into a Vess^l brim full of Water, there would not so much Water run out, as
when he should put in the Silver mass of like weight, wherefore he tried both,
and noted not only the quantities of Water at each time, but also the
difference, or excess of the one above the other: whereby he learned what
proportion in quantity is betwixt Gold and Silver of equal weight; and then
putting in the Crown it self into the Water brim ^ull as it was before, marked
how much the water did run out then, and comparing it with the Water run out,
when the Gold was put in, noted how much it did exceed that; and likewise
comparing it with the Water that run out when the Silver was put in, marked how
much it was less then that; and by those proportions, found the just quantity
of Gold that was stolen from the Crown, and how much Silver was put in instead
of it. By the which, ever since, the proportions of Metals one to another are
tried and found.

9. Praxiteles that famous Artist in the making of Statues, Zuing. Theat. vol.
3. l 3. p. 697. P^^san. i^ Atticis.
had promised Phryne a beautiful Courtezan, the choice of all the pieces in his
Shop, to take thence some such single Statue, as should be most pleasing to
her; but she not knowing which was most valuable, devised this Artifice to be
satisfied therein; she caused one to come in as in great have, and to tell
Praxteles that his Shop was on ^ire, he startled at the news, cried out, Is the
Cupid, and the Satyr safe? By this subtilty, she found out, wherein the Artist
himself believed, he had expressed the most skill, and thereupon she chose the
Cupid.

10. When the Duke of Ossuna was Viceroy of Sicily, there died a great rich
Duke, who left but one Son, H^wel's Epist. vol. 1. 3. Ep. 36. p. 98.
whom with his whole Estate, he bequeathed to the Tutele of the Jesuits, and
the words of the Will were, when he is past his Minority (Darete al mio
Figlivolo, quelque voi volute) you shall give my Son, what you will. It seems
the Jesuits took to themselves, two parts of three of the Estate, and gave the
rest to the Heir; the young Duke complaining to the Duke of Ossuna, (then
Viceroy) he commanded the Jesuits to appear before him, he asked them how much
of the Estate they would have, they answered, two parts of three, which they
had almost employed, already to build Monasteries, and an Hospital to erect
particular Altars and Masses, to sing Dirges and Refrigeriums for the Soul of
the deceased Duke: Hereupon the Duke of Ossuna caused the Will to be produced,
and found therein the words afore-recited, when he is past his Minority, you
shall give my Son of my Estate what you will. then he told the Jesuits, you
must by Virtue, and Tenor of these words, give what you will to the Son, which
by your own confession is two parts of three, and so he determined the business.

11. A poor Beggar in Paris being very hungry, Fuller's Holy State l. 3. c. 12.
p. 170.
staid so long in a Cook's Shop; who was dishing up of Meat, till his Stomach
was satisfied with the only smell thereof. The choleric Cook, demanded of him
to pay for his Breakfast, the poor Man denied it, and the controversy was
referred to the deciding of the next Man that should pass by, which chanced to
be the most notorious Idiot in the whole City. He on the relation of the
matter; determined that the poor Man's Money should be put betwixt two empty
dishes, and the Cook should be recompensed with the gingling of the poor Man's
Money, as he was satisfied with the only smell of the Cook's Meat, and this is
affirmed by credible Writers as no Fable but an undoubted truth.

12. Antiochus the Son of Seleucus, Camer. oper subcis. Cent. 1. c. 4. p. 50.
Plut. in Demetrio. p. 907. Pezel. Mellefic. Tpm. 1. p. 435.
daily languished and wasted away under a Disease, whereof the cause was
uncertain, to the great trouble and affliction of his Father; who therefore
sent for Erasistratus, a famous Physician to attend the care of his beloved
Son. Who addressing himself with his utmost dexterity to find out the root of
his infirmity; he perceived it was rather from the trouble of his mind, then
any effect of his constitution. But when the Prince could not be prevailed with
to make any such acknowledgement; by frequent feeling of his pulse, he observed
it to beat with more vigor and strength at the naming or presence of
Stratonica, that was the beloved Concubine of his Father, having made this
discovery, and knowing the Prince would rather die then confess so dangerous a
love, he took this course. He told Seleucus, that his Son was a dead Man; for
says he, he languishes for the love of my Wife, and what, said Seleucus, have
I merited so little at thy hands, that thou will have no respect to the love of
the young Man? Would you said Erasistratus be content to serve the love of
another in that manner. I would the gods said Seleucus, would turn his love
toward my dearest Stratonica. Well said Erasistratus, you are his Father, and
may be his Physician, Seleucus gave Stratonica to Antiochus, and sixty thousand
Crowns as a reward to the prudent Physician.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the liberal and bountiful disposition of diverse Great Persons.
THat is Tully's saying, Nihil habet Fortuna magna majus; quam ut possit, nec
Natura bona melius quam ut velit, been facere quam plurimis: A great Fortune
has nothing greater in it, then that is able; and a good nature, has nothing
better in it, then that it is willing to do good to many. In the Examples that
follow, the Reader may find a happy conspiracy; of great Fortunes, and good
natures; several Illustrious Persons, no less willing then they were able, to
do good, who dispersed their Bountyes, as liberally as the Sun does his Beams,
such was

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 8. p. 24. Cause. H.C. Tom. 1. l. 3. p. 92.
1. Gillias a Citizen of Agrigentum, who possessed (as I may say) the very
Bowels of Liberality it self; he was a Person of extraordinary wealth, but the
riches of his mind excelled the great plenty of his estate, and he was ever
more intent upon the laying out then the gathering of money; in so much that his
house was deservedly looked upon as the very Shop of munificence; there was it,
that Monuments for public uses were framed, delightful Shows presented to the
people, with magnificent Feasts prepared for their entertainment; the scarcity
of provision in dear years, were supplied from thence, and whereas these
charities extended to all in general, he relieved the poverty of particular
persons, gave dowryes to poor Virgins, entertained strangers, not only in his
City but also in his Country houses; and sent them away, with presents. At once
he received and clothed 500 Gelensian Knights, that by tempest were driven upon
his possessions. To make short, he seemed rather the Bosom of good Fortune,
then any Mortal; whatever Gillias possessed was as the common Patrimony, and
therefore not only the Citizens of his own City; but all persons in the
countries about him, did continually put up Prayers, and offer Vows for the
continuance of his life and health.

Full. hol. state. p. 297.
2. Frances Russel, second Earl of Bedford of that surname, was so bountiful to
the poor, that Queen Elizabeth would merrily complain of him, that he made all
the Beggars: and sure says mine Author, it is more honorable for Noble men to
make Beggars, by their liberality then by their oppression.

Plut. in. Publicola p. 107. Fulgos. l. 4. cap. 8. p. 545.
3. When Porsenna, King of Hetruria, had besieged Rome, there was a great
scarcity and dearth in the City, but having made peace with them, upon
reasonable terms, he commanded that of his whole Army, not a man should carry
any thing from his Tent, but only his arms; and so left his whole Camp, with
all sorts of provisions, and infinite riches, as a free gift to the Romans.

Full. worthies. p. 179. Middlesex
4. Sir Julius Caesar Knight was advanced Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, sworn privy Counceller 1607 and afterward Master of the Rolls: a
person of prodigious bounty to all of worth or want, so that he might seem to
be Almoner General to the Nation. The story is well known of a Gentleman who
once borrowing his Coach, (which was as well known to poor people, as any
Hospital in England,) was so rendezvouz'd about with Beggars, in London, that
it cost him all the money in his purse, to satisfy their importunity; so that
he might have hired twenty Coaches on the same terms.

Heyl. cosmog. p. 798.
5. Tigranes King of Armenia being sined by Pompey at six thousand Talents; not
only very readily laid down that sum, but added of his own accord, to every
Roman Soldier in Pompeys Army 50 Drachmes, of Silver, 1000 Drachmes to each
Captain, and to every Tribune or Colonel a talent.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 408.
6. Hiero King of Syracusa, had built a Ship of a mighty bulk, and adorned it
with great magnificence; upon which an Epigram was made by Archimelus a Poet,
it was witty and short, consisting but of eighteen Verses: but the King was so
delighted therewith that as a reward of his pains, he sent him from Sicily to
Athens 1000 measures of Wheat, causing it also to be laid down in the port of
the Pyreum at his own charge, a Princely bounty if consider, the furnishing
out of the Ships and Persons therein, together with their going and return.

7. Cymon the Athenian, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 544. Sabell. ex. l. 8 c. 2. p.
424. Plut. in Cimone. p. 484.
being ariv'd to mighty riches, by his wars against the Barbarians; caused all
the Walls and Fences about his lands to be beaten down and removed, that all
might freely carry away from thence, whatsoever they pleased: he releived at
his house with meat and drink, as many poor as came thither; when he went
abroad: he caused those of his retinue, to exchange their new and costly
garments for the torn and ragged ones of such as they met in poor habit,
provided they were otherwise worthy persons; and sometimes they gave Purses of
Money, to such as were in want, if they were known to be men of merit. This
procedure of his occasioned once Leontinus Gorgias to say of him, that Cymon
had provided himself of Riches that he might use them; and that the use he put
them to was to produce him honor and glory.

8. Antonius Caracalla, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. ^7. p. 411. Camer. oper. subcis.
cent. 1. c. 4. p. 49*
the Emperor though not very praise worthy in other parts of his life was yet
so delighted with those elegant Verses of Oppianus; which we yet see dedicated
to him, that he commanded, the Poet should be allowed out of his treasury a
Crown for every Verse, (that is two of ours says Lipsius) and if we go about
to number the Verses we shall find it a prodigious liberality.

9. Dioclesian the Emperor, assigned unto Eumenius the Rhetorician; who also
was the professor of his Art in the School at Augustodunum; no less then the
sum of fifteen thousand Phillippicks. Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 411.

10. Alexander the Great, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 538.
was perhaps in nothing greater then in his Princely liberality; when Perillus
besought his assistance, in making a Dowry for his Daughter, he ordered 50
Tallents to be given him; Perillus answered ten were sufficient, although said
he they may suffice him that is to receive; they are yet too sparing for him
that is to give. Another time he had commanded his Steward to give Anaxarcus
the Philosopher as much as he should desire; and when he demanded an hundred
Talents, the Steward not daring to part with such a sum, without acquainting
the King himself: his reply was that Anaxarchus knew he had such a friend, as
both could and would confer that and a far greater sum upon him. Beholding once
a Mulletter, taking upon his own Shoulders his Mules burden, that was laden
with Gold and not able to carry it any further; and perceiving him also to fail
under the weight of it; that said he, thy burden may seem less grievous to
thee: take to thine own Tent that Gold which thou carryest, which from this
hour, I will shall be thine own.

11. Ptolemeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 539. Zon.
Annal. tom. 1. f. ^4.
had taken care that the Jewish Law, by the permission of Eleazar the High
Priest, should be translated out of the Hebrew into the Gre^k Language; and
that the interpreters of it might have an agreeable reward for their pains; he
of his own accord, sent a mighty sum of Gold as a present to the Temple of
Jerusalem; and not only so, but having sought out all those that were of the
Jewish Nation, who were made Prisoners in the Wars of his predecessors; though
the number of them amounted, to an hundred thousand, yet he ransomed them from
their Lords at his own charge, and sent them away with their liberty, and that
without the injury of his own people, paying as the price of their ransom four
hundred and sixty Talents.

Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 548, 549.
12. Richard King of England at a Royal Feast of his, having observed two
Knights who were discoursing together, and intentively viewing some vessels of
Gold that stood on the Cupboard, he drew near to them, and demanded what they
conferred so earnestly about, we were saying, said one of them, that we should
both of us be sufficiently rich and contented, if we had only two of those
goblets that stand there in our possession: The King smiling told them they
should not depart unsatisfied upon that account, and that he gave the two
vessels they desired, but in regard the graving of them was such as it would be
some pity to have the work of an excellent Artist destroyed, he commanded they
should be weighed in his presence, and it being found that the value of them
amounted to twelve thousand Crowns, he ordered they should receive so much in
money in the lieu of the vessels themselves.

13. Pope Alexander the fifth, was so bountiful to persons of merit and virtue,
Fulgos. l. 4. c. 8. p. 554, 555.
and so very magnificent in works of public use, that he used to say amongst
his familiar friends, that he had been formerly a rich Bishop and a poor
Cardinal, but that now being advanced to the Papacy, he was almost reduced to
absolute Beggary.

14. Alphonsus the Elder, King of Sicily, used to wear upon his Fingers Rings
of extraordinary value, and that the Gems might receive no damage, as often as
he washed it was his manner to give them into the hands of such of his Servants
as chanced to be next him. He had once given them into the hands of one, who
supposing the King had forgot them, converted them to his own use: Alphonsus
dissembled the matter, instead of those put on other Rings, and kept on his
accustomed way. After some days the King being about to wash, he who had
received but not restored the former, put forth his hand to take from him his
Rings, as he had used to do: But Alphonsus putting his hand back, whispered him
in the Ear; I will give thee these Rings to keep, as soon as thou have returned
me those I did formerly entrust thee with; and further than this he proceeded
not with him.

15. Sarizanarus was the Author of that Hexastick which was made of the famous
City of Venice. H^wels Ep. vol. 1. 2. ep. 36. p. 59.
Viderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in undis,
Stare Vrbem et toti ponere Iura mari,
Nunc mihi Tarpeias quantumvis Jupiter Arces
Objice, and illa tui moenia Martis, ait,
Sic pelago Tibrim praefers, Vrbem aspice utramque,
Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse Deos.
The Poet had small reason to repent of his ingenuity, for as a reward of his
pains he had assigned him out of the public treasury of that state, an hundred
Zecchins for every one of those verses, which amounts to three hundred pounds
of our money.

Cambd. Remains. p. 21^. Spe^ds hist. p. 592.
16. When Henry of Lancaster, surnamed the Good Earl of Darby, had taken Bigerac
in Gascoign; Anno 1341. He gave and granted to every Soldier the house which
every one should seize first upon, with all therein. A certain Soldier of his
brake into a Mint Masters house, where he found so great a mass of money, that
he amazed therewith as a prey greater than his desert or desire, signified the
same unto the Earl, who with a liberal mind answered: It is not for my state to
play Boys play, to give and take; Take thou the money if it were thrice as much.

17. At the Battle of Poictiers James Lord Audley, Cambd. Remains. p. 209.
Graf^on. vol. 2. p. 299.
was brought to the black Prince in a Litter most grievously wounded, for he
had behaved himself with great valor that day: To whom the Prince with due
commendations gave for his good service four hundred Marks of yearly Revenues,
the which he returning to his Tent, gave as frankly to his four Esquires that
attended him in the Battle, whereof when the Prince was advertised, doubting
that his gift was contemned as too little for so great good service, the Lord
Audley satisfied him with this answer: I must do for them who deserved best of
me, these my Esquires saved my life amidst the enemies, and God be thanked I
have sufficient revenues left by my Ancestors to maintain me in your service.
Whereupon the Prince praising his prudence and liberality confirmed his gift
made to his Esquires, assigned him moreover six hundred marks of like Land here
in England.

18. King Canutus gave great Jewels to Winchester Church, Speeds hist. p. 402.
whereof one is reported to be a Cross. worth as much as the whole Revenue of
England amounted to in a year, and unto Coventry he gave the Arm of St.
Augustine, which he bought at Papia for an hundred Talents of Silver and one of
Gold.

19. Clodoveus Son of Dagobert King of France, Fabian. hist. p. 151.
in a great death caused the Church of St. Dennis which his Father had covered
with Plates of Silver, to be covered with lead, and the Silver given to the
relief of the Poor.

20. Isocrates the Son of Theodorus the Erecthian, Plut. moral. l. de dec^m
orator. p. 924.
kept a School, where he taught Rhetoric to an hundred Scholars, at the rate
of one hundred drachms of silver a piece: He was very rich and well he might,
for Nicocles King of Cyprus who was the Son of Evagoras, gave him at once the
sum of twenty Talents of Silver, for one only oration which he dedicated unto
him.

21. The Poet Virgil repeated unto Augustus Caesao, Camer. oper. subcis. cent.
1. c. 4. p. 49.
three Books of his Aeneads, the Second, Fourth and Sixth, the latter of these
chiefly upon the account of Octavia Sister to Augustus, and Mother of Marcellus
whom Augustus had adopted, but he died in the Eighteenth year of his Age.
Octavia therefore being present at this repetition, when Virgil came to these
Verses at the latter end of the sixth book, wherein he describes the mourning
for Marcellus in this manner; Heu miserando Puer, si qua fata asperarumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris --
Alas poor Youth, if Fates will suffer thee
To see the Light, thou shall Marcellus be.
Octavia swooned away: and when she was recovered, she commanded the Poet to
proceed no further, appointing him Ten Sesterces for every verse he had
repeated, which were in number twenty one. So that by the bounty of this
Princess, Virgil received for a few Verses, above the Sum of fifty thousand
Crowns.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Pious Works and Charitable Gifts of some men.
WHereas (says the Learned Willet) the professors of the Gospel are generally
charged by the Romanists as barren and fruitless of good works, I will, to stop
their mouths, show by a particular induction, that more charitable works have
been performed in the times of the Gospel, than they can show to have been done
in the like time in Popery, especially since the public opposition of that
Religion, which began about two hundred and fifty years since, (counting from
the times of John Wickli^fe) or in twice so much time now going immediately
before. To make good this he has drawn out a Golden Catalogue, of persons
piously and charitably devoted, together with their works; out of which I have
selected, as I thought, the chiefest and most remarkable to put under this
head, only craving leave to begin with one or two, beyond the compass of his
prescribed time, which I have met with elsewhere.

Bak. Chron. p. 236, 237.
1. In the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, the most deservedly famous for works
of Piety was William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, his first work was the
building of a Chapel at Tichfield, where his Father and Mother and Sister
Perrot were burled. Next he founded at Southwick in Hampshire near the Town of
Wickham, the place of his Birth, (as a supplement to the Priory of Southwick) a
Chauntry, with allowance of five Priests for ever: He bestowed twenty thousand
marks in repairing the houses belonging to the Bishopric, he discharged out of
prison in all places of his Diocese, all such poor prisoners as lay in
execution for debt under Twenty pounds, he amended all the high ways from
Winchester to London, on both sides the River: After all this, on the Fifth of
March, 1379. he began to lay the foundation of that magnificent structure in
Oxford called New College, and in person laid the first Stone thereof: In the
year 1387. on the twenty sixth of March, he likewise in person laid the first
stone of the like Foundation in Winchester, and dedicated the same as that
other in Oxford to the memory of the Virgin Mary.

2. In the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, Sir John Crosby Knight, Bak. Chron.
p. 311.
and late Lord Mayor of London, gave to the Repairs of the Parish Church of
Henworth in Middlesex, forty pound: To the repairs of St. Hellens in
Bishopsgate-street* where he was buried, five hundred Marks; to the repairing
of London Wall one hundred pounds, to the repairing of Rochester Bridge ten
Pounds, to the Wardens and Commonalty of the Grocers in London, two large Pots
of Silver, Chased, half gilded, and other Legacies.

Bak. Chron. p. 576.
3. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and in the year 1596. Ralph Rokeby one of
her Majesty's Masters of Requests then dying, gave by his Will to Christ's
Hospital in London one hundred pounds; to the College of the poor of Queen
Elizabeth one hundred Pounds, to the poor Scholars in Cambridge one hundred
pounds, to the poor Scholars in Oxford one hundred pounds, to the Prisoners in
the two Compters in London one hundred pounds, to the Prisoners in the Fle^t
one hundred pounds, to the Prisoners in Ludgate one hundred pounds, to the
Prisoners in Newgate one hundred pounds, to the Prisoners in the Kings Bench
one hundred pounds, to the Prisoners of the Marshalsea one hundred pounds, to
the Prisoners in the White Lion twenty pounds: A liberal and pious Legacy, and
not worthy to be forgotten.

4. Richard Sutton Esquire, Full. Chapter history. l. 10. cent. 17. p. 65, 66.
^^llets synops. papism. p. 1221. et p. 1231. Stows Ann. p. 1016, 1017.
born of Gentile Parentage, at Knaith in Lincolnshire, sole founder of
Charter House Hospital, which he called the Hospital of King James, for the
maintenance thereof he settled these manors in several Counties. Basham manor
in Cambridgshire, 2. Bastingthorp manner in Lincolnshire, 3. Blackgrove manor
in Wiltshire, 4. Broadhinton land in Wiltshire, 5. Castlecamps manor in
Cambridgshire, 6. Chilton manor in Wiltshire. 7. Dunby manor in Lincolnshire,
8. Elcomb manor and Park in Wiltshire, 9. Hackney land in Middlesex, 10.
Hallinburg Bouchiers manor in Essex, 11. Missunden manor in Wiltshire, 12.
Much Stanbridge manor in Essex, 13. Norton manor in Essex, 14. Salthrope
manor in Wiltshire, 15. Southminster manor in Essex, 16. Tottenham land in
Middlesex, 17. Vfford manor in Wiltshire, 18. Watalescote manor in Wiltshire,
19. Westcot manor in Wiltshire, 20. Wroughton munnor in Wiltshire. It was
founded, finished, and endowed by himself alone, disbursing thirteen thousand
pounds, paid down before the ensealing of the conveyance, for the ground
whereon it stood, with some other appurtenances besides six thousand expended
in the building thereof, and that vast yearly endowment whereof heretofore, not
to mention the large sums, bequeathed by him to the poor, to Prisons, to
Colleges, to mending high ways, to the Chamber of London, besides twenty
thousand pounds left to the discretion of his Executors. He dyed 1611. in the
ninth year of King James his Reign.

5. Anno Dom. 1552. Will^ts synops. papism. p. 1220.
King Edward the sixth, in the sixth year of his Reign, founded the Hospitals
of Christ-Church in London; and of St. Thomas in Southwark, and the next year
of Bridewel, for the maintenance of three sorts of poor, the first for the
education of poor children, the second for impotent and lame persons, the third
for idle persons to employ and set them on work. A Princely gift, whereby
provision was made for all sorts of poor people; such as were poor either by
birth or casualtie, or else wilfully poor. Besides by the said virtuous
Prince, were founded two Free Schools in Louth, in Lincolnshire, with liberal
maintenance for a Schoolmaster and Usher in them both. Likewise Christ's
College, in the University of Cambridge, enjoys a fellowship, and three
Scholars by the gift of the said excellent Prince.

6. Sir William Cecil not long since Lord Treasurer, Willet in synops. papism.
p. 1222.
in his life time gave thirty Pounds a year to St. John's College in Cambridge,
he founded also an Hospital at Stamford for twelve poor people, allowing to
each of them six pounds per Annum, he also left great sums of money in trust in
the hands of Mr. John Billet one of his Executors, who as carefully performed
that trust, and partly by this means and partly out of his own estate, has
done those excellent works: He repaired at the expense of diverse hundred
pounds, the great Church in the City of Bath, he enlarged the hot and cross
Bath there, walling them about, he built an Hospital there to entertain twelve
poor people for a month at the Spring, and three months at the fall of the
leaf, with allowance of four pence a day, he gave two hundred pounds to the
repairs of St. Martins Church, an hundred marks to St. Clements to build a
window, five pounds to each of the four Parishes in Westminster for twelve
years: Upon the building of the Market house there, he bestowed three hundred
pounds, whereof is made ten pounds a year for the benefit of the poor: He also
gave twenty pounds per Annum to Christ's Hospital till two hundred pounds came
out.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1222.
7. Robert Earl of Dorchester, Anno 1609. by his last Will and Testament,
ordained an Hospital to be built in East Greenstead in Sussex, allowing to the
building thereof a thousand pounds, (to the which the Executors have added a
thousand pounds more) and three hundred and thirty pound of yearly revenue, to
maintain twenty poor men and ten poor women, to each of them ten pounds by the
year and besides to a Warden twenty pounds, and to two Assistants out o^ the
Town to be chosen, three pounds six shillings eight pence a piece per Annum.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1223.
8. John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, at his own proper charge caused an
Hospital to be built at Croyden, for the maintenance of thirty poor people,
with a free School having a Master and an Usher, and laid unto it two hundred
pounds per Annum, besides the charge of the building, which is supposed to have
cost two thousand pounds more.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1226.
9. William Lamb Clothworker, gave to these charitable uses following, he built
the Conduit near Holborn with the Cock at Holborn-Bridge, bringing the water
more than two thousand yards in pipes of lead at the charge of fifteen hundred
pounds, he gave also to these uses following, to twelve poor people of St.
Faiths Parish weekly two pence a piece. To the company of Clothworkers four
pounds per Annum, for reading divine service in St. James Church, Sundays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and for four yearly Sermons, and for twelve poor men,
and twelve poor women, so many Gowns, Shirts, Smocks, Shoes, he gave Lands to
the yearly value of thirty pounds, to each of the Towns of Ludlow and
Bridgnorth one hundred pounds, to Christ's Hospital yearly six pounds, and to
purchase lands ten pounds; to St. Thomas Hospital yearly four pounds, to the
Savoy to buy bedding ten pounds. He erected a Free School at Sutton Valens in
Kent, with allowance to the Master of twenty pounds, to the Usher eight pounds.
He built six Almshouses there with the yearly maintenance of ten pound. He
gave also toward the Free School at Maidstone in Kent, to set the poor
Clothiers on work in Suffolk, he gave one hundred pounds.

Will^ts Synops. papism. p. 1226.
10. Sir Wolston Dixy Mayor, free of the Skinners, gave as follows: To the
maintenance of a Free School in Bosworth yearly twenty pound, to Christ's
Hospital in London yearly for ever fo^ty two pounds, for a Lecture in St.
Michael Bassings-Hall yearly ten pounds, to the poor of Newgate twenty pounds,
to the two Compters, to Ludgate and Bethlehem, to each of them ten pounds, to
the four prisons in Southwark, twenty pounds thirteen shillings four pence, to
the poor of Bassingshall ten pounds, to Emanuel College in Cambridge to buy
lands, to maintain two Follows and two Scholars six hundred pounds, to the
building of the College fifty pounds, to be lent unto poor Merchants ^ive
hundred pounds to the Hospitals of St. Bartholomew and St. Thomas each of them
^i^ty pounds, to the Poor of Bridewel twenty pounds, to poor Maids marriages
one hundred pounds, to poor Strangers of the Dutch and French Churches fifty
pounds, toward the building of the Pesthouse two hundrad pounds. The sum of
these gifts in money amounts to more than seventeen hundred pounds, and the
yearly Annuities to seventy two pounds.

11, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1224.
Sir John Gresham Mercer and Mayor of London, Anno 1548. in the Second year of
King Edward the sixth; gave ten pounds to the poor to every ward in London,
(which are twenty four within the City:) And to one hundred and twenty poor men
and women, to every one of them three yards of Cloth, for a Gown of eight or
nine shillings a yard, to Maids marriages and the Hospitals in London above two
hundred pounds: He also founded a Free School at Holt, a Market Town in Norfolk.

12. Mr. Thomas Ridge Grocer gave to charitable uses one thousand one hundred
sixty three pounds, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1228.
six shillings and eight pence, viz. To the company of Grocers, to be lent to
two young men free of the company an hundred pound, to his men and maid
servants sixty three pounds six shillings eight pence, unto the Hospitals about
London one hundred pounds, unto Preachers four hundred pounds, to poor
Tradesmen in and about London three hundred pounds, for a Lecture in
Grace-Church one hundred pounds, and in Gowns for poor men one hundred pounds.

13. Mr. Robert Offley Haberdasher, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1228.
gave six hundr^d pounds to the Mayor and Commonalty of Chester, to be lent to
young Tradesmen, and for the relief of poor and Prisons and other such
charitable uses two hundred pounds, he gave to the company of the Haberdashers,
to be lent to freemen gratis two hundred pounds more, to pay ten pound yearly
to the poor of the company two hundred pounds more, to give ten pounds per
annum to two Scholars in each University one, to Bethlehem one hundred pounds,
to other Hospitals, Prisons, and poor one hundred and sixty pounds more; in
toto, one thousand four hundred and sixty pounds.

14. The Lady Mary Ramsey, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1229.
who in the life time of Sir Thomas Ramsey joining with him, and after his
death assured in Land two hundred forty three pounds per annum, to Christ's
Hospital in London to these uses following, to the Schoolmaster of Hawstead
annually twenty pounds, to the Master and Usher in Christ's Church by the year
twenty pounds, to ten poor Widows besides apparel and houses, yearly twenty
pounds, to two poor a man and a woman during life to each ^ifty three shillings
four pence, to two fellows in Peter-house in Cambridge, and four Scholars
yearly forty pouuds, to St. Bartholomews Hospital ten pounds, to Newgate,
Ludgate, Compters, ten pounds, to Christ's Hospital after the expiration of
certain Leases, there will come per annum one hundred and twenty pound, to St.
Peter's, the poor in London, St. Andrews Vnder-shaft, St. Mary Woolnoth, ten
pounds, to six Scholars in Cambrid^e twenty pounds, to six Scholars in Oxford
twenty pounds, to ten maimed Soldiers twenty pounds, for two Sermons ^orty
shillings, to the poor of Christ's Church Parish ^i^ty shillings, to the poor of
the company of Drapers, yearly ten pounds, ten poor women's Gowns, ten poor
Soldiers Coats, Shoes and Caps: All these gifts aforesaid are to continue
yearly.

15. Mr. George Blundel Clothier of London, by his last Will and Testament,
Willets Synops. papism. p. 1229.
Anno 1599. bequeathed as follows. To Christ's Hospital five hundred pounds,
to St. Bartholomews two hundred and fifty pounds, to St. Thomas Hospital two
hundred and fifty pounds, to Bridewel yearly eight pounds, toward Tiverton
Church fifty pounds, to mend the high ways there one hundred pounds, to the
twelve chief Companies in London, to each one hundred and fifty pounds, toward
the releiving of poor prisoners and other charitable uses, in toto one thousand
eight hundred pounds: For poor Maids marriages in Tiverton four hundred pounds,
to the City of Exeter to be lent unto poor Artificers, nine hundred pounds;
toward the building of the free Grammar School in Tiverton two thousand four
hundred pounds, laid out since by his Executors, Sir William Craven and others,
one thousand pounds, to the Schoolmaster yearly fifty pounds, to the Usher
thirteen pounds six shillings eight pence, to the Clark ^orty shillings, for
reparations eight pounds, to place four boys Apprentices in Husbandry yearly
twenty pounds, to maintain six Scholars, three in Cambridge and three in
Oxford, the sum of two thousand pounds. The sum of all counting the yearly
pensions at a valuable rate, together with the legacies of money, makes twelve
thousand pounds or thereabouts.

16. Mr. Rogers of the company of Leather-sellers, Willets Synops. papism. p.
1230.
gave by his Will as follows, to the Prisons about London twelve pounds, to
the poor of two towns in the West Country thirteen pounds six shillings eight
pence, to the poor of the town of Pool where he was born ten pounds, to build
Almshouses there three hundred thirty three pounds, to relieve poor Prisoners
being neither Papists nor Atheists, that may be set free ^or twenty nobles a
man one hundred and fifty pounds, to poor Preachers ten pounds a man one
hundred pounds, to poor decayed Artificers that have Wife and Children one
hundred pounds, to the Company of Merchant Adventurers to relieve poor decayed
people, and for young Freemen four hundred pounds, to Christ's Hospital to
purchase Land for the relief of that house five hundred pounds, to erect
Almshouses about London, and to maintain twelve poor People threescore pounds,
to the Parish where he dwelt, ten pounds, and for two dozen of Bread every
Lords day to be distributed one hundred pounds, to Christs-Church Parish
fifteen pounds, to the Poor in diverse Parishes without Newgate, Cripplegate,
Bishopsgate, and St. Georges in Southwark, twenty six pounds thirteen shillings
four pence, to each alike. To St. Georges Parish in Southwark, St. Sepulchers,
St. Olav^s, St. Gile^, St. Leonards, to each thirty pounds, one hundred and
fifty pounds, to St. Botolphs without Aldgate and Bishopsgate to each twenty
pounds, forty pounds: Given to maintain two Scholars in Oxford, two in
Cambridge Students in Divinity, to the Company of Leather-sellers which is
carefully by them employed and augmented, four hundred pounds: The whole Sum
amounts to two thousand nine hundred and sixty pounds six shillings eight
pence.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1230.
17. Mr. George Palyn by his last Will and Testament, gave unto these charitable
use: To erect an Almshouse about London, and to allow unto six poor people
yearly, six pounds thirteen shillings four pence, he gave nine hundred pounds:
Given to the Chime at Bow Church, one hundred pounds: Given to St. John
Baptists and Brazen Nose College in Oxford to maintain four Scholars, to each
four pounds yearly, to each College three hundred pounds, in toto six hundred
pounds, given to the like use to Trinity and St. John's College in Cambridge,
to each three hundred pounds, in toto six hundred pounds: To six Prisons about
London sixty pounds, to Christ's Hospital to purchase twenty pounds per annum
three hundred pounds, to St. Thomas Hospital ^ifty pounds, to the Preachers at
Paul's Cross to bear their charges two hundred pounds, to diverse Parishes in
London, to some ten pounds, to some twenty pounds, one hundred thirty two
pounds: To the poor in Wrenbury in Cheshire to purchase twenty marks per annum,
two hundred pounds, to the use of the Church there thirty pounds, for forty
poor Gowns forty pounds, the sum is three thousand two hundred twelve pounds or
thereabouts,

18. Mr. Dove gave unto the company of the Merchant Tailors, Willets Synops.
papism. p. 1231.
the sum of two thousand nine hundred fifty eight pounds ten shillings, to pay
one hundred seventy nine pounds to these uses following: To maintain thirteen
poor Alms-men, and six in reversion per annum one hundred and seven pounds, to
a Schoolmaster eight pounds, to the Poor of St. Botolphs twenty pounds nine
shillings, to the Prisoners in both Compters, Ludgate and Newgate twenty
pounds, given to St. John's College in Cambridge one hundred pounds, to
Christ's Hospital to purchase sixteen pounds per annum, for one to teach the
boys to sing, two hundred and forty pounds, to toll a Bell at St. Sepulchers
when the Prisoners go to execution, fifty pounds.

19. Sir William Craven Alderman of London, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1231.
has given a thousand pound to Christ's Hospital in London, to purchase Land
for the maintenance of that house: He has also been a worthy Benefactor to St.
John's College in Oxford. He has built at Burnsall in Yorkshire a Church,
compassing it with a Wall at the charge of six hundred pounds. He has erected
a School with the allowance of twenty pounds per annum. He has built one
Bridge that cost him five hundred pounds, another two hundred and fifty pounds,
a third two hundred marks, a fourth twenty pounds; and caused a Causway to be
made, at two hundred pound charge, and all this in his lifetime.

20. Mr. Jones a Merchant abiding at Stood, Willets Synops. papism. p. 1230.
of the Company of the Haberdashers, has sent of late six thousand pounds to
the Company to be bestowed in Monmouth in Wales, where he was born in
charitable Works, and that Worshipful Company has already purchased two
hundred pounds* per annum, and more, allowing one hundred and fifty pounds per
annum, to an Hospital for twenty poor People, and an hundred marks to a painful
Preacher, to preach twice on the Lord's Day.

21. Mr. Robert Johnson Archdeacon of Leicester, Willets Synops. papism. p.
1232.
Pastor of North Luffenham in the County of Rutland, has been a worthy
Instrument in this kind, who at his own charge has caused two free Schools to
be built in two Market Towns in that County; the one at Okeham, the other at
Vppingham, with allowance of each twenty four pounds to the Master, and twelve
pounds to the Usher yearly. He has also built two Hospitals, called by the
Name of Christ's Hospital in the aforesaid Towns, with provision for each of
them, for twenty four poor people, he purchased Lands of Queen Elizabeth, which
he has laid to those Hospitals, and procured a Mortmain of four hundred marks
per annum. Likewise he redeemed a third Hospital, which had been erected by one
William Darby, and was dissolved, being found to be concealed Land. Besides he
has given the perpetual Patronage of North Luffenham to Emanuel College in
Cambridge, that the Town may always be provided of a sufficient Preacher. He
has also made good provision in both Universities, for Scholars that shall be
brought up in the said Schools. He has given also twenty marks per annum,
toward the maintenance of Preachers that are called to Paul's C^oss. He has
also been very beneficial to the town of Luffenham, Stamford, and other places
in Rutland, in providing for the education, of their poor Children, and placing
them Apprentices.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1239.
22. Mr. John Heydon Alderman of London, a Mercer, has given to a hundred Poor,
so many Gowns, a hundred pound, and twelve pence a piece in Money. To the
Company of Mercers six hundred pounds, to be lent to young Men, at three pound
six shillings eight pence the hundred, which makes twenty pound to be given
yearly to the Poor. Likewise four hundred pound more he gave to the same
company, to be lent out at the same rate, and the yearly annuity of thirteen
pounds six shillings eight pence arising thereof to go to the maintaining of
the Lecture in St. Michael's Pater Noster; to Christ's Church Hospital five
hundred pound; To the eleven Companies besides, eleven hundred pound to be lent
out to young Men, at three pound six shillings eight pence the hundred, and out
of the annuity arising thereof twenty pound per annum, to go to the Hospitals,
and sixteen pound to the Poor. To Exeter two hundred pound. To Bristol one
hundred pound. To Gloucester one hundred pound, to be lent to young Tradesmen at
three pounds, six shillings eight pence the hundred, to the use of poor
Prisoners, and poor people. To the Town of Wardbery, six pound thirteen
shillings and four pence. To the Company of Mercers for a Cup, forty pound. To
his Servants two hundred and forty pound. Out of the rest of his Moiety, he
gave to the aforesad Companies fifty pound to each, to the uses aforesaid.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1240.
23. Mrs. Owen, Widow of Justice Owen, founded an Hospital and Free School at
Islington, gave to the University Library at Oxford two hundred pound. To St.
John's College Library in Cambridge twenty pound, Founded one Fellowship and
Scholarship in Emanuel College. To Christ's Hospital sixty pounds, to give
twelve pence weekly to the Poor in Islington; sixty six pound thirteen
shillings four pence to beautify the Cloister in Christ's Hospital. To a
School-house at Edmonton twenty pound. To the Parish of Condover in Shropshire,
fifty pound for a great Bell. The building of Almshouses for ten poor Women at
Islington, and the purchase of the Lands laid to it, cost her 1415 pound, and
the building of the School-house there, three hundred sixty one pound, she gave
also yearly sums of Money to Preachers not Bene^iced, and to the Prisons in her
lifetime. By her last Will, twenty two pound per annum, for Islington School.
To Preachers thirty five pound. To the Parish of Bassingshaw twenty pound. To
the Prisons eight pound. To the Company of Brewers, in Linen, Plate, and
Money, a hundred pound. The sum of these Moneys, besides the annuity of twenty
two pound will amount to two thousand three hundred twenty pound, or
thereabout. All this she did, though at her death she had twenty two Children,
and Childrens Children; amongst their parts finding a portion for Christ's poor
Members.

Willets Synops. papism. p. 1228.
24. To all this as a most exemplary Charity, may be added that Act of
Parliament, held Anno 39. of the Queen, Chapter the third, for the relief of
the Poor in every Parish, and setting of them to work, by virtue of which Act,
there cannot be less gathered yearly, for the aforesaid charitable uses,
throughout the Land then thirty or forty thousand pounds yearly, a National,
and perpetual Charity, the like whereof perhaps, there is no Nation under
Heaven, that has yet, and possibly may not hereafter perform.

CHAP. XXIX. Of such as were Lovers of Justice, and Impartial Administrators of
it.
THose people in India that are called Pedalii, when they make their solemn
sacrifices to their gods, use to crave nothing at their hands but that they may
have Justice continued and preserved amongst them, as supposing in the
enjoyment of that, they should have little reason to complain, of the want of
any other thing. And it was the saying of Maximilian the Emperor, fiat
Iustitia and ruat coelum; let us have Justice whatsoever befalls us. The
Persons hereafter mentioned, were great Lovers and observers of this excellent
virtue, which is of so great advantage to Mankind.

1. The Chronicle of Alexandria relates an admirable passage of Theodorick
King of the Romans. Cause. H.C. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 90.
Iuvenalis a Widow, made her complaint, that a suit of hers in Court, was drawn
out for the space of three years, which might have been dispatched in few days.
The King demanded who were her Judges, she named them, they were sent unto and
commanded to give all the speedy expedition that was possible to this Woman's
cause, which they did, and in two days determined it to her good liking. Which
done Theodorick called them again, they supposing it had been to applaud their
excellent Justice, now done, hastened thither full of joy. Being come the King
asked of them, how comes it to pass, you have performed that in two days,
which had not been done in three years? They answered, The recommendation of
your Majesty made us finish it. How? replieth the King, when I put you into
Office, did I not consign all Pleas, and proceedings to you, and particularly
those of widows? you deserve death, so to have spun out a business in length,
three years space, which required but two days dispatch; and at that instant
commanded their heads to be struck off.

2. The Emperor Trajan had done many brave and eminent Acts, Cause. H.C. tom. 1.
l. 3. p. 90.
but none of his Atcheivements were so resplendent, as the Justice he readily
afforded to a virtuous Widow. Her son had been slain, and she not being able to
obtain justice, had the courage to accost the Emperor in the midst of the City
of Rome, amongst an infinite number of people, and flourishing legions, which
followed him to the Wars, he was then going to make War in Valachia. At her
request Trajan, notwithstanding he was much pressed with the affairs of a most
urgent War, alighted from his horse, heard her, comforted her, and did her
Justice. This Act of his was afterward represented on Trajan's pillars as one
of his greatest wonders.

3. When Sisamnes one of the chiefest of the Persian Judges, Herod. l. 5. p.
298. Val. Max. l. 6. c. 3. p. 169. Raleigh l. 3. c. 4.. 3. p. 37.
had given an unjust judgment, Cambyses the King, caused him to be ^^ey'd
alive, and his skin to be hung over the Judgment-feat, and having bestowed the
Office of the dead Father, upon Otanes the Son; he willed him to remember that
the same partiality, and injustice would deserve the same punishment.

4. It is reported of the Emperor Maximilian the first, Camer. oper. subcis.
cent. 1. c. 76. p. 348.
that when he passed by the places of Execution; belonging to Cities and
Signiories, where the bodies of Male^actors are hung up, as Spectacles of
terror; he would vail his Bonnet, and say aloud Salve Iustitia, as who should
say God maintain Justice.

^^k. Chron. p. 464.
5. In the fourth year of Queen Mary, exemplary Justice was done upon a great
Person. For the Lord Sturton (a man much in favor with the Queen as being an
earnest Papist) was for a murder committed by him, arraigned and condemned,
carried to Salisbury and there in the Marketplace was hanged, having this only
favor to be hanged in a Silken halter. Four of his servants were also executed
in places near adjoining to that where the murder was committed.

6. In the Reign of King James, Ann. 1612. June 25. the Lord Sanquer a Nobleman
of Scotland, Bak. Chron. p. 599.
having in a private revenge suborned Robert Carlisle to murder John Turner a
Master of Fence, thought by his greatness to have born it out. But the King
respecting nothing so much as Justice, would not suffer Nobility to be a
shelter for villainy, but according to the Law, the 29th of June, the said Lord
Sanquer having been arraigned and condemned by the name of John Creighton, Esquire
was executed before Westminster-hall-gate, where he died very penitent.

Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 7. p. 239.240. Fulgos. l. 6. c. 5. p. 769.
7. Artaxerxes Longimanus King of Persia, had of his Bedchamber one
Satybarsanes whom he much favored: this man earnestly importuned the King, in
an affair, which the King himself knew to be unjust: and having understood that
Satybarsanes was to receive 30000 Daricks to bring the business to a desirable
conclusion, he caused his Treasurer openly to pay that sum to him as his gift,
adding withal, that by the gift of that sum he should be never the poorer, but
should he grant what he desired he should deservedly be accounted the less just.

Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 100. p. 472. Bod. Meth. hist. c. 6.
8. Henry the second commanded that an Italian Lackey should he laid in Prison,
without telling why. The Judges set him at liberty: having first delivered
their opinion to the King: who again commanded that he should be put to death:
having as he said taken him tardy in a foul and heinous offense, which he would
not have to be divulged: the Judges, for all that would not condemn him, but
set open the prison doors to let him forth: It is true that the King caused him
to be taken afterward, and thrown into the River Seine, without any form of
Law to avoid tumult, but the Judges would not condemn a Person, where no proof
was made, that he was guilty.

Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. cap. 100. p. 472. Bod. Meth. hist. c. 6.
9. King Lewis the Eleventh, minding to Cajole the Court Parliament of Paris, if
it should refuse, to publish certain new Ordinances by him made; The Masters of
that Court understanding the drif^, went all to the King in their Robes. The
King asked them what they would. Sir Answers the President La Vaquery; We are
come with a full purpose to loose our lives every one of us; rather than we
will suffer, that by our connivance any unjust Ordinance should take place; The
King amazed at this answer of La Vaquery, and at the constancy of the
Parliament: gave them gracious entertainment, and Commanded that the Edicts
which he would have had published, should be cancelled in his presence,
swearing that from thence forward he would never make Edict that should not be
just and Equitable.

Zuing. Then. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 216.
10 Spitigneus the second, Prince of Bohemia, riding on the way, there met him a
Widow imploring his Justice; the Prince Commands her to expect his return: she
alleges that this delay would prove dangerous to her, for that she was to make
her appearance, the very next hour, or else to forfeit her Bond. The Prince
refers the Woman to others, that were his Ordinary Judges but she cried out,
that he himself and not others was the Judge whom God had appointed her, upon
which he alighted from his horse, and with great patience, attended the hearing
of the poor Woman's cause, for the space of two hours together.

11. Mahomet the second of that name Emperor of the Turks, Lips. Monit. l. 2.
c. 9. p. 245, 246. K^owl. Tur. hist. p. 411.
had a Son called Mustapha, whom he had designed to succeed him in the Empire:
otherwise a good Prince, but prone to lust: The Young Prince was fallen in love
with Achmet Bassa his Wife, a Woman of Excellent Beauty: He had long endeavored
to prevail with her by all sorts of allurements, but this way not succeeding,
he would try by surprise. He had gained knowledge of the time when the Woman
went to Bath her self (as the Turks often do;) he soon followed her with a few
of his retinue, and their seized her naked as she was, and in despite of all
the resistance she could make, had his will upon her. She tells her husband, he
the Emperor, and desires his Justice. The Emperor at first seemed to take small
notice of it, and soon after (though he had different sentiments within) he
rated the Bassa with sharp Language. What says he do thou think it meet to
complain thus grievously of my Son? know thou not that both thy self and
that wife of thine are my slaves; and accordingly at my dispose? If therefore
my Son, has embraced her and followed the inclinations of his mind; he has
embraced but a slave of mine, and having my approbation, he has committed no
fault at all, think of this and go thy way, and leave the rest to my self. This
he said in defense of his absolute Empire, but ill satisfied in his mind, and
vexed at the thing, he first sends for his Son, examines him touching the fact,
and he having confessed it, he dismissed him with outrageous Language and
threats, three days after when Paternal Love to his Son, and Justice had
striven in his breast, Love to Justice, having gained the superiority, and
victory: he commanded his Mutes to strangle his Son Mustapha with a Bow-string,
that by his death he might make amends to injured and violated Chastity.

12. Herkenbald a man Mighty, Carnerar. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 100. p. 468.
Noble, and Famous, had no respect of Persons in Judgment but condemned and
punished with as great severity the Rich, and his own kindred, as the Poor and
those whom he knew least in the world. Being once very sick, and keeping his
bed, he heard a great bustle in a Chamber next to that wherein he lay: and
withal a Woman crying and shricking out. He enquired of his servants what the
matter was: but they all concealed the truth from him: at last one of his Pages
being severely threatened by him, and told that he would cause one to pull out
his eyes from his head if he did not tell him plainly what all that stir was:
told him in few words. My Lord said he, Your Nephew has ravished a Maid, and
that was the noise you heard. The fact being examined and thoroughly averred.
Herkenbald condemned his dear Nephew to be hanged, till he should be dead. But
the Seneshall who had the charge to execute the sentence, seeming as if he had
been very hot and forward to do it, went presently and gave the young man
notice of all that passed, wishing him to keep out of the way for a while; and
some few hours after comes agrin to the sick person, assuring him against all
truth, that he had put his Sentence in execution. About five days after the
young Gentleman, thinking his Uncle had forgotten all, came and peeped in at
his Chamber door. The Uncle having spyed him, calls him by his name, and with
fair words tols him to his bed's head, till he was within his reach; and then
suddenly catching him by the locks with the le^t hand, and pulling him
forcibly to him, with his right hand he gave him such a ready blow into the
throat with a knife, that he dyed instantly. So great was the Zeal which this
Noble Man bare to Justice.

Lon. T^eatr. p. 475.
13. The Emperor Otho the first, being upon a Military Expedition, a woman threw
her self at his feet, beseeching a just Revenge according to the Laws, upon a
person who had committed a Rape upon her. The Emperor being in haste, re^erred
the hearing of her Cause till his Return. But who then, replied the woman,
shall recall into your Majesty's mind the horrid injury that has been done to
me? The Emperor looking up to a Church there by, This, said he, shall be a
witness betwixt thee and me, that I will do thee justice; and so dismissing
her, he with his Retinue set forward. At his Return, seeing the Church, he
called to mind the complaint, and caused the woman to be summoned; who at her
appearance thus bespake him; Dre^d Sovereign, the man of whom I heretofore
complained is now my Husband, I have since had a child by him, and have
forgiven him the injury. Not so, said the Emperor, by the beard of Otho he
shall suffer for it, for a collusion amongst your selves does not make void the
Laws. And so caused his head to be struck off.

Lon. Theatr. p. 475.
14. In the Reign of Constantius, Acindinus the Prefect of Antioc^, had a
certain person under custody, for a pound of Gold to be paid into the
Exchequer; threatening him, that in case he paid it not at a certain day, he
should die the death. The man knew not where to have it, and now the fatal day
drew near. He had a beautiful Wife, to whom a rich man in the City sent word,
that for a nights lodging he would pay in the Gold. She acquaints her Husband,
who for the safety of his life, readily gave leave; she renders her self up to
the rich man, who at her departure, gave her only a pound of Earth tied up in a
bag instead of the promised Gold. She enraged at her injury, together with this
super-added fraud, complains to the Prefect, and declares to him the truth of
the whole; who finding that his threats of her Husband had brought her to these
extremities, pronounced Sentence on this manner; The pound of Gold shall be
paid out of the Goods of Acindinus, the Prisoner shall be free, and the woman
shall be put into possession of that Land from whence she received Earth
instead of Gold.

R^leigos Hist. World. lib. 5. cap. 3.. 19. p. 471
15. Chabot was Admiral to King Francis the first, a man most nobly descended,
and of great Service, and in high favor with his Prince; but as in other men,
the passion of Love grows cold, and wears out by time; so the King's affection
being changed toward the Admiral, had charged him with some offenses which he
had formerly committed. The Admiral presuming upon the great good Services he
had done the King in Pie^ont, and in the defense of Marseilles against the
Emperor, gave the King other language than became him, and desired nothing so
much as a public Trial. Hereupon the King gave Commission to the Chancellor
Poyet, as President, and other Judges (upon an information of the King's
Advocate) to question the Admiral's life. The Chancellor (an ambitious man, and
of a large Conscience) hoping to content the King, wrought with some of the
Judges with so great cunning, others with so sharp threats, and the rest with
so fair promises, that though nothing could be proved against the Admiral
worthy of the King's displeasure, yet the Chancellor subscribed, and got others
to subscribe to the forfeiture of his Estate, Offices, and Liberty, though not
able to prevail against his life. But the King hating falsehood in so great a
Magistrate, and though to any that should bewail the Admiral's calamity, it
might have been answered, that he was tried according to his own desire, by the
Laws of his Country, and by the Judges of Parliament; yet, I say, the King made
his Justice surmount all his other Passions, and gave back the Admiral his
Honor, his Offices, his Estate, his Liberty; and caused the wicked Poyet his
Chancellor, to be indicted, arraigned, degraded and condemned.

16. Totilus King of the Goths, Lips. Monit. lib. 2. c. 9. p. 250, 251.
was complained to by a Calabrian, that one of his Lifeguard had ravished his
Daughter; upon which the Accused was immediately sent to Prison, the King
resolving to punish him as his fact deserved, but the Soldiers trooped about
him, desiring that their fellow Soldier, a man of known valor, might be given
back to them. Totilus sharply reproved them; what would ye, said he, know ye
not that without Justice, neither any Civil or Military Government is able to
subsist? can ye not remember what slaughters and calamities the Nation of the
Goths underwent through the injustice of Theodahadas? I am now your King; and
in the maintenance of that, we have regained our ancient Fortune and Glory:
would you now lose all for the sake of one single Villain? See you to your
selves, Soldiers; but for my part, I proclaim it aloud, careless of the event,
that I will not suffer it; and if you are resolved you will, then strike at me:
behold a body and breast ready for the stroke. The Soldiers were moved with
this speech, deserted their Client. The King sent for the man from Prison,
condemned him to death, and gave his Estate to the injured and violated person.

17. The Emperor Leo Arm^nus going out of his Palace, Lips. Monit. lib. 2. cap.
1. page 250.
was informed by a mean person, that a Senator had ravished his Wife, and that
he had complained of his injury to the Perfect, but as yet could have no
redress. The Emperor commanded that both the Prefect and Senator should be sent
for, and wait his return in his Palace, together with their Accuser; being come
back, he examined the matter, and finding it true as the man had represented,
he displaced the Prefect from his Dignity for his negligence, and punished the
crime of the Senator with death.

18. Charles the bold Duke of Burgundy, Lips. Monit. iib. 2. cap. 9. p. 240,
241.
and Earl of Flaunders, had a Noble Man in special favor with him, to whom he
had committed the Government of a Town in Zealand; where living in a great deal
of case, he fell in love with a woman of a beautiful body, and a mind and
manners no whit inferior: He passed and repassed by her door; soon after grew
bolder, entered into conference with her, discovers his flame, and beseeches a
compassionate resentment of it; he makes large promises, and uses all the ways
by which he hoped to gain her; but all in vain. Her chastity was proof against
all the batteries he could make against it. Falling therefore into despair, he
converts himself unto Villainy. He was, as I said, a Governor, and Duke Charles
was busied in War; he causes therefore the Husband of his Mistress to be
accused of Treachery, and forthwith commits him to Prison, to the end that by
fear or threats he might draw her to his pleasure, or at least, quit himself of
her Husband, the only Rival with him in his Loves. The woman, as one that loves
her Husband, goes to the Goal, and thence to the Governor to entreat for him;
and if she was able, to obtain his liberty. Do thou come, O my Dear, to
entreat me, said the Governor? You are certainly ignorant of the Empire you
have over me: Render me only a mutual affection, and I am ready to restore you
your Husband; for we are both under a restraint, he is in my Prison, and I am
in yours. Ah how easily may you give l^berty to us both! w^y do you refuse? As
a Lover I beseech you, and as you tender my life, as the Governor I ask you,
and as you tender the life of your Husband; both are at stake, and if I must
perish I will not fall alone. The woman blushed at what she heard; and withal,
being in fear for her Husband, trembled and turned pale. He perceiving she was
moved, and supposing that some force should be used to her modesty, (they were
alone) throws her upon the bed, and enjoys the fruit which will shortly prove
bitter to them both. The woman departed confounded, and all in tears, thinking
of nothing more than revenge; which was also the more inflamed by a barbarous
a^t of the Governor; for he having obtained his desire, and hoping hereafter
freely to enjoy her, took care that her Husband and his Rival should be
beheaded in the Goal, and there was the body put into a Coffin ready for
Burial: This done, he sent for her; and in an affable manner What, said he, do
you seek for your Husband? you shall have him, and (pointing to the Prison) you
shall find him there, take him along with you. The woman suspecting nothing,
went her way; when there she sees, and is astonished, she falls upon the dead
Corpse; and having long lamented over it, she returns to the Governor with a
fierce countenance and tone: It is true (said she) you have restored me my
Husband, I owe you thanks for the favor, and will pay you. He endeavors to
retain and appease her, yet in vain; but hasting home, she calls about her her
most faithful friends, recounts to them all that had passed. All agree that she
should make her case known to the Duke; who amongst other his excellent
Virtues, was a singular Lover of Justice. To him she went, was heard, but
scarce believed. The Duke is angry and grieved that any of his, and in his
Dominions, should presume so far: He commands her to withdraw into the next
Room till he sent for the Governor, who by chance was then at Court; being
come, do you know, said the Duke, this woman? the man changed color; do you
know too, added he, the complaints she makes of you? they are sad ones, and
such as I would not they should be true: he shakes, faulters in his speech,
says and unsays; being urged home, he confesses all, frees the woman from any
fault; and casting himself at the Dukes feet, said, he placed all his refuge
and comfort in the good grace and mercy of his Prince; and that he might the
better obtain it, he offered to make amends for his unlawful lust, by a lawful
Marriage of the person whom he had injured. The Duke, as one that inclined to
what he said, and now somewhat milder; you woman, said he, since it is gone
thus far, are you willing to have this man for your Husband: she refuses; but
fearing the Duke's displeasure, and prompted by the Courtiers that he was
Noble, Rich and in favor with his Prince, overcome at last, she yields. The
Duke causes both to join hands, and the Marriage to be lawfully made; which
done, You, Mr. Bridegroom, said he, you must now grant me this, that if you die
first without Children of your body, that then this Wife of yours shall be the
Heir of all that you have; he willingly granted it; it is writ down by a
Notary, and Witness is to it. Thus done, the Duke turning to the woman; Tell
me, said he, is there enou^h done for your satisfaction? There is, said she;
But there is no^ to mine, said he: And sending the woman away, he commands the
Governor to be led away to that very Prison in which the Husband was slain; and
dead, to be laid in a Coffin headless, as he was. This done, he then sent the
woman thither (ignorant of what had passed;) who frighted with that second
unthought of misfortune of two Husbands almost at one and the same time, lost
by one and the same punishment, fell speedily sick, and in a short time died;
having gained this only by her last Marriage, that she left her Children by her
former Husband very rich by the acces^ion of this new and great Inheritance.

19. Sir John Markham was Knighted by King Edward the fourth, Full. Holy State,
l. 4. c. 8. p. 263, 264.
and by him made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench; at which time one Sir
Thomus Cook, late Lord Major of London, and Knight of the Bath, a man of a
great Estate, was agreed upon to be accused of high Treason, and a Commission
granted forth to try him in Guild Hall. The King, by private instructions to
the Judge, appeared so far, that Cook, though he was not, must be found
guilty; and if the Law were too short, the Judge must stretch it to the
purpose. The fault laid to his charge was for lending Moneys to Queen Murgaret;
the proof was the Confession of one Hawkins, who was wracked in the Tower. Sir
Thomas Cook pleaded that Hawkins came indeed to request him to lend a thousand
Marks upon good Security, but that understanding who it was for, he had sent
him away with a refusal: the Judge showed the proof reached not the charge of
high Treason, that Misprision of Treason was the highest it could amount to;
and intimated to the Jury, to be tender in matter of life, and discharge good
Consciences; they found it accordingly: For which the Judge was outed of his
place, and lived privately the rest of his days; and gloried in this, that
though the King could make him no Judge, he could not make him no upright Judge.

CHAP. XXX. Of such persons as were illustrious for their singular Chastity,
both Men and Women.
THere is no Vice whatsoever that is very easy to overcome; but that of the
Lusts of the Flesh seems to have a peculiar difficulty in the Conquest of it;
for whereas Covetousness has its seat in the mind alone, this seises upon the
mind and body also; whereas other Vices use to grow upon us only through our
loosing the Reins unto desire, this is ingenerate, born with us, and
accompanies us all along from our Cradles to the Tomb, (for the most part)
having fixed its roots so deep within us, through long indulgence that not one
of many is able to prevail against it: By how much the more strong therefore
the enemy is, and the more intimate and familiar he is with us, the more noble
is the Victory and the Conquest more glorious.

Hieron. invit. Pauli Eremit. Falgos. l. 4. c. 3. p. 489. Lon. Theatr. p. 451.
Clarks mirr. c. 20. p. 69. Sabell. Exempl. l. 5. c. 6. p. 285. Burtons melanch.
part. 3.. 2. p. 451, 452.
1. St. Jerome Relates a Story of one Nicetas a young man of invincible Courage,
who when (by all sor^s of threatenings) he was not to be frighted into idolatry;
his enemies resolved upon another course: They brought him into a Garden
^lowing with all manner of sensual pleasures and delights, there they laid him
in a bed of Down, safely enwrapped in a Net of Silk, amongst the Lilies and
Roses, with the delicious murmur of the Rivulets, and the sweet whistling of
the winds amongst the Leaves, and then all departed. There was then immediately
sent unto him a young and most beautiful Strumpet, who used all the abominable
tricks of her impure art, and whorish villainies to draw him to her desire. The
youth now fearing that he should be conquered with folly, who had ^riumphed
over fury, resolutely bit off a piece of his own tongue with his teeth,
spitting it in the face of the whore, and so by the smart of his wound
extinguished the rebellion of his flesh.

Plut. in Dem^tr. p. 899. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 377.
2. While King Demetrius was at Athens, there was a young boy of so lovely a
Countenance, that he was commonly called Democles the fair, him did Demetrius
send for and court with fair speeches, large promises and great gifts, at other
times he sought to terrify him by threats, and all tha^ he might gain the use
of his body: But the chaste Lad was proof against all these, and to avoid the
importunity of the King, he resorted not to the public places of exercise, or
to the Baths with his companions as before, but used to wash himself in private
and alone. Demetrius was informed of it, and finding his time rushed in upon
him being alone, the boy perceiving he could not now avoid the lust of this
Royal Ravisher, (though he had infinite horrors at the apprehension of it) he
snatched off the cover of the Cauldron where the water was boiling, and leaping
into it soon choked himself, choosing rather to dye than to outlive the
violation of his Chastity.

Polyd. Virg. l. 1. c. 30. Bak. Chron. p. 60. Lon. Theatr. p. 455.
3. Thomas Archbishop of York in the Reign of Henry the first, falling sick,
his Physicians told him that nothing would do him good but to company with a
woman, to whom he replied, that the reamedy was worse than the disease, and so
dyed a Virgin.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 378.
4. Anno ^421. Pelagius was in Spain, and after the terrible slaughter received
in the Battle of Iuncaria under King Ordonius, he was given as hostage to the
Moors, for his Uncle Hermogius the Bishop Abderamine King of the Moors was
surprised and strangely taken with the beauty of this Prisoner of his (for he
was a lovely youth to look upon) and therefore determined to reserve this
flower for himself, accordingly he began to play with him, and lasciviously to
touch and solicit him. The noble youth rejected him and that frequently, the
Lover at last determined to obtain by force what he could not compass by
flatteries, which the other perceiving moved with a generous anger, he gave the
King a blow upon the Face with his Fist, And Dog, said he, take my life foom
me, but my chastity thou shall never extort from me. The Barbarian was so
incensed with this indignity, that he caused him to be put into a military
sling, and by that to be thrown forcibly over the River Boetis, and dashed upon
those Rocks that were on the other side.

5. Spurina was a young man of Hetruria, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 377. Val.
Max. l. 4. c. 5. p. 113.
of admirable beauty, so that he drew the eyes of all the women and virgins
that beheld him, and not only so but of the men also; the former sighed, and
either openly or in private wished the enjoyment of him, the men were touched
with jealousy each living in suspicion of his Wife; by reason of this so
powerful a temptation: Spurina (the best of young men) perceiving how matters
went, that he might at once free both himself and others from fear or trouble,
did so deform with bruises and scars that most lovely face of his, that
afterward he lived rather the mockery than the temptation of others.

6. Baldwine Earl of Flanders, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 374.
afterward made Emperor of Constanoinople; being about thirty two years of
age, was yet in that flourish and heat of youth, of such singular chastity, and
all the time of his absence from his Wife, did so contain himself that he never
cast a lustful glance, or looked upon any woman with unchaste eyes. Nicetas who
was otherwise his enemy, has wrote down thus much of him in his history, and
withal adds that he did exact the like chastity in all others, and therefore
twice a week about evening ho caused it to be proclaimed, that no man
whatsoever that had had to do with a strange woman, should presume to lie down
within the compass of his Palace.

7. Zenocrates the Son of Agathenor born in Chalcedon, Laert. vit. Phil. l. 4.
p. 97. M. Hurault c. 12. p. 320. Lon. Theatr.
the Scholar of Plato and a great Philosopher, was of a tried and approved
chastity, it is said that the beautiful Strumpet Phryne, intended one time to
make experiment of his continency, and pretending she was pursued by some
persons of ill intentions toward her, desired to be received into his house:
She was, and seeing there was but one bed, she desired to lie with him which he
also granted, there she made trial of her arts to subdue the virtue of this
excellent person, but she departed withont having obtained her desires, and
gave out that she had lain by the side of some statue and not a man. His
Scholars also laid the famous Harlot Lais in his bed, upon a wager she was not
able to subvert his constancy, which was also lost on her part, though such was
her beauty that the flower of Greece doted upon, and pur^hased the enjoyments
of at excessive rates.

8. Xenophon writes of Cyrus, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 369.
that when Panthea a most beautiful Lady was taken Captive by him, and was now
about to be b^ought into his presence, he expressly forbad it, lest he should
violate his own and her chastity; though but with his eyes: When Araspes one of
his familiar friends persuaded him to go to her Tent and confer with her,
alleging that she was of incomparable excellency; and a Lady worthy of a Kings
eye: Upon that account (replied he) there is the greater reason I should
forbear, for should I now make her a visit while I am at leisure, she may
peradventure so order the matter, as to occasion my return to her when I have
business enough.

9. King Antiochus the third of that name, came to his City of Ephesus, soon
after his arrival he there beheld tht Priestess of Diana, a Virgin of
unmatchable beauty, and such perfections as he had not seen before: He departed
from thence immediately, and that for this reason lest that love which began to
kindle in his breast, growing stronger and bolder by frequ^nt ^ight of the
person, should enforce him so far that he who came thither virtuous and chaste,
should return from thence with the shipwreck of both.

(...). l. 2. ^. 1^. ^. 372, ^^^. Val. (...). l. 4. c. 3. p. 103.
10. Scipio had taken the City of New Carthage where besides the rest of the
Spoil, there were found a ^umber of Boys and Girls, the children of the
Nobility: Amongst the rest one Virgin was brought and presented to Scipio,
whose mavelous beauty attracted the eyes of all men which way soever she
went, it was supposed this would be no unacceptable present to a young General,
but as soon as he had looked upon her, I would, said he, accept and enjoy this
Virgin, were I a private person and not in such command as now I am: As it is
the Republic keeps this mind of mine sufficiently employed; yet I receive her
as a kind of Pledge to be by me restored and returned where reason and humanity
shall persuade. Thereupon he asked the young Lady of what Country she was, what
her Birth, and who her Parents, by whom he understood that she was a Princess,
and contracted to Luceius a young Prince of her Nation: The General therefore
sent both for him and her Parents, and when come, setting the Virgin Lady by
him spoke thus to her Spouse: As soon as this Virgin was by my Soldiers brought
and presented to me, I did willingly behold the excellency of her form, and I
praised the other accomplishments of her body and mind, for nature has not
brought us forth blind and altogether ignorant of such things: Love can reach
even this Breast of mine, but then it must be an honest one, and such as the
time and my affairs will permit, Though therefore she is mine in the right of
War, I am not desirous in the midst of arms to play at this kind of Game, nor
perhaps is it comely to detain from a valiant person one that is already
contracted to him. I have learned thus much from her, and have therefore sent
for thee, that I might see thee, and that I (heaven is my witness) a chaste man
might deliver this chaste Virgin to thee. She has lived with me in that caution
and reservedness, as if she ^ad bin with her own parents; nor was it a gift
worthy either of my self or thee, if either force, or private fraud had bin any
diminution to her virtue, receive her inviolate, and enjoy her, nor will we
have any other recompense besides thy self, that is a cordial respect to Scipio
and the Romans. The young Prince was astonished for joy, the Parents fell down
at the feet of Scipio, and laying there a considerable weight of Gold, offered
it as her ransom, but he bid the young Prince take it as part of her Dowry
from himself, above that which her Parents should give: Thus did he overcome at
once his lust and his covetousness, and by this one noble act of his drew a
great part of Spain to the side of the Romans, they striving with eagerness to
be subject to a person of so much virtue.

Fulgos. l. 4. c. 3. p. 482.
11. Agesilaus King of Sparta after the Spartan (that is an inoffensive) manner,
loved Magabates, a Persian boy of singular beauty, and when (according to the
Persian custom) the boy came one time to kiss him, Agesilaus thrust him away
with his Arm, when he saw the boy was displeased at it, Bid him, said he, try
again (to one that stood by) but the boy would first know whether if he offered
he should not be again refused; I would not, said Agesilaus, receive one kiss,
though it should make me the fairest of all men, or enable me to turn all I saw
into gold.

Camer. hor. s^bcis. cen^. 1. c. 7. p. 39. Haenig. prop^g. castitat. l. 1. p.
117.
12. Rhomilda though a lustful Princess, had two Daughters Appa and Gela, who
were as chaste as the Mother was contrary, for when through the treason of the
Mother the Henetians had taken the City of Friol, they to preserve their honor
put raw flesh under their Armpits, which putrefying there yielded such a
stinking and loathsome smell, that the Barbarians were not able to come near
them: By this honest Artifice they preserved their Virgin innocence untouched.

13. Acciolin Tyrant of Padua, Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 60. p. 224.
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 17. p. 383. Lon. Theatr. p. 464. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2.
l. 7. p. 483.
in the year 1253. surprised by treason a little Neighbor City called Bassian,
at which surprisal Blanch Rubea being taken with her sword in her hand, (her
Husband was slain fighting valiantly) was disarmed and dragged by violence
before the Tyrant, who extremely taken with her beauty, with entreaties, rich
presents, and at some times an intermixture of threats; labored to corrupt her
chaste mind, but finding the Fortress impreguable this way, he resolved to carry
it by plain force: Blanch made shift by some pretense to rid her self out of
his hands, and recovering a window, threw her self headlong from thence to the
ground, where she lay weltring in her blood, She was taken up half dead,
carried to a bed, and carefully looked after: when some days were passed over
and she perfectly recovered; she was again brought before Acciolin, where she
persevered in her virtuous courage: But the shameless Beast caused her to be
bound, and held so fast by certain Grooms, the furtherers of his villainies,
that notwithstanding all the resistance she could possibly make, he defiled the
body of this excellent Lady. A mortal grief seized her at this execrable
outrage, yet having dissembled it some few days, she gained leave of her
friends to see the body of her Husband, being then all putrefied, the Tombstone
was lifted up, and Blanch discovering the body suddenly fell down upon it,
drawing after her the stay that held up the stone, by the fall whereof her head
was so crushed; that death soon followed, and she was laid in the same Tomb
with her beloved Husband.

14. When the Wife of Hiero King of Sicily, Camer. over. subcis. cent. 1. c.
51. p. 225. Fulgos. l. 4. c. 3. p. 485.
was taxed by her Husband that she had never told him of his stinking brea^h,
which one had then newly upbraided him with; I thought, answered she, that all
men's breaths had smelt so. An excellent Testimony of Chastity in that the woman
never came so near any man, as to discern if his breath was sweeter or
stronger, than that of her Husband. The same History is recounted of Bilia the
Wife of Duellius.

15. The^e was a Maid in Alexandria, Cause. H. C. part. 1. l. 3. p. 166.
endowed with an admirable beauty, and sued unto with all possible
importunities, she fled from them and hid her self in a Sepulcher of the dead;
twelve years lived she in this little Cell, made to lodge such as had nothing
to do with the world: Being at last found in this manner, and asked what she
meant to do; made answer: Thesaurum Castitatis servo inter arentes calvarias,
unde nulla s^amma erumpit, I preserve the treasure of chastity amongst these
dead carcasses from whence fly no sparkles of Concupiscence.

16. Brasilla of Diracchium, Ludov. V^ves de Christ sen ^^. instit l. 1. Lon
Theatr. p. 457. Hieronym.
an illustrious Virgin, being taken by a Soldier, and about to suffer violence
by him, told him that if he would let her go with her Virginity untouched, she
would show him an herb, which if he did but eat would preserve him from being
wounded by any weapon whatsoever: The Soldier agreed, and went with the Maid
into the Garden, where she takes of the next herb she met with, and chewing it
in her mouth, This, said she, is the Herb, and that you may not doubt of the
efficacy of it, make trial with your Sword upon my self, if you are able to
wound me. The Soldier was won to credit her by the steadfast earnestness of her
countenance, and drawing his Sword made such a thrust at her, that unwillingly
he deprived her of life, and she by this Artifice preserved her self from being
corrupted by the otherways unbridled l^st of him who had made her his Prisoner.

17. Cyrus had taken Captive the wife of Tigranes Son to the King of Armenia,
^enoph. Cyropaid. L^nicer. T^^at. p. 467. Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 3. p. 563.
and asked him at what price he would redeem his Wife? At the price of my life,
said he, rather than she should live in servitude. Cyrus delighted with that
answer, gave liberty to his Wife, her Father, and the rest of the Captives, and
when amongst them there was great discourse of the virtues of Cyrus; some also
extolling the complete shape of his body, And said Tigranes to his wife, did he
not seem to thee very beautiful? Really, said she; I did not look upon him:
Upon whom then, said he? Upon him, replied she, that said he would redeem my
captivity at the price of his life.

18. Euphrasia a Virgin being seized by a Soldier and perceiving her self
reduced to that condition, that neither her strongest resistance nor tears
could any longer defend her chastity, from an armed and bold Ravisher, she bids
him forbear, that she would redeem at a valuable rate what she could not obtain
by all her entreaties: Nicephor. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 13. p. 105. Strad.
prol. Acad. l. 1. prolus. 5. p. 117.
She tells him that she was skilled in Magic, had been initiated in
enchantments from her infancy, and that she knew a certain unguent with which
if he once anointed his body, he should be proof against either sword or dart,
that she would impart to him this secret, (which to that day she had kept to
her self) upon this condition, that he would solemnly swear from thenceforth
not to offer any injury to her Virgin modesty, the Soldier touched with the
ambition of military glory, swore readily to what she desired, she left him a
while, and having melted some wax with other ingredients, she anointed her neck
and shoulders sufficiently with it, then turning to the young man, That you may
understand, said she, that I have not deal^ deceitfully with you, I will extort
a belief from you, at the hazard of my own person; come Soldier and with the
utmost force you are able; strike with your Sword upon this neck of mine, that
I have so well secured with this Medicament; and soon shall thou be convinced
how safe I have rendered my self with this Artifice. He whose lust was almost
extinguished by the fervent desire he had to make trial; drew out his Sword,
and with force enough let drive at the place the Virgin had designed him: the
sword entered so far into her throat, that with one and the same blow, he cut
off his hopes of enjoying the Virgin, and her fears of loosing her Virginty.

Plut. parr^l. p. 670. in Alexandr. Lon. Theat. p. 457. Zon. An. tom. 1. ^ol.
32. S^bel. Exem. l. 5. c. 6. p. 290. P^z. Mellis. ^^. 1. p. 316.
19. Timoclea, was a Lady of Thebes, and at the sack of it was forcibly ravished
by a Thracian Prince; and she revenged the injury in this manner: dissembling
the extreme hatred which she bare to her ravisher, she told him she knew a
place, wherein much Treasure and store of Gold was concealed; she led him to an
out-place belonging to the house where there was a deep well, while the over
covetous Thracian, leaned* over to look into it; She tripp'd up his heels, and
sent him headlong to the bottom of it, with a quantity of stones after him to
hinder his resurrection from thence, for ever to the world; being afterward
brought before Alexander, and charged with the death of this Captain of his;
she confessed the fact, and when he asked who she was? I am said she the Sister
of that Theagenes; who died sighting valiantly against thy Father in the Fields
of Cheronaea; the generous Prince freely dismissed her.

Ra^. in Viridario. Cause. holy Co^r. par. 1. l. 38. p. 106.
20. There was a Maid called Lucia, who lived a Virgin amongst many others, and
whose exquisite beauty was sought unto with vehement solicitation, by a
powerful Lord, who having Command and Authority in his hands; sent messengers
to seize on this innocent Lamb: and whilst they were at the gate menacing to
kill her; and set all on fire, if this poor creature was not delivered into
their hands: the Maid came forth, what is it said she you demand? I beseech you
tell me whether there be any thing in my power, to purchase your Lord and
Masters Love; yea answered they in a flouting manner your eyes have gained him;
nor ever can he have rest tell he enjoy them. Well go then said she, only
suffer me to go to my Chamber, and I will give satisfaction in this point: The
poor maid seeing her self betwixt the Hammer and the Anvil; she spoke to her
eyes and said; how my eyes are you then guilty; I know the reservedness and
simplicity of your glances; nor have I in that kind any remorse of conscience.
But howsoever it be, you appear to me not innocent enough; since you have
kindled fire in the heart of a man whose hatred, I have ever more esteemed than
his love; Quench with your blood the flames you have raised. Whereupon with a
hand piously cruel: She dug out her eyes, and sent the torn relics,
embrewed in her blood, to him, who sought her; adding, Behold what you love. He
seized with horror, hastened to hide himself in a Monastery, where he remained
the rest of his days.

21. The Consul Manlius having overthrown the Army of Gallogrecians, Val. Max.
l. 6. c. 1.9.561 Sab. Ex. l. 10. c. 6. p. 570.
in Mount Olympus; part were slain and part made prisoners; amongst others was
the Wife of Prince Orgiagon, a woman of surpassing beauty, who was committed to
the custody of a Centurion; and by him forcibly ravished. Her ransom was
afterward agreed upon, and the place appointed to receive it from the hands of
her friends; when they came thither; and that the Centurion was intent both
with his eyes and mind upon the weighing of the Gold; she in her Language gave
command to them that were present that they should kill him: When his head was
cut off she took it up in her hands, went with it to her husband, and having
thrown it at his feet, she related the manner of the injury she had received
and the revenge she had taken; who will say that any thing besides the body of
this woman was in the power of her enemies? for neither could her mind be
overcome, nor the chastity of it violated.

22. I will shut up this Chapter with the illustrious Example of Thomas
Aquinas: Drex. Nicet. l. 2. c. 5. 3. p. 346.
this great person had determined with himself to consecrate the flower of his
age, to God, and the desirable virtue of Chastity, his Parents opposed this
Noble resolution of his, by flatteries and threats: and such other Arts as they
supposed might be of use to them upon this occasion, but without any success,
their Son remained constant to his purpose, in despite of all their endeavors;
Whereupon they took this other course: When Thomas was one day in his Chamber
all alone; they sent in to him, a young Damosel of an admirable beauty: who
with a countenance composed to lasciviousness; began, with various allurements
and feminine flatteries to invite him to wickedness; All things seemed to speak
in her, her voice and form, her eyes, and clothes, her gestures and perfumes;
the youth perceived the delightful poison began to slide into his heart; and
therefore turning himself, Lord Jesus said he suffer me not to commit this
filthy wickedness in thy sight; or for the sake of carnal lust to loose the
joys of Eternal Life; this said, he caught up a burning brand out of the fire;
with which he drove out this Siren before him: and shut his Chamber door upon
her, happily by this means escaping the snare that was spread before him, and
by which he was so near to have been entangled.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Patience; and what power some men have had over their Passion.
EVery man knows how to row in a calm: and an indifferet Pilot will serve to
direct the course of a Ship: when the season is quiet and serene; but the
conduct of that Governor is most praise worthy; who knows how to steer his
vessel aright, when the winds are enraged; and some furious tempest has put the
tumultuous waves into a vehement commotion. In like manner it is a small
commendation to appear mild, when nothing is said or done to displease us: but
to repress our rising passions, and to keep down our resentments; in the midst
of injurious provocations; so noble a victory deserves an Elogy; which perhaps
the greatest of Conquerors never merited.

Cause. Treat. of the passions. p. 119.
1. King Robert was one of the greatest Kings that ever wore Crown of France, on
a time he surpised a Rogue, who had cut away half of his Cloak Furred with
Ermins; to whom yet, so taken, and in an act of that insufferable presumption:
he did no further evil, but only said mildly to him; save thy self, and leave
the rest for another who may have need of it.

Bak. Chron. p. 287.
2. King Henry the sixth of England, was of that admirable patience, that to one
who struck him when he was taken Prisoner; he only said forsooth, you wrong
your self more then me, to strike the Lords Anointed.

Cause. H. C. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 94.
3. Its said that Philip the second King of Spain, having written a letter with
his own hand with much study and labor, to be sent to the Pope; when he asked
for sand to be cast upon it: his Secretary half a sleep, powered the Ink in the
Standish upon it, in stead of the former: this would have put most into a fury,
yet behold a person of this eminency, bare it, without speaking one angry word
to his Servant.

Plut. in Per. p. 154 Lips. monit. l. 2. p. 398. Wier. oper. p. 480. l. de ira.
Sab. Ex. l. 9. c. 1. p. 475.
4. There was a base uncivil fellow, that did nothing all the day long but rail
upon Pericles that famous Athenian in the Marketplace, and before all the
people: though he was at that time the Public Magistrate; yet did he take no
notice of it, but all the while, dispatched sundry matters of importance, till
night came, and then with a sober pace went home toward his house, this lewd
Varlet following him all the way, with open defamation. Pericles when he came
to his house it being dark, called to his man, and bade him light the fellow
home, lest it being night he should loose his way.

Pl^t. Lips. Min l. 2. c. 12. p. 292.
5. The Athenians sending Ambassadors to Philip King of Macedon, to request some
favors of him, he entertained them courteously; granted their desire, and being
about to dismiss them, he asked: if there was any thing further wherein he
might gratify the Athenians; To which one of them called Demochares replied;
yes, truly that thou would hang thy self; This Currish reply did exceedingly
enrage the Friends and Courtiers of King Philip: inciting him to revenge but be
without being moved sent them away courteously; only wishing them to tell the
Athenians, that they who spoke such things, were much weaker then they that
could hear and bear them patiently.

6. Casimir was Duke of the Sendominians a Potent Prince, Lips. mon. l. 2. c.
12. p^
and afterward King of Poland: being on a time in a purpose to divert himself,
he called to him one Ioannes Cornarius a Knight and his Domestic Servant,
inviting to play with him at Dice, they did so, and fortune was favorable one
while to one, and then to the other; so that having spent much time in gaining
little upon each other; and it being grown far in the night, it was agreed to
set the whole sum in controversy upon one single cast of the Dice. Casimire
proved the more fortunate, and drew all the money to to him. Ioannes displeased
and incensed with his bad fortune, in the heat of his impatience falls upon the
Prince, and with his fist lays him over the mouth: It was a capital crime, for
the servant to strike his Lord, and the same also his Prince; b^t though all
present were incensed at this insufferable Action: yet he escaped by the
benefit of the night, though not so, but that he was seized in the morning
brought back and set in the presence of Casimire to receive his sentence. He
having well weighed the matter; brake into this wise Speech: My friends, This
man is less guilty than my self; Nay, what ever is ill done is on my part: heat
and sudden passion (which sometimes oversways even wise men) did transport him;
and moved both his mind and hand to do as he did. But why did I give the cause?
Why, unmindful of my place and dignity, did I play with him as my equal. And
therefore Joannes take not only my pardon but my thanks too: by a profitable
correction thou have taught me, that hereafter I should do nothing that is
unworthy of a Prince, but retain my self within the just limits of decency and
gravity; this said, he freely dismissed him.

7. Memorable is the Example of Ioh^nnes Gualbertus a Knight of Florence, Wier.
op. p. 870. l. de ira.
who returning out of the Field into the City, attended with a numerous
retinue, met with that very person, who not long before had killed his brother,
his only brother; nor could the other escape him. Ioannes presently drew his
Sword; that with one blow he might revenge the death of his beloved brother.
When the other falling prostrate on the ground at his foot, humbly besought him
for the sake of the Crucified Christ, to spare his life. Ioannes suppressing
his anger; let him depart, and offered up his Sword drawn as it was before the
Image of Christ Crucified; in the next Church he came to.

8. The Wife of Cowper Bishop of Lincoln burnt all those notes, Clarks Mi^. 65.
p. 298.
which he had been eight years in gathering: out of a certain tenderness and
fear, she had lest he should kill himself with overmuch study; so that he was
forced to fall to work again, and was other eight years in gathering the same
notes; wherewith he composed that useful, and learned book which at this day is
called his Dictionary; though a greater vexation then this could very hardly
befall a Scholar; yet he received it with that patience: as not to give his Wife
an unkind word upon that account.

9. When Xenocrates came one time to the house of Plato to visit him: Laert. l.
3. p. 79.
he prayed him that he would beat his Servant for him; in regard he himself was
not at present so sit to do it: because he was in passion. Another time he said
to one of his servants that he would beat him sufficiently, but that he was
angry.

Plut. moral. lib. de ira cohib. p. 130
10. Polemon by his patience, cured the distempered passion of another in this
manner. There was a person of quality, an excessive lover of precious stones;
who even doted upon fair and costly Rings, and such like curious Jewels: this
man one day, did rail at Polemon in a most outrageous manner; and gave him very
uncivil and provoking language. To all which the Philosopher answered not one
word: but looked very earnestly upon one of the Signets the other had on his
hand, well considering the fashion and workmanship thereof: which when the
party perceived, taking (as it should seem) no small contentment; and being
very well-pleased that he so perused his Jewel (quite forgetting his anger) not
so Polemon (quoth he) but look upon the stone thus between you and the light,
and you will think it much more beautiful.

Plut. Moral. lib. de ira cohibend. p. 130.
11. Aristippus fell out upon a time (I know not how) with Aeschines his friend:
and was at that time in a great Choler, and sit of Anger. How now Aristippus
(quoth one who heard him so high, and at such hot words) where is your Amity
and Friendship all this while? Why asleep, (said he) but I will waken it anon.
With that he stepped close to Aeschines, and said; Do you think me every way so
unhappy and incurable, that I did not deserve one single admonition at your
hands? No marvel (said Aeschines again) if I thought you (who for natural wit
in all things else excel me) to see better in this case also than I, what is
meet and expedient to be done: And thus their strife ended.

Plut. Moral. lib. de ira cohib. p. 124
12. Arcadius an Argive, never gave over reviling of King Philip of Macedon,
abusing him with the most reproachful terms; and arrived at last to that bold
impudence, as to give him this kind of public warning. So far to fly until he
thither came,
Where no man knew or heard of Philip's name.
This man was afterward seen in Macedonia; then the Friends and Courtiers of
King Philip gave him information thereof, moving him to inflict some severe
punishment upon him, and in no case suffer him to escape his hands. But Philip,
on the contrary, having this Railer in his power, spoke gently unto him, used
him courteously and familiarly, sent unto him in his Lodging Gifts and
Presents; and so sent him away in safety. Afterward he commanded those
Courtiers who had incited him against him, to enquire what words this man gave
out of him amongst the Greeks; they made report again, and told him that he was
become a new man, and ceased not to speak wonderful things in the praise of
him. Look you then, said Philip unto them, am not I a better Physician than all
you, and am not I more skilled in the cure of a foul-mouthed fellow than the
best of you?

Plut. Moral. lib. de ira cohib. p. 125
13. King Ptolemaeus jesting and scossing at a simple and unlearned Grammarian,
asked him who was the Father of Peleus? I will answer you, Sir, said he, if you
will first tell me who was the Father of Lagus? This was a dry slout, and
touched King Ptolemaeus very near, in regard of the mean Parentage he was
descended from: So that all about the King were mightily offended at it, as an
intolerable frump. The King said no more than this; If it be not seemly for a
King to take a jest or a scoff, neither is it seemly or convenient for him to
give one to another man.

CHAP. XXI. Of such as have well deported themselves in their Adversity, or
been improved thereby.
THe Naturalists say there are a sort of Shellfish, which at a certain time
open to receive the Dew of Heaven; and that being thus impregnate, then the
more they are tossed to and fro with the foaming billows of the Sea, the more
orient and precious is the Pearl that is found in them. In like manner there
are some men who are beholden to their Afflictions for their Virtues; and who
had never shined with that luster, had not the black night of Adversity come
upon them. It is proverbial of England; Anglica Gens, optima flens, ^essima
ridens: a particular example hereof we have in

1. John Barret, P^ll^^s Warth^^, p. 258.
born at Linne, bred a Carmelite of White Friars in Cambridge, when Learning
ran low and Degrees high in that University, so that a Scholar could scarce be
seen for Doctors; till the University, sensible of the mischief thereby,
appointed Dr. Cranmer (afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) to be the Poser
General of all Candidates in Divinity. Amongst whom he stopped Barret for his
insufficiency. Back goes Barret to Linne, turns over a new, yea many new
leaves, plying his book to purpose, whose former ignorance proceeded from want
of pains, not parts; and in short time he became a tolerable, a good, an
excellent, and admirable Scholar: And commencing Doctor with due applause,
lived many years a painful Preacher in Norwich, always making honorable
mention of Dr. Cranmer, as the means of his happiness.

2. Pope Pius the fifth was long tormented with the Stone and Strangury; Zuing.
Th^atr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 174.
and in the sharpest of his fits he was often heard to say with sighs, Lord,
give me an increase of sorrow, so thou will but give me a proportionable
increase of patience.

3. Petrus, Zuinger. Theatr. v. 1. l. 2. p. 174.
the Abbot of Claravalla, through the vehemence of his disease lost one of his
eyes; and bare that Affliction not only with patience, but said, he rejoiced,
that of two enemies, he was now freed from the ^rouble of one of them.

4. Alphonsus King of Naples, Camerar. open. subci^i^. cent. 2. cap. 27. p. 111.
was informed in his absence by Lupus Simonius his Viceroy there, that one of
those two mighty Ships which the King had built (and seemed like Mountains) by
the negligence of the Seamen had taken ^ire, and was burnt down. He told the
Messenger, that he well knew that Ship, though great and magnificent, would yet
after some years be corrupted, or perish by some accident or other: and that
therefore the Viceroy, if he was wise, would bear that misfortune with an equal
mind, as he himself did.

5. Telamon hearing of the death of his beloved Son, L^n Theatr. p. 7.7.
being a man unbroken by all the Assaults of Fortune; with an unmoved
countenance replied, It is well, for I knew he must die whom I had begotten.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 2. p. 663. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 10. p. 156.
6. L. Paulus Aemilius had four Children, two of them Scipio and Fabius, were
brought into other Families by Adoption; the other two being boys, he yet
retained with him at home; one of these being fourteen years of age, died five
days before his Triumph, the other of twelve years deceased the third day after
it: And whereas there was almost none of the people but seriously lamented the
misfortune of his House; he himself bare it with so great a spirit, that
calling the people together, he rather gave them Consolations, than admitted
any from them: This was a part of his Oration to them; Whereas, O Citizens, in
this great felicity of yours, I was afraid lest Fortune did meditate some evil
against you: It was my prayer to the highest Jupiter, to Juno and Minerva, that
if any calamity was impending upon the people of Rome, that they would inflict
the whole of it upon my Family. All therefore, is well; since by the grant of
my request they have so brought it to pass that you should rather grieve for my
adversity, than that I should lament your misfortune.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. p. 87.
7. When the Romans, by their continual War with Hannibal, and especially by the
calamity that befell them in tho loss of that great Battle at Cannae, had much
exhausted their Forces; yet they received their Adversity with such a greatness
of mind, that they dared to send fres^ Recruits to their Forces in Spain, even
then when Hannibal was ready to knock at their Gates; and the Grounds whereupon
the Camp of Hannibal stood was sold for as much in Rome as if Hannibal had not
been there. To demean themselves in this sort in their adverse fortune, what
was it but to enforce that angry Deity, for m^re shame to be reconciled with
them.

^oel. Rhod. l. 19. c. 28. p. 918.
8. Hiero the Tyrant of Sicily was at first a rude, unaccomplished, a furious
and irreconcilable person, the same in all points with his Broth^r Gelo; but
falling afterward into a lingering Sickness, Aelian. var. hist. l. 4. p. 154.
by which he had a long Vacation from public cares and business; and em^^oying
that time in reading and converse with learned men, he became a man of great
Elegancy, and singular Improvements: And afterward, when he was perfectly
recovered, he had great familiarity with Simonides, Pindar the Theban, and
Bacchilides.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 3. c. 3. p. 92. Laert. l. 2. p. 46.
9. Xenophon was sacrificing to the Gods; when as he stood by the Altar, there
came to him a Messenger from Mantinea, who told him that his Son Grillus was
dead in Battle, he only laid aside the Crown from his head, but persisted in
his Sacrifice; but when the Messenger added that he died Victorious, he
reassumed his Crown, and without other alteration finished what he was about.

Plut. Apoth. p. 410.
10. Antigonus, the Successor of Alexander, had layen sick of a lingering
Disease, and afterward when he was recovered and well again: We have gotten no
harm, said he, by this sickness, for it has taught me not to be so proud, by
pu^ting me in mind that I am but a mortal man.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 4. c. 15. p. 155
11. Pla^o a^^irms that Theag^s had no other occasion to addict himself to the
Study of Philosophy, save only that leisure he had afforded him by a Disease
that retained him in his house; for whereas he was by that detained from the
management of State Affairs, he was thereby in a manner compelled to the Love
and Study of Wisdom.

Aelian. var. hist. lib. 4. c. 15. p. 156
12. Straton the Son of Corragus, may seem to have fallen sick to his own good
fortune and advantage: for whereas he was descended of an Illustrious Family,
and abounded with Wealth, yet he never used any exercise of his body, till such
time as he found himself to be afflicted with the Spleen. Then he was put upon
it to seek a remedy, by Wrestling, and other Exercises of the body. And whereas
at first he made use of these for the recovery of his health, afterward having
attained to great perfection and pro^iciency in bodily Exercises, and intending
to give some evidence thereof, in one day he overcame at Wrestling and
Whorlbats in the Olympic Games. He also was Victor in the next Olympiade: and
so was he too in the Nemean, Isthmian, and Pythian Games.

13. Philip King of Macedon was used to say, Plut. Moral in lib. de Apotheg.
Reg. etc. p. 408.
that he took himself much beholden and bound unto the Athenian Orators; for
that by whetting their tongues, and by giving out opprobrious and slanderous
words against him, they were the means to make him a better man both in word
and deed. For, said he, I strain my self, and every day do my best endeavor,
as well in my sayings as doings, ^e prove them liars.

14. Antigonus once in Winter time was driven to encamp in a place destitute of
all provisions necessary for the life of Man; Plut. Moral in lib. de Apotheg.
Reg. p. 414.
by occasion whereof certain Soldiers, not knowing that he was so nigh unto
them, spoke very presumptuously of him, and reviled him to purpose; ^ut he
opening the Cloth or Curtain of his Pavilion with his walking Staff, If, said
he, you go not further off to rail at me, I will make you to repent it; and so
withdrew himself.

15. Diogenes his hap was to be banished, Plut. Moral lib. de Tran. Animi. p.
148.
and driven out of his own Country; yet this Exile of his was so far from
proving evil to him, that it was the chiefest occasion of his improvement, as
being thereby after a sort thrust upon and compelled to the Study and
Profession of Philosophy.

16. Zeno the Citiaean had but one small Ship left him, Plut. lib. de Tranquil.
animi. p 148.
and hearing news that both it and all therein was cast away, drowned and
perished in the midst of the Seas; Plut. Apoth Reg. p. 416.
O Fortune, said he, thou have done well to drive us again to put on the poor
and simple habit of a Scholar, and to send us back unto our Porch and School of
Philosophy. By these losses of his he was afterward so great a gainer through
his improvement in Philosophy, that few, if any of his time had a greater
Reputation than he for Learning and Integrity; so that when he died, King
Antigonus the Second, who esteemed him above all other Philosophers, said of
him, that the Theater of his noble and glorious Acts was taken away; for he
desired that this man might above all others, be the Spectator and Approver o^
his Acts.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the willingness of some Men to forgive Injuries received.
WHen Aristotle was asked what grew old soonest and what latest? Bene^its, said
he, and Injuries. The wise Philosopher well understood that we are apt ^oon to
forget a good turn, but our memories are wonderful tenacious of any wrong or
injury that we conceive has been done to us. Most men write down the one in
Sand, where every blast of Wind obliterates the Record; but the other they take
care to have engraven upon leaves of Adamant, in Characters that scarce Time it
self is able to deface. The Heroes hereafter mentioned were of nobler minds,
and were doubtless, as mindful of Obligations as they were forgetful of
Indignities.

Bak. Chron. p. 36, 37.
1. King William the Conqueror seldom remembered Injuries after Submission; for
Edrick, the first that rebelled against him, he placed in Office near about
him. Gospatric, who had been a factious man, and a plotter of Conspiracies
against him; he made Earl of Gloucester, and trusted him with managing a War
against Malcolme King of the Scots. Eustace Earl of Boleyne, who in the King's
absence in Normandy, attempted to seize upon Dover Castle; he received after
into great savor and respect. Edgar, who, as next Heir to the Saxon Kings, had
often attempted by Arms to recover his right; he not only after twice defection
pardoned, but gave him also an Allowance as a Prince: Only Waltheof Earl of
Northumberland and Northampton, of all the English Nobility was put to death,
in all the time of the Kings Reign, and not he neither till he had twice
falsified his Oath of Allegiance.

Cla^ks mirr. c. 92. p. 410.
2. Doctor Cranmers gentleness in pardoning wrongs was so great, that it grew
into a Proverb, do my Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, and then you shall be
sure to have him your friend while he lives.

3. Augustus Caesar having taken Lucius Cinna the Nephew of Cn. Pompeius in
Arms against him, Wi^ri oper. l. de ira p. 834. Lon. Theatr. p. 372. Sabell.
ex. l. 5. c. 3. p. 262.
not only gave him his life, but as a particular instance of his love, restored
him his estate entire. This man was afterward found in a conspiracy against
him, and being convicted of it he again gave him his life upon this condition,
that he might say, I have here^ofore pardoned thee as an enemy, now I do the
like to thee as a Traitor and a Parricide: From henceforth let there be a
friendship begun betwixt us; and let us contend together, whether I have with
greatest sincerity given thee a double pardon, or thou have received it. After
this he received him into the number of his friends, and made him Consul Elect
for the year following, an honor scarce to be given to them that had fought
for the safety of his life, much less to such as had sought both openly and
privately to deprive him of it.

P^ut. i^ (...). p. 45.
4. Lycurgus had offended the moneyed men in Sparta, and therefore as he was
once in the Forum or Market place, there was a part of them that had raised up
a faction against him, who proceeded to that violence as with clamours and
stones to drive him from thence, and followed him as he withdrew himself. The
first in pursuit of him was Alcander, a young man, and somewhat of a hot and
fierce, though otherwise of no ill disposition, he as Lycurgus turned back to
him, with his Staff struck out one of his eyes, Lycurgus not daunted with the
blow, but turning to the people, showed his Citizens his face covered with
blood, and deformed with the loss of one of his eyes. This wrought so much of
modesty and sorrow in the Assembly, that they yielded up Alcander to him, and
thoroughly affected with this unhappy acccident, they waited upon him home.
Lycurgus with commendations dismissed them, led in Alcander yet neither did or
spoke a word of ill to him, but instead of that disposing otherwise of those
that attended his body, commanded Alcander to wait upon him, and minister unto
him. The young man did it with great ardor and obedience, and then being an eye
witness of the sobriety and meekness, and other virtues of the man he began to
admire him; and from thenceforth spoke nothing but in his praises.

5. Lucius Mur^ena though but the year before he had been accused by Cato of
canvassing and bribery wherein his life had been in the utmost hazard, Fulgos.
ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 443.
had he not been defended by Cicero the Father of Roman Eloquence, yet
forgetting this he interposed his own body for the safety of Cato, when his
death was intended by Metellus the Tribune of the people, and though he might
have seen himself revenged by the hand of another, yet thought it more glorious
to defend his enemy, than suffer it.

6. Anno 1541. Robert Holgate afterward Archbishop of York, Clarks mirr. c.
92. p. 412.
obtained a Benefice where Sir Francis Ask^w of Lincolnshire dwelt, by whom he
was much molested and vexed with continual suits of law, upon which occasion he
was sain to repair to London, where being he found means to be the Kings
Chaplain, and by him was made Archbishop of York, and President of the Council
in the North, during which time the said Knight happened to have a Suit before
the said Council, and doubted much that he should find hard measure from the
Archbishop, whose Adversary he had been, but the other forgetting all
forepassed injuries, afforded him all the favor that he might with justice.

7. When Timoleon the Corinthian had freed the Syracusans and Sicilians, Plut.
in Timoleon. p. 254, 255.
from the Tyrants that did oppress them, one Demaenetus a busy Orator took the
boldness in an open assembly of the people, to charge him with I know not what
miscarriages; w^ilst he was General in the Wars: Timoleon though he had power
to punish him, yet answered him not a word, only turning to the people he said,
that he thanked the Gods for granting him that thing which he had so often
requested of them in his prayers, which was that he might once see the
Syracusans to have full power and liberty to say what they would.

8. C. Julius Caesaer, Wi^ri. oper. l. de ira p. 834.
when perpetual Dictator and flourishing in the same and glory of his great
exploits; was aspersed with an indelible infamy, by the verses which Catullus
of Verona had made and published of him and Mamurra, but upon his submission he
not only did him no harm, but received him to his Table, and as a certain sign
of his being reconciled, he lodged with his Father as he used to do.

9. King Philip of Macedon, Justin. hist. l. 7. p. 68.
besieged the City of Methon, and as he walked about viewing the place one from
the Walls shot an Arrow at him^ whereby he put out his right eye, which yet he
took so patiently, that when the Citizens a few days after, sent out to treat
with him about the surrender, he gave them honorable terms, and after they had
put the City into his hands, took no revenge of them for the loss of his eye.

10. Pope Sixtus the Second, was accused by Bassus a Patrician of many grievous
Crimes, Wi^ri oper. l. de ira p. 842.
unto Valentini^nus the younger, the Emperor, and his Mother Placidia; before
whom he cleared his unspotted innocence, which done he interceded with tears
that Bassus might not be sent into exile according to his banishment, though he
could not prevail with the Emperor therein: Afterward when Bassus was dead,
he not only honored his Funeral with his presence, but also with his own hands
helped to commit him to his interrment.

11. Epaminondas through the envy of the Nobles, Lips. ex. polit. l. 1. ^. ^.
p. 91.
was not chosen General in a war that needed a most skilful leader, nor was he
only laid aside, but another was chosen in his stead, who was but little seen
in the military art: This brave man little moved with the indignity, listed
himself as a private Soldier. It was long e're the ill conduct of the new
General, had brought the Army into a real and almost inextricable strait, and
when all looked about enquiring for Epaminondas, he mindless of the injury of
his former unworthy repulse, came cheerfully forth; and having delivered the
Army from the hazard it was in, brought it back with safety into his Country.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 2. c. 44. p. 187.
12. There was an ancient feud betwixt Henry of Methimnia, Duke of Asincica of
the Family of the Guzmans, and Roderigo Ponze, de Leon, Marquess of Gades, and
whereas the Marquess had consulted with others about the surprisal of Alama,
from the Moors of Granado, and had determined of the expedition, he would not
that the Duke should be acquainted with, or have any share in the glory of that
action. But he was speedily besieged by the King of Granado in that Town, and
whereas he sent all about for assistance, the Duke was again neglected:
Notwithstanding all which the gallant Duke burying in oblivion the memory of
all forepast injuries, called together all the Soldiers in his government or
that were mercenaries under him, entreated his friends; and so enflamed others
with his exhortations, that having with great celerity mustered a very great
Army, he came to the seasonable succors of Alama, raised the Siege, and set
the Marquess with all others with him, in freedom from the fears of any enemy;
and afterward when the Marquess came first to him, with acknowledgments of so
great a benefit, and tendered him his greatest thanks; Let these things pass,
Marquess, said he; neither indeed does it become good men to be mindful of
former fallings out, and especially in a cause where Religion is concerned, but
rather if any such thing has heretofore been betwixt us, let us sacrifice them
to our Country and the Christian name, and give them no longer any place in our
remembrance: And since things have at this time so fortunately succeeded for us
both, let us joyfully celebrate this day, and let it remain as an eternal
witness of our reconciliation. This said they embraced, lodged together that
night, and lived ever afterward in a mutual and sincere friendship.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 305.
13. Alphonsus the elder King of Sicily, used to wear upon his fingers Rings of
extraordinary price, and to preserve the luster of the stones, when he washed
used to give them to him that stood next to hold: He had once delivered them to
one who supposing the King had forgotten them converted them to his own use,
Alphonsus dissembled the matter, put on others and kept his wonted course,
after some days being to wash, the same man stood next him that had the former,
and put forth his hand as to receive the Kings Rings, who pulled his hand back
and whispered him in the ear, that when he should restore the former, he would
trust him with these: A Speech worthy of a liberal and humane Prince, and one
endued with so great a mind as he was.

Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 44. p. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 3. p. 314.
14. Q. Metellus that fortunate man, in the flower of all his glory, was seized
upon by Catinius Labeo Tribune of the people, and dragged to the Mount Tarpeius
to be thrown headlong from thence and scarce was there another Tribune to be
found to intercede for his life, at last he escaped (by another mediation) the
fury of his adversary: whom in his Censorship he had removed from the Senate:
And yet though there were so many of the family of the M^telli, in great
authority and power in the state, the villainy of this Tribune was overpassed
both by him that was injured and all the rest of his Relations.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of such as have patiently taken free Speeches, and Reprehensions
from their Inferiors.
THe fair speeches of others commonly delight us, although we are at the same
time sensible they are no more than flatteries and falsehoods; nor is this the
only weakness and vanity of our nature, but withal it is very seldom that we
can take down the pill of Reproof without an inward resentment; (especially
from any thing below us) though convinced of the necessity and justice of it:
Great therefore was the wisdom of those men, who could so easily dispense with
any man's freedom in speaking, when once they discerned it was meant for their
reformation and improvement.

1. A senior Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, Full. hist. of the
Univers. of Cambridg p. 97.
(of the opposite faction to the Master) in the presence of Dr. Whitaker in a
common place fell upon this subject, what requisites should qualify a Scholar
for a Fellowship, concluded that Religion and Learning were of the Quorum for
that purpose, hence he proceeded to put the case, if one of these qualities
alone did appear, whether a Religious Dunce were to be chosen before a Learned
Rake-Hell, and resolved it in favor of the Latter: This he endeavored to
prove with two arguments. First, because Religion may but Learning cannot be
counterfeited: He that chooses a Learned Rake-Hell is sure of something, but
who electeth a Religious Dunce may have nothing worthy of his choice, seeing
the same may prove both Dunce and Hypocrite. His second was, there is more
probability of a Rake-Hells improvement to Temperance, than of a Dunces
conversion into a Learned Man. Common place being ended, Dr. Whitaker desired
the company of this Fellow, and in his Closet thus accosted him, Sir, I hope I
may say without offense, as once Isaac to Abraham, here is wood and a knife but
where is the Lamb for a burnt offering, you have discovered much keenness of
language and fervency of affection, but who is the person you aim at, who has
offered abuse to this Society. The other answered, If I may presume to follow
your Metaphor, know Sir, (though I am a true admirer of your most eminent
worth) you are the sacrifice I reflected at in my discourse, for (whilst you
follow your studies and remit matters to be managed by others) a company is
chosen into the College of more zeal than knowledge (whose judgments we
certainly know to be bad, though others charitably believe the goodness of
their affections) and hence of late there is a general decay of Learning in the
College. The Dr. turned his anger into thankfulness, and expressed the same
both in loving his person and practicing his advice, promising his own presence
hereafter in all elections, and that none should be admitted without his own
examination, which quickly recovered the credit of the house, being replenished
with hopeful Plants before his death, which fell out in the 38th of Q. Eliz.
Anno 1593.

2. Augustus Caesar sitting in judgment, Niphil. in Augusto. p. 59. Dio
Cassi^s. l. 55. p. 632.
Mecaenas was present, and perceiving that he was about to condemn diverse
persons, he endeavored to get up to him, but being hindered by the Crowd, he
wrote in a Schedule, Tandem aliquando surge Carnifex; Rise Hangman, and then as
if he had wrote some other thing, threw the Note into Caesar's Lap: Caesar
immediately arose, and came down without condemning any person to death: and so
far was he from taking this reprehension ill: that he was much troubled he had
given such cause.

Zuing. The. vol. 3. l. 3. p. ^98. Plut. Mor. in l. Apoth. Reg. Er. p. 409, 410.
3. A poor old Woman came to Philip King of Macedon; and entreated him to take
cognizance of her cause, when she had often interrupted him with her clamors in
this manner: the King at last told her he was not at leisure to hear her: No
(said she) be not then at leisure to be King; the King for sometime considered
of the Speech; and presently he heard both her, and others that came with their
complaints to him.

4. One of the Servants of Prince Henry (Son to Henry the fourth) whom he
favored, Stow. Ann. p. 344.
was arraigned at the Kings Bench for Felony; whereof the Prince being
informed, and incensed by lewd persons about him, in a rage he came hastily to
the Bar where his servant stood as Prisoner; and Commanded him to be unfettred
and set at liberty; whereat all men were amazed: only the Chief Justice, who at
that time was William Gascoign; who exhorted the Prince to be ordered according
to the Ancient Laws of the Kingdom, or if he would have his servant exempted
from the rigor of the Law: that he should obtain (if he could) the gracious
Pardon of the King his Father; which would be no derogation to Law or Justice.
The Prince no way appeased with this answer, but rather inflamed, endeavored
himself to take away the Prisoner. The Judge considering the perilous Example
and inconveniency that might thereupon ensue; with a bold Spirit and Courage,
Commanded the Prince upon his Allegiance to leave the Prisoner, and to depart
the place. At this Commandment, the Prince all in a fury, and chafed; in a
terrible manner came up to the place of Judgment: men thinking that he would
have slain the Judge; or at least done him some harm. But the Judge sitting
still without moving: declaring the Majesty of the Kings place of Judgment and
with an assured bold countenance; said thus to the Prince. Sir, Remember your
self I keep here the place of the King your Sovereign Lord and Father, to whom
you owe double Allegiance; and therefore in his name I charge you to desist
from your wilfulness and unlawful enterprise, and from henceforth give good
example to those which hereafter shall be your own Subjects; and now for your
contempt and disobedience, go you to the prison of the Kings Bench whereunto I
commit you, until the pleasure of the King your Father be further known. The
Prince amazed with the words and gravity of that worshipful Justice, laying his
Sword aside the doing reverence, departed and went to the Kings Bench as he was
commanded. When the King heard of this action, he blessed God that had given
him a Judge, who feared not to minister Justice, and also a Son, who could
patiently suffer and show his obedience thereunto.

Z^ing. The. vol. 7. l. 2. p. 1701. H^id. i^ Sphing. c. 10. p. 281. Poly. f.
223.
5. Fridericus was consecrated Bishop of Vtrecht, and at the feast the Emperor
Ludovicus Pius sitting at his right hand, admonished him that being mindful of
the profession he had newly taken upon him, he would deal justly and as in the
sight of God in the way of his Vocation, without respect of persons. Your
Majesty gives me good advice, said he, but will you please to tell me whether I
had best to begin with this Fish upon my Trencher at the head or the tail? At
the head, said the Emperor, for that is the more noble part. Then Sir, said
the Bishop, in the first place renounce you that incestuous marriage you have
contracted with Judith. The Emperor took this reprehension so well, that he
dismissed her accordingly.

6. Alexander the great having taken a famous Pyrate, Chetw^ hist. Coll. Cent.
1. p. 12.
and being about to condemn him to death, asked him, Why do thou trouble the
Seas: And why, said he, do thou trouble the wh^^^ world? I with one Ship seek
my Adventures, and therefore am called a Pyrate, thou with a great Army warrest
against nations, and therefore are called an Emperor, so that there is no
difference betwixt us but in the name. Alexander was not displeased with this
freedom, but in consideration of what he had said, he dismissed him without
inflicting any punishment upon him.

7. Theodosius the Emperor having cruelly slaughtered some thousands of the
Thessalonians for some insolency of the Citizens to the Statues of his Wife,
Speed. h p. 275. is it.
coming to Millain would have entered the Church to have communicated with other
Christians, but was resisted and forbid by St. Ambrose, in which estate the
Emperor stood for eight Months, and then with great humility and submission
acknowledging his offense, was absolved and again received into the
Congregation, and notwithstanding St. Ambrose had reproved him with great
liberty, and opposed him with as much resolution, yet the good Emperor both
obeyed willingly, and ^everenced exceedingly that great Prelate.

8. There came a young man to Rome; Polychron. ^. 147.
who in the opinion of all men exceedingly resembled the Emperor Augustus,
whereof he being informed sent for him; being in presence, he asked him if his
mother had never been at Rome, the stranger answered No, but his Father had;
the Emperor took patiently this sharp reply, and sent him away without harm.

9. M. Antoninus Pius, Paraei. Med. hist. tom. 1. p. 380. Lat, comp. hist. c.
11. p. 45. Pez. Mell. tom. 2.
used to take well, the free, and facetious speeches of his friends; even such
as seemed to be uttered with too great a freedom and liberty. Coming once to
the house of Omulus his friend, and beholding there at his entrance, diverse
Columns of Porphyry; he enquired whence they were brought? Omulus told him,
that it became him that set his foot into another man's house, to be both deaf
and dumb: he meant he should not be curious and inquisitive. The Emperor was
delighted with this freedom, so far was he from resenting it, in such manner as
some others would have done.

10. Philip King of Macedon, Plut. Mor. l. de Apoth. Reg. etc. p. 409, 410
with great patience admitted such liberty and freedom in speaking to him. He
had in one battle taken a considerable number of Prisoners, and was himself in
person to see them sold in port ^ale. As he sat in his Chair, his Clothes were
turned or tucked up higher then was decent and seemly; when one of the
Prisoners who was upon sale, cried unto him: Good my Lord I beseech you pardon
me, and suffer me not to be sold amongst the rest, for I am a friend of yours,
and so was to your Father before you; And prithee good fellow said Philip,
whence grew this great friendship betwixt us: and how is it come about? Sir,
said the Prisoner I would gladly give you an account of that privately in your
ear. Then Philip commanded that he should be brought unto him; he thus
whispered in his ear; Sir, I pray you let down your mantle a little lower
before, for sitting thus in the posture as you do; you discover that which were
more mee^ to be unseen. Hereupon Philip spoke aloud unto his Officers. Let this
man said he go at liberty, for in truth he is one of our good friends, and
wishes us well; though I either knew it not before, or at least had forgotten
it.

Plut. Mor. l. de Apoth. Reg. p. 415.
11. Demetrius won the City of Athens by assault, before much distressed for
lack of Corn, but being Master of the Town, he caused the whole body of the
City to be assembled before him, unto whom he declared, that he bestowed upon
them freely, a great quantity of Grain; but in this his speech to the people,
he chanced to commit an incongruity in Grammar, when one of the Citizen^, set
thereby to hear him arose, and with a loud voice pronounced that word aright.
For the correction of this one Solecism (said he) I give unto thee besides my
former gift 5000 Medimnes or measures of Corn more.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the incredible strength of mind wherewith some Persons have
supported themselves in the midst of torments, and other hardship.
A Young Gentleman immediately before he was to enter into a battle was
observed to be seized with a sudden shaking and shivering all over his body;
Whereupon one asked him what was the matter? My flesh, said he, trembles at the
foresight of those many and great dangers whereinto my resolved and undaunted
heart will undoubtedly carry it. The strength of some men's hearts has not only
prevailed over the weakness of their flesh; but reduced it to a temper capable
of enduring as much, as if it had been brass, or something that (if possible)
is yet more insensible.

B^sb. Ep. 4. p. 226.
1. When we were come within sight of the City of Buda, there came by the
Command of the Bassa some of his family to meet us with diverse Chiauses But in
the first place a Troop of Young Men on Horseback made us turn our eyes to
them, because of the Novelty of their Equipage which was thus: Upon their bare
heads (which was in most of them shaven) they had cut a long line in the Skin
in which wound they had stuck feathers of all kinds, and they were dew'd with
drops of blood: yet dissembling the pain, they rode with as much mirth and
cheerfulness as if they had been void of all sense; just before me there walked
some on foot, one of these went with his naked arms on his side, in each of
which he carried a knife which he had thrust through them above the Elbow.
Another walked naked from his Navel upward, with the skin of both his loins so
cut above and below, that he carried a Club stuck therein as if it had hung at
his Girdle, another had fastened a Horse-shoo with diverse Nails upon the Crown
of his Head; but that was old done, the Nails being so grown in with the flesh
that the shoo was made fast; In this Pomp we entered Buda, and was brought into
the Bassa's Palace, in the Court of which stood these generous contemners of
pain, as I chanced to cast my eye that way, what think you of these men said
the Bassa? Well said I: but that they use their flesh in such manner as I would
not use my clothes as being desirous to keep them whole: he smiled and
dismissed us.

2. Andronicus Comnenus fell alive into the hands of his enemy; Nicet. Ch^^.
Ann. l. 2 de i^^. Andr^o. p 40.41. Cause. H. C. in Treat. of pass. p. 38. Knowl.
Tark. hist. p. 53. Sabel. Ex. l. 8. c. 4. p. 436.
who having laden him with injuries and contumelies, abandoned the miserable
Emperor, to the people for the punishment of his perf^diousness. By these he
had redoubled buffets given him with implacable violence: his hair was torn
off, his beard pulled away, his teeth were knocked out; and not so much as
women, but ran upon his wretched body to torture and torment it; whilst he
replied not a word; some days after his eyes being dug out, and his face
disfigured with blows, they set him on an old botchy Camel, without ought else
to cover him, then an old shirt, this Spectacle so full of horror, nothing
mollify'd the peoples hearts, but desperate men rushed upon him as thick as
^lies in Autumn; some covered him all over with dirt and ^ilth, others squeezed
spunges filled with ordure on his face, others gave him blows with clubs on the
head, others pricked him with Awls and Bodkins, and diverse threw stones at him,
calling him mad Dog. A wicked woman of the dregs of the vulgar, threw a pail of
scalding water upon his head, that his skin pilled off: Lastly they hastened to
hang him on a gibbet, by the feet, exposing him to a shameful nakedness in
sight of all the world, and they tormented him to the last instant of death: at
which time he received a blow from a hand which thrust a Sword through his
mouth into his bowels: all these and greater inhumanities the aged Emperor
underwent with that invincible patience, that he was heard to say no other
thing then, Lord have mercy on me, and why do ye break a bruised reed?

3. Ianus Anceps, Barth. hist. Anat. Cent. 3. hist. 15. p. 36, 37.
a wicked person, lived in a lone house by the way side, without the Eastgate
of Copenhagen: this man in the night, had murdered diverse persons, and knocked
them on the head with an Ax. At last he was discovered, taken, and condemned to
a terrible death, He was drawn upon a sledge through the City, he had pieces of
^lesh pulled off from his body with burning Pincers; his legs and arms were
broken, his tongue was pulled out of his mouth: thongs of his skin, were cut
out of his back, his breast was opened by the speedy hand of the Executioner:
his heart pulled out and thrown at his face. All this the stout hearted man,
bare with an invincible courage; and when his heart lay panting by his side; in
the midst of such torments as he yet underwent; he moved his head, and looked
upon the by standers, with a frowning aspect, and seemed with curiosity to
contemplate his own heart, till such time as his head was cut off.

4. Mutius Scaevola, Plut. in Publ. p. 108
having resolved to kill Porsena King of the Hetruscans, who at that time was
the enemy of Rome; he came into his Camp, and Tent, with a purpose to Execute
his design: but by mistake instead of the King be slew his Secretary, or
Captain of the Guard; being taken, and adjudged to death, to punish this error
of his Arm, he thrust his right hand into the ^ire, and without change of
countenance, held it therein, till it was quite burnt off. At which invincible
patience and constancy of his King Porsena was so amazed, that he raised his
Siege before Rome, Plut. pa^al. p. 906. Camer ^p. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 3. p.
221. Fulg. l. 3. c. 3. p. 347.
and also made peace with the Romans.

5. When Xerxes was arrived at the Cape of Artemisium with above 500000
fighting men, the Athenians sent out Agesilaus the brother of Themistocles, to
discover his Army. He coming in the habit of a Persian, into the Camp of the
Barbarians; slew Mardonius one of the Captains of the guard of the Kings body,
supposing he had been Xerxes himself, whereupon being taken, he was fettred,
and brought before the King, who was then offering sacrifice upon the Altar of
the Sun, into the fire whereof, Agesilaus thrusting his hand, and there
enduring the torment, without sigh or groan, Xerxes commanded to loose him. All
we Athenians said Agesilaus, are of the like courage, and if thou will not
believe it, I will put also my left hand into the fire, the King amazed at his
resolute Speech, Commanded him to be carefully kept, and looked too.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 110.
6. Isabella wife of Ferdinand King of Spain, was a woman of that firm temper of
mind, that not only in the times of her sickness; but also in the sharpest
pains of her travail: she ever suppressed, both voice and sighs. A most
incredible thing, but that Marinaeus Siculus affirms, that he was assured of
the truth hereof, by Ladies of unquestionable verity, who attended upon her in
her Chamber.

Verul hist. life and death Art. 15. tit. 32. p. 364.
7. The Lord Verulame mentions a certain tradition of a man, who (being under
the Executioners hand for High Treason) after his heart was plucked out of his
body, and in the hand of the Executioner, was yet heard to utter three or four
words of Prayer; Purch. pilg. tom. l. 8. c. 12. 2. p. 989.
and Purchase speaking of the humane sacrifices in New Spain: where the heart is
offered to the Sun; says thus, there happened a strange accident in one of
these sacrifices reported by men of worthy credit. That the Spaniards beholding
the solemnity, a young man whose heart was newly plucked out: and himself
turned down the stairs, when he came to the bottom, he said to the Spaniards in
his Language, Knights they have slain me.

Marsham (...) ad Monast. Angl. f. 9.
8. Gregorius Nazianzenus, tells of the Pontick Monks, that some of them torture
themselves with chains of Iron: some as if they were wild beasts; shut up
themselves in narrow and strait Cells, and see no body; remain in silence; and
fasting for the space of twenty days and nights together. O Christ (goes he on)
be thou propitious to those souls: that are Pious and devout I confess, but not
so prudent and advised as they might be.

Verul. de Augm. s^i^^t. l. 4. c. 4. p. 25^.
9. This is a notable Example of Tollerance, which happened in our times in a
certain Burgundian, who was the Murderer of the Prince of Orange, this man
though he was scourged with Rods of Iron; though his flesh was torn off with
red hot and burning Pincers: yet be gave not so much as a single sigh or groan.
Nay further, when part of a broken Sca^fold fell upon the head of one that
stood by as a spectator; this burned villain in the midst of all his torments
laughed at that accident; although not long before the same man, had wept when
he saw the curls of his hair cut off.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 3. p. ^6.
10. After the Ancient custom of the Macedonians, there were certain Noble
youths, that ministered unto Alexander the Great, at such time as he sacrificed
to the gods: one of which having a Censer in his hand, stood before the King:
it chanced that a burning coal, fell upon his Arm, and although he was so burnt
by it, that the smell of his burnt flesh, was in the Noses of them that stood
by: yet he suppressed his pain with silence; and held his Arm immovable; least
by shaking the Censer he should interrupt the sacrifice, or least by his
groaning he should give Alexander any disturbance. The King also delighted with
this patience of the youth; that he might make the more certain experiment of
his tollerance, on set purpose continued and protracted his sacrifice, and yet
for all this the youth persisted in his resolute intention.

11. Anaxarohus was variously and cruelly tormented by the Tyrant Nicocreon;
Val. Max. l. 3. c. 3. p. 77, 78.
and yet by all his cruelti^s could never be restrained from urging of him with
opprobrious terms and the most reproachful language. At last the Tyrant being
highly provoked threatened that he would cause his tongue to be cut out of his
mouth. Effeminate young man said Anaxarchus, neither shall that part of my body
be at thy disposal. And while the Tyrant (for very rage) stood gaping before
him, he immediately bit off his Tongue with his Teeth; and spat it into his
mouth. A Tongue that had heretofore bred admiration in the ears of many, but
especially of Alexander the Great; at such time as it had discoursed of the
State of the earth, the properties of the Seas, the motion of the Stars, and
indeed the Nature of the whole World: in a most prudent and eloquent manner.

12. William Colingborn, Fab. Chron. p. 519. Chet. hist. coll. Cent. 12. p. 321.
Esquire being condemned for making this Rhyme on King Richard the third, The Cat,
the Rat; and Lovel our Dog
Rule all England under the Hog.
was put to a most cruel death; for being hanged and cut down alive, his bowels
rip't out and cast into the fire, when the executioner put his hand into the
bulk of his body, to pull out his heart; he said, Lord Jesus yet more trouble?
and so died, to the great sorrow of much people.

13. Amongst the Indians the meditation of patience; Val. Max. l. 3. c. 3. p.
78.
is adhered to, with that obstinacy, that there are some, who pass their whole
life in nakedness, one while hardening their bodies in the frozen rigours, and
piercing colds of Mount Caucasus: and at others exposing themselves to the
^lames, without so much as a sigh or groan. Nor is it a small glory that they
acquire to themselves, by this contempt of pain, for they gain thereby the
reputation, and Title of Wise Men.

14. Such Examples as I have already recited, Fulg. Ex. l. 3. c. 3. p. 365, 366
I have furnished my self with, either by reading, or by the relation of such
as have seen them: but there now comes into my mind, a most eminent one,
whereof I can affirm that I my self was an eye witness, and it was this.
Hieronymus Olgiatus was a Citizen of Millain, and he was one of those four that
did Assassinate Galeatius Sforza, Duke of Millain. Being taken he was thrust
into Prison, and put to bitter tortures; now although he was not above two and
twenty years of age, and of such a delicacy and softness in his habit of body;
that was more like to that of a Virgin, than a man, though never accustomed to
the bearing of Arms, by which it is usual for men to acquire vigor and
strength; yet being fastened to that rope upon which he was tormented, he seemed
as if he sat upon some Tribunal; free from any expression of grief, with a
clear voice, and an undaunted mind, he commended the exploit of himself and his
Companions; nor did he ever show the least sign of repentance. In the times of
the intermissions of his torments, both in Prose and Verse, he celebrated the
praises of himself and his Confederates. Being at last brought to the place of
Execution, beholding Carolus and Francion two of his associats to stand as if
they were almost dead with fear; he exhorted them to be courageous, and
requested the Executioners that they would begin with him, that his fellow
sufferers might learn patience by his example. Being therefore laid naked, and
at full length upon the hurdle, and his feet and Arms bound fast down unto it,
when others that stood by were terrified with the show and horror of that death
that was prepared for him; he with specious words, and assured voice extolled
the gallantry of their action, and appeared unconcerned with that cruel kind of
death, he was speedily to undergo; yea when by the Executioners knife he was
cut from the shoulder to the middle of the breast, he neither changed his
countenance nor his voice; but with a Prayer to God, he ended his life.

Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 352. Sabell. Ex. lib. 5. cap. 8. p. 301.
15. Caius Marius the Roman Consul having the chief veins of his legs swelled (a
Disease of those Times) he stretched out one leg to be cut off by the hand of
the Surgeon; and not only did he refuse to be bound (as it is customary with
such Patients) or to be held by any man; but not so much as by any word or sign
did he bewray any sense of pain all the time of the operation, no more than if
the incision had been made in any other body, or that he himself had been
utterly void of all sense. But afterward, when his Surgeon propounded to
him the same method of cure for his other leg; (in regard the Disease was
rather deforming than extremely dangerous) Marius told him, that the matter
seemed not to him of that importance, as that upon the account thereof, he
should undergo such tormenting pain. By which words he discovered, that during
the time of the incision of his leg, he had endured very great pain; but that
through the strength and tollerance of his mind, he had dissembled and suppressed
what he felt.

Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 348.
16. This was also an Example of great patience in this kind, which Strabo
mentions in his Geography from the Authority of Nicholaus Damascenus; viz. that
Zarmonochaga, the Ambassador from the Indian King, having finished his
Negotiation with Augustus to his mind, and thereof sent account to his Master,
because he would have no further trouble for the remaining part of his life,
(after the manner of the Indians) he burnt himself alive, preserving all the
while, the countenance of a man that smiled.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Fortitude and Personal Valor of some Famous Men.
Cause. H. C. tom. 1. lib. 1. p. 7.
THere is a Precious Stone by the Greeks called Ceraunia, as one would say the
Thunderstone, for it is bred among Thunders, and is found in places where
Heaven all swollen with anger, has cleft the Masterpieces of the Worlds
Magazine, says Caussine, such is the valiant man; bred up so long in dangers
till he has learned to contemn them. And if the Poet be a Prophet you shall
hear him say. He that smiling can gaze on
Styx and black waved Acheron,
That dares brave his ruin, he
To Kings, to Gods, shall equal be.
At least if he fall in a Noble Cause he dies a Martyr, and the Brazen Trumpet
of Fame, shall proclaim this glorious memorial to late Posterity, as it has
done for those that follow.

1. Sapores the Persian King beseiged Caesaria in Cappadocia, Di^oth. m^mor.
lib. 3. p. 239. Zonar. Annal. tom. 2.
a Captive Physician, showed him a weak place of the City, where he might
enter, at which the Persians gaining entrance, put all indifferently to the
Sword. Demosthenes the Governor of the City, hearing the Tumult, speedily
mounted, and perceiving all lost, sought to get out, but in the way fell upon a
Squadron of the Enemy, that gathered about him to take him alive, but he
setting Spurs to his Horse, and stoutly laying about him with his Sword, slew
many, and opening himself a way through the midst of them escaped.

2. When L. Sylla beheld his Army put to the worst by A^chelaus the General of
Mithridates, Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 301.
he alighting from his Horse, laid hold of an Ensign, and rushing with it into
the midst of his Enemies; cried out, it is here Roman Soldiers, that I intend
to die; but for your parts when you shall be asked, where it was that you left
your General, remember it was in Orchomenum. The Soldiers moved with this
Speech of his, returned to their Ranks, renewed the Fight, and became the
Victors in that Field, where they were so near an overthrow.

3. Manlius Capitolinus when as yet he was not full seventeen years of Age,
Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 28. p. 170. Solin. cap. 6. p. 191.
won the Spoils of two Enemies, he was the first amongst the Romans that was
honored with a Mural Crown; by his Valor he gained thirteen Civick Galands,
and thirty other Military Rewards; he had thirty and three Scars, the
remainders of most honorable wounds that were to be seen in the ^ore-part of
his body, besides a wound in his shoulder, and another in his hip. He saved P.
Servilius the Master of the Horse, when he was surrounded with a Troop of his
Enemies, and was he who defended and preserved the Capitol, when the Gauls had
little less than become the Masters of it.

4. Pyrrhus King of Epirus sighting in the first ranks against the Mamertines,
Dinoth. m^morab. lib. 3. p. 235. Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 304.
had received a wound, and retired to have it bound up; but when he heard that
the Enemies courage was increased by that accident, and that one of the bravest
amongst them, had called for him by name, he returned to the Battle, and having
^ound out him, who had given him the Challenge, he gave him such a blow upon
the head with his sword, he threw him dead at his feet; by which action the
Enemy being dismayed, left him the better of the day.

5. The Athenians under the command of Miltiades, Justin. hist. lib. 2. p. 41.
Sabell. Ex. lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 206.
had charged the Army of Dari^s at Marathon so home, that they were enforc^d to
run away to their Navy, where it was that one Cynegirus an Athenian, showed
such incomparable valor, for being in pursuit of the Persians to their Ships;
when some of them were putting off from the shore, he caught hold of one of the
Ships with his right hand, holding it till his hand was cut off; then did he
lay hold of it with his left hand till that also was cut off, and yet then he
catched hold of it with his teeth, nor did he leave it till such time as the
^^eeting breath had withdrawn it self from his body, and thereby disappointed
the resolute intentions of his mind.

6. In the Naval sight betwixt Met^llus Asdrubal, Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 2.
p. 302.
L. Glaucus, a Knight of Rome, having laid hold upon Asdrubal's Ship, by no
wounds could be beaten from thence, till he left both his hands together with
the Ship. Bruson. facet. and Ex. lib. 2. cap. 43. p. 152.

7. Philopoemen, Fulgos. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 305.
the Megapolitan was in the Army of Antigonus King of Mac^d^n, when he fought
against Cleomenes the King of Sparta, and with a too forward, yet Military
ardour, not expecting the Signal, rushed forth against the Enemy, where
fighting he was shot through both thighs with an Arrow, and thereby was at were
fettered; for there was no pulling it out, he therefore so opened and strained
one thigh one way, and the other the contrary, that he brake the Arrow, and so
pulled out both pieces, and no whit discouraged thereby, pressed yet so boldly
upon the adverse part, that he was the principal cause of that days Victory,
falling on the side of Antigonus.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 162. Dinoth. memorab. 239. lib. 3. p. 239.
8. In the Reign of Johannes Zimisca, Emperor of Greece; the Russians and
Scythians with an Army of 300000 Soldiers, wasted Thrace, against whom Bardus
Sclerus, a stout and valiant Person was sent; he having fortunately fought
against a part of that Army, when he had drawn them within the compass of an
Ambush he had placed for them, elevated with this Success, he refused not a
pitched ^ight with the rest, and why he was riding in the battle in the midst
of his Soldiers, exhorting them both by words and deeds, to quit themselves
like men, a Scythian of a vast Stature above the rest, having spied him, rushed
upon him and gave him a terrible blow upon the head, which the excellent temper
of his Helmet resisted: But Sclerus, struck with that force upon the head of
the Scythian, that he clave the Barbarian in two parts, the Scythians
astonished, with the prodigious effect of so potent an Arm, committed
themselves to ^light, and the Grecians obtained a Signal Victory.

Plin. hist. lib. 7. cap. 28. p. 170. Solin. cap. 6. p. 191. Sab^llic. Ex. lib.
4. cap. 6. p. 208. Bruson. sac^t. and Ex. lib. 2. cap. 43. p. 152.
9. L. Siccius Dentatus a Tribune of the People, when Sp. Tarp^ius, and A.
Aeternius were Consuls, is reported to have served in an hundred and twenty
pitched Battles, eight times he was victorious in single Combats, wherein
himself had been the Challenger; he carried on the forepart of his bo^dy forty
five Scars, made by honorable Wound^; he wan the Spoil of thirty four several
Enemies, and had given him by his Captains for his prowess, and good service,
eighteen headless Spears, twenty five Capparisons and Furnitures of great
Horses, eighty three C^ains, one hundred and sixty Bracelets to adorn his Arms,
twenty six Crowns or triumphant Chaplets, whereof fourteen were Civick, for
r^s^^ing so many Roman Citizens in jeopardy of death, eight of beaten Gold,
three other mural, for mounting first upon the Enemies Walls; and last of all
one oblidional, for forcing the Enemy to break up ^ is Seige, and depart.

Plin. hist. lib. 7. cap. 28. p. 170. Soli^. cap. 6. p. 192. Sab^l^ic. Ex. li^.
4. cap. 6. p. 2^^. (...). Ex. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 3^1.
10. M. Sergius, the second time he went into the Field, his hap was to loose
his right hand, and in two other Servic^s he was wounded no fewer than three
and twenty times, by means whereof he had little use of either hand, and his
feet stood him in little stead. How be it thus maimed and di^abled as he was to
be a Soldier, he went many a time after to the Wars, attended with one Slave
only, and performed his devoir; twice was he taken Prisoner by Annibal; and
twice brake he Prison and made his escape. Notwithstanding that, for twenty
Months space, he was every day ordinarily kept bound with Chains and Fetters;
four times fought he with his left hand only, until two Horses one after
another were killed under him, after with a right hand of iron fastened to his
arm, and in France he forced twelve fortified Camps o^ the Enemies. Bruson.
facet. and Ex. lib. 2. cap. 43. p. 152.

Plut in Poplic. p. 105. Val. Max. lib. 3. c. 7. p. Sabell. Ex. lib. 4. cap. 6.
p. 207. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 311. Live. hist. l. 2. p. 25.
11. Pors^nna King of the Hetrurians had so beaten the Romans, that Poplicola,
the Roman Consul having received many Wounds, and the rest forced to fly to
Rome it self for safety; the enemy pressed hard upon the Rear of them, and were
now entering upon the Bridge, which gave them a fair entrance into Rome, when
there stood Horatius Cocles, who singly maintained the fight against the whole
Forces of the Enemy, till such time as his Companions had cut down the Wooden
Bridge behind him, and then armed as he was, he leaped into Tyber, and swam
safe to the bank on the other side, having only received a wound in his
Buttock, by an Hetrusian Javelin. Poplicola the Consul admiring his Valor
proposed it to the People, that each of them should give him as much as should
maintain him for a day, and that they should allot him as much Land, as he
could compass in one day with a Plough, which they yielded to, and besides
erected for him a Brazen Statue in the Temple of Vulcan, with those Honors
endeavoring to alleviate the lameness he had contracted by his wound.

12. Under the Walls of Durazzo, Plut. in Caio. p. 7.15. Sueton. in Iulio. p.
41. H^yl. Cosmogr. p. 599. Sabell. Ex. lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 206.
first called Epidamnum, and afterward Dyrrhachium, was the first bickering
betwixt the Soldiers of Caesar and Pompey, not only to the present loss, but
to the utter discomfiture of Caesar (as himself confessed) if the Enemies
Captain had known how to overcome: at this Seige the Valor of Cassius Sceva,
was famous, who alone so long resisted Pompey's Army, that he had 130 Arrows
sticking in his Shield, lost one of his eyes, was wounded in the thigh and
shoulder, yet gave not over till Caesar came to his rescue.

13. In the Battle against Perseus, Plut. in Aemylio. p. 266. Justin. hist.
lib. 33. p. 285. Dinoth. memor. lib. 3. p. 236.
M. Cato, Son to the Orator of that Name, sighting bravely amongst the thickest
of the Enemies, was beaten from his Horse; and then fought on ^oot, when a
Party of the Enemy had surrounded him, and when they pressed upon him on every
side to bear him down, he stood unappalled, and gallantly sustained tbeir
Assaults: But while he fiercely set upon one of greatest Stature amongst them,
his Sword flew out of his hand into the midst of them, to recover which
protecting himself with his Shield, and opening his way, he pressed betwixt the
points of their Swords in the view and to the wonder of both Armies; when
having recovered his Sword he retreated to his Companions, with the applause of
all men, full of Wounds and as full of Glory; the rest in imitation of his
Valor, falling ^iercely upon the Enemy obtained a great Victory.

14. Alexander the Great had besieged a City of the Oxydracae, Diodor. Sicul.
lib. 17. p. 570, 571. Oros. hist. lib. 3. cap. 19. p. 94. Dinoth. memor. lib.
3. p. 234. Justin. hist. lib. 12. p. 145.
and resolving to carry it by Storm, had broke in at a Gate, and forced the
Enemy to ^ly into the Castle; here, while the rest of the Macedonians were
busied in undermining the Walls; he not enduring delay, caught up a Ladder, and
rearing it up against the Wall, and holding his Shield over his head, began to
mount it, all which he performed with that celerity, that before the Guard of
the place had observed it, he had gained the top; they durst not approach to
deal with him hand to hand, but at a distance threw Javelins and Darts at him,
in such a number as that he was sore pressed by them. The Macedonians sought to
mount upon two Ladders they had advanced, but their number and weight that
ascended, caused them to break under them. Then was Alexander left destitute of
any Assistance, but scorning to retire by the way that he came, armed as he was
leaped into the midst of his Enemies, and made a bold and courageous
resistance. On his right hand he had a Tree that grew near the Wall, and on the
left the Wall it self, to keep him from being environed, and there he fought it
with the stoutest of them; many a blow he received upon his Helmet and Shield;
at last he had a wound under the Pap with an Arrow, with the pain of which he
was forced to the Earth. Then the Indian that had given him the wound,
carelessly approaching too near him, to strike him as he lay, received
Alexander's Sword into his Bowels, and tumbled down by his side; the King
catching hold of a Bough that hung downwards, again recovering his standing,
and then began to challenge the best of them to the fight. In this posture he
was found by Peucestes, who by this time had got over the Wall, and after him a
multitude of others, by which means the Castle was taken, and most of them put
to the Sword.

Baker's Chron. p. 45. Dinoth. lib. 3. p. 240. Polyd. Virg. lib. 8.
15. In the Reign of William the First, a private Norwegian Soldier, himself
alone upon a Bridge, resisted the whole Army of the English, slew forty of
them, and maintained the place for diverse hours together, till one getting
under the Bridge, found means to thrust up a spear into his body, and so killed
him.

Oros. hist. lib. 6. cap. 16. p. 262. Vell. Patercul. lib. 2. p. 31. Dinoth.
lib. 7. p. 237. Appian. bell. civil. lib. 2. p. 75.
16. Caius Caesar was renowned as a valorous Person, and one that despised all
danger, he alone diverse times restored the fight, opposing those of his Army
that sled, and retaining them, often thrusting into the thickest of his
Enemies, striking terror into them, and inflaming the courage of his own, when
at Munda in Spain he fought against the Sons of Pompey; he was the first that
assaulted the Enemy, and when his Soldiers hardly endured the brunt, he alone
fought in the Front of them, two hundred Javelins were thrown against him, yet
he moved not a foot. The Soldiers moved with anger and shame, renewed the
^ight, and at last late toward Evening obtained through his Prowess a Noble
Victory, by the death of thirty thousand men of the adverse Party.

Baker's Chron. p. 50.
17. King William the Second, being reconciled to his Brother Robert; he
assisted him to recover the Fort of Mount Saint Michael which their Brother
Henry did forcibly hold in Normandy: during which Seige straggling one time
alone upon the shore; he was set upon by three Horsemen, who assaulted him so
^iercely, that they drove him from his Saddle, and his Saddle from his Horse.
But he catching up his Saddle, and withal drawing out his Sword, defended
himself till rescue came, and being afterward blamed for being so obstinate to
defend his Saddle. It would have angered me (said he) to the very heart, that
the Knaves should have bragged they had won the Saddle from me.

Baker's Chron. p. 47, 48.
18. Malcolme King of the Scots, in the time of King William the Second was a
most valiant Prince, as may appear by an Act of his, of an extraordinary
strain. For hearing of a Conspiracy and Plot to murder him, whereof one was
Author, whose name is not recorded. He dissembled the knowledge of it, till
being abroad one day a hunting, he took the ^ellow apart from the Company, and
being alone; Here is now, said he, a fit time and place, to do that manfully,
which you have intended to do treacherously; draw your Weapon and if you now
kill me none being present, you can incur no danger: With which Speech of the
King the Fellow was so daunted, that presently he fell down at his feet,
confessed his fault, humbly asked forgiveness, and being granted him was ever
after serviceable and faithful to the King.

H^ro^ian. lib. 7. p. 324, 325.
19. Maximinus the Emperor in an expedition that he made against the Germans
when he came to huge and vast Marshes (into which the Germans had retreated)
the Romans fearing to follow so far; Dinoth. memor. lib. 3. p. 238.
he himself mounted on his Horse, was the first that entered the Marish, and
their slew many of the Barbarians that with great obstinacy resisted him. The
Army confounded with shame, that the Emperor alone should sustain the Assault
of the Enemy, entered the Marish also, where they fought it with that gallantry,
that few of the Barbarians escaped their Swords; the Emperor himself still
bravely fighting in the head of them.

20. Ptolomeus the Son of Pyrrhus King of Epirus was of that valourous heart
and strength of body, Justin. hist. lib. 25. p. 244. Dinoth. l^b. 3. p. 235,
236.
that he dared accompanied only with sixty Soldiers, to assault the City of
Corcyra manned with a Garrison and took it. The same Person in a Naval fight,
leaping out of a Boat into a Galley of the Enemies, reduced it under his power:
And at the Seige of Sparta, a City famous for Military Glory; he brake into the
midst of the City, beating down all the Ranks of Soldiers that opposed his
Entrance.

21. Lysima^hus the Macedonian, Patric. de regno. lib. 1. t^t. 11. p. 47.
had sent Poison to Calisthenes to put an end to his miserable life; for
Alexander upon the account of his too great liberty of Speech, had caused his
hands, nose, ears, lips to be cut off and thrust into a Cage with a Dog for his
company, to be carried about to the terror of others: When Alexander
understood this of Lysimachus he was so incensed against him, that he commanded
he should disarmed be exposed to a Lion of extraordinary fierceness. He
wrapping his Cloak about his hand (when the Lion came gaping upon him) thrust
it into his Mouth, and plucking out his Tongue by the roots, left the Lion dead
at his foot. Alexander admiring his virtue constancy forgave him his fault, and
not only so, hut held him in much better esteem than before, and gave him both
more honor, and a better command about him.

22. Godfrey of Bovillon was brought up in that School of Valor, Fuller's holy
war. lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 44.
the Court of Henry the Fourth, the Emperor: Whilst he lived there, there
happened an intricate Suit betwixt him and another Prince about Title of Land;
and because Judges could not untye the knot, it was concluded the two Princes
should cut it asunder with their Swords in a single Combat. Godfrey declined
the Fight as much as in him lay, as conceiving any private Title for Land not
ground enough for a Duel. Notwithstanding he yielded to the Tyranny of Custom,
and after the fashion of the Country entered the Lists; when at the first
Encounter his Sword brake, but he struck his Adversary down with the Hilt, yet
saved his life, and gained his own Inheritance. Another parallel act of his
Valor was, when being Standard Bearer to the Emperor, he with the Imperial
Ensign, killed Rodul^hus the King of Saxony in single Fight, and fed the Eagle
on the bowels of that Arch-Traytor.

23. Acilius was a Soldier of Caesar's, Plut. in Caesare. p. 715.
who being in a Naval Fight at Massilia, threw himself into a Ship of the
Enemy's; where having lost his right hand, together with his Sword, he yet
retained his Shield in his left hand; with which he so laid upon the faces of
his Enemies, that he alone put them all to flight, and took the Ship.

24. When Epaminondas with his Troops was entered Sparta, Plut. in Agesil. p.
615.
there was one Isada, a young man, a proper and beautiful person; who coming
out of the Bath, naked as he was both of Clothes and Armor, with a Lance in
one hand and a Sword in the other, threw himself into the midst of the Enemies,
wounding and over-throwing all that opposed him. When the Fight was over, no
wound was found upon him; whether some Tutelar God had taken care of his
Virtue, or that he seemed to the Enemy to be something more great and august
than a man. They say that the Ephori rewarded this valorous exploit of his with
a Crown; but soon after imposed upon him a Fine of one thousand Drachmes, for
daring to expose himself in the Fight in such manner without Armor.

Plut. in Marcello. p. 363.
25. Lucius Bantius of the City of Nola, was a man of great Nobility and Virtue,
had fought with great resolution at the Battle of Cannae; and having slain a
number of Enemies with his own hands, he was at last found in a heap of dead
bodies, all covered with Javelins. Hannibal himself astonished at his valor,
not only sent him home without Ransom, but honored him also with Presents, and
contracted a Friendship with him. Whereupon, at his Return to Nola, he sought
to make it of Hannibal's Party. Marcellus the Consul had understanding hereof;
and not enduring to cut off a man, who had exposed himself to so many dangers
in the behalf of the Romans, and so highly merited of them; and withal, knowing
how to treat a high Spirit with such humanity and discourse, as to assure him
to himself: One time when Bantius came with others to salute him, he asked who
he was? when he heard it was Lucius Bantius, (which he knew before) as one
seized with admiration and joy; What, said he, are you that Bantius of whom the
Romans discoursed so much above all those that fought at Cann^e; who alone,
they say, deserted not the Consul, but received on your own body those Iavelins
that were aimed at him? Bantius not denying it, but showing him his scars:
Since then, said he, that you bear about you so many tokens of your good will
to us, why would you not let me see you sooner? do you think us so ill natured,
as not to esteem of that Virtue that is in honor with our very Enemies? Here
he embraced the young man, and presented (...) with a gallant Horse and five
thousand Drachmes. From thenceforth he was most faithful to the intere^^ of
Marcellus, and the people of Rome.

Ios^ph. Iewi^h ^^rs, l. 7. c. 1. p. 728.
26. The Emperor Titu^ e^^ouraged his Soldiers to assault a Wall of the ^^ower
of Antonia in Jerusalem; but all being dismayed at the extremity of the danger,
Sabinus a Syrian undertook it, a man of excellent strength and courage, yet so
small of stature, that one would have deemed him unfit to be a Soldier. This
man offered himself to Caesar with eleven more that envied his Virtue. He took
his Shield in his left hand, and holding it above his head, with his drawn
Sword in his right hand, about the sixth hour of the day he went unto the Wall.
On every side the Jews upon the Wall cast an infinite number of Darts at him,
and rolled down upon him huge Stones that struck down some of the eleven that
followed him: But Sabinus did not remit his force, till such time as he had
ascended the top of the Wall, and put the Enemies to flight; for they,
terrified with his strength and courage, and indeed supposing that more had
come up after him, they ^led. Thus the gallant man failed not of his purpose,
yet was he stricken with a Stone, and thrown down flat upon his face most
violently, with a great noise; so that now the Jews seeing him alone, and lying
upon the ground* returned again, and shot him on every side. He kneeling upon
his knees, and covering himself with his Shield, did first of all revenge
himself upon his Enemies, and wounded many that came near him; till that with
wounding them he was so weary, that he could strike no longer; und so at last
was slain with Arrows. Those of his Company having almost reached the top of
the Wall, were slain with Stones, or wounded and carried into the Camp.

27. The Romans having won the Tower Antonia, Joseph. Jewish Wars, l. 7. c. 3.
p. 729.
the Jews ^led into the Inner Temple, and there maintained sight from the ninth
hour of the night to the seventh hour of the day; at which time the Romans had
the worst of it. This was observed by Julian a Centurion, (born in Bithinia)
who at that time stood by Titus in Antonia; he therefore presently leaped down
thence, and all alone pursued the Jews who had the Victory in the Inner Temple:
And the whole multitude ^led, deeming him by his force and tourage not to have
been a man; in the midst of them he slew all he lighted upon, whilst for haste
the one overturned the oath. This deed seemed admirable to Caesar, and terrible
to his Enemies. Yet did the destiny befall him which no man can escape; for
having his Shoes full of sharp Nails, as other Soldiers have, running upon the
Pavement, he slipped and fell down, his Armor in the fall making a great
noise; whereat his Enemies who before fled, now turned again upon him. Then the
Romans in Antonia fearing his life, cried out; but the Jews, many at once,
struck him with Swords and Spears. He defended many blows with his Shield, and
many times attempting to rise, they struck him down again; yet as he say he
wounded many: neither was he quickly slain, because the nobler parts of his
body were all armed, and he shrunk in his neck a long time; till other parts of
his body being cut off, and no man helping him, his strength failed. Caesar
sorrowed to see a man of that force and fortitude slain in the sight of such a
multitude. The Jews took his dead body, and did beat back the Romans, and shut
them in Antonia; only the brave Julian left behind him a renowned memory, not
only amongst the Romans and Caesar, but also amongst his Enemies.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the fearless Boldness of some Men, and their desperate^
solutions.
SOme men have within them a Spirit so daring and adventurous, that the
presence and more than probability of any disaster whatsoever, is not able to
conjure down. To desperate Diseases they apply as desperate Remedies; and
therein Fortune sometimes so befriends them, that they come off as successfully
with their Presumptions and Temerities as others who manage their Counsels
with the greatest care and conduct they are able.

1. A Dutch Sea man being condemned to death, Mans^^'s Travels, l. 3. p. 280.
his Punishment was changed, and he was ordered to be left at St. Hellen's
Island. This unhappy person representing to himself the horror of that
Solitude, fell upon a resolution to attempt the strangest action that ever was
heard of. There had that day been interred in the same Island an Officer of the
Ship: The Seaman took up the body out of the Coffin; and having made a kind of
Rudder of the upper board, ventured himself to Sea in it. It happened
fortunately to him to be so great a Calm that the Ship lay immovable within a
League and half of the Island; when his Companions seeing so strange a Boat
^loat upon the Waters, imagined they saw a Spectre, and were not a little
startled at the resolution of the man, who durst hazard himself upon that
Element in three boards slightly nailed together, though he had no confidence
to find or be received by those who had so lately sentenced him to death.
Accordingly it was put to the question whether he should be received or not;
some would have the Sentence put in execution, but at last mercy prevailed, and
he was taken aboard, and came afterward to Holland; where he lived in the Town
of Horn, and related to many how miraculously God had delivered him.

Raleigh's Hist. World, l. 2. c. 22.. 9. p. 472.
2. The French King Charles the Eighth, through the weakness of Peter de Medices
in his Government, had reduced the City of Florence unto such hard terms, that
he had the Gates of it set open to him; H^yl. Cosm. p. 741.
he entered it (not professing himself friend or foe to the Estate) in a
triumphant manner, himself and his Horse armed with his Lance upon his thigh.
De Serres hist. France, p. 447.
Many Insolences were committed by the French, so that the Citizens were driven
to prepare to fight for their Liberty. Charles propounds intolerable
Conditions, demanding high sums of money, and the absolute Rule of the State
as by right of Conquest, he having entered armed into it. But Peter Caponi a
principal Citizen, catching these Articles from the King's Secretary, and
tearing them before his face, bad him sound his Trumpets, and they would ring
their Bells. Which bold and resolute words made the French better to bethink
themselves; and came readily to this Agreement, that for forty thousand pounds,
and not half that money to be paid in hand, Charles should not only depart in
peace, but restore whatever he had of their Dominion, and continue their
assured friend.

Lon. Theatr. p. 576.
3. Henry Earl of Holsatia, surnamed Iron (because of his strength) being gotten
into great favor with Edward the Third, Crantz. hist. Saxo^. l. 3. c. 24. p.
91.
King of England, by reason of his Valor was envied by the Courtiers; who one
day (in the absence of the King) counseled the Queen, Camerar. oper. subcisiv.
cent. 1. c. 22. p. 118
that for as much as the Earl was preferred before all the English Nobility,
she would make trial whether he was so nobly born as he gave out, by causing a
Lion to be let loose upon him, saying that the Lion would not so much as touch
Henry if he was Noble indeed. They got leave of the Queen to make this Trial
upon the Earl. He was used to rise before day, and to walk in the base Court of
the Castle, to take the fresh Air of the morning. The Lion was let loose in the
night; and the Earl having a night Gown cast over his Shirt, with his Girdle
and Sword, and so coming down the Stairs into the Court, met there with the
Lion, bristling his hair and roaring; he nothing astonished, said with a stout
voice, Stand, stand you Dog. At these words the Lion couched at his feet, to
the great amazement of the Courtiers, who looked out of their holes to behold
the issue of this business. The Earl laid hold of the Lion, and shut him within
his Cage, he left his Nightcap upon the Lyon's back, and so came forth without
so much as looking behind him. Now, said the Earl (calling to them that looked
out at the Windows) let him amongst you all that stands most upon his
Pedigree, go and fetch my Nightcap; but they ashamed, withdrew themselves.

4. In the Court of Matthias King of Hungary, there was a Polonian Soldier in
the King's Pay, who boasted much of his valor, and who in a bravado would
often challenge the Hungarians to wrestle, Crantz. hist. Saxon. l. 3. c. 24. p.
91.
or skirmish with the Sword or Pike, wherein he had always the better. One day
as he stood by a great Iron Cage in which a Lion was kept, Lon. Theatr p. 577.
the greatest and fiercest that had been seen of a long time, Camerar. oper.
subciciv. cent. 1. c. 22. p. 118
he began to say to those that were in his company, Which of you dares to take
a piece of flesh out of this Lyon's throat when he is angry: None daring to
take it in hand; You shall see, added the Polonian, the proof of my Speech. All
that day following the Lion had not any meat given him, the next day they threw
him the fore Quarters of a Sheep; the Lion begins to grunt, to couch down at
his Prey, and to eat greedily: Herewith the Polonian enters; and lo^king the
Lion betwixt his legs, gives him a blow with his fist upon the Jaw, crying hah,
you Dog, give me the flesh. The Lion amazed at such a bold voice, let go his
hold, showing no other Countenance, but casting his eye after the Polonian that
carried the flesh away.

5. The City of Rome being taken by the Gauls, Plut. Paral. in Camillo, p. 141.
and those that fled to the Capitol besieged; in this distress some of the
Romans that were fled to Veientum brought that same Camillus, Live. hist. l. 5.
p. 102.
whom before they had ungratefully forced into Exile, to take upon him the
Supreme Command. Zon. Annal^ tom. 2. p. 61
He answered, that while those in the Capitol were safe, he took them for his
Country, and should obey their Commands with all readiness, but should not
obtrude himself upon them against their will. But all the difficulty was to
send to them that were enclosed in the Capitol; by the way of the City it was
impossible, as being full of Enemies. But amongst the young men of Ardaea,
where Camillus then was, there was one Pontius Cominius, of a mean Birth, but
desirous of Glory and Honor, who offered himself to this piece of service. He
took no Letters to them, lest, being taken, the design should be betrayed to
the Enemy: But in meat habit, and pieces of Cork under it, he performed part of
his journey by daylight; as soon as it grew dark, being near the City, because
the Bridge was kept by the Enemy he could not that way pass the River; with his
light Garment, therefore, bound about his head, and bearing up himself upon his
Cork, he swam over the River; and perceiving by the fire and noise that the
Guards were awake, he shunned them, and came to the Carmental Gate; there all
was silent, and the Capitoline Hill was most steep, and hard to ascend: By this
way he climbs up, and at last came to the Sentinels that watched upon the
Walls; he salutes them, and tells them who he was. He was taken up, led to the
Magistrates, acquaints them with all his business: They presently create
Camillus Dictator, and by the same way dismiss Pontius; who with the same
wonderful difficulty escaped the Enemy as before, and came safe to Camillus,
and Camillus to the safety of his Country.

6. In the Reign of Tham King of China, Alvarez. Seemed. hist. China, part. 1.
c. 22. p. 109, 110.
there was a Colao, an Officer not unlike that of our Duke, who having been
Tutor to the King, was very powerful with him, and to preserve himself in his
Grace and Favor, studied more to speak what would please the King, then to
tell him the truth for the good of his Estate. The Chinese forbear not to
speak of it amongst themselves, and to tax the flattery of this Coloa; once
some Captains of the Guard were discoursing this Point at the Palace, when one
of them being a little warmed with the Discourse, secretly withdrew himself,
went into the Hall where the King was, and kneeling down upon his knees before
him; the King asked what he would have? Leave, said he, to cut off the head of
a flattering Subject. And who is that, said the King? Such a one who stands
there, replied the other. The King in a rage; What, said he, against my Master
dare thou to propound this, and in my Presence too? Take him away, and strike
off his head. When they began to lay hands upon him, he caught hold of a wooden
balanster; and as there were many pulling of him, and he holding with a great
deal of strength, it brake: by this time the King's heat was over; he commands
they should let him go, and gave order that the balanster should be mended, and
that they should not make a new one, that it might remain a witness of the
Fact, and a memorial of a Subject, that was not afraid to advise his King, what
he ought to do.

Lips. Monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 96.
7. Phocion the Athenian was a man that stood with unmovable constancy against
the Multitude, the Nobles, Fortune and Death it self. There was once an Oracle
recited at Athens; viz. that there was amongst them one single man that ever
dissented from the agreeing opinions of all the rest. All the people were
enraged, and enquired after that man. Now, pray, said Phocion, surcease your
enquiry, I am the man you seek for; for not one thing of all that you do did
ever please me.

Bak. Ch^on. p. 144.
8. In a Parliament at Salisbury, in the twenty fifth year of King Edward the
First, the King requires certain of his Lords to go to the Wars in Gascoigne,
which needed a present Supply, by reason of the death of his Brother Edmund;
but all the Lords made excuses each for themselves: Whereupon the King in great
rage threatened they should either go, or he would give their Lands to others
that would. Upon this Humphry Bohune, Earl of Hereford, High Constable; and
Robert Bigod Earl of Norfolk, Marshal of England, made their Declaration, that
if the King went in Person they would attend him, otherwise not: which Answer
offended the King more; and being urged again, the Earl Marshal protested he
would willingly go thither with the King, and march before him in the
Vanguard, as by right of Inheritance he ought to do. But the King told him
plainly he should go with any other, though he went not himself in person. I am
not so bound, said the Earl, neither will I take that Journey without you. The
King swore, By God, Sir Earl, you shall go or hang. And I swear by the same
Oath, said the Earl, that I will neither go nor hang; and so departed without
leave.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 3. p. 160.
9. Avidius being General of the Army, when a part of the Auxiliaries without
his privity had slain three thousand of the Sarmatians upon the Banks of the
Danubius, and returned with a mighty Spoil; the Centurions expecting mighty
Rewards, for that with so small Forces they had overthrown so great a number;
but he commanded them to be seized, and crucified. For, said he, it might have
fallen out that by a sudden eruption of the Enemy from some Ambush, the whole
Army might have been hazarded. But upon this Order of his a Sedition arose in
the Army, when he straight goes forth into the midst of the Mutineers unarmed,
and without any Lifeguard; where unappalled, he spoke in this manner: Kill me
if you dare, and give a glorious instance of your corrupted Discipline. When
they saw his undaunted boldness they all grew quiet, and willingly subm^tted
themselves to Discipline; which thing not only preserved the Romans themselves
in obedience, but struck such an awe into the Barbarians, that they sent
Ambassadors to Antonius to grant them Peace for an hundred years; for they were
astonished above measure to find such Authority in Military Laws, as that by
the Judgment of the Roman General even they were condemned to die, who had
gloriously (though unlawfully) overcome.

10. Alexander the Great being in Cilicia, Plut. in Alexandr. p. 675.
was detained with a violent Disease; so that when all other Physicians
despaired of his health, Philip the Acarnanian brought him a potion, Val. Max.
l. 3. c. 8. p. 92.
and told him if he hoped to live he must take that. Alexander had newly
received Letters from Parmenio, wherein he advised him to repose no trust in
Philip, Q. Curtius libr.
for he was bribed to destroy him by Darius with a mighty Sum of Gold. Zon.
Annal. tom. 1. f. 32.
Alexander held the Letters in the one hand, took the Potion in the other, and
having supped it off, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 119.
showed Philip the Contents of them; who, though incensed at the slander cast
upon him, yet advised Alexander to confide in his Art; and indeed he recovered
him.

11. Charles the Fifth, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 110, 111.
Emperor of Germany, had his Forces and Camp at Ingolstadt, and was compassed
about with a huge number of Confederated Enemies, yet would he not ^ight,
whether because some Forces he expected were not yet come, or that he foresaw a
safe and unbloody Victory: In the mean time the Enemy, that abounded with great
Guns, thundered amongst his Tents in such manner, that six thousand great Shot
was numbered in one day; so that the Tents were every where boared through, the
Emperor's own Tent escaped not the fury of the Guns; men were killed at his
back, on each side of him, and yet the Emperor changed not his place, no nor
his carriage, nor his Countenance. And when his Friends entreated him that he
would spare himself, and all them in him; smiling, he bad them be of good
courage, for no Emperor was ever killed with a great Gun. These things are
short in the relation, but so mighty to consider of, as to deserve the memory
and applause of Ages to come. The like constancy and gravity in all his actions
and behavior accompanied him throughout his whole life.

12. In the Reign of King Henry the Third was Simon Montford Earl of Leicester;
Bak. Chron. p. 133.
a man of so audacious a Spirit, that he gave King Henry the lie to his face,
and that in the presence of all his Lords, and of whom it seems the King stood
in no small fear; for passing one time upon the Thames, and suddenly taken with
a terrible Storm of Thunder and Lightning, he commanded to be set on Shore at
the next Stairs, which happened to be at Durham-house, where Montford then lay;
who coming down to meet the King, and perceiving him somewhat frighted with the
Thunder, said unto him; Your Majesty need not fear the Thunder, the danger is
now past. No Montford, said the King, I fear not the Thunder so much as I do
thee.

13. Malcolme King of Scots besieging Alnwick Castle, Sp^^a's hist, p. 440.
an English Knight unarmed, only having a light Spear in his hand, on the end
of which he bare the Keys of the Castle, came riding into the Camp; where being
brought to the King, couching his Spear as though he intended to present him
with the Keys, ran him into his left eye, left him dead; hence some say came
the name Pierceye: the Knight by the swiftness of his Horse escaped.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the immovable Constancy of some persons.
THis admirable Virtue is to the Soul as the Balast to the Ship, it keeps it
steady and preserves it from fluctuation and uncertainty, at such times as any
tempest of adversity shall assault it. It holds the middle place betwixt levity
and obstinacy of the Mind, and being now to give some examples thereof, let
none be displeased that I make choice of one of the other Sex to begin with,
seeing a more illustrious one is not very easily to be met with.

Olear. voyages and Travels of Ambassadors. l. 3. p. 132, 133.
1. The Baron de Raymond having married the Daughter of an English Gentleman
called William Barnsley, soon after to comply with the great Duke of Moscovy,
he changed his Religion: Now the Law of the Country is, that if in a family the
Husband or Wife be of theirs, the rest shall be enforced to profess it, so that
by this Law his Wife was to follow his example: Her Husband first used all the
mild means imaginable, but finding so great a constancy on the other side, was
forced to recur to the Authority of the great Duke and Patriarch. These offered
her at first great advantages, but she though but fifteen years of age, (and
the handsomest Stranger in the Country) cast her self at the Dukes feet,
praying him rather to take away her life, than to force her to a belief she was
not satisfied of in her Conscience. The Father used the same submission but the
Patriarch put him off with Kicks, told him that she was to be treated as a
Child, and baptized whether she would or no. Accordingly she was dragged to a
Brook where she was rebaptiz'd, notwithstanding her protestations she made
against it, when they plunged her in the water she drew in along with her one
of the Religious Women, when they would oblige her to detest her former
Religion she spit in their faces, and would never abjure. After her Baptism she
was sent to Stuatka where her Husband was Governor, where she staid the three
years of his Government: Those expired he returned to Mosco and there dyed, she
then thought she might profess the Protestant Religion, but that would not be
permitted, her two Sons were taken from her, and she with a little Daughter was
sent to the Monastery of Belossora, where she lived five years amongst the
Nuns, in all which time she was not suffered to speak with any, and but once
(by the means of a German) heard of her friends. The Patriarch dying she got
out of the Monastery, and his Successor allowed her Liberty of Conscience at
her own house, and to give and receive visits: I often visited this virtuous
Lady in this condition, and have heard that she dyed some two years since
constant in her Religion to the last gasp. I may add, that her Father William
Barnsley dyed in England not long since, aged one hundred twenty six years,
after he had married a second Wife at one hundred: The former History commenced
Anno Dom. 1636.

Plut. paral. i^ Paplicola p. 104.
2. Tarquinius the Son of Demaratus, in the Sabine War had vowed a Temple to
Jupiter Capit^linus Tarquinius Superbus the Son of him that had vowed it, built
it but dedicated it not, as being expelled Rome before it was perfectly
finished. Poplicola one of the Consuls, had a great desire to dedicate this
Temple, but the dedication thereof fell to M. Horatius his Colleague in the
Consulship: All were assembled in the Capitol for this purpose, Horatius had
commanded silence, other Rites were performed, and now (as the custom is)
holding a Post in his hands, he was beginning to speak the words of dedication,
when M. the brother of Poplicola who had long waited at the door for this
occasion, spoke aloud, Consul, thy Son is dead of a Disease in the Army. The
Assistants were perplexed at this news, but Horatius not moved in the least;
Dispose then, said he, of his Carcass as you please, I shall not mourn at this
time: and so performed the rest of his dedication. His news was not true, but
merely feigned by Marcus to divert Horatius from the Dedication in favor of
his Brother: But however the constancy of the man is memorable, whether he in a
moment discerned the fraud; or whether though he believed it yet was unmoved.

3. Pomponius a Knight of Rome was in the Army of Lucullus against Mithridates,
Fulgos. ex. l. 3. c. 8. p. 420.
where (upon some engagement) he was sorely wounded and made a prisoner, being
brought into the presence of that King, he was asked by him whether when he had
taken care for the cure of his wounds he would be his friend? Pomponius with
the constancy worthy of a Roman replied; That if he would be a friend to the
people of Rome he would then be his, otherwise not.

4. Sylla had seized upon the City of Rome, Val. Max. l. 3 c. 8. p. 91.
had driven out his enemies thence, and (...) in Arms had called the Senate
together for this purpose, that by them he might speedily have C. M^rius
adj^^ged the enemy of the people of Rome. Ther^ was no man amongst them found,
who had the courage to oppose him in this matter; only Q. S^aevola the Augur
being asked his opinion herein* would not declare his assent with the res^. And
when Sylla began to threaten him in a terrible manner; Though said he, you show
me all these armed Troops wherewith you have surrounded this Court, and though
you threaten me with death it self, yet shall you never bring it to pass that
to save a little old blood, I should judge Marius an enemy, by whom this City
and all Italy it self has been preserved.

5. It was the saying of Xantippe concerning Socrates her Husband, Aelian. va^
hist. l. 9. c. 7. p. 237.
that although there were a thousand perturbations in the Commonwealth, yet
did Socrates always appear with the same manner of countenance, both going o^t
and returning into his house: For he had a mind equally prepared for all
things, and so well and moderately composed, that it was far remote from grief
and above all kind of fears.

6. C. Mevius was a Centurion in the Army of Augustus, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 8. p.
92.
in his war against Anthony, wherein after he had done many gallant things he
was at last circumvented by an unexpected ambush of the enemy, taken prisoner
and carried to Alexandria. Being in the presence of Antonius, he was by him
asked how he should deal with him? Cause, said he, my Throat to be cut, for
neither by the obligations of saving my life, nor by the punishment of any kind
of death, can I ever be brought to cease from being Caesar's Soldier, and begin
to be thine. But by how much the greater constancy he showed a contempt of
life^ by so much the more easily did he obtain it, for Antonius in the
admiration of his virtue, preserved him.

7. Modestus the Deputy of Valens the Emperor, B^. Cowp^rs Sermon. p. 103.
sought to draw S. Basil, after many other Bishops, into the heresy of Arrius,
he attempted it first with caresses, and all the sugared words that might be
expected from one that was not uneloquent: Disappointed in his first essay, he
reinforced his former persuasions with threats of exile and torments, yea and
death it self, but finding all these equally in vain, he returned to his Lord
with this character of the man: Firmior est quam ut verbis, praestantior quam
ut minis, fortior quam ut blanditiis vinci possit. That is, he is so solid that
words cannot overcome him, so resolute that threats cannot move him, and so
strong, that Allurements cannot alter him.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 3. c. 4. p. 92.
8. Dion the Son of Hyparinus, and Scholar of Plato, was busied in the dispatch
of public affairs, when it was told him that one of his Sons was fallen out of
the window into the Courtyard, and was dead of the fall. Dion seemed to be
nothing moved herewith, but with great constancy continued in the dispatch of
what he was about.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 3. c. 5. p. 93.
9. Antigonus the second, beheld when his Son was born dead upon the shoulders
of some Soldiers that had thus brought him from the Battle, he looked upon him
without change of countenance, or shedding a tear, and having praised him that
he dyed like a brave Soldier and a valiant man, he commanded to bury him.

F^^th. Resolves. cent. 2. c. 11. p. 182.
10. When the aged Polycarpus was urged to reproach Christ, he tells the
pro-Consul Herod, that fourscore and six years he had served him, and never was
harmed by him, with what conscience then could he blaspheme his King that was
his Savior: And being threatened on with fire if he would not swear by Caesar's
fortune, he tells him that it was his ignorance that made him expect it, For,
said he, if you know not who I am, hear me telling you that I am a Christian:
And when at the fire they would have fastened him to the Stake, the brave Bishop
cries out to let him alone as he was, for that God who had enabled him to
endure the fire, would enable him also without any chains of theirs to stand
unmoved in the midst of flames: so with his hands behind him unstirred he took
his Crown.

Ga^elter. tab. chron. p. 287.
11. Valens an Arrian Emperor, coming to the City of Edessa, perceived that the
Christions did keep their Assemblies in the fields, (for their Churches were
demolished) whereat he was so enraged that he gave the President Methodius a
box on the ear, for suffering such their meetings: commanding him to take along
with him a cohort of Soldiers, and to scourge with Rods and knock down with
Clubs as many as he should find of them. This his order being divulged, there
was a Christian woman who with her Child in her Arms, ran with all speed
toward the place, and was got amongst the ranks of those Soldiers that were
sent out against the Christians, and being by them asked whither she went and
what she would have? She told them that she made such have, lest she and her
little Infant should come too late, to be partakers of the Crown of Christ
amongst the rest of those that were to suffer. When the Emperor heard this he
was confounded, desisted from his enterprise, and turned all his fury against
the Priests and Clergy.

Luth Colloq. men's. p. 248.
12. Henry Prince of Saxony, when his Brother Georg^ sent to him that if he
would forsake his faith and turn Papist, he would leave him his Heir. But he
made him this answer, Rather than I will do so, and deny my Savior Jesus
Christ, I and my Kate each of us with a staff in one hand, will beg our bread
out of his Countries.

Val. Max ^. 3. c. 8. p. 9
13. Quintus Metellus Numidicus, when he perceived whereunto the dangerous
endeavors of Saturninus the Tribune of the people tended, and of what
mischievous consequence they would prove to the Commonwealth, unless they were
vigorously opposed, rather than he would suffer the Law he proposed to pass by
his Suffrage, he chose to go into banishment. What greater constancy can there
be than that of this man, who rather than to consent to a hurtful law, would be
forced from his Country, wherein he had attained to the principal dignity and
honor.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the great Confidence of some men in themselves.
THis manner of confident behavior, if founded in extraordinary military skill
and virtue, in an uncommon integrity and uncorruptness of manners, or some
special improvement and proficiency in learning, for the most part has an
happy event, it is far otherwise when it proceeds from an humor of immoderate
boldness or impudent boasting. If these that follow had unwonted and unusual
successes, it was because they were men of as admirable virtues.

1. The Roman Army in Spain was oppressed, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. p. 83.84.
and the greater part of it cut off by the Punick forces, all the Nations of
that Province had embraced the friendship of the Carthaginians, and there was
now no commander of ours, that dared to undertake in an affair of that
desperation, when P. Scipo at that time but twenty four years of age, stepped
up and promised that he would go, which confidence of his gave hopes to the
people of Rome both of safety and victory. The same confidence he used in
Spain, for when he besieged the Town of Badia, and that several persons stood
before his Tribunal, he adjourned to a house within the Walls of the City,
commanding them to make their appearance there upon the next day. Soon after he
took the City, and at the time and in the place ascending his Tribunal he did
them Justice. With the same confidence, though forbidden by the Senate, he
passed out of Sicily, into Africa, and when there having taken some Spies that
Hannibal had sent into his Army, he neither punished them, nor enquired of the
Forces or order of the Carthaginians, but leading them through all his Troops,
he asked if they had seen as much as they desired, and so sent them away in
safety. Also when M. Noevius Tribune of the People, (or as others say the two
Petilii) had accused him to the people; he came into the Forum with a great
Retinue, and mounting the Desk he put a Triumphant Crown upon his Head, and
thus spoke. This day ye Romans, I forced Carthage whose hopes were then too
high, to stoop to your commands, and therefore it is but equal, that you with
me should go to the Capitol to render thanks to the Gods. Glorious was the
event of these words, for the whole Senate, and all the Order of Knights, and
the Body of the Commons, accompanied him to the Residence of Jupiter. The
Tribune must now deal with the people in their Absence, for he was deserted and
left alone in the Forum, to his great reproach, so that to disguise his shame,
he was forced to follow the rest unto the Capitol, and instead of an accuser,
became the honourer of Scipio.

Val. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 75.
2. There was a great scarcity and dearth at Rome when C. Curatius Tribune of
the People, caused the Consuls to appear in presence of the people, there he
would have it enacted, that touching the buying of Corn, and for the sending
Legates to dispatch that Affair, they should propose it to the Senate. P. Nasica
apprehending this inconvenient he opposed it: whereat the people about him
began to clamor, he on the other side unappall'd, thus roundly took them up: I
pray you Romans said he, hold your tongues, for I my self do better understand
what is profitable for the Commonwealth, then any or all of you. At the hearing
of these words, all the people, with a silence full of veneration, showed they
had a greater respect unto his Authority, then they had unto their own food.

Val. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 85.
3. P. Furius Philus the Consul, when the Province of Spain fell to him by lot,
and that Q. Metellus and Q. Pompeius both Consular Persons, and both his
vehement enemies, had often upbraided him, with his going thither as a place he
most desired to go to; he compelled them both to go with him as his Legates; A
noble confidence this was, I had almost said, some what rash too: that dared to
have two so sharp hatreds so near him, and to endure his enemies in such place
about him, as was scarce safe to him had they been his friends.

Val. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 86.
4. L. Crassus, in his Consulship, had the Province of Gallia fallen to him by
lot, whither when C. Carbo came (whose father he had condemned) as a spy upon
all his actions, he not only did not remove him thence as he might have done,
but he also did assign him a place in his tribunal, nor did he take cognizance
of any affair, but in his presence and by his advice. So that fierce and
vehement Carbo, got nothing by this Journey of his into Gallia; but only to
understand, that his guilty Father had been sent into Exile, by the Sentence of
a most upright Person.

Val. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 86.
5. These were also Examples of the Public Confidence, that in the War against
Pyrrhus, when the Carthaginians of their own accord sent one hundred and twenty
Ships to Ostia, as a Guard for the Romans; the Senate then voted that Legates
should be sent to their Admiral to tell him that the Romans were wont to make
such Wars, as they were able to manage with their own Forces; and that
therefore he should return with his Navy. In like manner when after the Battle
at Cannae, the Roman strength was almost exhausted, yet even at that time they
dared to send recruits to their Army in Spain. Hence it was, that the very
place where the Enemies Camp was, ( Hannibal being then at the Gates of Rome)
was sold for no less, than if the Carthaginians had not been there. Thus to
behave themselves in adversity; what was it but to make Fortune (ashamed of her
former persecutions) to return to their assistance.

Val. Max. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 88.
6. Hannibal was an Exile with Prusias King of Bythinia and advised the King to
give Battle, when the King told him, that the Entrails of the Sacrifice did not
portend well at that time,; And what, said he, will thou rather give credit, to
the Liver of a Calf, than to an old and experienced Commander? If you look upon
the words they are short and concise, but considering the sense they are
copious and full. For he therein laid before him at once the two Spains taken
from the Romans; the Forces of Gaul and Liguria reduced under his Power, a new
Passage made over the tops of the Alps; the Memorial of his Victory at the Lake
Thrasimene; the Noble Monument of his Glorious Achievements at Cannas, the
Possession of Capua, and the endangering of all Italy it self; all which
considered, he could not bear that the Entrails of a single Sacrifice should be
preferred to the glory he had acquired by a long experience. And indeed for the
exploration of warlike sacrifices, and a right estimation of Military Affairs;
more was to be allowed to the breast of Hannibal, than to all the little fires,
and all the Altars of Bithinia, Mars himself being the Judge.

7. Caesar being in disguise with three Servants entered a Brigandine, Chetw.
hist. collect. cent. 4. p. 97.
intending to cross the Sea, but coming down the River to enter the Sea, it was
so troubled and tempestuous that the Pilot not daring to pass further would
have returned. Then Caesar discovered his Face, and said, Fear not, thou
carriest Caesar and his Fortune.

8. Paracelsus was exceedingly sharp and vehement against the Followers of
Galen, Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ. medic. p. 35.
and looked upon them in a manner as Persons of no value at all: So that some
where he thus breaks out upon them, and at the same time most highly applauds
himself: Take you notice of this, says he, that the very foolishest hair which
grows upon the hinder part of my head (for he was somewhat bald behind) knows
more than you and all your Writers, and the Buckles upon my Shoos are more
learned than your Masters Galen and Avicenna; and this Beard of mine has more
experience than all your Universities put together; and I am apprehensive of
the very hour, wherein the Sows will drag you through the dirt. He hissed at
all the Ancients, not excepting Hippocrates, Galen and Aristotle himself; and
he boasted that they being exploded (who by the consent of so many Ages had
been the Princes of Philosophy and Physic) he was now come, who was a
Philosopher according to the Light of Nature, and not the Dictates of men, and
that in Physic he was the most absolute Monarch.

9. There were continual Contentions betwixt Nicias and Cleon, Fulgos. Ex. lib.
3. cap. 7. p. 401.
in the Administration of the Commonwealth at Athens: but Nicias had the
reputation of the most skilful and experienced Commander. It fell out that the
Greeks being overthrown by the Athenians, ^our hundred Spartans retired
themselves into the Island Stagyra: The Athenians passionately desired to have
these men in their hands, and therefore besieged them in the Island with their
Forces; but whereas the extremity of the Weather, the Forti^ication of the
Place, and the Valor of the Defendants kept them from being Masters of their
wishes; all the fault was laid upon Nicias who had the Chief Command in the
business. Cleon often contended with him about it, and at last grew so fervent
therein, that he openly said, That if the Supreme Command in that expedition
should be committed to him alone, he would render them a very good account of
it in a short time. This Province was therefore decreed to Cleon alone, and
such a mavelous confidence he had, that at his departure from Athens he gave
out, that within the compass of twenty days, he would have those beseiged
Lacedaemonians in his hands either dead or alive. Fortune favored this boldness
of his, and that which Nicias an experienced Leader thought very difficultly to
be compassed at all, that Cleon brought to pass within the time he had
designed; and having seized the Place, and slain some of the Defendants, he
brought the rest Prisoners to Athens.

10. Agesilaus King of Sparta was then in his Youth, Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap.
7. p. 402.
when to the terror of all the Grecians, the Fame went that the Persians were
resolved upon the Invasion of Greece with a Mighty Army. At this time Agesilaus
made offer to his Citizens, that with a small Army, he would not only defend
his Country but would also pass over into Asia, and there obtain of the
Persians a notable Victory, or at least an honorable Peace. The Spartans
conceiving good hope from this confidence of his, gave him the leading of ten
thousand Soldiers well armed; with these Forces Agesilaus went into Asia,
overthrew the Persians in Battle; whence being recalled by his Citizens, joyful
and victorious he brought home his Army so entire, that he had lost very few of
them.

Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 405.
11. Antigonus had newly taken upon him the Name and Dignity of King of Macedon,
when it was told him that the People were openly discontented therewith, he
conscious to himself of his manifold virtues, in the sight of the People, laid
down his Crown and Scepter; then he recited the Heads of those things which he
had performed with great Valor and Glory; after which he openly admonished
them, that if they knew any man more worthy of the Kingdom than himself, that
they should at their pleasure dispose of Crown and Scepter to that Person. With
this confidence of mind, he so moved the People, that all of them (of their own
accord) advised him to reassume the Kingdom, and besought him thereunto with
most earnest entreaties; which yet he constantly refused to do, till they had
taken condign punishment of the Authors of the Sedition.

Fulgos. Ex. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 406.
12. Cato the Elder showed no less confidence, when he moved for the Censorship
against his Competitors; for being got up into a Place whence he might be
conveniently heard, he spoke openly in these Terms: That the manners of the
Romans stood in need of a sharp and severe, and not a faint hearted Physician:
That hereupon such as were vicious, because they knew him, did shun his
Censorship, and gave their Votes to his Competitors, that they might have none
to look into, and correct their Miscarriages. If therefore the Roman people,
had any regard for Virtue and detestation of Vice; if they desired the manners
of Rome should be restored to their ancient frugality; they should then make
choice of him and Valerius Flaccus to be their Censors. The People were moved
with this Oration, and preferring him before others, voted him the Censorship;
which he administered with that integrity, that the People erected him a Statute
in the Forum, with this Inscription; That Cato the Censor had merited the
Honor of that Statue; far that by his prudence he had reduced the loose
manners of the Romans, to their pristine Frugality and Virtue.

Fulgos. Exs lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 418.
13. Balthazar Cossa applied his mind to his Studies for some time with great
diligence at Bononia; thence he put himself upon the way toward Rome, and
being asked why he would go to Rome? That (said he) they may choose me Pope;
and this he said in good earnest, not long after he was made Cardinal by
Alexander the Fifth, and succeeded him in the Popedom by the name of John the
Twenty Fourth.

CHAP. XL. Of the Great Reverence showed to Learning and Learned Men.
TH^smopolis was a Stoic Philosopher, Causs. holy C. tom. 1. l. 2. p. 59.
and was kept in the House of a Great Roman Lady; she once called him aside,
and used much Discourse with him concerning his Capacity, his Virtue and Worth;
she resolved to bestow a great Office upon him, and what should it be, but to
take charge of her Little Bitch, which was ready to Whelp. The inconsiderable
rudeness of this Lady shows she then took more care of her Bitch, than she had
formerly taken of her self, and had Learned Men never met with more Worthy
Patrons; the World (though never so well enlightened by the Sun) had been but a
wide Dungeon of uncomfortable darkness; but the best o^ it is, they have found
fairer respects from the greatest of Princes, yea and the most barbarous
Nations.

1. I dwelt, Martin. Martinii bell. Tartar. p. 284.
says M^rtinus Martinius, in the City of Venxus, in a fair House; the City and
People being all in a ^umult, by reason of the Tartar 's approach: As Soon as I
understoed it, I fixed over the fairest Gate of the House, a Red Paper, very
long and broad, with this Inscription upon it. Here dwells the European Doctor
of the Divine Law; likewise at the entrance of the greater Hall I set out my
greatest and fairest bound Books, to these I added my Mathematical Instruments,
Perspective, and other Optic Glasses, and what else I thought might make the
greatest show; and withal I placed the Picture af our Savior upon an Altar
erected for that purpose; by which fortunate Stratagem, I not only escaped the
violence and plunder of the common Soldiers, but was invited and kindly
entertained by the Tartarian Viceroy.

2. Alexander the Great having found* amongst the Spoils of King Darius, Lips.
mon. lib. 1. cap. 8. p. 117. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 29. p. 171. Lonicer. Theat. p.
307. Sabell. Ex. lib. 7. cap. 5. p. 389. Lips. monit. lib. 2. p. 407.
his Perfumier, or Casquet of sweet Ointments, richly embelished with Gold,
costly Pearls, and Precious Stones; when his Friends about him showed him many
uses that curious Cabinet might be put to: It shall serve, said he, for a C^se
for Homer 's Works: also in the forcing and Saccage of the City of Thebes, he
gave express commandment, that the Dwelling House, and the whole Family of
Pindarus the Poet should be spared; he caused also the City where Aristotle his
Master had been born to be rebuilt, and seeing a Messenger coming to him with a
cheerful countenance, as one that brought him good News: What, said he, can
thou tell me that Homer is alive again?

3. Dionysius the Tyrant though otherwise proud and cruel, Plin. lib. 7. cap.
30. p. 171. Solin. cap. 7. p. 197. Sabell. Ex. lib. 7. cap. 5. p. 388.
being advertized of the coming of Plato, that great Philosopher: sent out a
ship to meet him adorned with goodly streamers: and himself mounted a chariot
drawn with four white horses, gave him the reception of a great King, at the
Haven where he disembarked and came on shore.

4. Pompey the Great, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 171. Solin. cap. 7. p. 197.
Sabell. Ex. lib. 7. cap. 5. p. 390.
after he had ended the War with Mithridates, went to visit Posidonius that
Renowed Professor of Learning, and when he came to his house, gave straight
Commandment to his Lictours that they should not (after their usual manner with
all others) rap at the door. This Great Warrior to whom, both the East and West
parts of the World had submitted: veiled as it were the Roman fas^es, and the
Ensigns of his Authority, before the door of this Philosopher.

Plin. l. 7. c. 30. p. 172
5. The Kings of Egypt and Macedon gave a singular testimony, how much they
honored Menander the Comical Poet, in that they sent Ambassadors for him; and
a Fleet to waft him for his more security: though he more esteemed of his
private studies, then all the honors designed for him, by the bounty and
savor of these great Princes.

Plin. l. 7. c. 30. p. 172
6. In the first Publi^k Library that ever was erected in Rome, there was also
set up the Statue of M. Varro that Learned man; and for his greater Honor, it
was also done while he himself was yet living.

Zuing. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 39.
7. Pomponius says in his fourth book of the Pandects; By reason of the desire
I have to learn, (which to this seventy and eight year of mine age, I have ever
looked upon as the best account to desire to live,) I am mindful of this
sentence, which is said to be one of Iulians; Though I had one foot in the
grave, yet should I have a desire to learn something.

Zuing. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 39.
8. Claudius Caesar eraz'd the name of a Greek Prince, out of the Roll of the
Judges, because he understood not the Latin Language, and sent him to travel.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 8. p. 115.
9. Solon the Athenian, traveled as far as Egypt, Cyprus, nay surveyed all
Asia, and this for no other reason, then the desire he had to increase his
knowledge: which was so great and constant, that it was his saying, By learning
every day something, I am grown old. About the time of his death, when he lay
languishing npon his bed, he raised up his head to hearken to some friends of
his discoursing at his bed side, and when they asked him to what purpose, he
did so? he gave that Noble answer, that I may die the more Learned.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 8. p. 121.
10. Theodosius the younger, continually turned over the Greek, and Latin
Historians: and that with such eagerness, that whereas he spent the day in
Civil and Military affairs; he set apart the night for the Lecture of them, and
that neither himself might be disturbed in his reading; nor any of his servants
constrained to watch with him: he caused a Candlestick to be made with that
artifice, as to supply the light with oil, of its own accord, as often as there
was any want.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 18. p. 411.
11. The Greek Emperor Leo, was exceeding bountiful to Learned Men, and when
once an Eunuch of his told him, that such expenses were sit to be made upon
his men of War. I would said he it might come to pass in my time, that the
Salaries of the Soldiers might be spent upon the Professors of the Liberal Arts.

Lips. mon^t. l. 1. c. 8. p. 123, 124.
12. Alphonsus that great King of Naples was wont to say, he had rather suffer
the loss of his Kingdoms (and he had seven) then the least part of his
Learning: nor did he love it only in himself, but others, it is to this King
that we are indebted, for Laurentius Valla, Antonius Panormitanus,
Bartholomaeus Faccius, Georgius Trapezuntius, Ioannes Aurispa, Ievianus
Pontanus, and a considerable number of Juniors to them: He set up Universities
and erected or adorned Libraries up and down in his Kingdoms, and a choice book
was to him the most acceptable present of all other: In his Ensigns he carried
Portrayed an Open Book, importing that knowledge drawn from thence became
Princes, when he heard the King of Spain should say, that Learning was below
Princes he said angrily; it was the voice of an Ox and not a Man: As for
himself, he read Caesar and Livy with great diligence; he translated the
Epistles of Seneca into Spanish with his own hand; so conversant in the Sacred
Writings, that he said he had read over the Old and New Testament with their
glosses fourteen times: all this he did being stricken in years; for he was
fifty before he intermedled with studies, his improvement therein having been
neglected in his younger time, and yet we may say of this Prince, how great a
man was he both at home and abroad? a greater both in virtue and fortune,
Europe has not seen.

13. The Emperor Charles the fifth, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 8. p. 127.
being at Genoa; was entertained with an Oration in Latin, and when he found
that he could not fully comprehend the sense of it, with a sad countenance he
made this ingenuous confession, that he now underwent the punishment, of his
youthful negligence, and that his Master Hadrianus was but too true a Prophet,
when he told him (as he often had) that one day he would surely repent it:
Paulus Iovius who was then present, and an ear witness, has related thus much
of that great Prince.

14. It is reported of Magdalene Queen of France, Burt. Mei. par. 3. 1. p. 392.
Heids. in Sphin. c. 15. p. 534, 535.
and wife to Lewis the Eleventh by birth a Scottish Woman, that walking forth
in an Evening, with her Ladies, she espied M. Alanus one of the Kings
Chaplains: an old hard favored man, lying fast asleep in an Arbor, she went to
him, and kissed him sweetly. When the young Ladies laughed at her for it; she
replied that it was not his person, that she did bear that Reverence and
respect unto, but the Divine beauty of his soul.

15. The Great Theodosius used frequently to sit by his Children, Chetw. hist.
coll. Cent. 3. p. 82.
Arcadius and Honorius, whilst Arsenius taught them: he commanded them to give
their Master the same respects as they would unto himself, and surprising them
once sitting and Arsenius standing he took from them their Princely Robes, and
restored them not till a long time after, nor without much entreaty.

16. Marcus Aurelius showed great piety and respect to his teachers and
instructers: Chetw. hist. collect. Cent. 3. p. 83.
he made Proculus Proconsul, and took Iunius Rusticus with him, in all his
expeditions, advised with him in all his public and private business, saluted
him before Praef^cti praetorio, designed him to be second time Consul, and
after his death, obtained of the Senate publicly to erect his Statue.

17. Claudius Tacitus the Emperor a great favourer of Learned Men, Speed. hist.
p. 250.
commanded the works of Tacitus the Historian to be carefully preserved in
every Library, throughout the Empire, and ten times every year to be
transcribed at the public cost; notwithstanding which many of his works are
lost.

CHAP. XLI. Of the exceeding intentness of some men upon their Meditations and
Studies.
THe Greek Writers extol to the heavens the Gallantry of one Cynaegirus an
Athenian; who in the famous battle at Salamine against the Persians, laid hold
upon one of their Ships with his right hand, and that cut off, with his left,
when that also was lost he endeavored to retain it with his teeth: No less is
the constancy of these illustrious persons to be wondered at, some of whom no
consideration whatsoever, unless the indispensable laws of necessity or death
it self could be able to divorce from their dear studies.

Clarks mirr. c. 77. p. 349.
1. Thuanus tells of a Countryman of his called Franciscus Vieta, a very learned
man, who was so bent upon his studies, that sometimes for three days together
he would sit close at it, sine cibo and somno, nisi quem cubito innixus, nec se
loco movens capiebat. Without meat or sleep, more than what for mere necessity
of nature, he took leaning on his Elbow, without moving out of his place.

Clarks mirr. c. 82. p. 358.
2. Dr. Reyno^ds when the Heads of the University of Oxford came to visit him in
his last sickness; which he had contracted merely by his exceeding pains in his
studies, (whereby he brought his withered body to be a very Sckeleton) they
earnestly persuaded him that he would not (perdere substantiam propter
accidentia) loose his life for learning, he with a smile answered out of the
Poet, Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causas,
Nor to save life lose that for which I live.


Zuing. Theatr. vol. 4. l. 3. p. 682.
3. Chaerephon the familiar Friend of Socrates, was surnamed Nycteris, sor that
he was grown pale with nocturnal Lucubrations, and was so exceedingly emaciated
and made lean thereby.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 23. Fulgos. l. 8. c. 7. p. 1044.
4. Thomas Aquinas sitting at Dinner with Philip, or (as Campanus says) with
Lewis King of France, was on the sudden so transported in his mind, that he
struck the board with his hand and cried out, Adversus Manichaeos conclusum
est; The Manichees are confuted. At which when the King admired; Thomas
blushing, besought his pardon, saying: That an Argument was just then come into
his mind; by which he could utterly overthrow the opinion of the Manichees.

5. Bernardus Abbot of Claravalla, had made a days journey by the side of the
Lake Lausanna, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 23.
and now at Sun. setting being come to his Inn, and hearing the Friars that
accompanied him, discoursing amongst themselves of the Lake, he asked where
that Lake was? When he heard he wondered, professing that he had not so much as
seen it, being all the time of his Journey so intent upon his meditations.

V^l. Max. l. 8. c. 7. p. 226. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 24.
6. Archimedes who by his Machines and various Engines, had much and long
impeded the victory of M. Marcellus in the Siege of Syracuse, when the City was
taken, was describing Mathematical figures upon the earth, so intent upon them
both with his eye and mind, that when a Soldier who had broke into the house,
came to him with his drawn Sword and asked him who he was? He (out of an
earnest desire, to preserve his figure entire which he had drawn in the Dust)
told not his name, but only desired him not to break and interrupt his Circle:
The Soldier conceiving himself scorned, ran him through, and so confounded the
draught and lineaments of his Art with his own blood. He lost his life by not
minding to tell his name, for Marcellus had given special order for his safety.

7. I remember I have often heard it from Joseph Scaligers own mouth, Heinsii
orat. orat. 1. p. 4.
that he being then at Paris, when the horrible Butchery and Massacre was
there, sat so intent upon the study of the Hebrew tongue, that he did not so
much as hear the clashing of Arms, the cries of Children; the lamentations of
Women, nor the Clamours or Groans of Men.

8. St. Augustine had retired himself into a solitary place, Sabell. Ex. l. 2.
c. 6. p. 86.
and was there sat down with his mind wholly intent upon divine meditations,
concerning the mystery of the sacred Trinity, when a poor woman (desirous to
consult him upon a weighty matter) presented her self before him; but he took
no notice of her; the woman spoke to him, but neither yet did he observe her:
upon which the woman departs, angry both with the Bishop and her self,
supposing that it was her poverty that had occasioned him to treat her with
such neglect. Afterward, being at Church where he preached, she was wrapped up
in Spirit; and in a kind of Trance she thought she heard St. Austin discoursing
concerning the Trinity; and was informed by a private voice, that she was not
neglected, as she thought, by the humble Bishop, but not observed by him at
all, who was otherwise busied: upon which she went again to him, and was
resolved by him according to her desire.

9. Thomas Aquinas was so very intent upon his meditations and in his readings,
Sabell. Ex. l. 2. ^. 7. p. 91.
that he saw not such as stood before him, he heard not the voices of such as
spoke to him, so that the Corporeal Senses seemed to have relinquished their
proper Offices to attend upon the Soul, or at the least were not able to
perform them, when the Soul was determined to be thoroughly employed.

10. Mr. John Gregory of Christs-Church, Vid. his life and death, prefixed to
Gregorii Posthuma. p. 3.
by the relation of that Friend and Chamber-fellow of his, who has published a
short account of his life and death, did study sixteen of every twenty four
hours for diverse years together, and that with so much appetite and delight, as
that he needed not the cure of Aristotle's drowsiness to awake him.

11, Sir John Ieffrey was born in Sussex, Lloyds state worthies. p. 223.
and so profited in the study of our Municipal Laws, that he was preferred
secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, and thence advanced by Queen Elizabeth in
Michalmas Term the nineteenth of her Reign, to be Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, which place he discharged for the term of two years to his great
commendation. This was he who was called the plodding Student, whose industry
perfected nature, and was perfected by experience. It is said of him, Nullus
illi per otium dies exit, partem noctium studiis vindicat, non vacat somno sed
succumbit, and oculos vigilia fatigatos, cadentesque in opere detinet. He spent
no day idly, but part of the nights he devoted to study, he had no leisure to
sleep, but when surprised by it for want of it, his weary eyes when closing and
falling by reason of his overwatching, he still held to their work, and
compelled to wait upon him.

12. Aristotle the Philosopher, Laert. l. 5. p. 117, 118.
is said to be so addicted to his meditations, that he unwillingly gave way to
that necessary repose, which nature called upon him for, and therefore to
repress the ascent of vapors, and thereby to hinder his being overtaken with
sleep, he used sometimes to apply a vessel of hot oil to his Stomach, and when
he slept he would hold a brazen Ball in his hand over a Basin, that so when the
Ball should fall down into it, he might again be awaked by the noise of it.

Plat. de vitis pontif. p. 320, 321
13. Callistus the third has this as part of his character, set down by the Pen
of Platina, that he was sparing in his diet, of singular modesty in his speech,
of easy access, and that although he was arrived to fourscore years of Age,
yet even then he remitted nothing of his usual industry and constancy in his
studies, but both read much himself, and had others who read to him when he had
any time to spare, from the great weight of his affairs.

Melch. Adam in vit. Germ. Med. p. 96.
14. Iacobus Milichius a German Physician, was so enflamed with a passionate
desire of Learning, that he would not spare himself even then when ill in
respect of his health, and when old age began to grow upon him, when some of
his friends would reprehend this over-eagerness of his, and his too much
attentiveness to his studies, his reply was that of Solon. (...). i. e. I grow
old in learning many things. He was so careful and sparing afterwa^d of his
time, that no man could find him at his own house, but he was either reading or
writing of something, or else (which was very rare with him) he was playing at
Tables, a sport which he much delighted in after dinner. After Supper and in
the Night he was at his Studies and Lucubrations; which was the reason that he
slept but little, and was also the cause of that disease which took away his
life, for the over constant and the unseasonable intention of his mind in his
studies, was doubtless the occasion of that affliction which he had in his
Brain and Stomach, so that he dyed of an Apoplexy, Nov. 10th. 1559.

Melch. Adam in vit. Germ. Med. p. 295.
15. Iacobus Schegkius though he was blind many years together, had frequent
fits of an Apoplexy, was in extreme age, and found therein a deficiency of all
his strength, yet could not he indulge himself in idleness, but continued then
intent upon his thoughts and meditations, had one to read for him, and put
forth most learned Commentaries upon the Topics of Aristotle.

CHAP. XLII. Of such Persons as were of choice Learning, and singular skill in
the Tongues.
WHen Basilius Amerbachius heard of the death of Theodorus Zuingerus, M. Adam,
Germ. Med. p. 304.
a German Physician, he sighed, and brake out in these words; Piget me vivere
post tantum virum, cujus magna fuit Doctrina; sed exigua si cum Pietate
conferatur. It grieves me to live after so great a Person, whose Learning was
great; but if compared with his Piety, but small. The Piety of these Persons
underwritten for ought I know, was as great as their Learning: however, since
the Learning of most of them has survived them, we have the less reason to be
sorry that we come after them.

1. Wonderful is that Character which Vives gives of Budaeus, Hakew. Apol. l.
3. c. 6.. 1. p. 226.
himself being a man of eminent parts. France, says he, never brought forth a
sharper Wit, Vives in l. 2. de civit. Dei, c. 17. p.
a more piercing Judgment; one of more exact diligence, and greater Learning;
nor in this Age, Italy it self. There is nothing written in Greek or Latin,
which he has not read and examined. He was in both these Languages excellent;
speaking both as readily, perhaps more, than the French, his Mother tongue. He
would read out of a Greek Book in Latin, and out of a Latin one in Greek. Those
things which we see so excellently written by him flowed from him extempore. He
writes more easily both in Greek and Latin, than the most skilful in those
Languages understand. Nothing in those Tongues is so abstruse, which he has
not ransacked, and brought, as another Cerberus, out of Darkness into Light.
Infinite are the significations of Words, Figures, and Properties of Speech,
which unknown to former Ages, by the only help of Budaeus, studious men are now
acquainted with: and these so great and admirable things he (without the
direction of any Teacher) learned merely by his own industry. I speak nothing
of his knowledge in the Laws; which being in a manner ruined, seem by him to
have been restored: Nothing of his Philosophy; whereof he has given such an
Instance in his Books De Ass, which no man could compose without an assiduous
conversation in the Books of all the Philosophers. He adds, that
notwithstanding all this, he was continually conversant in Domestic and State
Affairs at home and abroad in Embassies: and concludes all with that Distich
which Buchanan made of him.

Gallia quod Graecia est, quod Gracia barbara non est.
Vtraque Budaeo, debe^ utrumque suo.
That France is turned to Greece, that Greece is not turned rude.
Both owe them both to thee, their dear great learned Bude.
2. Tostatus, Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6.. 1. p. 227.
Bishop of Abulum, at the age of two and twenty years (says Possevine)
attained the knowledge of all Arts and Sciences. For besides Philosophy and
Divinity, Canon and Civil Laws, History and the Mathematics, he was well
skilled both in the Greek and Latin Tongues. So that it was written of him by
Bellarmin, Hic stupor est mundi, qui scibile discutit omne.
The Wonder of the World; for he
Knows whatsoever known may be.
He was so true a Student, and so constant in sitting to it, that with Didymus
of Alexandria, he was thought to have had a body of Brass: and so much he wrote
and published, that a part of the Epitaph engraved upon his Tomb was, Primae
natalis luci, folia omnia adaptans
Nondum sic fuerit pagina trina satis.
The meanning is, that if we should allow three leaves to every day of his life
from his very Birth, there would be some to spare: yet withal, he wrote so
exactly, that Ximenes his Scholar, attempting to contract his Commentaries upon
St. Matthew, could not well bring it to less than a thousand leaves in Folio;
and that in a very small Print. Others also have attempted the like in his
other Works, but with the same success.

3. Julius Caesar Scaliger was thirty years old before he fell to study, Leig^s
Relig. and Learn. l. 5. c. 12. p. 317, 318. Lips. ep. cent. 2. e p. 44. Iano
Do^sae filio.
yet was a singular Philosopher, and an excellent Greek and Latin Poet. Vossius
calls him, The Miracle of Nature, the chief Censor of the Ancients, and the
Darling of all those that are concerned to attend upon the Muses. Lipsius
highly admires him: There are three, says he, whom I use chiefly to wonder at,
as persons, who though amongst men, seem yet to have transcended all humane
Seize; Homar, Hippocrates and Aristotle: but I shall add to them this
fourth, that is, Julius Scaliger; that was born to be the Miracle and the Glory
of our Age. He verily thinks there was no such acute and capacious Wit as his
since the Age of Julius Caesar. Meibomiu^ calls him a man of stupendous
Learning, and than whom the Sun has scarce shined upon a more learned. Thuanus
says, Antiquity had scarcely his Superior; it is certain his own Age had not
the like.

4. Amongst the great Heroes and Miracles of Learning most renowned in this
latter Age, Hakew. Apol. advertisement. 3. p. 6, 7. H^ins. Oration. orat. 1. in
funere Ios. Scalig. per totum.
Joseph Scaliger has merited a more than ordinary place. The learned Causabon
has given this Character of him: There is nothing, says he, that any man
could desire to learn, but that he was able to teach. He had read nothing (and
yet wh^t had he not read) but what he did readily remember. There was nothing
in any Latin, Greek or Hebrew Author that was so obscure or abstruse, but that
being consulted about it, he would forthwith resolve. He was thoroughly versed
in the Histories of all Nations, in all Ages, in the successive Revolutions of
all Empires; and in all the Affairs of the ancient Churches, he was able to
recount all the Ancient and Modern Names, Differences and Proprieties of living
Creatures, Plants, Metals, and all other Natural things. He was accurately
skilled in the situation of Places, the bounds of Provinces, and their various
Divisions, according to the diversity of Times. There was none of the Arts and
Sciences so difficult, that he had left u^touched. He knew so many Languages so
exactly, that if he had made that one thing his business throughout the whole
compass of his life, it might have been worthily reputed a miracle. Hereunto
may be annexed the Testimony of Julius Caesar Bulengerus, a Doctor of the
Sorbon, and Professor at Pisa; who in the twelfth Book of the History of his
time, thus writes of the same Scaliger. There followed the Year 1609. an
unfortunate Year, in respect of the death of Joseph Scaliger, than whom this
Age of ours has not brought forth any of so great a Genius or ingenuity as to
Learning; and possibly the fore-past Ages have not had his Equal in all kinds
of Learning.

H^kew. Apol. ^. 3. c. 6. 1. p. 228.
5. That which Pasquier has observed out of Monshclet is yet more memorable,
touching a young man, who being not above twenty years old, came to Paris in
the Year 1445. and showed himself so admirably excellent in all Arts and
Sciences, and Languages, that if a man of an ordinary good Wit and sound
Constitution should live one hundred years, and during that time should study
incessantly without eating, drinking and sleeping, or any recreation, he could
hardly attain to that perfection. Insomuch that some were of opinion that he
was Antichrist, begotten of the Devil, or at least somewhat above Humane
Condition. Castellanus, who lived at the same time, and saw this Miracle of
Wit, made these Verses on him; his are in French, but may be thus Englished.

A young man have I seen
At twenty years so skilled,
That every Art he had, and all
In ^ll degrees excelled.
Whatever yet was writ
He vaunted to pronounce,
Lik^ a young Antichrist if he
Did read the same but once.
6 Beda was born in the Kingdom of Northumberland at Girroy now Yarrow in the
Bishopric of Durham, Full^rs Chapter hist. l 2. cent. 8. p. 98, 99. Camb. Brit. p.
743.
brought up by St. Cuthbert, and was the profoundest Scholar of his Age, for
Latin, Greek, Philosophy, History, Divinity, Mathematics, Music, and what
not: Homilies of his making were read in his life time in the Christian
Churches, a dignity afforded him alone, whence some say, his Title of Venerable
Beda was given him; It being a middle betwixt plain Beda which they thought too
little, and St: Beda which they thought too much while he was yet alive.

7. Roger Bacon was a famous Mathematician and most skilful in other Sciences,
Leigh. on Relig. and Learn. l. 3. c. 5. p. 125. Seldom de diis Syris. Syntag.
1. c. 2. p. 104.
accurately versed in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, of whom Seldom thus: Roger
Bacon of Oxford a Minori^e, an excellent Mathematician, and a person of more
learning than any of his age could a^ford.

8. Richard Pacie Dean of Paul's, and Secretary for the Latin Tongue to King
Henry the Eighth, Leigh. on Relig. and Learn. l. 3. c. 10. p. 278.
he was of great ripeness of wit, learning, and eloquence, and also expert in
foreign languages. Pitsaeus gives him this Character. A man endowed with most
excellent gifts of mind, adorned with great variety of le^^^ing, he had a sharp
wit, a mature judgment, a constant and firm memory, a prompt and ready tongue,
and such a one as might deservedly cont^nd with the most learned men of his
age* for ^kill in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew languages.

9. Anicius M^^li^s Soverinus Boe^hius, Leigh. o^ Relig. and Learn. l. 4. c. 8.
p. 140. Polit. misc. cent. 1. c. 1. p Hereboord. ep. ded ad disp. ex.
philosoph. s^l.
^^ourished Anno Dom. 520. He was very famous in his days being Consul at Rome,
and a man of rare gifts and abilities: Some say that in prose he came not
behind Cicero himself, and had none that exceeded him in Poetry. A great
Philosopher, Musician, and Mathematician. Polit. says of him thus: Than
Boethius, in Logic who more acute, in Mathematics more subtle, in Philosophy
more copious and rich, or in Divinity more sublime? He was put to death by
Theodoricus King of the Goths, and after he was slain Peripatetick Philosophy
decayed, and almost all Learning in Italy: Barbarism wholly invaded it, and
expelled good Arts and Philosophy out of its Borders, says Hereboord of Verona.

10. St. Augustine in his Epistle to Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, Zuing. Thea^r.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 34.
writes concerning St. Jerome, that he understood the Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee,
Persian, Median, and Arabic tongues, and that he was skilled in almost all the
learning and languages of all Nations. The same St. Augustine says of him, no
man knows that which St. Jerome is ignorant of.

11. Mithridates the great King of Pontus, Plut. in Lucullo. p. Plin. not. ^.
l. 7. c. 24. p. 168. Sabell. ex. l. 10. c. 9. p. 582. G^ll. l. 17. c. 17.
had no less than twenty and two Countries under his Government, yet was he
used to answer all these Ambassadors in the same language of his Country that
he spoke to him in, without the help of any Interpreter. A wonderful evidence
of a very singular memory, that could so distinctly lay up such a diversity of
stores, and so faithfully, as that he could call for them at his pleasure.

12. Hugo Grotius was born at D^lph in the Low Countries, L^igh Rel. and Learn.
l. 4. c. 3. p. 215.
Anno 1583. Vossius says o^ him that he was the most knowing, as well in
Divine as Humane things. The greatest of men* says Meibomius, the Light and
Columen of Learning, of whom nothing so magnifick can be either said or writ,
but that his virtue and erudition has exceeded it.

Leigh's Rel. and Learn. lib. 5. cap. 11. p. 313.
13. Claudius Salmasius a Learned French Critic; of whom Rivet thus; that
Incomparable Person the Great Salmasius has wrote of the Primacy of the Pope,
after which Homer if any shall write an Iliad, he will spend his pains to no
purpose. C. Salmasius, says Vossius, a man never enough to be praised, nor
usually to be named without praise. The Miracle of our Age, and the Promus
Condus of Antiquity, says Guil. Rive^. The Great Ornament not only of his own
Country, France; but also of these Netherlands, and indeed the Bulwark of the
whole Commonwealth of Learning, says Vossius.

Zuing. Theat^. vol. 1. lib. 1. p. 34.
14. Hieronymus Al^ander did most perfectly speak and write the Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, with many other Exotic and Foreign Languages. He first taught
Greek at Paris, soon after he was called to Rome by Pope Leo the Tenth, and
sent Ambassador into Germany. By Pope Clement the Seventh made Bishop of
Brundusium, and by Pope Paul the Third he was made Cardinal.

Leigh's Rel. and Learn. lib. 4. cap. 11. p. 258.
15. Andreas Masius was a great Linguist, for besides the Italian, French,
Spanish, and the rest of the Languages of Europe; he was also famous for no
mean skill in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Syriack* Thuanus gives him this
Character; a man of a sincere, candid, and open disposition, endowed with rare
and abstruse Learning, and who to the knowledge of the Hebrew, Chaldee, and the
rest of the Oriental Tongues had added exceeding piety, and a diligent study of
the Holy Scriptures, as appears by his Commentary. He wrote learnedly on
Joshua, and assisted A^ias Montanus in the Edition of the King of Spain's
Bible; and first of all illustrated the Syriac Idiom with Grammatical Precepts
and a Lexicon.

Leig'h Rel. and Learn. lib. 3. cap. 12. p. 166.
16. Carolus Clusius had an exact skill in Seven Languages, Latin, Greek,
Italian, French, Spanish, Portugal, and Low Dutch; a most acute both Writer and
Censor of Histories, that are not commonly known: As also most Learned in
Cosmograp^y, says Melchior Adam in his Lives of the German Physicians. Lipsius
thus sported on him.

Omnia naturae dum Clusi arcana r^cludis
Clusius haud ultra sis, sed aperta mihi.
Leigh's R^l. and Learn. lib. 3. cap. 9. p. 152.
17. Gulielmus Canterus born 1542. besides his own Belgic Tongue, was skilled
in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, the German, French, and Italian: so that one says of
him; If any would desire the Specimen of a Studious Person, and one who had
wholly devoted himself to the advancement of Learning, he may find it exactly
expressed in the Person of this Gulielmus Canterus.

Full. Chapter hist. lib. 11. c^nt. 17. p. 126.
18. Lancelot Andrews, born at All-Hallows-Barking in London, Scholar, Fellow,
and Master of Pembrook-hall in Cambridge, then Dean of Westminster, Bishop of
Chichester, Ely, and at last of Winchester. The World wanted Learning to hear
how learned this man was; so skilled in all, especially the Oriental Languages,
that some conceive he might (if then living) almost have served as an
Interpreter General at the confusion of Tongues. He dyed in the first year of
the Reign of King Charles the First, and lies buried in the Chapel of Saint
Mary Overies, having on his Monument a large elegant and true Epitaph.

19. Gerhardus Johannes Vossius Professor of Eloquence, Chronology, Leigh's
Rel. and Learn. lib 6. cap. 6. p. 358.
and the Greek Tongue at L^yden, and Prebend of Canterbury in England, an
Excellent Grammarian, and General Scholar, one of the greatest Lights in
Holland. He has written learnedly of almost all the Arts. B^chartus says thus
of his Book, De Historicis Graecis, a work of wonderful Learning, by the
reading of which, I ingeniously profess my self to have been not a little
profited.

20. Isaac Causabone, Leigh's Rel. and Learn. lib. 3. cap. 10. p. 156.
a great Linguist, but a singular Grecian, and an excellent Philologer.
Salmasius (no mean Scholar himself) calls him that Incomparable Person, the
Immortal Honor of his Age, never to be named without praise, and never enough
to be praised. He had a rare knowledge in the Oriental Tongues, in the Greek
scarce his Second, much less his equal, says Capellus.

21. James Usher the Hundredth Archbishop (from St. Patrick) of A^magh. Leigh's
Rel. and Learn. lib. 6. cap. 6. p. 359.
A divine, says Voetius, of vast reading and erudition, and most skilful in
Ecclesiastical Antiquity. The great Merits (says Vossius) of that great and
every way learned Person in the Church, and of the whole Republic of Learning
will never suffer, but that there will be a grateful celebration of his memory
for ever, by all the Lovers of Learning. Fitz Simonds the Jesuit^, with whom he
disputed though then very young, in one of his Books gives him this Title,
Acatholicorum Doctissimus, the most Learned of all the Protestants.

22. John Seldom a Learned Lawyer of the Inner Temple; Leigh's Rel. and Learn.
lib. 5. cap. 13. p. 322.
he had great knowledge in Antiquity, and the Oriental Languages, which he got
after he fell to the Study of the Law. He is honorably mentioned by many
Outlandish men. He wrote in all his Books (...), above all Liberty. To show
that he would examine things and not take them upon trust. Dr. Duck, says thus
of him, to the exact knowledge of the Laws of his Country, he also added that
of the Mo^aical, and the Laws of other Nations, as also all other Learning, not
only Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, but also a singular understanding and knowledge
of the Oriental Nations.

23. John Gregory born at Amersham in the County of Buckingham, Fuller's
Worthies. p. 136, 137. Vid. Account of his Life and Death, prefixed to Gregorii
postb^mae.
1607. He was bred in Christ-church in Oxford, where he so applied his Book;
that he studied sixteen hours in the four and twenty, for many years together.
He attained to singular skill in Civil, Historical, Ritual, and Oriental
Learning, in the Saxon, French, Italian, Spanish, and all Eastern Languages,
through which he miraculously traveled without any Guide, except that of Mr.
Dod the Decalogist for the Hebrew Tongue, whose Society and direction therein
he enjoyed one Vacation near Banbury. As he was an excellent Linguist and
general Scholar: so his modesty set a greater luster upon his Learning. He was
first Chaplain of Christ-church, and thence preferred Prebendary of Chichester
and Sarum, and indeed no Church Preserment, compatible with his Age, was above
his Desert^. After twenty years trouble with an Hereditary Gout, improved by
immoderate study; it at last invaded his Stomach, and thereof he died Anno
1646. at the Age of thirty nine years. He died at Kidlington, and was buried at
Christ-church in Oxford. This Epitaph was made by a Friend on his Memory.

Ne premas cineres hosce Viator
Nescis quot sub hoc jacent Lapillo
Graeculus, Hebraeus, Syrus,
Et qui te quovis vincet Id^omate.
At ne molestus sis,
Auscul^a, and causam auribus tuis imbibe.
Templo exclusus
Et avita Relligione
Iaem senescente, (ne dicam sublata)
Mutavit chorum, altiorem ut capesceret.
Vade nunc, si libet and imitare.
R. W.
Ch^tw. hist. ^ollect. cent. 3. p. 86.
24. Manutius in his Preface to his Paradoxes tells us of one Creighton a
Scotch-man, who at twenty years of Age (when he was killed by the Order of the
Duke of Mantua) understood twelve Languages, had read over all the Fathers and
Poets, disputed de omni scibili, and answered extempore in Verse, Ingenium
prodigiosum, sed de fuit Iudicium: He had a prodigious Wit, but was defective
in Judgment.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the first Authors of diverse Famous Inventions.
THe Chinese look upon themselves as the wisest People upon the Face of the
Earth; they use therefore to say, that they see with both eyes, and all other
Nations but with one only. They give out that the most famous inventions that
are so lately made known to the Europaean world; have been no Strangers to
them, for a number of Ages that are passed. I know not what Justice they may
have in these pretensions of theirs; but shall content my self to give some
account of the most useful amongst them, by whom, and when they were conveyed
down to us.

H^kw. Apol. lib. 3. cap. 10. 2. p. 276, 277.
1. The Invention of that Excellent Art of Printing, Peter Ramus seems to
attribute to on^ John Faust a Moguntine, telling us that he had in his keeping,
a Copy of Tully's Offices Printed upon Parchment, with this Inscription, added
in the end thereof, viz. The Excellent Work of Marcus Tullius I John Faust,
Ram. Scho^. Mat^e^. lib. 2. p.
a Citizen of Ments, happily I up (...) not with writing Ink, or Brass Pen, but
with an Excellent Art, by the help of Peter Gerneshem my Servant, finished it
was in the Year 1466. the Fourth of February. Pasquier says, Stow's Annals. p.
404.
the like had come to his hands, and Salmuth says, that one of the same
Impression was to be seen in the Public Library of Ausburg; another in Emanuel
College in Cambridge; Ga^lb^^t. Tab. Chron. p. 719.
and a fifth Dr. Hakewell says he saw in the Public Library of Oxford, though
with some little difference in the Inscription. Yet Polydor Virgil from the
report of the Moguntines themselves, affirms that John Gutenberge, Fulgos. Ex.
lib. 8. cap. 11. p. 1082.
a Knight, and dwelling in Mentz was the first Inventor thereof, Anno 1440. and
with him agree diverse Learned Persons, believing he was the first Inventor of
this Invaluable Art; but Faust the first who taking it from him made proof
thereof in Printing a Book. Iunius tells it was the Invention of Lawrence Ians
a Citizen of Harlem, Belg. Commonwealth. p. 57. H^rlen's Cosmog. p. 384. Hist.
Man. A^ts. cap. 5. p. 65.
in the Low Countries, with whom joined Thomas Peter's a Kinsman of his, for the
perfecting of it; and that the forementioned John Faust stole his Letters, and
fled with them first to Amsterdam, thence to Collen, and afterward to Ments.
According to their Books they of China have used Printing this 1600 years; but
it is not like unto ours in Europe, for their Letters are engraven in Tables of
Wood. The Author gives his Manuscript to the Graver, Back. Chron. p. 284.
who makes his Tables of the same bigness with the Sheets that are given him,
and pasting the Leaves upon the Table with the wrong side outward, he engraves
the Letters as he finds them, with much facility and exactness, their Wooden
Tables are made of the best Pear Tree: So that any Work which they print (as
they do in great numbers) remains always entire in the Print of the Table to be
Reprinted, as often as they please, without any new expense in setting for the
Press, as there is in our Printing. It was brought into England by William
Caxto of London Mercer, Anno 1471. who first practiced it.

As touching that of Guns though Lipsius calls it the Invention of Spirits and
not of men, Hakew. Apol. l. 3. ^. 10.9.3. p. 278.279.280. Ral^ighs Hist. world.
l. 1. c. 7.4. p. Heyl. Cosm. p. 399. Bak. Chron. p. 222. Lo^icer. Theatr. p.
361. Stows. Annal. p. 571. and p. 584.
and Sir Walter Raleigh, will have it found out by the Indians; and Petrach and
Val^urius, refer it to Archimedes for the overthrow of Marcellus his Ships at
the Seige of Syracuse. Yet the common opinion is that it was first found out by
a Monk of Germany. Forcatulus in his fourth Book of the Empire and Philosophy
of France names him Berthold Swartz of Cullen; and Salmuth, calls him
Constantine, A^klitzen of Friburg, but all agree that he was a German Monk, and
that by chance a Spark of Fire falling into a pot of Nitre, which he had
prepared for Physic or Alchymy, and causing it to fly up: he thereupon made a
composition of Powder, with an Instrument of Brass or Iron, and putting Fire to
it found the conclusion to answer his desire. The first public use of Guns
that we read of, was thought to be about the year 1380. as Magius, or 400 as
Ramus, in a Battle betwixt the Genowayes, and the Venetians; at Clodia Fossa,
in which the Venetians having got (it seems) the invention from the Monk; so
galled their enemies that they saw themselves wounded and slain, and yet knew
not by what means nor how to prevent it, as witnesses Platina in the life of
Pope Urban the sixth.

3. The Mariners compass is an admirable Invention, of which ^odinus thus,
Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 10. 4. p. 281. Stowes Annall. p. 811. V^rstg. Restitut.
of Intellig. c. 2 p. 33. H^yl. Cosm. p. 71. and. p. 1015.
though there be nothing in the whole Course of Nature that is more worthy of
wonder then the Loadstone yet were the ancients ignorant of the divine use of
it. It points out the way to the skillful Mariner, when a^l other helps fail
him, and that more certainly though it be without Reason, sense or life, then
without the help thereof all the Wisards and learned Clerks in the world, using
the united strength of their wits, and cunning can possibly do. Now touching
the time and Author of this invention, there is some doubt. Dr. Gilbert our
country man, who has written in Latin a large and learned discourse of this
stone; seems to be of opinion that Paulus Venetus, brought the Invention of the
use thereof from the Chinese. Osorius in his discourse of the Acts of King
Emanuel, refers it to Gama, and his Country men the Portugals, who as he
pretends took it, from certain barbaro^s Pirates roaving upon the Sea, about
the Cape of good Hope. Goropius Becanus thinks he has good reason to entitle
it upon his countrymen, the Germans, in as much as the thirty two points of the
Wind upon the Compass, borrow the name from the Dutch in all Languages. But
Blond^^ who is therein followed by Pancirollus (both Italians) will not have
Italy lose the praise thereof, telling us that about Anno 1300, is was found
out ^t M^l^hi^ or Melphis a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the province of
C^^^pania, now called Terra di Lovorador. But for the Author of it one names
him not, and the other assures us he is not known. Yet Salmuth out of C^^zus
and Gomara, confidently christens him, with the name of Flavius, and so does
Dubartas, whose verses on this subject are thus translated. We Are, not to Ceres
so much bound ^or bread
Neither to Bacchus for his Clusters red.
As signior Flavio to thy witty trial,
For first inventing of the Seamens Dyal,
The use of the needle turning in the same
Divine Device! O Admirable Frame!
Whereby through the Ocean, in the darkest night
Our hugest Carracks are conducted righ^:
Whereby we are stored with trouchman, guide and lamp
To search all corners of the watery camp:
Whereby a Ship that stormy heavens have whirld
Near (in one night) unto the other world,
Knows where she is, and in the card descries
What degrees thence the Aequinoctial lies.
It may well be then, that Flavius the Milevitan, was the first inventor of the
guiding of a Ship by the turning of the needle to the North; but some Germane
afterward added to the compass, the 32 points of the wind in his own language,
whence other nations have since borrowed it.

H^kew. Apol. Advertisment. 3. p. 19.
4. The Instrument of perpetual Motion was invented by Cornelius van Drebble a
German here in England and by him presented to King James.

Id. Ibid. Gassend. invita Peireskiil. 2. p. 55 Histor. Manual Arts c. 3. p. 29
Petr. Serve. dissert. de angu. Armario. p. 68.
5. Sailing Coaches were invented by Simon Stevinius in the Netherlands, of
which wonderful kind of Coaches we are told that Peireskius made trial in the
year 1606. Purposing to see Grotius (says Gassendus) he diverted to
Scheveling that he might satisfy himself, in the carriage and swiftness of a
Coach, a few years before invented and made up, with that Artifice, that with
expanded sails it would ^ly upon the shore, as a ship upon the Sea. He had
formerly understood that Count Mannice, a little after his victory at Neuport,
had put himself thereinto, together with Francis Mendoz^ his prisoner, on
purpose to make trial thereof, and that within two hours they arrived at
Putten, which is distant from Scheveling 14 leagues, that is 40 miles and more.
He had therefore a mind to make experiment of it himself, and he would often
tell us with what admiration he was seized, when he was carried with a quick
wind, and yet perceived it not, the Coaches motion being as quick as it self.
When he perceived that he flew over ditches and passed the interposed waters,
scarce touching the super^icies of them. How those that travelld before, seemed
to come toward them, as things that were at the remotest distance were almost
in a moment left behind, and other things of the like nature.

6. In the Reign of Leo Isauricus, Caliph Zulciman, besieged Constantinople,
H^^l. Casm. p. 630. Gault. tab. Chron. p. 533.
for the space of three years, where by Cold and Famine 300000 of the Saracens
were consumed. At this seige was that fire invented which were for the violence
of it call wild-sire and the Latins because the Greeks were the Authors of
it, call Graecus Ignis, by this invention the Ships of the Saracens were not a
l^ttle molested. It was invented by Call^^icus. Anno 678

7. The Lydians were the first inventors of Dice Ball, H^rod l. 1. p. 40.41.
Chesse, and the like games: necessity and hunger in^orcing them thereunto.
Ingenii largitor venture; Famine sharpens the brain as well as the stomach. In
the time of Atys the Son of Manes the Lydians were vexed with it and then
devised these games, every second day playing at them they beguiled their
hungry stomachs. Thus ^or twenty two years they continued playing and eating by
times: But then seeing that themselves were more fruitful in getting and
bea^ing children, then the soil was at that time fruitful in bringing forth
sustenance to maintain them, They sent a Colony into Italy, under the conduct
of Tyrrhenus the Son of Atys: who planted in that Country first called
Tyrrhenia and since Tuscany.

8. The Phenicians by reason of their Maritime situation, Heyl. Cosm. p. 101^.
were great adventurers at Sea, trading in almost all parts of the then known
world, they are said to have been the first Navigatours, and first builders of
Ships: they first invented open vessels, the Egyptians Ships with decks, and
gallyes with two banks of Oars upon a side. Great Ships of burden were first
made by the Cypriots, Cock-boats and Skiffs by the Illyrians or Liburnians,
Brigantines by the Rhodians, Frigatts or light Barks by the Cyrenians, men of
War by the Phamphilians. As for tackle the Boeotians invented the Oar; D^edalus
of Creet, Masts and sails: Anacharsis grappling hooks: the Tuscans anchors;
The Rudder, helm, and art of steering, was the invention of Typhis, the chief
Pilot in the famous Argo, who noting that a Kite, when she slew, guided her
whole body by her tail, effected that in the devices of Art, which he had
observed in the works of Nature.

9. The Sicilians were heretofore famous for many notable inventions: H^yl.
Cosm. p. 83.
Pliny ascribes to them the finding out of hourglasses; and Plutarch of
military Engines, brought to great perfection by Archimedes that Countreyman,
Palamedes the son of Nauplius, is said to have first instituted sentinels in an
army, and was the first inventor of the watchword: the battle ax, was first
found out by Penihesilea Queen of the Amazons, who came to the seige of Troy in
aid of King Priamus, where she was slain by Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles.

10. The dying of Purple, H^yl. Cosm. p. 691.
was first in^ented at Tyr^, and that as Julius Pollux says, by a mere
accident, a Dog having seized upon the Fi^h called Conchilis or Purpura had
thereby stained his lips with that delightful color: which gave the occasion
of its seeking and it was afterward the richest and most desirable color to
persons of greatest quality, for ages together.

11 The Inhabitants of Sidon are said to be the first makers of Glass, Full. Chapter
Hist l. 3. Cent. 7. p. 84.
the materials of the work being brought hither from the Sands of a River,
running not far from Ptolomais, and only made fusible in this City. About Anno.
Dom 662. one Benault a foreign Bishop, (but of what place I ^ind not,) brought
the mystery of making glass, into England, to the great beautifying of our
houses and Churches.

12. For Verses, H^yl. C^sm. p. 671.
and writing in that way: Aristotle, ascribes the first making of pastoral
Eclogues to the Sicilians. Arion an excellent Musi^ian and eminent Poet, is
said to be the first inventor of Tragoedies, and the Author of the verse called
Dithyrambick* Sappho an Heroic woman, and called the tenth Muse, was the Author
of the verse called Sapphick and be it here remembered that the first Bishop of
Sherborn (when taken out of the Bishopric of Winchester by King Ina) which was
Ad^lme, Camd. Brit. p Wil^shire. Ful^ch Hist. l. 2. cent. 8. p. 94.95.
kinsman to the King, was the first of our English Nation, who wrote in Latin,
and the first that taught Englishmen, to make Latin verse, according to his
promise, Primus ego in patriam mecum modo vita supersit,
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas.
If life me last that I do see that native soil of mine
From Aon tops, I Will first with me, bring down the Muses nine.


Heyl. Cosm. p. 361.
13. Unto the Flemings we are indebted for the making of Cloth, which we learnt
of them, and also for Arras hangings, Dornix, the making of Worsted, Says, and
Tapestries, they restored Music and found out diverse musical Instruments, To
them belongs also the invention of Clocks, Watches, Chariots, the laying on
of Colors with oil, and the working of Pictures in Glass.

Heyl. Cosm. l. 4. p. 921.
14. Brachygraphy or the Art of W^iting by short Characters, is said by Dion to
be invented by Mecaenas, the great favorite of Augustus Caesar ad celeritatem
scribendi, for the speedier dispatch of writing. Isidor ascribes it to Aquila
the freedman of this Mecaenas; and to Tertius, Pers^nnius, and Philargius who
had added to this invention, yet had all they their chief light in it, from
Tullius Tito a freedman of Cicero's, who had undertaken and compassed it in the
propositions, but went no further. At the last it was perfected by Seneca, who
brought this Art into order and method, the whole Volume of his contractions
consisting of five thousand words.

H^yl. Cosm. p. 1^03.
15. The boiling and baking of Sugar as it is now used, is not above two hundred
years old, and the refining of it more new than that, first found out by a
Venetian in the days of our Fathers, who is said to have got above 100000
Crowns by this invention; and to have left his Son a Knight, before which our
Ancestors (not having such luxurious pallats) sometimes made use of rough Sugar
as it comes from the Canes, but most commonly contented themselves with honey.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 925.
16. That Paper which was first in use, was the invention of the Egyptians, for
on the banks of the River Nilus, grew those sedgy weeds called Papyri, which
have since given name to Paper. By means of this Invention, Ptolemy
Philadelphus was enabled to make his excellent Library at Alexandria, but
understanding that Attalus King of Pergamus (by the benefit of this Egyptian
Paper) strove to exceed him in this kind of Muni^icence, he prohibited the
carrying it out of Egypt. Hereupon A^talus invented the use of Parchment, made
of the Skins of Calves and Sheep, from the materials called Membranae and
Perganiena from the place where it was invented. The convenience hereof was the
cause that in short time the Egyptian Paper was worn out of use, in place
whereof succeeded our Paper made of Rags, Hist of Manual Arts. c. 4. p. 57.
the Authors of which excellent invention our Ancestors have ^orgotten to
commit to memory: My Lord Bacon reckons this amongst the singularities of Art,
so that of all Artificial matters there is scarce any thing like it: It derives
its pedigree from the Dunghill.

Vsque ad^o magnarum sordent primordia rerum.
Hist. of Manual Arts. c. 4. p. 46, 47.
17. Amongst all the productions and inventions of Humane wit, there is none
more admirable and useful than writing, by means whereof a man may copy out his
very thoughts, utter his mind without opening his mouth, and signify his
pleasure at a thousand miles distance, and this by the help of twenty four
Letters and fewer in some places; by various joining and combining of which
letters, all words that are utterable and imaginable may be framed: For the
several ways of joining and combining these Letters, do amount (as Clavius the
Jesuit has taken the pains to compute) to 5852616738497664000 ways, so that
all things that are in heaven or earth, that are or were or shall be, that can
be uttered or imagined, may be expressed and signi^ied by the help of this
mavelous Alphabet, which may be described in the compass of a farthing. It
seems this miracle has lost its master, being put down with the inventa
Adespota, by Thomas Read, and thus sung by him. Quisqui^ erat, meruit senii
transcendere metas,
Et fati nescire modum, qui mystica primus
S^nsa animi docuit, magicis signare figuris.
that is, Who er'e he was that first did show the way,
TO express by such like Magic marks our mind,
D^serv'd Reprieve unto a longer day,
Then Fate to mortals mostly has assigned.


18. Archimedes the Syracusan was the first Author of the Sphere, Heyl. Cosm.
p. 84.
of which instrument he made one of that Art and Bigness, that a man standing
within, might easily perceive the motions of every Celestial Orb, and an
admirable agreement betwixt Art and Nature, Claud. ep. p. 369.
this rare invention is celebrated by the praises of many, but especially by
Claudian in an Epigram he has on purpose composed upon it, of which this is
part: Jupiter in parvo cum cernerat Aethera vitro,
Risit and ad superos talia dicta dedit:
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae,
Iam meus en fragili luditur orb labor, etc.


CHAP. XLIV. Of the admirable Works of some curious Artists.
WHen Learning (as to the generality) was at a kind of lower ebb in the world,
it was ordinary for such as had a more than ordinary knowledge in the
Mathematics, to pass amongst the vulgar sort; as men that were devoted to
conjuration and necromancy. The illiterate rout could not believe that to be
any lawful Art, which trod so near upon the heels of nature, and whose
wonderful productions transcended the measure of their reason: Pet. Ram. Schol.
Mat^. l. 2. Hak^w. Ap. l. 3. c. 10. 1. p. 233. Versteg. res^. of decayed
intellig. c. 2. p. 53. H^yl. Cosm. p. 399. Petr. serve. de ung. Arm. p. 64.
Keckerm. in Physic. l. c. 4. p. 1368. Du Bart^s in 6 th day of the first week.
p.
Since then the times have been more favorable to learning, and thereby Art
improved to that height, as some of the following examples will discover.

1. Petrus Ramus tells us of a wooden Eagle and an iron Fly, made by
Regiomontanus a famous Mathematician of Norimberg, whereof the first slew forth
of the City aloft in the Air, met the Emperor Maximilian a good way off coming
toward it, and having saluted him, ^eturned again waiting on him to the City
gates. The Second, at a feast whereto he had invited his familiar friends, slew
forth of his hand, and taking a round returned thither again, to the great
astonishment of the beholders, both which the excellent Pen of the noble Du
Bartas rarely expressed.

Why should I not that wooden Eagle mention,
A learned German's late admired invention,
Which mounting from his fist that framed her;
Flew far to meet an Almain Emperor?
And having met him; with her nimble Train
And weary Wings turning about again;
Followed him close unto the C^stle Gate
Of Norimberg, whom all their shows of State;
Streets hanged with Arras, A^ches curious built:
Gray Headed Senate, and Youths Gallantise;
Graced not so much as only this d^vice.
He goes on and thus describes the Fly.

Once as this Artist more with mirth that meat,
Feasted some Friends whom he esteemed great;
From under's hand an iron Fly ^lew out,
Which having stown a perfect round about,
With weary Wings returned unto her Master:
And as judicious on his Arm he placed her.
O! Divine Wit, that in the narrow Womb
Of a small Fly, could find sufficient Room
For all those Springs, Wheels, Counterpoise and Chains,
Which stood in stead of Life, and Spur and Reins.
Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 10. 1. p. 274. Versteg. c. 2. p. 52. Knowls.. Turk.
hist. p. 713.
2. The Silver Sphere, (a most exquisite piece of Art, which was sent by the
Emperor Ferdinand to Solomon the Great Turk) is mentioned by Paulus Iovius and
Sabell^cus. It was carried (as they write) by twelve men unframed, and reframed
in the Grand Seignior's presence by the maker of it, who likewise delivered him
a Book, containing the mystery of using it: of which Du Bartas thus.

Nor may we smother or forget ungrately,
The Heaven of Silver that was sent but lately,
From Ferdinando as a famous work,
Unto Bizantium to the Greatest Turk;
Du Bartas ibid.
Wherein a Sprite still moving to and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to g^.
And though the one Sphere did always slowly glide,
And contrary the other swiftly slide:
Yet still the Stars kept all their courses even,
With the true courses of the Stars in Heaven:
The Sun there shifting in the Zodiac,
His shining houses never did forsake
His pointing path; there in a mouth his Sister
Fulfilled her course and changing often her Luster,
And form of Face, (now larger) lesser soon,
Followed the Changes of the other Moon.
Faith. Ann. p. 128.
3. In the twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth, Mark Scaliot Blacksmith; made a
Lock consisting of eleven pieces of Iron, Steel and Brass, all which together
with a Pipe Key to it, weighed but one grain of gold, he made also a chain of
gold consisting of forty three links, whereunto having fastened the Lock and Key
before mentioned, he put the Chain about a Fleas neck, which drew them all with
ease: Now all these together, Lock and Key, Chain and F^^a being weighed, the
weight of them was but one grain and a half.

Plin. l. 7. c. 21. p. 167. Aelian. var. ^^st. l. 1. c. 17. p. 13.
4. Calicrates used to make Pismires, and other such little creatures ou^ of
Ivory, with that wonder^ul Artifice, that other men could not discern the parts
of them one from the other, without the help of Glasses.

Plin. l. 7. c. 21. p. 167. A^lian. var. hist. l. 1. c. 17. p. 13. Servius de
^^ng. Armor. p. 56.
5. Myrmecides was also excellent in that kind of workmanship, he wrought out of
Ivory a Chariot with four wheels and as many horses in so little Room, that a
little Fly might cover them all with her wings: The same man made a Ship with
all the tackling to it, no bigger than that a small Be might hide it with her
wings.

6. Praxiteles was a curious worker in Imagery, Plin. l. 7. c. 38. p. 175.
he made a Statue of Venus for the Gnidians so lively, that a certain young man
became so amorous of it, that the excess of his love deprived him of his wits.
This piece of Art was esteemed at that rate by King Nicomedes, that whereas the
Gnidians owed him a vast sum of money, he offered to take that Statue in full
satisfaction of his debt.

7. Cedrenus makes m^ntion of a Lamp which (together with an Image of Christ)
was found at Ed^ssa in the Reign of Justinian the Emperor: Citesi. opus. Med.
p. 63.64.
It was set over a ce^tain gate there, and privily enclosed (as appeared by the
date of it) soon after Christ was crucified; it was found burning, (as it had
done for Five hundred years before) by the Soldiers of Cosroes King of Persia,
by whom also the oil was taken out of it and cast into the fire; which
occasioned such a Plague, as brought death upon almost all the forces of
Cosroes.

8. At the demolition of our Monasteries here in England, Hak^. Apol. l. 2. c.
3. 3. p. Came. Brit. p. in Yorks. L^d. Viv. in l. de Civ. Dei. l. 21. c. 6. p.
there was found in the supposed Monument of Constantius Chlorus (father to the
Great Constantine) a burning Lamp which was thought to have continued burning
there, even since his burial; which was about three hundred years after Christ.
The Ancient Romans used in that manner to preserve lights in their Sepulchers,
a long time, by the oylyness of Gold, resolved by Art into a liquid substance.

9. A^thur Gregory of Lyme in the County of Dorset, Full. Worth. p. 234. in
Dorsetshire.
had the admirable Art, of forcing the Seal of a Letter, yet so invisibly that
it still appeared a Virgin to the exactest beholder. Secretary Walsingham, made
great use of him, about the packquet, which passed from Foreign parts to Mary
Queen of Scotland. He had a Pension paid for his good service out of the
Exchequer, and died at Lyme about the beginning of the Reign of King James.

10. Cornelius van Drebble that rare Artist, Hist. Man. Arts. c. 3. p. 33.
made a kind of Organ, that would make an excellent Symphony of it self, being
placed in the open air, and clear Sun, without the fingering o^ an Organist;
which was (as is conceived) by the means of air enclosed: and the strictures of
the beams, rarifying the same, for in a shady place it would yield no Music,
but only where the Sunbeams had the Liberty to play upon it, as we read of
Memnons Statue.

11. I remember says Clavius, Fortes^ feriae Aca. p. 150
that while (as yet) I was but young, and Studied the Mathematics: for the
great honor we had of Alexander Farnesius, we invited that Prince, into our
School, and amongst other gifts and shows, that were presented him by the
Ingenious, a Mathematical one was imposed upon me. Then was it that the force
of a Concave, was happily serviceable to me ^ for by the virtue and power of
it, I erected on high the name of Alexander Farnesius: impressed it in the air,
all the letters of it, being radiant and shining. It was a monument indeed but
only of our observation, and honor to, but very short of the greatness of the
Farnesian family.

12. His Highness the Duke of Holsteine has ordered a Globe to be made in the
City of Gottorp, Olea^ius. in his Travels. p. 339.
it is a double Globe, made of Copper, ten foot and half in Diameter, so that
within it ten persons may sit at a table, which with the seats about it,
hangs at one of its Poles. There a man may see (by means of an Horizontal
Circle within the Globe) how the Stars and Sun it self, out of its Center,
moves of its self, through its Ecliptic Degrees, and rises, and sets
regularly. The motion of this Globe exactly follows that of the heavens, and
deriveth that motion, from certain Wheels, driven by water, which is drawn out
of a mountain hard by, and let in as it requires more or less, according to
the swiftness of the Spheres.

Gass. in vit. Paeiresk. l. 5. p. 185. Hist. Man. Arts. c. 1. p. 10, 11.
13. There was at Liege, Ann. 1635. a Religious, and industrious man of the
Society of Jesus, named Linus, by birth an English man, he had (says Kircher)
a Phial or Glass of Water, wherein a little Globe did float, wit^ the twenty
four letters of the Alphabet described upon it, on the inside of the Phial, was
an Index or Style, to which the Globe did turn and move it self, at the period
of every hour, with that letter which denoted the hour of the day successively:
as though this little globe kept pace and time with the heavenly motions. And
Kircher himself, had a vessel of water in which (just even with the surface of
the water) were the twenty four hours described. A piece of Cork was set upon
the water, and there in were put some seeds of the Heliotrope, or Sun-flower,
which like the flower it self did turn the Cork about, according to the course
of the Sun, and with its motion, point out the hour of the day.

Fortes. seriae A^. p. 123.
14. I will show you an experiment (says Galilaeo) which my last leisure hours
did produce, and so calling his servant he gave him his Cloak, and taking out a
round box; he went directly to the window, upon which at that time the Sun
^^one: and opening the box toward the Sun, till such time as it had received
the light of it, he desired that the room should be made as dark as might be,
which done turning to Clavius then with him; did you not desire (said he) that
something should be showed or made by us to day? Pardon the extravagancy of the
word; Behold here the work of the first day: Let there be light, and opening
the concave box, a light shot it self into the dark and ascended by degrees as
a vapor that is kindled by the Sun, as soon as it disappeared, there was a great
applause made him, by all the assistants that were then in presence.

Fortes. seriae Ac. p. 143.
15. I will produce says Grenibergius, an experiment concerning voice, which I
infused into a Statue: It was not made of Brass or solid Marble, but of
Plaster, that so the winding receptacles of the voice (as it were included in
the bollow belly) might receive the percussions of sounds, and render them
again the more happily. I therefore put words into this ductory of the voice,
as the distances of breath would permit, and so again I infused others at the
like intervals. I then closely stopped up the entrance of the voice, at last
after diverse windings, and various inflections and such impediments as promoted
^he design; what I had spo^en, came to the head and face of the Statue, and for
as much as the force of the words was sharp and that there was a succession of
Spirits; they did very expeditely move the Jaws and the tongue which were made
moveable for that purpose) even to the variety of Syllables.

16. Ianellus T^rrianus a Great Master in the Mathematics, Hist. of Man. Arts.
c. 2. p. 22. Habi^g obs. o^ hist. p. 157, 158.
did usually delight the Emperor Charles the fifth, with miracles of Study,
sometimes he sent wooden Sparrows, into the Emperors dining room, which flew
about there and returned: At other times he caused little armed men, to muster
themselves upon the table; and artificially move according to the discipline of
war; which was done so beyond Example, that the Superior of the Religious house
of S. Ierom, nothing read in the mysteries of that Art, suspected it for plain
Witchcraft.

17. We were heretofore, Scal. de sub. in Card. Exer. 333. p. 1061.
some young Scholars of us, with Albertus Durerus, one of which (as 'twas usual
with him) gave evidence of his strength, in diverse trials. Durerus stroking him
on the head, come (said he) let us see if you can do a very small matter: and
with all showed him two little Tables of Brass, the one laid upon the other,
take said he fast hold on the uppermost, and sever it from the other that is
under it: when he had assayed it, but in vain, and though he used more strength
yet found it was all one; The young man told him, that he had deluded him, for
the two tablets were rivetted together, and thereupon he desisted the further
trial. When Durerus himself bending them downwards, easily performed it, for
both being exactly polished they sliped one from the other.

18. There was an Artificer in Rome who made vessels of Glass of so tenacious a
temper, Petr. Saty. p. 68, 69. Plin. l. 36, c. 26. Sutton. in Tiberio. p. Xiph.
in Tib. p. 56.
that they were as little liable to be broken as those that are made of Gold
and Silver, when therefore he had made a Vial of this purer sort, and such as
he thought a present worthy of Caesar alone, he was admitted into the presence
of the then Emperor Tiberius: the gift was praised, and the skilful hand of the
Artist applauded, and the devotion of the giver accepted. The Artist that he
might inhance the wonder of the Spectators, and promote himself yet further in
the favor of the Emperor, desires and receives again the Vial out of Caesar's
hand, and threw it with that force against the floor that the solidest metal
would have received some damage or bruise thereby. Caesar was not only amazed
but affrighted, with the Act; but he taking up the Vial from the ground (which
was not broken, but only shrivelled together as if the substance of the Glass
had put on the temperature of Brass) drew out an Instrument from his bosom,
aptly corrected the form of it, and reduced it to it is former figure; by
striking upon it, as they use to do on a Brazen Vessel that is bruised. This
done he imagined that he had conquered the world, as believing that he had
merited an acquaintance with Caesar, and raised the admiration of all the
assistants: but it fell out otherwise, for the Emperor enquired if any other
besides himself was privy to the like tempering of Glasses: when he had told
him no, he commanded to strike off his head, saying, that should this Artifice
come once to be known, Gold and Silver would be of as little value as the dirt
of the Street. Knowl. Tur bis. p. 1273
Long after this, viz. 1610. we read that amongst other rare presents, then
sent from the Sophy of Persia to the King of Spain, were six Glasses of
Malleable Glass so exquisitely tempered that they could not be broken.

19. At Dantzick a City of Prussia, Hist. Man. Arts. chapter 3. p. 33.
Mr. Marrison (an ingenious Traveller of this Nation) sent a Mill, which
without help of hands did saw Boards, having an iron whe^l, which did not only
drive the Saw, but also did hook in and turn the Boards unto the Saw. Dr. John
Dee mentions the like seen by him at Prague; but whether the Mill moved by Wind
or Water, is set down by neither of them.

20. At the Mint of Segovia in Spain, Sir Ke^el^. Digby's bodies. chapter 23 p. 207.
there is an Engine that moves by Water, so artificially made, that one part of
it distendeth an Ingot of Gold, into that breadth and thickness as is requisite
to make Coin of. It delivers the Plate that it has wrought unto another that
printeth the Figure of the Coin upon it, and from thence it is turned over to
another that cutteth it according to the Print in due shape and weight. And
lastly, the several Pieces fall into a reserve in another Room, where the
Officer whose charge it is sinds Treasure ready coined.

Petr. Servi^. dissert. de ^ng. armario.. p. 66, 67.
21. Oswaldus Norhingerus, the most excellent Artisan of this or the former
Ages, made 1600 Dishes or Platters of turned Ivory, all perfect and complete in
every part; yet so small and little, so thin and slender, that all of them
('it is wonderful to relate, more to make) were included at once in a Cup turned
out of a Pepper Corn of the common bigness. Johannes Carolus Shad of Muelbrach
carried this wonderful work with him to Rome, showed it to Pope Paul the Fifth,
who saw and counted them all, by the help of a pair of Spectacles; they were so
little as to be almost insensible to the eye; he then gave liberty to as many
as would to see them, amongst whom were Gaspar Scioppius, and Johannes Faber of
Bamberge, physician in Rome.

Servii dissert. de ung. Armar. p. 67, 68.
22. Johannes B^ptista Ferrarius a Jesuit, not long since showed openly Cannons
of Wood with their Carriages, Wheels, and all other their Military Furniture
(small and slender one you must think) for twenty five of these, together with
thirty Cups turned out of Wood, and neatly made, were altogether contained and
included in one single Pepper Corn, which yet was such as exceeded not the
common bigness.

Hist. man. Arts. cap. 12. p. 148.
23. George Whitehead an English man, made a Ship with all her Tackling to move
it self on a Table, with Rowers plying the Oars, a Woman playing on the Lute,
and a little Whelp crying on the Deck, says Schottus in his Itinerary.

24. The Grounds of Chemical Philosophy go thus, that Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury are the Principles into which all things do resolve, and that the
radical and original moisture whereby the first Principle of Salt consists,
cannot be confirmed by calcination, but the forcible tinctures and impressions
of things, as Color, Taste, Smell, nay and the very forms themselves, are
invisibly kept in store in this ^irm and vital Principle. To make this good by
experiment, they take a Rose, July-flower, or any kind of Plant whatsoever;
they take this Simple in the Spring time in its fullest and most congruous
consistence, they beat the whole Plant in a Mortar, Roots, Stalks, Flowers,
Leaves, and all, till it be reduced to a confused Mass. Then after maceration,
fermentation, separation, and other workings of Art, there is extracted a kind
of Ashes, or Salt including these forms and tinctures under their power and
Chaos. These Ashes are put up in Glasses, written upon with the several Names
of the Herbs or Plants, and sealed Hermetically; that is the mouth of the Glass
heated in the fire, and then the neck of it wrung about close, which they call
the Seal of Hermes their Master. When you would see any of these Vegetables
again, they apply a Candle or soft sire to the Glass, and you shall presently
perceive the Herbs or Plants by little and little to rise up again out of their
Salt or Ashes, in their several proper Forms, springing up as at first (but in
a shorter time then) they did in the Field. But remove the Glass from the fire
and immediately they return to their own Chaos again. And though this went for a
great secret in the time of Quercetan, yet Gasfarell says, that (...) it is no
such rare matter for Mounsieur de Claves one of the most excellent Chemists of
these days uses to make show of this at any time.

25. Johannes a Porta in his Catoptricks mentions Parabolical Section, Fortes.
^eriae Acade^. p. 150, 151.
and the wonderful power and effects of it, many admire the Invention, few
(perhaps none) know how to frame an Instrument in that form, that shall
speedily fire, and at almost an infinite distance. For that which Proclus and
Archimedes did for the safety of their Country, were but slight things to this.
I have I confess (says Clavius) attempted the making of one of them, not
unprosperously, but with an incredible and dreadful success.

26. There was one in Queen Elizabeth's time that wrote the Ten Commandments,
Dr. Heylen's life of King Charles. p. 1.
the Creed, the Pater Noster, the Queens name, and the Year of our Lord, within
the compass of a penny, and gave a pair of Spectacles of such an Artificial
making, that by the help thereof she did plainly and distinctly discern every
Letter.

27. One Francis Alumnus was so notable in the Mystery of Writing, Hist. Man.
Arts. cap. 3. p. 43.
that he wrote the Apostle's Creed, and the ^ourteen first Verses of St. John's
Gospel, in the compass of a penny, and in full words: this he did in the
presence of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Pope Clement the Seventh, as is
related by Genebrard in his Chronology, and Simon Mayolus out of him, who had
also in his own possession such a Miracle (as he calls it) or the very same I
believe, for in his twenty fourth Colloquy these are his words: Nos domi idem
miraculum servamus; I have the same Miracle at home in my keeping.

28. There are certain Aeolii Sclopi, Hist. Man. Ar^ts. cap. 3. p. 34.
or Wind Muskets which some have devised to shoot Bullets without Powder, or
any thing else but Wind or Air compressed in the bore of it, or injected by a
Spring, and these they say discharge with as much force as others with Powder.

29. I saw at Leigorn, Gassar. Curlos. cap. 7. p. 236.
a Clock brought thither by a German to be sold, which had so many Rarities in
it, as I should never have believed if my own eyes had not seen it, for besides
an infinite number of strange motions, which appeared not at all to the eye,
you had there a company of Shepherds, some of which played on the Bagpipe, with
such Harmony and exquisite motion of the Fingers, as that one would have
thought they had been alive, others danced by couples, keeping exact time and
measure, whilst others capered and leaped up and down, with so much of
nimbleness, that my spirits were wholly ravished with the sight.

30. There was a Clock which was the great and excellent Work of Copernicus,
Fortes. seriae. Ac idem. p. 58, 59, 60.
in which there was not only to be heard, a number of different noyses,
occasioned by its various motions, but also most exactly to be discovered the
circuitions of all the celestial Orbs, the distinctions of days, months, years;
there the Zodiac did explicate its Signs: so performing the circle of the
year; there the playful Ram began the Spring, Cancer produces the Summer, Libra
inriches it with Autumn, and the slothful Scorpio makes the Winter. Here also
the Moon changes in the Nones, shines out more bright in the Ides, and
shamefully conceals her conjunction with the Sun in the Calends. But those
things which the Ingenious Artificer presented, and as it were produced into
the Scene, upon the entrance of every hour, marvellously delighted the
Spectators, every hour made show of some Mystery in our Faith. The first
Creation of Light, the powerful separation of the Elements, and all other
intermediat Mysteries he had traced upon this Engine, even to the great
Eclipse, that was when our Savior suffered on Mount Calvary to insist upon the
particulars, was the Work of an Age, the Eye that is the devourer of such
beautiful Objects, embraces more in an hour than the Tongue of the most
eloquent is able to represent in a considerable space of time.

Morrison's Itinerary. part. 1. cap. 3. p. 31.
31. At Strasburg there is a Clock of all other the most famous, invented by
C^nradus Dasipodius in the year 1571. Before the Clock stands a Globe on the
Ground showing the motions of the Heavens, Stars, Planets, namely of the Heaven
carried about by the first mover, in twenty-four hours, of Saturn by his proper
motion carried about in thirty years, of Jupiter in twelve, of Mars in two, of
the Sun, Mercury and Venus in one year, of the Moon in a Month. In the Clock
it self there be two Tables on the right and left hand, showing the Eclipses of
the Sun and Moon from the year 1573. to the year 1624. The third Table in the
midst is divided into three Parts. In the first Part the Statues of Apollo and
Diana, show the course of the year and the day thereof, being carried about in
one year; the second Part shows the year of our Lord, and of the World the
Equinoctial days, the hours of each day, the minutes of each hour, Easter day,
and all other Feasts, and the Dominical Letter. The third Part has the
Geographical description of all Germany, and particularly of Strasburg, and the
names of the Inventor, and of all the Workmen. In the middle frame of the Clock
is an Astrolabe, showing the Sign in which each Planet is every day, and there
be the Statues of the seven Planets upon a round piece of Iron, lying flat; so
that every day the Statue of that Planet that rules the day comes forth, the
rest being hid with^n the Frames, till they come out by course at their day, as
the Sun upon Sunday, and so for all the Week. And there is a Terrestial Globe,
and the quarter and the half hour and the minutes are showed there. There is
also the Skull of a dead man, and two Statues of two Boys, whereof one turns
the Hour glass, when the Clock has stricken, the other puts forth the Rod in
his hand at each stroke of the Clock. Moreover there be the Statues of the
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, and many observations of the Moon. In the
upper Part of the Clock are four old men's Statues, which strike the quarters of
the hour, the Statue of Death coming out at each quarter to strike, but being
driven back by the Statue of Christ, with a Spear in his hand for three
quarters; but in fourth quarter, that of Christ goes back, and that of Death
strikes the hour, with a bone in his hand, and then the Chimes sound. On the
top of the Clock is an Image of a Cock, which twice in the day croweth aloud,
and clappeth his Wings. Besides this Clock is decked with many rare Pictures,
and being on the inside of the Church, carries another Frame to the outside of
the Wall, wherein the hours of the Sun, the courses of the Moon, the length of
the day, and such other things are set out with great Art.

32. In the Duke of Florence his Garden at Pratoline is the Statue of Pan
sitting on a Stool with a wreathed pipe in his hand, Morrison's Itin^rary. p.
602. Hist. Man. Arts cap. 3. p. 36, 37.
and that of Syrinx beckning him to play on his Pipe. Pan putting away his
Stool, and standing up plays on his Pipe, this done he looks on his Mistress,
as if he expected thanks from her, takes the Stool again, and sits down with a
sad countenance. There is also the Statue of a Landress, beating a Buck, and
turning the Cloths up and down with her hand, and battledor wherewith she beats
them in the water. There is the Statue of Fame lowdly sounding her Trumpet, an
Artificial Toad creeping to and fro, a Dragon bowing down his head to drink
water, and then vomiting it up again, with diverse other Pieces of Art, that
administer wonder and delight to the beholders.

33. At Tibur or Tivoli near Rome, Hist. Man. Arts. cap. 3. p. 37.
in the Gardens of Hippolitus d' Este, Cardinal of Ferrara, there are the
Representations of sundry Birds, sitting on the tops of Trees, which by
Hydraulick Art, and secret conveyances of water through the trunks and branches
of the trees, are made to sing and clap their wings; but at the sudden
appearance of an Owl out of a Bush of the same Artifice, they immediately become
all mute and silent, i^ was the work of Claudius Gallus, as Possevine informs
us.

34. At Dantzick in Poland there was set up a rare invention for weaving of
four or five Webs at a time without any human help. Hist. Mam. Arts. cap. 7. p.
85.
It was an Engine that moved of it self, and would work night and day. This
Invention was suppressed because it would have ruined the poor people of the
Town, and the Artificer was secretly made away, as Lancelor^i the Italian Abbot
relates from the mouth of M. Muller a Polonian who had seen the device.

35. That Plicatilis domus or portable Palace made of Wood, Hist. Man. Arts.
cap. 3. p. 43.
which King Henry the Eighth, carried with him into France, to that famous
enterview that he had with Francis the First, was a work of great Art and
Magnificence and much spoken of by Foreign Writers; especially Paulus Iovius,
and amongst our own by my Lord of Cherbury, in his History of that Prince. The
Model of this Famous Piece was preserved, and says he, to be ^een of late
years in the Tower of London.

36. In Florida and other places of the West Indies, Hist. Man. Arts. cap. 7.
p. 99.
the Inhabitants made garments of Feathers with mavelous Art and Curiosity,
as also rare and exquisite pictures for in those Countries there are birds of
rare and exquisite Plumage, of very gay and gaudy colors, such as put down all
the pride of the Peacock, they mingle variety of colors in such an admirable
medley, that they make a very glorious show. Fernando Cortez the Spaniard,
found abundance of these curious works in the Palace of Montezuma the Emperor
of Mexico, which were such and so excellent, that none could make in Silk, Wax,
or Needle Work, any thing comparable to them: Nay he adds, that they were so
artificial and neat, that they cannot be described in writing, or presented to
the imagination, except a man sees them. These admired pieces put down not only
those of Zeuxis and Ap^lles, but those two of Michael Angelo and Raphael Vrbin,
the Plumes of these birds do seem to surpass all their colors; not only for
Luster and beauty, but also for duration and lasting.

37. Keneth King of Scotland had slain C^uthlintus the Son, Delvio. disq.
magic. lib. 1. cap. 3. qu. 4. p. 40.
and Malcolmus Duffus the King and Kinsmen of Fenella* she to be revenged of
the murderer; caused a Statue to be framed with admirable Art, in one of the
hands of it was an Apple of Gold set full of precious stones, which whosoever
touched was immediately slain, with many darts which the Statue threw or shot
at him: Keneth suspecting nothing was invited to this place, and being slain in
this manner, Fenella escaped over into Ireland.

38. Hadrianus Iunius, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. lib. 7. p. 625.
saw at M^cklin in Brabant a Cherrystone cut in the form of a Basket, wherein
were fourteen pair of Dice distinct, each with their spots and number easily to
be discerned with a good eye, Peach. Com. Gent. c. 9. p. 79.
and Anno 1524. the City of Colonia Agrippina was painted with much exactness,
yet in so little that a fly might cover it.

Zonar. Ann. tom. 3. p. 126.
39. Proclus a famous Mathematician, in the Reign of Anastasius Dicorus, made
burning glasses with that skill and admirable force, that therewith he burnt at
a great distance the Ships of the Mysians and Thracians that had blocked up the
City of Constantinople.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Industry and pains of some men, and their hatred of Idleness.
THat of the Areopagites is the most honorable Court in the City of Athens,
and there it was most diligently inquired into, after what manner each of the
Athenians lived, what kind of income and revenue he had, and by what means it
was that he sustained himself and his family: They were taught to follow some
honest course of life, as knowing they were to give a public account thereof:
and if any man was convicted of idleness or a reprovable way of living, he had
a note of infamy upon him, or else was ejected the City as an unprofitable
member thereof: No doubt but by this procedure of theirs, they put slothfulness
out of all countenance, and filled their City with examples of every kind of
industry, without fear of incurring the danger of a public accusation, as

Cause. H.C. in the treat. of passions. 6. p. 15. Plin. not. h. l. 18. c. 6. p.
556.
1. Pliny tells of one Cresin who manured a piece of ground, which yielded him
fruit in abundance, while his neighbors Lands were extremely poor and barren,
for which cause he was accused to have enchanted them, otherwise, said his
accuser, his inheritance could not raise such a revenue, while others stand in
so wretched a condition: But he pleading his cause, did nothing else but bring
forth a lusty Daughter of his, well fed and well bred who took pains in his
Garden; also he showed his strong Carts and stout Oxen which ploughed his Land,
his various implements of Husbandry, and the whole equipage of his tillage in
very good order: He then cried out aloud before the Judges, Behold the Art,
Magic, and Charms of Cresin? The Judges did acquit him and doubted not but
that his Lands fertility was the effect of his Industry and good Husbandry.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 1. c. 33. p. 29.
2. There was one Mises who presented the great King Artaxerxes, as he rode
through Persia, with a Pomegranate of a wonderful bigness, which the King
admiring demanded out of what Paradise he had gotten it, who answered that he
gathered it from his own Garden: The King was exceedingly pleased with it, and
gracing him with Royal gifts, swore by the Sun, that the same man with like
diligence and care, might as well of a little City make a great one.

Lips. ep. cent. 4. ep. 31. p. 880.
3. The Emperor Theodosius the younger devoted the day to the Senate, to
military, judicial, and other affairs, but a considerable part of the night to
his studies and Books, having his Lamp so made that it would pour in oil of it
self to renew the light, that so he might neither lose time nor occasion an
unseasonable disturbance to his Servants.

4. Cleanthes was a young man, and being extremely desirous to be a hearer of
Chrysippus the Philosopher, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 7. p 227. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3.
l. 2. p. 670. Laert. vit. Phil.
but wanting the necessary provisions for humane life, he drew water and
carried it from place to place in the night to maintain himself with the price
of his labor, and then all day he was attending upon the doctrines of
Chrysippus, where he so profited, and withal so retained that industry he had
while young, that he read constantly to his Auditors, to the ninety and ninth
year of his Age, others say Zeno was his Master, and that wanting wherewith to
buy paper, he wrote memorials from him upon the bones of Cattle and the broken
pieces of Pots: Thus fighting in the night against poverty, and in the day
against ignorance, he became at last an excellent person.

5. St. Jerome says that he himself had read six thousand books that were
written by Origin, Sabell. ex^l^ 1. c. 7. p. 45.
who daily wearied seven Notaries and as many boys in writing after him.

5. Demosthenes that afterward most famous Orator of all Greece, Val. Max^l.
8. c. 7. p. 225
in his youth was not able to pronounce the first letter of that Art which he
so affected, but he took such pains in the correction of that defect in his
pronunciation, that afterward no man could do it with a greater plainness, his
voice was naturally so slender and squeaking, that it was unpleasant to the
Auditory, this also he so amended by continual exercise, that he brought it to
a just maturity and gratefulness, the natural weakness of his lungs he
rectified by labor, striving to speak many verses in one breath, and
pronouncing them as he ran up some steep place, he used to declaim upon the
shores where the waters with greatest noise beat upon the Rocks, that he might
acquaint his Ears with the noise of a tumultuating people, and to speak much
and long with little stones in his mouth, that he might speak the more freely
when it was empty. Thus he combated with nature it self and went away Victor;
overcoming the malignity of it by the pertinacious strength of his mind, so
that his Mother brought forth one, and his own industry another Demosthenes.

7. Johannes Fernandas of Flanders, Fulgos. ix. l. 8. c. 7. p. 1041.
though born blind and pressed with poverty, yet by his sole industry attained
to rare skill in Poetry, Logic, Philosophy, and such a sufficiency in the Art
of Music, that he was able to compose a song of four parts memoriter, which
others can difficultly do by setting all down in writing.

8. Elfred a King of the West Saxons here in England designed the day and night
equally divided into three parts, Bak. Chron. p. 332. Clerks mirr. c. 74. p.
322.
to three especial uses, and observed them by the burning of a Taper set in his
Chapel, eight hours he spent in meditation, reading, and prayers, eight hours
in provision for himself, his repose and health; and the other eight about the
affairs of his Kingdom.

9. Almost incredible was the painfulness of Baronius, Full. h. state. l. 2. c.
9. p. 7^.
the compiler of the voluminous Annals of the Church, who for thirty years
together, preached three or four times a week, to the people.

10. A Gentleman in Surry that had Land worth two hundred pounds per Annum,
Ch^tw. hist collect. cent. 3. p 79. Tr^nchfield's counsel to his Son. p. 133.
which he kept in his own hands, but running out every year, he was
necessitated to sell half to pay his debts, and let the rest to a Farmer for
one and twenty years. Before that term was expired, the Farmer one day bringing
his Rent; asked him if he would sell his Land? Why (said he) will you buy it?
If it please you, says the Farmer. How, said he, that is strange, tell me how
this comes to pass, that I could not live upon twice as much being my own, and
you upon one half thereof, though you have paid rent for it or able to buy it.
Oh, says the Farmer, but two words made the difference, you said go, and I
said come. Wha^'s the meaning of that, said the Gentleman. You lay in bed,
replied the Farmer, or took your pleasure, and sent others about your business,
and I rose betimes, and saw my business done my self.

Parti. medul. tom. 2. p. 380.
11. Marcus Antoninus the Emperor, as he was a person of great industry
himself, so did he also bear so great a hatred unto idleness, that he withdrew
the salaries of such men, as he found to be slothful and lazy in their
employments; saying that there was nothing more cruel, then that the common
wealth, should be gnawn and fed upon, by such as procured no advantage
thereunto by their labors.

Meleh. Adam. in. vit. Germ. m^dic. p. 287.
12. Ioanes Vischerus, Rector of the University of Tubing; when in the sixty
third year of his age, so dangerous a year to humane life; though weak in body,
and thereby at liberty in respect of the statutes of the University, from his
office of teaching, yet as always before, so then, in the last act of his life
he so followed his business, that so long as he had any strength or ability, so
long as his voice and spirits permitted: he was constant in his meditations,
comments, and teaching. And when by reason of the inclemence of the air, he
could not perform his part in the public auditory of Physicians, he
strenuously continued to profess in private at his own house. When his wife
oftentimes advised and besought him that he would not do it, but have some
regard to his own health, as a man that could scarce speak or stand on his
feet, and utterly unfit to speak by an hourglass, so molested by a Cough as he
was: he replied: That which a man does with a willing mind, is no way
troublesome to him: suffer me to speak and walk so long as the strength of my
body will permit, for so soon as I shall betake my self to my bed, I shall not
be pulled from thence till such time, as four bearers come to carry me into the
Churchyard.

13. Conradus Gesnerus* was a man of infinite study, Melch. Adam. in Vit. Germ.
medic. p. 155. Thuan. l. 36.
diligence and industry, in searching after the knowledge of all the parts of
Nature; but particularly he bent himself to observe those things that were
delivered concerning metalls, plants, and living creatures; and the noble
Historian Thuanus says of him most truly; That to his last breath he was
inflamed with an incredible desire, and endeavor after the advancement of
learning; so that when he was seized with the plague, and that his strength
began to desert him, he rose out of his bed, not to dispose the affairs of his
house, and family, but to set in order the papers in his study, that what he
could not set forth in his lifetime, might after his death be made public to
the benefit of the common wealth.

Plut. moral. p. 394.
14. Aeleas a King of Scythia, used to say that he thought himself no better
then his horsekeeper when he was Idle.

Plut. moral. p. 394.
15. Dionysius the Elder being asked if he was at leisure and no business at
present? The Gods forbid said he that ever it should be so with me; for a bow
(as they say) if it be over-bent, will break; but the mind if it be over-slack.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Dexterity of some Men in the Instruction of several
Creatures.
MAn is seldom so unfortunate a teacher, as when he has himself for his
Scholar; but should he employ at home, that ingenuity and industry which he
sometimes makes use of abroad; what a wonderful proficient would he be in all
kind of Virtue? For there is scarce any thing that may seem so difficult; but
his care and constancy has overcome, as the following examples will be
sufficient to account for.

1. The Count of Stolberge in Germany, Aist. of Manual Arts. c. 11. p. 167.
168. Marhal. Ep. l. 15. Ep. 96
had a Deer which he bestowed on the Emperor Maximilian the second, that would
receive a Rider on his back, and a Bridle in his mouth and would run a race
with the fleetest Horse that came in the field, and outstrip them too. Martial
also mentions a Deer used to the bridle.

Hic erat ille tuo domitus Cyparisse capistro,
An magis ille tuus Sylvia cervus erat.
2. At Prague the King of Bohemia's palace, Mr. Morrison saw two tame Leopards,
that would either of them at a call, leap behind the huntsman when he went
abroad a hunting, and sit like a dog, on the hinder parts of the horse, and
would soon dispatch a deer.

3. Seneca speaks of a tame Dragon, Moris. Itinerary. p. Hist. Man. Arts. c.
11. p. 169
that took meat from the hands of Tiberius; and else where Repentes ^uter
pocula, sinusque innoxio lapsu dracones; tame Dragons that crept up and down
amongst their Cups, and in their Bosoms, and did them no hurt.

4. Scaliger saw a Crow in the French Kings Court, Senec. de. ira. l. 2.
that was taught to fly at Partridges, or any other fowl from the Falconers
fist.

5. Elephants have bin taught, Scalig. Exercit. 232. p. 728 Sandys. T^avels.
Senec. Epist. Ep. 85. p. 192. Hist. Man. Arts. cap. 11 p. 172.
not only to dance upon the Earth, but in the air also; dancing upon the rope.
The manner of teaching them to dance is thus they bring some young Elephant upon
a floor of earth, that has bin heated underneath, and they play upon a Cittern
or Tabour, while the poor beast lifts up his stumps very often from the hot
flower, more by reason of the heat, then any desire to dance. And this they
practice so often until the beast has got such a habit of it, that when ever
he hears any music, he falls a dancing. Busbequius saw a dancing Elephant in
Constantinople, and the same Elephant playing at ball, tossing it to another
man with his trunk and receiving it back again.

6. Michael Neander saw in Germany a Bear brought from Poland that would play
on the Tabour, Hist. Man. Arts. c. 11. p. 173.
and dance some measures, yea dance within the compass of a large round Cup,
which he would afterward hold up in his paw, to the spectatours to receive
money or some other boon for his pains.

7. A Baboon was seen to play upon the Guitar, Hist. Man. Arts. c. 11. p. 174.
and a Monkey in the King of Spains court was very skillful at chesseplay,
says Bel^hazar Castilion, de aulico.

8. Cardinal Ascanio had a Parrot, Hist. Man. Arts. c. 11. p. 194.
that was taught to repeat the Apostles Creed verbatim in Latin; and in the
Court of Spain there was one that could sing the Gamut perfectly. If at any
time he was out, he would say, Nova Bueno, that is not well; but when he was
right he would say Bueno va, now it is well. As John Barnes an English Friar
relates in his book de Aequivocatione.

Lips. Epist. Cent. 1. Ep. 50. p. 102. Suet. l. 7. c. 6. p. 273. Aelian. de.
Animal. l. 2. c. 11. p. 84.
9. The Elephant is a creature of a very docible and capable nature to learn
almost any thing, they have bin taught by their keepers to adore the King,
says Aristotle, to dance, to throw stones at a mark, to cast up arms into the
air, and receive them again in their fall, to walk upon ropes, which Galba was
the first that exhibited at Rome, says Suetonius. And these things they learn
with that care, that they have been often found practicing, in the night, what
had been taught them in the day. They write too, says Pliny, speaking of one
who wrote in the Greek tongue. Ipse ego haec scripsi, and Spoliae Celtica
dicavi. I my self saw, says Aelian, one of them writing Roman Letters, upon a
tablet with his trunk, and the letters he made were not ragged but straight and
even, and his eyes were fixed upon the tablet as one that was serious and intent
upon his work. In the plays that Germanicus Caesar showed at Rome in the reign
of Tiberius; there were twelve Elephants, six males, and six females, these
were clothed in hist^ionical habits as men and women. At the command of their
keeper, they danced in the cirque, and performed all the Gestures of a Mimick.
At last they were brought where they were to feast, a table was covered with
all kind of dainties, and Gobletts of Gold with other little cups of wine
placed and beds covered with purple carpets, after the manner of the Roman
eating, for them to lie upon. Upon these they lay down, and at the signal
given, they reached out their Trunks to the table and with great modesty fell
to eating, no ravening or desire of the best or bigger part; but they eat and
drank as a sort of civil men would do.

Heidseld in Sphing^. c. 6. p. 141.
10. In the time of the war betwixt Augustus Caesar and M. Antonius; when there
were uncommon chances, and no mean rewards of the victory; all the world stood
at gaze, which way Fortune would incline it self. There was then a poor man at
Rome who purposing to provide for himself against all events, had this
contrivance; he bred up two Crows with his utmost diligence, and brought it to
pass, that in their prattling language, one would salute Caesar, and the other
Antonius. This man when Augustus returned conqueror, met him upon the way with
his crow upon his fist, which ever and anon came out with his Salve Caesar
victor, Imperator: Hail Caesar the conqueror and Emperor. Augustus delighted
herewith, purchased the bird of him at the price of twenty thousand Deniers of
Rome.

11. Pierius tells of an Elephant called Hanno which Emanuel King of Portugal
presented to Pope Leo the tenth. Camerar. oper. subsiciv. Cent. 1. c. 25. p.
131.
The King desirous to send him to Rome, and the Ship wherein he was to be
carried being ready to depart, the could not get Hanno for some days, to
suffer himself to be led to the Sea side, much less to go a shipboard; so
greatly he seemed to misdoubt that voyage. The King displeased at the delay
promised a great reward to any man, that could win Hanno to ship himself, none
offered to do it. At last the King was secretly informed, that all this was
done by the cunning of Hanno's keeper, who being in love with a maid had no
desire to leave Portugal, and therefore had councelled his scholar Hanno not
suffer himself to be transported, telling him he should be carried into wild
and terrible deserts, in the Enemies country, where he should be mocked and
outraged of all, ill fed, badly lodged, and destitute of all necessary
provisions, besides the way was long, dangerous and all by Sea; so that it was
better for him to be killed upon the land, then to undergo a condition most
miserable. The King informed of this wile, commands the keeper to be brought
before him, and the whole being confessed he enjoins him to take care, that the
Elephant might be embarked within three days, if not he should be hanged for
an example to all that presume to dally with their Princes commands. The keeper
apprehending the rope twisted, and his neck half in the noose; reads his
scholar a new lecture, tells him that some enemies had gone about to deceive
him, for envy they bare to his felicity and to move rebellion against the King,
that the matter was nothing so as he had said; for they should not go unto any
deserts, but to the Lady City of all the world seated in the most pleasant
place, where was abundance of all delicate provisions, that there was a Prince
whom all the world worshipped, where Hanno should have all the best sport, and
pleasure he could desire. And therefore that he should be merry, and make
himself ready to go cheerfully on board with his master, and should assure
himself of a good and pleasant voyage. Hanno changing his mind upon these new
instructions, when the signal was given, went willingly toward the ship,
showing himself all the way, very obedient and tractable.

12. Pezelius gives the relation of a wonderful dog, P^zel. mellefic. Hist.
tom. 2. p. 328.
and thinks that possibly some wicked spirit was within him; a Tinker, says
he, brought him to Constantinople, and a great confluence of people there was
to behold the feats he would do. Many of them laid their rings upon a heap
confusedly together before this dog, and yet at the command of his Master, he
would restore to every particular man his own without any mistake. Also when
his master asked him in the presence of many, which of the company was a
Captain, which a poor man, which a wife, which a widow, which a whore, and the
like, he would discover all this without error, by taking the garment of the
party enquired after in his mouth.

13 I my self saw a dog at Rome, Plut. moral. l. de. Comp. terrestr. p. 967.
whose Master a Player had taught him many pretty tricks; amongst others he
gave us this experiment, he soaked a piece of bread in a certain drug, which
was indeed a somniferous and sleepy, but he would have it thought also to be a
deadly potion. The dog having swallowed it down (as he was taught) began to
quake, tremble, yea and staggered as if he had bin astonished, in the end he
stretc^ed out himself, and lay as stiff as one stark dead, suffering himself to
be pulled and drawn any way, like a block. But afterward when he understood by
that which was said and done, that his time was come, and that he had catched
the hint for his recovery: he began at first to strive by little and little, as
if awaked from a dead sleep, lifting up his head he began to look to and fro,
at which all the beholders wondered not a little. Afterward he arose upon his
feet, and went directly to him, unto whom he was to go, jocund and merry. This
pageant was performed by him so arti^icially, I cannot tell whether to say, or
naturally, that all those who were present, and the Emperor himself (for
Vespasian the ^ather was there in person, within the Theater of Marcellus) took
exceeding great pleasure and delight therein.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Taciturnity and Secresy of some Men entrusted with
Privacies.
IT was a rare commendation that Spintharus gave of Epaminondas the Theban,
that he had rarely had conversation with any person that knew more, and spoke
less. It is equal prudence to know when to speak, as well as how; and least we
should be over prodigal or unseasonable in our speech, Nature has taken care
that the tongue should be confined within a double enclosure, of the lips and
teeth. Many a man has dearly bought the intemperance of the little Member:
which was one reason why Numa prescribed the veneration of Tacita to the
Romans, as a tenth Muse, not inferior to any of the Nine; as by which great
Enterprises are conducted with safety, which would otherwise prove frustrate or
hazardous.

Treasury of ancient and modern times, l. 1. c. 17. p. 39.
1. In the time of Pope Eugenius, the Seignory of Venice had a Captain named
Cremignola, by whose Treason their Army had received the Overthrow. It was
debated in the Senate what to do with him; and concluded that (being dangerous
to recall him) the best way was, at present to dissemble the matter, and at his
return to repay him with death. This determination o^ theirs was deferred and
s^ept for eight Months, but shut up in each breast with such s^cresy, that his
ears (in all that time) could reach no suppo^ition thereof. This was
questionless a matter of no mean marvel, considering the number of the
Senators, amongst whom were diverse much endeared to Cremignola, some in
Propinquity in blood, others in Friendship, many of them poor, and so liable to
be corrupted with rewards, whereof the Captain had no lack of ability to offer
and be^^ow; all which notwithstanding, this honorable Seal of Secrecy was set
with such assurance upon every soul* that eight Months being expired,
Cremignola was kindly recalled to Venice, entertained with embraces and
befitting Ceremonies; but on the morrow after surprised, and before the Senate
condemned to lose his head; which Sentence was accordingly executed.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 2. p. 36.
2. The secret Counsels of the Senate of Rome were divulged by no Senator for
many Ages together, only C. Fabius Maximus; and he also through imprudence,
meeting with Crassus as he went into the Country, told him of the third Punick
War secretly decreed in the Senate, for he knew he was made Questor three Years
before, but knew not that he was not yet chose into the Order of the Senators
by the Censors, which was the only way o^ admittance. But though this was an
honest error o^ Fabius, yet was he severely reprehended by the Consuls for it;
for they would not that Privacy (which is the best and safest Bond in the
Administration o^ Affairs) should be broke. Therefore, when Eumenes King of
Asia, a friend of our City* had declared to the Senate, that Perses King of
Macedon was preparing to War upon the people of Rome, it could never be known
what he had said in the Senate house, or what answer the Fathers had made to
him, till such time as it was known that King Perses was a Prisoner. So that
you would have thought, that which was spoke in the ears of all had been heard
by none.

3. It is reported of the Egyptians, Aelian. var. hist. l. 7. c. 18. p. 209.
that they undergo tortures with a wonderful patience; and that an Egyptian
will sooner die in torments, than discover the Secret he has been entrusted
with.

4. It was heretofore a custom that the Senators of Rome carried their Sons
with them; A Gell. noct. Attic. l. 1. c. 23. p. 40. Sabellic. Exempl. l. 1* c.
3. p. 17. Bruson. facetiar. l. 4. c. 1. p. 257.
and thither did Papyrius Praetextatus follow his Father: some great Affair was
consulted of, and deferred to the next day, charge being given, that none
should disclose the subject of their debate before it was decreed. The Mother
of the young Papyrius, at his Return, enquired of him what the Fathers had done
that day in the Senate; who told her that it was a Secret, and that he might
not discover it. The woman was the more desirous to know for this answer he had
made her, and therefore proceeds in her enquiry with more earnestness and
violence. The boy finding himself urged, invented this witty lie: It was, says
he, debated in the Senate, which would be most advantageous to the
Commonwealth; that one man should have two Wives, or that one woman should have
two Husbands. The woman in a terrible fright leaves the house, and acquaints
diverse other Ladies with what she had heard: the next day came a troop of women
to the door, crying and beseeching that rather one woman might marry two men,
than that one man should marry two women. The Senators entering the Court,
enquire what meant this intemperance of the women, and what their request
intended. Here young Papyrius stepped into the midst of the Court, and told
them what his Mother had desired to know, and what answer he had given. They
commended his wit and secrecy, and then made an Order that no Senators Sons
should enter their Court, save only that one Papyrius.

5. Eumenes was informed that Craterus was coming against him with an Army;
Plut. de garrulit^t. p. 506.
he kept this private to himself; and did not acquaint the most intimate of his
friends therewith, but gave out that it was Neoptolemus that came to fight him;
for he well knew that his own Soldiers, who reverenced Craterus for his Glory,
and were lovers of his Virtue, had Neoptolemus in contempt. When therefore the
Battle came to be fought, Eumenes was victorious, and Craterus unknown, was
killed amongst the rest: so that this Battle was gained by his Taciturnity, and
his friends rather admired than reprehended him for it.

6. The Ambassadors of the King of Persia were at Athens invited to a Feast,
Plut. de Garrulit. p. 194.
whereat also were pre^sent diverse Philosophers; who, to improve the
conversation, discoursed of many things both for and against. Amongst the which
was Zeno, who being observed to sit silent all the while, the Ambassadors
pleasantly demanded what they should say of him to the King their Master:
Nothing, said he, further than this, that you saw at Athens an old man, who
kn^w how ^o hold his tongue.

7. M^t^llus the Roman General was once asked by a young Cen^urion, Plut. de
garrulit. p. 506.
what d^sign he had now in hand? who told him, that if he thought his own (...)
was privy to any part of his Counsel, he would immediately plu^k it off and
burn it.

8. Leaena was an Athenian Strumpet that could play well upon the Harp, Plin.
l. 34. c. 8. p. 500. Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 3. p. 353.
and sing sweetly unto it, ^he was familiarly acquainted with Harmodius and
Aristogito^, and privy to their plot and project touching the murder of
Pisistratus the Tyrant, yet would she never reveal this purpose and intention
of theirs to the Tyrant or his Favorites, though she was put to most exquisite
and dolorous torments about it. The Athenians therefore, desirous to honor
this woman for her resolute and constant secrecy, and yet loath to be thought
to make so much of such a Harlot as she was, devised to represent the Memorial
of her and her act by a Beast of her name, and that was a Lyoness; the Statue
of which they gave order to Iphicrates to make, and that he should leave out
the tongue in the head of this Lyoness; for some say that, fearing lest her
torment should cause her to betray her friends, she bit it off, and spit it in
the face of the Tyrant and Tormentors.

Parch. Pilgr. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 14. p. 807.
9. When the King of Ala goes to War, he assembleth his chief men into a Grove
near the Palace; where they dig a Ditch in a round Circle, and there every man
declares his opinion: after this Consultation the Ditch is closed, and under
pain of Treason and death all which has been spoken must be concealed, as if
it was so buried as they had before represented in their Emblem.

Mariana hist. de Esp. p. 147.
10. A Country man having killed Lucius Piso Governor of Spain, was exposed to
tortures, thereby to extort from him a Confession of his Confederates: he
endured the first day's torments with invincible courage; but fearing himself
for the second, as he was going to the Rack he slipped out of the hand of his
Leader, and dashed his head with that violence against a Stone Wall that he
died immediately, lest he should, through extremity of pain, be enforced to
disclose that which he had sworn to conceal.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 3. p. 77. Lon. Theatr. p. 586.
11. Zeno Eleates was a person extremely well versed in the nature of things,
and one that knew how to excite the minds of young men to vigor and constancy;
he gained reputation to his Precepts by the example of his own Virtue. For
whereas he might have lived in all security in his own Country, he left it, and
came to Agrigentum, that then was in miserable Slavery: he hoped by his
ingenuity and manner of deportment to have converted a Tyrant, and such a one
as Phalaris from his Cruelties. But finding that wholesome counsel would do
nothing with him, he inflamed the Noble Youth of that City with a desire of
Liberty, and freeing their Country. When this was made known to the Tyrant, he
called the people together in the Forum; and exposing the Philosopher unto
cruel torments before their faces; he frequently demanded of him who they were
that were his Confederates? Zeno named not one of them; but all such as were of
most credit with the Tyrant, these he rendered suspected to him; and reproching
the Citizens with their fear and cowardice, he excited them to so sudden and
vehement impulse of mind, that they stoned the Tyrant Phalaris in the place.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 3. p. 78. Lon. Theatr. p. 587.
12. Theodorus, a wise and excellent person, wearied the hands of all the
Tormentors that Hieronymus the Tyrant exposed him to; the severity of his
Scourges, the Racks he was stretched upon, the Burning Irons he was tortured
with, could never be able to extort from him a confession of the names of them
that were with him in the Conspiracy, or to betray the Secret he was entrusted
with; but instead of this, in the extremity of his sufferings he impeached the
principal Favorite of the Tyrant, and that person he most relied upon in the
Government; and thereby deprived him of one that was most faithful to him.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of such who in their raised Fortunes have been mindful of their
low Beginnings.
AT the Coronation of the Emperors of Constantinople it was customary to
present them with several sorts of Marbles and of different colors by the hand
of a Mason; who was then to bespeak the new Emperor to this purpose; Choose,
mighty Sir, under which of these Stones
Your pleasure is, that we should lay your bones.
They brought him Patterns for his Gravestone, that the prospect of death
might contain his thoughts within the due bounds of modesty and moderation in
the midst of his new Honors. And it was, doubtless, to keep them humble, that
the following persons were so mindful of their obscure beginnings.

1. Pope Benedict the Eleventh was born of mean Parentage, Drex. oper. l. 3. c.
8.. 4. p. 425. Causi^. Holy Court. tom. 1 l. 3.. 31. p. 95.
nor was he unmindful of his primitive poverty when advanced to this high
degree of honor. While he was in the Monastery, his Mother was a Laundress to
the Monks; and being now made Pope, he sent for her to come to him; she came;
and the great Ladies supposing it unfit to present her to his Holiness in her
homely Attire, had furnished her in such manner, that she now appeared almost
another woman. Being thus brought into the presence of her Son; the Pop^
dissembled his knowledge of her: And what mean you, said he? bring me my
Mother; as for this Lady, I know her not ^s my Mother is a Laundress, and it is
with her that I desire to speak. They therefore withdrew her from the Presence,
stripped her of all her costly Ornaments; and having dressed her up in her old
rags, they again returned with her: then the Pope embraced her; In this habit,
said he, did I leave my Mother, in this I know her, and in this I receive her.

The Emperors of China elect their Wives out of their own Subjects; Alvar. Sem.
hist. China, par. 1. c. 23. p. 120.
and provided they are otherwise accomplished, as in Beauty, and inclinations
to Virtue, they regard not her Estate or Condition; in so much that for the
most part they are the Daughters of Artizans. One of these was the Daughter of
a Mason; and when she was Queen, kept ever by her an iron Trowel: when the
Prince her Son upon any occasion behaved himself more haughtily than became
him, she sent to show him that instrument with which his Grandfather used to
lay Stones for his Living; by which means she reduced him to better temper.

3. A^athocles, C^mir. ^^. sub^is ^v. cent. 2. p. 230.
who from the Son of a Potter, came to be King of all Sicily, would yet never
wear Diadem, nor have any Guard about him* He also caused his name to be
engraven in Greek letters upon Vessels of Earth: these Vessels he disposed
amongst the richest of his Pots of Silver and Gold, that he might be thereby
imminded from whence he descended.

4. Willegis Archbishop of Mentz, Cam^r. op. subcisc^v. cent. 2. c. 54. p. 232.
from a base condition, ascended to the highest Dignities; yet would he leave
behind him a perpetual mark of his humility, and a remembrance of his mean
Quality to his Successors. Being of a poor House, and Son to a Carter, he
caused these words following to be written in great letters in his lodging
Chamber; Willegis, Willegis, recole unde veneris: Willegis, Willegis, remember
whence thou came. He caused also the Wheels and other Instruments of a Cart,
to be there hung up in remembrance of his Pedigree.

Camer. op. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 54 p. 232.
Les^ the Second of that name, of a base Descent, was for his Virtues chosen
King of Polonia, Anno 780. But he ruled as a Prince descended from ancient
Kings: and all his life time upon solemn days, when he was to appear in his
Royal Robes, he caused a Garment of course Cloth which he had worn before to be
cast over them, thereby to keep in remembrance his former life.

Cumer. op. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 54 p. 133.
6. When Libussa Princess of Bohemia had first ennobled, and then married
Primislaus, the third of that name; who before was a plain Husbandman. In
remembrance of his first condition, he brought with him (at such time as he was
to receive the Royalties) a pair of wooden Shoes; and being asked the cause,
he answered, that he brought them to that end, that they might be set up for a
Monument in the Castle of Visegrade, and showed to his Successors, that all
might know that the first Prince of Bohemia of that Race was called from the
Cart to that high Dignity; and that he himself, who from a Clown, was brought
to wear a Crown, might remember he had nothing whereof to be proud. These
Shoes are still kept in Bohemia as a precious Relick; and the Priests of
Visegrade carry them about in Procession upon every Coronation day. This Prince
having increased his Kingdom, built the City of Prague, and walled it about;
did long reign happily, and left a numerous Posterity.

Clarks Mir. c. 64. p. 280
7. Iphicrates, that noble General of the Athenians, in the midst of his
Triumphs cried out, (...) from what to what; from how great misery and
baseness, to how great blessedness and glory are we exalted?

Clarks marrow of Eccl. hist. part. 2. l. 2. p. 46.
8. Thomas Cromwell was born at Putney in Sussex, his Father was a Blacksmith;
and though he could do little to his Education by reason of his Poverty, yet
such was the pregnancy of the Son, that through various Fortunes and Accidents
he was first knighted by King Henry the Eighth, then made Master of his Jewel
house, then one of the Privy Council, then Master of the Rolls, then Knight of
the Garter, and lastly, Earl of Essex, Great Chamberlain of England, and the
King's Vicegerent to represent his own Person. Now, whereas men advanced from
mean and base degree to high Dignity usually grow proud, forgetting what they
were and whence they came, and casting off their old friends who were formerly
beneficial to them; it was sar otherwise with this noble Earl, as appears by
sundry examples. Riding in his Coach with Archbishop Cranmer through
Cheapside, he spyed a poor woman of Hounslow, to whom he was indebted for
several old Reckonings to the value of forty shillings; he caused her to be
called unto him, asked her whether he was not some way indebted to her: she
said, yea; but she never durst call upon him for it, though now she stood in
great need of it. He therefore presently sent her to his house with one of his
Men; and when he came from the Court he did not only discharge his Debt, but
gave her an yearly Pension of four pounds, and a Livery every Year so long as
she lived after. He also took special notice of Frescobald the Florentine, who
had releived him in his youthful necessities. And another time being with other
Lords at the Monastery of Sheen, as he sat at Dinner, he spyed afar off a
certain poor man who used to sweep the Cells and Cloisters of the Monks, and to
ring the Bells; whom when the Lord Cromwell had well noted, he called him to
him, and before all the Table took him by the hand; and turning to the Lords,
My Lords, said he, see you this poor man; this man's Father was a great friend
to me in my necessity, and has given me many a Meals meat. Then said he to the
poor man, Come unto me, and I will so provide for thee, that thou shall not
want while I live.

9. Mr. Ignatius Jordan was born at Lime Regis, Clark's Marrow of Eccles. hist.
part. 2. p. 471.
in the County of Dorset; and when he was young he was sent by his friends to
the City of Exeter, to be brought up in the Profession of a Merchant. In this
City having passed through the several inferior Offices, he at last ascended to
the highest place of honor, to be Major there, and was Justice of Peace for
twenty four Years together; yet his beginning was but very small, and this upon
occasion he was ready to acknowledge. When some threatened him with Lawsuits,
and not to give over till they had not left him worth a Groat: to these he
cheerfully replied, that he should be then but two pence poorer than when he
came fast to Exeter; For, said he, I brought but six pence with me hither. He
would often say that he wondered what rich men meant, that they gave so little
to the Poor, and raked so much together for their Children; do ye not see, said
he, what becomes of it? And would reckon up diverse examples of such as heaped
up much for their Children, and they in a short time consumed it all: on the
other side, he spoke of such as had small beginnings, and a^terwards became
rich, or of a competent Estate; giving a particular instance in himself; I
came, said he, but with a groat or six pence in my purse to this City; had I
had a shilling in my purse, I had never been Major of Exeter.

CHAP. XLIX. Of such as have despised Riches, and of the laudable Poverty of
some Illustrious Persons.
SEbastianus Foscarinus, some time Duke of Venice, Burton's Melanch. part. 2..
3. p. 305.
caused to be engraven on his Tomb in St. Mark's Church this which follows.
Accipite cives Veneti, quod est optimum in rebus humanis. Res humanas
contemnere. Hear, O ye Venetians, and I will tell you which is the best thing
in the World; it is to contemn and despise the World. This is durus sermo, a
hard saying; and few there are amongst all the Living that can digest the
Sermon of this dead Prince. Only some choicer Spirits there are to be found
here and there, who seem to have been present at such a Lecture as this; and to
have brought it along with them, firmly engraven upon their hearts. Such was

1. Johannes Gropperus of Cologne, Thuan. hist. tom. 1. l. 16. p. 310. Leighs
Bell. and Leara. c. 3. p. 214.
a German, who was offered a Cardinalship by Pope Paul the Fourth; but that
Dignity, and the vast Riches annexed thereunto, which other Mortals for the
most part, have the most fervent ambition and desire to attain unto; he, with a
modesty and greatness of mind, rare to be met with in this or any other Age,
refused, when freely proffered him.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 78. p. 359.
2. Thirty Mahumetan Kings, the chief of whom was Smaragdus, assailed the
Kingdom of Castile, with a purpose to drive the Christians out of Spain, which
they held already as good as conquered. Whereupon Sancho King of Navarre levied
an Army consisting of a small number of men, but courageous and most resolute
Soldiers; with these he never left till he had broken, defeated, put to rout,
and utterly dispersed the Army of the Barbarians; which done all the Christian
Captains and Soldiers came running to him in crowds to kiss his hands and
knees, and to do him all possible Honors; crying with loud voices, God save
the Invincible Captain, and the most valorous Warrior. Afterward when they
came to share the Booty, which was great (the Riches of thirty Kings being then
assembled in one heap) there was no man but confessed, that how great a part
soever Sancho should reserve of it to himself, would yet be less than his
deserts. There was found a huge quantity of Silver and Gold, some ready coined,
much cast into Ingots; a number of Pearls and Stones of rich value, great store
of Hangings and Rich Vestures, a large quantity of curious Housholdstuff, such
as the Moors use, who are excessive and Pompous in War. Almost innumerable Arms
of all sorts, forged, wrought, and curiously enriched; Horses of service great
store, incredible numbers of Saddles, Bridles, etc. and Prisoners by hundreds,
out of which might be drawn great ransoms. All the Castilians, and they of
Navarre, besought Sancho to take to himself of this rich Booty what he should
please, who by his cheerful countenance showing the pleasure he took in this
liberal offer of his Army: As for me (says he) I desire nothing but this Iron
Chain which I have hewn asunder in your sight, and that Precious Stone which I
have beaten down with my hands, pointing at Smaragdus (which signifies an
Emerald) lying dead on the ground, and weltering in his blood. In Memory of
this Victory, the Arms of Navarre were afterward Chains born crosswise, and
disposed into a Square, and those Chains set with Emeralds.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 78. p. 358.
3. After the winning of a Famous Battle, Themistocles came to view the Bodies
of the Dead, and spying many a rich Booty lying here and there very thick; he
passed by, saying to a Favorite of his; Gather, and take to thee, for thou art
not Themistocles.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 78. p. 358.
4. Ammianus Marcellinus magnifies Julian the Emperor, who shared a great Prey
amongst the Soldiers, according to every man's Valor and Demerits; but as his
custom was (for his own part to be content with a little) he reserved nothing
for himself, but a Dumb Child which was presented to him, who knew many things
and made them understood by convenient countenances and gestures.

Cael. Rhod. lib. 13. cap. 66. p. 608.
5. Numerianus was a Teacher of Boys in Rome, when upon the sudden, moved with
I know not what kind of Impulses, he left both his Boys and his Books; he
passed over hastily into Gaul, there pretending that he was a Senator, and
commissioned by Severus the Emperor, he began to raise an Army, with which he
vexed Albinus the Enemy of Severus. He had routed diverse of his Troops of
Horse, and with a youthful ardour had gallantly acquitted himself in diverse
Enterprises. Severus being informed hereof, and supposing him to be one of the
Senatorian Order, he wrote a Letter to him, wherein having given him due
praises for the service he had done, he desired him to increase his Forces.
This he speedily performed, and having done things worthy of admiration, he
sent to Severus one thousand seven hundred and fifty Myriads of Drachmes. This
done without fear he presented himself to the Emperor, and openly declared who
he was; yet he neither requested (upon the score of his Victories) that he
might really be made one of the Senate; nor did he petition for any Honor, or
increase of Wealth, but only received from Severus some small thing to maintain
him alive, and so retired into the Country, where he spent the rest of his life
in privacy and poverty.

6. Crates Thebanus was adored for a God, Laert. vit. Philosoph. lib. 6. p. 158
l B^rtons melanch. part. 2.. 3. p, 297.
a Nobleman by Birth, many Servants he had, an Honorable Attendance, much
Wealth, many Manors, rich Apparel, and great store of Money; but when he
apprehended that all this, yea all the Wealth of the World was but brittle,
uncertain, and no whit availing to live well; he cast off his burden, renounced
his Estate, and threw his Treasure into the Sea.

7. Epaminondas that great General of the Thebans, Justin. hist. lib. 6. p. 62.
Aelian. var. hist. lib. 5. cap. 5. p. 172. Cael. Rhod. lib. 19. cap. 31. p. 920.
after his Glorious Exploits and Famous Victories, lived in such meanness and
extreme poverty, that he had but one upper Garment, and that a poor one to; so
that if at any time he had occasion on to send it to the Fuller, or to mending,
he was constrained for want of another to stay at home* till it was returned.
At his death they found nothing in his House but a little Iron Spit, nor
wherewithal to commit him to the Ground; so that he was buried at the Public
Charge; yet had this great man the offer of a considerable sum in Gold sent him
by the Persian King, whereof he would not accept; and in mind, says Aelian, he
showed himself more genrous in the refusal, than the other did in the gift of
it.

7. Aristides, Plut. in vita Aristid. p. 337.
who by his Valor, Prudence and Justice, had made the Athenians rich and
honorable, at his death was so poor, that nothing in his House being found to
do it withal, he was buried at the charge of the Commonwealth.

9. Frederick Duke of Saxony, Feltham's Resolves. cent. 2. cap. 35. p. 230.
his virtues were so great, that unanimously the Electors chose him for
Emperor, while he as earnestly did refuse; nor did they like tickly Italians,
pet at this and put another in his room; but for the reverence they bore him,
when he would not accept it himself, they would yet have one that he should
recommend, which was Charles the Fifth, who out of his gratitude for the
putting of him into that Place, sent him a Present of 30000 Florens. But he
that could not be tempted by the Imperial Crown, stood proof against the blaze
of Gold; and when the Ambassadors could fasten none upon him, he desired but
his permission to leave 10000 amongst his Servants. To which he answered, They
might take it if they would; but he that took but a Piece from Charles, should
be sure not to stay a Day with Frederick. A mind truly Heroic, evidently
Superlative; by despising what was greatest, not temptable, with either
Ambition or Avarice, far greater than an Emperor by refusing to be one.

10. Audentius upon the death of Bassianus Caracalla, Inper. hist. p. 208.
was proffered the Roman Empire, which yet he utterly refused, and could not by
any persuasions be wrought upon to accept of it.

11. Alexander the great having overcome Darius; Plut. in (...) p. 749.
of the Persian Spoils he sent Phocion the Athenian an hundred Talents of
Silver; but when the Messengers brought him this Gift, He asked them, why
Alexander gave him so great a Gift, rather than to any other of the Athenians?
Because, said they, he only esteems thee to be a good and honest man: Clark's
mirror. cap. 15. p. 59.
Then, said Phocion, let him give me leave to remain that which I seem, and am,
so long as I live. The Messengers would not so leave, but followed him home to
his House, where they saw his great frugality and thriftiness; Sabell. Ex. lib.
2. cap. 1. p. 59.
for they found his Wife her self Baking, and he himself drew water to wash his
feet. But when they were more earnest with him than before, to accept of their
Master's present, and were offended with him, saying, That it was a shame for
the Friend of Alexander to live so miserably and beggarly: Then Phocion seeing
a poor old man pass by; asked them, Whether they thought him worse than that
man? No, the Gods forbid, replied they; yet, answered he; He lives with less
than I do, and yet is contented and has enough. To be short, he said, If I
should take this Sum of Money, and not employ it, it is as much as if I had it
not; again, if I should employ it, I should occasion all the City to speak evil
of the King, and me both. And so he sent back this Great Present, showing
thereby, that he was richer that needed not such Sums, than he that gave them.

Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 4. p. 130. Clark's mirr. cap. 113. p. 556.
12. Paulus Aemylius was sent by the Senate of Rome into Spain, where they were
all up in Arms; in which Journey he twice overcame the barbarous people in main
battle, and slew about 30000 of them; he took in also two hundred and fifty
Cities, and so leaving the Country quiet, he returned to Rome, not enriched by
all these Victories the worth of one groat; yea he so little regarded the
World, that although he was Consul twice, and twice triumphed, yet when he died
all the Estate he left was little enough to satisfy his Wives Jointure.

Clark's mirr. cap. 113. p. 556.
13. Vergerits the Pope's Legate was sent by his Master to Luther (when he first
began to preach against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome) to proffer him a
Cardinal's Cap, if he would relinquish his Opinions; to whom he answered,
contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor, I do equally despise the
favor and fury of Rome. Another time there was Proposals made of a great Sum
of Money to be sent unto him; but one of the Cardinals who was then present,
cried out, Hem Germana illa bestia non curat aurum; That beast of Germany does
not care for money. Luther also tells us, that when some of the Cardinals were
by the Pope sent to him, to tempt him with promises of great Wealth and Honor.
Turning my self, says he to God; Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab
eo; I earnestly protested, that God should not put me off with such mean matter.

Plut. in Catone, p. 765, 766. Clark's mirr. cap. 113. p. 557.
14. Deiotarus King of Galatia being a very old man sent for Cato Vticensis to
come to him, intending to recommend to him the care of his Sons; and when he
was arrived the King sent him diverse rich Presents of all sorts, entreating him
that he would accept of them: This so much offended Cato, that he stayed very
little with him, and the next day returned: But he had not gone one days
Journey, when he found greater gifts that tarried for him, with Letters from
the King, in which he earnestly requested him to accept of them; or if not,
that yet at least he would suffer them to be divided amongst his Friends, who
did every way deserve them, and the rather, because Cato had not enough of his
own wherewithal to content them. But Cato would by no means either accept of
this Royal Bounty himself, or suffer his Friends to meddle with any of it,
saying, That his Friends should always have part with him, of that which was
his own justly.

15. The Romans sent their Ambassadors to Corinth, Strigel. in Justin. comment.
p. 300.
to separate those Cities which had been under the Government of Philip, from
the Councils of the Achaians; but the Ambassadors were beaten by the Achaians,
and not only so; but defiled with Ordures. The Romans could not concoct this
affront; and therefore sent Q. Metellus who overthrew them at Thermopylae, and
their General Critolaus poisoned himself, in his stead they set up Dracus their
General, whom L. Mummius the Consul overcame, thereupon all Achaia was yielded
up to to the Consul, who demolished Corinth by order of the Senate, because it
was there where their Ambassadors had been affronted. Thebes and Chalcis were
also utterly subverted, because they had assisted the Corinthians. At this time
it was that the Consul L. Mummius showed himself a rare example of Abstinence;
for of all the Brazen Images, Marble Statues and Pillars, the Painted Pieces of
Ablest Artists, the Infinite Riches and Ornaments that were found in this most
Opulent City, he touched not one, nor caused any the least thing of all the
Spoils to be transferred unto his own House.

16. Atilius Regulus the Glory of the first Punick War, Val. Max. lib. 4. p.
110.
and the greatest loss we had in it, when by his frequent Victories he had
broken and wasted the wealth of insolent Carthage in Africa, and understood
that by reason of his discreet and fortunate mannaging his Affairs, his command
was continued to him another year; he wrote unto the Consuls, that his Bailey
which he had to oversee his Field of seven Acres was dead; and that a hired
Servant had thereupon taken occasion to depart, and to steal all his
Instruments of Husbandry; whereupon he desired they would send him a Successor,
lest his Field being untilled his Family should be in want of Food: Upon this
report by the Consuls to the Senate, they order his Field to be tilled, his
Wife and Family provided for, and his Instruments of Husbandry redeemed at the
Public Charge.

17. In the second Punick War Cn. Scipio wrote out of Spain to the Senate, Val.
Max. lib. 4. p. 111.
desiring that a Successor might be sent him, in as much as he had a Virgin
Daughter who was now of mature Age, and that without him a Portion could not be
provided for her. The Senate, lest the Commonwealth should be deprived of a
good Captain, took upon them the Office of the Father; they consulted with the
Wife and Kindred of Scipio, married his Daughter, and gave her a Portion out of
the Public Treasury.

CHAP. L. Of such Persons as have preferred Death before the loss of their
Liberty, and what some have endured in the preservation of it.
Cl. mirr. cap. 78. p. 352.
THe Ancient Romans had so high an esteem of Liberty, that they thought it
worthy of Veneration; for they made it one of their Goddesses, erected and
dedicated Temples in honor of it. The contrary to it, they had in such
detestation that they punished their greatest Offenders with Interdiction,
Relegation, Deportation, and such like. Generally all sorts of men are so
tenacious of their Liberty, that they will refuse no kind of hardship, but
sacrifice their chiefest Ornaments Jewels, and expose even life it self (as
precious as it is) to the uttermost hazards to preserve it.

Pezel. mellific. hist. tom. 2. p. 219.
1. When Maximinus fought against the City Aquileia, the Matrons and Women
thereof cut off the hair from their heads to supply the want of Bow-strings,
and to shoot Arrows against the Invaders of their Liberties. The like also was
once done at Rome heretofore; so that in honor of the Ladies, the Senate did
consecrate a Temple to Venus the Bald.

Joseph. de ^illo Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 28. p. 761.
2. The Castle of Massada, being built by Herod the Great, was a most
impregnable Fort, and furnished with Provision for many years, having Wine and
Oil and Dates that had continued good and sweet for one hundred years; it had
also in it nine thousand and sixty Men, besides Women and Children: These being
besieged and so distressed by the Romans, that they had no hope of escape from
servitude and bondage at the least; they therefore by an unanimous consent,
chose out ten men who should kill all the rest, who having dispatched them,
they cast lots whose turn it should be to dispatch his surviving Fellows. The
man on whom the Lot fell, having killed them, fired the Palace, and killed
himself; only two Women and five Children that hid themselves in a Vault,
escaped, and gave the Romans an account of what had happened.

Purch. Pilgr. vol. 2. p. 878. Clark's mirr. cap. 78. p. 852.
3. The Isle of Gaza near unto Malta, being taken by the Turks, a certain
Sicilian that had lived long there, and had married a Wife, by whom he had two
fair Daughters, (being then in state to be married) seeing this last calamity
of the loss of Liberty approaching, rather than he would see his Wife and
Daughters to be brought into shameful servitude; having called them to him, he
first slew with his Sword his two Daughters, and then their Mother; this done
with an Harquebuse, and a Cross-bow bent (as clean bereft of his senses) he
made toward his Enemies, of whom he slew two at the first encounter, and
afterward fighting a while with his Sword (being environed with a multitude of
Turks) brought himself to the end of his most unhappy life.

Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. lib. 17. p. 590, 591.
4. Perdiccas had besieged the City of Isaurum in Pisidia; two days he had
assaulted it, wherein it was defended with great courage, though with the loss
of many gallant men, that were ready to die rather than to depart with their
Liberty. Upon the third day many being slain, and for want of men the Walls
being but slenderly manned; the Isaurians perceiving they could no longer
maintain the place, and resolving not to undergo a punishment that was joined
with reproach, they took this remarkable course, having shut up their Parents,
Wives and Children in their Houses, they set fire to them, into these Flames
they cast all their Riches, and whatsoever they thought might be of any use to
the Enemy. Perdiccas wondering at what was done, again assaulted it with all his
Forces in several parts; but then the Isaurians repairing to their Walls, threw
down the Macedonians on all sides. Perdiccas astonished at this, demanded the
reason, why they who had delivered up their Houses, and all that was dear to
them to the Flames, should yet so obstinately defend their Walls? At last when
Perdiccas and the Macedonians were retreated from the Assault, the Isaurians
threw themselves into the fire, and so perished together with their Houses and
Relations.

5. Ptolemaeus ruling over the Cyprian Cities, Diador. Sicul. Biblioth. lib.
20. p. 666.
and hearing that Nicocles the Paphian King did closely hold correspondence
with Antigonus; he sent Argaeus and Callicrates his Friends with command that
they should put Nicocles to death, as fearing the defection of other Cities,
besides that of Paphos. These came to Cyprus, and having received some Troops
of Menelaus the General there, they beset the Palace of Nicocles, and having
declared the Kings commands, they demanded Nicocles to death. He at first would
have excused the matter, but when he saw that would not serve his turn he slew
himself. Axiothea the wife of Nicocles being informed of the death of her
Husband, did then slay her Daughters that were Virgins, that they might not
fall into the enemies hands: She also persuaded the Wives of Nicocles his
Brethren, with her to murder themselves, though Ptolemy had granted them
impunity: Their Husbands seeing this, set fire upon the Palace and slew
themselves, by this means the Royal Family of the Paphians, was utterly
distinguished.

6. The Tacchi (a people in Asia) rather then they would be captivated to the
Greeks, Clarks mirr. c. 78. p. 351.
threw themselves down headlong from the Rocks, the very women throwing down
their own children first, and then casting themselves upon them.

7. Philip King of Macedon had beseiged the City of Abydus, Polyb. l. 16. p.
338, 339.
and straightly beset it both by Sea and Land, when the inhabitants defended it
against him with great courage, till at last the Enemy had undermined and
overthrown the outward wall, and were now by their mines approaching that other
wall which the Inhabitants had made up within instead of the former. Then the
besieged apprehensive of their danger, sent Ambassadors to Philip, offering him
the surrender of their City upon condition, that the Rhodians and Soldiers of
Attalus should be freely dismissed, and that every freeman should have liberty
to depart whither he pleased. Philip returned them this answer, that either
they should resolve to surrender at discretion, or else fight it gallantly.
They of Abidus made desperate by these means, consulted together, and resolved
upon this course, to give liberty to all slaves that they might assist them
with greater cheerfulness, to shut up all their wives in the Temple of Diana,
their Children and Nurses in the public Schools, to lay all their silver and
gold upon a heap in the Market place, and to put their most precious furniture
into two Galleys. This done they chose out fifty persons of strength and
Authority, whom in presence of all the Citizens they caused to swear, that as
soon as they should perceive the enemy to be Master of the inward Wall, they
should kill all their Wives and Children^ burn the Galleys, and cast the Silver
and Gold into the Sea. They all swore to defend their liberty to the last
breath, and indeed when the Walls were fallen, all the Soldiers and Inhabitants
maintained the ruins of them with that obstinacy, that few remained alive or
unwounded: And when the City was taken, Philip was amazed to see the rest kill
their Wives and Children, cast themselves headlong from houses and into pits,
and running upon any kind of death, so that few of that City could be persuaded
to outlive the loss of their liberty, unless such as were bound, and by force
preserved from doing violence upon themselves.

Oros. hist. l. ^. c. 7. p. 192 Clarks mir. c. 78. p. 351.
8. At Numantia in Spain four thousand Soldiers withstood forty thousand Romans
for fourteen years together, in which time having often valiantly repulsed them
and forced them unto two dishonorable compositions, at last when they could
hold out no longer, they gathered all their Armor, money, and goods together,
and laid them on an heap, which being fired they voluntarily cast themselves
also into the flames, leaving unto Scipio nothing but the bare name of Numantia
to adorn his triumph with.

Clarks mir. c. 78. p. 351.
9. The City of Saguntum had been besieged by Annibal for the space of nine
months, in which the famine was so great that the inhabitants were enforced to
eat man's flesh: At last when they could hold out no longer, (rather than they
would fall into the hands of their enemies) they made a fire in which
themselves and their City was consumed to Ashes.

Justin l. 13. p. 159.
10. Perdiccas made war upon Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, although he had no
way provoked him, yet although he overcame the King in Battle, he carried
thence nothing but hazards and wounds instead of rewards, for the slying Army
being received into the City; each man slew his Wife and Children, set fire on
their houses and furniture of them, and having laid upon one heap all their
riches at once, and consumed them to ashes; they then threw themselves headlong
from Towers, and high places into the flames, so that the victorious enemy
enjoyed nothing of theirs, besides the sight of those flames, which devoured
the spoils they hoped to have divided amongst them.

11. When Brutus had besieged the City of the Xanthii in Licia, Strigel.
comment. in Justin. p. 28.
they themselves set fire on their own City, some of them leap^d into the
flames and there perished, others fell upon their own swords, A woman was seen
hanging from the roof of her house with an infant newly strangled about her
neck, and in her right hand a burning torch, that she might that way have burnt
down the house over her.

CHAP. LI. Of such as in highest Fortunes have been mindful of Humane frailty.
THe Lamae (who are the Priests of the Tibitenses) when they prepare to
celebrate prayers they summon the people together, Vaugh. flor. Solut. p. 162.
with the hollow whispering sounds of certain pipes, made of the bones of dead
men: They have also Rosaries or Beads made of them which they carry always
about them, and they drink continually out of a Skull. Being asked the reason
of this Ceremony by Anthony Andrada (who first found them out) one that was the
chiefest among them told him that they did it, ad fatorum memoriam, they did
therefore pipe with the bones of the dead, that those sad whispers might warn
the people of the swift and invisible approach of death, whose music they
termed i^: The Beads they wore did put them in mind of the frail estate of
their bodies, their drinking in a skull did mortify their affections, repress
pleasures, and imbitter their taste, lest they should relish too much the
delights of life, and certainly these great and excellent persons hereafter
mentioned, did therefore carry along with them the commemoration of death, as
finding it a powerful Antidote against those excesses and deviations, whereunto
the nature of man (especially in prosperity) has so notable a proneness.

1. Maximilianus the first, Emperor of Germany, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p.
339. Paroeti. hist. prof medulla tom. 2. p. 116.
for three years (some say two) caused his Coffin made of Oak to be carried
along with him in a Wagon before he felt any sickness, and when he drew near to
his death, he gave order in his last will, that they should wrap up his dead
body in course linen, without any embowelling at all, and that they should stop
his mouth, nostrils, ears, and all open passages of his body with unslaked
lime, this was the only embalming and conditure he required, and that for this
purpose, that his body might (by this eating and consuming thing) be the sooner
resolved into its earth.

2. Saladine that great Conqueror of the East, Iovii Elog. p. 30. Sandys.
relat. l. 2. p. 107. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 14. p. 251. Platin. de
vituspontif. p. 211. Camerar. oper. subcism cent. 1. c. 12. p. 75.76.
after he had taken Jerusalem; perceiving he drew near unto death, by his last
Will forbad all funeral pomp, and commanded that only an old and black Cassock
fastened at the end of a Lance, should be born before his body, and that a
Priest going before the people, should aloud sing these verses, as they are
remembered by Boccace.

Vixi divitiis, regno, tumidusque trophaeis,
Sed pannum heu nigrum nil nisi morte tuli.
Great Saladine the Conqu'rour of the East,
Of all the State and Glory he possessed,
O frail and transitory good! no more
Has born away, than that poor Shirt he wore.
3. The Emperor Severus after many wars, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 338.
growing old and about to dye, called for an Urn in which (after the ancient
manner) the ashes of their burnt bodies were to be bestowed, and after he had
long looked upon it, and held it in his hands, he uttered these words; Thou
(said he) shall contain that man, whom all the world was too narrow to confine.

Mors sola fatetur. --
Quantula sint hominum Corpuscula.
It Is only death that tells
How small he is that swells.
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 338.
4. Philip King of Macedon had a fall, and after he was risen, perceiving the
impression of his body upon the sand; Good Gods, said he, what a small parcel
of earth will contain us, who aspire to the possession of the whole world.

Luth. Colloq. mensal. p. 471.
5. Luther after he had successfully opposed the Pope, and was gazed and admired
at by all the world as the invincible Champion of the true Christian faith, not
long before his death sent a fair Glass to Dr. Iustus Jonas his friend, and
therewith these following verses.

Dat vitrum vitro Jonae, vitrum ipse Lutherus,
Se similem ut fragili noscat uterque vitro.
Luther a Glass, to Jonah Glass, a Glass does send,
That both may know our selves to be but Glass, my Friend.
Plut. moral. l. de Apoth. ^^g. p. 414.
6. Antigonus lay sick a long time of a lingering disease, and afterward when he
was recovered and well again; We have gotten no harm, said he, by this long
sickness, for it has taught me not to be so proud, by putting me in mind that
I am but a mortal man. And when Hermodorus the Poet in certain Poems which he
wrote, had styled him the Son of the Sun, he to check that unadvised speech of
his He who uses to empty my Close-Stool, (said he) knows as well as I that
it is nothing so.

Pet. Gregor, de Repub. l. 6. c. 3. p. 183. Plut in Solon. p. 93.94.
7. Croesus that rich King of Lydia, showed unto Solon his vast riches, and
asked of him who it was that he could esteem of as an happier man than he?
Solon told him that riches were not to be confided in, and that the state of a
man in this life, was so transitory and liable to alteration and change, that
no certain judgment could be made of the felicity of any man, till such time as
he came to dye. Croesus thought himself contemned and despised by Solon, while
he spoke to him in this manner, and being in his great prosperity at that time,
thought there was little in his speech that concerned him. But afterward being
overthrown by King Cyrus in a pitched battle, his City of Sardis taken, and
himself made prisoner, when he was bound and laid upon a pile of wood to be
publicly burnt to death in the sight of Cyrus and the Persians, then it was
that he began to see more deep into that conference he heretofore had with
Solon: And therefore being now sensible of the truch of what he had heard, he
cried out three times, O Solon, Solon, Solon. Cyrus admired hereat, and
demanded the reason hereof, and what that Solon was? Croesus told him who he
was, and what he had said to him about the frailty of man, and the change of
condition he is subject to in this life? Cyrus at the hearing of this, like a
wise Prince began to think, that the height of his own fortune could as little
excuse from partaking in this fragility, as that of Croesus had done, and
therefore in a just sense and apprehension of those sudden turns, which the
destinies do usually allot to mankind, he pardoned Croesus, set him at liberty,
and gave him an honorable place about him.

Polyb. hist. l. 8. p. 527. petr. Gregor. de Repub. l. 6. c. 3. p. 183.
8. Antiochus at the first stood mute and as one amazed, and afterward he burst
out into tears, when he saw Achaeus the Son of Andromachus who had married
Laodice the Daughter of Mithridates, and who also was the Lord of all that
Country about the Mountain Taurus, brought before him bound, and lying
prostrate upon the earth: That which gave the occasion to these tears of his,
was the consideration of the great suddenness of these blows which Fortune
gives, and how impossible it is to guard our selves from them; or prevent them.

9. Sesostris was a Potent King of Egypt, Peter. Gregor, de Repub. l. 6. c. 3.
p. 183.
and had subdued under him diverse nations, which done he caused to be made for
him a Chariot of gold, and richly set with several sorts of precious Stones,
Four Kings by his appointment were yoked together herein, that they instead of
Beasts might draw this Conqueror as often as he desired to appear in his glory.
The Chariot was thus drawn upon a great Festival, when Sesostris observed that
one of the Kings, had his eyes continually fixed upon the wheel of the Chariot
that was next him. He then demanded the reason thereof, the King told him that
he did wonder and was amazed at the unstable motion of the wheel that rolled up
and down, so that one while this and next that part was uppermost, and the
highest of all immediately became the lowest: King Sesostris did so consider of
this saying, and thereby conceived such apprehensions of the frailty and
uncertainty of humane affairs, that he would no more be drawn in that proud
manner.

10. Xerxes Son of Darius and Nephew to Cyrus, Steph. in voc. p. 2092. Camer.
oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 12. p. 79. 80.
after five years preparation came against the Grecians (to revenge his Fathers
disgraceful repulse, by Miltiades) with such an Army that his men and Cattle
dried up whole Rivers, he made a Bridge over the Hellespont, where looking back
on such a multitude, considering man's mortality he wept, knowing, as he said,
that no one of all those should be alive after an hundred years.

CHAP. LII. Of such as were of unusual Fortune and Felicity.
MEn in a Dream find themselves much delighted with the variety of those images
of things which are presented to their waking fancies, that felicity and
happiness which most men count so, and please their thoughts with, is more of
imaginary than real, more of shadow than substance, and has so little of
solidity and stableness in it, that it may be ^itly looked upon as a dream. All
about us is so liable to the blows of fortune, and it bestows those blows with
that blindness and prodigality, and oftentimes sullies the last hours of it,
very minious with that blackness, that we count those happy men that have felt
least of her frowns In which respect,

1. Lucius Matellus may well pass for one of these fortunate persons, Godw.
Romans antiq. l. 2 2. p. 52, 53. Sabell^ ex. l. 7. c. 8. p. 409, 410. Plin. not.
li. l. 7. c. 43 p. 177.
for he was one of the Quindecimviri, that is, one of the fifteen men,
appointed for the keeping of the Sibylline Oracles, and to see that sacrifice
and all Ceremonial Rites were duly performed, he was General of the Horse,
twice Consul, chief Pontiff, the first that showed Elephants in his Triumph,
and a person in whom all those Ten Ornaments met, which may befall a most happy
Citizen In a most flourishing City, for he was a stout warrior, good Orator,
fortunate Leader, performed great matters being personally present, had
ascended to the greatest honors, was very wise, a complete Senator, had
attained great riches by honest means, left many Children, and was most eminent
in the most celebrious City.

Val. Max. l. 7. c. 1. p. 187. Sabell. Ex. l. 7. c. 8. p. 409, 410. Plin. not.
hist. l. 7. c. 44. p. 178.
2. Quintus Metellus by incessant degrees of indulgent Fortune from the day of
his birth to that of his death, at last arrived to the top of a most happy
life. He was born in a City that was the Princess of the World, and was born of
noble Parents; he had rare gifts of the mind, and a sufficiency of bodily
strength to undergo labor and travel; he had a Wife conspicuous at once for
her chastity and fruitfulness; he had born the Office of a Consul, been General
of an Army, and had gloriously triumphed; he had three Sons of Consular degree,
one whereof had been Censor, and also triumphant; and the fourth was a Praetor:
he had three Dunghters bestowed in Marriage, whose Children he had with him.
How many Births and Cradles? how many of his Descendants at man's estate? how
many Nuptials? what Honors, Governments, and what abundant Congratulations did
he behold in his Family? And all this felicity at no time interrupted with any
Funeral, any sighs, or the least cause of sadness. Look up to Heaven it self,
and you shall scarce find the like state in that place, seeing our greatest men
have assigned mourning and grief to the Gods themselves. The last act of his
life was agreeable to all the rest; for having lived to a great age, he expired
by a gentle and easy way of death, amongst the kisses and embraces of his
dearest Relations; and when dead, was born upon the shoulders of his Sons, and
Sons in Law, through the City; and by them laid upon his Funeral fire.

Just. hist. l. 12.^
3. The very same day that Philip King of Macedon had the City of Potidaea
surrendered up to himself, there came a Messenger that brought him word of a
great Victory that Parmenio his General had obtained over the Illyrians:
Another brought him news that his Horse had won the Prize and Victory at the
Olympic Games: And then came a third to acquaint him, that Olympias his Queen
was delivered of a young Prince, which afterward proved the unconquerable
Alexander.

Fall. Holy War.
4. It is a rare happiness of the Family of St. Lawrence, Barons of H^ath in
Ireland, that the Heirs thereof for four hundred Years together have always
been of age before the death of their Fathers. Clarks Mirr. cap. 104. page 493.

H^ro^^ot. l. 2 p. 178.
5. Polycrates of Samos was a petty Kieg, but a Minion of Fortune; had such a
Series of Prosperity in all his Affairs, that he was advised by Amasis King of
Egypt and his Alley, to apply some remedy to his overgreat Fortune; and that
he might have some occasion of trouble, exhorted him to cast away what he most
esteemed in such manner as he should be sure never more to hear of. He
therefore threw into the Sea that precious Emerald of his which he used as his
Signet, (...). op. p^^i^ie. (...). 2. c. 57 p. 242.
but not long after it was sound in the belly of a Fish that was dressed for
his Table.

^^ll. Wor^^. l. ^ p. 370
6. And to show us that there is a kind of recurrency of remarkable Accidents;
one Ander^^, a Townsman and Merchant, talking with a friend on
Newcastle-Bridge, and fingering his Ring, before he was aware let in ^all into
the River, and was much troubled with the lo^^ thereof, until the same was
found in a Fish caught in the River, and restored unto him.

7. It is said of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, that his Affairs had so good
success, M. Huraults Polit. Max. l. 2. c. 1. p. p. 159, 161
that he never repented him of any thing he did, that he was never denied any
thing he asked, and that he never commanded any thing wherein he was not
obeyed. And being asked by a Senator (who marvelled at these things) the reason
of them. Because, said he, I make all my doings conformable to Reason, I demand
not any thing which is not rightful, I command not any thing which redoundeth
not more to the benefit of the Commonwealth than to mine own profit.

8. That was a mavelous happy Accident that fell out to a Rower in a Tyrian
Vessel: Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 314.
he was cleansing of the Deck, when a Wave took him on the one side, and struck
him into the Sea, and soon after a contrary Wave hoisted him up into the Ship
again; so the lamentations of his misfortune were mixed with congratulations
for his safety.

9. L. Sylla might well be surnamed The Happy; Fulgos. ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 437.
for whereas he had attained the Dictatorship with many hazards, and therein
had put to death two thousand six hundred Knights of Rome, had slain ten
Consuls, proscribed and exiled so many, and forbid so many others the Rights of
Burial; yet, when he had voluntarily resigned the Dictatorship, and divested
himself of so great a Power, all Rome beheld him securely walking in the
Marketplace, and no man attempted to revenge upon him so great miseries as he
had occasioned to that City.

10. Arnulphus Duke of Lorrain, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 605.
when he had dropped his Ring into the Mosella, had it restored to him again
from the belly of a Fish.

11. Matthias King of Hungary caused his Money and other things to be stamped
with the Figure of a Crow, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 605.
carrying a Ring, with an Emerald in her bill; whereof I find this to be the
reason: having upon some occasion laid his Ring, with an Emerald in it, besides
him, a Crow came and snatched it away; the King followed the Crow, shot her
with a Pistol Bullet, and thereby became again the Master of his Ring.

12. Timotheus a General of the Athenians, Ioh. Textor offici^. l. 2. c. 23. p.
97.
had Fortune so favorable and propitious to him, that in every War he had an
easy and assured Victory: So that his Rivals in Glory at that time, envying
his great prosperity, painted Fortune casting Cities and Towns into his lap as
he lay sleeping besides it. Timotheus once beholding this Emblem, said: If I
take Cities while I sleep, what think you shall I do when I am awake?

13. Xanthus writes of Alcimus King of the Lydians, Coel. Rhod. l. 19. c. 29.
p. 919.
that he was a Prince of a singular both Piety and Clemency; that thereupon he
not only had an uncommon prosperity in the matters relating to his Person; but
withal, that throughout the whole course of his Reign the Lydians lived in a
most happy Tranquillity, and so secure a Peace, that every man lived void of
fear, and without apprehensions of any designs against them; in the midst of a
great abundance of Riches, in which they had long flourished.

Alexander passed the Hellespont, Plut. p. 672. in Alexand*
came to Troy, where he sacrificed to Pallas, and made a Libation to the
Heroes. He also poured Oil upon the Tomb of Achilles; and according to the
accustomed manner, he with his friends ran round about it naked, and placed a
Crown upon it; pronouncing of Achilles that he was a most happy and fortunate
person, for that while he lived he had so good a friend as Patroclus; and when
dead, that he had so famous a publisher of his Actions as Homer.

15. Matilda or Maud the Empress had the same happiness for which Pherenice is
admired; Chet. h. col^ cent. 2. p. 32
she was Daughter of a King, viz. Henry the First; Mother of a King, viz. Henry
the Second of England; and Wife of a King, to wit, Henry the Fourth, Emperor of
Germany. On her was made this Epitaph.

Ortu magna, viro major, sed maxima prole
Hic jacet Henrici filia, nupta, parens.
Ia^^. h. l. 12. p. 151.
16. Alexander the Great was a happy and a fortunate person in diverse respects:
he had Philip for his Father, the noblest Warrior of his time; and he had for
his Master (in his Youth) the Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle. Besides which,
Justin observes of him, that he never gave Battle to any Enemy, whom he did not
overcome; never laid Siege to any City, which at last he did not take; nor
never came unto any Nation, whom he did not subdue, and bring under his
subjection.

Fulg. ex. l. 6. c. 11. p. 832.
Appius a Roman was proscribed by the Triumvirate: this being known unto him,
he divided his Wealth amongst his Servants; and with them got into a Ship,
intending to sail into Sicily. In his passage there arose a mighty Tempest;
whereupon his Servants let him down from the Ship, into a little Boat, telling
him that he should therein be safest from the Tempest; in the mean time away
they sailed with the Ship, and all his Riches therein. The event was, that the
Servants and Ship was cast away wherein they thought themselves secure, and
Appius by force of the Winds was driven with his little Boat unto his desired
Sicily, where he abode in safety:

CHAP. LIII. Of the Gallantry wherewith some Persons have received Death, or
the Message of it.
AS they who remember they are but sojourners, in their hired lodgings, depart
thence without any affliction or trouble of mind; so as many as consider that
Nature has lent them this tabernacle of the body but for a little time are
well contented to remove as soon as they receive a summons.

1. Theodorus being threatened with death by Lysimachus, Speak on this m^^ner,
said he, to thy purpled Minions, for to Theodorus it is all one, whether he
purrefye, under ground, or on a C^oss above it.

Raleighs h. world. l. 5. c. 3. 18. p. 484.
2. Sophonisha, was the Queen of Syphax the Numidian, and he being made prisoner
to the Romans, she came and yielded her self to Massanissa, and vehemently
besought him, that she might not be delivered into the hands of the Romans. Her
youth and excellent beauty, so commended her suit, that he forth with granted
it, and to make good his promise, married her himself that very day, having bin
contracted with her before her marriage with Syphax. But Scipio the Roman
General gave him to understand that the Romans had title to (...) was a
mischeivous enem^ (...) advised him, not to (...) little reason. Massanissa
(...); and finally, having promised to be governed by Scipio, he departed to
his Tent; where, after he had spent some time in agony, he called to him a
Servant; and tempering a Potion for Sophonisba, sent it her with this message,
that gladly he would have had her to live with him as his Wife, but since they
who had power to hinder him of his desire would not yield thereto, he sent her
a Cup that should preserve her from falling alive into the hands of the Romans;
willing her to remember her Birth and Estate, and accordingly to take order for
her self. At the Receipt of this Message and Present she only said, that if her
Husband had no better Present for his new Wife, she must accept of this.
Adding, that she might have dyed more honorably, if she had not wedded so
lately before her Funerals; and herewithal she boldly drank off the Poison.

3. Calanus the Indian, Diod. Sicul. 17. p. 575*
of great fame and name for Philosophy, and held in great reverence by
Alexander the Great; when he had lived seventy three years in perfect health
and was now seized upon by a Disease; accounting that he had arrived at that
term of felicity, which both Nature and Fortune had allotted him, determined to
depart out of life: and to that purpose desired of Alexander a Funeral pile to
be erected, and that as soon as he had ascended to the top of it, he would
appoint his Guard to put fire to it. The King not able to divert him from his
purpose, commanded the Pile to be erected: an innumerable multitude of people
flocked together to behold so unusual a Spectacle. Calanus, as he had said,
with a marvelous alacrity ascended the top of the Pile, and there laid him
down, wherein he was consumed to ashes.

4. When the Tyrant sent his Messenger of death to Canius to tell him that he
must die that day, H^yw. hier. l. 4. p. 233.
Canius was then playing at Chess, and therefore desired the Messenger not to
interrupt his play till the Game was out; which he played in the same manner,
and with as much concern as he did before the Messenger came. The Game done, he
submitted to the Sentence that was passed upon him.

5. Queen Anne, Bak. chron* p. 408.
the Wife of Henry the Eighth, when she was lead to be beheaded in the Tower,
she called one of the King's Privy Chamber to her, and said unto him; Commend
me to the King, and tell him, he is constant in his course of advancing me; for
from a private Gentlewoman he made me a Marquess, from a Marquess a Queen; and
now that he has left no higher degree of worldly honor for me, he has made
me a Martyr.

6. Dr. Fecknam was sent to the Lady Jane Gray, Bak. Chron. p. 458.
that she must prepare her self to die the next day; which Message was so
little displeasing to her, that she seemed rather to rejoice at it. The Doctor
being earnest with her to leave her new Religion, and to embrace the old, she
answered, that she had now no time to think of any thing, but of preparing her
self to God by Prayer. Feckman thinking she had spoken this, to the end she
might have some longer time of life, obtained of the Queen three days longer,
and then came and told so much to the Lady Jane. Whereat she smiling, said, You
are much deceived if you think I had any desire of longer life; for I assure
you, since the time you went from me my life has been so odious to me, that I
long for nothing so much as death; and since it is the Queen's pleasure, I am
most willing to undergo it.

7. Rubrius Flavius being condemned to death by Nero, H^^w. hi^^. l. 4. p. 241.
and brought to the Block; when the Executioner spoke to him, that he would
boldly stretch forth his neck; Yes, (said he) and I wish thou would as boldly
strike off my head.

Burt. melan. part. 2. 3. p. 318. Kornman. de mir. mort. l. 8. c. 3. p. 2.
8. Ludovicus Cortesius, a rich Lawyer of Padua, commanded by his last Will, and
a great Mulct (if otherwise) upon his Heir, that no Funeral should be kept for
him, no man should lament; but as at a Wedding, Music and Minstrels to be
provided: and instead of black Mourners, he took order that twelve Virgins clad
in Green should carry him to the Church. His Will and Testament was accordingly
performed, and he buried in the Church of St. Sophia.

Burt. melan. part. 3. 3. p. 320.
9. Cardinal Brundusinus caused this Epitaph in Rome to be inscribed upon his
Tomb, both to show his willingness to die, and to tax those that were loath to
depart.

Excessi e vitae aerumnis facilisque, lubensque.
Ne pejora ipsa morte dehinc videam.
With ease and freedom I resigned this breath,
Lest I should longer see what is worse than death.
10. The words of dying Plotinus, Coel. Rhod. l. 21. c. 11. p. 977.
says Caelius, are worthy to be writ in Letters of Gold: or if there be any
other thing that is more precious than it, in as much as they prescribe each of
us what to do in the like case. He lay, as I said, a dying when Eustochius went
to Puteoli to visit him. Hitherto, said Plotinus, I expected thee; and even now
I am laboring to return that which is divine in us, unto that Divinity that
informs and enlivens the whole Universe. And having said these words, he gave
up the Ghost.

The End of the Third Book of the Wonders of the Little World.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Atheists; and such as have made no account of Religion: with their
Sacrilegious actions, and the punishments thereof.
THat was a worthy Law which was made by Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans,
viz. That men should not serve the gods in transitu, as they passed by; nor
when they were in haste; or were about any other business: but that they should
worship and pray to them when they had time and leisure, and had set all other
business apart. He thought that the gods could never be attended upon with
reverence and devotion enough: whereas many of those that follow, were so much
of the contrary mind, that they would abstain from no kind of affronts and
abuses, both in word and deed, toward them whom they esteemed as their
Deities; most of these have been made as exemplary in their punishments, as
they had been presumptuous in their impieties.

Lord Remy his Civil considerations, c. 59. p. 152.
1. A young Florentine, Anno 1527. esteemed a man very brave and valiant in
arms, was to fight with another young man, who (because he was melancholy and
spoke little) was called Forchebene: they went together with a great company to
the place appointed which was without the Port of St. Gal, whither being come,
a friend to the former went to him and said, God give you the Victory: the
proud young man adding blasphemy to his temerity, answered, How shall he choose
but give it me? They came to use their weapons, and after many blows given and
taken, both by the one and the other; Forchebene, being become as the Minister
and Instrument of God, gave him a thrust in the mouth, with such force, that
having fastened his tongue to the poll of his neck (where the sword went through
above the length of a span) he made him fall down dead; the sword remaining in
his mouth, to the end that the tongue which had so grievously offended might
even in this world endure punishment for so horrible a sin.

Herodot. l. 3. p. 187. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 52.
2. When Cambyses, King of Persia, had conquered Egypt, seeing the Ox that is
consecrated to Apis, he smote him into the Hip, so that he died. The more
wicked in this, that what he did to that Idol Beast, he did, as he supposed, to
the true God in contempt of all Religion. But not long after the counterfeit
Smerdis rebelling against him, and having seized the greatest part of Persia;
as Cambyses was mounting his Horse, with a purpose to march against him, his
sword fell out of the scabbard, the same sword with which he had before slain
the Ox; by this he received a wound in his Hip in the same place, wherein he
had given one to the Ox, and of this wound in a short time he died.

3. Vrracha, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 57.
the Queen of Arragon, made War with her son Alphonsus; and when she wanted
money, she determined to rifle the Shrine of St. Isidore at Leons in Spain:
such as went with her feared to touch those Treasures; she therefore with her
own hands seized upon many things: but as she was going forth of the Temple,
she fell down dead. So dangerous it is to adventure upon that which our selves
are persuaded is Sacrilege, though it should not be so in it self.

4. Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 7, 8. Dinoth.
memorab. l. 8. p. 576.
having rifled the Temple of Proserpina in Locris, and sailing thence with a
prosperous wind, See (said he smiling) to his friends, what a good Voyage the
gods grant to them that are sacrilegious. From Jupiter Olympius he pulled off a
garment of Gold of great weight, which King Hiero of Syracuse had dedicated out
of the spoils of the Carthaginians; and instead thereof caused a woollen one
to be put upon him, saying, That a garment of Gold was too heavy in Summer, and
too cold in Winter, but a woollen one was convenient for both seasons. He
caused the golden Beard of Esculapius at Epidaurus to be taken off, saying, It
was not fit that he should have a Beard, when his father Apollo was beardless.
He took out of the Temples also the tables of Gold and Silver; and thereon
being wrote (according to the custom of Greece) That these were the Goods of
the gods, he said, he would make use of their goodness. Also the golden Goblets
and Crowns which the Statues held out in their hands, he took from thence,
saying, He did but receive what was given, and that it was great folly to
refuse what was proffered from their hands to whom we pray that we may receive.

5. Heliogabalus would needs be married to one of the Vestal Virgins: Lamprid.
Herodian. Dinot. mem. l. 8. p. 577. Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 47.
he caused the perpetual fire which was ever preserved burning in honor of
Vesta, to be put out; and as one that intended to wage war with the gods, he
violated indifferently all the Rites and Ceremonies of Religion in Rome; by
which impiety he so provoked gods and men against him, that he was assaulted
and slain by his own Soldiers.

6. Alphonsus, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 4. p. 43.
the tenth King of Spain, would usually blame Providence, and say, That had he
been present with Almighty God in the Creation of the World, many things should
have been better ordered and disposed than they were: But let it be observed
that he was thrust out of his Kingdom, made a private man, died in infamy and
the hatred of all men.

Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 52, 54. Id. l. 1. c. 6. p. 170, 171.
7. Iulianus at the first feigned himself to be a Christian, and (as some say)
was entered into Orders for Deacon: from a worshipper of Christ, he afterward
turned a great Persecutor and mocker of the Christians, and Christianity it
self: in contempt of which he permitted the Jews to re-edifie that Temple of
theirs, which had been ruined under Titus, and the care of that affair was
committed to Antiochenus Philippus; but the divine power showed forth it self
to the terror of men: for so soon as they had laid the Stones in the
Foundation of it, the earth began to make a horrid noise, and exceedingly
trembled; it cast out the begun Wall; sent forth a flame that slew the Workmen,
and consumed all the Tools and Instruments that were there, as well Iron as
other. This was it that occasioned the work to be laid aside; the next night
there were diverse Crosses found upon the garments of many men, and those in
such manner set on, that they could not be washed, or any other way got out
thence. At last this Iulianus waging War with the Persians (by an unknown hand)
he received a deadly wound betwixt his Ribs: when filling his own hands with
his own blood, and throwing it up toward Heaven, he brake out into these
words, Satisfy thy malice, O Galilean (so he called Christ) for I acknowledge
I am overcome by thee.

Clarks Mir. c. 88. p. 386.
8. Pope Leo the tenth admiring the huge mass of money, which, by his
Indulgences, he had raked together, said (most Atheistically) to Cardinal
Bembus, Vide quantum haec fabula de Christo nobis profuit, See what a deal of
wealth we have gotten by this Fable of Christ: And when he lay upon his
deathbed, the same Cardinal rehearsing a Text of Scripture to comfort him, his
reply was, Apage has nugas de Christo, Away with these baubles concerning
Christ.

Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. ^. 46.
9. Nero the Emperor spoiled Temples and Altars, without any difference; and
thereby showed that Religion was not only despised, but also hated by him: nor
did he spare that Syrian Goddess which he worshipped, but sprinkled the face of
her with urine; by these, and the like means, he became hated both of God and
men, so that the people of Rome revolted from him, whereby he was compelled to
a fearful and miserable slight; and fearing they would inflict on him torments
worse than death, he laid violent hands upon himself.

Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 46.
10. Antoninus Commodus had not only abused himself diverse other ways, but even
in the midst of the solemnities of Religion he could not abstain from impiety.
When he sacrificed to Isis with the Image of that Goddess (which himself
carried) he laid upon the heads of the Priests, and enforced them so to pelt
one another with Pine Nuts (which according to the Rites of their Religion they
carried in their hands) that sometimes some of them died upon it: With these
and other wicked acts of his, he was grown into that hatred, that he lost his
life as he lay in his bed; slain by such as were about him, to the great
rejoicing of the people of Rome; his body after it had some time lain unburied
was cast into Tyber.

Clarks Mir. c. 88. p. 891.
11. A Cardinal with great Pomp, making his entrance into the City of Paris,
when the people were more than ordinarily earnest with him for his fatherly
Benediction, Quandoquidem (said he) hic populus vult decipi, decipiatur in
nomine Diaboli, Since these people will be fooled, let them be fooled in the
Devils name.

12. John, Bakers Chron. p. 107. Stow's Annal. p. 175.
King of England, having been a little before reconciled to the Pope, and then
receiving an overthrow in France, in great anger cried out, That nothing had
prosper'd with him since the time he was reconciled to God and the Pope. Being
also on a time a Hunting, at the opening of a fat Buck, See, said he, how the
Deer has prospered, and how fat he is, and yet I dare swear he never heard
Mass. He is reported in some distress, to have sent Thomas Hardington, and Raph
Fitz-Nichols, Knights, in Embassage to Miramumalim, King of Africa and Morocco,
with offer of his Kingdom to him upon condition he would come and aid him; and
that if he prevailed, he would himself become a Mohammedan, and renounce his
Christian Faith. The end of him was, that he was poisoned by a Monk of
Swinstead Abbey in Lincolnshire.

13. Theophylact, Cause. hol. Court, Tom. 2.. 2. p. 168.
son of the Emperor, by the absolute power of the Emperor was seized of the
Patriarchate of Constantinople; he then became a Merchant of Horses, which he
so violently affected, that besides the prodigious race of two thousand which
he ordinarily bred, he many times left the Altar, where he sacrificed to the
living God, to hasten to see some Mare of his that had Foaled in the Stable.

14. Leo the fourth, Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 55.
Emperor of Constantinople, thrust on by his covetous desire, in show of jest
(as another Dionysius) took off the Crown from the head of St. Sophia, which
had been made by former Princes in honor of her, not without vast expenses; he
afterward wore it upon his own head. But his impiety passed not without its
punishment: for instead of Gemms, Carbuncles and envenomed Pustules brake out
on every part of his head, so that he was constrained thereby to lay aside his
Crown, and also to depart the World.

15. Paulus Graecus had revolted from Bamba, Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 55.
King of the Goths; usurped the title of the King of Spain; and besides diverse
other evil actions of his, he had taken out of a Temple, in the City of Gerunda
a Crown, which the devout King Bamba had consecrated to St. Foelix: not long
after he was duly rewarded for it: For he was taken by Bamba, against whom he
had rebelled; he was brought from Nemausis, a City in France, to Toledo in
Spain, Crowned with a Diadem of Pitch; his eyes put out; riding upon a Camel,
with his face turned toward the tail; and followed all along with the
reproaches and derision of all that beheld him.

16. M. Crassus the Roman General going upon a Military expedition into
Parthia, Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 51, 52.
as he passed through Iudaea, his covetousness put him upon the thoughts of
Sacrilege, so that he risted the Temple of Jerusalem of the Treasures that
were laid up in it: but divine vengeance had him in chase for it; for not long
after, he was overcome in Battle by the Parthians, where he lost both his fame
and life, and son, together with his ill gotten Goods; and being found by his
enemies when dead, had molten Gold poured into his mouth to upbraid his
covetousness.

17. Mahomet the second being repulsed by the Inhabitants of Scodra, Knowles
Turk. hist. p. 423. Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 4. p. 615.
in a furious assault he had made upon that City, wished that he had never
heard of the name of Scodra, and in his choler and frantic rage, most horribly
blasphemed against God, most wickedly saying, That it was enough for God to
take care of heavenly things, and not to cross him in his worldly actions. He
kept no promise further than for his advantage; and took all occasions to
satisfy his lust.

Fulg. Ex. l. 1. c. 2. p. 52.
18. Philomelus, Onomarchus, and Phaillus, had spoiled the Temple of Delphos,
and had their punishment divinely allotted to them. For whereas the ordained
punishment of sacrilegious persons is this, That they shall die by being thrown
headlong from some high place; or by being choked in the water, or burnt to
ashes in the fire: Not long after this plunder of theirs, one of them was burnt
alive, another drowned, and the third was thrown headlong from an high and
steep place: so that by these kinds of deaths, they suffered according to that
Law, which amongst the Grecians was made against such as are found guilty of
Sacrilege.

Diodor. Sicul. bibli. l. 20. p. 698.
19. Agathocles without any provocation came upon the Liparenses with a Fleet,
and exacted of them fifty Talents of Silver. The Liparenses desired a further
time for the payment of some part of the money, saying they could not at
present furnish so great a sum, unless they should make bold with such gifts
as had been devoted to the gods, and which they had never used to abuse.
Agathocles forced them to pay all down forthwith, though part of the money was
inscribed with the names of Aeolus and Vulcan: so having received it, he set
sail from them; but a mighty wind and storm arose, whereby the ten Ships that
carried the money were all dashed in pieces. Whereupon it was said, that Aeolus
(who is said thereabouts to be the god of the Winds) had taken immediate
revenge upon him, and that Vulcan remitted his to his death; for Agathocles was
afterward burnt alive in his own Country.

Sabellic. Ex. l. 4. c. 3. p. 188.
20. Cambyses sent fifty thousand Soldiers to pull down the Temple of Jupiter
Ammon; but all that number, having taken their repast betwixt Oasis and the
Ammonians, before they came to the place, perished under the vast heaps of
sand, that the wind blew upon them, so that not so much as one of them escaped;
and the news of their calamity was only made known by the neighboring Nations.

Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 4. p. 614.
21. When those bloody wars in France for matters of Religion (says Richard
Dinoth) were so violently pursued between the Hugonots and Papists, there were
diverse found that laughed them all to scorn, as being a sort of superstitious
fools, to lose their lives and fortunes upon such slender accounts: accounting
Faith, Religion, immortality of the Soul mere fopperies and illusions: And as
Mercennus thinks there are fifty thousand Atheists in Paris at this day.

Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 4. p. 615.
22. Bulco Opiliensis, sometimes Duke of Silesia, was a perfect Atheist; he
lived (says Aeneas Sylvius) at Vratislavia, and was so mad to satisfy his
lust, that he believed neither Heaven nor Hell, or that the Soul was immortal;
but married Wives, and sent them away as he thought good; did murder, and
mischief; and whatsoever he himself took pleasure to do.

Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 4. p. 619.
23. Frederick the Emperor (says Matthew Paris) is reported to have said, that
there were three principal Impostors, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, who that they
might rule the world had seduced all those that lived in their times. And Henry
the Lantgrave of Hesse heard him speak it, That if the Princes of the Empire
would adhere to his institutions, he would ordain and set forth another and
better way both for Faith and Manners.

CHAP. II. Of such as were exceeding hopeful in Youth; but afterward improved
to the worse.
THere is nothing (says Montaigne) at this day more lovely to behold than the
French Children: but for the most part they deceive the hope that was
fore-apprehended of them; for when they once become men, there is no excellency
at all in them. Thus as many a bright and fair morning has been followed with
dark and black Clouds before Sunset; so not a few have outlived their own
virtues; and utterly frustrated the good hopes that were conceived of them.

1. Dionysius the younger, Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 6. p. 227. Petr. Greg. de
repub. l. 8. c. 1. p. 318.
the Tyrant of Sicily, upon the death of his father, showed himself exceeding
merciful and of a Princely liberality, he set at liberty three thousand persons
that were under restraint for debt, making satisfaction to the Creditors
himself. He remitted his ordinary Tributes for the space of three years; and
did several other things, whereby he gained the favor and universal applause
of the people. But having once established himself in the Government, he
reassumed that disposition, which, as it appears, he had only laid aside for a
time. He caused his Uncles to be put to death, whom he was awed by, or stood in
fear of; he slew his own Brethren, that he might have no Rival in the
Sovereignty; and soon after, he raged against all sorts with a promiscuous
cruelty, in such manner that he deserved to be called not so much the Tyrant,
as Tyranny it self.

2. Philip, Polyb. hist. l. 4. p. 339. Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 6. p. 227.
the last King of the Macedonians but one, and who made war upon the Romans,
was (as Polybius says of him, who saw and knew him) a Prince adorned with most
of the gifts and perfections both of body and mind; he had a comely visage, a
straight and proper body, a ready eloquence, a strong memory, comprehensive
wit, a facetious ingenuity in his speeches and replies, accompanied with a
Royal gravity and majesty; he was well seen in matters of Peace and War; he had
a great spirit and a liberal mind; and in a word, he was a King of that
promising and fair hope, as scarcely had Macedon, or Greece it self, seen any
other his like. But behold in a moment all this noble building was overturned,
whether by the fault of Fortune, that was adverse to him in his dispute with
the Romans, brake his spirit and courage, and wheeled him back from his
determined course unto Glory; or whether it was by the fault of Informers, or
his own, who gave too easy and inconsiderate an ear to them; however it came
to pass, he laid aside the better sort of men, poisoned some, and slew others,
not sparing his own blood at length, for he put to death his own son Demetrius.
To conclude, that Philip concerning whom there were such goodly hopes, and in
the beginning of whose Reign, there had been such happy and auspicious
discoveries, declined unto all kind of evil, proved a bad Prince, hated, and
unfortunate.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 6. p. 228.
3. Herod, King of Judea, in the six first years of his Reign, was as gallant,
mild, and magnificent a Prince as any other whatsoever; but during the rest of
his Rule, which was one and thirty years, he was fierce and cruel, both to
others and to his own friends and family, to that degree, that at one time he
caused seventy Senators of the Royal blood to be put to death; he slew his
Wife, and three of his own sons; and at the last, when he saw that he himself
was at the point to die, he sent for all the Nobles from every part of Judea,
upon the pretense of some weighty occasion: and when they were come, he most
earnestly desired of his friends, that being enclosed in the Cirque by the
Soldiers they should every man be slain, not for any crime they were guilty
of, but as he said, That when he was dead, there might be a real, just, and
universal grief at his funeral, when there should be no Family exempt from this
calamity.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 6. p. 229.
4. Tiberius the Roman Emperor showed himself a good Prince, all the while that
Germanicus and Drusus were alive; he seemed to have a mixture of virtue and
vice while his mother was in being, but afterward he brake out into all kind
of infamous and execrable actions, proceeding in his Villainies to such a
height, that at some times, through the torment of his own conscience, he not
only repented of what he had done, but professed he was weary of his life.

Pezel. Mellisic. tom. 2. p. 15^. Cael. Antiq. l^^t. l. 11. c. 12. p. 496.
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 6. p. 229. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1.. 3. p. 317.
5. Nero, Emperor of Rome, at his first coming to the Throne, was a mirror of
Princes, as he was afterward of Monsters: The Emperor Trajan gave this
Elogium of him, That the best of Princes came far short of the first five years
of Nero; but he soon outlived his own innocence, and a far less commendation:
for he poisoned his brother; forced his Master Seneca to bleed to death; ripp'd
up the belly of his Mother; set the City of Rome on fire, while he himself, on
the top of a Tower, sang and played the burning of Troy: and indeed abstained
from no kind of excesses in vice and wickedness, till having made the world too
long a-weary of him, he was forced to become his own Executioner.

Joseph's Antiq. l. 18. c. 9. p. 479, 480. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1.. 2.
p. 317.
6. C. Caligula, though very young, governed the Empire the first and second
year of his Reign with most noble directions, behaving himself most graciously
toward all men, whereby he obtained the love and good liking of the Romans,
and the favor of his other Subjects: but in process of time, the greatness of
his Estate made him so forgetful of himself, as to decline to all manner of
vice, to surpass the limits of humane condition, and to challenge to himself
the title of Divinity, whereby he governed all things in contempt of God.

Imperial. hist. p. 471. P^^el. Mellisic. tom. 2. p. 342.
7. Heraclius, the Eastern Emperor, in his old age, did much degenerate from
the virtues of his youth: for in his first years his Government was laudable,
happy and fortunate; afterward he fell to the practice of forbidden acts,
dealing with Soothsayers and Magicians; he fell also into the Heresy of the
Monothelites; and made an incestuous Marriage with Martina, the daughter of his
brother; after which his fortune changed, the oriental Empire began to decline,
and he lost all Asia.

Pezel. Mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 207.
8. Bassianus Carracal^a was so courteous and pleasant, and obsequious (in his
Childhood) to his Parents, his friends, and indeed unto all the people, that
every man was the admirer of his piety, meekness, and good nature: but
advancing further into years, he was so changed in his manners and behavior,
and was of so cruel and bloody a disposition, that many could scarcely believe
it was the same person whom they had known in his Childhood.

9. Boschier, Chetwinds hist. collect. cent. 1. p. 9.
in his penitential Sermons relates of a Friar that always dined on a Net,
till he had obtained the Popedom, then he bad them take the Net away, seeing
the Fish was taken. Another in his younger time, and mean estate, lived only
upon bread and water, saying, that Aqua and panis vita carnis; but being
afterward advanced, changed his diet, and then said, Aqua and panis vita
canis. A third there was, that being low, Preached exceedingly against the
Pride, vices and sins of men in place and power; but being afterward raised to
preferment, he changed his note: and to one that admired at it, he replied by
profaning that Scripture, When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child.

10. Lucullus was as sufficient a Warrior in all kind of Service as almost any
of the Roman Captains, Plut. M^r. p. 394.
and so long as he was in action, he maintained his wit and understanding
entire: But after he had once given up himself to an idle life, and sat mewed
up (as it were) like an housebird at home, and meddled no more in the affairs
of the Commonwealth, he became very dull, blockish and stupid, much like to
Sea Spunges after a long Calm, when the salt water does not dash upon them and
drench them: so that afterward this Lucullus committed his old age to be
dieted, cured and ordered by Callisthenes one of his enfranchised bondmen, by
whom it was thought he was medicined by amatorious drinks, and bewitched with
other Charms and Sorceries, until such time as his Brother Marcus removed this
Servitor from about him, and took upon him the government and disposition of
his person, during the remainder of his life, which was not long.

11. Maxentius, Petr. Gr^g. de Repub. l. 8. c. 1.. 5. p. 318.
the son of Maximiamus, having seized upon Rome, and driven out from thence
Severus, the son of Galerius Augustus, showed himself equal and merciful to all
men, insomuch as that he recommended the Christians unto the care of the
Governors of his Provinces; but no sooner had he strengthened himself with
wealth, and quieted Italy and Africa, but he turned Tyrant; a cruel Persecutor
of the Christians; and left no sort of impiety or intemperance, or villainy
unpractised by him.

CHAP. III. Of the rigorous severity of some Parents to their Children; and how
unnatural others have showed themselves toward them.
EVery thing is carried on by a natural instinct to the preservation of it self
in its own being: and by the same Law of Nature, even the most brutish amongst
the bruit^ themselves, may be observed to retain a special kind of indulgence
and tenderness toward their offspring. The Monsters of the Sea draw out the
breast, and give suck to their young ones. The extraordinary severities of some
Parents to their Children, may assure us, that there are greater Monsters upon
the Land, than are to be ^ound in the bottom of the deep; and if some of these
may extenuate their inhumanities by I know not what virtuous pretenses, yet the
barbarities of the rest must be wholly imputable to their savage nature, and
the bloodiness of their disposition.

Cause. hol. Cour. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 112. Aelian. var. hist. l. 1. c. 34. p. 30.
Lo^icer. Theatr. p. 291.
1. There was a Peasant, a Mardonian by Nation, named Rachoses, who being the
Father of seven sons, perceived the youngest of them played the little
Libertine, and unbridled Colt: he endeavored to cure him with fair words and
reasons, but finding him to reject all manner of good counsel, he bound his
hands behind him, carried him before a Magistrate, accused him, and requires he
might be proceeded against as a delinquent against nature. The Judges who would
not discontent this incensed father, nor hazard the life of this young man,
sent them both to the King, which at that time was Artaxerxes. The father went
thither, resolved to seek his sons death, where pleading before the King with
much fervor, and forcible reasons, Artaxerxes stood amazed at his courage. But
how can you, my friend, (said he) endure to see your son die before your face?
He being a Gardener by Trade, As willingly (said he) as I would pull away
leaves from a rank Lettuce, and not hurt the root: The King threatened the son
with death if his carriage were not better; and perceiving the old man's zeal to
Justice, of a Gardener made him a Judge.

Cause. hol. Cour. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 112. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 8. p. 153.
2. Titus Manlius Torquatus had a son in great employments in the Empire,
flourishing in honor, age and reputation, who being accused by the Ambassadors
of Macedonia to have ill carried himself in their Province, when he had it in
charge, this father, with the Senates permission, would himself be Judge in the
sons cause, heard the accusers two whole days together, confronted Witnesses,
gave his son full scope to defend himself, and to produce all that he could for
his justification. In the end on the third day he pronounced Sentence, thus, It
having sufficiently been proved to me, that my son D. Silanus has ill
acquitted his charge, and taken money from the allies of the Roman people,
contrary to the command of Laws and honesty, I declare him from this time
forward, unworthy both of the Commonwealth, and my house. The unfortunate son
was so overwhelmed with melancholy, upon this Judgment given by his father,
that the next night he killed himself: and the father esteeming him degenerate,
would not so much as honor his funerals with his presence.

Sabellic. Exempl. l. 3. c. 3. p. 132.
3. Artaxerxes, King of Persia, had fifty sons by his several Concubines, one
called Darius he had made King in his own lifetime, contrary to the custom of
the Nation, who having solicited his father to give him Aspasia, his beautiful
Concubine, and refused by him, stirred up all the rest of his brothers to join
with him in a conspiracy against the old King. It was not carried so privately
but that the design came to Artaxerxes his ear, who was so incensed thereat,
that casting off all humanity as well as paternal affection, not contented with
Prisons or Exile, he caused them all at once to be put to death* by his own
hand bringing desolation into his house, but lately replenished by so numerous
an offspring.

4. Epaminondas, Plut. in Paral. p. 910. Fulg. l. 2. c. 2. p. 243. Lonicer.
Theatr. p. 290. Dinoth. l. 3. p. 154.
the Theban, being General against the Lacedaemonians, it fell out that he was
called to Thebes, upon the election of Magigistrates, at his departure he
commits the care and government of the Army to his son St^simbrotus, with a
severe charge, that he should not ^ight till his return. The Lacedaemonians,
that they might allure him to a Battle, reproach him with dishonor and cowar
dize; he impatient of these contumelies, contrary to the commands of his
father, descends to the Battle, wherein he obtained a signal Victory. The
Father returning to the Camp, adorns the head of his son with a Crown of
Triumph, and afterward commanded the Executioner to take it off from his
shoulders, as a violatour of Military Discipline.

5. A. Manlius Torquatus in the Gallick War, Val. Max. l. Orosii hist. l. 3. c.
9. p. 82. Live. Decad. 1. l. 8.
commanded his own son, by a severe sentence, to be put to death for engaging
with the enemy contrary to his orders, though the Romans came off with the
Victory.

6. Constantius the second, De Serres Gener. hist. of France, p. 49. Imper.
hist. p. 529.
called Copronymus, a great enemy to Images, commanded them all to be thrown
down, contrary to the liking of his mother Irene; who not only maintained them
with violence, but also caused them to be confirmed by a Council held at Nice,
a City in Bithynia, seeing that at Constantinople the people were resolute to
withstand them. Hence grew an execrable Tragedy in the Imperial Court; Irene
seeing her son resolved against her defense of Images, was so very much
transported, that having caused him to be seized upon in his Chamber, she
ordered his eyes to be put out, so that he dying with grief, she also usurped
the Empire.

7. M. Scaurus, Val. Max. l. 5. c. 8. p. 154.
the light and glory of his Country (when at the River Athesis, the Roman Horse
were put to flight by the Cimbrians, and leaving the Pro-consul Catulus, fled
in great terror to the City) sent his son word (who was a partner in that
dishonorable flight) that he had rather have met the bones of him, slain in
Battle, than to behold him with the marks of a degenerate cowardice upon him:
The son upon the receipt of this message, fell upon his Sword and died.

8. A. Fulvius, Val. Max. l. 5. c. 8. p. 154.
a person of the Senatorian Order, had a son, conspicuous amongst those of his
age, ^or wit, learning and beauty; but when he understood, that prevailed upon
with evil counsel, he was gone with a purpose to join himself with the Army of
Catiline, he sent after him, in the midst of his Journey fetched him back, and
caused him to be put to death, having first angrily told him, That he had not
begotten him for Catiline against his Country, but for his Country against
Catiline. He might have restrained him of his liberty, till the fury of that
Civil War was over-past; but that would have made him the instance of a
cautious, whereas this is the example of a severe one.

9. Titus and Valerius, Plut. paral. in Poplicol.^ p. 99. Sabellic. Exempl. l.
1. c. 5. p. 351.
the two sons of L. Brutus (after the expulsion of Tarquinius) had conspired
with others to restore him, though by the death of the Consuls: the Conspiracy
being detected by Vindicius a servant, they, with the rest, were brought before
the Tribunal of the Consuls, whereof Brutus their father was one; and when they
were accused, and their own Letters produced against them, Brutus calling both
his sons by their names: Well, said he, what answer make you to these crimes
you are accused of? when he had thrice asked them, and they remained silent,
turning his face to the Lictours, The rest is now, said he, to be performed by
you; they straight catch hold of the young men, pull off their Gowns, and
binding their hands behind their backs, scourged them with Rods. When others
turned away their eyes, as not able to endure that spectacle, Brutus alone
never turned away his head, nor did any pity change the wonted austerity and
severity of his countenance: but looking frowningly upon his sons, in the midst
of their punishments, he so remained till he had seen the Axe ^ever their heads
from their shoulders, as they lay stretched out upon the ground; then leaving
the rest to the doom of his Colleague, he rose up and departed.

Fi^zh. of Rel. and pol. par. 1. c. 8. p. 70.
10. King Herod after his enquiry, about the time of the birth of the new King
of the Jews, which the Wise men of his Nation said was then born, caused a
number of innocent Infants in Bethlehem, and the Coasts thereof, to be slain:
and amongst the rest a young son of his own. Augustus Caesar being certified of
this at Rome, said it was better to be Herod's Pigg than his son; this he said
in allusion to the custom of the Jews, who killed no Hoggs, as not being
permitted to eat any Swines flesh.

Lon. Theatr. p. 293.
11. The Dukedom of Holsatia was heretofore divided amongst several Counts; so
many Rulers did occasion great pressures upon the subjects; and especially one
of these Counts called Adolph, was more grievous than any of the rest;
Hardvicus therefore, one of the Nobles, conspired against him, enters his
Castle and Chamber by night, and advised him to yield himself: but he refused,
and fought it out, till such time as he was killed by the Conspirator. There
was then with the Count one of Hardvicus his own sons, who waited upon him, him
also Hardvicus did kill at that time with his own hands; and this he did, as he
said, that none might suspect his son, as being privy to the Treason intended
against his Master.

Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 17. p. 908. Muret. var. Lect. p. 217. Fulg.
Ex. l. 5. c. 8. p. 650. Lon. Theatr. p. 291.
12. Deiotarus had a great number of sons, but he caused them all to be slain,
save only that one whom he intended for his Successor; and he did this for his
sake, that the surviver might be the greater both in power and security.

13. Pausanias was a great Captain of the Spartans! but being convicted by the
Ephori of a Conspiracy with the Persians against his Country, he fled to the
Temple of Minerva for Sanctuary; it being unlawful to force him thence, the
Magistrates gave order to build a Wall about it, that being guarded and kept
in, he might be pined to death. As soon as his mother Alcithea understood this,
though he was her only son, yet she brought the first stone, to make there a
Prisoner till his death, one that was so nearly related to her.

Fulg. Ex. l. 5. c. 8. p. 659.
14. Antonius Venereus, Duke of Venice, caused his son Ludovicus to die in
Prison; for that being incensed with his Mistress, he had caused diverse pairs
of Horns to be fastened to the doors of her Husband.

Sp^^ds hist. p. 448.
15. Robert de Beliasme delighted in cruelty, an Example whereof he showed on
his own son, who being but a child, and playing with him, the father, for a
pastime, put his thumbs in his child's eyes, and crushed out the balls thereof.

CHAP. IV. Of the degenerate Sons of Illustrious Parents.
WHen Aristippus showed himself altogether mindless of his Children, who lived
in a different manner from his Instruction and Example; one blaming his
severity, remembered him that his Children came of him: and yet, said he, we
cast away from us Phlegm and Vermin, though one is bred in us, and the other
upon us. Augustus too looked upon his but as Ulcers and Wens, certain
excrescencies that were fit to be cut away; and forbad the two Iulia's to be
buried in the same Monument with him: such a one was

1. Scipio, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 5. p. 81.
the son of Scipio Africanus, who suffered himself to be taken by a small Party
of Antiochus, at such time as the glory of his Family went so high, that Africa
was already subjected by his father, and the greater part of Asia subdued by
his Uncle Lucius Scipio; the same man being Candidate for the Pretorship, had
been rejected by the people, but that he was assisted by Cicereius, who had
been formerly the Secretary of his father; when he had obtained that Office,
his debauchery was such, that his relations would not suffer him to execute it,
but pulled off from his finger a Ring wherein was engraven the Effigies of his
father: what a darkness was this that sprang from so glorious a light?

2. How base a life did the son of Quintus Fabius Maximus live? Val. Max. l^ 3.
c. ^. p. 81.
and although all the rest of his Villainies were obliterated, this one thing
was enough to make discovery of his manners, that Quintus Pompeius the City
Praetor, prohibited him from intermeddling with his fathers Estate; nor was
there found one man in so great a City that went about to oppose that decree,
all men resenting it, that that money which ought to be subservient to the
glory of the Fabian Family, should be expended in debauchery: so that him who
through the fathers indulgence was left his heir, the public severity
disinherited.

3. Hortensius Corbio, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 5. p. 81.
was the Grandchild of Quintus Hortensius, who for Estate, and admirable
eloquence, was comparable with the Citizens that were of the greatest rank; yet
this wretched young man led a more base and abject life than the vilest obscene
persons in Rome; and at the last, put his tongue to the vile use of more
persons in Brothel-houses, than his Grandfather had made good use of his for
the safety of the Citizens.

4. Cresippus, Fulg. l. 3^ c. 5. p. 386.
was the son of Chabrias the Athenian, a person equally famous for his great
virtues and victories; and who had been much more happy had he died without
issue, for this son of his was so degenerate from the virtue of his father,
that he often occasioned Phocion his Tutor (though otherwise a most patient
man) to say, that what he endured through the folly of Cresippus, was more than
enough to compensate all that his father had merited of him.

5. Caligula was as infamous for his sloth, Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 388.
lust and folly, as his father Germanicus was famous for his vigor of mind,
prudence and integrity; and although fortune advanced this degenerate son to
the Empire, yet most of the Romans desired rather the virtue of Germanicus, in
the fortune of a private man, than an Emperor of so flagitious a life. Add to
this, that the people of Rome, the confederate Nations, yea and barbarous
Princes, bewailed the death of Germanicus, as the loss of a common Parent; but
Caligula the son was not thought worthy of tears, or honor, or so much as a
public funeral at his death.

Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 388.
6. Valerianus Augustus, for the greatness of his virtues, deserves a memorial
amongst the most Illustrious of Princes; at least, if his fortune had been
equal to his virtue. But his son Galienus, was of a disposition so unlike to
his father, that by reason of his impious behavior, his unchastity, and sloth,
he not only occasioned his fathers Captains to rebel against him, but (which
was never before seen) he encouraged Zenobia and Victoria, weak women, to
aspire to the Crown: so that the great and peaceable Empire, which he received
of his father, he left diminished, and torn in a miserable manner.

Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 388.
7. Marcus Antonius Philosophus, Emperor of Rome, was a singular example of
virtue, and left Commodus his son the heir of his Empire, but of no kind of
alliance to him in any other respect. The people of Rome saw the goodness of
one exchanged for the malice of the other, and the sharpest cruelty to succeed
in the room of an incomparable clemency; weary of this, they were compelled to
rid their hands of Commodus, it being openly bruited in the City, that he was
not the son of Marcus, but a Gladiatour: for they thought it impossible, that
so much wickedness should arise from the virtue of him that was deceased: so
that there seemed nothing wanting to the glory of Marcus, but that he did not
die without issue.

Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 389. Pezel. Mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 249.
8. Carus the Emperor succeeded Probus, both in his Empire and good qualities;
he had extended the limits of the Roman Empire, and governed it with great
equity: but he left his son Carinus his successor, that resembled his father
in no one thing: for whereas Carus was of great Courage, Justice, Moderation
and Continence; this other was an unchaste, and unjust, and a coward: his father
was somewhat ashamed of him, had thoughts of creating another Successor to
himself; and for the benefit of the Commonwealth, to have taken at once from
his son, both the title of Caesar, and his life it self; but the evil fortune
of the Roman Empire, at this time, intercepted all his purposes by a sudden
death.

Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 391.
9. Saladine, who left so great a name behind him, left also the Kingdom of
Syria to his son Noradine, whose sloth and unprincely qualities were such, that
he was driven out by the people, and his Uncle Saphadine set up in his stead;
after which he had so exhausted his own Patrimony, that he was fain to subsist
upon the mercy and charity of his brothers, and at last died with the just
reproaches of all men.

Fulg. l. 3. c. 5. p. 392.
10. Johannes Galleacius, who first had the title of Duke of Millaine, was a
Prince of a great and liberal mind, and adorned with all other virtues that
were to be required in a great person, he was beloved at home, and feared
abroad. He was possessed of a great part of Italy, which he had gained with
much honor: so that he was thought superior rather than equal to some
Christian Kings. This man left his son John to succeed him, than whom Phalaris
himself was not more cruel; what his father had got by blood and valor, and
sweat, this madman lost (at least the greater part thereof) laughing* so that
at last growing hateful and contemptible to his own people, he was flain by
them. And his other son Gabriel having lost Pisa, whereof he was possessed, was
openly beheaded at Genoa.

11. Although Cassander, Pezel. Mell. tom. 1. p. 418.
through his equity and industry in his affairs, had many who voluntarily
became the followers of his greatness, yet he made war upon diverse Cities of
Greece; the destruction of which, as a neighboring fire, struck such terror
into the Spartans, that they then first surrounded their City with Walls, which
before they only defended with their arms. So far were they degenerated from
the virtue of their Ancestors, that whereas for many Ages, the valor of the
Citizens had been the only Wall of their City; the Citizens now thought they
could not be safe, unless they lay hid behind the Walls of their City.

12. Franciscus Sfortia, Fulg. Ex. l. 3. c. 5. p. 393.
Duke of Millaine, amongst Christian Princes excelled in all kind of virtues,
he was not inferior to Trajan for humanity; and to the degree of his fortune,
was reputed as liberal as Alexander the Great: But his sons did mightily
degenerate from the so great virtue of their father; Galeacius the Elder, was
ambitious and lustful, proud of the least successes, and extremely dejected
when any adversity befell him. Philip, the second son, was corpulent, foolish,
and a coward. Ludovicus was profane, saying, That Religion and Justice were
fictions, invented to keep the people in order; he was of a haughty mind,
covetous, lustful, broken in adversity, and unfortunate, if not cowardly: for
though he had greater forces than his enemy, he lost that Dukedom to Lewis the
12. King of France, in sixteen days, which his father had gained by arms, and
kept with the singular love and benevolence of all men, to the day of his death.

13. Phocion was an excellent person: Plut. in Phocion p. 755.
but his son Phocus was so dissolute, and resigned up to intemperance and
excessive drinking, that he could not be reclaimed by the Spartan discipline it
self. When Menyllus had presented Phocion with a great gift, and he had refused
it, he requested that he would, at least, permit his son Phocus to receive it:
If, said he, my son Phocus reform himself, he will have a Patrimony sufficient
to maintain him; but as he now behaves himself, there is nothing that can be
enough for him.

14. Marcus Tullius Cicero, Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 11. p. 1075.
the famous Orator, had a son of the same name, but of a very different nature:
for whereas his father was a temperate and abstemious person, his son was so
addicted to Wine, that he would swallow down two Gallons at once; and in one of
his drunken fits, he so far forgot himself, that he struck M. Agrippa upon the
head with a Pot.

15. Theodosius the great, Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 11. p. 1075.
was a most happy and fortunate Emperor, but in this one thing unfortunate,
for he left behind him two sons, Honorius in the West, and Arcadius in the
East, both Emperors, but both so slothful and unlike their father, that partly
by that, and partly by the treachery of Ruffinus and Stilichon, the Empire was
miserably and foully dilacerated by the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandalls.

16. The sons of the Emperor Constantine the Great, were as much below the
Genius of their father, Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 11. p. 1075.
in all praise worthy things, as he did surpass all other Princes in piety, and
true greatness of mind: For in respect of the Government of his life, no man
was more heedless than his son Constantinus. Constans, the second son, was a
man much addicted to unseemly pleasures: And Constantius, the third son, was
yet more intolerable by reason of his inconstancy, and arrogance.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 11. p. 1075.
17. Casimirus was fetched out of a Monastery and made King of Poland, a man of
great virtue: but his son Boleslaus, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, did much
degenerate from the noble example of his father: For he was a despiser and
contemner of Religion, a neglecter of the administration of Justice, and of a
cruel nature and disposition. He slew Sanctus Stanisiaus, the Archbishop of
Cracovia: and at last died himself an exile from his Country.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 11. p. 1075.
18. Herodes Atticus, the Sophist, in respect of his wit and eloquence, was
second to none of his time: yet had he a son of his called also Atticus, who
was of so dull and stupid a nature, that he could never be made capable of
understanding the first rudiments and elements of learning.

CHAP. V. Of undutiful and unnatural Children to their Parents.
SOlon would never establish any Law against Parricides, or Parent-killers,
saying, The gods forbid that a Monster should ever come into our Commonwealth;
and certain it is, that six hundred years from the building of Rome were
over-past, before so much as the name of that crime was known amongst them. The
first that killed his Father, and stained his hands in the blood of him that
gave him life, was Lucius Ostius, a person afterward detested throughout all
Ages. P. Malleolus was the first (says Livy) amongst the Romans, who was known
to have killed his Mother, and who underwent that punishment, which was by the
institution of the Ancients in that case: They ordained that the Parricide
should be first scourged to blood, then sown up in a Sack, together with a Dog,
a Cock, a Viper, and an Ape, and so thrown headlong into the bottom of the
Sea. But notwithstanding the severity of this Law, and those of other Nations,
against a crime of this nature, there are too many Instances of unnatural
children, as in part will appear by what follows.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 5. p. 340.
1. Antiochus, a Jew, accused his own Father, and some other Jews, then living
at Antioch, that they had plotted upon a set night to set fire upon the whole
City. The Antiochians, who for other causes, had no kindness for the Jews, gave
credit to this accusation of his, and were so exasperated against them, that
taking Arms they resolved upon a sharp revenge. A great Tumult there was, and
therein many thousands of men, Jews and others slain, and, amongst the rest,
the ungracious Accuser himself did miserably perish.

2. L. Vibius Serenus was drawn out of the place of his exile and bound with
Chains, Dinoth. memorab. l. 5. p. 339. Tacit. An. l. 4. p. 116.
caused to attend in open Court, where he was accused by his own son, that he
had conspired against Tiberius the Emperor, and had privily sent such into
France as might kindle a war against him: and to put the better color upon his
accusation, he added that Caecilius Cornutus, a Pretorian person, was conscious
to the plot, and had also lent out a considerable su^m for the advancement of
the War. Serenus hearing this grand accusation of his son, not at all
affrighted, though in hazard of his life, with a mind unappall'd, and a
threatening look, beholding him, began to shake his Chains, and to call upon
the revenging Deities That they would return him to his banishment, and execute
just punishment upon his ungrateful and wicked son. All men thought the
Accusation was false, in regard he named but one single man, as the Associate,
in so great an enterprise; the son then named two others, Cneius Lentulus, and
Seius Tubero; but in regard both of them were the intimate friends of Caesar,
and the one extreme old, and the other infirm of body, they were both adjudg'd
innocent. The servants of Serenus the father were put to torture, wherein,
notwithstanding, they gave contrary evidence: so that the accuser stung with
the sense of his villainy, and withal affrighted with the menaces of the people
(threatening the Gallows, Stoning, or the punishment of a Parricide) fled out of
the City, but was fetched back from Ravenna, to prosecute his accusation. The
success was, Serenus was banished to the Island Amorgus, the son though he was
in favor with Tiberius, who too much indulged informers, yet was he hated of
all sorts, and infamous amongst all persons so long as he lived.

Justin tells us of a certain African, Just. l. 18. p. 151, 152. Cau^. hol.
Cou^. par. 1. l. 3. p. 112.
called Cartallus, who by the suffrage of the people was raised to an eminent
degree of dignity, and casually sent upon some solemn Embassy, into a place
where his Father, with many others, were banished. He looking upon himself, at
that time, like a Peacock, gloriously furnished out with the rich ornaments of
his Employment, thought it was not suitable with his honor, to admit that his
Father should so much as see him, though he sought it with earnestness. The
unfortunate father became so much enraged with this contempt of himself, and
the proud refusal of his son, that he instantly raised a sedition; and
mustering together a tumultuary Army of Exiles, he fell upon his son, although
a Magistrate, took him, and condemned him to death: presently prepared a high
Gibbet, and attired as he was, in Gold and Scarlet, with a Crown on his head,
caused him to be fastened to this fatal Tree for a strange Spectacle.

4. There was a young Duke of Gelders, Phil. de Comines l. 4. c. 1. p. 105,
106. Dinoth. memorab. l. 5 p. 341. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 217. De Serres
hist. France, p. 38^. Lo^. Theatr. p. 283.
named Adolph, who took his father, Duke Arnold, one night as he was going to
bed, and led him five Dutch Miles on foot bare-legg'd, in a mavelous cold
night, and laid him in a deep Dungeon, the space of six Months, where he saw no
light, but through a little hole. Wherefore the Duke of Cleves, whose sister
the old Duke (being prisoner) had married, made sharp War upon this young Duke
Adolph. The Duke of Burgundy sought diverse means to agree them, but in vain. In
the end, the Pope and the Emperor began to stir in the matter, and the Duke of
Burgundy under great Curses, was commanded to take the old Duke out of Prison,
Treas. times, l. 5. c. 23. p. 469. Camer. oper. subs. cent. 1. c. 92. p. 427.
which he did accordingly, the young one not able to withstand him. I have
often seen them both together in the Duke of Burgundies Chamber, pleading their
Cause before a great Assembly: and once I saw the old man present the combat
to his son (says Comines) the Duke of Burgundy desirous to agree them, offered
the young Duke, whom he favored, the Title of Governor of Guelderland, with
all the Revenues thereof, save of a little Town, near to Brabant, called Grave,
which should remain to the father, with the Revenues of three thousand Florens,
a yearly Pension of as much, and the title of Duke, as was but reason. I (says
Comines) with others wiser than my self, were appointed to make report of these
conditions to the young Duke, who answered us, That he had rather throw his
father headlong into a Well, and himself after him, than agree to such an
appointment, alleging that his father had been Duke forty four years, and that
it was now time for him to Govern. Notwithstanding he said he would agree to
give him a yearly Pension of three thousand Florens, with condition he should
depart the Country, as a banished man, never to return: and such other lewd
speeches he used. Soon after the young Duke in disguise left the Duke of
Burgundies Court to repair home to his own Country: but as he Ferry'd over a
water near to Namur, he paid a Guildon for his passage; whereupon a Priest
there present, began presently to mistrust him, and soon after knew him, so
that he was taken, and led to Namur, where he remained a Prisoner till the Duke
of Burgundies death; after which by the men of Gaunt he was set at liberty, and
by them carried before Tournay, where being weakly accompanied, he was
miserably slain in a Skirmish, in full revenge of his impiety toward his
father.

Live. hist. l. 1. p. 18. Patr. de regno l. 8. tit. 20. p. 561. Lon. Theatr. p.
280. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 6. p. 61.
5. Tullia was the daughter of Servius Tullius, King of the Romans, she was
married to Tarquinius Superbus, and together with her husband conspired against
her father, who by his Son-in-law, was one day in the Senate House thrown from
the top to the bottom of the Stairs; he was taken up half dead; and as they
hasted with him toward his own house, he was slain in the Cyprian Street. In
the mean time Tullia had been at the Senate to salute her husband with the name
of King, was sent home by him, and chancing to return that way, the Coachman
perceiving the dead Corpse of the King lie in the Street, stopped his Horses in
a terrible fright: Tullia looked out of her Chariot, and being informed what
was the matter, she commanded him to drive the Wheels of her Chariot over the
face and body of her own and slain father, upon which that which by the Sabines
in their first settlement at Rome, had for lucks-sake been called the Cyprian,
that is, the Good Street, was from thence-forward called the wicked Street.

Sueton. in Neron. c. 34. p. 254. Lon. Theatr. p. 281. Par. Med. hist. tom. 1.
p. 356. Pezel. mell. to. 2. p. 158.
6. Nero, the Emperor, had tried to poison his mother Agrippina three times,
and still found she was fortified with Antidotes; he then prepared false Roofs,
that being loosed with an Engine might fall upon her as she slept in the night;
when this was discovered, he made a Ship that should be taken in pieces, that
so she might perish, either by wrack, or the fall of the Decks upon her: but
she escaped this danger also by swimming. Which when Nero understood, he
commits the slaughter of his mother to Anicetus the Centurion, who taking along
with him (to the Villa of Agrippina) persons fit for the employment, compassed
the house, brake open the door, and with his drawn sword presented himself,
with the rest of the Murderers, at her bedside: apprehending his intention,
she showed him her belly, and bad him strike there, This Womb of mine, said
she, is deservedly to be dug up, that has brought forth such a Monster; and
so after many wounds, died. It Is said that Nero came thither to behold the
Corpse of his mother, that he took her limbs into his hands, and commended
this, and dispraised that other, as his fancy led him; he caused her Belly to
be opened that he might see the place where once he had lain; while this was
doing, finding himself a dry, he was so unconcerned as to call for drink,
without leaving the place, saying, He did not think he had so handsome a mother.

7. Bajazet, Knowles Turks hist. l. 495, 496. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 211.
the second of that name, being thrust out of his mighty Empire by his son
Selymus, when he was near fourscore, broken with years and grief, resolved to
forsake Constantinople, before he was enforced to it by his son, and to retire
himself to Dymotica, a small and pleasant City in Thrace, where he had formerly
bestowed much cost for his pleasure, and now thought it the fittest place
wherein to end his sorrowful days. But the cursed impiety of Selymus had
provided otherwise for him: for with the promise of ten Ducats a day during
life, and threats of a cruel death, in case it was not performed, he prevailed
with Haman a Jew, chief Physician to the old Emperor, to make him away by
poison, as he was upon his Journey: so that with horrible gripings and heavy
groans, he gave up the Ghost in the year 1512. when he had Reigned thirty
years. The perfidious Jew upon the delivery of the poisonous potion, had hasted
to Constantinople to bring Selymus the first news of it, who commanded his head
to be presently struck off, saying, That for the hopes of reward he would not
stick to do the like to Selymus himself.

8. Orodes was the King of Parthia, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 206, 207.
Clarks mi^. c. 112. p. 550.
the same who had overcome Crassus his Army, and slain himself in the field; he
was grown old in grief, for the death of his son Pacorus, slain by Ventidius,
and was fallen into a Dropsy, not likely to live long: his son Phraates
thought his death too slow, and did therefore determine to hasten it by poison,
which being administered, had an effect so contrary, that only putting him into
a looseness, it carried the disease away with it; and instead of a messenger of
death, it proved a medicine of health. His son, incensed at so strange a
miscarriage of his design, passed from secret to open Parricide, and caused the
old King his father to be openly smothered. He mounted the Throne, and sending
back the Ensigns and spoils of the defeated Army of Crassus, he was so much in
the favor of Augustus, that he sent him a beautiful Italian Lady for his
Concubine: of her he begat Phrataces, who when he was grown up, with the
privity and endeavors of his mother, became the murderer of his father, making
him the example of the same impiety, whereof in times past he had been the
detestable Author.

9. Eucratides, Usser. An. p. 480. A. M. 457*
King of the Bactrians, in all his Wars behaved himself with much prowess: when
he was worn out with the continuance of them, and was closely besieged by
Demetrius, King of the Indians, although he had not above three thousand
Soldiers with him, by his daily Sallies he wasted the enemies Forces
consisting of sixty thousand, and being at liberty in the fifth Month, reduced
all India under his command. In his return homewards he was slain by his own
son, whom he had made joint Partner with him in the Kingdom: he did not go
about to dissemble or smother his Parricide, but drove his Chariot through the
blood, and commanded the dead Corpse to be cast aside into some by-place or
other, unburied, as if he had slain an enemy and not murdered a father.

Howells Epist. vol. 1.. 6. p. 211.
10. When (says Howell) I was in Valen^ia in Spain, a Gentleman told me of a
Miracle which happened in that Town: which was, That a proper young man under
twenty, was Executed there for a crime, and before he was taken down from the
Tree, there were many gray and white hairs had budded forth of his Chin, as if
he had been a man of sixty. It struck amazement into all men: but this
interpre^ation was made of it, That the said young man might have lived to such
an age, if he had been dutiful to his Parents unto whom he had been barbarously
disobedient and unnatural.

Herb. Trav. l. 2. p. 291.
11. Scander, late King of Georgia, by a Circassian Lady had three hopeful sons,
Scander-Cawne, Thre-Beg, and Constandel, all born Christians: but for
preferment, the two last named became Bosar-men or Circumcised. Thre-Beg served
the Turk, Constandel the Persian. Constandel was naturally deformed, but of
such an active Spirit, that his bodily imperfections were not noted; but his
hateful ambition rendered him more than Monstrous. It happened that Acbas, King
of Persia, had vowed some revenge upon the Turks: and to that end gave order to
Ally-Cawne to trouble them. Constandel perceives the occasion right, to attempt
his hellish resolutions, and therefore after long suit, got to be joined in
Commission with the Persian General: Through Georgia they go, where Constandel,
under a pre-text of duty, visits his sad parents, who (upon his protests that
his Apostasy was counterseit) joyfully welcomed him: but he forgetting that,
and all other ties of nature, next night at a solemn Banquet, caused them to be
murdered, and till the Georgians saluted him King, perpetrated all sorts of
Villainies imaginable. But how secure soever he stood in his own fancy, the
dreadful Justice of an impartial God retaliated him: the rest of his life,
after this hated Parricide, was infinitely miserable: For, first, near
Sumachan, Cycala's son, the Turkish General, wounded him in the arm, and by
that, gained the Victory over the Persian. The same night he was also assaulted
in his Tent by his enraged Countrymen, who in his stead (for at the first
alarm he escaped) cut a Catamite in pieces, his accursed bedfellow. And though
he so far exasperated the Persian to revenge, that he brought the whole Army
into Georgia, resolving there to act unparalled Tragedies; yet was he
overreach'd in his Stratagems: for upon parley with the Queen (his late
brothers Wife) he was shot to death at a private signal, given by that Amazon
to some Musquetteers, ambushed of purpose betwixt both the Armies: a just
punishment for such a Viper.

CHAP. VI. Of the affectation of Divine Honors, and the desire of some men to
be reputed Gods.
POwer is a liquour of so strong a Fermentation, that few vessels are fit to be
entrusted with any extraordinary measure of it: it swells up men to an
immeasurable pride, and such a degree of immodesty, as to believe themselves
above the condition of mortality. Death is the only remedy against this
otherwise incurable madness: and this it is that lays down these Magnifico's
in the same nakedness and noysomeness with others. Raleighs hist. of the World,
l. 5. c. 6.. 12. p. 669.
O Eloquent, just and mighty Death (says Sir Walter Raleigh) whom none could
advise, thou have persuaded; what none has dared, thou have done; and whom all
the world has flattered, thou have cast out of the world and despised. Thou
have drawn together all the far stretched greatness; all the pride and cruelty,
and ambition of man, and covered it all over with these two narrow words, Hic
jacet. All these reputed gods have died like other men, only perhaps more
untimely, and less lamented.

1. Amulius, Zon. Annal. tom. 2. f. 54. Dinoth. memorab. l. 8. p. 577.
King of the Latins, was a proud man, and at last grew up to that degree of
arrogant impudence, that he sought (amongst his people) to have the reputation
of a god, and to that purpose, he had certain Machines, by the help of which he
imitated Thunders; made an appearance of Lightnings, by sudden ejaculations of
flames, and cast out Thunderbolts: but by a sudden inundation of waters (near
the place where he dwelt) both he and his Palace were overborn, and drowned.

2. Agrippa, Zon. Annal. tom. 1. f. 48. Iose. Antiq. l. 19. c. 7. p. 510.
King of the Jews, had Reigned over all Iudaea three years, when he appointed
Royal Shows in Caesarea; upon the second day of which, in the morning, he
entered the Theater robbed in a Vest of Silver; the Silver irradiated with the
beams of the Rising-sun, shone with such a luster, as bred a kind of horror
and aweful dread in the Spectators. His flatterers therefore straight cried out
from this and that other place, That he was a god; and besought him to be
propitious to them. They said, That they had hitherto revered him only as a
man, but hereafter should acknowledge, that he was above the nature of
mortality. The King, though he heard, did not reprehend these speeches, nor
reject so impious an Adulation; but a while after, when he had raised up
himself, he spied an Owl sitting over his head (he had seen the like at Rome
before in his calamity, and was told it was the token of a change of his
forlorn estate to great honors: but when he should see the Bird in that
posture the second time, it should be the messenger of his death) surpised
then with that unpleasing sight, he fell into pains of the heart and stomach,
when turning to his friends, Behold I your god (said he) am ceasing to live!
and he whom you but now called immortal is dragged unto death. While he said
this, oppressed with torture, he was straight carried back to his Palace, and
in five days was taken out of the World in the 54. of his age, and seventh
year of his Reign.

Plut. in Alex. p. 608. Zon. Annal. tom. 1. f. 33. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l.
3. c. 5. p. 94. Aelian. var. hist. l. 2. c. 19. p. 58.
3. Alexander the Great was very desirous to be accounted and taken as a god,
and boasted amongst the Barbarians that he was the son of Jupiter Ammon: so
that Olympia^ his mother used to say that Alexander never ceased to calumniate
her to Juno. Being once wounded, This, said he, is blood, not that Ichor, which
Homer says is wont to slow from the gods. It is reported, that finding himself
near unto death, he would privily have cast himself into the River Euphrates,
that being suddenly out of sight, he might breed an opinion in men, that he was
not departed as one over-pressed with the weight of a disease, but that he was
ascended to the gods from whence he first came: But when Roxane having
understood his mind, went about to hinder him, he sighing said, Woman do thou
envy me the glory of immortality and divinity?

Cael. Rhod. A. L. l. 3. c. 5. p. 94. Lo^. Theatr. p. 638. Purch. pilg. tom. 1.
l. 6. c. 8. p. 763.
4. There was in Libya a man called Psaphon, to whom Nature had been
sufficiently indulgent in bestowing upon him extraordinary accomplishments; the
inward magnificence of his mind expanding it self, and prompting him to it, he
used this subtle artifice to possess the Inhabitants about him with an opinion
of his divinity. Having therefore taking a number of such Birds as are capable
of the imitation of humane speech, he taught them to pronounce these words
distinctly, (...), Psaphon is a great god: this done he set them all at
liberty, who filled the Woods and places about with this ditty, which the
Inhabitants hearing, and supposing this to fall out by divine power, they fell
to adoration of him.

Sueton. in Caligul. c. 22. p. 177. Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 10. p. 426.
5. Caligula caused the Statues of the gods, amongst which was that of Jupiter
Olympius, to be brought out of Greece, and taking off their heads, commanded
his own to be set on instead thereof, and standing betwixt Castor and Pollux,
exhibited himself to be worshipped of such as resorted thither. He farther
erected a Temple, and instituted both Priests, and most exquisite Sacrifices to
the service of himself. In his Temple stood his Image of Gold, taken to the
life, which every day was clad with the same attire as was himself; his
Sacrifices were Phaenicopters, Peacocks, Bustards, Turkeys, Pheasants, and all
these were daily offered.

Diodor. Sic. Biblioth. l. 16. p. 526. Din. mem. l. 8. p. 577.
6. Philip, King of Macedon, though a great contemner of the gods, had yet a
great desire to be reputed one himself, and that also not inferior to any of
the rest: for in that celebrious Pomp, in which he caused twelve Statues of the
gods to be carried, he added his own for a thirteenth, and would that it should
be carried the first in order: but he was at that time stabbed and slain by the
hand of Pausanias, one of his own Guard.

Plut. in Ages. p. 607. Cael. Rhod. l. 11. c. 16. p. 504. Pezel. mell. to. 1.
p. 232. Aeli. var. hist. l. 12. c. 51. p. 336.
7. Menecrates the Physician, having successfully cured diverse persons of
deplorable diseases, was called Jupiter; and he himself was not ashamed to take
that name upon him: insomuch that in the front of his Letter he wrote on this
manner, Menecrates Jupiter sends to King Agesilaus health; who on the other
side, to meet with his intolerable pride and vanity, returned, King Agesilaus
wishes to Menecrates soundness. The Greek Writers affirm of him, that he took
an Oath of such as he cured of the Falling Sickness, that they should follow
and attend upon him as his servants: and they did follow him, some in the habit
of Hercules, and others in that of Mercury. Philip of Macedon observing the
vanity of this man, invited him, with his own gods to supper: when he came, he
was placed at a higher and more sumptuous Table, whereon was a fairer Altar
than on the rest; on this Altar (while the dishes were carried up to other
Tables) were made diverse ^ibations, and suffumigations with incense; till such
time as this new Jupiter perceiving in what manner he was derided and abused,
went his way, being well laughed at by all that were present.

8. Flavius Domitianus being mounted to the Imperial Seat, Sueton. l. 2. c. 13.
p. 336.
when after divorce, he had remarried and brought home his wife, he was not
ashamed to say openly, That she was called to his [ Pulvinar] a bed whereon the
Statues of the gods are laid, during the solemn Games exhibited to them. And
upon the day when he made a great Feast unto the people, he was well pleased to
hear their acclamations throughout the Amphitheatre, in these words, All
happiness to our Lord and Lady. When in the name of his Procurators, he endited
any formal Letters, thus he began, Our Lord and God thus commands. Whereupon
afterward this custom was taken up, that neither in the writing nor speech of
any man, he should be otherwise called.

9. After Diocletian had settled the affairs of the East, Pezel. mell. hist.
tom. 2. p. 252.
when he had subdued the Scythians, Sarmatians, the Alani and Basternae, and
had brought the necks of diverse other Nations under the Roman yoke, he then
grown proud, and puffed up with the glory of his Victories, commanded that
divine honors should be given to the Roman Emperors: And therefore in the
first place he himself would be adored, as if there was in him some Celestial
Majesty. And whereas the Emperors before him were wont to give their hands to
the Nobility to kiss, and then raised them with their own hands to kiss them on
the mouth; and that the manner of the vulgar was to kiss the knees of their
Emperor: Diocletian sent forth his Edict, that all men without distinction,
should prostrate kiss his feet; in the mean time his Shoes or Sandals were set
with precious Stones and Pearls, and enriched with Gold. In like manner his
garments, yea his very Chariot was adorned, that he might seem more august, and
be looked upon by all men as a god.

10. Lysander, Pezel. mell. to. 1. p. 228.
the Lacedemonian General, having taken Athens, as he had arrived to a greater
power than any Grecian had hitherto obtained; so his pride was greater than the
power he had gotten: For of the Athenian spoils, he caused a brazen Statue of
himself to be made, which he erected at Delphos. He was the first amongst all
the Greeks, that had Altars built to him by the Cities as a God; and Sacrifices
that were appointed in honor of him: He was also the first of the Greeks who
had Paeana's sung to him; the Samians changed the name of their Temple of Juno
and called it Lysandria. One of the Paeana's that were sung to him had this
beginning, Nos Graeciae inclytae ducem
Lacedaemone ampla natum
Celebremus, Io Paean.


11. C. Julius Caesar had the honors of a continued Consulship, Sueton. l. 1.
c. 76. p. 44.
the perpetual Dictatorship, the Censor of manners, had the titles of Emperor,
and father of his Country; his Statue was erected amongst those of Kings; his
Seat in the Senate House was of Gold; and yet not content with these, he
suffered such further honors to be decreed to him, as were beyond the
condition of a man, such as Temples, and Altars, a Priest, a Couch, and other
Ensigns of Divinity.

Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 4. p. 103. Zuin. Theat. vol. 11. l. 4. p. 2572.
12. Empedocles, the Philosopher, had cured Panthias of Agrigentum of a
deplorable disease, and perceiving that thereupon he was reverenced in a manner
as if he had been a god; he became so en^lamed with a desire of immortality and
glory, and that he might be supposed to have been translated into the number of
the gods, that he cast himself headlong into the midst of the flames of Mount
Aetna.

CHAP. VII. Of unnatural Husbands to their Wives.
IT is reported of the cruel Beast called the Hy^na, that by his exact
imitation of a humane voice, he trains the unwary Shepherds out of their
Cottages, till he has brought them within the compass of his danger, and then
he falls upon them with all his fierceness, and devours them. Thus there are
some brutish and evil natured men, who by pretenses of Generosity, Love and
Virtue, inveagle the hearts of poor innocent Virgins, till they are become the
masters of their Fortunes and Honor: which done, death it self is more
desirable than that bitterness and indignity they are wont to treat them with.

Clarks mir. c. 65. p. 295.
1. Anno Dom. 1652. in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, lived one Adam Sprackling,
Esquire, who about twenty years before had married Katherine, the daughter of
Sir Robert Leukner of Kent. This Sprackling had a fair Estate, but had
exhausted it by drinking, gaming, etc. At last Executions were out against him,
and he forced to keep home, and make his house his Prison: this filled him full
of rage, so that his Wife was constrained many times to lock her self from him.
But upon Saturday night, Dec. 11. 1652. as it seems, he resolved to mischief
her: and being at ten a Clock at night in his Kitchen, he sent for one Martin,
a poor old man, out of his bed to him: so that there were in the Kitchen
Sprackling and his wife, one Ewell, and this Martin: Sprackling commanded
Martin to bind Ewells legs, which the one did, and the other suffered, thinking
it had only been a ranting humor of their Master: Then began he to rage
against his wife, who sat quietly by, and though she gave him none but loving
and sweet words, yet he drew his Dagger, and struck her over the face with it,
which she bore patiently, though she was hurt in the Jaw. He still continuing
to rage at her, she weary and in great fear, rose up and went to the door: her
Husband followed her with a Chopping-knife in his hand, with which he struck at
her wrist, and cut the bone in sunder, so that her hand hung down only by the
sinews and skin: no help was near, Ewell was bound, and Martin being old and
weak, durst not interpose, fearing his own life, only prayed his Mistress to
stay and be quiet, hoping all should be well, and so getting a Napkin bound up
her hand with it. After this, toward morning, still railing and raging at his
wife, he dashed her on the forehead with the Iron Cleaver, whereupon she fell
down bleeding: but recovering her self on her knees, she cried and prayed unto
God for the pardon of her own and her husbands sins: praying God to forgive him
as she did; but as she was thus praying, her bloody husband chopped her head into
the midst of the very brains, so that she fell down, and died immediately. Then
did he kill six Dogs, four of which he threw by his wife; and after she was
dead, chopping her twice into the legs, compelled Martin to wash Ewells face
with her blood, himself also dipping linen in her blood, washed Martin's face,
and bloodied his own face with it. For all which, being apprehended and carried
to Sandwich layle, at the Sessions following, which were April 22. 1653. he was
arraigned, condemned, and hanged on the 27 day: dying very desperately, and not
suffering any, either Ministers, or Gentlemen to speak with him after his
condemnation.

2. Elavius, Plut. Mor. lib. de quaest. Romans qu. 20. p. 856.
or Phaulius, a Sooth-sayer, had a wife who used secretly to drink wine, and as
often as she was therein surprised and taken in the manner by her husband, she
was by him well beaten with Myrtle Rods. And for that reason the women, when
they dress up and adorn the Chapel or Shrine of their goddess Bona, they never
bring home for that purpose any branches of the Myrtle Tree: and yet otherwise
take pleasure to make use of all sorts of branches and flowers in that
solemnity.

3. At Argos there were two of the principal Citizens, Plut. Mor. l. de Amore,
p. 1144.
who were the heads of opposite Factions one to another in the Government o^
the City: the one was named Nicostratus, and the other Phaulius. Now when King
Philip came to the City, it was generally thought that Phaulius plotted, and
practiced to attained unto some absolute principality and sovereignty in the
City, by the means of his wife (who was a young and beautiful Lady) in case he
could once bring her to the Kings bed, and that she might lie with him.
Nicostratus was aware of as much, and smelling his design, walked before
Phaulius his door, and about his house, on purpose to discover his intentions,
and what he would do therein. He soon found that the base Phaulius had
furnished his wife with a pair of high Shoes; had cast about her a mantle; and
set upon her head a Chaplet after the Macedonian fashion. Having thus accoutred
her after the manner of the Kings Pages, he sent her secretly in that habit and
attire unto the Kings lodging, as a Sacrifice to his lust, and an agrument of
an unparalled villainy in himself, who could endure to be the Pander in the
prostitution of his own Wife.

4. Periander, Patric de Regno, l. 4. tit. 10. p. 249.
the Corinthian, in a high sit of passion, trod his Wife under-foot, and
although she was at that time with child of a boy, yet he never desisted from
his injurious treatment of her, till such time as he had killed her upon the
place. Afterward when he was come to himself, and was sensible that what he
had done was through the calumniating instigation of his Concubines, he caused
them all to be burnt alive; and banished his son Lycophron as far as Corcyra,
upon no other occasion than that he lamented the death of his Mother with tears
and outcryes.

Patrit. de K^ip^b. instit. l. 4. tit. 4. p. 166.
5. Nero the Emperor being once incensed against his Wife Poppaea Sabina, gave
her such a kick with his foot upon the belly, that she thereupon departed this
life. But though he was a man that seemed to be born to cruelty and blood, yet
he afterward so repented himself of this act, that he would not suffer her
body to be burnt after the Roman manner; but built the funeral pile for her, of
odours and perfumes, and so ordered her to be brought into the Julian monument.

Coel. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 20. c. 27. p. 955.
6. Herod the Sophist, being offended with his Wife Rhegil^a for some slight
fault of hers, commanded his freed man Alcimedon to beat her: She was at that
time eight months gone with Child, or near upon; so that (by the imprudence of
him who was employed to chastise her) She received some blows upon her belly,
which occasioned first her miscarriage, and soon after her death. Her Brother
Bradeas a person of great nobility, cited her Husband Herodes to answer the
death of his Sister before the Senate of Rome; where if he had not, it is pity
but he should have received a condign punishment.

Joseph. Antiq. l. 11.
7. When M. Antonius was overcome at Actium, Herod King of Iudaea, believing
that he was in danger to lose his Kingdom, because he had been a fast friend to
Antonius, Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 19. l. 2. p. 3526.
determined to meet Caesar Augustus at Rhodes, and there endeavor to assure
his favor to him. Having resolved upon his journey, he committed the care and
custody of his Wi^e, to Sohemus his friend^ giving him withal thus much in
command, That in case he should hear of his death by the way, or at the place
wither he was intended; that then he should not fail forthwith to kill Mariamne
his Wife; yielding this only reason of his injunction, that it might not be in
the power of any man to enjoy so great a beauty, after his decease. Mariamne
had extorted this secret from Sohemus; and at Herod's return twitted him with
it. Herod caused Sohemus unheard, to be immediately put to death; and not long
after he also beheaded Mariamne his beloved Queen and Wife.

Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 19. l. 2. p. 3527.
8. Amalasuenta had raised Theodahitus, at once, to be her Husband and King of
the Goths; but upon this proviso, that he should make oath, that he would rest
contented with the title of a King, and leave all matters of Government to her
sole dispose. But no sooner was he accepted as King, but he forgot his Wife and
benefactress; recalled her enemies from banishment, put her friends and
relations many of them to death; banished her self unto an Island in the
Vulsiner lake, and there set a strong guard upon her. At last he thought
himself not sufficiently safe, so long as Amalasumha was alive; and thereupon
he dispatched certain of his instruments to the place of her exile, with order
to put her to death; who ^inding her in a bath, gave her no further time, but
strangled her there.

CHAP. VIII. Of such Wives as were unnatural to their Husbands, or evil
deported toward them.
IN Italy there grows an herb, they call it the Basilisco; it is sweet scented
enough; but withal it has this strange property, that being laid under a stone
in a moist place, in a few days it produces a scorpion. Thus though the Woman
in her first creation, was intended as a meet help for man, the partner of his
joys and cares, the sweet perfume and relish of his days throughout his whole
pilgrimage: yet there are some so far degenerated from their primitive
institution, (though otherwise of exterior beauty and perfection enough) that
they have proved more intolerable than Scorpions, not only tormenting the life,
but hastening the death of their too indulgent Husbands.

1. Joan Gandchild to Robert King of Naples, Full. proph. statr. l. 5. c. 2. p.
348.
by Charles his son, succeeded her Grandfather in the Kingdom of Naples and
Sicily, Anno 1343. a woman of a beautiful body, Barlet. hist. of Scanderbeg, l.
10. p. 369.
and rare endowments of nature: She was first married to her Cousin Andrew, a
prince of Royal extraction, and of a sweet and loving disposition: but he being
not able to satisfy her wantonness, She kept company with lewd persons; at
last she grew weary of him, complaining of his insufficiency; and caused him in
the City of Aversa to be hung upon a beam, and strangled in the night time; and
then threw out his Corpse into a Garden, where it lay some days unburied. It
is said that this Andrew on a day coming into the Queens chamber, and finding
her twisting a thick string of silk and silver, demanded of her, for what
purpose she made it; she answered to hang you in, which he then little
believed; the rather because those who intend such mischief, use not to speak
of it beforehand; but it seems she was as good as her word.

2. Cicero put away his wife Terentia for diverse reasons; Plut. in vit.
Ciceron. p. 881.
as because she had made small account of him in the time of the wars, which
were betwixt Caesar and Pompey; so that when he went from Rome to Pompey,
Clarks mir. c. 65. p. 298.
she provided no fit accommodations for his journey; and when he came back
again into Italy, she never showed the least spark or sign of love, or good
will toward him: for though he staid long at Brundusium, she never went to see
him; and when his Daughter took that journey to visit him, she neither provided
company to conduct her, nor gave her money or other necessarys for the way; yea
she so handled the matter, that when Cicero came to Rome, he found nothing in
his house but bare walls; and yet he was much set in debt by her.

3. Bithricus King of the West Saxons, Stowes Annals, p. 77.
married Ethelburga the Daughter of Offa King of Mercia; by whom, after he had
reigned seventeen years, he was poisoned, and buried at Warham; upon which
occasion, it was ordained by the Nobles, that from thenceforth the Kings Wives
should not be called Queens, nor suffered to sit with them in place of Estate.
This Ethelburga fled into France with infinite treasure; where offering a
mighty sum of her gold to Charles King of France, he put her to her choice,
whether she would have him or his Son to her Husband. She chose the Son, for
the reason (as she said) that he was the youngest: then said Charles, Had
thou chosen me, thou should have had my Son, but now thou shall neither have
him nor me; and then sent her to a Monastery, wherein she professed her self a
Nun, and became there the Abbess for some years; but afterward being found to
have committed adultery with a Layman, she was cast out of the Monastery, and
ended her life in poverty, and much misery.

Heyl. Cosmogr. p. 64.
4. Alboinus the first King of Italy of the Lombards, having slain Cunemundus
King of the Gepida, made a drinking Cup of his Scull. Rosamund the Daughter of
that King, he had taken to Wife; and being one day very merry at Verona, forced
her to drink out of that detested Cup; which she so stomached, that she
promised one Helmichild a Courtier, that if he would aid her in killing the
King, she would give him both her self and the Kingdom of Lombardy. This when
he consented to, and performed, they were so hated that they were constrained
to fly to Ravenna, unto the protection of Longinus the Exarch, who persuaded
her to dispatch Helmichild out of the way, and to take him for her Husband, to
which she willingly agreed. Helmichild coming out of the bath, called for
drink, and she gave him a strong poison; half of which when he had drank, and
found by the strange operation how the matter went, he compelled her to drink
the rest, and so both dyed together.

Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. p. 358.
5. When Alexander the Great had determined to invade the Dacae, where he knew
Spitamenes was, who not only had revolted himself, but had also drawn diverse
others into the society of his rebellion, and had at some times overthrown some
of Alexanders Captains, there fell out one thing remarkable; the Wife of
Spitamanes, (upon whom he extremely doted) when by her feminine flatteries she
was not able to persuade her Husband, to make trial of the Victors clemency,
and to endeavor to appease that Alexander, whom he could not avoid nor escape,
she set upon her Husband when intoxicated with Wine he lay fast asleep; and
drawing a Sword that she had concealed under her garments, she cut off his
head, delivered it to a servant that was conscious of her fact, and with him
only in her company, as she was, with her garments besprinkled with his blood,
she went directly to Alexander's camp, and caused him to be informed that there
was one there, to inform him of something that he was concerned to know from
her. When she was admitted, she desired the servant might come in; who showed
the head of Spitamenes, to those that searched what he carried wrapped up in his
garment. When the King knew this, though he looked upon it as a considerable
piece of service to him, that a Renegado, and a Traitor was dispatched; yet had
he a horror of the fact, that she should ensnare his life that had well
deserved at her hands, who was her Husband, and Parent of the Children which
they had betwixt them; so that considering the atrocity of the fact overweighed
any pretended merit from himself, he sent her word, that she should forthwith
depart his Camp, lest she should infect the Greeks with the barbarity of her
example.

5. Semiramis the Wife of Ninus King of Assyria, Clarks mir. c. 65. p. 296.
was a witty and beautiful woman, beloved of her Husband even unto dotage: as
she was one day in discourse with him, she told him that she was exceedingly
desirous of a thing, yet because of the greatness of it, she durst not discover
it, nor could hope to prevail. Ninus not apprehending her subtilty bad her tell
him what it was; she answered, that he should deliver to her the government of
his Empire for five days; which when she had obtained, she caused her Husband
to be slain, and so usurped his Empire.

Fulvius understanding that he was proscribed by the Triumvirate, Fulgos. Ex.
l. 5. c. 3. p. 609.
betook himself to his Wife, hoping to be hid, and some way kept private by
her, in this time of his extremity. He might the rather expect her fidelity in
this thing; for of a slave he had made her a free woman, and received her to
his bed: but he found a deadly enemy instead of a friend; for she suspecting
that he was in love with another woman, did her self accuse and discover him to
the Triumviri; by whose order he dyed in a miserable manner.

8. The noble Pittacus, Plut. Moral. in l. de tranq. Animi, p. 153.
so famous for his valor, and as much renowned for his wisdom and justice,
feasted upon a time certain of his friends, who were strangers. His Wife coming
in at the midst of the dinner, being angry at something else, overthrew the
Table, and tumbled down all the Provision under-foot. Now when his guests and
friends were wonderfully dismayed and abashed hereat: Pittacus made no more ado
at the matter, but turning to them; There is not one of us all (says he) but
he has his cross, and one thing or other wherewith to exercise his patience;
and for my own part, this is the only thing that checketh my felicity; for were
it not for this shrew my Wife, I were the happiest man in the world; so that of
me these verses may be verified, This man who while he walks the street,
Or public place, is happy thought;
No sooner sets in House his feet,
But woe is him, and not for naught,
His Wife him rules, and that is a spite,
She scolds, she fights from noon to night.


CHAP. IX. Of the deep hatred some have conceived against their own Brethren,
and the unnatural actions of Brothers and Sisters.
SIR Henry Blunt in his voyage to the Levant, tells us, that at Belgrade in
Hungary where Danubius and Sava meet, their waters mingle no more than water
and oil; and though they run sixty miles together, yet they no way incorporate,
but the Danow is clear and pure as a well, while the Sava that runs along with
it, is as troubled as a street channel. After the manner of these Rivers it is
with some brethren, though bred up together, and near enough each other, in
respect of their bodies; yet their minds have been as distant from each other
as the Poles are; which, when opportunity has served, they have showed in the
effects of an implacable hatred.

Clarks mir. cap. 91. p. 404, 405.
1. Sir George Sonds of Kent had lately two Sons grown up to that age, wherein
he might have expected most comfort from them: but in the year 1655. the
younger of them named Freeman Sonds, having no apparent cause or provocation,
either from his Father or Brother, did in a most inhumane and butcherly manner
murder the elder as he lay sleeping by him in his bed: he clave his head and
brains with a Cleaver; and although this was his mortal wound, yet perceiving
him to groan and sigh, as one approaching unto death, he stabbed him with a
Stilletto seven or eight times in and about the heart (as the sorrowful Father
witnesses in his Printed narrative of the whole;) and when he had finished
this black and bloody tragedy, he went to his aged Father then in bed, and told
him of it, rather glorying in it, than expressing any repentance for it. Being
apprehended, he was presently after condemned at Maydstone Assizes, and
accordingly executed.

Textor. Ofsicin. l. 5. c. 11. p. 564. Sabell. Ex. l. 3. c. 10. p. 170. Korum.
de mirac. mortuor. l. 4. c. 62. p. 27.
2. Eteocles was the Son of Oedipus, by his own Mother Iocasta; their Father the
King of Thebes had ordered it, that Eteocles and his other Son Polynices, after
his departure, should reign yearly by course: But Eteocles after his year was
expired, would not suffer his Brother to succeed; whereupon Polynices being
aided by Tydeus and Adrastus made war upon his Brother: they meeting together
with their forces in the field, were slain by each other in the battle; their
dead bodies were also burned together when the flame parted it self; as if it
seemed to declare such a deadly hatred betwixt them, that as their minds being
alive, so neither could their bodies being dead agree. This their antipathy was
propagated to their posterity, breaking out into many outrageous and bloody
wars. Unto such ends does the providence of God often bring an incestuous
brood, that others may be instructed thereby.

Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 88. p. 408.
3. Upon the death of Selymus the second which happened Anno 1582. Amurath the
third succeeded in the Turkish Empire; at his entrance upon which, he caused
his five Brothers Mustapha, Solomon, Abdala, Osman and Sianger without all pity
or commiseration to be strangled in his presence, and gave order that they
should be buried with his dead Father: an ordinary thing with Mohammedan
Princes, who to secure to themselves the Empire without rivalship, doubt not to
pollute their hands with the blood of their nearest relations. It is said of
this Amurath, when he saw the fatal bow-string put about the neck of his
younger Brother, that he was seen to weep, but it seems they were Crocodiles
tears, for he held firm to his bloody purpose.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 348.
4. Petrus King of Spain having reigned some time with great cruelty, purpling
his hands in the blood of his Nobles: At last his Brother Henry took up arms
against him Anno Dom. 1369. He had hired auxiliary forces out of France against
Petrus; and having met him in the field, a bloody battle was fought agreeable
to the pertinacious hatred of the two Brethren. The victory resting on the side
of Henry, and his Brother made prisoner; being brought before him, Petrus with
a Dagger wounded Henry in the face; the other endeavoring to repay it with
interest, both grapled together, having thrown each other to the ground: But
others coming in to the help of Henry, he quickly became the superior; and
having slain his Brother with many wounds, he succeeded in his Kingdom.

5. Extreme was the hatred that was betwixt Bassianus and Geta, Herodian l. 4.
p. 207. Simps. chapter hist. l. 1. cent. 3. p. 27. Pezel. Mellific. histor. tom. 2.
p. 208.
the two sons of Severus the Emperor, which soon betrayed it self upon the
death of their Father; they could not agree about the partage of the Empire;
nor did they omit any means whereby they might supplant each other; they
endeavored to bribe each others Cooks and Butlers to poison their Masters: but
when both were too watchful to be thus circumvented, at last Bassianus grew
impatient, and burning with ambition to enjoy the Rule alone, he set upon his
Brother Geta, gave him a deadly wound, and shed his blood in the lap of Iulia
their Mother; and having executed this villainy, threw himself amongst the
soldiers, told them that he had with difficulty saved his life from the malice
of his Brother: and having parted amongst them all that Severus his Father had
been eighteen years heaping up, he was by them confirmed in the Empire.

6. Anno 1080. Boleslaus King of Poland, Gaulter. tab. Chron. p. 628, 629.
(having slain his Brother S. Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia at the very Altar
as he was in the celebration of the Mass) he suddenly fell into a frenzy, and
such a degree of madness, that he laid violent hands upon himself. It is said
of this King, that he grew into a vehement hatred of the Bishop his Brother,
upon the account of that freedom he took, in reproving him for those horrible
crimes he frequently committed.

7. Tosto and Harold the sons of Earl Godwin falling out, Speeds hist. p. 413.
Chetwind. hist. collect. cent. 7. p. 206. Clarks mir. c. 14. p. 55.
Tosto secretly hyed himself into the Marches of Wales, and near the City of
Hereford at Portaslith, where Harold had a house then in preparation to
entertain the King, he slew all his Brothers servants; and cutting them
piecemeal into gobbets, some of their limbs he salted, and cast the rest into
the vessels of Mead and Wine; sending his Brother word, that he had furnished
him with powdered meats against the Kings coming thither.

8. Robert Duke of Normandy was chosen King of Jerusalem, Speeds hist. p. 44^.
but refused that in hopes to have England; but it is observed that he never
prospered after: his Brother Rufus got the Crown, and when he was dead, Henry
Beauclerke his youngest Brother ascended the throne, and conquered Normandy on
the Vigil of St. Michael; he also put out the eyes of Robert his Brother, and
kept him prisoner in Cardiff Castle twenty six years; where for grief conceived
at the putting on of a new Robe (too little for the King, and therefore sent to
the Duke to wear) he grew weary of his life, as disdaining to be mocked with
his Brothers cast Clothes; and cursing the time of his unfortunate nativity,
refused thenceforth to take any sustenance, and so pined himself to death.

9. Alphonsus Diazius a Popish Spaniard, Clarks mir. c. 14. p. 55.
hearing that John Diazius his Brother had renounced Popery, and was become a
professor of the Reformed Religion, fell into so deep a hatred of him, that
like another Cain, he slew his Brother with his own hands; for which he was not
only not punished, but highly applauded by the Romanists for his heroical
achievement; but he was so haunted and hunted by the furies of his own
Conscience, that he desperately hanged himself at Trent, about the neck of his
own Mule.

T^^n^hfield hist. impro^^^. p. 110, 111.
10. Cleopatra the Wife of Cyricaenus having taken Sanctuary at Antioch after
her Husbands overthrow, her Sister Gryphina the Wife of Gryphus most
importunately ^olicited her death; and though Gryphus much persuaded her
delivery, yet she her self commanded the Soldiers to dispatch her; but a few
days after, the same Gryphina falling into the hands of Cyricaenus, was by him
made a Sacrifice to his Wives Ghost.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 502.
11. Selymus the first having stepped into the throne of his Father, sought the
destruction of all his Brethren; and while his Brother Corcutus lay quiet in
Magnetia, he secretly led an army thither to destroy him; Corcu^us having
notice of it, fled away with two Servants, and all passages by Sea being shut
up, he was glad to hide himself in a Cave by the Seaside, where he lived
miserably upon Country Crabs, and other like wild fruit, till discovered by a
Peasant, he was apprehended; Selymus informed of it, sent one to strangle him,
and bring his dead body to Prusa. The Executioner, a Captain coming to Corcutus
in the dead time of the night, and awaking him out of his sl^ep, told him his
heavy message, that he was sent by his Brother, presently to strangle him.
Corcutus exceedingly troubled with this heavy news, and fetching a deep sigh,
desired the Captain so long to spare his life, until he might write a few
short lines unto his Brother Selymus, which he did readily in Turkish verse,
upbraiding him with his horrible cruelty, and concluding with many a bitter
curse, he besought God to take a just revenge upon him. Being then strangled
his d^ad body was brought to Prusa: Selymus uncovered the face of it, to be
sure that it was he; when seeing this writing in his hand, he took and read it;
and is said thereupon to have shed tears, notwithstanding his cruel nature, and
stony heart.

CHAP. X. Of the Barbarous and Savage cruelty of some men.
THeodorus Gadaraeus who was Tutor to Tiberius the Roman Emperor, observing in
him (while a Boy) a sanguinary nature and disposition, that lay lurking under a
show of lenity and pretense of clemency; was used to call him a lump of clay,
steeped and soaked in blood. His prediction of him did not fail in the event.
This being he who thought of death that it was too light a punishment: for
hearing Carnulius (being in his disfavour) had cut his own throat: Carnulius
(said he) has escaped me: to another who begged of him to dye quickly, he told
him he was not yet so much in his favor, yet even this Artist in cruelty has
since been out-acted by Monsters more overgrown than himself.

Sandersons hist. of K. James. p. 577.
1. The Island of Amboyna lies near Seran, the chief Town of it has also the
same name, and is the Randesvous for the gathering and buying of Cloves: the
English lived in the Town, under the protection of the Castle, held and well
manned by the Dutch. In February 1622. a Iaponer Soldier discoursing with the
Dutch Sentinel of the Castle, was suspected, tortured, and confessed diverse of
his Contrymen contrivers with him, of surprising the Castle; also one Price
an English man, and prisoner with them, accused other English men of the
Factories, who were all sent for, and put to horrid torture, the manner thus;
First they hoysed up the Examinant by the hands with a Cord on a large Door,
fastening him upon two staples of Iron on the top, as wide as the arms could
stretch, his feet hung to the ground stretched out at length and wideness,
fastened beneath the Door; then they wrapped a cloth about his neck and face,
so close that no water could go by: This done, pouring the water leasurely upon
his head, and filling the cloth up to his mouth and nostrils, that he could
not draw breath but must withal suck in water, and so continued till it forced
his inward parts to come out at his nose, eyes and ears; stifling and choking
him into a swound or fainting: but being taken down, they made him vomit out
the water, and so somewhat recovered, they torture him again four or five
times, his body swollen three times bigger, his cheeks like bladders, his eyes
staring out beyond his brows: one Colson thus tortured did still deny their
accusation; whereupon they burn him under his paps, arm-holes, elbows, hands
and feet, till the fat dropped out their Torches, then they lodged him in a
dungeon where his flesh putrified, and Maggots engendered in it, to a horrid and
loathsome condition, till at the end of eight days they were executed, March
1623. At which instant there was a sudden darkness and a tempest, that forced
two Dutch ships out of the Harbor, which were hardly saved. The dead were all
buried in one pit; and one Dunkin (their accuser) stumbled at their grave, and
fell stark mad, and died so within three days after, also a sickness followed
at Amboyna, of which diverse Dutch dyed: The names of the English thus
inhumanely dealt with, were Captain Towerson, Tompson, Beaumount, Collins,
Colson, Webber, Ramsey, Johnson, Fard and Brown.

2. It is in this kind a memorable example that Seneca relates of Piso, Sen. de
ira. l. 1. c. 16. p. 297. Wier. oper. p. 798. lib. de ira. Hakew. Apol. l. 4.
c. 4.. 7. p. 341, 342. Cause. hol. court. tom. 1. l. 3. p. 90.
who finding a Soldier to return from forraging without his comrade (as if he
had slain him whom he brought not back with him) condemned him to death. The
executioner being in readiness, and he stretching forth his neck to receive the
stroke of the Axe, behold in the very instant his comrade appears in the place.
Whereupon the Centurion, who had the charge of the execution, commands the
Executioner to desist, and carries back the condemned Soldier to Piso,
together with his Comrade, thereby to manifest his innocence, and the whole
army waited on them with joyful acclamations. But Piso in a rage gets him up to
the Tribunal, and condemns both the Soldiers, the one for returning without
his Comrade, and the other for not returning with him; and hereunto adds the
condemnation of the Centurion, for staying the execution without warrant, which
was given him in charge; and thus three were condemned to dye for the innocence
of one.

Dinot. mem. l. 5. p. 372.
3. The thirty Athenian Tyrants were of that fierce and cruel disposition, that
they caused the daughters of some of the slain Citizens to dance, in the blood
of their own Parents, who had newly been murdered by them.

Val. Max. l. 9. c. 2. p. 248. Din. mem. l. 5. p. 373. Lips. de constable. l. 2. c.
24. p. 214.
4. Sylla having upon his credit, received to mercy four Legions of the adverse
part, which amounts to twenty four thousand men; he caused them notwithstanding
in public to be cut in pieces, calling in vain for mercy from his treacherous
right hand, which he had reached out as a sure token of it. And when the dying
groans of these men reached to the very Curia it self, where the Senate were
then met, and that the Senators themselves stood in amaze what it might mean:
Let us mind our business, Fathers, said he, a few seditious Fellows are
punished by my orders. Upon which Lipsius justly cries out, I know not what I
should herein chiefly wonder at, whether that a man could so do, or so speak.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 709.
5. Solomon, the Magnificent Emperor of the Turks, having obtained a Victory
over the Germans, finding amongst the Captives a Bavarian Soldier, a man of an
exceeding high Stature, he caused him to be delivered to his Dwarf to be by him
slain, whose head was scarce so high as the others knees: and that goodly tall
man was mangled about the legs for a long time by that apish Dwarf, with his
little Scimiter, till falling down, with many feeble blows, he was at last
slain in the presence of Solomon, who took mavelous pleasure in this scene of
cruelty.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 350, 351, 352.
6. Mahomet the Great, first Emperor of the Turks, after the winning of
Constantinople, fell in love with a most beautiful young Greekish Lady, called
Irene, upon whose incomparable perfections he so much doted, that he gave
himself up wholly to her love. But when he heard his Captains and chief
Officers murmured at it, he appointed them all to meet him in his great Hall;
and commanding Irene to dress and adorn her self in all her Jewels and most
gorgeous apparel (not acquainting her in the least with any part of his design)
taking her hand he led this miracle of beauty into the midst of his Bassaes,
who dazzled with the brightness of this Illustrious Lady, acknowledged their
error, professing that their Emperor had just cause to pass his time in
solacing himself with so peerless a Paragon: But he on a sudden twisting his
left hand in the soft curls of her hair, and with the other drawing out his
crooked Scimiter, at one blow struck off her head from her shoulders; and so at
once made an end of his love, and her life, leaving all the assistants in a
fearful amaze, and horror of an act of that cruelty.

Lon. Theatr. p. 354.
7. Novellus Carrarius, Lord of Padua, enflamed with an ambition of greater
Rule, took away by poison William Scaliger the Lord of Verona and Vincentia,
though a familiar friend of his. And to enjoy Verona the more securely, having
betrayed into his power Antonius and Bruno his two sons, he caused them also to
be slain. Being in the City of Vincentia, he fell in love with a Maid of
singular beauty; and required her parents to send her to him: but being refused
he sent his Guards to fetch her; when brought, he basely violated her chastity;
two days after, he caused her to be cut in small pieces, and sent her so back
in a Basket to her Parents. The father amazed with the atrocity of the fact,
represented the whole to the Senate, beseeching their assistance in so great an
injury: The Senate having deliberated upon the matter, sent the body of the
Maid so inhumanely mangled to the Venetians, declaring that they did commit
themselves to their care and Patronage. The Venetians took upon them their
defense, and having wearied out Carrarius with war, at last penned him up in
Padua, and compelled him to yield himself; being taken, they strangled him,
together with his two sons Francis and William.

8. Vitoldus, Lon. Theatr. p. 352. Sabell. Ex. l. 6. c. 8. p. 352.
Duke of Lithuania, was a man of a truculent and cruel disposition; if he had
destined any to death, his way was to cause them to be sewed up in the skins of
Bears, and so expose them to be torn in pieces by dogs. In all his Military
expeditions, he never was without a Bow in his hand, and if he saw any Soldier
to march out of his rank, he used to shoot him dead with an arrow. This
fierceness of his, that Nation (though otherwise haughty, and a contemner of
death) did so stand in awe of, that many under his dominion (at his command)
without expectation of an Executioner, either hanged or poisoned themselves.

9. Perotine Massey her Husband was a Minister in Q. Mary's Reign, Full. worth.
p. 5. Hantsh.
he fled out of the Land for fear, but she with her mother was condemned to be
burnt as Heretics, which was done July 18. 1556. she was near the time of her
delivery, and by force of the flame her young child burst out of her belly:
this babe was taken out alive by W. House, a by-stander, and by the command of
Elier Gosseline the Bailiff (supreme Officer in the then absence of the
Governor of the Island Guernsey) cast again into the fire, and therein
consumed to ashes: here was a Spectacle without precedent, a cruelty built
three Generations high; for the Grandmother, Mother, and Grandchild suffered
all in the same flame at the same time.

10. Demetrius, Din. mem. l. 5. p. 372.
the King of Syria, after he had overcome Alexander the Jew in a Battle, he led
the Prisoners taken in that fight to Jerusalem, where he caused eight hundred
of them in the midst of the City to be Crucified, the sons in the very sight of
the mothers, and after commanded the mothers themselves to be slain.

11. In the Reign of King Edward the sixth (upon the alteration of Religion)
there was an Insurrection in Cornwall, ^ak. Chron. p. 437. Speed^ hist. p. 833.
and diverse other Countries, wherein many were taken and Executed by Martial
Law. The chief Leaders were sent to London, and there Executed. The Sedition
being thus suppressed, it is memorable what cruel sport Sir William Kingston
made, by virtue of his Office (which was Provost Martial) upon men in misery.
One Boyer, Major of Bodmin in Cornwall, had been amongst the Rebels, not
willingly but enforced: To him the Provost sent word that he would come and
dine with him, for whom the Major made great Provision. A little before dinner
the Provost took the Major aside, and whispered him in the ear, That an
Execution must that day be done in the Town, and therefore required that a pair
of Gallows should be set up against dinner should be done. The Major failed not
of his charge: presently after dinner the Provost taking the Major by the hand,
entreated him to lead him to the place where the Gallows was; which when he
beheld, he asked the Major if he thought them to be strong enough? Yes, said
the Major, doubtless they are: Well then, said the Provost, get you up
speedily, for they are provided for you. I hope, answered the Major, you mean
not as you speak? In faith, said the Provost, there is no remedy, for you have
been a busy Rebel: and so without respite or defense he was hanged to death.
Near the said place dwelt a Miller, who had been a busy actor in that
Rebellion, who fearing the approach of the Martial, told a sturdy Fellow his
servant, that he had occasion to go from home, and therefore bad him, that if
any came to enquire after the Miller, he should not speak of him, but say that
he was the Miller, and had been so for three years before: So the Provost came
and called for the Miller, when out comes the servant, and says, He was the
man: The Provost demanded, how long he had kept the Mill? These three years,
answered the servant: then the Provost commanded his men to lay hold on him,
and hang him on the next Tree: At this the Fellow cried out, That he was not
the Miller, but the Millers man. Nay Sir, said the Provost, I will take you at
your word. If thou be the Miller, thou art a busy knave; if thou art not,
thou art a false lying knave, and howsoever, thou can never do thy Master
better service than to hang for him, and so without more ado he was dispatched.

Dinot. mem. l. 5. p. 377, 378. Chalc. l. 9. p. 119, 121. Knowles Turk. hist.
p. 362, 363.
12. Vladus Dracula so soon as he had gained the Sovereignty of Moldavia, chose
out a multitude of Spear-men, as the Guard of his body: that done inviting to
him as many as were eminent in authority in that Country, he singled out from
them all that he thought had any inclination to a change. All these together
with their whole Families he empaled upon sharp Stakes, sparing neither the
innocent age of young Children, the weak Sex of women, nor the obscure
condition of servants. The Stakes and place where they were set, took up the
space of seventeen Furlongs in length, and seven furlongs in breadth; and the
number of those that were thus murdered, and in this cruel manner, is said to
be no less than twenty thousand.

Excerp. e Polyb. l. 13. p. 675. Kaleigh's hist. World, l. 5. c. 4.. 10. p. 532.
13. Nabis, the Tyrant of Lacedaemon, did utterly extinguish the Spartan name,
forcing into exile as many as were eminent for Riches, or the renown of their
Ancestors, and dividing their wealth, and Wives amongst the mercenary Soldiers
he had hired. Withal he sent murderers after such as he had banished, not
suffering any place of retreat to be safe to them. He had also framed an Engine
or rather an Image of his Wife, which after her name he called Apega: with
admirable art it was fashioned to her resemblance, and was arrayed in such
costly garments as she used her self to wear. As often as the Tyrant cited before
him any of the rich Citizens, with a purpose to milk them of their money, he
first with a long and very civil speech, used to represent to them the danger
Sparta stood in of the Achaeans, the number of Mercenaries he kept about him
for their safety; and the great charge he was at in sacred and civil affairs.
If they were wrought upon by this means, it sufficed: but if otherwise, and
that they were tenacious of their money, he used then to say, Possibly I am not
able to persuade you: yet it is likely that Apega may: and with a show of
familiarity takes the man by the hand and leads him to this Image, which rises
and embraces him with both arms, draws him to her breasts, in which and her
arms were sharp iron Nails, though hidden with her clothes: herewith she
gripped the poor wretch, to the pleasure of the Tyrant, who laughed at his cruel
death.

14. Johannes Basilides, Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 2. c. 88. p. 337.
Emperor of Russia, used for his recreation to cause noble and well deserving
persons to be sewed up in the Skins of Bears, and then himself set Mastives
upon them, which cruelly tore them in pieces. He often invited his
Father-in-law Michael Temrucovins to Banguet with him: and then sent him home
to his Family through the Snow, having first caused him to be stripped stark
naked: sometimes he shut him up in a room in his own house, till he was almost
famished, causing four Bears of extraordinary bigness to be tied at the door to
keep all provisions from him. These Bears at other times he would let loose
amongst the people, especially when they were going to Church: and when any
were killed by them, he said his sons had taken great pleasure in the sport,
that they were happy that perished in this manner since it was no small
diversion to himself.

15. Changhien Chunghus, Martin. de bello Tart. p. 299, 300, etc.
no better than a Thief, at first thrived so fast that after he had vexed the
Provinces of Huquang and Honan in China, and part of that of Nan^^ng and
Kiangsi, he entered the Province of Suchuen in the year 1644. and having taken
the principal City called Chingtu, in the heat of his fury, he killed a King of
the Tamingian race, as also several Princes of that Family; but these
slaughters were but the Preludes of those execrable cruelties he afterward
practiced: For he had certain violent and sudden motions of cruelty, and
Maxims drawn from the very bowels of vengeance it self. For one single man's
fault, he often destroyed all the Family, without respect to Infants or women
with child. Nay many times he cut off the whole Street where the offender
lived, involving in the slaughter the innocent with the guilty. He once sent a
man Post into the Country of Xensi: who glad he was out of the Tyrants hands
returned no more; to revenge this imaginary injury, he destroyed all the
quarter of the City, where he lived, and thought he much bridled his
fierceness, that he did not extinguish the whole City. He had an Executioner
whom he loved above all the rest, for his natural inclinations to cruelty; this
man dying of a disease, he caused his Physician to be killed: and not content
with this, he sacrificed an hundred more of the same Profession to the Ghost of
his deceased Officer. If walking out he saw a Soldier ill clad, or whose
manner of gate, and walking was not so vigorous and masculine as he desired, he
presently commanded him to be killed. He once gave a Soldier a piece of Silk,
who complained to his fellow of the poorness of the piece, of which he being
informed by one of his Spies, he presently commanded him and his whole Legion,
which were two thousand men, to be all Massacred at once. He had in his Royal
City six hundred Praefects, and in three years space there were scarce twenty
of them left, having put all the rest to several kinds of deaths for slight
causes. He had five hundred Eunuchs taken from the Princes of the Tamingian
Family: after he had put all their Lords to death, one of these presuming to
style him not with the title of King (but the bare name of Changhien Chungus)
he caused them all to be slain. One of his chief Priests was apprehended for
some words let fall against him: and he having got together about twenty
thousand of the same Profession, put them all to the sword; and then applauded
himself as if he had done an Heroical action. He levied an hundred and
fourscore thousand all Natives of the Province of Suchuen, Anno 1645. these he
sent before him to take the City of Nanchung in the Country of Xensi; they
finding it difficult, forty thousand of them revolted to the enemy, and so the
rest were forced to return without effecting the design. The Tyrant enraged to
see them retire, commanded the rest of his Army, that had always marched with
him, to cut in pieces these one hundred and forty thousand of the new raised
Suchuens: this horrible butchery lasted four days, in which slaughter he
commanded some to have their skins pulled off and filled with straw, and having
sowed on the head to be carried in the Towns where they were born, to strike
terror into the rest. Not content with this he vexed the whole Province, so
that he left it in a manner desolate: for he perfectly hated it, because he
thought they approved not of his Government. He caused almost eighteen thousand
Students to be brought before him, and at once Massacred them all, saying,
These were they that by their Sophisms solicited the rest to Rebellion. Anno
1646. the Tartars entered the Province of Xensi to give him Battle: and
therefore to leave the Country behind him secure, he commanded all the Citizens
of what quality soever, in his Royal City of Chingtu, to be bound hand and
foot, which was done by his Army; and then riding about them, he viewed them
with less compassion than a Tygre, and cried out, Kill, kill these Rebels: it
is thought there were no less than six hundred thousand souls, most of which
were thus horribly murdered. He besides sent part of his Army to other Cities
about, and killed all those he could lay hands on; and so brought the populous
Province of Suchuen into a vast Wilderness. In his march he caused his
Soldiers to kill all their Wives: himself to give them an example, having
caused two hundred and eighty beautiful Maids that waited upon his three
Queens, to be slain. He killed all his sick or weak Soldiers, to deliver them,
as he said, out of so miserable and ruined a Country. Then he turned his rage
against Cities, Palaces, and Buildings, not sparing his own stately one in
Chingtu; he consumed it, together with a great part of the City by fire; he cut
down all Trees and Woods that they might profit no man. He sunk sixty Ships of
silver in the River of Chiang, having killed the Shipmen to conceal the place.
This done, he marched into the Province of Xensi, to meet the Tartars, where
this Devil incarnate was happily killed.

Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 3. p. 429. Camer. oper. subs. cent. 1. c. 87. p. 405.
Iov. Elog. l. 1. p. 43, 44.
16. Accioline, Tyrant about Taurisium and Padua, surpassed all those in
cruelty, that were called by the name of Christians; he gelded Boys; vitiated
Virgins; cut off the breasts of Matrons; ripped up the bellies of women with
child, casting the births into the fire. Once hearing that Padua had revolted
from him, he caused twelve thousand Paduans in his Army to be slain every man;
being after this beaten in the Field, wounded and made a Prisoner, he tore open
the lips of his wound, that he might die as cruelly as he had lived. The manner
of this Tyrant was like unto that of Caligula, he put men to death by slow
degrees, that they might feel themselves die: so that by diverse ways of
torture he was the death of thirty thousand persons.

CHAP. XI. Of the bitter Revenges that some have taken upon their Enemies.
WHen the Emperor Frederick had newly obtained a most signal Victory in
Hungary, he made a Speech to his Soldiers, whereof this was a part: We have
done, said he, a great Work, and yet there is a greater that still remains for
us to do; which is, to overcome our selves, and to put an end at once to our
Covetousness, and the desire of Revenge. Thus great and generous souls are ever
found to be the most placable, and are easiest appeased: while the weak and
fearful are guilty of the greatest barbarities, as not knowing how to allot any
measure or bounds to their anger.

1. A Student, Zac. Lusit. prax. Adm. l. 3. obs. 79. p. 382.
sufficiently skilled in Philosophy, fell at odds with his fellow Student, boat
him with his ^ists, and gave him a great deal of reproachful language; not
content with this, he meditated a further Revenge. Pretending sorrow for what
had past, he invites him to a Feast, where they should be reconciled: here he
offers him a Cup of Wine, which he had mixed with two ounces of the blood of a
red hair'd man, who but a while before had breathed a vein, he put in sugar in
the sight of all that were present. The other, in token of friendship,
willingly takes off the poison. The next day he was sensible of no
inconvenience; but after a third was past, he seemed to have some dotage in his
discourses; at length he became a mere fool, and so continued while he lived:
no kind of remedy being found any whit available to him.

2. In the Isle of Majorca, Treasury of ancient and modern times, l. 2. c. 10.
p. 135.
there was a Lord of a Castle, who amongst others kept a Negro slave, and for
some fault of his had beaten with some severity; the Villain Moor watching his
opportunity, when his Master and the rest were absent, shut the door against
him; and at his return he thus acted his damnable Revenge: while his Lord stood
without demanding entrance, he reviled him, violated the honor of his Lady,
threw her and two of his young children out at the Castle windows, and stood
ready to do the like with the third and youngest child: The miserable father,
who had beheld the ruin of all his Family but this one, begged of his slave to
save the life of that little one; which the cruel slave refused, unless he
would cut off his own nose: the pitiful Parent accepted the condition, and had
no sooner performed it, but the bloody Villain first cast the infant down
headlong, and then himself in a barbarous bravery, thereby to elude the
desired Revenge of his abused Lord.

3. As I went from Rome with my company, Camer. oper. subs. cent. 1. c. 84. p.
390.
says Camerarius, passing through the Marquisate of Ancona, we were to go
through a City called Terni: As we entered the City, we saw over the gate, upon
an high Tower, a certain Tablet, to which were fastened (as at first it seemed
to us) a great many Batts or Reermice; we thinking it a strange sight, and not
knowing what it meant, one of the City, whom we asked, told us thus: There was,
said he, in this City two Noble, Rich, and mighty houses, which of a long time
bare an irreconcilable hatred one against the other: their malice passed from
father to son, as it were by inheritance, by occasion of which many of both
houses were slain and murdered. At last the one house not many years since,
resolved to stand no more upon murdering one or two of the adverse party by
surprise, but to run upon them all at once, and not to leave one of them alive.
This bloody Family secretly gathered together out of the Country adjoining,
with their servants, and such other Bravo's as many Italians keep in pay to
employ in the execution of their Revenges; these were privily armed, and had
notice to be ready at a word. About midnight they seize upon the person of the
Governor of the City, and leaving Guards in his house, go on silently to the
house of their enemy, disposing Troops at the end of every Street. About ten of
them take the Governor in the midst of them, as if they had been the Archers
of his Guard, whom they compelled by setting a Poynard to his throat, to
command speedy entrance; he caused the doors to be opened, for they seeing the
Governor there, made no refusal: which done, they call their Accomplices that
stood not far off, put the Governor into safe keeping, enter, and kill man,
woman and child, yea and the very horses in the stable. That done, they force
the Governor to command open the City gates, and so they depart, and disperse
into private places amongst their friends; some fled to the next Sea Ports, and
so gat far off: but such as staid any whit near, were so diligently searched
for, that they were found, drawn out of their holes, and put to death with
grievous tortures; after which their hands and feet being cut off, were nailed
to that Tablet, says he (which you saw as you entered the City) as a lesson to
Posterity. The Sun having broiled those limbs so fastened, makes Travelers,
that know nothing of the Tragedy, to suppose they are Reermice.

Athenei Deip^osaph. l. 12. c. 11. p. 541. A^lia^. var. hi^t. l. 9. c. 8. p.
237, 238.
4. Dionysius, the younger, a Tyrant of Sicily, came to Locris, the birth place
of his Mother Doris; there he took the most stately and capacious house in all
the City; he caused all the rooms of it to be strewn with a sort of wild
Beteny and Roses; and having utterly cast off all shame, sent for several of
the Locrensian Virgins, whom having stripped naked he tumbled with upon a bed,
being also naked himself. But the incensed Citizens took a sharp revenge upon
him (for this affront) in the persons of his Wife and Children: for having
inflicted a thousand torments upon these innocent persons; at last they thrust
Needles into their fingers, betwixt their flesh and the nails, and then cut
their throats; after which, they chopped their flesh into small pieces, of which
they boiled some, cursing all those that would make dainty to eat of it; the
rest they dried and grinded, that it might be swallowed down in pottage by poor
people; that which remained they cast into the Sea; their bones were beaten in
Mortars, and the powder mingled with those horrible Messes; and the pottage,
which they had made of humane flesh. As for the Tyrant himself, he was reduced
to that necessity, that he went up and down playing upon a Cymbal, to procure
food for his belly, and died in that miserable state.

5. Conrade Trincio, Lord of Fulingo, in the Duchy of Spoleto, hearing that
the Captain of the Castle of Nocera, Camer. oper. subcis. cen. 1. c. 84. p. 392.
had slain Nicholas Trincio, his brother, upon suspicion of Adultery, came and
besieged this Captain, and held him so strait to it; that being out of all hope
to save himself, he first cut the throats of his Wife and Children, and then
threw himself down from an high Tower, that he might not fall alive into the
power of Conrade. Who seeing himself frustrated of the means to torment him
according to his intention, set upon the kindred, allies, friends and
familiars; and as many of them as he could take, he tortured without all mercy;
and after he had murdered them, plucked out their bowels; chopped their bodies
into small parcels; hung up their quarters in the Highways; their bowels and
guts upon bushes, and places of show, for Travelers to gaze on: behaving
himself with that savage and outrageous cruelty, that no man can call it a
punishment or revenge, but must study to find out a fit name for it, and after
all, perhaps, shall lose his labor.

6. Altobel, Camer. ibid. p. 392.
a Citizen of Tudertum (which some call Todi) in the Duchy of Spoleto, made
War upon his fellow Citizens, seized upon the City and State. After which he
behaved himself with great cruelty amongst them, both toward rich and poor.
Many in-roads he also made up on the Neighbor Territories; spoiled and risted
some other Cities near Tudertum. At last he was defeated and taken Prisoner by
the Popes Army: forthwith he was bound stark naked to a Post in the Market
place, to the end that all they whom he had wronged might revenge themselves
upon him, in what manner they pleased: Thither run the Mothers, whose Children
he had killed, who, like so many wild beasts, begin to tear his body with their
greedy Teeth; others wound, cut, and slash him; some in one sort, some in
another; the fathers, kindred and friends of such as he had Massacred, pulled
out his eyes, heart, entrails, not forgetting any point of extreme rigor,
which they made him not to feel. He with a courage desperately obstinate,
endured these torments with constancy, saying, between times, That no new thing
had happened unto him; and that long since he had foreseen within himself this
punishment. Being dead they put an end to their fury, by cutting his body into
morsels, which (like flesh in a Butchers Shop) were sold by weight, and
afterward eaten by those that bought them. Leander, in his description of
Italy, says, this fell out in his time.

7. The Duke of Limbourg deceasing without issue, Camer. ibid. c. 87. p. 407.
the Duke of Brabant, and the Earl of Gelders, strove about the succession,
each of them pretending right to it; when they could not agree they fell to
arms: at last the Duke of Brabant wan the Victory in a Battle, and took,
amongst other Prisoners, the Bishop of Collen, who followed the party of the
Earl of Gelders. This Bishop, after he had been Prisoner to the Earl of
Heynault the space of seven years, was set at liberty upon certain conditions
which he accepted: and being ready to return home, he prayed the Earl that he
would honor him so far, as to convey him into his Country: The Earl willingly
condescended, and having brought him almost to Collen, not mistrusting any
thing, he saw himself upon the sudden enclosed with a Troop of Horsemen, which
took him and delivered him to the Bishop, who locked him up in a Prison, where
he ended his days: And the more to vex and torment him, the Bishop caused an
Iron Cage to be made and anointed all over with honey, which was laid out to
the Sun, the Earl being locked fast within it. This was done in the memory of
our Fathers, says Philip Camerarius.

Zuinger. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 204.
8. Ranimirus the base son of Sanctius the great, was fetched out of a Monastery
by those of Tarracon Anno 1017. and made King. After which in an expedition
against the Moors, having taken his shield in his left and his lance in his
right hand, he was bid by some Nobles about him to take the bridle of his
Horse; how can I, said he, unless you reach it to be held in my teeth, seeing
both my hands are already full. At this the Nobles fell into a laughter, and he
thereat conceived such displeasure against them, that having sent for eleven of
the chief of them to Ostea, he caused their heads to be struck off, only
saying, the Fox knew not who he played with.

Zuin. ibid. p. 209.
9. Anaximenes one of the Master; and Companions of Alexander the Great, that he
might revenge himself of Theopompus the son of Damostratus wrote a malevolent
history exquisitely expressed, this he sent forth under the name of Theopompus
(whose style he had imitated to the very life) and dedicated it to the
Athenians and Lacedaemonians; by which means he raised bitter and potent enemies
to Theopompus throughout all Greece.

Zuin. ibid. l. 2. p. 246.
10. C. Cornisicius a Poet and Emulator of Virgil, when he saw the Soldiers
often flying, he called them Helmetted Hares; who so far resented this term of
ignominy, that upon the first opportunity they all deserted him in fight, and
so he was slain upon the place by the enemy.

Su^ton. in Vitellio, p. 301.
11. Vitellius the Emperor upon the coming of Vespasian, was seized upon by the
people of Rome; they bound his hands behind him, put a halter about his neck,
tor^ his garments, and drew him half naked into the Forum; they taunted him all
along the street called the Sacred way, with the most opprobrious spe^ches.
They drew backward the hairs of his head, as is usual with heinous
Malefactors; they underser his chin with the point of a Sword, that he might
carry his face aloft to be seen of all men; some cast dirt and dung upon him,
others called him Incendiary and Gormandizer, others upbraided him with
defaults in his body; at the last he was cruelly put to death at the Gemonies
with little blows, and by slow degrees; thence he was drawn with a hook, and
his dead body thrown in Tiber.

Xiphil. in. Augusto, p. 27. Wier. oper. p. 828. lib. de Ira. Plut.
12. M. Tullius Cicero had made some invective Orations against M. Antonius, for
which when Antonius came to be of the Triumvirate, he caused him to be slain.
Fulvia the Wife of Antonius not satisfied with the death of that great Orator,
caused his head to be brought to her, upon which she bestowed many curses; she
spat in the face of it, she placed it upon her lap, and opening the mouth, drew
out the tongue, and pricked it in diverse places with a needle; and after all
caused it to be set up in a high and eminent place, over those Pulpits from
whence the Orators use to speak their Orations to the people. Reynolds Treat.
pass. chap. 15. p. 150.

Wier. oper. p. 829. l. b. de Ira. Heyl. Cousin. p. 107.
13. Pope Stephen the seventh, having been hindered from the Popedom by Formosus
his Predecessor, when after his death he was made Pope, he caused his dead
body to be taken out out of the Sepulcher, to be stripped of the Pontificial
Ornaments, clothed in secular garments, and to be buried without the Church;
he also caused his fingers to be cut off, and to be cast into the River for the
Fish to devour. When Sergius the third came to be Pope, he caused the body of
the same Formosus to be drawn out of its second burying place, to be beheaded
in the Forum or Marketplace, and then to be cast into the River Tiber, to
gratify Lotharius the King of France, who thus hated the dead Formosus, for
that by his means the Empire was translated from the French to the
Berengarians: others say that Sergius did this to Formosus, because he had also
opposed him in the Election.

14. Cambyses the son of Cyrus King of Persia, Herodot. l. 3. p. 161. 167.
Dinoth. memo^ab. l. 5. p. 353.
sent to Amasis King of Egypt, that he should send him his Daughter: Amasis
knowing that the Persian would use her but as one of his Concubines, not his
Wife, and withal dreading his power, he sent Nitetes the Daughter of Apries
the former King, adorned after the manner of his Daughter. The Daughter of
Apries made known this deceit to Cambyses at her first coming, who was
thereupon so incensed, that he resolved upon a war with Egypt: and though
Amasis was dead before he could take Memphis; yet as soon as he had, he went
thence to the City Sais, enters the Palace of Amasis, caused the body of him to
be taken out of his Sepulcher, which done, he would have it to be scourged,
pulled, beaten, pricked and used with all the contumely he could devise: this
being done till the ministers of his pleasure were wearied, and seeing the
salted Carcass opposed their blows, so that no particle fell from it thereby,
he at last caused it to be cast into the fire, where it was burt to ashes.

15. Cyrus warring against Tonyris Queen of the Massagetes, Herodot. l. 1. p.
88, 89. Dinoth. Memorab. l. 5. p. 313. Justin. hist. l. 1. p. 23.
had by a stratagem taken her Son Spargapises, for he had left part of his army
with plentiful provisions of meats and wines, on purpose to be seized upon.
These troops Spargapises had cut in pieces, and that done, set himself and his
army to feasting and carowsing; and while they were secure asleep, and
enfeebled by drinking, Cyrus set upon them, killed and took most of them:
Spargapises brought before Cyrus desired him that he might be unbound; when he
was loosed and his hands at liberty (grieved for the discomfiture of his army)
he slew himself. After which Tomyris in a great battle overthrew the forces of
Cyrus, and having found him amongst the dead, in revenge of her Sons death, she
caused his head to be cut off, and to be thrown into a vessel full of humane
blood; with this bitter sarcasm, say some, Satiate thy self with blood which
thou have so much thirsted after: but Herodotus thus, Thou have destroyed my
Son taken by guile, while I am alive and victorious, but as I threatened I will
satiate thee with blood.

16. A Noble Hungarian having found one in bed with his Wife, Wier. oper. p.
^63. lib. de jejun. commenti^.
committed the Adulterer to prison there to be famished to death; and that he
might the better attain his end, he caused a roasted Hen ever and anon to be
let down to his nose, that by the smell of the meat his appetite might be
excited to the greater eagerness, but he was not suffered to taste of it; only
it was presented to make his punishment the more bitter: when the miserable
creature had endured this manner of usage for six days; the seventh it was
found that he had eaten the upper part of his own arms.

Dict. Cret. l. 5. p. 128.
17. When Paris was dead, Helena was married to another of the Sons of Priamus
called Deiphobus; and Troy being taken by the Greeks, Menelaus her first (from
whom she had been stolen) acted his revenge upon this later Husband with great
severity; for he cut off his ears, and arms, and nose; and at the last when he
had maimed him all over and in every part, he suffered him to dye in exquisite
torments.

Lo^ic. Thea. p. 643. Manst. Cos. l. 2. p. H^yl. Cosm. p. 144.
18. Fridericus Barbarossa the Emperor, with a strong army besieged Millaine
that had withdrawn it self from under his obedience, and had lately affronted
his Empress on this manner. The Empress desirous to see the City, and (not
fearing to meet with any disrespect from a place under her Husbands
jurisdiction) had put her self into it. The mad people seize upon her, set her
upon the back of a Mule with her face to the tail-ward, and the tail in her
hand instead of a bridle; and in this contumelious manner put her out at the
other gate of the City. The Emperor justly incensed, urged the besieged to
yield, who at last did, and he received them to mercy upon this condition, that
every person who desired to live, should with their teeth take a Fig out of the
genitals of a Mule, as many as refused were immediately to be beheaded: diverse
preferred death before this ignominy; those that desired life did what was
commanded; whence came that scornful Proverb in Italy, when putting one of
their fingers betwixt two others, they cry Eccolasico, behold the fig.

Wier. oper. p. 830. lib. de ira.
19. There are no greater instances of revenge, says Sabellicus, than in the
factious Cities of Italy, where the Chiefs of the one faction falling into the
hands of the other, it was a great favor to be beheaded or strangled. Pontanus
adds, that he has heard his Grandmother tell, how in certain mortal differences
betwixt some families, one of the opposite faction being taken, he was
immediately cut into small gobbets, his liver was thrown upon the hot coals,
broiled and divided into little morsels, and distributed amongst their friends,
invited to breakfast for that purpose; after which execrable feeding, there
were brought cups not without the sprinklings of some of the gathered blood;
then followed congratulations amongst themselves, laughter, jests and witty
passages to season their viands: and to conclude, they drank to God himself, as
being the favourer of their so remarkable a revenge.

Boltons 4. last things. p. 238. Clarks mir. c. 5. p. 22. Reynolds on passions.
c. 15. p. 150.
20. A certain Italian having his enemy in his power, told him there was no
possible way for him to save his life, unless he would immediately deny and
renounce his Savior: the overtimerous wretch in hope of mercy did it, when the
other forthwith stabbed him to the heart, saying that now he had a full and
noble revenge, for he had killed him at once both body and soul.

Rushw. hist. coll. p. 650.
21. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham was stabbed at Portsmouth, Saturday,
August 23. 1628. by John Felton; it is said the Villain did it partly in
revenge, for that the Duke had denied him some Office he made suit for; nor is
it improbable, for I find him thus characterised: he was a person of a little
stature, of a stout and revengeful spirit; who having once received an injury
from a Gentleman, he cut off a piece of his little finger, and sent it with a
challenge to the Gentleman to fight with him; thereby to let him know, that he
valued not the exposing of his whole body to hazard, so he might but have an
opportunity to be revenged.

22. Anno 1500. at such time as Tamas Shaw ruled Persia, Herb. Trau. l. 2. p.
160.
the City Spahawn (the metropolis of all Persia surfeiting with luxury, refused
not only to contribute reasonably to the Kings occasions (at that time molested
with the Turks and Tartars) but audaciously withstood his desired entrance. A
rebellion so insufferable, as made him swear a revenge scarce to be
paralleled. With fury he assaults, in a rage enters it, firing a great part,
and in all hostile severity pillaging each house: and to conclude, regarding
neither the outcries of Old Men, weak Women nor innocent Children; in two days
he made headless three hundred thousand of those late Spahawnians: and from
Tamerlains rigid example at Damascus erects a Trophy (a Pillar of their Heads)
as a memorial of their disloyalty, and his bitter revenge.

CHAP. XII. Of the great and grievous Oppressions, and unmercifulness of some
men, and their punishments.
IN Scotland, in a place called Kile, there is a Rock about twelve foot high
and as much in breadth: It is called the Deaf Craig, for though a man call
never so loud, or shoot off a Gun on the one side, yet his fellow on the other
side cannot hear the noise. Oppressors may be resembled to this stone, their
hearts are as hard, and their ears are as deaf to the cries of the poor; they
are so too to the denunciation of the just judgments of God against them,
otherwise so many of them had not come to the like lamentable ends.

1. John Cameron was Bishop of Glasgow, Spots. hist. Char. of Scotl. l. 2. p.
114. Clarks mir. c. 33. p. 115.
a man given to violence and oppression, who committing many deeds full of
cruelty and covetousness, especially upon his own Tenants and Vassals, made as
the fame goes, a fearful and unhappy end: For in the year 1446. the night
before Christmas Day as he lay asleep in his house of Lockwood some seven miles
from the City of Glasgow, he seemed to hear a voice summoning him to appear
before the Tribunal of Christ, and give an account of his doings; thereupon he
awaked, and being greatly terrified, did call his servants to bring lights and
sit by him; he himself took a book in his hand and began to read, but the voice
being again heard, struck all the servants with amazement; the same voice
calling the third time far louder and more fearfully, the Bishop after a heavy
groan was found dead in the bed, his tongue hanging out of his mouth: this
reported by Buchanan almost in the same words, I thought good to remember, as a
notable example of Gods judgment against the crying sin of Oppression.

2. The magnificent Mosque or Temple in Cairo of Egypt was thus built. Drex.
Eter. prod. c. 1.. 27. p. 40.
Assan Bassa, a man of a crafty and covetous disposition, desiring to gain
himself a name in the world, by some famous structure which yet should be of
little expenses to himself; took this course: He caused it to be proclaimed all
abroad that his purpose was to build a Glorious Temple to the Honor of God;
and that he might have the more happy success in this enterprise of his, he was
determined to bestow a liberal Alms upon all comers of what place or country
soever; appointing at the same time both the day and place for the distribution
of this his largess. The fame of this brought an innumerable company of people,
not only from all the parts of Egypt, but also from other Kingdoms to Cairo.
Assan against their coming had provided a mighty number of Shirts and Coats;
now as many as came to partake of his bounty, he caused to be received in a
large and ample Court, which one by one (and no otherwise) were ordered to pass
from thence by several little doors into another Court of equal extent; in
their passage every man was stripped of his own Clothes, and instead of them
forced to receive a Shirt and Coat of his providing. The subtilty of the
business was this, that whatsoever so many thousands of persons had brought
along with them to defray their expenses, might be deposited in one certain
place appointed by himself; for he well knew the manner of men in those
Countries, was to sow up in their Shirts or Caps, all the money they carried with
them. At last a doleful and lamentable cry arose amongst the spoiled people,
imploring Assan to restore them their own clothes: he deriding at once both
their clamours and tears, caused all their garments to be cast into a mighty
fire prepared for the purpose; from whence after they were burnt, was taken up
such a quantity of Silver and Gold, as sufficed to begin and finish that noble
structure he had resolved upon. But observe after what manner the insolent
oppression of this man was punished. The Turkish Emperor being informed of the
wickedness of Assan, sent Ibraim Bassa with his letters to him, wrapped up (as
the manner is) in black silk: the tenor of which was this: As Soon as this our
Messenger is come to thee, our will and pleasure is, that thou send us by him
thy head unto Constantinople. In vain was it to dispute the command of his
Lord, and thus the miserble man perished.

Speeds hist. p. 13.
3. William the Conqueror for his game, and the pleasure he took in hunting,
enforested thirty miles in Hamshire, pulled down thirty six Parish Churches,
and dispeopled all the place, chasing the inhabitants from the places of their
inheritance. But the just hand of God was visible and remarkable upon his
posterity, for this his grievous oppression: for in this very New Forest, his
two Sons, Richard by a pestilent air, and King William Rufus by the shot of an
Arrow, and his Grandson Henry, son of Duke Robert by hanging in a bough, as
Absalom, came to their untimely ends.

Clarks mir. c. 33. p. 114.
4. Anno Dom. 1570. at Ry^ in Sussex, there was a strange example of Gods
judgments upon a covetous oppressive Gentleman, and one that desired to grind
the faces of the Poor. This Gentleman living near the Sea, had a Marsh, wherein
upon poles Fishermen used to dry their Nets; for which he received of them
yearly a sufficient sum of money: but at length not being content with it, he
caused his servants to pluck up the poles, not suffering the Fishermen to come
upon his ground any longer, except they would compound at a larger rate; but it
came to pass the same night, that the Sea breaking in, overwhelmed all his
Marsh; which says Hollinshead continues in that manner to this very day.

5. Lucullus the Roman Consul visiting the Cities of Asia, Plut. in vita
Luculli. p. Clarks mir. c. 15. p. 583 59.
found the poor country afflicted, and oppressed with so many evils and
miseries, as no man living could believe, nor tongue express: for the extreme
and horrible covetousness of the Farmers, Customers and Roman Usurers did not
only devour it, but kept the people also in such miserable bondage and
thraldom; that Fathers were forced to sell their goodly Sons, and Daughters
ready for marriage, to pay the interest and use money, of that which they had
borrowed to pay their fines withal; yea they were forced to sell the Tables
dedicated to the Temples, the statues of their gods, and other Ornaments and
Jewels of their Temples; and yet in the end they themselves were adjudged for
bondslaves to their cruel Creditors, to wear out their days in miserable
servitude. And yet the worst of all was the pain and torment they put them to
before they were so condemned; for some they imprisoned and cruelly racked,
others they tormented upon a little brazen Horse, set them in the Stocks, made
them stand naked in the greatest heat of Summer, and on the Ice in the deepest
of Winter; so that bondage seemed to them a relief of their miseries, and a
rest from their torments. Lucullus found the Cities of Asia full of such
oppressions, whereof in a short time he exceedingly eased them.

6. King John of England was a great oppressor: Baker. chro. p. 101, ^ 106.
on a time a Jew refusing to lend this King so much money as he required, the
King caused every day one of his great teeth to be pulled out by the space of
seven days, and then the poor Jew was content to give the King ten thousand
marks of silver, that the one tooth which he had left might not be pulled out.
The same King assaulting the chastity of the Daughter of Robert Fitzwater
called Mawd the fair, and by her repulsed, he is said to send a messenger to
give her poison in a poached Egg, whereof she died: not long after, he himself
had but little better fate, being poisoned at Swinestead Abbey.

7. Luther reports that he being at Rome a great Cardinal died, Luth. coll^.
Mensal. p. 82.
and left behind him great store of money. Before his death he had made his
Will, and laid it in a Chest where his money was. After his death the Chest was
opened, and therein by the money was found written in Parchment, Dum potui
rapui, rapiatis quando potestis.
I scraped together while I could,
That you should do so too, I would.


8. Five Brethren of the Marshalls successively Earls of Pembrook dyed
issueless. Speeds hist. p. 539.
Which Matthew Paris attributes to the judgment of God upon them, for their
Fathers iniquity, who detained from the Bishop of Firning certain Manours which
he had violently taken from him.

9. Lewis the eleventh, Trenchfeld hist. improved p. 64.
King of France, having been a great oppressor of his Subjects by excessive
Taxes, and enforced Contributions; when he grew old resolved to redress that
and other mischiefs, whereby they had been oppressed; but was in a short time
after this purpose prevented by death.

10. Anno Dom. 1234. in the reign of King Henry the third, there was a great
dearth in England, Clarks mir. c. 33. p. 117. Stowes c^r.
so that many people died for want of victuals. At which time Walter Gray
Archbishop of York, had great store of Corn, which he had hoarded up for five
years together; yet in that time of scarcity refused to relieve the poor with
it; but suspecting lest it might be destroyed with Vermin, he commanded it to
be delivered to Husbandmen, that dwelt in his Manors, upon condition to
return him as much New Corn after Harvest: but behold a terrible judgment of
God upon him for his covetousness and unmercifulness to the poor. When men came
to one of his great Stacks of Corn near to the Town of Rippon, there appeared
in the sheaves all over, the heads of Worms, Serpents and Toads; so that the
Bailiffs were forced to build a high wall round about the Stack of Corn, and
then to set it on fire, lest the venomous creatures should have gone out, and
poisoned the Corn in other places.

CHAP. XIII. Of the bloody and cruel Massacres in several places, and their
occasions.
THe Naturalists tell us of a Serpent (who is therefore called Haemorrhois)
that wheresoever he bites, he makes the man all over bloody. It seems his
poison has a particular command over the blood, so as to call it all into the
outward parts of the body. The vulgar rout and headstrong multitude, when once
it is enraged, is such another kind of Serpent* wheresoever the scene of its
insolency is, it makes it all over bloody. This unbridled torrent bears all
down before it; and being transported with its own fury, it knows no difference
of age, sex or degree, till it has converted a flourishing place into an
Akeldama, or a field of blood.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 40. p. 188.
In the year 1506. in Lisbon, upon the tenth day of April, many of the City went
to the Church of Saint Dominicks to hear Mass: On the left side of this Church
there is a Chapel much reverenced by those of the Country, and called Jesus
Chapel. Upon the Altar there stands a Crucifix, the wound of whose side is
covered over with a piece of Glass. Some of those that came thither to do their
devotions, casting their eyes upon this hole, it seemed to them that a certain
kind of glimmering light came forth of it: Then happy he that could first cry a
miracle* and every one said that God showed the testimonies of his presence. A
Jew that was but lately become a Christian there, denied that it was any
miracle; saying it was not likely that out of a dry piece of Wood there should
come such a light. Now albeit many of the standers by doubted of the miracle;
yet hearing a Jew deny it, they began to murmr; calling him wicked Apostate,
a detestable enemy to Jesus Christ; and after they had sufficiently revile^ him
with words, all the multitude foaming with anger, fall upon him, pluck off the
hair of his head and beard, tread upon him, trail him into the Churchyard,
beat him to death, and kindling a great fire cast the dead body into it. All
the residue of the people ran to this mutinous Company: there a certain Friar
made a Sermon, wherein he vehemently egged on his auditors to revenge the
injury that our Lord had received. The people mad enough of themselves, were
clean cast off of the hinges by this Exhortation: besides this two other Friars
took and held up a Cross as high as they could, cried out, Revenge, Heresy,
Heresy, down with wicked Heresy, and destroy the wicked Nation. Then like
hungry Dogs they fall upon the miserable Jews, cut the throats of a great
number, and drag them half dead to the fires, many of which they made for the
purpose. They regarded not Age or Sex, but murdered Men, Women and Children;
they brake open doors, rush into rooms, dash out Childrens brains against the
walls; they went insolently into Churches, to pluck out thence the little
Children, old Men and young Maids, that had taken hold of the Altars, the
Crosses and Images of Saints, crying misericordia, mercy, mercy; there they
either so murdered them presently, or threw them out alive into the fire. Many
that carried the port and show of Jews, found themselves in great danger, and
some were killed, and others wounded, before they could make proof that they
had no relation to them. Some that bare a grudge to others, as they met them
did but cry Jews, and they were presently beaten down, without having any
liberty or leisure to answer for themselves. The Magistrates were not so hardy
as to oppose themselves against the fury of the people: so that in three days
the Cutthroats killed above two thousand Jewish persons. The King
understanding the news of this horrible hurly burly, was extremely wroth, and
suddenly dispatched away Jacques Almeida, and Jacques Lopez, with full power to
punish so great offenses, who caused a great number of the seditious to be
executed. The Friars that had lift up the Cross, and animated the people to
murder, were degraded and afterward hanged and burnt. The Magistrates that had
been slack to repress this riot, were some put out of Office, and others fined;
the City also was disfranchized of many privileges and honors.

2. In the 1281 year since the birth of our Savior, De Ser. hist. of France.
p. 143. Heyl. Cosm. p. 88. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 552. Camer. oper.
subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 83. p. 385. Gault. tab. Chron. p. 683.
when Charles of Anjoy reigned in Sicily, his Soldiers all French men, lying
in Garrisons in the Cities, grew so odious to the Sicilians, that they studied
of nothing so much as how to be revenged, and to free themselves from the yoke
of the French. The fittest and most resolute in this business, was a Gentleman
called John Prochyto. This Gentleman being justly provoked by the French, who
had forced his Wife, and finding himself much favored by the Sicilian Lords
and Gentlemen, begins by their counsel and support to build a strange design,
for the entrapping of all the French at once, and abolishing for ever their
memory in Sicilia. All which was so secretly carried for eighteen months, that
ever since it has been looked upon as a prodigious thing, that a design of
that nature could possibly be so long and safely concealed by so many people,
and so different in humor. The watchword or signal was, that upon Easter Day,
when the Bell should begin to toll to Even-song, all the Sicilians should
presently run to arms, and joining together with one accord, should fall upon
all the French throughout Sicilia. Accordingly all the Inhabitants of the I^le,
were gathered together at the appointed hour, and armed ran upon the French,
cut all their throats without taking so much as one prisoner, or sparing the
Children, or Women gotten with Child by the French, that they might utterly
extinguish the whole race of them. There were slain eight thousand at that
time; and there escaped but a very small number, who fled into a Fort called
Sperling, where for want of victuals they were all starved to death. This
bloody Massacre, is to this day called the Sicilian Even-song.

Davil. hist. l. 5. p. 374. Heyl. Cosm. p. 176. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 7. p.
552. Camer. oper. subcisiv. Cent. 1. c. 83. p. 387.
3. Anno 1572. was the bloody Parisian Mattins, wherein was spilt so much
Christian blood, that it flowed through the streets, like rain water in great
abundance: and this butchery of Men, Women and Children, continued so long,
that the principal Rivers of the Kingdom were seen covered with murdered
bodies; and their streams so dyed and stained with humane blood, that they who
dwelt far from the place where this barbarous act was committed, abhorred the
waters of those Rivers; and refused to use either it, or to eat of the fish
taken therein for a long time after. This Tragedy was thus cunningly plotted:
A peace was made with the Protestants, for assurance whereof, a marriage was
solemnized, between Henry of Navarre, chief of the Protestant party, and the
Lady Margaret, the Kings Sister. At this Wedding, there assembled the Prince of
Conde, the Admiral Coligni, and diverse others of chief note; but there was not
so much Wine drank, as blood shed at it. At midnight the Watch-bell rung: the
King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde are taken prisoners, the Admiral
murdered in his bed, and thirty thousand at the least, of the most potent men
of the Religion, sent by the way of the Red Sea to find the nearest passage to
the Land of Canaan.

Camer. oper. subcis. Cent. 1. c. 83. p. 389.
4. In the year 1311. and in the time of Pope Clement the fifth, all the order
of the Knights Templars being condemned at the Council of Vienna, and adjudged
to dye; Philip the Fair, King of France, urged by the Pope, and out of a
covetous desire of store of Confications, gave way for men to charge them with
crimes; and so these Innocents were put to death. The Great Master of the
Order, together with two other of the principal Persons, one whereof was
Brother to the Dolphin of Viennois, were publicly burnt together.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 646. Lonic. Thea. p. 342. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 552.
5. Mithridates, King of Pomus, once a friend, and confederate of the Romans,
and took their part against Aristonicus, who would not consent to the admission
of the Romans, unto Pergamus, according to the last will of King Attalus: yet
afterward conceiving an ambitious hope to obtain the Monarchy of all Asia; in
one night he plotted and effected the death of all the Roman Soldiers,
dispersed in Anatolia, to the number of one hundred and fifty thousand.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 176.
6. The Massacre of the Fr^nch Protestants at Merindol and Chabriers, happened
in the year 1545. the instrument of it being Mini^r, the President of the
Council at Aix. For having condemned this poor people of Heresy, he mustered a
small army, and set fire on the Villages: they of Merindol seeing the flame,
with their Wives and Children fled into Woods, but were there butchered, or
sent to the Galleys. One Boy they took, placed him against a Tree, and shot him
to death with Calivers. Twenty five which had hid themselves in a Cave, were in
part stifled, in part burnt. In Chabriers, they so inhumanely dealt with the
young Wives and Maids, that most of them dyed immediately after. The Men and
Women were put to the sword, the Children were rebaptized. Eight hundred men
were murdered in a Cave, and forty Women put together into an old Barn, and
burnt: yea such was the cruelty of these Soldiers to these poor Women, that
when some of them had clambered to the top of the Barn* with an intent to leap
down, the Soldiers beat them back again with their Pikes.

7. King Etheldred, Bake. Chro. p. 18. Heyl. Cosm. p. 317.
the younger Son of Edgar, being oppressed and broken by the Danes, was forced
to buy his peace of them at the yearly tribute of ten thousand pounds, which in
a short time after was inhanced to forty eight thousand pounds; which moneys
were raised upon the Subjects by the name of Danegelt. Weary of these exactions
(sending forth a secret commission into every City of his Kingdom) he plotted
warily with his Subjects, to kill all the Danes as they slept in their beds;
which accordingly was put into execution, on St. Brices night, November 13.
Anno 1012.

8. That Tribe of the Tartars, Heyl. (...) p. 848.
who are called Hippophagi, from their feeding upon Horseflesh; made an
expedition into Asia the greater, leaving Albania behind them they fell into
Media. Phraortes the then King encountered them, but was overthrown; finding
therefore he was not able to remove them by force, he assayed it by policy,
persuading them to look Southward, as unto richer Countries: hereupon full of
prey and presents, they marched toward Egypt;: but were met in Syria by
Psamniticus the Egyptian King, out^ying the Median (for he was the richer King)
he loaded them with gifts and treasure, and sent them back again into Media,
from whence they came; where for many years they afflicted that people, and the
neighboring Provinces, doubling their tributes, and using all kind of
insolences; till in the end Cyaxares, the Son and Successor of Phraortes,
acquainting some of his most faithful Subjects, with his design, caused the
better part of them to be plentifully feasted, made them drunk and slew them,
recovering thereby the possession of his whole estate.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Excessive Prodigality of some Persons.
AT Padua in Italy they have a stone, Burt. M^l. part 1.. 2. p. 112.
called the stone of Turpitude; it is placed near the Senate House; hither it
is that all Spendthrifts, and such as disclaim the payment of their debts are
brought; and they are enforced to sit upon this Stone, with their hinder parts
bare; that by this note of public infamy and disgrace, others may be terrified
from all such vain expenses, or borrowing more than they know they are able to
pay. Great pity it (...) that there is not such a Stone in all the Countries of
the World; or at least some other happy invention, whereby it might be
provided, that there should be fewer followers of such pernicious examples, as
were those that are hereafter related.

Treasury of Ancient and Mod. times, l. 8. c. 20. p. 781
1. Cresippus, Son to Chabrias a noble Athenian, was so prodigal, that after he
had lavishly consumed all his goods and other estate, he sold also the very
stones of his Fathers Tomb, in the building whereof the Athenians had disbursed
one thousand Drachms.

Id. ibid. p. 780.
2. Paschisyrus, King of Crete, after that he had spent all that he had, and
could otherwise make, he at length sold his Kingdom also; and lived afterward
privately in the City of Amathunta in Cyprus, where he dyed miserably.

Sa^ell^e. Ex. l. 8. c. 7. p. 457. F^lgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 1. p. 1145.
3. Heliogabalus the Emperor, was poss^ssed rather with a madness, than excess
of prodigality; he filled his Fish Ponds with Rose Water; he supplied his Lamps
with the precious Balsam, that distills from the Trees in Arabia; he wore upon
his Shoos Pearls and Precious Stones, engraven by the hands of the most
skillful Artists; his Dining room was strewed with Saffron, and his Portico's
with the dust of Gold: and he was never known to put on any Garment a second
time, whether it was of the richest Silk, or woven with Gold.

Beard. The. of Gods judgments, c. 21. p. 6^. Clarks mir. c. 61. p. 241.
4. A young Prodigal, the Son of a rich and wealthy Citizen, and newly left the
Heir of his deceased Father, did determine at once to please and gratify his
five Senses; and to that purpose he allowed to the delight of every several
Sense, an hundred pounds. In the first place therefor he bespake a curious
fair Room richly hanged and furnished, with the most exquisite Pictures to
please his Eye; he had all the choycest Music that could be heard of, to
please the Ear; he had all the Aromatic and Odoriferous Perfumes, to content
his Smell; all the Candyes, Sweetmeats, Preserves and Junkets, even to the
stretching of the Confectioners Art, to delight his Taste: lastly a fair and
beautiful young Lady, to lodge with him in a soft Bed; and the finest Linen
that could be bought, to accommodate his Touch, all which he enjoyed at one
time. He spent thirty thousand pounds in three years; and after all, swore if
he had three times more than ever he had, he would spend it all to live one
week like a God, though he was sure to be damned in Hell the next day after.

Plut. in Dem^trio, p.
5. King Demetrius having raised a Tax upon the Athenians, of two hundred and
fifty Talents; when he saw all that mass of money, laid on a heap before him, he
gave it amongst his Curtezans, to buy them Soap.

Su^ton. l. 4. c. 37. p. 187.
6. C. Caligula, in less than a year, scattered and consumed those infinite
heaps of Gold and Silver, which Tiberius his Predecessor had heaped up,
amounting to no less than seven and twenty hundred millions of Sesterces.

Joseph. de bello I^^uico, l. 5. c. 13. p. 696. T^^it. hist. l. 2.
7. Of Vitellius, Josephus yields this Testimony, that having reigned but eight
months and five days, he was slain in the midst of the City; whose luxury and
prodigality, should he have lived longer, the Empire could not have satisfied.
And Tacitus also says of him, that holding it fully sufficient, and not caring
for the future, within the compass of a few months, he is said to have set
going nine hundred millions of Sesterces; which sum, Budaeus having cast it up,
thus pronounces of it; I affirm, says he, is no less than twenty five hundred
thousand Crowns.

8. When Nero had given so unreasonable a sum, Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 9.. 5. p.
423. Pezel. Mellific. tom. 2. p. 158. Paraei Medulla, tom. 1. p. 358.
that his Mother Agrippina thought it fit to restrain his boundless
prodigality, She caused the whole sum to be laid upon the Table, as he was to
pass by, that so the sight of it might work him to a sense of his folly; but he
(as it seems) suspecting it to be his Mothers device, commands presently so
much more to be added to it; and withal was heard to say aloud, I knew not that
I gave so little. To Tiridates, during his abode in Italy, by the space of nine
months, he allowed daily eight hundred thousand Sesterces; and besides at his
parting, for a farewell, he bestowed on him no less than an hundred millions.
The rest of his prodigal gifts were not disproportionable thereunto: so that in
the whole, he cast away in prodigal needless gifts, two and twenty hundred
millions of Sesterces: besides which, Menecrates a Fiddler, and Specillus a
Fencer, he rewarded with the Patrimonies, Houses and Estates of such men as had
been triumphers in the City of Rome: he said they were poor and sordid that
could keep account of their expenses.

9. Demades the Athenian, Zuin. Thea. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 626.
as he was a rich, so doubtless a prodigal person; for whereas the Athenians
had made a law, that no stranger should dance in their Theater; and in case any
should be found so to do; he who set forth the Plays, should pay a fine of one
thousand Drachms. Demades not so much regarding this law, as his own pleasure,
hired at once one hundred strangers to dance in his plays, and for them paid
the fine of one hundred thousand Drachmes.

10. Agustinus Chiessius, Hale. Gold. Remains. Ser. 2. p. 27.
a Banker or mony-merchant at Rome, at the christning of his Son, entertained
Pope Leo the tenth, upon the River Tiber, and all the foraign Ambassadors,
with the Nobles of the City, with all exquisite and curious fare, dished out in
costly Plate; and upon the changes of every Service (and they were not a few)
all the meat, Plate and all was cast away into the River, and new and costlier
still supplied in the room of them.

11. Stephen Langton, Bish. Godw. p. 108.
Archbishop of Canterbury, translated the bones of Thomas Becket, with so great
expense at the solemnity, that neither he, nor four of his successors were able
to recover the debt it cast his See and Church into.

12. Poppaea Sabina, Plin. l. 11. c. 41. p. 348. Clarks mir. c. 102. p. 471.
the Wife of Nero, was at once so proud and prodigal, that her Mules had
bridles and furnitures of Gold, were shod with Silver, and sometimes with Gold:
and she kept five hundred female Asses always about her Court, in whose Milk
she used to bath her body, that she might preserve the delicacy of her skin.

13. Philotas tells us, Plut. in Antonio, p. 928.
that he was one of the retainers of the eldest Son of M. Antonius that he had
by Fulvia, and used to Sup with him amongst others of his Friends at such time
as he Supped not with his Father. It chanced one night there was a loquacious
Physician at Supper, that was troublesome to all the Guests by his importunity;
which when Philotas observed, he set upon him with this Sophisme. To him that
has a kind of Fevor cold water may be administered: but every man that has ^
Fevor, has a kind of Fevor; therefore to every man that has a Fevor, cold
water may be administered: The Physician was amazed and struck dumb with this
fallacy; the Son of Antonius laughed, and was so well pleased therewith, that
pointing to a Cup-board standing on the side, and repleat with Cups and huge
Dishes of Plate, he said, I give thee all that Philotas. He thanked him for his
bounty, but thought of any thing rather, than that so little a Boy had the
power of bestowing so great a largess. Soon after one of the Servants took down
the Plate, bestowed them in a Vessel, and required Philotas to seal it up.
Philotas refusing, and fearing to do it: what are you afraid of, said the
Servant? know you not that he who is the giver is the Son of Antony, and may
give away as much Gold. Yet if you will be ruled by me, accept of the worth of
them in money, lest possibly his Father may be desirous of some one piece of it,
for the Antiquity or Curiosity of the workmanship.

Patricii de Regno and Regis instit. l. 4. tit. 9. p. 245.
14. Caius Julius Caesar, was extremely profuse in his expenses, while as yet
but a private person; insomuch that before he was called to any place of
Magistracy, he had not only consumed his own estate, but had also contracted a
debt of no less than three hundred talents; so that when he was sent forth as
Praetor into Spain, he wittily said, that he wanted three hundred talents to be
worth nothing; meaning, that no less a sum would enable him to pay his debts.

Fullers chapter hist. p. 337. Clarks mir. c. 126. p. 646.
15. King Henry the eighth at the dissolution of Abbeys, gave away large shares
almost to every one that asked, as appears by a pleasant story. Two or three
Gentlemen, the Kings Servants, waited at the door when the King was to come
out, with a purpose to beg of his Highness a large parcel of Abbey-lands. One
Mr. John Champernoune another of his Servants seeing them, was very inquisitive
to know their Suit, but they would not impart it to him. This while out comes
the King, they kneel down, and so does Mr. Champernoune (having an implicit
faith that Courtiers would beg nothing hurtful to themselves) they present
their Petition, the King grants it, they render him humble thanks, and so does
Mr. Champernoune. Afterward he requires his share, they deny it; he appeals to
the King, the King avowes his equal meaning in the largess; whereupon his
Companions were fain to allot him the Priory of St. German in Cornwall, valued
at two hundred forty three pound eight shillings per Annum; so that a dumb
beggar met with a blind giver, the one as little knowing what he asked, as the
other what he gave.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Prodigious Luxury of some Men in their Feasting.
IT is an old saying, Leges bonae ex malis moribus procreantur, that good Laws
have their original from the bad manners, and evil way of living in that people
for whom they are made. By which we may easily observe, that the Romans were a
people anciently and exceedingly addicted to all kind of Luxury, in that there
were so many Laws made to repress their proneness to the practice of this Vice.
There was the Lex Orchia, Fannia, Didia, Licinia, Cornelia and diverse others;
yet all these too little: for according as their riches increased, so did their
inclination grow so forward this way, till at last in a monstrous sensuality,
they had drowned and swallowed up, even the last remainders of their primitive
virtue. This pernicious example of theirs has since been followed by all sorts
of men, the Prelates themselves not excepted; and the luxury of these our days
is grown to that height, that we seem to exceed all that have gone before us:
so that we want no instances, only let a Roman have the honor to march first.

1. L. Aelius Verus made a Supper wherein he expended sixty hundred thousand
Sesterces; Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 7. p. 457. Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 1. p. 1147.
and which enhances the wonder, there were no more than twelve persons who at
that time feasted with him; he presented these twelve at their departure, with
Silver, Gold, Crystalline and Myrrhine Vessels; for all these sorts of Cups had
been made use of in that Feast; he also gave each of them a Mule adorned with
the richest Trappings, to carry them home to their several Houses. Now to
enquire with what delicates he treated these Guests, whom he so liberally
rewarded for their Company, is a curiosity only befitting such persons as
rather desire to hear of things monstrous, than any ordinary instances of
luxury.

2. Not long since there was a Prelate stranger (whose name I will conceal for
the honor of his profession) who one day invited to a feast all the Nobility
of Avignon, History of wonderful secrets in Nature. c. 25. fo. 79.
as well Men as Women; where for a beginning of his Pomp, at the very entry
into the Hall, where the Feast was appointed, lay spread upon a curious board,
a great Beef with his head cut off, and his entrails taken out, having in his
belly a whole Heart or Deer of the like dressing, stuffed full of little Birds,
as Quails, Partridges, Larks, Pheasants and other like, the same being so
cunningly conjoined in the belly of the second beast, that it seemed some
excellent Mathematician had been the Workman thereof. But that which made the
matter both strange and wonderful, was that all the Birds so assembled did
roast and turn all alone upon a broach, by certain Compass and Conduits without
the help of any man. For the first course, his Guests were presented with store
of curious Pastry, wherein were enclosed many little Birds quick, who as soon
as the Crust was taken off, began to fly about the Hall. There were besides,
sundry sorts of silver Plate full of Jelly so subtly conveyed, that a man
might have seen in the bottom a number of little Fishes quick swimming and
leaping in sweet water, to the great delight and pleasure of the Assistants.
Neither is it less strange that all the Fowls which were served upon the Table
were larded with Lamprey, though it was in a season when they cost half a Crown
apiece. But that which seals up the Pomp of this proud Prelate, was, that there
was reserved as many quick birds, as he was served with dead Fowls at his
Table, so that if there were a Pheasant sent up dressed, there were Gentlemen
appointed who presented another alive: and all to show the magnificence of the
Priest. The consummation of his delights was that the Gentlemen which served
him had their faces covered with a Veil, lest their breath should offend him or
his meat. All which I have set down not for imitation, but rather that all good
Christians should detest this prodigious example of unheard of Luxury.

Fuller. Chapter hist. l. 4. cent. 15. p. 193.
3. Anno Dom. 1470. in the tenth year of King Edward the fourth, George Nevill
brother to the great Earl of Warwick, at his installment into his
Archbishopric of York, made a prodigious Feast to all the Nobility, most of
the prime Clergy, and many of the great Gentry: wherein by his Bill of Fare,
three hundred quarters of Wheat, three hundred and thirty Tuns of Ale, one
hundred and four Tuns of Wine, one Pipe of Spiced Wine, eighty fat Oxen, six
wild Bulls, one thousand and four Weathers, three hundred Hoggs, three hundred
Calves, three thousand Geese, three thousand Capons, three hundred Piggs, one
hundred Peacocks, two hundred Cranes, two hundred Kids, two thousand Chickens,
four thousand Pigeons, four thousand Rabbets, two hundred and four Bittours,
four thousand Ducks, four hundred Hersews, two hundred Pheasants, five hundred
Partridges, four thousand Woodcocks, four hundred Plovers, one hundred Curleus,
one hundred Quails, one thousand Egrets, two hundred Rees, above four hundred
Bucks, Does, and Roe-bucks, one thousand five hundred and six hot Venison
Pasties, four thousand cold Venison Pasties, one thousand dishes of Gelly
parted, four thousand dishes of plain Gelly, four thousand cold Custards, two
thousand hot Custards, three hundred Pikes, three hundred Breams, eight Seals,
four Porpuses, and four hundred Tarts. At this Feast the Earl of Warwick was
Steward, the Earl of Bedford, Treasurer, the Lord Hastings, Comptroller, with
many more Noble Officers; Servitors one thousand, Cooks sixty two, Kitcheners
five hundred and fifteen. But seven years after the King seized on all the
Estate of this Archbishop, and sent him over Prisoner to Callis in France,
where Vinctus jacuit in summa inopia, he was kept bound in extreme poverty,
Justice thus punishing his former Prodigality.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 743. Clarks mir. c. 61. p. 243.
4. Anno Dom. 1543. Muleasses, King of Tunis, frighted by the coming of
Barbarossa, as he was passing out of Sicilia, to have met the Emperor at
Genoa, he was by contrary Winds driven first to Cajeta, and afterward to
Naples, where he was by the Viceroy honorably received, and an house
appointed for him richly furnished. The Neapolitans wondering at the strange
attire of the people, with the manner of their feeding, and curious plenty of
all manner of sweet perfumes: For into every dish they put in odours of
exceeding price, so that it was well known that a Peacock, and two Pheasants
dressed after the Kings Kitchen, cost above an hundred Ducats: so that not
only the dining room (when they were carved up) but all the house was so filled
with the strange and fragrant smell, that all they that dwelt near thereabouts
were partakers of unusual and delicate perfumes.

5. Clodius Aesopus, Plin. nature. hist. l. 10. c. 51. p. 297.
the Tragedian, had a huge Charger or Platter, wherein he served up at the
board all manner of singing birds, and such as could imitate the voice of man:
the birds cost him six hundred Sesterces apiece, and the whole Charger six
hundred thousand: and this he did, not that herein he sought to sooth his
palate, but only to have a name that he had eaten the resemblers of man's voice.

6. A. Vitellus had a famous Platter, Xiphil. in Vitellio p. 152. Sueton. l. 9.
c. 13. p. 298. Lon. Theatr. p. 666.
which for the huge bigness of it, was called Minerva's Buckler, in this he
blended together the Livers of Gilt-heads, the brains of Pheasants and
Peacocks, the Tongues of Phenicopters, and the milts of Lampreys, brought from
the Spanish and Carpathian Seas, by the Masters of his Ships and Galleys. This
Platter is said to have cost a Million of Sesterces, all of massy Silver, and
was long preserved, till Adrian the Emperor caused it to be broken in pieces,
and scattered about. This Vitellius Feasted usually three times (sometimes
four) a day, every sitting being valued at four hundred thousand Sesterces; and
he was able with the more ease to go through all these courses of eating, by a
continual custom of vomiting, which, it seems, amongst these Bellygods was a
continual practice.

7. L. Lucullus was a great Statesman, Plut. i^ Luc. p. 519. Sabell. Ex. l. 8.
c. 7. p. 456. Bruson. Fat. l. 3. c. 33. p. 247.
whom M. Tullius, and Pompey the Great, meeting by chance in the Marketplace
(out of a desire to know what his daily fare might be) they invited themselves
to sup with him that night, but upon condition he should give no warning
thereof, for that they desired not to put him to charge. He began at first to
put them off with excuses for that time, wishing them rather to agree on the
next day; but they importuning him for the present, he demanded of them,
whether then they would suffer him to give order in what room they should sup?
That they permitted, whereupon he presently dispatches away a Messenger in
their hearing, that he would that night sup in Apollo. After some time the
Guests came, and find all things ready in a pompous and Princely manner, but
knew not the true reason, all the cunning lying in the word Apollo; for he had
so disposed of his Rooms, that being distinguished by names, their provision
and charge (when he sat in them) was accordingly allotted to them. By which
means his Steward and Cook (as soon as they heard the Room named) knew
presently what to provide. Now amongst the rest, that which bore the name of
Apollo was chiefest; the sum allotted thereunto, being (as Plutarch says)
fifty thousand Drachmes, which Budaeus casts up to five thousand Crowns.

8. This Age of ours has beheld Petrus Riarius Savonensis, Fulg. Ex. l. 9. c.
1. p. 1549. Lon. Theatr. p. 667.
of the Order of the Minorites (whom Pope Julius the fourth made Cardinal)
using garments of cloth of Gold, though he was at home. Nor did he think it
sufficient that his Beds were covered with Counterpanes of Gold, but he also
caused the very Ticking and Pillows to be made of Silk and cloth of Gold. He
did the necessities of Nature in Silver. When Eleonora of Arragon was marr^ed
to Hercules, the Duke of Esti, and was departing to Ferrara, he made her a
Feast at Rome, wherein were an excessive number of dishes, repleat with the
most precious and delicate meats: betwixt Services were delightful Shows; it
lasted for seven hours; and all the Servitors, that they might answer the
greatness of the Feast, changed their garments as often as they renewed the
Service. That which was brought off the Table, was cast among the people. A
particular commemoration of the sumptuousness would be too tedious: and lest he
should seem to be wanting to the severity of his Order (I mean the contempt of
it) he maintained Teresia his Concubine, not only openly, but also with such
cost (as may well be collected from hence) that she went in Shoes, that were
beset with Pearls. It is said of this man, that in two years he spent in
luxurious vanity, no less than three hundred thousand Crowns.

Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 7. p. 378. Martial. l. 3. Epig. 22. p. 119. Senec. ad
Helv. c. 10. p. 422.
9. Apicius, a famous Belly-god, had laid up ninety Millions of Sesterces for no
other purpose but only to be sacrificed in his Kitchen, besides many great
gifts of Princes, and a mighty Revenue from the Capitol. Being in debt, he
began at last (though sore against his will) to look into his reckonings, and
take an account of his Estate, and found that (all being cast up) he had yet
left unto himself clear, the sum of ten Millions of Sesterces: and thereupon,
as if he should have been forced (poor man) to live in a hunger-starved
condition, to redeem himself from this imaginary poverty he poisoned himself.

Plin. l. 9. c. 5^. p. 267. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 7. p. 382.
10. Julius Caesar, the Dictatour, borrowed of Hirtius six hundred Lampreys by
weight, for the furnishing out of a triumphal Supper, and by weight to be
repaid: and if such were his store of Lampreys, what shall we conceive of his
other Provisions?

Lamprid. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 7.. 4. p. 382.
11. Heliogabalus was of that excess in diet, that at one Supper he caused to be
served in, the heads of six hundred Estridges, only for eating of their brains;
being near the Sea, he never tasted fish; but in places farthest distant from
the Sea, all his feeding was upon fish. In the inland he fed the Country
Clowns with the melts of Lampreys and Pikes. To be brief, he exceeded all the
Suppers of Vitellius and Apicius.

Se^ec. de cons. ad Hell. c. 9. p. 421. Sueton. l. 4. c. 37. p. 187. Hak. Apol.
l. 4. c. 7.. 4. p. 382.
12. C. Caligula was such a one, says Seneca, whom nature seems to have brought
forth, to show what effects the greatest vices joined with the greatest fortune
could produce. This man, says Suetonius, in thriftless expenses exceeded the
wits of all the prodigals that ever were, inventing most monstrous kinds of
meats and suppers. The most Orient Pearls that were to be gotten, he dissolved
in Vinegar, and swallowed down; he set before his guests bread and Victuals of
Gold, commonly saying, That a man had need be thrifty or Caesar. Yet
notwithstanding, says Seneca, being assisted with the inventions of all his
Companions, he could hardly find the means to spend the Tributes of all the
Provinces at one supper, though it was so much the easier, considering he
practiced the dissolving and swallowing of Pearls.

Plin. not. hist. l. 33. c. 11. p. 481. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 7.. 4. p. 375.
13. In the days of Claudius, the Emperor, Drusillanus a slave of his,
surnamed Rotundus, the Treasurer under him in the higher Spain, had a Silver
Charger of five hundred pound weight, for the working whereof there was a Forge
framed aforehand of set purpose; besides which he had eight more of a smaller
size, weighing fifty pounds a-piece: now how many Slaves must there be to carry
up these Vessels, and what Provisions that required such Plate?

14. M. Antonius having but twelve Guests, Plut. Athen. Delp. l. 4. c. 1. p.
128. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 7.. 8. p. 391.
provided eight Boars, one set to the fire after each other, that whenever he
came in (sooner or later) one, at least, might be served up in its prime. And
yet was he exceeded herein; for one Caranus, as says Athenaeus, set before
every Guest a Boar, in a particular dish; what the unheard of magnificence of
this Macedonian was in his Provisions, and gifts to his Guests in this his
Nuptial Feast, is too tedious to relate, as it is set down by the same
Athenaeus.

15. Two Pearls there were together the fairest and richest that have ever been
known in the World, Plin. not. hist. l. 9. c. 35. p. 257. Plut. in Antonio p.
Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6.. 4. p. 369. Bru^. Fat. l. 3. c. 33. p. 247. Fulg. Ex. l.
9. c. 1. p. 1137.
and those possessed at one time by Cleopatra, the last Queen of Egypt, which
came into her hands by the means of the great Kings of the East, and were left
to her by descent. This Princess, when Marcus Antonius had strained himself to
feast her with all the sumptuousness and magnificence he could, in the height
of her Pride and wanton bravery, she began to debase the expense and provision
of Antony; and when he demanded how it was possible to go beyond his
magnificence? She told him that she would spend upon him in one Supper an
hundred thousand Sesterces. Antony laid great wagers upon it, and she bound it
again. The morrow after it was to be tried, and the wager won or lost.
Cleopatra made him a Supper upon the appointed day, sumptuous and Royal enough,
but no extraordinary Service seen upon the board, whereat Antony laughed her to
scorn, by way of mockery, demanding to see the Bill of Fare, and an account of
the particulars. She again said, All that had been served up already, was but
the overplus above the rate in question, affirming that yet in that Supper,
she would make up the whole sum: yea her self alone would eat above that
reckoning, and her own supper should cost six hundred thousand Sesterces; and
with that commanded the second Service to be brought in. The Servitors, as they
had in charge before, set before her only one Crewet of sharp Vinegar, the
strength whereof is able to dissolve Pearls: now she had at her ears hanging
those two most precious Pearls, the singular and only Jewels of the World, and
even Natures wonder. As Antony looked wistly upon her, and expected what she
would do, she took one of them from her ear, and so soon as it was liquified,
drank it off: and as she was about to do the like by the other, L. Plancus the
Judge of the wager, laid fast hold on it with his hand, and withal pronounced,
That Antony had lost the wager: whereat Antony fell into a passion of anger.
After, this brave Queen was taken Prisoner, and deprived of her Royal State,
the other Pearl was cut in twain, and in memory of that one half Supper (that
it might remain to Posterity) it was hung at both the ears of the Statue of
Venus, in the Temple of Pantheon at Rome.

16. And yet, Plin. not. hist. l. 9. c. 35. p. 255. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6.. 4.
p. 370.
says the same Pliny, as Prodigal as these were, they shall not go away with
the prize, in this kind, but shall lose the name of the chief and principal in
superfluity of expense. For long before their time, Clodius, the son of Aesop,
the Tragedian, the only heir of his father (who died exceeding wealthy)
practiced the like in Pearls of great price: so that Antony need not be over
proud of his Triumvirate, seeing he has to match him in all his magnificence,
one little better than a Stage Player, who upon no wager at all laid (and that
was more Princely, and done like a King) but only in a bravery, and to know
what taste Pearls had, mortified them in Vinegar, and drank them up: and
finding them to content his Palate wondrous well, because he would not have
all the pleasure by himself, and know the goodness thereof alone, he gave every
Guest at Table one Pearl a-piece to drink: in like manner the same Author calls
this Clodius, a young man, not only of a ruinous, but of a mad kind of Luxury;
and (says he) he threw away a vast Inheritance with all the speed he could, as
if it had been an insupportable burden.

CHAP. XV. Of the Voraciousness of some great Eaters, and the Swallowers of
Stones, etc.
WHereas we should eat to Live, and to enable these frail bodies of ours to a
more cheerful attendance upon the Soul in her several Functions: many of these
who are hereafter mentioned, may seem to have lived for no other purpose than
to eat. Something may be said in favor of those whom Disease has brought to a
Dog-like appetite: but nothing in the behalf of those Gluttons, whose paunches
have been so immeasurably extended, only by a bestial custom, and an inordinate
desire to gratify their own sensuality.

Din. mem. l. 6. p. 448
1. Aristus, an Arcadian, at one supper usually eat three Chenix of Bread,
besides flesh and other provisions, which would abundantly satisfy six
ordinary persons at a meal.

Ath. Deip. l. 10. p. 413. Bruy. de ^e cib. l. 3. c. 6. p. 158.
2. Astydamas, the Milesian, who had three times overcome in the Olympic Games,
being once invited by Ariobarzanes, the Persian, to Supper, promised that he
would eat up all that which was provided for the whole company, which he also
performed, devouring all that was the appointed provision for nine men.

Ath. Deip. l. 10. p. 414.
3. Herodotus, a Trumpeter of Maegara, usually eat six loaves of half a strike
apiece, and twenty pounds of such flesh as came to hand, drinking therewith two
Congies of Wine.

Ath. Deip. l. 10. p. 415.
4. There was a woman of Alexandria, says Athenaeus, that used to eat at once,
twelve pounds of flesh, and above four pounds of Bread, and together with it
drank up ten pints of Wine.

Capitol. in Maxim. p. Lips. Epist. Misc. Epist. 51. p. 456.
5. The Emperor Maximinus used, says Capitolinus, to eat in one day forty
pounds of flesh, sixty, says Cordus, and to drink with it an Ampho^a of Wine,
Capital measure, which is eight Congies; I should fear to speak this, says
Lipsuis, but that it is affirmed by a good Author, and one most worthy of
credit.

Capitol. Lips Epist. M^s^. Epist. 51. p. 457. Sab. E. l. 10. c. ^0. p. 587.
6. Clodius Albinus, the Emperor, would eat so many Apples, Quantum ratio
humana non patitur, as no man would believe: he would eat for his breakfast,
five hundred of those Figgs the Greeks call Callistruthia; Cordus adds an
hundred Peaches of Campania, ten Melons of Ostia, twenty pound weight of the
Grapes of Lovinium, one hundred Gnat-sappers, and four hundred Oysters. Out
upon him, says Lipsuis, God keep such a Plague from the Earth, at least from
our Gardens, which he, together with the Herb Market, would swallow up and
devour at once.

7. King Hardiknute, Bak. Chron. p. 25.
as Harold his brother for his swiftness was surnamed Harefoot, so he for his
intemperance in Diet, might have been surnamed Swinesmouth, for his Tables were
spread every day four times, and furnished with all kinds of curious dishes, as
delighting in nothing but gormandizing and swilling: but he had soon the reward
of his intemperance, for in a solemn Assembly and Banquet at Lambeth, revelling
and carousing, he suddenly fell down without speech or breath, after he had
Reigned only two years, and was buried at Winchester.

8. Theagenes Thasuis, Ath. Deip. l. 10. p. 412.
a Wrastler, was of that voracity, that in one only day, without any other
assistance, he would devour a whole Ox.

9. Milo, Ath. Deip. l. 10. p. 412. Bruy. de re cib. l. 3. c. 5. p. 157.
Marsil. Cag. de sanit. tuend. l. 1. c. 6. p. 19.
the Crotonian, was also a notable devourer: he used to eat twenty pounds of
flesh, and as many of bread in a day, and drank three Choas of Wine. In the
Olympic Games, when he had taken up an Ox on his shoulders and born him a
Furlong; he alone the same day eat him up.

10. The Emperor Aurelianus was delighted exceedingly with one Phagon, Vopis.
in Aurel. c. 50. p. 898. Lips. Epist. Misc. Ep. 51. p. 457.
who eat so very much, that in one day at his Table he would devour a whole
Boar, an hundred Loaves, a Sheep, and a Pigg, and drink above an Orca; I know,
says Lipsius, it was a Wine Vessel, and bigger than the Amphora, but how much
I know not.

11. Will you have an example, Lips. ibid. p. 457. Iov. Elog. l. 1. p. 57. Din.
l. 6. p. 549. Camer. oper. subcis. cen. 2. c. 30. p. 129. Schot. Phys. curios.
l. 3. c. 12. p. 458. Iohnst. hist. of wonders. things of Nature, Class. 10. c.
2. p. 31.
says Lipsius, little beyond the memory of our fathers? Vguccio Fagiolanus was
one of the Tyrants of Italy, and his abode, for the most part, was at Lucca,
till he was forced away: being therefore a banished man, and withal aged; he
boasted at the Table of Canis Scaliger in Verona, that when he was young, he
could eat four fat Capons, and as many Partridges, the roasted hind quarters of
a Kid, a breast of Veal stuffed, besides all kind of Sawces at one Supper: this
he did to lay his hunger, what if he had eat for a wager?

12. Anno 1511. the Emperor Maximilian, being at Augusta, there was presented
to him a man of a prodigious bigness, and incredible strength and stomach, Cag.
de san. tuend. l. 1. c. 6. p. 19. Don. hist. med. mirab. l. 2. c. 2. p. 194.
Schot. Phys. curios. l. 3. c. 12. p. 458.
insomuch that at one meal he would eat a whole Sheep or Calf raw, and when he
had so done, professed he had not satisfied his hunger. It Is said he was born
in the Northern parts, where, by reason of the cold, men use to have great
stomachs, although the edacity of this man is almost incredible.

13. Nicolas Wood of Harrisom, in the County of Kent, Tail. Poems, p. 142.
Full. worth. p. 86. Kent. Sands notes on Ovid's Met. l. 8. p. 162.
Yeoman, did with ease eat a whole Sheep of sixteen shillings price, and that
raw, at one meal; another time he eat thirty dozen of Pigeons. At Sir William
Sydleyes he eat as much as would have sufficed thirty men; at the Lord Wottons
in Kent he eat at one meal fourscore and four Rabbets, which number would have
sufficed an hundred threescore and eight men, allowing to each half a Rabbet;
he suddenly devoured eighteen yards of black pudding, London measure; and when
at once he had eat threescore pound weight of Cherries, he said they were but
wash-meat. He made an end of a whole Hogg at once, and after it (for fruit)
swallowed three pecks of Damsons, after he had broken his fast, having (as he
said) eaten one pottle of Milk, one pottle of Pottage, with Bread, Butter and
Cheese. He eat in my presence, says Taylour, six penny wheaten Loaves, three
six-penny Veal Pies, one pound of sweet Butter, one good dish of Thorne-back,
and a shiver of a peck household loaf of an inch thick, and all this in the
space of an hour; the house yielded no more, and so he departed unsatisfied.
One John Dale was too hard for him at a place called Lenham, he laid a wager he
would fill Woods belly with good wholesome victuals for two shillings; and a
Gentleman that laid the contrary waged, that when he had eaten out Dales two
shillings, he should then forthwith eat up a good Sirloin of Beef: Dale bought
six pots of mighty Ale, and twelve new penny white loaves, which he sopp'd in
the Ale, the powerful fume whereof conquered this conqueror, and laid him in a
sleep, to the preservation of the roast Beef, and unexpected winning of the
wager. He spent all his Estate to provide provant for his belly, and though a
Landed man, and a true labourer, died very poor about the year 1630.

Schenck. obs. med. l. 3. obs. 4. p. 304. Cag. de santuend. l. 1. c. 6. p. 22.
Iohnst. not. hist. clas. 10. c. 2. p. 312.
14. Cornelius Gemma speaks of a woman in his time, who for one moments space
was not able to forbear eating or drinking, if she did it would be with her as
if she were strangling: This distemper which she had almost from her childhood,
increased upon her with her age. Being dead, her belly was opened, and thence
almost twenty pounds of sat taken; her Liver was found turgid with blood and
spirits, intensely red and of an incredible bigness.

Schenck. obs. med. l. 3. obs. 6. p. 304.
15. Tobias Fisher, an eminent Physician, says, he knew a man of fifty years of
age, who from his youth was wont, with a strange kind of greediness, to take in
all sorts of food, and as speedily to eject them. He adds, that this kind of
hunger did seize him at stated times, that his strong appetite lasted not above
twenty days, that for so many days after he had a loathing of all things, and
that the rest of the year he eat sparingly, and lived in good health.

Crol. Basil. chym. praef. ad monit. p. 128.
16. Anno 1606. there was at Prague a certain Silesian, who, for a small reward
in money, did (in the presence of many persons) swallow down white stones to
the number of forty six: they weighed well near three pounds; the least of them
was of the bigness of a Pigeons egg, so that I could scarce hold them all in
my hand at four times: this rash adventure he diverse years made for gain, and
was sensible of no injury to his health thereby.

Mr. Boyls Exp. philos. par. 2. Essay 3. p. 86.
17. Not long ago there was here in England a private Soldier (who, for ought I
know, is yet alive) very famous for digesting of stones; and a very inquisitive
man (that gave me the accuratest account I have met with concerning him)
assures me, that he knew him familiarly, and had the curiosity to keep in his
company for twenty four hours together, to watch him, and not only observed
that he eat nothing but stones in that time (or fragments of them of a pretty
bigness) but also that his grosser excrement consisted chiefly of a sandy
substance, as if the devoured stones had been in his body dissolved and
crumbled into sand.

18. Crantzius tells of a certain Stage Player, who commonly eat at once as
much as would suffice ten men, Zhin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 279.
by which means he had attained to a mighty corpulency; the King of Denmark
being informed of him, and that he could do no more than another man, caused
him to be taken and hanged up as a devourer of the laborers food, and a
public annoyance.

19. Firmius Seleucius (the same through whose conduct Egypt revolted from the
Emperor Aurelianus) did in one day eat up a whole Ostridge, Sabel. Ex. l. 10.
c. 10. p. 587.
which is the greatest of all birds that fly; he cat up several of those
Horse-fishes that are found in the River Nilus; and used to swim with safety
amongst the Crocodiles, having first his body all over anointed with the fat of
them.

20. Anno 1594. being called from Collen to Reinback, Fabrit. obs. chirurg.
cent. 4. obs. 31. p. 312.
to the care of a Noble person there, who lay sick of a grievous disease,
continuing there for a Months space, I was well acquainted with the Minister of
the place, a man of forty years of age, very strong and of a good habit of
body: This man told me in good earnest, and upon his faith, that for seven
years space he had been troubled with an intolerable hunger, that was so
insatiable, that oftentimes he was constrained to go into the Field (wanting
food at home) and thence cut up herbs and grass, and devour them raw as they
were; he found no help from Physic in this his distemper: but at last in the
seventh year, by a critical evacuation, which then befell him, he was delivered
of it.

CHAP. XVI. Of great Drinkers, and what quantities they have swallowed.
THe infusion of too great a quantity of Oil immediately extinguishes the Lamp:
the light of Reason, yes, and the Lamp of life it self are frequently
suffocated, and put out for ever, by such immoderate potations as we shall
hereafter read of. If some have survived those infamous victories they have
this way gained, the greatest of their rewards were but mean compensations for
their hazards; nor is the valor of such men to be admired who have dared to
outlive their own virtue.

1. Firmius was Deputy of Egypt under the Emperor Aurelianus, Din. mem. l. 6.
p. 448. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6. ^. 5. p. 371.
he being challenged by Barbarus, a famous Drinker, though he used not to drink
much Wine but most water, yet took off two Buckets full of Wine, and remained
sober all the time of the Feast after.

2. That of the Emperor Maximinus is almost incredible, Capit^lin. p. 602.
that he often drank in one day an Amphora of the Capitol, which is nine
Gallons our measure, counting a Gallon and a pint to the Congius, whereof the
Amphora contained eight.

3. In the Reign of Aurelianus there was one Phagon, Vopis. in Aurel. c. 50. p.
898. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6. ^.5. p. 371.
who drank out in one day plus Orca. What measure this Orca held I cannot well
determine, says Dr. Hackwell; neither could Lipsius himself: yet thus much
confidently he affirms of it, Lips. Epist. Miscel. Ep. 51. p. 454.
I know for certain, says he, that it was a Vessel of Wine, and that bigger
than the Amphora, but how much I know not.

Camer. oper. subtis. cent. c. p. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6.. 5. p. 371.
4. That was a right beast in this kind whose Epitaph was found at Rome, without
the gate of Capena, says Camerarius: Heus hic situs est Offellius Buratius
Bibulus, qui dum vixit aut bibit aut minxit, abi praeceps.

So hoe, here lies Offellius Buratius Bibulus, who while he lived, did either
drink, or piss, go and be hanged.



Plut. Shot as in Phys. curios. l. 3. c. 12. p. 462. Lips. Ep. Miscel. Ep. 51.
p. 454. Bruyer. de te. cibaria l. 3. c. 6. p. 161.
5. Alexander the Great, who was this way sufficiently addicted, after the
burning of Calanus, propounded a prize of drinking, wherein he that drank most,
says Plutarch, was one Promachus: the prize was one Talent: Promachus took off
four Congies, a Congius of old (says Lipsius) contained about ten pints, or
six Sextaries; he had his Talent, and death into the bargain, for he died the
third day after, together with one and forty other, who in that drunken match
had striven beyond their strength.

Lips. Ep. Misc. Ep. 51. p. 454. Shot. Phys. curios. l. 3. c. 12. p. 462.
6. At a Feast that the same Alexander made, he called for a mighty Cup that
held two Congies, two Gallons and a pint, and offered it to one Proteus, who
thankfully received it, and praising the King's liberality, took it clear off,
with the great applause of the company: and then filling the same Cup again,
took that off also; and after filling it, offered it to Alexander himself, who
also drank it off, but not able to bear it, he fell with his head upon the
Cushion, and the Cup fell out of his hands.

Plin. not. hist. l. 14. c. 22. p. 427. Din. mem. l. 1. p. 448. Iohnst. not.
hist. clas. 10.6.2. p. 313.
7. Novellius Torquatus, a Millanois, wan the name from all the Romans and
Italians in the matter of drinking: he had gone through all honorable degrees
of dignity in Rome: he had been Praetor, and attained to the place of a
Proconful: In all these Offices of State he wan no great name, but for drinking
in the presence of Tiberius three Gallons of Wine at one draught; and before he
took his breath again, he was dubbed Knight by the name of Tricongius, or three
Gallon Knight; and the Emperor did delight to behold him in the performance of
such feats.

Lips. Epist. Misc. Ep. 51. p. 456. Ni^et. An. l. 3. fol. 16. Din. mem. l. 6.
p. 448.
8. Lipsius speaks of one Camaterus Logotheta, employed in the affairs of Manuel
the Emperor of Constantinople, that he was of an excellent wit, and very happy
in an ex tempore eloquence; he was one of the greatest drinkers of all others,
and though he used to drink most Wine excessively, yet was not his reason
drowned with that plenty, but was in all points as sober men are, yea at such
times his reason and speech were more quick and elegant, as if inkindled by
those spirits. He once agreed with the Emperor himself, that he would drink
off a Porphyry Vessel that stood by full of water: the Emperor said he should
receive such precious garments, and some certain pounds in money if he did it:
if not, he himself should forfeit the worth of them. He immediately stooping
down with his head and neck, after the manner of a beast, never left sucking
till he had drawn it dry, though it held two Congies of water, and so he wan
and received of the Emperor his wager.

Lips. Ep. Misc. Ep. 51. p. 456.
9. A few years since, says Lipsius, at the wedding of a Noble person in
Bavaria, to exhilarate the Guests, there was a drinking wager propounded
amongst the servants and retainers, and thither came one who drank little less
than six Congies in a short space, and so went away with the prize. I confess,
says my Author, I have neither seen, read, nor heard the like.

10. Diotimus, Din. mem. l. 6. p. 449.
the Athenian, was surnamed Chone, that is, the Tunnel, for that one of these
being put to his mouth, he drank Wine poured into it, without so much as
requiring any space wherein to take his breath. Aelian. vaer. hist. l. 2. c.
41. c. 78.

11. The son of M. Tullius Cicero was so great a drinker, Din. mem. l. 6. p.
448.
that it was ordinary with him to fetch off the quantity of two Congies at
once, that is to say, two Gallons and a quart.

12. It was a kind of usual Rule amongst the Romans to drink down the evening,
Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6. p. 364.
and to drink up the morning Star; and another of their common practices was,
to drink so many cups and healths as there were letters in the name of their
Mistresses, according to that of Martial: Naevia sex cyathis, septem Iustina
bibaiur,
Quinque Lycas, Lyde quatuor, Ida tribus.
Six cups to Naevia's health, sev'n to Iustina be,
To Lycas five, to Lyde four, and then to Ida three.


13. Heraclides, Cael. Antiq. lect. l. 29. c. 17. p. 1364. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2.
l. 5. p. 402.
a Champion, is also famous at once both for his excessive eating and drinking:
he would swallow down such a mighty quantity of drink, that there was none
found that could be able to match him. It was usual to invite some to
breakfast, some to dinner, some to supper, and others to another eating bout
after that: so that as one company went off, another sat down, only he kept his
place all the day, and was able to hold out with all those successive companies.

14. I have often seen, Barthol. hist. Anat. cent. 1. hist. 39. p. 54, 55.
and not without astonishment, a certain drinker of Malta, called Petrus, who
from place to place made trial of his artifice; he having drank twenty or
thirty cups of water at the pleasure of the Spectators, lie would suddenly
restore them all by vomit, and as water running out of a Fountain, he would
orderly fill up the cups as he drank them off. At other times he would spout
out the whole quantity, at the distance of twenty foot or more; besides, if the
company desired it he would not only restore the clear water, but so as that it
should be of different both color and taste: one while Rose Water, another
spirit of Wine, Sack, Claret, White Wind, etc. and thus he filled several cups
with several sorts of drinks at one and the same vomit. He confessed he could
do this with the most ease when he was fasting and his stomach empty: For if
soon after dinner he was called by great persons to see this trial, he used to
vomit up his meat before his ventricle would be rightly disposed for the
reception of such a quantity of water. When he was to discharge himself of the
liquor he had drank up, he performed it only with the pressure of his hand upon
his stomach or breast, that he might not be suspected of Magic; and to obtain
license for the public ostentation of his gainful Art, he revealed the manner
of his secret to Pope Urban the eight at Rome, to Cardinal Richelieu at Paris,
and to the Prince of Orange at the Hague. When some suspected that the Glasses
gave the several colors, he caused them first to be clearly washed with water,
and to show he had no such fraud, he not only received Glasses at the hand of
Spectatours themselves; but also offered his several Vomits, as well to the
taste as to the eye of any that desired to make the Experiment.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 2. c. 41. p. 79.
15. Dionysius also in the Feast called Choas, propounded a drinking match,
wherein whosoever should be found to have drank a greater quantity than any of
the rest, should have a Crown of Gold for his reward. Xenocrates of Chalcedon,
was the man that obtained this inglorious victory, and received the Crown
accordingly; who at his departure, placed it upon the Head of the Statue of
Mercury, which stood at the Palace Gate: It being the custom for the Victors,
in all exercises, to leave their Crowns of Flowers, Myrtle, Ivy and Laurel
there, he would not supersede it for lucre of the Gold.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 2. c. 41. p. 82.
16. And to conclude this Chapter, how absurd and flithy soever it is, for a
Woman to be observed too much addicted to the desire of drinking: yet it is
remembered of one Clio, to her eternal infamy, that not only she used to contend
with those of her own Sex in drinking, but also used to provoke men thereunto;
with such success in her bestiality, that she was known to be able to drink,
and bear away a greater quantity of Drink than any man she could meet with.

CHAP. XVII. Of Drunkenness, and what has befallen some Men in theirs.
THe Father rightly describes the nature of this beastly vice, when he says of
it, That it is a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, a delightful sin, which he
that has, has not himself; and he that acts it, does not only commit a sin,
but is wholly converted into sin, being deserted of his Reason, which is at
once his Councellor and Guardian: sometimes he dishonours himself by that which
is ridiculous; and at others exposes himself to uttermost hazards, by dealing
with things that are dangerous to himself and others.

Athen. Deipros. l. 2. c. 2. p. 37. Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 94. p.
443. Lonic. Thea. p. 665. Cael. Rbod. l. 17. c. 2. p. 765. Delrio. Disq. Mag.
l. 2. qu. 27.. 1. p. 317. Burt. Mel. part 1.. 2. p. 163.
1. Timaeus tells of a House in Agrigentum, which was called the Galley, upon
this occasion. There were certain young Men in it, who having their heads well
heated with drinking, were grown so infatuate and senseless with the Wine, that
they verily believed they sailed in a Galley, which was tossed with the waves
and winds in the midst of the Main Ocean. They thereupon entered into such a
folly, that they cast out of the Windows into the Street, the Beds and all the
Household Stuff, supposing they had thrown it into the Sea to lighten their
Ve^sel, now in danger of being wracked. And when many came running, and
carrying away every one something of what was cast out; yet were not these
Youngsters at all awaked out of their dotage thereby. On the day following came
some of the Magistrates to the place, found them in a vomiting condition; and
to such of them as asked, they replied, That they had endured great hardship by
the Storm; that for the safety of their lives, they (by the advice of their
Pilot) had cast part of their lading overboard. The Magistrates admiring at
this senseless stupidity, one of their Company who seemed somewhat elder than
the rest, rose up and said; As for me Noble Tritons (he took them for Sea-gods)
fear has made me repair to the Hold, where I have lain under Decks as long as
I was able. The Magistrates pitying this continued madness of the poor fellows;
after they had reproved them, advised that thence-forward they should take heed
how they took so liberally of the Creature, and dismissed them. They returned
them thanks, and said, That if they should escape the fury of this Tempest, and
arrive in safety at their Haven, they should not fail to erect Statues in
public to them amongst the rest of the Sea-gods, seeing they had so
opportunely appeared to them for their safety.

2. Lonic^rus tells of one who was violently assaulted by the temptations of
the Devil to commit one of these three sins, Lonic. Thea. p. 66^.
either to be drunk once, or commit adultery with the Wife of his Neighbor, or
else murder his Neighbor. At last being overcome, he yielded to commit the
first, as judging it a crime that had less of horror in it than either of the
other. But being drunk, he was easily thrust on to the rest which before he had
feared: for the flame of lust being kindled with his Luxury, he feared not to
violate the chastity of his Neighbors Wife; and the Husband casually
surprising him in the act, and desirous to revenge himself of the injury he had
sustained, received a mortal wound at his hand whereof he soon after died. Thus
he that had given way to Drunkenness, was also involved in Adultery and Murder.

3. A Gentleman, Henric. ab Heeres obse Med. l. 1. obs. 17. p. 167.
having been revelling abroad, was returning home when it was late at night;
his head that was overladen with Wine, proved too heavy for the rest of his
body, so that he fell down in the street, not able to rise through the
feebleness of his legs; he had his sword by his side, when another coming by
that way, and hearing the voice of his enemy at some distance, suddenly snatched
out the Drunkards sword; and having run it into the heart of his adversary,
left it sticking in the wound, and in all haste conveyed himself away from the
place. The Watch at that time chanced to pass by, who finding a man lie dead
with a sword in his body, and this drunken person lying near him with his
scabbard empty, they took him along with them to the Magistrate, who having
received such apparent testimony against him, committed him to Prison: he was
hanged for the murder though innocent; and afterward the true murderer being
to be hanged for some other matter, confessed it was himself who had made use
of his sword to act his own private revenge.

4. A young man newly returned from the Wars, Henric. ab Heeres obs^ Medic.
obs. 17. p. 163.
in which he had been a Captain of a Troop of Horse, having drank liberally
from the noon time of the day till it was far in the night, laid himself down
to sleep upon a Bench, which was near to an open Casement; there was his Face
beat upon all the night long by a thick Snow that had fallen. In the morning he
had a strange writhing in the mouth, his right cheek which lay nearest to the
Window was absolutely resolved, for he was not able to move the eyebrow on that
side, nor could he breathe or spi^ on that side of the face; besides, the whole
part was changed in the fashion, bigness and color of it, nor was he at last
recovered without a great deal of difficulty.

Henric. ab Heeres ib. obs. 17. p. 163.
5. When about thirty years since, I was a Student in a famous University in the
upper Germany, some riotous Students were entertained by a Nobleman at his
Chamber, who intending to treat them to the height of intemperance, had so
gorged himself with Wine, that he was fast asleep at the Table he sat by, in
which posture his associates left him, and departed. A great Wax-candle stood
upon the Table, and in his sleep he had turned himself so inconveniently for
it, that it burnt his breast, and the parts about it in such manner that his
inwards might be seen, which yet was not perceived by him that was buried in
Wine. The Candle being burnt out, he yet remained snorting, and lying upon the
wax and ashes. In the morning he was awaked by his fellow Tospots, and invited
by them to a Cup of Wormwood-wine, when he complains of insufferable torments.
The most skilful Physicions and professors of that Art were immediately sent
for, but in vain did they endeavor to oppose so great a burning; so that in
horrid torments, upon the third day following he concluded his miserable life,
having first warned his Companions with tears to beware of carowsing.

Henric. ab Heeres ib. l. 1. obs. 17. p. 165.
6. Anno 1584. there was one at Liege who was most addicted to daily
drunkenness, and in his Cups (as o^t as he had emptied his Pockets of his money
by playing at Cards) he used to swear, he would be the death of his Wives,
Uncle, because he refused to furnish him with more money to play with. This
Uncle was a Canon, a good and honest man, especially a person of great
hospitality. One night when he entertained a Letter-carrier, he was murdered by
him, together with a Niece and a little Nephew of his. All men admiring that
the Canon was not present at Mattins, who never used to absent himself; having
long knocked at his doors in vain, this Drunkard of ours, having scarce
digested his yesterdayes Ale, set up a Ladder to the Windows, and with others
entered the House. Spying there three dead Corpse, they raise the Neighborhood
with a lamentable cry; amongst the whispers of whom, when some said that the
Drunkard was the murderer, he was laid hold on, cast into Prison, and thrown
upon the Rack; where he says, that he does not think that he did it; that by
reason of his daily and continual drunkenness, he could affirm nothing of a
certainty; that he had sometime a will, or rather a velleity to kill the Canon,
but that he should never have touched his Niece or young Nephew. Well, he was
condemned, and the innocent, wretch, even in the presence of this execrable
Letter-carrier, was long wearied with exquisite torments, and at last dyed an
unheard of death. The Letter-carrier being again returned to Liege, and not
able to endure the hourly tortures of a revenging God inflicted upon his soul;
of his own accord presented himself before the Judges, beseeching them, that by
a speedy death he might be freed from that Hell he felt here alive; affirming
that when he was awake (though seldom when asleep) the Image of the little Babe
whom he had strangled presented it self to his eyes, shaking the Furies Whips
at him, with such Flames as the Drunkard had perished in. When he spoke this at
the Tribunal, he continually fanned his face with his hands, as if to discuss
the flames. The thing being evident by the Goods taken and other discoveries,
he also the same year upon the 23d. of August was hanged till dead, and then
burnt at a stake.

7. The Son of Cyrillus a Citizen of Hippo, Lonic. T^^^. p. 662. Aug. tom. 10.
Ser. 33. Burt. Mel. part 1.. 2. p. 112.
being given to a riotous way of life, in one of his drunken sits committed
violent incest with his Mother then big with Child, and endeavored to violate
the Chastity of one of his Sisters, wounded two other of them, and slew his
Father almost. So that St. Augustine writing about it, says, Accidit hodie
terribilis casus, a dreadful accident fell out.

8. Aristotle, Loni^. T^ea. p. 6^2.
speaking of the luxury of the Syracusans, adds that Dionysius the younger
continued drunk sometimes for the space of ninety days together, and thereby
brought himself to purblind sight and bad eyes. Clarks Mir. cap. 91. p. 404.

9. The Emperor Zeno had made himself odious by the death of many Illustrious
Persons; Zonar. A^nal. tom. 3. p. 126. Lonic. Thea. p. 666. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2.
l. 7. p. 559.
and besides led a life sufficiently corrupted and debauched, which was
followed by a violent death. For say some, being much addicted to gluttony and
drunkenness, he wo^ld fall down void of all sense and reason, little differing
from a dead man; and being also hated by his Wife Ariadna, she caused him to be
taken up in one of those drunken sits, and carried out as dead into one of the
Imperial Monuments, which she ordered to be closed upon him, and covered with a
massy stone: afterward being returned to sobriety, he sent forth lamentable
cries; but the Empress commanded none should regard him, and so he miserably*
perished. Kornman. de mirac. mort. lib. 7. cap. 59. p. 43.

10. One Medius, Diodor. Si^. bibl. l. 17. p. 580. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 7. p.
503. Lonic. Thea. p. 673.
a Thessalian, keeping a Genial Feast in Babylon, earnestly besought Alexander
the Great, that he would not refuse his presence amongst them; he came and
loaded himself with Wine sufficiently. At last, when he bad drank off the Great
Cup o^ Hercules to the bottom, on the sudden, as if he had been struck with
some mighty blow, he gave a shriek, and fetched a deep sigh: he was taken
thence by the hands of his Friends who were near him; Physicians were called,
who sat by him with all diligent attendance; but the distemper increasing, and
they perceiving that (notwithstanding all their care) he was tortured with most
acute pains, they cast off all hopes of his life, as also he himself did; so
that taking off his Ring from his finger, he gave it unto Perdiccas; and being
asked whom he would should succeed him, he answered The Best: this was his last
word, for soon after he dyed, being the seventh month of the twelfth year of
his reign.

11. Lyciscus was one of the Captains whom Agathocles had invited to Supper:
Diodor. Si^. bibl. l. 20. p. 671.
in the War of Africa, this man being heated with Wine, fell into railing and
contumelious language against the Prince himself: Agathocles himself bore with
him, and because he was a person o^ good use to him in the War, he put off his
bitter speeches with a jest; but the Prince Archagathus his Son was extremely
incensed, and reproved Lyciscus with threats. Supper ended, and the Commanders
going to Archagathus his Tent, Lyciscus began to reproach the Prince also, and
with no less a matter, than adultery, with his Mother-in-Law (that is to say)
Alcia the Wife of Agathocles. Archagathus was so vehemently offended herewith,
that snatching a Spear out of the hands of one of the Guard, he ran him
therewith into the side in such manner that he presently fell dead at his foot.
Thus his intemperance in Wine brought on another of the tongue, and both ended
in an untimely death.

Stows Ann. p. 385.
12. In the year 1446. there was a Wedding near Zeghebnic, celebrated as it
appears with such an unheard of intemperance and dissolute doings, that there
dyed of extreme surfeiting, by excessive drinking, no less than ninescore
persons as well Women as Men.

Laert. l. 4. p. 107.
13. Arcesilaus, the Son of Scythus an Academick Philosopher, being of the age
of seventy and five, drank so much Wine, that the intemperate liberty he then
took, brought him first into madness, and from thence to death it self.

Clarks mir. c. 42. p. 148.
14. There was in Salisbury not long since, one who in a Tavern, in the midst of
his carowsing and healths, drank also a health to the Devil, saying, That if
the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was
either God or Devil; whereupon his Companions stricken with horror hastened out
of the Room, and presently after hearing an hideous noise, and smelling a
stinking favor, the Vintner ran up into the Chamber, and coming in, he missed
his Guest, found the Window broken, the iron bar in it bowed and all bloody,
but the man was never more heard of.

Clarks mir. ibid.
13. At the Plow in Barnwel near Cambridge, a lusty young man with two of his
neighbors, and one woman in their company, agreed to drink up a barrel of
strong Beer, which accordingly they did, but within twenty four hours three of
them dyed, and the fourth hardly escaped after great sickness.

Clarks mir. c. 42. p. 149.
16. Anno Dom. 1618. one Thomas Alred of Godma^chester, being a common Drunkard,
was entreated by a Neighbor to unpitch a load of Hay; and being at that time
drunk, the Pitchfork slipped out of his hand, which he stooping to take up again,
fell from the Cart with his head downwards, and the Fork standing with the
Tines upward, he fell directly upon them, which striking to his heart killed
him immediately.

Just. hist. l. 12. p. 139.
17. Alexander the Great invited his Friends to a solemn Feast, wherein among
those that were drunk, mention was made of the achievements of King Philip;
Alexander preferred himself before his Father, and began to extol the greatness
of his actions to the very Heavens, as most part of the Guests did flatteringly
comply with him therein. When therefore Clytus presuming upon the great
friendship he had with the King (wherein none had a greater share) went about
to defend the memory of Philip, and to extol his actions, Alexander was so
offendded herewith, that hastily snatching a Javelin out of the hands of one of
the Guards, he slew Clytus therewith at this drunken feast; and glorying in the
death he had given him, he upbraided the dead with his Patronage of Philip, and
the praises of his Fathers warfare. But so soon as his mind (satiated with
blood) came to its usual repose; and that honor succeeded in the place of
anger; then considering the person slain, and also the occasion upon which, he
began to repent of what he had done, and that he had received the praises of
his Father with as great impatience, as perhaps was due to his reproaches. Now
it grieved him that he had slain an old man, his Friend, an Innocent, and that
also in the midst of his Cups: so that converting to repentance with the same
fury as he had rushed into anger before, he was now determined to dye, and had
killed himself but that he was hindered by his Friends; yet even then he would
pine himself, had fasted for four days, and had done so till death, but that
he was recalled by the comforts and counsel of Calisthenes, and the earnest
intercessions of his whole Army.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Luxury and expense of some Persons in Apparel, and their
variety and vanity therein, and in their other Furniture.
WHen Michael Paleologus the Greek Emperor had sent certain rich Robes as a
present to Nugas the Scythian Monarch: he asked of those that brought them,
Nunquam calamitates, morbos, mortemque depellere possent, whether they could
drive away calamities, sickness and death; for if they could not, they were not
(in his opinion) to be much regarded. It seems there have been others of a
contrary mind, as will appear by what follows.

1. Lollia Paulina, Plin. l. 9. c. 35. p. 256. Cause. hol. Court, tom. 1. lib.
3. p. 93.
a Roman Lady, being invited to a banquet, went thither and carried about her
in Chains, Carcanets and Precious Stones, a million of Gold: her Father had
despoiled all the Roman Provinces to cloth this only Daughter, and yet was
afterward enforced to drink poison, being overwhelmed in the despair of his
own affairs.

2. In the year 1544. there was found in Rome a Coffin of Marble eight foot
long, Cause. hol. Court, tom. 3. Max. 1^. p. 418. Hist. Manu. Arts, c. 7. p. 97.
and in it a Robe, embroidered with Goldsmiths work, which yielded six and
thirty pound weight of Gold; besides forty Rings, a cluster of Emeralds, a
little Mouse made of another Precious Stone; and amongst all those precious
Magnificences, two Leg-bones of a dead Corpse, known by the inscription of the
Tomb to be the bones of the Empress Mary, Daughter of Stilicon, and Wife of
the Emperor Honorius.

3. Charles, Lonic. Thea. p. 649.
Duke of Burgundy, had one Garment of the price of two hundred thousand
Ducats; a prodigious luxury, and which could not be maintained but by the
expilation of his Subjects.

4. In the third year of the reign of King Richard the second, Bakers Chron. p.
198.
Sir John Arundel with diverse others put to Sea, with a purpose to pass over
into Britain, but were all cast away in a tempest. This Sir John Arundel was
then said in his furniture to have two and fifty new suits of apparel, made of
Cloth of Gold and Tissue, all which were also lost at Sea.

5. Demetrius his garments were illustrious with Purple and Gold; his Shoos
also were daubed over with it. Lonic. Thea. p. 650.
In his Cloak was woven the representation of the World and the Stars: so that
when he fell from the Sovereignty of Macedon, no King how great soever that
succeeded him, did dare to be seen in that Cloak; to so envyed a magnificence
did the make and value of it amount.

Plut. in Luc^l. p. Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 7. p. 456. Hak^w. Apol. l. 4. c. 9..
2. p. 414.
6. A Praetor in Rome intending to set forth the most sumptuous and magnificent
shows he could devise, sent to Lucullus to borrow of him some store of short
Cloaks; his answer was, that he would take a time to see if he had so many as
the Praetor desired; and the next day sending to know what number would serve
his turn; it being told him an hundred, he ^ad them take two hundred; but
Horace speaks of a far greater number, no less than five thousand.

Hora. Ep. 6.
-- chlamydes Lucullus ut aiunt, etc.
Lucullus asked once if he could lend
Unto the Stage one hundred Cloaks; replied,
How can I man so many? Yet i will send
As many as I have, when I have tried;
Soon after writes, five thousand Cloaks I have,
Take all or part, as many as you crave.
Martial. l. 8. Epig. 46.
7. At their public Feasts, even private Romans changed their Cloaks, only for
ostentation to show their variety; hence that of the Poet.

Vndecies una surrexti Zoile coena,
Et mutata tibi est Synthesis undecies.
Eleven times one Supper thou
O Zoilus did arise;
As many times thou did I trow
Thy Mantle change likewise.
Nicet. Choniat. Anna. de gestis Alexii, l. 1. p. 54, 55. Lips^i Monit. l. 2.
c. 15. p. 360, 361. Camerar. bor. subcis. cent. 2. c. 30. p. 129, 130. Drexel.
de cultu corpo^is, l. 3. c. 8.. 6. p. 426.
8. The Emperor Henry the fifth, having conquered Sicily, and the Kingdom of
Naples, had reached yet further in his hopes, and intended for Greece: he
therefore sent his Ambassadors to Alexius Angelus the Greek Emperor, to
demand of him a mighty sum of Gold as a Tribute from him, which if he denied,
he would seek to obtain by War. Alexius informed of the arrival of these
Foraigners, and their business; that by an ostentation of his splendor and
riches, he might possess them with reverence and dread of him, commanded his
Nobles to attend him adorned with Gold and the richest of their Jewels; he
himself, from head to foot, was but one continued splendor, dazzling the eyes
of all that beheld him. The Germans came, but so far were they from being
terrified with this Gallantry, that they wished for nothing more than to fight
with these men, who they saw were prepared to enrich them with their spoils.
The Grecians in the mean time directed their eyes to the Emperor; calling upon
them to behold the glory of his Garments and Jewels: See, said they, how he
appears like some flowery Meadow; in the midst of Winter you may here recreate
your eyes, with the sweet pleasures of the Spring. The Germans replied, That
they were not at all moved or affected with these feminine Ornaments, that the
time was now come wherein the Greeks must change their Gold for Iron; for
unless they should succeed in the Embassage, they must expect to fight with
men, that do not glitter with Jewels as the Meadows with Flowers; nor glory in
their embroidered Garments as Peacocks in their Plumage; but who (as the true
Sons of Mars) in the fight would carry sparkles in their eyes, and whose
sweat-drops, as they fell from them, should resemble Oriental Pearls. Thus they
frighted these effeminate ones with their words, and had done it much more with
their blows, but that the death of the Emperor Henry (which soon after
followed) put a period to those purposes. This was about Anno 1197.

9. Sir Walter Raleigh, Drexell. de cultu corp. l. 3. c. 10.. 5. p. 432.
in great favor with Queen Elizabeth, was observed in her Court, to wear his
Shoos so set with Pearls and Precious Stones, that they were estimated to
exceed the value of six thousand and six hundred Crowns.

10. C. Caligula, Sueton. l. 4. c. 52. p. 195, 196.
the Emperor, in his Apparel, Shoos and other habit, did not always wear what
was according to the guise of his Country, what was Civil, Manlike, no nor what
was suiting with a mortal man. He went sometimes attired in Cloaks of
Needle Work embroidered with diverse colors, and set out with Precious Stones;
at others, in a Coat with long Sleeves, and with bracelets; sometimes you
should see him in Silks, veiled all over in a loose Mantle of Tiffanie or
transparent Linen; one while in Greekish Slippers, or Buskins; otherwhiles in
a simple pair of Brogues, or high Shoos; now and then also in Women's Pantofles
and Pumps. For the most part he showed himself abroad with a golden Beard,
carrying in his hand a Thunderbolt, or three-forked Mace and Trident, or else a
Warder or Rod called Caduceus, all of them the Ensigns and Ornaments of the
Gods; yea sometimes he went in the attire of Venus. His triumphal Robes and
Ensigns he always wore, even before he made his Expedition; or else the
Cuirace of Alexander the Great, which he had caused to be fetched out of his
Sepulcher.

11. Heliogabalus the Emperor excelled all others in his prodigious Luxury in
this kind; Paraei hist. prof. medul. tom. 1. p. 398, 399.
for his upper Garments were ever either of Gold or Purple, or else the richest
Silks that were procurable, nay sometimes all beset with Jewels and Pearls,
which habit he was the first that brought up at Rome; his Shoos were bedecked
with Precious Stones and Pearl: he never wore any Suit of Apparel twice. He
thought of wearing a Diadem made up with Jewels, wherewith to set off his face,
and render his aspect more effeminate. He sat commonly amongst Flowers or the
most precious odours: his excrements he discharged into Gold Vessels, and
Urined in Vessels of Onyx, or Myrrhine pots. He never swimmed but in Fishpools,
that were before hand replete with the Nobler Unguents, and tinged with
Saffron. His Household Stuff was Gold or Silver, his Bedsteads, Tables and
Chests of Massy Silver, and so were his Cauldrons and other Pots; and even
these and the most part of his other Vessels, had lascivious engravings
represented on the sides of them.

12. Anno 1582. the seventh of May a rich Merchants Daughter of Antwerp, Stub.
Ana^. of Abuses, p. 44. Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 14. p. 423.
came to a fearful and lamentable end: she being invited to a Wedding, and
intending to show her self in her greatest gallantry, sent for two Landresses
to dress her Ruffs (then greatly in fashion) who bringing them home as well
dressed as possibly they could, yet not to the satisfaction of her foolish
curiosity; she in a great rage began to curse and swear; and throwing the Ruffs
on the ground, wished the Devil might take her, when she wore any of them
again. In which time (by Gods permission) the Devil in the shape of a Gallant
her Suitor, came to her, and questioning the cause of her rage; she told him
how she was abused in setting her Ruffs. He undertook to please her, dressed
them; she liking them, put them on, and looking in the Glass was very well
pleased. But while she was so doing, the Devil kissed her, and writhing her
neck, killed her. Great preparations were made for her Burial, and when four
men went to move the Coffin, they could not; they opened the Coffin, and
instead of the Body which was gone, there was seen sitting therein a black Cat,
very lean and deformed, setting to great Ruffs and frizling of Hair, to the
great fear and wonder of the beholders.

CHAP. XIX. Of Gaming, and some men's expensiveness therein, together with the
woeful and dreadful consequences of it.
ALexander the Great set a fine upon some of his Friends, for that when they
were playing at Dice, he perceived they did not play; for there are many who
are concerned in this sport, as if it was the most serious and weighty affair
in the world. We cannot say that they play who permit their whole fortunes, yea
sometimes their Wives and Children to the disposal of the Dice; and great pity
it is that such should be played with; but rather that some exemplary
punishment should be imposed upon so bold a prodigality.

History of the life of the Duke of Espe^non, part 2. l. 5. p. 235.
1. A Famous Gamester called Pimentel, an Italian, in the year 1603. came into
France: It is said, and it is perfectly true, that this Cavalier hearing what a
humor of play reigned at the French Court, caused a great number of false Dice
to be made, of which he himself only knew the high and the low runners; hiring
men to carry them into France: where after they had bought up and conveyed away
all that were in Paris, he supplied all the Shops with his own. By which means
having subjected the Spirit of Play, and tied the hands of Fortune, he arrived
at last in France; where insinuating himself into the Court, he was by some of
his own Nation, who had great interest there, soon brought acquainted with the
King, and admitted as a Gamester. Amongst others the Duke of Espernon was one
from whom he drew considerable sums; he got all his ready money and many of his
Jewels; and after these wan of him a piece of Ambergriese to the value of
twenty thousand Crowns, the greatest that ever was seen in Europe, and which
the Republic of Venice (to whom it was afterward sold) preserve to this day
in their Treasury as a great rarity.

Fullers Worthies p. 142. Buckinghamshire.
2. Henry Cheney, created by Queen Elizabeth Baron of Tuddington, in
Bedfordshire, in his youth was very wild and venturous; he played at Dice with
Henry the Second, King of France, from whom he wan a Diamond of great price at
one cast; and being demanded by the King what shift he would have made to
repair himself in case he had lost the cast: I have, said young Cheney (in an
Hyberbolical brave) sheeps tails enough in Kent with their wool, to buy a
better Diamond than this.

3. The Emperor Nero, Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 9.. 5. p. 423.
as he was excessively prodigal in his gifts, so was he answerable thereunto in
his Gaming, for he adventured four hundred thousand Sesterces upon every pick
of the Dice.

4. Sir Miles Pateridge played at Dice with King Henry the Eighth, Fullers
profane state, l. 5. c. 14. p. 437.
for Jesus Bells; they were four Bells the greatest in London, hanging in a
fair Tower in St. Paul's Churchyard: it is true he was the winner, and brought
the Bells to ring in his Pocket; but it is observed that the Ropes afterward
caught about his neck, and for some offenses he was hanged in the days of King
Edward the sixth.

5. The Chinese delight excessively in all sorts of Games; Herb. Trav. l. 3 p.
340.
they play at Chess, Irish, Passage, In and In, Hazard; and not only play
great games, but when they have lost, they care not though they stake their
Wives and Children, whom if they lose, they part with till they can advance so
much money as they were staked for.

6 Anno Dom. 1533. near to Belissma in Helvetia, Fincel. mandat. 4. Clarks mir.
c. 17. p. 62.
three men were playing at Dice on the Lords Day, and one of them called Vlrick
Schraeterus having lost much money, at last expecting a good Cast, brake out
into this cursed speech, If Fortune deceive me now I will thrust my Dagger into
the very Body of God as far as I can! The Cast miscarrying, he drew his Dagger,
and threw it against Heaven with all his might: when behold the Dagger
vanished, and five drops of blood fell upon the Table in the midst of them, and
immediately the Devil came in and carried away the blasphemous wretch, with
such a noise that the whole City was amazed at it; the other half distracted
with fear, strove with all their strength to wipe out the drops of blood, but
the more they wiped it, the more clearly it appeared. The rumor hereof flying
into the City, multitudes flocked to the place, where they found the Gamesters
washing the board: whom by the decree of the Senate they bound with Chains, and
carried toward the Prison: but as they went by the way, one of them was
stricken suddenly dead, with such a number of Lice and Worms creeping out of
him, as was wonderful and loathsome to behold. The third (to avert the
indignation that seemed to hang over their heads) was by the Citizens
immediately put to death. The Table was preserved for a Monument to show the
accursedness of Dicing, with the inconveniences and mischiefs attending upon
the same.

7. Anno Dom. 1550. there lived in Alsatia one Adam Steckman, Fincel. l. 2.
Clarks mir. c. 17. p. 62.
who got his living by dressing of Vines: this man having received his wages
lost it all at Dice, whereupon he grew so distempered in mind, wanting
wherewithal to maintain his Family, that in his Wives absence, he cut the
throats of his three children, and would have hanged himself, but that his Wife
coming in and seeing this pitiful Tragedy, gave a great outcry, and fell down
dead: whereupon the Neighbors coming in apprehended the man, who by the Law
was adjudged to a cruel death.

8. Mesabates, Plut. in. Artexerx. p. 1019.
the Eunuch of King Artaxerxes, had cut off the head and right hand of Cyrus,
the Kings brother, after he was dead; and as the manner of the Persians is,
Parysatis, the Kings mother, and a mighty Lover of her son Cyrus, not finding a
sufficient opportunity to be revenged of this Eunuch as she desired; at last
she laid this design against his life. She was in other things a witty woman:
but especially very skillful at Dice, whereat she often played with the King,
whom finding at leisure, she challenged to play for a thousand Darici,
permitted him to win, and paid him the money; then feigning she was troubled at
her loss, she requested that he would play once more for an Eunuch: it was
agreed betwixt them, that which soever was beaten, should except live of their
most faithful Eunuchs, and that out of the rest the conqueror might choose any
such one as he should best like: The Game went on the side of Parysati^, who
made choice of Mesabates, being not of the number whom the King had excepted;
and before the King could understand her intention, she delivered him to the
Executioners, with order to fley him alive, to fasten his body down-ward upon
three Crosses, and to hang his Skin upon a Stake by it self. When this was
done, the King was much incensed against her: but she laughing, put all o^f
with a jest, You are, said she, a pleasant and gallant person, who are so wroth
for the loss of an old and wicked Eunuch, whereas I can sit down and rest
contented with the loss of a thousand Darici.

Cla^ks mir. c. 61. p. 240.
9. Mr. Roger Ascham, Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, and also her Secretary
for the Latin Tongue, was so much addicted to Dicing and Cock-fighting, that he
lived and died a poor man.

Cael. Anti^. lect. l. 20. c. 24. p.
10. The Emperor C. Caligula was so exceedingly prodigal in his play, that it
is said of him, that he adventured four hundred thousand Sesterces, which
amounts to ten thousand Crowns, not upon every cast o^ the Dice, but upon every
Punctum or prick of the Die.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 10. l. 5. p. 2482.
11. Ioannes Gonzaga had lost at Dice, a mighty sum of money, his son Alexander
stood by and showed some dislike at it; whereupon the father turning to them
that stood by, Alexander the Great, said he, hearing of a Victory that his
^ather had gained, is reported to be sad at the news, as fearing that there
would be nothing lest for him to gain: but my son Alexander is afflicted at my
loss, as ^earing there will be nothing left for him to lose.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 10. l. 5. p. 2482.
12. Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valentinois, when he had lost at Dice many thousand
Crowns at one sitting, Well, said he, the sins of the Germans have paid for all
this: for the money was of that Tribute which his father Pope Alexander the
sixth had collected out of Germany for the sale of Pardons and Indulgences.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 10. l. 5. p. 2482.
13. Ludovicus Mediarotas, a Cardinal of Padua, and Patriarch of Aquileia, is
said to have carried away the sum of twenty ^ive thousand Crowns from
Alphonsus, King of Arragon and Naples, which it is certain he wan of him in one
day while he played with him at Dice.

CHAP. XX. Of the oversights of some Persons of great abilities: and their
imprudence in their speeches, or affairs.
IT is observed of those Chickens that are hatched by the warmth of the Ovens
in the City of grand Cairo, that there is none of them but has some blemish or
other, something redundant, or something that is defective: and the same
observation is made of the greatest wits, Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtua
dementiae, something of madness or folly is still found in the most
accomplished amongst men; Tanquam naevi in candido pectore, few breasts are so
white but there are certain Moles to be seen upon them: and those that have
been most exercised and practiced in affairs, have had some such aberrations,
wherein it should seem that all their prudence had forsaken them.

1. Enguerrand of Marigny, Cause. Treatise of the Passions, p. 118, 119.
was a man of great abilities, and having governed the Finances under Philip
the fair; afterward seeing himself persecuted by Charles of Valois, by an
inexcusable temerity threw away his life: For Charles sharply asking of him an
account of the Treasures of the deceased King, he freely answered, It is to
you, Sir, I have given a good part of them, and the rest has been employed in
the Kings affairs. Whereupon the Prince giving him the lie, the other took the
unseasonable boldness to reply, By God, Sir, it is you your self; this
insolency sent him to the Gallows at Mountfaucon, which he had caused to be
built in his greatest authority.

2. At Sir Henry Wotton's first going Ambassador into Italy, Iz. Walton's life
of Sir Henry Wotton, p. 45, 46.
as he passed through Germany he stayed some days at Augusta, where having
been in his former Travels well known by many of the best note for learning and
ingenuity, with whom he passing an evening in merriment, was requested by
Christopher Flecamore to write some s^n^ence in his Albo (a Book of white
paper) which for that purpose many of the German Gentry usually carry about
them: Sir Henry consenting to the motion, took an occasion from some accidental
discourse of the present company, to write a pleasant definition of an
Ambassador in these words, Legatus est vir bonus, peregre missus, ad mentiendum
Reipublicae causa, which Sir Henry could have been contented should have been
thus Englished, An Ambassador is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good
of his Country: but the word for lie (being the hinge upon which the conceit
should turn) was not so expressed in Latin, as would admit of so fair a
construction as Sir Henry thought of in English. Yet as it was it slept quietly
among other sentences in this Albo almost eight years, till by accident it fell
into the hands of Gasper Schioppius, a Romanist, a man of a restless spirit and
malicious Pen, who with Books against King James, Prints this as a principle of
that Religion, professed by the King and his Ambassador Sir Henry Wotton, then
at Venice; and in Venice it was presently after written in several glass
windows, and spitefully declared to be Sir Henry Wotton's. This coming to the
knowledge of King James, he apprehended it to be such an oversight, such a
weakness or worse in Sir Henry, as caused the King to express much wrath
against him; and this caused Sir Henry to write two Apologie^, one to Velserus
(one of the chie^s of Augusta) in the universal language; and another to King
James, which was so ingenuous, clear, and so choicely eloquent, that His
Majesty at the receipt thereof, said, Sir H^nry Wotton had commuted
su^ficiently for a greater offense.

Fitz-Herb. o^ ^^lig. and Policy, par. 1. c. 3. p. 25, 26.
3. Lewis the eleventh King of France, one of the most Politic Princes that
France ever had, being at Wars with his own brother Charles, Duke of Normandy;
Francis, Duke of Britanny; and Charles, Duke of Burgundy, and desiring greatly
to separate the last from the other two, that he might the better be revenged
on them, solicited him by his Ambassadors to come to con^erence with him,
which the Duke yielded unto, so that the meeting might be in a Town of his own,
in the Frontiers of Flanders and France, for his better security, wherewith the
King was well contented. The meeting therefore being appointed at Peronne,
whither the Duke was come with his Army, and safe conduct sent to the King by a
Letter of the Dukes own hand; the King went thither without any forces or
guard, to show the confidence he had in the Duke, to oblige him the more, and
to gain his good will: But the Duke seeing now his enemy in his power, and
understanding at the same time that Liege ws revolted from him, by the
solicitation of certain Ambassadors o^ the King, took him prisoner, and would
not release him unt^l he h^d recovered the Town of Liege, whither he forced him
to accompany him, with no small danger of his Person; and in the end having
made him grant to some hard conditions in favor of his Confederates (against
whom the King had especially plotted that Conference and Treaty) he released
him. Now who sees not how grossly this Politician ^rred, wherein it might be
presumed that a man of any experience could not have been deceived: First that
having employed his Agents to stir up the Town of L^ige against the Duke, he
did not counte^mand it, when he resolved to put himself into his hands; and
then that he would upon any security or safe conduct put himself to the
courtesy and mercy of his enemy, without urgent and inevitable necessity.

Fullers Worthies, p. 355. Gloces^ersh.
4. Thomas Ruthal was by King Henry the seventh, ^or his great abilities,
preferred to be Bishop of Durham; King Henry the eighth made him of his Privy
Council, notwithstanding the hatred which Cardinal Woolsey bare unto him. It
happened that King Henry employed him as a Politic person to draw up a
Breviate of the State of the Land, which he did, and got it fairly transcribed:
but it fell out that instead thereof, he (deceived with the likeness of the
cover and binding) Presented the King with a Book containing the Inventory of
his own Estate, amounting to an invidious and almost an incredible sum of one
hundred thousand pounds. Woolsey glad of this mistake, told the King he knew
where a mass of money was, in case he needed it. This broke Ruthals heart, who
had paid the third part of the cost of making the Bridge of Newcastle over
Tyne, and intended many more Benefactions, had not death on this unexpected
occasion surprised him, Anno Dom. 1523.

5. The Duke of Ossuna, Howells Epistles vol. 1.. 3. Ep. 36. p. 9^
a little man but of great fame and fortune, was revoked from being Viceroy of
Naples (the best employment the King of Spain has for a subject) upon some
disgust, and being come to this Court, where he was brought to give an account
of his Government, being troubled with the Gout, he carried his sword in his
hand instead of his staff: the King misliking the manner of his posture, turned
his back to him, and so went away. Thereupon he was overheard to mutter, Esto
es para servir muchachos, This it is to serve Boys. This coming to the Kings
oa^, he was apprehended, and committed Prisoner to a Monastery not far off,
where he continued some years, until his Beard came to his girdle; then growing
very ill, he was permitted to come to his house in Madrid, being carried in a
bed upon men's shoulders, where he died about the year 1622.

6. When Pope Julius the second, Lord Remy his Civil Considerat. c. 65. p. 167.
attempted to deliver Italy from the Vltra Montani, he sent an Italian
Ambassador to the King of England, to persuade him to take Arms in his behalf
against the King of France: and the Ambassador having delivered all that he
had in charge to say, answer was given in the behalf of the King, That he was
most ready and willing to defend the Pope, but that an Army was not so soon to
be made ready: for that the English, by reason of their long Peace, had in a
manner lost the use of Arms. And because they were to go against a King, who
was no less mighty and puissant, than warlike, as was the King of France, there
ought to be a time to make necessary provision for a War of so great
importance. The Ambassador presently to no purpose or reason added these words,
Anchio hodetto pi^ volte questo medesimo a sua sanctita, which is to say, And I
have oftentimes said the same to his Holiness: these words which showed the
will of the Ambassador to be different from that of his Prince, gave great
doubt and suspicion to the Kings Council, and they began to doubt that the
Ambassador was rather inclined to favor the King of France than the Pope his
Master; and setting secret Spies about him to observe his behavior, it was
perceived that by night he spoke secretly with the French Ambassador, by which
means he was undone; and if he had fallen into the hands of the Pope, he had
peradventure put him to death. However by his imprudent answer, he both wronged
himself, and was the occasion that the King of England was constrained to begin
the War sooner than he would, who in deferring the succors had possibly
accorded the controversy betwixt the Pope and the French King.

7. Demaratus, Lord Remy his Civil consid. c. 6^* p. 166.
which should have succeeded in the Kingdom of Sparta, was deprived thereof by
Ariston his father, for one only imprudent word uttered without consideration
in the Senate. Which was, that news being brought unto him that he had a son
born, he counted upon his fingers how long his Wife had been with him, and
seeing that there were no more than s^ven Months, and that usually women are
delivered at nine, he said, It is not possible that he should be my son; these
words turned to the great damage of Demaratus: for after the death of Ariston
his father, the Spartans refused to give him the Kingdom, because the Ephori
bare record that Ariston had said that it was not possible that Demaratus, born
at the end of seven Months, should be his son, and that he had bound it with an
Oath.

Lord Remy Civil co^siderat. c. 65. p. 168.
8. Renzo de Ceri (a most honorable Captain in h^s time) was in the pay and
^ervice of Lawrence de Medici, against Francis Maria, Duke of Vrbin. This
Captain was advertised that certain Spanish Captains had plotted a Treason to
deliver the Duke of Vrbin into the hands of the Duke of Florence: wherefore the
said Renzo, talking with a Drum, demanded of him in jest and laughing (but with
great inconsideration) When will these Spaniards deliver your Duke Prisoner?
The Drum made no answer, but being returned to the Camp he reported to his Duke
the words which Renzo had used to him, without any necessity or reason:
wherefore the Duke of Vrbin having engraven them in his heart, stood upon his
guard, and marked the behavior of the Spanish Captains. In the end, through
certain Letters and writings, found amongst their Baggage, the truth appeared,
and the Conspirators against Duke Francis were known, who were committed to
Prison, and convict of Treason. Thus Renzo was the cause why the Treason took
no effect, the Captains were dispatched, and that Lawrence his Master made not
so soon an end of the Wars, as otherwise he might probably have done.

Bish. Cowp. S^rm. p. 56. Ch^twinds ^ist. collect. c^n. 2. p. 42.
9. Famous was the Contention between Chrysostom on the one part, and
Th^ophilus, Cyril, and Epiphanius on the other about the burning or not burning
of Origens Books, all good and great men, yet they grow so hot, that because
Chrysostom would not consent to the burning, Theophilus and Cyril would hardly
acknowledge him a lawful Bishop, and Epiphanius in bitter chiding fell to such
choler, as he said, he hoped he should not die a Bishop. To whom Chrysostom
answered as eagerly again, That he trusted he should never return alive into
his own Country of Cyprus: which chiding words were not so bitter in sound as
afterward they proved true indeed: For both Epiphanius died before he gat home
to Cyprus; and Chrysostom being put out of his Bishopric, ended his life in
banishment.

CHAP. XXI. Of the dangerous and destructive curiosity of some men.
Melch. Ad. vit. Germ. Med. p. 133.
VEssalius was busied in the dissection of the body of a Person of Quality,
meaning to find out the root of that distemper, which was supposed to have
given him his death, when to his grief he found that which he looked not for:
The heart panted, and there appeared other convincing signs, that the
unfortunate Nobleman might have lived, had not he been so unseasonably
Butchered: this cost the Anatomist much trouble and disgrace; and it has
fallen out with many others in the like manner, who while they have been
gratifying their curiosity, have occasioned irreparable injuries to themselves
or others.

Schot. Phys. curios. l. 1. c. 36. p. 177. H^yw. ^l^r. l. 7. p. 480.
1. Cornelius Agrippa living in Lorrain, had a young man who Tabled with him,
one day being to go abroad he left the Keys of his Study with his Wife, but
with great charge to keep them safe, Delrio disq. magic. l. 2. Q^. 29.. 1. p.
356.
and trust them to no man. The youth overcurious of Novelty, never ceased to
importune the woman till ^he had lent him the Key to take view of his Library:
he entered it, and light upon a Book of Conjurations, wherein reading, he
straight hears a great bouncing at the door; but not minding that, he reads on:
the knocking grew greater and louder: but he making no answer, the Devil breaks
open the door and enters, enquires what he commands him to have done, or why he
was called: the youth amazed, and through extreme fear not able to answer, the
Devil ^eises upon him, and wriths his neck in sunder. Agrippa returns and finds
the young man dead, and the Devils insulting over the Corpse, he retires to his
Art and calls his Devil to an account of what had been done, who told him all
that had passed: then he commanded the Homicide to enter the body, and walk
with him into the Marketplace, where the Students were frequent; and after two
or three turns there, to forsake the body; he did so, the body falls down dead
before the Scholars: all judge the reason of it, some sudden fit of an
Apoplexy, but the marks about his neck and jaws rendered it somewhat suspicious;
Agrippa concealed this story in Lorrain: but being banished thence, he
afterward feared not to publish it in Lorrain.

2. The Emperor Carracalla had a curiosity to know the name of him who was
most like to succeed him, H^yl. Cosmo. p. 790. Speeds hist. p. 232. Chetwinds
hist. collect. c^nt. 7. p. 181. Herodia^. l. 4. p. 236, 237.
and employed one Maternianus to enquire amongst the Magicians of the Empire,
by whom accordingly he was advertised, that Macrinus was to be the man: the
Letters being brought unto Carracalla as he was in his Chariot, were by him
delivered with the rest of his Pacquets to the hands of Macrinus (who was
Captain of his Guard, and by his o^fice to attend upon the person of the
Emperor) that he might open them, and signify unto him the contents thereof
at his better leisure. Macrinus finding by these the danger in which he stood,
resolved to strike the first blow, and to that end entrusted Martialis one of
his Centurions with the Execution, by whom the Emperor was slain at Edessa as
he was going to make water.

3. Natholicus, Fitz-Herb. of Relig. and Policy, par. 1. c. 36. p. 449, 450.
King of Scotland, sent a great favorite of his to enquire of a famous Witch,
what should be the success of a War which he had in hand, and other things
concerning his person and estate, to whom she answered That Natholicus should
not live long, and that he should be killed by one of his own servants; and
being further urged to tell by whom? She said, that the Messenger himself
should kill him; who, though he departed from her with great disdain, and
reviled her, protesting that first he wo^ld suffer ten thousand deaths: yet
thinking better upon the matter in his return, and imagining that the King
might come to know of the Witches answer by some means or other, and hold him
ever after suspected, or perhaps make him away, resolved to kill him, which he
presently after performed: Thus was that Prince punished for his wicked
curiosity, in seeking by such unlawful means to know the secret determinations
of God.

4. Such was the fatally venturous curiosity of the elder Pliny, Mr. Boyles
Ext. Phil. Essay p. 4. Kornman. de mira^. mort. l. 6. c. 36. p. 18.
that as the younger relates, he could not be deterred by the formidableness of
the destructive flames vomited by V^suvius, from endeavoring by their light to
read the nature of such Vulcanian Hills: but in spite of all the disswasions
of his friends, and the affrighting eruptions of that hideous place, he
resolved that flaming wonder should rather kill him than escape him; and
thereupon approached so near that he lost his life to satisfy his curiosity,
and fell (if I may so speak) a Martyr to Physiologie.

5. Alipius the intimate friend of St. Augustine went to Rome to improve
himself in the study of the Law, Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 231, 232.
Augu^tin. Retract. l. 6. c. 8. p. 73.
and one day was unwillingly drawn to accompany them to a sword-Play. Though,
says he, you may compel my body, yet my eyes and mind you can lay no force
upon. And therefore when he came to the Theater he sat with his eyes closed:
but hearing a mighty shout of the people, overcome with curiosity, and trusting
to himself that he was able both to see and despise whatsoever it should be, he
opened his eyes and saw the blood that was drawn, drinking up with the sight
the same immanity wherewith it was shed and beheld by others: so that falling
into a present delight and approbation of that bloody pleasure, he not only
returned thither often himself, but drew others to the same place upon the like
occasion.

Gaulter. tab. Chron. p. 17.
6. Nero the Emperor, about the sixty sixth year of Christ, possessed at once
with a mad spirit of cruelty, and I know not what kind of foolish curiosity,
that he might have the lively representation of the burning of Troy, caused a
great part of the City of Rome to be set on fire; and afterward to conceal
himself from being thought the author of so great a villainy, by an unparalleled
slander, he cast the guilt of so horrid a fact upon the Christians: whereupon
an innumerable company of those Innocents were accused, and put to death, with
variety of most cruel tortures.

7. In the Land of Transiane there was a Prince tributary to the King of Pegu,
Vicent le Blan^'s Travels, tom. 1. c. 32. p. 145.
and his near Kinsman named Alfonge, who married a sister of the Prince of
Tazatay, her name was Abelara, one of the greatest beauties in the Eastern
parts: they lived a sweet and happy life with entire affection; and for their
greater felicity they had two Twin sons, who in their under-growth discovered
something of great and lofty, and appeared singularly hopeful for the future.
These Infants having attained their ten years, loved so cordially they could
not live asunder, and the ones desire still met with the others consent in all
things: but the Devil, the enemy of concord, inspires a curiosity into the
minds of the father and mother to know their fates: and to their grief they
were told the time should come when these two Brothers that now loved so
fondly, should cut one another throats, which much astonished the poor
Princes, and filled them with fearful apprehensions. The two Princes being come
to their fifteen years, one said to the other, Brother, it must needs be you
that must murder me, for I will sooner die a hundred deaths than do you the
least imaginable harm. The other replied, Believe it not, good brother, I
desire you, for you are as dear and dearer to me than my self. But the father
to prevent the misfortune, resolved to separate them, whereupon they grew so
troubled and melancholy, that he was constrained to protract his design till an
occasion happened that invited all three, the father and two sons to a War
betwixt the Kings of Narsinga and Pegu, upon title of Territories: but by the
mediation of Bramins a peace was concluded, upon condition these two young
Princes should espouse the two daughters of the King of Narsinga, and that the
King of Pegu, on him that married the elder, should confer all the Countries he
took in the last War, with the Kingdom of Martaban: and the other brother,
besides the Kingdom of Tazatay, should have that of Verma; the Nuptials
consummated, each departed to his Territory; Lands spaciously divided. Now it
fell out that the King of Tazatay was engaged in a sharp War with the King of
Mandranella, and sent to the two brother Princes for aid: who both hastened
(unknown to each other) with great strength to his assistance. He from Verma
came secretly to Town to visit a Lady (once their ancient Mistress) and the
other brother being on the same design, they met at the Ladies gate by night,
not knowing one another, where furious with jealousy, after some words, they
drew and killed each other. One of them dying, gave humble thanks to God that
he had prevented the direful Destiny of his Horoscope, not being the Assasine
of his brother as 'twas prejudicated: hereupon the other ^inding him by his
voice and discourse, drawing near his end himself, crept to him, and embraced
him with tears and lamentations, and so both dolefully ended their days
together. The father being advertised of it, seeing his white hairs led by his
own fault to so hard fortune, overborn with grief and despair, came and slew
himself upon the bodies of his sons; and with the grief and tears of all the
people, were buried all three in one Monument: which shows us the danger of too
great curiosity.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Ignorance of the Ancients, and others.
THere never was, nor is there ever like to be (in this World) a beauty of that
absolute compleatness and perfection, but there was some Mole to be discerned
upon it; ^r at least some such thing as might have been wished away. It is not
therefore the design of this Chapter to uncover the nakedness of our Fathers,
so as to expose it to the petulancy of any, but rather to congratulate those
further accessions of light and improvements in knowledge, which these latter
Ages have attained unto, and to celebrate the wisdom and goodness of the great
Creator, who has not been so liberal in his impartments to our Progenitors,
but that he has reserved something wherewith to gratify the modest inquiries,
and industrious researches of aftertimes.

1. That there were any such men as Antipodes, Heyl. Cosm. p. 24. Herb* Trav.
l. 1. p. 6. Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 8. p. 248, 249. Purch. Pilg. tom. 1. l. 8. c.
1. p. 895.
was in former times reckoned a matter so ridiculous and impossible, that
Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz, happening to see a Tractate written by Virglius,
Bishop of Saltzburg, touching the Antipodes, not knowing what damnable Doctrine
might be couched under that strange name, made complaint first to the Duke of
Bohemia, and afterward to Pope Zachary, Anno 745. by whom the poor Bishop
(unfortunate only in being Learned in such a time of ignorance) was condemned
of Heresy. Even S. Austin and La^tantius, and some other of the ancient
Writers, condemn this point of the Antipodes for an incredible ridiculous
fable; and venerable Bede esteemed it for no better.

Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 8.. 3. p. 355.
2. The famous King Ethelbert had this Epitaph set upon him, which in those
days passed with applause, Rex Ethelbertus hic clauditur in Polyandro,
Fana pians certus Christo meat absque Meandro.
King Ethelbert lies here
Closed in this Polyander:
For building Churches sure he goes
To Christ without Meander.


Full. Eccles. hist. in his praes. to the second book, p. 47.
3. And how low Learning ran in our Land amongst the native Nobility, some two
hundred years since, in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, too plainly appears
by the Motto on the sword of the Martial, Earl of Shrewsbury, which was, Sum
Talboti, pro occidere in imicos meos, the best Latin that Lord, and perchance
his Chaplains too (in that Age) could afford.

4. Rhemigius, an Interpreter of St. Paul's Epistles, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 7..
2. p. 236.
Commenting upon these words, A vobis diffamatus est sermo, tells us that
diffamatus was somewhat improperly put for divulgatus: St. Paul being not very
solicitous of the propriety of words. Whereupon Ludovicus Vives demands, What
shall we say to these Masters in Israel, who know not that St. Paul wrote not
in Latin but in Greek?

Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 7.. 2. p. 236.
5. It appears by the rescript of Pope Zacchary to Boniface a German Bishop,
that a Priest in those parts baptized in this form, Baptizo te in nomine patria
and filia and spiritua sancta. And by Erasmus, that some Divines in his time,
would prove that Heretics were to be put to death, because the Apostle says,
Haereticum hominem devita, which it seems they understood as if he had said, De
vita toll.

6. Du Pratt, a Bishop and Chancellor of France, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 7.. 2. p.
236.
having received a Letter from Henry the eighth, King of England, to King
Francis the first of France, wherein, amongst other things, he wrote Mitto tibi
duodecem Molossos, I send you twelve Mastiff Dogs: the Chancellor taking
Molossos to signi^ie Mules, made a Journey on purpose to Court to beg them of
the King, who wondering at such a Present to be sent him from England, demanded
the sight of the Letter, and smiling thereat, the Chancellor finding himself
deceived, told him that he mistook Molossos for Muletos, and so hoping to mend
the matter made it worse.

Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 8.. 1. p. 247.
7. The ignorance of former Ages was so gross in the point of Geography, that
what time Pope Clement the sixth, had elected Lewis of Spain to be the Prince
of the Fortunate Islands, and for his aid and assistance therein had Mustered
Soldiers in France and Italy; our Countrymen were verily persuaded that he
was chosen Prince of Britain, as one of the Fortunate Islands. And our very
Leiger Ambassadors there with the Pope, were so deeply settled in this
opinion, that forthwith they withdrew themselves from Rome, and hasted with
all speed into England, there to certify their friends and Countrymen of the
matter.

8. The head of Nilus was to the Ancients utterly unknown, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c.
8.. 1. p. 248.
as witnesses Herodotus, Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus, to which Ovid alludes,
Nilus in extremum fugit perterritu^ orbem,
Occuluitque caput quod adhuc la^et. --
Nile sled for fear to the Worlds utmost bound,
And hid his head which cannot yet be found.
But, says Pererius upon Genesis, as many other things are found out unknown
to the Ancients, so likewise amongst others, the head-spring of Nilus; and that
in vast Marshes, near the Mountain of the Moon, not far from the famous
Promontory of Good Hope, where is the utmost bound of the Continent, according
to the Latitude of the Globe of the earth Southward.

9. It is very observable and indeed admirable, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 8.. 1. p.
248. Joseph. against Apion. l. 1. p. 768.
that neither Herodotus nor Thucydides, nor any other Greek Author contemporary
with them, have so much as mentioned the Romans, though then growing up to a
dreadful power, and being both Europeans. And for the Gauls and Spaniards, the
Grecians, as witnesses Budaeus (in his Book De Ass) were so utterly ignorant
of them, that Ephorus, one of the most accurate Writers took Spain, which he
calls Iberia, to be a City, though the Cosmographers make the circuit of it to
contain above 1136 French Miles.

10. The Ancients held, Herb. Trav. l. 3. p. 343.
that under the middle or burning Zone, by reason of excessive heat, the earth
was altogether uninhabitable: but it is now made evident by experience, that
there is as healthful, temperate and pleasant dwelling as any where in the
World, as appears by the relations of Benzo, Acosta, Herbert, and others.

11. They were also altogether ignorant of the New World, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c.
8.. 1. p. 249.
which is known to us by the name of America, or the West Indies, till such
time as it was discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Genoan, Anno 1492.

12. Archbishop Parker (in his Antiquitates Britannicae) makes relation of a
French Bishop, Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 7.. 2. p. 237.
who being to take his Oath to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and ^inding the
word Metropoliticae therein, being not able to pronounce it, he passed it over
with, Soit pour dict, Let it be as spoken. And others of the Clergy, when they
had most grossly broken Priscians head, being taken in the fact, their common
defense was those words of St. Gregory, Non debent verba coelestis oraculi,
subesse regulis Donati, The word^ of the Heavenly Oracles ought not to be
subject to the Rules of Donatus.

13. King Alfred in his Preface upon the Pastorals of St. Gregory, Hak. Apol.
in advert. 3. p. 5.
which he translated into English, says, That when he came first to his
Kingdom, he knew not one Priest on the South side of the River Humber, that
understood his service in Latin, or that could translate an Epistle into
English.

14. Archelaus, Coel. Antiq. lect. l. 7. c. 28. p. 326.
King of Macedon, was so ignorant in the things of nature, that upon an Eclipse
of the Sun, amazed with fear, he caused the Gates of the Palace to be shut up,
and the hair of his son to be cut off, as he used in solemn mournings. A
further survey of the ignorance of the Ancients may be taken from a
re-collection of some of the instances of the newly discovered Phenomenon (at
least if we believe Mr. Glanvile) which are scattered, Glanvil. plus ultra. c.
10. p. 73, 74, 75.
as he says, under the heads of the Arts and Instruments, which are as follow.
In the Heavens, those of the Spots, and Dinettick motion of the Sun; the
mountainous protuberances and shadows of the body of the Moon, about nineteen
magnitudes more of fixed Stars; the Lunulae of Jupiter; their mutual Eclipsing
one another, and its turning round upon its own Axis; the ring about Saturn,
and its shadow upon the body of that Star; the Phases of Venus; the increment
and decrement of light amongst the Planets; the appearing and disappearing of
fixed Stars; the altitude of Comets; and nature of the Via Lactea. In the Air,
its spring; the more accurate History and nature of Winds and Meteors; the
probable height of the Atmosphere have been added by the Lord Bacon, Des
Carts, Mr. Boil, and others. In the earth, new Lands by Columbus, Magellan,
and the rest of the discoverers; and in these new Plants, new Fruits, new
Animals, new Minerals, and a kind of other world of Nature, from which this is
supplied with numerous conveniences for life. In the Waters, the great motion
of the Sea, unknown in elder times; and the particular Laws of flux and reflux
in many places are discovered. The History of Bathes, augmented by Savonarola,
Baccius, and Blanchellus. Of Metals, by Agricola; and the whole Subterranean
World described by the universally Learned Kircher. The History of Plants much
improved by Mathiolu^, Ruellius, Bauhinus, and Gerhard, besides the late
account of English Vegetables, published by Dr. Merrett, a worthy Member of the
Royal Society; and another excellent Virtuoso of the same Assembly, Mr. John
Evelyn, has very considerably advanced the History of Fruit and Forest Trees,
by his Sylva and Pomona, and greater things are expected from his preparations
for Elysium Britannicum, a noble design now under his hands. The History of
Animals has been much enlarged by Gesner, Rondeletius, Aldrovandus, and more
accurately enquired into by the Micographers, and the late Travelers, who have
given us accounts of those more remote parts of the Earth, that have been less
known to these; amongst whom the ingenious Author of the Carribees deserves to
be mentioned as an instance. In our Bodies Natural History has found a rich
heap of Materials in the particulars of the Venae Lacteae; the Vasa Lymphatica;
of the Valves and Sinus of the Veins; the several new passages and Glandules;
the Ductus Chyliferus; the Origination of the Nerves; the Circulation of the
Blood, and the rest.

Sandys in Ovid. M^t. l. 7. p. 144.
15. Great men and Learned, says Pliny, who know more in natural causes than
others do, feared the extinction of the Stars, or some mischief to befall them
in their Eclipses: Pindaru^ and Stesichorus were subject to this fear,
attributing the failing of their lights to the power of Witchcraft.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Sloathfulness and Idleness of some men.
IT is said of the Elder Cato, That he used to inflame the minds of his fellow
Soldiers to the love of Industry, Labor and Virtue, with such kind of
Memorials as this: Si cum labor quippiam recte geris,
Labor recedit, facta recte permanent:
Quod si jocose, nequiter quid egeris,
Abit voluptas; turpe factum permanet.
which because it pleased me in the reading, and may possibly do the like to
some others, for the sake of the English Reader, I will adventure thus to
translate, When what is good, we do perform with pain:
The pains soon pass, the good deeds still remain.
When slothfully or basely ought is done,
Those base deeds stay, when all the pleasure's gone.
Indeed all the Ancient Romans were such haters of Idleness, Camer. oper. subc.
cent. 1. c. 15. p. 90.
that whereas Agenotia, which was to stir up to action; Stimula, which was to
put on further; and Strenua, which was to make men Strenuous, were all three
received as Goddesses to be worshipped in Temples within the City; they would
not receive Quies or rest, as a Goddess in public, but built a Temple for her
in the Lavicanian way, which was without the City. And thither may those
unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth go with their Sacrifices, who are
like unto these that follow.

1. Altades, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 32. p. 137.
the twelfth King of Babylon, an idle and slothful person, laid down these two
as his Maxims, He is a vain and foolish man, who with continual labor and
misery, makes War to the destruction of himself and others. His other was this,
He is the most fool of all, that with toil and labor heaps up Treasure, not
for himself but his Posterity. From this idle Philosophy he collected two
things, That no War was to be made, because of the labor; and a second, That
we should enjoy the riches and glory, that was got by the sweat and miseries of
others. Accordingly he framed his life, and spent his whole time amongst Whores
and Catamites.

2. There was, Camer. oper. subcis. ce^* 2. c. 32. p. 137.
says Olaus Magnus, a Stageplayer, who was grown to an unreasonable
corpulency; and well he might, for he could eat as much as ten men, and da^ly
used so to do: one of the Kings of Denmark being informed of him, and that he
lived a kind of idle li^e; that he might no longer be a public grievance, and
a devourer of that ^ood which was only due to them that labored in their
employments, he caused him to be hanged up.

3. Varia Servilius, Textor. Offic. l. ^. c. 47. p. 679.
descended of a Pretorian Family, was remarkable for no other thing, save only
his idleness, in which he grew old: insomuch as it was commonly said by such as
passed by his house, Varia hic situs est, Here lies Varia, speaking of him as
of a person that was not only dead, but buried.

Textor. Offic. l. 5. c. 47. p. 679.
4. Domi^ianus the Emperor, the son of Vespatianus and Domicilla, while he held
the Empire, was so given up to sloth and idleness, that he spent most part of
his time in pricking of flies to death with the point of a needle or bodkin: so
that when once it was demanded of one who was come out from him, Who was with
the Emperor? His answer was, Ne musca quidem, Not so much as a fly.

Textor. Offic. l. 5. c. 47. p. 679.
5. Alexander, the son of Basilius Macedo, was Emperor, when he was a young man
about twenty years of age, at which time, and after he was so devoted to sloth
and idleness, that laying aside the care of all matters of weight and Moment,
he minded nothing else but Hunting, Horses, and Dogs, placing therein all his
employment and delight.

Textor. Offic. l. 5. c. 47. p. 679.
6. Romanus, the Grandchild of Romanus Laucapenus, was a man the most slothful
of all other men: he wholly resigned up himself to drinking of Wine, to
idleness, and other pleasures: so that the care of the Empire was entrusted in
the hands of Josephus Bringa, the Prefect, merely upon the account of the
extreme wretchlesness of the Emperor.

Textor. Offic. l. 5. c. 47. p. 679.
7. Charles, the son of Ludovicus Carolinus, King of France, when he succeeded
his father in the Kingdom, was so noted for his singular sluggis^ness, that he
was commonly called Charles the slothful: for he minded nothing that was
serious, insomuch that he consumed and wasted away with mere idleness; and dyed
young, leaving his Throne to be possessed by his son.

Herod. l. 5. Zuin. Theat. vol. 20. l. 1. p. 3639.
8. The Thracians accounted it the most honorable to be without any kind of
employment: Husbandry and Tillage of the ground was looked upon by them as most
contemptible; the gallantest way to procure them a livelihood, was (as they
held) by the Wars, by Rapine, and Plunder.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 20. l. 1. p. 3639.
9. The Sybarites did throw out of their City, and banish from amongst them all
such sorts of Artificers, and Handicrafts men as did make any noise, that so
they might have full scope in the enjoyment of their rest and repose, and have
no disturbance in the morning.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 20. l. 1. p. 3640.
10. The Thespienses esteemed it a great blemish to their Nobility to concern
themselves in the study or practice of any Mechanical Art or Trade, yea they
held themselves dishonored to be busied in Agriculture it self: by this means,
the people generally lived in extreme poverty.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 20. l. 1. p. 3640.
11. The Messaliani, a sort of Heretics, and Enthusiasts, reject all bodily
labor, indulging themselves in the greatest idleness and sloth that may be,
expecting the coming of a certain Devil, whom they believe to be the Holy Ghost.

Camer. med. hist. cent. 1. c. 16. p. 94.
12. Camerarius relates a pleasant History from Iodocus Damhoud on this manner.
As I was sitting, says he, with some Senators of Bruges, before the gate of
the Senate House, a certain Beggar presented himself to us, who with sighs and
tears, and lamentable gestures, expressed to us his miserable poverty, and
asked our alms, saying withal, That he had about him a privy maim, and a secret
mischief, which very shame restrained him from discovering to the eyes of men:
We all pitying the case of the poor man, gave him each of us something, and he
departed: one amongst us sent his servant after him, with command to enquire
out of him, what his private infirmity might be, which he was so loath to
discover? The servant overtook him, and desired of him that satisfaction; and
having diligently viewed his Face, Breast, Arms, etc. and finding all his Limbs
in good plight, I see nothing, said he, whereof you have any such reason to
complain. Alas, said the Beegar, the disease that afflicts me is far different
from what you conceive of, and is such as you cannot see. It is an evil that
has crept over my whole body, it is passed through the very veins and marrow
of me, in such manner, that there is no one member of my body that is able to
do any work: this disease is by some called Idleness and sloth. The servant
hearing this, left him in anger, and returned to us with this account of him:
which after we had well laughed at, we sent to make further enquiry after this
beggar; but he had withdrawn himself.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the blockish dullness and stupidity of some persons.
PLiny mentions a sort of Bears, and we also read it of certain Asses in
Tuscany, that having fed upon Hemlock, they became so stupid that no sharp
words of their Keeper, or others, would in the least work upon them: We shall
find these heavy creatures out-acted in their dullness and insensibility by
men, whose passions, senses and reason may seem to have been overwhelmed in
them, beyond what could be expected (I was about to say) from the force and
power of Poppy, or any Opiate whatsoever.

1. Agatharcides speaks of a certain people in Aethiopia, Diodor. Sic. rer.
Antiq. l. 3. c. 3. p. 75.
who live without any kind of passion, they are not moved with the speech or
sight of any such foreigners as fail thither, but looking backward they stand
as if they were immovable, and without sense. If any strike them with a drawn
sword they fly not, bearing all strokes and injuries whatsoever. No man is
troubled at the wound or loss of another: so that they often see their Wives,
Children, or other relations slain before their face, and yet express no sign
either of anger or pity. In a word, they bear all sorts of evils with a quiet
mind, only looking upon such as strike them, and at every stroke, a little
moving of their heads.

2. Honorius the Emperor being at Ravenna, Camer. oper. subcis. cen. 2. c. 89.
p. 340. Zonar. Annal. to. 3. p. 122.
when Rome was taken by Alarick King of the Goths; he there received the news
Perditam Romam esse, that Rome was lost: he understood it of a Cock of the Game
he had which was called Roma; and exceedingly wondered that he was so soon dead,
when he had sported pleasantly with him but a while before. Of so dull and
stupid a temper was this Prince, retaining nothing at all of the virtue of his
Father or Grandfather; and of the like disposition was Arcadius his Brother.

3. The Turks in the Reign of Orchanes, Knowles Turk. hist. p. 185, 186.
had passed over the Hellespont, and taken the Castle of Zembenick, by the
Greeks called Coiridocastron, that is to say, the Hogg Castle; this was the
first footing the Turks ever had in Europe, and from whence to this day they
could never be removed; but such was the great security, and stupidity of the
proud Greeks at this time, that instead of arming to drive them out, as with
ease they might; to extenuate the greatness of the loss, they commonly said
there was but an Hogstie lost, alluding to the name of the Castle. This Castle
gained, the Turks soon proceeded further to spoil the Country of Chersonesus as
far as Callipolis; which pleasant City they took Anno 1358. where the madness
and stupidity of the Greeks was again more than before to be wondered at; for
the news of Callipolis being brought to Constantinople, the people there made
small account thereof; but to extenuate the matter, when they had any talk of
it, in jesting wise they commonly said, that the Turks had but taken from them
a pottle of Wine.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 2. p. 145. Sueton. p. 225, 227. in Claudio. Lonic. Thea.
p. 471.
4. Messalina was the Wife of the Emperor Claudius, whom she and his Freed-men
governed as a little Aethiope uses to do an Elephant. The great stupidity of
this Emperor will appear, by the impudent boldness, and prodigious license she
took in his lifetime. Diverse of the Nobility she caused to be slain, and more
to be banished. And for lust I suppose there was not such a monster to be found
for some ages before. Her adulteries were daily, and those not only in private,
but in the very Palace, in the presence both of Ladies and their Husbands, as
if she delighted in the infamy it self. In the night time she used to go
disguised into the common stews, and there prostituted her self amongst the
rest of those unhappy sacrifices, received her stipend, wearying her self, but
not satisfying her lust. Once she thus flouted her Husband; There was one
Mnester a Stage Player, with whom she was fallen in love; and him according to
her modesty she courted. The man refused, whether out of reverence to the
Emperor, or fear that he should not carry the defilement of his Bed with
impunity; at which the Empress said laughing, What if my Claudius himself
command you, will you then obey? This seemed incredible: but to her Husband she
goes, persuades that Stock to send for Mnester, and command him to obey her in
all things; from thenceforth the Player made no other denial. This is not all.
There was in Rome one Cajus Silius, the most beautiful of all the Roman youth;
him she enticed, enjoyed, and openly loved: as his reward, she made him Consul,
and transferred the Riches and Ornaments of the Court to his House; so that he
was now revered as the Prince; and yet not satisfied with this, she must have a
new sauce to her languishing pleasure: she therefore openly marries him, while
her Husband had retired to Hostia: the Nuptials were celebrated with all kind
of pomp; the flower of both orders in Rome were invited; a great Feast was
made, the genial bed prepared, and all usual solemnities performed; the Bride
lay in the lap of her new married Husband, and treated him openly with all
conjugal freedom: this is strange, her Husband being living, and also Emperor,
but it was done, and had passed untaken notice of for him, but that his
freed-men about him (fearing such novelties would tend to a change, and so
hazard their fortunes) excited him to revenge; at last therefore he gave order
for his Wifes death; but with so little concern, and memory of what he had
done, that he often asked his Servants why their Lady came not to Dinner, as if
she had been still alive.

5. When Valerianus, P^zel. Mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 231.
the Emperor, was taken prisoner by Sapores the Persian; and by him made his
footstool, as often as he mounted his horse; His Son Gallienus succeeded him at
Rome, who no way solicitous what became of his Father or the Empire, gave up
himself to all manner of debauchery and voluptuousness; ever and anon saying to
those that were about him, What have we for Dinner, what pleasures are prepared
for us, what shall we have for Supper to morrow; what Plays, what Sports in the
Cirque, what sword-fights, and what Scenick pastimes? So far was he dissolved
by his luxury into stupidity and insensibleness, that when report was brought
him of his Fathers death; his answer was, That he knew his Father was mortal.
When he heard Egypt was revolted, What, said he jesting, can we not be without
the flax of Egypt? When he was told that Asia was wasted, Can we not live, said
he, without the delights of Asia? When news came that Gallia was lost, Cannot,
said he, the state be safe without trabeated Cassocks? Thus in his loss from
all the parts of the world, he jested; as if he were only deprived of that
which furnished him with some inconsiderable trifle. So that in contempt of
him, not only foraign Nations rent away the Roman Provinces; but also in diverse
parts of the world, so many aspired unto the Empire, that no less than thirty
such pretenders are named, from the time of his Fathers, and his reign, to his
death.

6. Polydorus, Aelian. var. hist. l. 13. c. 15. p. 369.
by the Comic Poets, is said to be a man of extraordinary dullness and
stupidity of mind; and he had also a skin of that hardness, that a pin would
not enter into it.

7. Sivardus, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 224.
hearing of the death of his Father Regnerus, King of the Danes, and how he had
been thrown amongst Serpents, to be poisoned and eaten up by them, at the
command of Hella, King of the Britains; was so stupefied with the grief he
received thereat; that while he stood full of thoughts, leaning upon a Spear he
held in his hand, the point of his Spear ran quite through his foot; and
remained insensible of the wound he had received by it.

8. Charles the eighth, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 225.
having conquered the Kingdom of Naples, was upon his return into France, when
the Venetians, Pope Alexander the sixth, Maximilian the Emperor and Lewis Duke
of Millaine, entered into a league with that silence, that Philip, the King of
France his Ambassador then at Venice, though he was daily in the Court, and
called to by the other Ambassadors, yet could know nothing of it. The next day
when the League was engrossed, he was called into the Senate by the Duke; and
when he understood the League, and the names of them that had entered into it,
he was almost quite bere^t of his understanding: the Duke told him, that the
League was not made with purpose to war upon any, but to defend themselves if
they were warred upon. Then Philip a little coming to himself, What then, said
he, shall not my King return into France? Yes said the Duke, if he will return
in a friendly manner, and we will assist him in all things. With this answer
Philip departed out of the Senate; and being come into the Courtyard, he
turned to a Secretary of the Senates, that had been with him all the while; And
for the love of God, said he, tell me over again all that the Duke said to me,
for at this time I do not remember one word of it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the treacherous and infirm Memories of some men, and what
injuries have been done thereunto, through Age, diseases or other accidents.
THe Lynx is the sharpest sighted of all other beasts, yet it is also observed
of him, that if he chance to look behind him, he forgets all that was before
him, and his mind loses whatsoever it is that his eyes have ceased to see.
There are some indeed whose forgetfulness may be imputed to the stupidity of
their natures; but there are others also of extraordinary acuteness and
ingenuity, who are so unhappy, as to be attended with a miserable frailty in
their memory; and some very learned men have been so unfortu^ate, as (through
Age, disease, the vehement surprisal of some passion, or other accident) to
have utterly lost all that their industry had gained.

Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 24. p. 168. Solin. c. 7. p. 195. Sabell. Ex. l. 10.
c. 9. p. 583.
1. Pliny tells of one, that with the stroke of a Stone, fell presently to
forget his Letters only, in such manner as he could read no more, otherwise his
memory served him well enough. Another, says he, with a fall from the roof a
very high house, lost the remembrance of his own Mother, his next Kinsfolks,
Friends and Neighbors; and a third in a sickness of his, forgot his own
servants: and upon the like occasion, Messala Corvinus the great Orator, forgot
his own proper name, though he remembered other things well enough.

Schenck. Obser. Med. l. 1. Obs. 1. p. 68. Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 35.
2. Franciscus Barbarus (the friend of Hermolaus) in his old age lost all memory
of his Greek learning, wherein before he was excellently skilled; and the same
thing befell Georgius Trapezuntius, who in his extreme age forgot all kind of
Learning, both Greek and Latin.

Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 2. p. 68.
3. Apollonius tells of Artemidoru^ the Grammarian, who having, as he walked,
espied a Crocodile lying on the Sands, and perceiving him to move, was so
smitten with the apprehension of fear, that he verily believed that his left
Leg and Hand were already devoured by the Serpent, and utterly los^ all the
memory of his Learning.

Coel. Antiq. lect. l. 13. c. 31. p. 616. Senec. Epist. 27. p.
4. Seneca writes of Calvis^^, Sabinus a rich man, that he had so slender a
memory, tha^ sometimes he forgot the name of Vlyss^^, at others that of
Achill^s, and so of Priamus whose names yet he knew as well as we do those of
our School^ masters, and yet this man was very ambitious of being thought to be
a learned man.

Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 3. p. 68.
5. Ba^^a, King of the Goths, by a draught of Poison, given him by his successor
Heringius, utterly lost the use of his memory.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 4. p. 68.
6. In the reign of the Emperor Frederick the second, one Germanus a Clerk,
having opened a vein, whereat he might lose some blood, together with it lost
all memory of Learning* nor could be better tell how to write or read, than if
he had never learnt either, but in the mean time he still retained all other
things. A year together he continued in this Kind of oblivion, till (which is
strange) being let blood again, at the same time of the year, in the same
place, he was restored to his former knowledge of reading and writing.

7. A certain Franciscan, Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 8. p. 68.
being recovered of a disease, was suddenly so deprived of his memory, that
although he was an able Divine, yet he did not understand the first Elements,
nor could he remember the names of those things which he daily used. Four
months did he thus continue, and began to learn his Alphabet; but by the use of
powerful medicines, he recovered all his former learning, in the next four
months.

8. When Curio the Orator, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 36.
was to plead in the behalf of Sex. Naevius, and Cicero was to do the like for
Titinia Corta; upon the sudden Curio forgot the whole cause, and said it was
occasioned by the witchcraft and enchantments of Titinia. But the truth is, he
had naturally so frail a memory, that sometimes propounding to insist upon
three heads, he would either add a fourth, or have forgotten the third. And in
his writings, usually he forgot what he had set down before.

9. Hermogenes was born in Cilicia, Quenstedht Dialog. de Patr. vir. Illustr.
p. 496.
a Rhetorician of that account, that he may challenge the next place to
Aristotle; he was scarce eighteen years old, when he wrote the Art of
Rhetoric, which is yet extant. He was in great reputation for his learning, in
the reign of Marcus Aurelius; but being arrived to the twenty fourth year of
his age, he fell into an invincible and incurable stupidity of mind; so that he
forgot all manner of learning: whereupon they used to say, by way of jest,
Hermogenes was an old Man amongst Boys, and a Boy amongst old men; he
flourished Anno Christi 160.

10. Antonius of Siena, Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 8. p. 68.
being newly recovered of a disease, did so perfectly forget all that he had
before fixed in his memory, that he remembered not so much as the names of
things: while he was at Florence, he believed he was at Siena; he knew not his
friends from his enemies, but called them by other names; and therefore as a
mere mad Man and Dotard, he was left to Nature. It was now twenty days since he
was thus affected; when a looseness took him, wherein he voided blood, green
choler and other things, and was thereby restored to his former memory, though
he remembered nothing of what he had done in the mean time.

11. In Cla^dius Caesar, Sutton. l. 5. c. 39. p. 227. Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 36.
there was nothing that men wondered more at, than his forgetfulness and
inconsiderateness. When Messalina his Empress was slain by his command, as soon
as he was sat down to Supper, he enquired of the Servitors, why their Lady did
not come. And many of those whom he had put to death, the next day he invited
into Council, and to play at Dice; and as if they made little haste, he sent
messengers to reprove them for their sloth.

12. Th^anus writes of Theodore Beza* Iohnst. not. hist. Cl. 10. c. 9. p. 353.
that before he died, when his mind was grown feeble, he forgot things present*
but what was printed in his memory afore-time, when he had his understanding,
that he held, and it continued thus with him, during the two years wherein he
languished.

Coel. Antiq. lect. l. 20. c. 10. p. 933.
13. So stupid and so dull of memory was Atticus the Son of Herod the Sophist,
that by no means he could be brought to retain the names of the first Elements,
or letters in the Alphabet. His father to remedy this evil, procured twenty
four boys of like age with his son; and gave to each of them a surname from
the several letters, that at least by this means he might instruct the gross
capacity of his son.

Langii Polyanth. p. 811.
14. The Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, had so profited in learning and
Philosophy, that he was numbered amongst the learned: and used to employ a great
part of the day in philosophical discourses and disputations. But afterward he
was seized upon with so great a forgetfulness of all sorts of learning, as if
he had never had the least acquaintance with letters.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 36.
15. When Theseus was about to sail into Creet, with a purpose to encounter with
the Minotaur there, his father commanded him all the way in his Voyage thither,
to make use of black sails; but in case he should be victorious, in his return
homewards, he should then advance his white flags, as the sure sign of his
being a Conqueror. Theseus utterly forgot all that his Father had given him in
charge: when therefore the careful old man stood almost continually upon the
Rocks, in a longing expectation of his Sons arrival; at last he set his eye
upon the ship, which he knew; but observing that the sails of it were black,
and concluding that his Son was perished in that his unfortunate enterprise, as
one who was not able to survive that which was once so dear and desirable to
him, he cast himself headlong from the Rock into the Sea, and was there drowned.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 36.
16. Conradus Lycosthenes in the year 1555. was suddenly taken with a dead
Palsy on his right side, by which he lost the use of his speech; and though he
retained his reason, yet his memory was quite gone for diverse days. At last
being restored to his wonted health, he lived seven years, with his memory as
perfect and entire as ever.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the absurd and strange follies of diverse men.
SOme little deviations of any of the lesser lights, would scarce be heeded by
us, but should the Sun make but one false step, the eyes of almost all the
world would be suddenly directed that way: thus the follies of mean persons are
lightly passed over; whereas the impertinences of Princes, and the dotages of
great persons, are as generally observed and censured, as those foolish and
ridiculous customs, wherewith whole Nations at once have been tainted and
infected.

History of the Caribby Islands, l. 2. c. 23. p. 337.
1. Amongst the Caribbians as soon as the wife is delivered, the husband goes to
bed to bemoan himself there, and act the part of the woman in that condition;
but what is most troublesome to the poor Caribbian who has put himself into
bed instead of his new delivered wife is, that they oblige him to a certain
diet for ten or twelve days together, allowing him every day only a little
piece of Cassava, and a little water, wherein there had been boiled a little of
that Rootbread; afterward his allowance is a little increased, yet still
continued in that same diet; but he breaks the Cassava, which is presented to
him, only in the middle, for the space of about forty days, leaving the
extremities entire, which he hangs up in his Hut, to serve at the entertainment
he afterward intends to make for all his Friends: nay, after all this he
abstains, sometimes for the space of ten months, or a whole year, from several
kinds of meat, as Lamantin, Tortoises, Swines-flesh, Hens, Fish, and delicious
things; being so pitifully simple, as to fear that those things might prejudice
the Child: at the expiration of the fast, the shoulders of the poor Father, who
has a Child born, are scarified and opened with the tooth of an Agouty; and it
is requisite that the besotted wretch should not only suffer himself to be so
ordered, but he must also endure it, without expressing the least sentiment of
pain: Their persuasion is, that the more apparent the Fathers patience shall be
in these trials, the more recommendable shall be the valor of his Son. But
this noble blood must not be suffered to fall to the ground, since the effusion
thereof contributes so much to future courage; it is therefore carefully saved
to rub the Child's face withal, out of an imagination, he will be the more
generous.

2. The Sinitae or the Sinenses, Lips. Monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 35.
have in their houses little Images, which they worship as their gods; yet make
they not so much of them, but in case any thing befall them contrary to their
expectation, they will have them to suffer for it; so that after they have
scourged them, they often cast them out into the streets; when soon after moved
with repentance, they take them up again, adore them, seek to appease them, and
offer them Wine and Incense.

3. The King of Catona at his Coronation, Clarks mir. c. 54. p. 216.
swears that it shall not rain unseasonably, neither shall there be famine or
pestilence within his Dominions during his Reign.

4. In Sophala in the East Indies, Purch. Pil. vol. 2. p. 1539. Clarks mir. c.
54. p. 216.
the King is called the Quiteve, and has many that sing his praises, when he
goes abroad, calling him Lord of the Sun and Moon, King of the Land and Rivers,
Conqueror of his enemies; in every thing great, great Witch, great Thief,
great Lion, and all other names of greatness which they can invent, whether
they signify good or bad, they attribute to him.

5. Xexes, Herodot. l. 7. p. 397. Lonic. Thea. p. 368. Clarks mir. c. 102. p.
473.
having made a Bridge of Boats over the Hellespont, for the transportation of
his huge Army out of Asia into Europe, there arose a great tempest which brake
his Bridge in sunder; wherewith he was so enraged, that he sent a Chartel of
defiance to the Sea, and commanded his Servants to give it three hundred
stripes, and to throw fetters into it to bind it to its good behavior; with
hot Irons to burn ignominious brands in it; his Officers performing his
commands were to say, O thou unruly water, thy Lord has appointed thee this
punishment, for that thou have wronged him that deserved it not from thee; but
whether thou will or not, he is resolved to pass over thee, nor shall any man
hereafter sacrifice unto thee, as being a deceitful and bitter River.

Dio. Cassi. l. 39. p. 397. and 405. Xiphil. in Caligul. p. 98. Sueton. l. 4.
c. 55. p. 197.
6. C. Caligula, the Roman Emperor, had a Horse called Swift, whom he invited
to Supper with himself; he caused his provender to be set before him in Gold,
he gave him Wine to drink in goblets of Gold; he swore by his health and
fortune, he promised to make him Consul, and had done so if the Horse had
lived; he did make him Priest, yea a Colleague with himself in the Supreme
Ponti^icate; his Stable was of Marble, his Manger of Ivory, his Caparisons and
harness Purple, and a pendant Jewel of Precious Stones at his Poictrel; and he
allowed him a House, Family, Servants and Household Stuff.

Herb. Trav. l. 2. p. 209. Clarks mir. c. 102. p. 474.
7. The Great Cham of Tartary, was wont when he had Dined, to cause his
Trumpeters to sound their Trumpets before his Palace Gate, thereby to give
notice, and proclaim to all the Kings in the World, that now the Great Cham had
Dined, they might all take leave to go to Dinner.

Plater. Obs. l. 1. p. 42, 43.
8. I knew a Lady so overcurious and nice, that seeing Hogs and other creatures
cut up and bowelled, tormented herself with the thought, that she also carried
about with her in her own body, such stinking filth (as she called it)
enclosed. Upon which she conceived such an abhorrence, that ^^e hated her own
body; saying, she knew not what course to take to free herself from that
uncleanness: and with this fancy she was continually vexed; of which she often
seriously, and with great anxiety complained to me; and when I had much ado to
forbear laughing, she would be very angry.

Plater. Obs. l. 1. p. 42.
9. The same Author mentions another Woman, that was exceedingly afflicted, and
with tears complained to the Minister of the Parish, of the great trouble she
had; that whereas in the morning when she rose, she put on her clothes; at
night when she went to bed, she was constrained to put them off again.

Herodot. l. 7. p. 411.
10. Pharnuches was a great Commander of Horse in the Army of Xerxes, which he
designed against Greece; who marching out of Sardis mounted upon a stately
Horse, a Dog ran betwixt the legs of his Horse; the Horse affrighted, reared up
and threw Pharnuches out of his Saddle, with the bruise of which fall he spat
blood. His Servants soon after the fall of their Master, dealt with the Horse
as they had received his orders to do, which was to lead him to the place where
he had thrown his Lord, and there to cut off his legs and knees.

Herodo. l. 4. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 6. p. 430.
11. The South Wind had dried up all the receptacles of water amongst the
Psilli, a people in Africa (for that all their Country, which is within the
Syrtis, is without Rivers) they therefore had a public conference about it,
where it was concluded, that an expedition should be made by them against that
Wind: when they came amongst the Sands that are plentiful thereabouts, the same
Wind blowing overwhelmed them all with the Sands, and so the Nasamones seized
upon their Country.

Cause. Holy Court, tom. 1. l. 2. p. 38.
12. The Mossines are a people who performed all the actions of most secrecy, in
public; yea even those which are ordained for the necessities of nature, and
treated the affairs of the Commonwealth in their Houses.

Cause. Hol. Court, ibid.
13. The Tibarenes, as soon as their Wives were delivered, bound up their own
heads with a Kerchief, lay down on their Beds, and made themselves to be
attended like women in Childbed. The poor Women, in the mean time were up and
about the House, endeavoring to make ready Baths for their Husbands, to dress
and season their viands, to tend and cherish them, as if they had born all the
pain of feminine travel.

14. It is said of the Abderitae, Coel. Rhod. Antiq. l. 30. c. 4. p. 1390.
after they had beheld the Tragedy of Andromeda and Medusa, that they all even
from the least to the greatest, became so frantic and foolish, that they
ceased not to sing, to clap their hands, to cry, to whistle through the
streets; and to have no discourse nor thought of any thing but Andromeda and
Medusa.

15. Queen Stratonica, Cause. Hol. Court, tom. 1. l. 3. p. 93.
Wife of Seleucus, had not one hair upon her head; yet notwithstanding gave six
hundred Crowns to a Poet, who had celebrated her in his Verse, and sung that
her hair had the tincture of the Marygold. I know not how this soothing
flatterer meant it, but this Queen became very proud of it, which made her so
much the more ridiculous.

16. Rudolphus, Lonic. Thea. p. 370.
King of the Heruli, warred with Tado, King of the Lombards; and when both
Armies approached each other, Rudolph committed the whole to his Captains, he
himself remained in his Tent in the mean time, and sat jesting at the Table.
It Is true, he sent one to the top of a Tree to behold the fortune of the day;
but withal told him, if he brought him ill news, he would take his head from
his shoulders. This Scout beheld the Heruli to run, but not daring to carry
that news to the King, consulted only his own safety; by which means the King
and all that were with him were taken and slain.

17. Nero, Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 9.. 5. p. 423.
the Emperor, was so luxuriously wastful, and beyond all reason and measure,
that he would not fish but with Nets of Gold, drawn with purple colored Cords.
It is said he took delight to dig the Earth with a Golden Spade: and when there
was question about cutting the Isthmus of Corinth (a design that had long
troubled his brain) he went thither led on with musical Violins, holding in his
hand the Golden Spade, with which he began in the sight of the whole world, to
break the ground; a matter which seemed ridiculous to the wiser sort, living in
that age.

18. C. Caligula presented himself to be adored, Sueton. in Caligula, p. 177.
Senec. de ira, l. 1. c. 16. p. 299. Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 1. p. 426.
ordained peculiar sacrifices to himself; at nights in case the Moon shined out
full and bright, he invited her to embracements and to lie with him; the day he
would spend in private conference with Jupiter Capitolinus; sometimes
whispering, and laying his ear close to the Statue of him, and sometimes again
talking aloud, as if he had been chiding. Nay being angry with Heaven because
his interludes were hindered by claps of Thunder, and his banqueting disturbed
with flashes of lightning, he challenged Jupiter to fight with him, and without
ceasing roared out that verse of Homer. (...)
None is, O Jove, more mischievous than thou: or else that, (...)
Dispatch thou me,
Or I will thee.
whereupon Seneca inferrs what extreme folly was that to think that either
Jupiter could not hurt him, or that he could hurt Jupiter.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 197.
19. The servants of the Moscovites (yea and their Wives too) do often complain
of their Lords, that they are not well beaten by them, for they look upon it as
a sign of their indignation and displeasure with them, if they are not
frequently reproached and beaten by them.

Sabell. Ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 179.
20. In the worship of Hercules Lyndius, it was the manner, that such as stood
by him that embowelled the sacrifice, did curse the bowels, and wish heavy
Imprecations upon them.

Aelian. var. hist. l 8. c. 4. p. 215, 216.
21. Poliarchus, the Athenian, was arrived at that height of Luxury and Folly,
that if any of his Dogs, or Cocks that he loved, chanced to die, he made
public Funerals for them, invited his friends, and buried them with great
sumptuousness: erecting Pillars upon their Monuments, upon which also he caused
their Epitaphs to be engraven.

CHAP. XXVII. Of such as have been at vast Expenses about unprofitable
Attempts; and where-from they have been enforced to desist, or whereof they
have had small or no benefit.
THere is scarce any thing of that difficulty, but some one or other have had
the confidence to undertake it; and there have been some men of that nature, as
to desire nothing more than to effect that which others have looked upon as
altogether impossible. Some of those costly designs have been given over as
suddenly, as they were rashly adventured upon, and others made to miscarry by
some accident or other.

Or^el. Epit. fol. 55. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 374.
1. In the Province of Northgoia, a part of Bavaria, the Emperor Charles the
great, caused a Ditch to be begun, which should have been in length two
thousand pa^es, and in breadth three hundred, wh^reby through the help of the
Rivers Regnitz and Altmul, he meant to have made a passage for Boats from the
Danubius into the River of Rhine, which begun work was hindered by continual
rains, and the Marishness of the Grounds.

Herod. l. 2. p. 137. Sandys Relat. l. 2. p. 128, 129. Heyl. Cousin. l. 4. p.
923. Bellon. Lithgows Travels p. 311. Diod. Sicul. r^rum. Ant. l. 1. c. 2. p.
29. Knowles Turk. hist. p. 544.
2. Full West of the City of Memphis, close upon the Libyan Deserts, alost on a
rocky level adjoining to the Valley, stand those Pyramids (the barbarous
Monuments of Prodigality and vain glory) so universally celebrated the Regal
Sepulchers of the Egyptians. The greatest of the three and chiefest of the
Worlds seven wonders, being square at the bottom, is supposed to take up eight
Acres of ground, every square being three hundred single paces in length. The
square at the top consisting of three stones only, yet large enough for
threescore to stand upon, ascended by two hundred fifty five steps, each step
above three foot high, of a breadth proportionable. No stone so little
throughout the whole, as to be drawn by our Carriages; yet were these hewn out
of the Trojan Mountains far off in Arabia, a wonder how co^veyed hither, how so
mounted a greater. Twenty years it was in building by three hundred sixty six
thousand men continually wrought upon, who only in Radishes, Garlic, and
Onions, are said to have consumed one thousand and eight hundred Talents. It
has stood (as may be probably conjectured) about three thousand two hundred
years, and now rather old than ruinous. Herodotus reports, That King Cleops
became so poor by the building hereof, that he was compelled to prostitute his
daughter, charging her to take whatsoever she could get.

Arsinoe is eighty Miles distant from Cairo, Knowles Turk. hist^ p. 670.
the ancient Kings of Egypt (seeking by vain and wonderful works to eternize
the memory of themselves) had with incredible charge and cost, cut through all
that main Land, so that Vessels of good burden might come up the same from
Arsinoe to Cairo: which great cut or ditch S^sostris, the mighty King of
Egypt, and long after him Ptolomaeus Philadelphus purposed to have made a
great deal wider and deeper, and thereby to have let the Red Sea into the
Mediterra^ean, for the readier Transportation of the In^ian Merchandise to
Cairo, and to Alexandre^ which mad work Sesostris (prevented by death) (...)
not perform; and Ptolomaeus (otherwise persuaded by skilful men) in time gave
over for fear, lest by letting in the great South Sea into the Mediterranean,
he should the^^by (as it were with another general Deluge) have drowned the
greatest part of Grecia, and many other goodly Countries of Asia: and with
exceeding charge (instead of honor) have purchased himself eternal infamy.

4. The Emperor Caius Cal^gula desired nothing more earnestly, Camer. oper.
subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 370.
than to effect that which others thought was utterly impossible to be brought
to pass: And hereupon it was, that he made a Bridge which extended it self from
Baiae to Puteoli, that is, three Miles and six hundred paces our-right; to this
purpose, he caused Ships of burden to be brought from all parts, these he
placed at Anchor in double order, or two by two in breadth, and cast a huge
quantity of earth upon them, till such time as he had brought his Bridge into
the form of the Appian way.

5. Claudius Caesar, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 371.
successor to the forementioned Caligula, propounded to himself to let dry the
Fucine Lake; this he hoped speedily to effect with small cost, and to his great
honor: the rather because some private persons had offered to perform it at
their own charge, provided, that the drained Lands should be granted them as
the reward of their labors. For three Miles space therefore, partly by
levelling, and partly by digging in the Mountain, he at last with great
difficulty finished his intended Cha^nel, when he had spent eleven years about
it, and kept thirty thousand men at work therein continually, and without
intermission.

6. Severus and Celer were the Contrivers and Engineers, Camer. oper. s^bc.
cent. 1. c. 81. p. 372. Tacit. Annal. l. 5. Sueton. in N^ron. l. 6. c. 31. p.
251.
who had the boldness and con^id^n^e to attempt to perform by Art that which
Nature had denied, and to mock the great power and wealth of Nero, for they
promised to cut out a Navigable River from the Lake Avernus, unto the mouth of
Tyber, the ground being all the way rugged and dry, or interposed Mountains to
make their way through, and no way of increasing the water, unless by the
Pomptine Fenns, all else was so craggy and dry, that to dig through them was
intolerable labor, without any sufficient cause or occasion for it.
Notwithstanding all which, Nero (as he was ambitious to be thought the
performer of incredible things) attempted to digg through the Mountains nearest
unto Avernus, and the Monuments and footsteps of his vain and exploded hopes
are yet remaining to be seen. Suetonius makes mention of this Channel, begun as
far as from Avernus to Ostia, wherein Ships should have sailed, and yet not by
Sea, to the length of an hundred and sixty Miles; and the breadth of it was
such, as that two Ships might meet and pass by each other in it. For the
perfecting of this Work, Nero caused all the Prisons every where to be
ransacked, and the men to be Transported into Italy; and even those that were
convicted of Capital Crimes, he suffered not to be any other way condemned, but
only to these works of his.

Camer. oper. s^bc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 373.
7. Seleucus Nicanor endeavored to cut through that Isthmus, or neck of Land,
that lies betwixt the Euxine and the Caspian Sea; but he lived not to finish
it, for he was slain by Ptolomaeus Ceraunus.

Camer. oper subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 373.
8. Some of the Egyptian Kings cut a mighty Channel or Passage, in length four
days sail, and in breadth, such as two Galleys might safely meet in it. In the
digging and cutting of this in the Reign of Neco, King of Egypt, there were no
less than an hundred and twenty thousand Agyptians that perished: The marks and
Mines of this great work are to be seen still near unto Sues. The design they
drove herein was, to sail from the River Nilus into the Red Sea, or to Sinus
Arabicus; but all these expenses came to nothing, but were frustrate in their
end.

Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 373.
9. Trajanus the Emperor, as Dion reports, attempted to cut a Channel, whereby
he might bring Euphrates into the River Tygris; but when he understood that the
Channel of Euphrates lay much higher than that of Tigris; he desisted from his
Enterprise, fearing lest Euphrates being brought thus down into a lower way
should not slow as it was wont.

Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 375.
10. Anno 1569. the Turks with a mighty number of Soldiers and slaves,
attempted to bring the River Volga (the greatest River of the Asiatick
Sarmatia, and which by seventy mouths exonerates it self into the Caspian Sea)
into the same Channel with the River Tanais, which divides Europe from Asia: To
this purpose they were to digg through a high Mountain, called by the
Muscovites Perenteka, about seven Miles in the ascent and descent of it; but
those Turks were consumed in their labor, partly by Famine, and over-working,
and partly by venomous creatures, and the Incursions of the Tartars: so that
after great expense of blood and money, nothing came of it.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of false Accusers; and how the Accused have been acquitted.
WEre it enough to accuse, there would no man be innocent. But Innocence is
under such a Protection and Guardianship, as seldom so deserts it: but that
usually the means of its escape are as strange, as the contrivances against it
were impudent and daring. It is true, some have been brought off at a cheaper
rate, than he who follows, who foresaw his ruin, unless he took care that he
could not be guilty.

1. Combalus was a beautiful young man, Burt. Mel. par. 3.. 3. p. 566. Purchase.
Pilg. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 15. p. 79.
and having received orders from Seleucus his Lord and King, to conduct his
Queen Stratonice into Syria; fearing the worst, before he went he took such
effectual order with himself, that at his return he might free his fidelity
from all manner of suspicion. The Queen fell in love with him by the way: but
he refusing to comply with her desires was by her at her return accused of
incontinency, to the King her husband; and thereupon cast into Prison; the day
of hearing being appointed, to the admiration of the beholders, he made it
appear that he was no man, and thereby sufficiently cleared his innocence.

2. Democritus looked upon all the occurrences of humane life with laughter:
Hippocrat. Epist. ad Damaget. Burt. Mel. in his Ep. to the Reader, p. 23, 24,
25, etc.
and he was so far carried with this Ironical passion, that the Citizens of
Abdera took him to be mad: They sent therefore Ambassadors to Hippocrates the
Physician that he would exercise his skill upon him. When Hippocrates was come,
the people of Abdera came flocking about him, some weeping, some entreating of
him that he would do his best. After some little repast, he went to see
Democritus, the people following him, whom he found in his Garden in the
Suburbs, all alone, sitting upon a stone, under a Plane Tree, without Hole or
Shoes, with a Book on his knees, cutting up several beasts, and busy at his
study: The multitude stood gazing round about to see the Congress; Hippocrates
having saluted him, demanded of him what he was doing? He told him, That he was
busy in cutting up several Beasts, to find out the causes of Madness and
Melancholy; Hippocrates commended his work, admiring his happiness and leisure:
And why, quoth Democritus, have not you that leisure? Because, replied he,
Domestical affairs hinder, necessary to be done for our selves, Neighbors,
Friends, Expenses, Diseases, Frailties, and mortalities which happen to Wife,
Children, Servants, and such businesses which deprive us of our time. At this
speech, Democritus profusely laughed (his friends and the people standing by,
weeping in the mean time and lamenting his madness) Hippocrates asked the
reason why he laughed? He told him, At the vanities and fopperies of the time,
to see men so empty of all virtuous actions, to hunt so after Gold, having no
end of Ambition, to take such infinite pains for a little glory, and to be
favored of men, and to make such deep Mines in the Earth for Gold, and many
times to find nothing, with loss of their lives and fortunes: Some to love
Dogs, others Horses: Some to desire to be obeyed in many Provinces, and yet
themselves will know no obedience; some to love their Wives dearly at first,
and after to forsake them, and hate them: begetting children, with care and
cost for their education; yet when they grow to man's Estate, to leave them
naked to the worlds mercy. Do not these behaviors express their intolerable
folly? When they are poor and needy, they seek Riches: and when they have them,
they do not enjoy them, but either hide them under ground, or else wastfully
spend them: There is no truth or Justice found amongst them, for they daily
plead one against another, and all this for Riches, whereof after death there
can be no possession. When Hippocrates heard these, and such other words, so
readily uttered without premeditation, to declare the Worlds vanity, full of
ridiculous contrariety, and having further discoursed with him at large, he
left him; and no sooner was he come away, when the Citizens came ^locking about
him, to know how he liked him? He told them in brief, that notwithstanding
those small neglects of his attire, body, diet, etc. the world had not a wiser,
a more learned, a more honest man, and they were much deceived to say that he
was mad.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. p. ^6.
3. M. Scaurus was by a studied Oration, accused publicly to the people, that
he had received a great sum of money from King Mithrida^es, and was hired
therewith to betray the Commonwealth: Scaurus pleaded for himself on this
manner, It is somewhat unequal, O ye Citizens of Rome, that I should be
compelled to render an account of my actions to such persons as I have had but
little conversation with. Yet (though most of you have not been with me in my
honors and employments) I shall be bold to ask you this one question, Varius
Sucronensis says that Aemylius Scaurus is corrupted with the Kings money to
betray the Roman Republic; Aemylius Scaurus denies that he is any way gu^lty
of such a cr^me: Which of us two will ye believe? The people moved with this
saying of his, with loud clamours forbad his accuser to proceed any further in
his action.

Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. p. 84. Lon. Theat. p. 373.
4. M. Naevius, a Tribune of the people (or as some say the two Petilii) accused
Pub. Scipio Asricanus in the Forum to the people and Senate: he came into the
Forum, with a great retinue, and ascending the Pulpit, with a triumphal Crown
upon his head, This day, said he, O Romans, I enforced proud Carthage to
receive the Law from you, and therefore it is meet, that you should accompany
me to the Capitol, there to make supplication for the continuance of your
prosperity. The event was agreeable to the gallantry of his words, for the
whole Senate, Knights of Rome, and all the Commonalty went along with him; it
remained, that his Accuser should either stand alone in the midst of his
confusion, or join himself with the rest, which he did, and from an Accuser,
became one of the honourers of Scipio.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 11. p. 293.
5. M. Marcellus had taken Syracuse, and made use of his Victory with an
uncommon moderation: but the Sicilians unmindful hereof, and stirred up by his
enemies, came to the Senate to make complaint of him: he was then Consul, and
his Colleague Valerius Laevinus fortuned not to be present at that time in the
Senate: how easy was it for him to disturb the business, and to send them away
deluded. But he would have their complaint heard, and when his Colleague was
come, removed himself and sat in a lower place. When they had made their
Accusation, the Senate commanded them to withdraw, but he desired they might be
present also at his defense, which done, he departed the Court, leaving every
man his liberty to vote as he pleased. Here it was that his innocence and their
impudence was manifest to all men, yea even to themselves: so that of Accusers,
they became Suppliants, and requested him to become the Patron of Sicily; which
he undertook, and with that fidelity discharged. his trust, that forgetting all
injuries, he did several good Offices for them.

6. The two Caelii were accused of Parricide, Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 5. p. 766.
in as much as Titus Caelius their father, was found murdered in his bed, the
two brethren lying in a bed in the same Room, and there was no servant or
freed-man, who were under the suspicion of this murder: But they were both
acquitted upon this account; full proof was made to the Judges, that they were
found both of them fast asleep, and the Chamber door standing open. This sleep
of theirs was looked upon as the Index of an innocent security; and it was
adjudged that Nature could not away with it, to sleep upon the wounds and blood
of a newly murdered father, and by this means they were pronounced not guilty.

7. M. Antonius, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. p. 86.
the Orator, as Quaestor was going into Asia, and was got as far as Brundusium,
where by Letters he understood that he was accused of Incest before L. Cassius,
the Praetor, whose Tribunal was by reason of an over severity called the Rock
of the guilty. He might have escaped by the benefit of the Memmian Law, that
forbad any should be accused that were absent upon public affairs. But he
immediately returned to the City, and hereby declaring an innocent confidence,
he soon obtained a speedy absolution, and a more honorable dismission.

8. Such was the malice and falsehood of the Arrians against Athanasius, Simson
Chapter hist. l. 4. cent. 4. p. 486, 491. Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 20. p. 245.
that they accused him of Fornication, Magic, the slaying of Arsenius and
cutting off his hand, the overthrowing of the Holy Table, breaking of the Cup,
and burning of the Scriptures: thus he was accused at the Council of Tyrus,
where all things were carried with part^ality, clamor, confusion, and
unrighteous dealing; Athanasius going to the Emperor to complain hereof, was
deposed in his absence, that Arsenius setting his Hand to the Instrument, whom
they feigned he had murdered, at the Council of Sardica: all these accusations
were found to be a Mass of forged lies and calumnies, which the Arrians had not
the confidence to appear to, before those uncorrupted Judges: so the Innocence
of Athanasius was cleared, and he restored.

9. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Stowes An. p. 719.
Thomas Lovelace, by forged Letters, sought to have three of his Cousin-Germans
brought into question for their lives about matters of High Treason; the malice
and forgery of this wicked business being found out, the false accuser had
judgment, to be carried on Horseback about Westminster Hall, with his face to
the Horse-tail, and a Paper on his back containing his offense; from thence to
be carried in the same manner, and set on the Pillory in the Palace-yard, and
there to have one of his ears cut off; also to be set on the Pillory on a
Market Day at Cheapside, with the like Paper; after that to be carried into
Kent, and at the next Assize there, to be set on the Pillory with the like
Paper, and his other ear to be there cut off; also to stand in the Pillory one
Market Day at Canterbury, another at Rochester; and in all these places his
offense to be openly read: which sentence was accordingly executed.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Perjured persons, and how they have been punished.
AN Oath is the most solemn and Sacred security that one man can possibly give
to another: notwithstanding which, there are a multitude of men who bear no
more regard to what they have sworn, than if they had been words which had
never been said. Nemesis is in pursuit of all these sons of falsehood and fraud,
and having once overtaken them will, no doubt, inflict a vengeance upon them
agreeable to their merit.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 299. Din. mem. l. 3. p. 166, 167. Iov. Elog. l. 2. p.
100. Beards Theat. l. 1. c. 27. p. 169, 170.
1. Vladislaus, King of Poland and Hungary, had fortunately fought against the
Turks at the Mountain Haemus, and taken Carambey, the General of their Army; by
means of this Victory, he occasioned Amurath, the Turkish King, to sue to him
for Peace: the terms of it were both honorable, and every way advantageous: it
was mutally sworn to by the King upon the holy Evangelists; and Amurath, by his
Ambassadors, upon the Turkish Alcoran. This known to the Pope, and other
Christian Princes, they spoke of it as unseasonable, unprofitable, and
dishonorable; whereupon the Cardinal Julian is sent by the Pope as his Legate
to break the Peace, and to absolve the King from his Oath. The young King
therefore at their instance, breaks the League, and undertakes the War with
greater preparations and vigor than his former; he advances with his Army to
Varna, a City upon the Pontick Shore, doing all the mischief he was able to the
Enemies Country; which so soon as the Turk had knowledge of, he returns out of
Cilicia, and enters battle with the Christians; where at first the Turks were
made to retire by the King and Huniades with great slaughter, and almost to
fly; Amurath seeing all brought into extreme danger, beholding the Picture of
the Crucifix in the displayed Ensigns of the voluntary Christians, plucked the
writing out of his bosom, wherein the late League was comprised, and holding it
up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to Heaven, said, Behold thou Crucified
Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name made with me, which they
have without cause violated: now if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as
we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name and me, and show thy power
upon thy Perjured people, who in their deeds deny thee their God. It was not
long e're the battle turned, Vladislaus was slain, his head cut off by Ferizes
an old Ianizary, and fastened on the end of a Lance, Proclamation was made
that it was head of the Christian King, by which the rest were so daunted that
they fled; the Legate also who exhorted to this War was slain, and his dead
Corpse laden with the outrage and contumelies of the Infidels, for that being a
Priest he had contrary to the Law of Nations, advised and persuaded to break
the Peace. This battle was fought Anno 1444.

2. Ibraim Bassa, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 78. p. 308. Knowles Turk.
hist. p. 654.
Grand Vizier, the Minion and darling favorite of Solomon the Magnificent, upon
a time in familiar conference with his Lord and Master, besought him that he
would not persist to accumulate so many honors upon him, lest flourishing and
being improved to an unbecoming height, his Majesty e're long should think it
fit to tumble him headlong from that high Pinnacle of honor whereunto he had
raised him, by putting him to death; Solomon then assured him with an Oath,
That so long as he lived he should never be put to death by his order.
Afterward this so fortunate Ibraim grew into dislike with his Master; and
Solomon having purposed his death, was yet somewhat troubled about the Oath
that he had before made him, when one of the Priests told him, That when a man
is asleep he cannot be said to live, seeing that life is a continual Vigil and
Watch; that therefore opportunity should be sought to find the Bassa asleep,
and then he might be conveniently sent out of the World, without breach of the
Princes Oath. Solomon liked well of this base and fradulent device, and one
time when the Vizier was sleeping, sent an Eunuch with a Razour to cut his
Throat, as accordingly he did.

3. Ludovicus, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 341. Fulg. l. 9. c. 6. p. 1230.
the son of Boso, King of Burgundy, came into Italy against the Emperor
Berengarius the second, where he was by him overcome in Battle and taken; but
as a singular instanc^ of humanity in Berengarius, he was by him set free,
having first received his Oath, That during his life he should no more return
into Italy: but the ungrateful Prince unmindful both of his own Oath, and the
others benefits, not long after enters Italy a second time with mighty Forces,
and about Verona was again made Prisoner, and had his eyes put out by the
Victor as a punishment of his ingratitude and breach of Faith.

4. Anno 1070. or thereabouts, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 522.
so great a feud arose betwixt the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Pope Gregory
the seventh, that the Pope excommunicated him, and depriving him of his
Imperial Dignity, caused that Rodulphus, Duke of Suevia, should be (as he was)
by some of the German Princes substituted in his stead; there was therefore a
great Battle betwixt them, at the River Ellester, where the Emperor Henry had
the Victory: Rodulphus by a terrible blow had his right arm struck off from his
body, at which he cried out, Behold, O ye Nobles, that right hand of mine which
I gave to Lord Henry, in confirmation of the fidelity I had sworn to him, which
Oath, notwithstanding, contrary to all Justice and Equity, I have violated, and
am now thus justly punished.

5. Ptolomaeus, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 208, 209. Fulg. l. 9. c. 6. p.
1216. Beard's Th^at. l. 1. c. 27. p. 169.
one of the Successors of Alexander the Great, having driven out An^igonus,
had seized upon Macedonia, made Peace with Antiochus, and a League with
affinity with Pyrrhus: So that now he was secure on all hands, except his own
Sister and the Children she had: It was Arsinoe, who had been the Wife of
Lysimachus King of Macedon; he therefore bent his mind and used all his arts to
take her, together with her Children; but finding her cautious, advised and
fearing all things, he made use of the strongest engine with the weaker sex,
which is Love; she was his Sister, but that was nothing in the East, where such
relation is rather an incentive than otherwise. He therefore sent his
Ambassadors with presents and letters; he offers her the society of the
Kingdom and the inheritance of it to her Children; and professes, that he had
employed his Arms upon it for no other end, than that he might leave it to
them; the truth of this he was ready to depose upon oath, wherever she pleased
to appoint, even at the holiest Altars and Temples she should make choice of.
In short, Arsinoe is persuaded, she sends the most faithful of her Friends to
receive the Kings Oath, which he immediately gave them in an ancient Temple
touching the Altar, and Images of the gods; cursing himself with horrid and
utmost execrations, if he did not sincerely desire the marriage of his Sister,
if he did not make her his Queen, and her Children his Heirs, and no other.
Arsinoe now full of hopes, comes to an enterview and conference with him; who
in his countenance and eyes carried nothing but love; he marries her, sets the
Diadem upon her head in sight of the People and Soldiery, and calls her Queen;
Arsinoe overjoyed, went before to Cassandrea a well fortified City, where her
Treasures and her Chilren were (this was the only thing he sought) she brings
in her Husband, to receive and feast him there; the Ways, Temples and Houses
were adorned, sacrifices offered; her Son Lysimachus of sixteen, and Philip of
thirteen years old were commanded to go meet their Uncle, whom he met and
greedily embraced without the Gates, and brought along with him. Being entered
the Gate and Castle, he lays aside his Mask, and resumes his own countenance
and affections; having brought in his Soldiers, he immediately commands the
Royal youths to be slain, and that in the lap of their Mother whither they had
fled; she (the more miserable in this that she might not dye with them) having
in vain interposed her self betwixt them and the Swords of their Executioners,
was driven into exile, with the allowance only of two Maids to attend her
there. But Ptolomy did not long triumph in his victory; for an inundation of
Gauls breaking into Macedonia, overcame and took him, cut off his head, and
fixing it at the end of a Spear, carried it about to strike terror into others.

Beard. Thea. l. 1. c. 28. p. 178.
6. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in the City of London, one Ann
Averies Widow, who forswore her self for a little money, that she should have
paid for six pound of Flax, at a shop in Woodstreet, upon which she was
suddenly surprised with the justice of God, and fell down immediately
speechless, casting up at her mouth, what nature had ordained to pass another
way, and in this agony died.

Herb. Trav. l. 2. p. 190.
7. Mclech Bahamen, a King that commanded many Hills and Dales in Gelack and
Taurus, was looked upon by the Covetous and ambitious eye of Shaw Abbas, King
of Persia; he sent therefore Methicuculi Beg with an Army of Cooselbashawes to
perfect his designs upon him, commanding his General not to descend thence
without victory. Bahaman having intelligence hereof, after he had like an
experienced Soldier, performed all other things requisite, put Himself, his
Queen, two Sons, and ten thousand able men in a large and impregnable Castle,
victualled for many years, not fearing any thing the Persian could attempt
against him. Methicuculi, having viewed this inaccessible Fortress, and finding
force not valuable, turns Politician, summons them to a Parlee; which granted,
he assaults them with protestations of truce and friendship, entreating the
King to descend and taste a Banquet, swearing by Mortis Alli, the head of Shaw
Abbas, by Paradise, by eight Transparent Orbs he should have Royal quarter,
come and go as pleased him. By these Paynim attestations, and rich presents, he
so allured the peaceful King that was unused to deceit, that at last he trained
the King and his two Sons to his treacherous Banquet; whereat upon a sign
given, three Cooselbashes standing by, at one instant with their slicing
Scimitars whipped off their heads: e're this villainy was spread abroad, by virtue
of their Seals he caused the men above to descend and yield up the Castle unto
him, some receiving mercy, others destruction. By this detested policy he yoked
in slavery this late thought indomitable Nation.

8. Stigand thrust himself into the Archbishopric of Canterbury, Bishop
Godwin, p. 73.
and with it held Winchester; he raised the Kentish men against William the
Conqueror, who thereupon bore a grudge against him; underhand procured Legates
from Rome to deprive him; and he was likewise clapped up in the Castle of
Winchester, and hardly used, even well near famished, which usage was to make
him confess where his treasure lay. But he protested with Oaths that he had no
money; yet after his death a little Key was found about his neck, the lock
whereof being carefully sought out, showed a note or direction of infinite
treasures hid under ground in diverse places; he dyed in the year 1069.

9. Elfrid, Speeds hist. p. 380. Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 7. p. 198.
a Noble man, intending to have put out the eyes of King Ethelstan, his treason
being known, was apprehended and sent to Rome; where at the Altar of St. Peter,
and before Pope John the tenth, he abjured the fact; and thereupon immediately
fell down to the earth, so that his Servants bore him to the English School,
where within three days after he dyed; the Pope denying him Christian buryal,
till he knew King Ethelstan's pleasure.

10. From Basham in Sussex, Speeds map. p. 9.
Earl Harold for his pleasure putting to Sea in a small Boat, was driven upon
the Coast of Normandy, where by Duke William he was detained till he had sworn
to make him King of England, after Edward the Confessors death; he afterward
without any regard to his oath, placed himself in the Throne. Duke William
thereupon arrived at Pensey, and with his Sword revenged the perjury of Harold,
at Battle in the same County, and with such severity, that there fell that day,
King Harold himself, with sixty seven thousand nine hundred seventy and four
English men; the Conqueror thereby putting himself into full possession.

11. Ludovicus, Radau. Orat. Ext. pars 2. c. 10. p. 260.
King of Burgundy, made war upon the Emperor, and being taken prisoner by him,
the Emperor gave him his liberty, having first made him swear, that he should
never more make war upon him. Ludovicus was no sooner free in his person, but
as if he had been free of his oath too, he came upon the Emperor with greater
preparations, and a stronger Army than before: But he was overcome the second
time, and lost all; his eyes also were plucked out, and upon his forehead from
ear to ear, were these words imprinted with a hot Iron, This man was saved by
Clemency, and lost by Perjury.

Camer. oper. sabcis. cent. 2. c. 77. p. 303.
12. In the reign of the Emperor Ludovicus, the Son of Arnulphus, Adelbert
Palatine of the Oriental France was accused of having slain the Emperors Son;
and thereupon was closely besieged by the Emperor in the Castle of Aldenburg
near Pabeberg; but the Castle was so well fortified both by Art and Nature,
that the Emperor despaired of forcing it, or prevailing with the defenders of
it, to surrender themselves. Hatto the Bishop of Mentz, goes to Adelbert (who
was his near Kinsman, and therefore the more liable to be overreached by his
fraud) and invites him to treat with the Emperor; and that if things should
not prove to his own mind, he swore to him, that he would see him safe returned
into his Castle of Strength. Adelbert accepts of the motion, the Bishop and he
went out of the Gates; when the Bishop looking upon the Sun, told him the
journey was long, and an early hour of the day, and therefore he thought i^
best to return to the Castle, and refresh themselves with a Breakfast, that
they might a^terwards travel the better. Adelbert suspecting no evil, with
great courtesy invites him back with him; they returned, and after breakfast
again they set forward. As soon as Adelbert came in presence of the Emperor,
he is there yielded up into the power of his enemy, and condemned to death.
Upon which (with as great boldness as truth) he accused Hatto of his treachery
and perjury, who replied that he had performed his Oath, in returning with him
to Breakfast in his Castle. Adelbert (by the Emperors command) was executed;
and soon after the noble Family of the Palatines of the Oriental France was
extinct; and so the Castle, together with all his other Territories fell into
the hands of the Emperor.

Camer. oper. s^bcis. cent. 2. c. 77. p. 303.
13. Paches, the Athenian General, called out Hippias Captain of the Arcadians,
and Governor of the Town of Notium, to a Treaty, upon this sworn condition,
That in case they should not agree amongst themselves, he would set him in
safety within the Town. When Hippias was come forth to him, he set a Guard upon
him; and forthwith leading his Army against the Town, he assaulted and took it,
put all the Arcadians and Barbarians he found there to the Sword. This done he
took Hippias along with him to the City, where he gave him his liberty, as he
said, according to their agreement, but soon after causing him again to be
apprehended, he appointed him to be put to death.

Live. hist. Clark. mir. c. 95. p. 429.
14. The Aequi having made a League with the Romans and sworn to the same;
afterward revolted, chose a General of their own, spoiled the Fields and
Territories belonging to Rome. Ambassadors were thereupon sent to complain of
the wrong, and to demand satisfaction. But the General so little esteemed them,
that he bad them deliver their message to an Oak that grew thereby. Accordingly
one of the Ambassadors turning to the Oak said, Thou hallowed Oak, and
whatsoever else belongs to the gods in this place, hear and bear witness of
this persidiousness, and favor our just complaints, that by the assistance of
the Gods, we may be revenged for this perjury. So returning, the Romans
gathered an Army, and having in Battle overthrown the Aequi, they utterly
destroyed that perjured Nation.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Inconstancy of some Men in their Nature and Disposition.
IN the Country of the Troglodytae, they say there is a Lake, the taste of
whose Waters is bitter and salt thrice in a day, then it returns to sweet
again, and in the same manner it is with it in the night also: whereupon it
has gained the name of the mad River. Men are no less unequal and inconstant
in their manners, than these Waters are in their taste; now courteous, and then
rough; now prodigal, and straight sordid; one while extremely kind, and e're
long vehemently hating, where they passionately loved before.

1. Mena was the Freed-man of Sextus Pompeius, Orosii hist. l. 6. c. 18. p. 266.
and in the War betwixt him and Octavianus Caesar, he revolted from his Master
with sixty Ships in his company, of all which Caesar made him the Admiral: not
long after Caesar having lost most of his Navy by shipwreck, Mena returned to
Pompeius his forsaken Lord, carrying along with him six Ships, and was received
by him with great humanity: here endeavoring to repair his formerly lost
honor, he burnt diverse of Caesar's Ships: and yet after all this when he found
himself circumvented and overcome by Agrippa in a Naval fight, he again went
over to Caesar's side with six Galleys; this Runnagate the third time was
received by Caesar, who indeed indulged him his life, but left him without
employment under him.

2. As long as Marius the younger, Sabellic. Exemp. l. 6. c. 3. p. 324. Plin.
l. 34. c. 6. p. 492.
managed the War with prosperity and success, he was then called by the people
of Rome, the Son of Mars; but no sooner did fortune begin to frown upon him,
but they altered their style, and called him the Son of Venus: such is the
levity and vanity of the inconstant multitude; and brake down the Statues made
for him in every street.

3. Pope Innocent, Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 8. p. 461.
while as yet he was a private man, used more than all others to cry out of the
Popes, that they did not employ the uttermost of their endeavors to root out
that schism, under which the Church of Rome had so long labored; and that they
did not oppose with all their might, the enemies of the Christian faith. But
when this man had himself attained to the Popedom, he was so altered in his
opinion and manners, that diverse persons are supposed to be prosecuted by him
with great violence upon no other account, than that they earnestly exhorted
him to the performance of those things, the want of which he had so blamed in
his Predecessors.

4. The Athenians had given Divine Honors to Demetrius Phalaraeus, Clark. mir.
c. 72. p. 314. Plin. l. 34. c. 6. p. 492.
in a base manner had flattered him during his victories, had set up two
hundred Statues in his honor; but when they heard of his overthrow by Ptolomy
King of Egypt, and that he was coming to them for succor, they sent some to
meet him, to let him know, he should not come near them, for they had made a
decree that no King should come into Athens. They subverted and took down all
those Statues which they had before erected, and that also while Demetrius was
living, and before either rust or dust had any way disfigured them; three
hundred and sixty Statues, says Pliny, and brake before the year was out.

Xiphil. in Caligula, p. 95.
5. Cains Caligula was so inconstant, and difficult in the management of
affairs, that no man knew what was fit for him to say or do in his presence;
sometimes he delighted in a numerous and full attendance, and soon after he was
in love with solitude; he would often be angry when nothing was begged of him;
and at other times, when any thing was asked he would haste away with all the
speed imaginable, to the performance of this or that, and when he came upon the
place, do little or nothing in it: he was prodigal in the expending, and sordid
in the procurement of monys; he was now pleased with flatterers, and such as
spoke freely in his presence, and immediately incensed against both; he
dismissed many villainous persons without any punishment; and caused many
excellent persons to be killed by his command; and he freequently treated his
best friends with severity, and in an injurious manner.

Plut. in Alcibiad. p. 203. Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 8. p. 462.
6. Alcibiades varied his manners according to the custom of those he conversed
with, he passed through more mutations, than the Cameleon does colurs. In
Sparta he was very frequent in exercises, fed sparingly, went frugally, was
austere, and kept himself to their black broth, no way differing from the
natural Spartans. In Ionia he was voluptuous, merry and slothful: in Thrace he
gave himself to riding and drinking of Wine; and when he was with Tissaphernes
he strove to exceed the very Persians themselves, in all sorts of pomp and
luxury.

Fullers Worthies p. 82. Barkshire.
7. Bray is a Village well known in Barkshire, the vivacious Vicar hereof,
living under King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth, was first a Papist, then a Protestant, then a Papist, and then
a Protestant again: this Vicar being taxed by one for being a Turn-coat, and an
inconstant changeling; Not so, said he, for I have always kept my principle,
which is to live and dye the Vicar of Bray.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 553.
8. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, seeming to loath the
Roman Superstition, came for refuge into England Anno 1616. and having here
both by Preaching and Writing, labored to overthrow the Church of Rome, upon I
know not what projects he declared himself to be of another mind Anno 1622. and
returned again to Rome, where he wrote as reproachfully of the Church of
England; but the infatuated man was not long after imprisoned in the Castle of
Angelo, and his dead body burnt to ashes.

Heyl. ibid. Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 11. p. 304.
9. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, says of Ecebolius, that he was
under Constantine a Christian, under Julian a Pagan, and a Christian again
under Iovinian: so wavering and inconstant a Turncoat was Eccbolius, says he,
from his beginning to his end.

10. -- Lydington was a man of the greatest understanding in the Scottish
affairs, Bak^r. Chro. p. 514.
and a person of an excellent wit, but withal so variable and inconstant, that
George Buchanan used to give him the surname of Chameleon.

11. There was a Matron in Ephesus of so noted a chastity, Petron. Arb. in
Satyr. p. 140, 141, etc.
that the Women of the neighboring parts stocked thither on purpose to behold
her. She when she buried her Husband, was not content with the common usages to
follow the Hearse with dischevelled hair, or in the sight of the assistants to
beat upon her bare breasts; but she also followed the deceased into the very
monument; and having seen it laid there in its peculiar apartment, (after the
Greek manner) she remained there to keep the body, and to lament it for whole
nights and days together. Her Parents nor Kindred could prevail to get her
away; and the Magistrates themselves having attempted it in vain were departed.
All men bewailed a Woman of so singular an example, and it was the ^ifth day
since she had tasted any food. The faithful Maid sat by her mournful
Mistress; and when her own tears were spent, lent her others, repairing also
the light in the Monument, as often as it required it. She was therefore the only
discourse of the City, and it was confessed by all men, that that was the only
true and most illustrious example of conjugal chastity and love. In the mean
time the Governor of the Province, had commanded that certain thieves should
be crucified near to that very Dormitory, where the Matron lamented her lately
departed Husband. The next night therefore the Soldier that was set to guard
the Crosses, lest any should steal the bodies thence, and bury them, perceiving
a clear light amongst the Monuments, and hearing the sighs of some Mourner, in
a curiosity that is incident to humane nature, he was desirous to know who was
there, and what they did: He thereupon descends into the Monument, where
beholding a most beautiful woman, at first he stood immovable; soon after
espying the dead body that lay there, considering her tears, and those injuries
she had done to her face with her nails, judging of the matter as it was, that
the woman was such as was not able to bear the death of her Husband; he went
and fetched his Supper into the Monument, and began to exhort the Mourner, that
she would not persist in a vain grief, or distend her heart with unprofitable
sighs: he represented that the same fate waited upon all; that all must come at
last to that long home: and spoke such other things, as serve to appease such
hearts as are exasperated with grief. But she wounded with an unknown
consolation, rent her breasts with greater vehemence, and pulling off her hair,
she laid it upon the breast of her deceased Husband, that lay before her.
Notwithstanding all which the Soldier left not the place, but with the same
exhortation, attempted to bring the woman to taste of some food. At last the
Maid (corrupted it is likely by the odor of the Wine) reached out her conquered
hand, to receive the humanity of him that invited her: and having refreshed her
self with meat and drink, she began to attempt upon the obstinacy of her
Mistress: What, said she, is this like to advantage you, if you shall perish by
famine, if you shall bury your self alive, if you shall render up your
uncondemned breath, before such time as the fates do require it? Think you the
Ghosts, or ashes of the dead,
Regard what tears their supervivours shed?
Will you restore him to life again, in despite of all the destinies that
oppose it; or will you rather deserting a feminine error enjoy the comforts of
life as long as you may be permitted? That very body that lies extended before
you, ought to put you in mind, that you should endeavor to live. No man is
unwilling to hear when he is entreated to live. And therefore the woman dry
with several days abstinence, suffered her obstinacy to be prevailed upon, and
filled her self with meat as greedily as her Maid had before done. But you know
what it is that for the most part is wont to tempt humane satiety; with the
same blandishments wherewith the Soldier had prevailed with the Matron to
live, with the same he attempts her chastity also. The young man seemed to this
chaste one neither unhansome nor uneloquent; and the Maid too seeking to get
him into her favor, repeated ever and anon, And will thou ^ight with pleasing
Loves, nor care
Within what solitary fields we are?
To cut short, the woman abstained not as to that part of the body, the
victorious Soldier overcame in both; they therefore lay together, not only
that night but the next, and a third after, the entrance of the Monument being
closed, that it might be supposed that the most chaste woman had expired upon
the Corpse of her Husband. But the Soldier delighted with the beauty of the
woman, and also with the privacy, bought what he was able; and at the entrance
of the night brought it to the Monument: the Parents therefore of one of the
Thieves lately crucified, perceiving how slightly the bodies were guarded, took
down their Son from the Cross, and committed him to the earth. But the Soldier
in the morning perceiving that one of the Crosses was without its Carcass, and
fearing the punishment of his neglect; told the woman what had happened, and
withal that he would not expect the sentence, but would pronounce upon his
sloth, with his own Sword, beseeching her to afford him a place, and to make a
^atal repository, for her Friend as well as for her Husband. The woman (no less
compassionate than chaste) Certainly, said she, the gods will not suffer, that
at the same time, I should behold the funerals of two men, the dearest unto me
of all other; I had rather part with the dead than slaughter the living; and
having said this, she commands the body of her dead Husband to be taken out of
his Coffin, cuts off his nose to disfigure his face, and delivers him to be
fastened to the Cross that was empty. The Soldier made use of the wit of the
wise woman; and the next day it was the wonder of the people, which way the
dead Thief was again got upon his Cross.

Coel. Rhod. lect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 13. p. 499. Brusen. facetiar. l. 4. c. 7.
p. 278.
12. Portius Latro, an excellent Orator, of whom Seneca says, that he was too
much in every thing, and constant in nothing; for he neither knew how to leave
his studies, nor when he had, how to get to them again: when he once set
himself to writing, he remained at it night and day; and followed it without
any intermission, till such time as he fainted; and on the other side, when he
was risen from it, he yielded up himself as entirely to pastime, jesting and
merriment. When he was got into the Mountains and Woods, he contended with the
best and hardiest of all them that were born in those places, for patience in
Labor, and Pains and diligence in Hunting; and fell into such desires of
living in that manner, that he had much ado to persuade himself back to his
former course of life. But being once returned, he gave up himself with such
eagerness to his studies, as if he had never departed from them. This man
afterward fell into the disease of a double Quartan, which was so tedious to
him, that not able to endure it, he laid violent hands upon himself, and so
dyed.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Covetous and Greedy disposition of some Men.
THe great and learned Hippocrates, Cause. hol. Court, tom. 1. l. 2. p. 56.
wished a consultation of all the Physicians in the World, that they might
advise together upon the means how to cure Covetousness: ^t is now above two
thousand years ago, since he had this desire; after him a thousand and a
thousand Philosop^ers have employed their endeavor to cure this insatiable
Dropsy. All of them have lost their labor therein, the evil rather increases,
than dec^^^es under the multitude of remedies. The^ have been a number in
former ages sick o^ it; and this wide Hospital of the World is still as full of
such Patients as ever it was. We read of

1. Herod, Zonar. Ann. tom. 1. ^ol. 42.
the Ascalonite, after his vast expenses, that he grew to such a Covetous
humor, that having heard how Hir^anus his predecessor had opened the Monument
of King David, and carried thence three thousand talents of Silver; he taking
along with him, a party of his choicer friends (lest the design should take
air) went in the night time, opened and entered the same Monument; and though he
found nothing of Silver, as Hircanus had before done, yet he found there much
furniture, and several utensils of Gold, all which he caused to be carried
away; which done, he passed on to the more inward Cells and Repositories, where
the bodies of the two Kings David and Solomon lay embalmed; endeavoring to
enter there, two of his Courtiers were struck dead; and as it is constantly
affirmed, he himself (frighted with the eruption of fire and flame from those
apartments) went his way. After this deed of his, it was observed that his
affairs succeeded not with his wonted prosperity; and in his family there was a
kind of continual Civil War, which after did not end without the blood of more
persons than one.

2. Marcus Crassus, Plut. in. vita Crassi, p. 543. Plin. l. 3. c. 10. p. 479.
the Rom^n, at the beginning had not much more than three hundred talents left
him; yet by his covetous practices got such a vast estate, that when he was
Consul, he made a great sacrifice to Hercules, and kept an open feast for all
Rome, upon a thousand Tables, and gave to every Citizen Corn to find him three
months; Z^in. Theat. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 616. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 5.9.1. p. 352.
and yet before his Parthian expedition, being desirous to know what all he had
was worth, found that it amounted to seven thousand and one hundred talents,
but even this would not content him; but thirsting after the Parthian Gold, he
led an Army against them, by whom he was overthrown; his head was chopped off by
Surinas the Parthian General, who also caused molten Gold to be poured down his
throat, upbraiding by that action his unquenchable avarice.

Clarks mir. c. 33. p. 113.
3. Cardinal Angelot was so basely covetous, that by a private way he used to go
into the Stable, and steal the Oats from his own Horses: on a time the Master
of his Horse going into the Stable in the dark, and ^inding him there, taking
him for a Thief, beat him soundly; he was also so hard to his Servants, that
his Chamberlain watching his opportunity slew him.

Herod. l. 1. p. 77, 78.
4. Nitocris, Queen of Babylon, built her Sepulcher over the most eminent Gate
in that City; and caused to be engraven upon her Tomb, What King soever that
comes after me, and shall want money, let him open this Sepulcher and take
thence so much as he pleases, but let him not open it unless he want, for he
shall not find it for his advantage. Darius long after finding this inscription
brake open the Sepulcher, but instead of Treasure he only found this
Inscription within; Unless thou were a wicked man, and basely covetous, thou
would never have violated the Dormitories of the dead.

F^ll. worth. p. 84. Barks.
5. Arthur Bulkley, the covetous Bishop of Bangor, in the reign of King Henry
the eighth, had sacrilegiously sold the five fair Bells of his Cathedral, to be
transported beyond the Seas, and went down himself to see them shipped; they
suddenly sunk down with the Vessel in the Haven, and the Bishop fell instantly
blind, and so continued to the day of his death.

F^ll. chapter ^ist. l. 10. cent. 17. p. 57.
6. One reports this Pasquin of Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, for his
covetousness, Here lies his Grace in cold clay clad,
Who died for want of whai he had.


Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 73, 74.
7. Anno 712. Rodericus was the last King of the Goths: there was a Palace in
Toledo, that was shut up, and made fast with strong Iron bars; the Universal
Tradition concerning which was, That the opening of it should be the
destruction of Spain: Rodericus laughed at it, and supposing that Treasure was
hid in it, caused it to be broke open; no Treasure was found, but there was a
great Chest, and in it a linen cloth, wherein was depainted several strange
^aces, and uncouth habits in a Military posture; also there was an Inscription
in Latin to this purpose, That Spain should be destroyed by such a Nation as
that; and the Prediction was in some sort verified: for Count Iulianus having
his daughter ravished by the King, in Revenge thereof he called in the Moors
from Africa, who slew the King and ruinated the Country.

8. Perses, the last King of Macedon, a little before he was taken, Pulg. l. 9.
c. 4. p. 1191.
was deserted by all his Soldiers, saving only a few C^^ans, whom he retained
with the hope of mighty promises, having beforehand put into their hands some
Vessels of Gold, as a pledge of his just meaning; by means of these men he was
brought into a safe place, where promising to pay them in money, he took back
his Vessels, and refused to give them any thing in lieu of them; whereupon
being deserted by the Cretans also, he sled into Samothracia without other
company than his Gold, was taken by Aemylius, and led in Triumph through Rome;
and lost both his Kingdom and Liberty as his Covetousness deserved.

9. Pope Benedict the ninth was so very desirous of Gold, Fulg. l. 9. c. 4. p.
1199.
that he sold the very Popedom it self to Gregory the sixth for money; and it is
very probable that he would have sold himself, his liberty and life too, in
case he could have found a purchaser that would part with good store of Coin.

10. In the Siege of Cassilinum, Val. Max. l. 7. c. 10. p. 206.
where Hannibal had reduced them within to a grievous Famine, there was a
Soldier that had taken a Mouse, and sold it to another for two hundred pence,
rather than he would eat it himself to assuage his cruel hunger: but the event
was both to the buyer and seller as each did deserve, for the seller was
consumed with lamine, and so enjoyed not his money; the buyer though he paid
dear for his Mor^el, yet saved his life by it.

11. Quintus Cassius being in Spain, Val. Max: l. 9. c. 4. p. 256.
M. Silius, and A. Culpurnius, were purposed to slay him: as they went about it
they were seized upon with their Daggers in their hands, the whole matter was
confessed by them; but such was the extreme covetousness of Cassius, that he
let them both go, having agreed with one for fifty, and the other for sixty
thousand Sesterces. It is scarce to be doubted but that this man would
willingly have sold his own Throat to them in case he had had another.

12. Ptolomaeus, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 4. p. 256.
King of Cyp^^s, by sordid means had heaped up much Treasure, and saw that for
the sake of his Riches he must perish; he therefore embarked himself, together
with all his Treasure, in a Ship, and put to Sea, that he might bore the bottom
of his Vessel, die as himself pleased, and withal disappoint the expectation of
his enemies that gaped for the prey: but alas, the covetous wretch could not
find in his heart to sink so much Gold and Silver as he had with him, but
returned back with those Riches which should be the reward of his death.

13. Vespasian the Emperor practiced such kind of Traffic as even a private
man would shame to do, Su^ton. l. 10. c. 16. p. 313. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 5.. 4.
p. 357.
taking up Commodities at a cheap, that he might vend them at a dearer rate. He
spared not to sell Honors to such as sued for them; or Pardons to such as were
accused, whether they proved guilty or guiltless. He made choice of the most
ravenous polling Officers he could any where find out, advanced them to the
highest Places, that thereby being grown Rich, he might condemn their persons,
and con^iscate their Estates. These men he was commonly said to use as Spunges,
because he both mo^stened them when dry, and squeezed them when wet. When some
of his special Friends for his honor intended to erect to him a sumptuous
Statue worth a Million of Sesterces, ^os vero inquit mihi argentum day, he
desired rather to receive from them the value thereof in ready Coin, as being
less troublesome to them, and more acceptable to him.

14. C. Caligula was the Successor of Tiberius, Su^ton. l. 4. c. 42. p. 190.
as well in Vice as the Empire; some with threats he forced to name him their
heir, and if they recovered covered after the making of their Wills, Hak. Apol.
l. 4. c. 5.. 4. p. 357.
he dispatched them by poison, holding it ridiculous that they should live long
after their Wills were made. For the bringing in of money he set up Stews both
of Boys and Women in the Palace it self, and sent some through the Streets to
invite persons thither, for the increasing of the Emperors Revenues; and
having by this, and such like wretched means, amassed huge heaps of Treasure
(to satiate his appetite being in^lamed with a longing desire of touching
money) he would sometimes walk upon heaps of Gold, and sometimes as the pieces
lay spread abroad in a large Room, he would roll himself over them stark
naked. Most transcendent and excessive covetousness, which blinded so great a
Prince, and cast him into such an extremity of baseness, as to become a public
Pander and Poysoner for the love of money.

Su^ton. l. 7. c. 12. p. 277. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 5.. 3. p. 355. Fulg. Ex. l.
9. c. 4. p. 1194.
15. Galba being Proconsul in Spain under Nero, the Tarraconians sent him for a
Present a Crown of Gold, affirming that it weighed fifteen pounds: he received
it, and caused it to be weighed, found it to want three pounds, which he
exacted from them (laying a side all shame) as if it had been a true debt: And
to show he was no Changling, after his coming to the Empire, he gave with his
own hands to a certain Musician that pleased him (out of his own Purse) twenty
Sesterces, about three shillings English money; and to his Steward at making up
of his Books of Account, a reward from his Table.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 408.
16. Lewis the eleventh in fear of his father Charles the seventh, abode in
Burgundy, where he contracted a familiarity with one Conon an Herbman:
succeeding his father in the Kingdom, Conon took his Journey to Paris to
present the King with some Turnips, which he had observed him to eat heartily
o^ when he sometimes came from Hunting: in the way hunger constrained him to
eat them all up, save only one of an unusual bigness, and this he presented the
King with. The King delighted with the simplicity of the man, commanded him a
thousand Crowns; and the Turnip wrapped up in Silk to be reserved amongst his
Treasures: a covetous Courtier had observed this, and having already in his
mind devoured a greater sum, bought a very handsome Horse, and made a Present
of him to the King, who cheerfully accepted the gift, and gave order that the
Tu^nip should be brought him; when unwrapt, and that it was seen what it was,
the Courtier complained he was deluded: No, said the King, here is no delusion,
thou have that which cost me a thousand Crowns for a Horse that is scarcely to
be valued at an hundred.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Tributes and Taxes some Princes have imposed upon their
Subjects.
I Have read of Henry the second, King of England, that he never laid any Tax
or Tribute on his Subjects in all his Reign, and yet when he died he left nine
hundred thousand pounds in his Treasury: a mighty and vast sum, if we consider
the time wherein this was. There are ways it seems for Princes to be Rich,
without ^ullying their Consciences with heavy and unheard of Oppressions of
their Subjects: some indeed of the following imposts were but a moderate
sheering of the Sheep; but others were the ^^eaing off skin and all, and the
Princes tyrannically sporting of themselves with the bitter Oppression, and
woeful miseries of their overburdened people. Thus

1. Johannes Basilides the great and cruel Duke of Muscovia, Cause. hol. Court.
tom. 2. Max. 12. p. 399.
commanded from his Subjects, a Tribute of Sweat, and of Nightingales in the
midst of Winter.

2. Sylla raised out of the lesser Asia alone, Appian. ^ell. civil. l. 5. p.
104. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 5. p. 355.
twenty thousand Talents yearly; yet Brutus and Cassius went further, forcing
them to pay the Tribute of ten years within the space of two, and Antonius in
one, by which computation they paid in one year two hundred thousand Talents, a
mighty sum.

3. There was heretofore amongst the Grecians a Tribute called Chrysargurum,
Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 5.. 9. p. 54.
by which every Beggar, every Whore, every divorced woman, every servant or
freed-man paid something to the Treasury: something was exacted from every Male
for Dung, for Cattle, for Dogs; both in City and Country every man and woman
paid a Silver penny for their heads; for every Horse, Ox, and Mule as much as
was demanded; but for every Ass or Dog six halfpence: for which Tribute, when
there was great lamentation in the City, seeing it was exacted without mercy,
Anastasius Dicorus the Emperor abolished it, and burnt the Tables (wherein the
Tribute was described) in the Cirque, in the presence of all the people.

4. Caius Manlius, Live. l. 7. p. 126. Su^ton. in Neron. c. 10. p. 237.
the Consul, by a new example, propounded a Law in his Camp at Sutrium, by
which throughout all the Tribes all that were manumitted should pay the
twentieth part of what they were worth; and because that by this Law a great
in-come and addition was to be made to their impoverished Treasure, the fathers
of the Senate were agreed it should pass; this Law was abrogated by Nero in the
beginning of his Reign, that he might thereby be the more gracious with the
people.

5. Basilius the younger, Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 5. p. 55.
Emperor of the East, ordained a Tribute wherein that which could not be paid
by the poor, was to be exacted upon the Rich: the Tribute was called (...),
Allelengyon; this kind of Tribute was taken away by Romanus Argyrus the
Emperor, and had been before that by Constantine, but that death prevented him.

6. The Emperor Fl. Vespatianus laid an Imposition upon Urine, Hak. Apol. l.
4. c. 5. p. 357.
and being by his son Titus put in mind of the baseness of it, Petr. Greg. de
Repub. l. 3. c. 6. p. 56.
he took a piece of money received upon that account, and reaching it to his
sons Nostrils, demanded of him, whether he felt any other favor from it than
from any other kind of money, adding withal, Bonus odor Lucri ex re qualibet,
The smell of gain is good and pleasant from whencesoever it arises; the like
Tribute upon Urine, was exacted by Ferdinand, King of Naples, upon the Citizens
of Capua, by which he also got an infamous note upon himself.

Su^ton. in Caligul. c. 40. p. 189.
7. Cajus Caligula, the Roman Emperor, exacted new and unheard of Tributes; he
gathered them at first by Publicans: but perceiving the gain on their side was
much, he afterward gathered them by Centurions, and Pretorian Tribunes; nor
was there any sort of men, nor any kind of thing but what was Assessed at
something. For all manner of eatable things throughout the whole City, he had a
certain rate upon them; for all manner of Lawsuits and Judgments, wheresoever
commenced or decided, he had the fortieth part of the sum about which they
contended; and if any man was convicted to have compounded or given away his
right, he was sure to be punished; he had the eighth part out of the daily
gains of Porters; out of the gets of common Prostitutes, he received as much as
they earned by once lying with a man; it was also annexed to the Chapter of the
Law, That not only Strumpets, but all such as kept such houses of baseness,
should be liable to this Tribute: nay that even wedded persons should pay for
their use of marriage.

Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 6. p. 57.
8. In the last Wars in Lorrain, and in the year 1594. whereas before there were
sundry sorts of Tributes imposed, this was at that time added, That every
Family should contribute so much to the present Tax, as it did usually expend
in victuals in one day.

Petr. Greg. l. 3. c. 6. p. 57.
9. The Lampsaceni at such time as they wanted money, took this course in the
Collection of it, They imposed a further rate than usual upon all vendible
things, so that what was the former price of the Commodities, that the seller
did reserve to himself, and what was over and above, was paid to the Public.

Herodian. Lamprid.
10. The Emperor Commodus upon his birthday, demanded of each of the Senators
Wives, and from each of their Children two Crowns; and this Tribute he called
his First Fruits; and of all the Senators, that were in the rest of the Cities
and Provinces, he exacted five Drams a man: when notwithstanding all this,
money still failed, he feigned a necessity of his passing over into Africa to
settle the Affairs thereof, that so he might have an occasion of Collecting so
much as might bear the charge of his Expenses.

Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 4. p. 51.. 13.
11. Isaacius Comnenus, Emperor of the East, had a new and extraordinary way of
Taxing: and it was on this manner, Upon every Street wherein there were thirty
Chimneys, or Tunnels, he imposed one Crown in Gold, two in Silver, one Sheep,
six strikes of Barley, six measures of Wine, six measures of Brann, and thirty
Hens; upon one that had twenty, the eighth part of a Crown in Gold, a Crown in
Silver, half a Lamb, four measures of Barley, four measures of Wine, and twenty
Hens; upon a Street that had ten, he fixed as his Tribute, five pieces of
Silver, a young Lamb, two measures of Barley, and ten Hens.

12. Margareta, Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 4. p. 52.
the Queen of Denmark and Norway, upon the overthrow of Albertus by the Swedes,
being advanced to the Kingdom, exhausted the Suernes and Goths by intolerable
exactions and imposts, she demanded a certain sum of money for every Tail of
the greater Cattle, a Floren for every Hearth or fire, and a mark of Stockholme
value from every Marriage: besides diverse other heavy Taxes that were levied
every Week or Month upon them.

13. Almost all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, Lips. de Constantia, l. 2.
c. 23. p. 210, 211.
says Lipsius, paid yearly the fifth part of the profits of their Pasture, and
the tenth of their Arable. Nor did Anthony and Caesar forbear to exact the
Tributes of nine or ten years to be paid in one. When Julius Caesar was slain,
and Arms were taken up for their liberty, every Citizen was commanded to pay
down the five and twentieth part of all their Goods. And more than this, all
that were Senators paid for every Tile of their house six Asses, an immense
contribution above the reach of our senses, as well as of our Estates. But
Octavianus Caesar (probably with some reference to his name) exacted and
received of all freed men the eighth part of their Estates. I omit what the
Triumvirs, and other Tyrants have done, left I should teach those of our times
by the recital of them.

14. Alexander Severus, Alex. ^^ Alexandr. l. 4. c. 10. p. Herod. l. 3.
who was accounted amongst the best of the Emperors, was yet severe this way,
for he imposed a Tribute upon all Taylours, Boat-men, or Barge-men, Apple-women
and Citron sellers, Skinners and Leather-sellers, Wain-wrights, Silver-smiths
and Goldsmiths, and other Arts and Handicrafts, for the adorning of those
Baths which he had Founded. And, says Herodian, deceasing in the eighteenth
year of his Reign, he left to his Children and Successors such a sum of money
as none before him had done; and so great an Army as no force could be able to
resist.

15. The Tribute called Cunigosteura and Fanolehe, Zuin. The^t. vol. 3. l. 6.
p. 812.
was by the institution of Charles the Great: Every measure of Bread-corn paid
yearly five pence; every man, who by reason of sickness or age, desired an
exemption from the War, was fined at the same sum: nor were the Churches or
Churchmen themselves freed of Contribution in this kind. This Prince had with
him an account of all Farms, Stipends, Fields, Meadows, Vineyards, Villages,
the annual Rents and value of all these, with the Tributes imposed upon them:
as also a stated account of great and small Cattle, and number of servants: not
only so, but he had the very household stuff of all Prefects, Presidents,
Prelates, Monks, and Nuns, written down and Registered.

16. King Athelstan imposed, Bak. Chron. p. 16.
as a Tribute on the Prince of North- Wales, to pay three hundred Wolves
yearly, which continued three years: and in the fourth there was not one Wolf
to be found, whereby the Province was cleared of infinite trouble and danger,
the great abundance of them had formerly occasioned.

17. Ludovicus Sfortia sent F. Marchesius to the Genoans to demand of them a
mighty Tribute: Rad. orat. Extemp. pars 2. c. 12. p. 283, 284.
The Genoans received the Ambassador with all manner of civility, they led him
into a Garden, and there showed him the herb Basil (it is the Emblem of an
afflicted Commonwealth) they desired him to take some of that weak Herb and
smell to it, he did so, and told them that it smelt very sweet: they then
wished him that he would press and rub it betwixt his fingers, and so smell to
it: he did so, And now, says he, it stinks: In like manner, said the Genoans,
if the Prince deal graciously and mercifully with us, he will oblige us to all
cheerfulness and readiness in his service, but if he shall proceed to grind and
oppress us, he will then find the bitter and troublesome effects of it.

Plin. not. hist. l. 12. c. 1. p. 358. Mag^ri. Polymn. p. 2213.
18. The Plane Tree was first brought over the Ionian Sea, into the Island
Diomedia to beautify the Tomb of Diomedes; from thence translated into Sicily;
and so at length brought into Italy, and planted as a singular, rare, and
special Tree; but now it is carried as far as Terwin and Tourney in France,
where it is counted an appurtenance to the very soil that pays Tribute;
insomuch as people that will but walk and refresh themselves under the shadow
of it, must pay a Tribute and Custom thereupon to the people of Rome.

Magiri. Polym^. p. 2214.
19. Dionysius the elder exacted a vast sum of money of the Syracusans, and
when he saw that they lamented, pretended poverty, and desired to be freed of
it, he then appointed a new Impost or Tax to be laid upon them: and this he
caused to be collected twice or thrice. At last when he had commanded the same
should be paid again; and that he observed thereupon that the people laughed,
and as they walked together cast out sharp words and jests upon him, he gave
order that the Tribute should be demanded no more, for, says he, since they
begin to contemn us, it is a sign that they have no money at all left.

Magiri. Polymn. p. 2213.
20. Licinius, the Prefect of Gallia, proceeded so far in his avaricious design,
that whereas the Gauls were to pay their Tribute every Month, he ordained that
there should be fourteen Months accounted to the year; December he said was
indeed the Tenth Month, but after that he would have two other to succeed
(which he called the Augusti) for the eleventh and twel^th Months, for these
interposed Months he required the same Tribute to be paid, as in any other two
of the year.

Magiri. Polymn. p. 2214.
21. Drusus had imposed a Tribute upon the Frisons, a small one and agreeable to
their poverty; it was that for Military uses they should pay a certain number
of Ox Hides, not determining either the measure or strength of them. Olennius
was afterward made Governor of that people, and he chose out certain Bulls
Hides, according to the measure and strength of which their Tribute should be
accepted: if otherwise, not. This was hard to other Nations, but especially to
the Germans, who had Forests indeed of mighty Beasts that were wild, but had
few Herds of them at home: and therefore they first delivered up their Oxen
themselves; afterward their Lands; and at last not able to pay their Tribute,
they gave up their own bodies, those of their Wives and Servants to be Slaves
in lieu of it. Hereupon began first complaints, and then indignation; and
because they were not able to remedy these things by a just War, they seized
upon those Soldiers that were appointed to collect the Tribute, and hung them
upon Gibbets.

Magiri. Polymn. p. 2214.
22. Antigonus laid heavy Impositions upon the Nations of Asia, and when one
told him that Alexander did not use to do so, he said it was true indeed, for
Alexander did only Mow Asia, and that he was to gather the Stubble. Magiri.
Polymn. p. 2213.
(...) was the name of a Tribute that was imposed upon the Astrologers, and
such as were figure-setters, and by that appellation they used to reproach such
as consulted the Mathematicians and Calculators of Nativities.

23. Every three years the Aethiopians were wont to pay by way of Tribute unto
the Kings of Persia, Plin. not. hist. l. 12. c. 4. p. 360.
as Herodotus says, two hundred Billets of the Timber of the Ebony Tree,
together with Gold and Ivory, the yearly Tribute of which last was twenty great
and Massy Elephants Teeth.

24. Mausolus, Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 3. c. 6. p. 57.
King of Caria, had sundry subtle and injurious ways whereby he used to extort
money from his Subjects; he feigned that another King demanded Tribute of him
which he was not able to pay, and that therefore he must be supplied by the
purses of his people; he got a great sum from the Myllacenses, pretending that
their Mother City was to be invaded by the enemy, and whereas it wanted a Wall
he had not wherewith to build one. By Condalus his Lieutenant he diverse ways
drained and exhausted the people; for such Cattle as were given him he left in
the hand of the Donours for some years, and then demanded them, together with
all the increase of them within such a time as they were first given; he sold
the Fruits of such Trees at a price as hung over any part of the Kings
Highways; he demanded a Tributary Dram for the burial of any Soldier that
deceased. And whereas the Lycians rejoiced and delighted in their hair, he
feigned an Edict from the King, That they should have it cut off, unless every
man should redeem his at a certain rate by him at pleasure imposed.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Cheats; and the extraordinary boldness of some in their
Thefts.
THe Emperor Aurelius Alexander (says Lampridius) was so perfect a hater of
all Thieves, that if he chanced but to see any of them, he had his finger ready
to pull out one of their eyes; and not only so, but it seems that so great was
his Antipathy toward all that labored under that kind of Infamy, that at the
casual sight of any such, with the very commotion of his mind, he would vomit
up choler, and such a sudden burning would come into his face that he could not
speak for the present so much as one single word. Great sure is that filthiness
which excited a loathing in so gallant and great a man; but the Histories of
these bold and subtle practitioners will not (I hope) prove altogether so
nauseous.

1. Richard Smyth of Shirford in Warwickshire, Dugdale's Antiq. Warwicksh. p.
38.
having but one only daughter called Margaret, and doubting of issue Male,
treated with Sir John Littleton of Frankley in Worcestershire, for a marriage
betwixt his said daughter and William Littleton, third son to the said Sir
John: In consideration whereof he agreed to settle all his Lands in remainder,
after his own decease without other issue upon the said William and Margaret
and the Heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten, but for lack of such
issue, to return to his own right Heirs. And having writings drawn accordingly,
trusted the said Sir John Littleton to get them engrossed, which being
effected, and a day appointed for sealing, Mr. Smith came over to Frankley,
where he ^ound very noble entertainment; and some of Sir John's friends to bear
him company, in whose presence the writings were brought forth and begun to be
read; but before they came to the uses, stepped in Sir John Littletons Keeper in
a sweat, and told them that there were a brace of Bucks at Lare in the Park,
which carried a Glass in their Tayls for Mr. Smiths Dogs to look in (for he
loved coursing well and had his Greyhounds there) but if they made not haste,
those Market people which passed through the Park would undoubtedly rouse them.
Whereupon Sir John Littleton earnestly moved Mr. Smith to seal the Writings
without further reading, protesting they were according to the draughts he had
seen, and without any alteration. Which bold asseverations putting him out of
all suspicion of sinister dealing, caused him forthwith to seal them, and go
into the Park. Hereupon the two children (for they were not above nine years
old a piece) were married together, and lived in the House with Sir John; but
about six years after the young man dyed by a fall from his Horse; and Mr.
Smith resolved to take his Daughter away: Sir John designing to marry her again
to George his second Son, refused to deliver her, till which Mr. Smith never
suspected any thing in the deed formerly so sealed as has been said, but then
upon the difference betwixt him and Sir John, it appeared that for want of
issue by the before specified William and Margaret the Lands were to devolve
unto the right Heirs of the said William, which was Gilbert Littleton his
eldest Brother, contrary to the plain agreement at first made. What success
attended all this take in short: From Gilbert these Lands descended to John his
Son, from him to the Crown, as being one of the Conspiracy with Essex, in the
forty second of Eliz. and dyed in Prison. After which Muriel his Wi^dow,
petitioned King James for a restitution of his Lands, and obtained it; but
doubting further troubles by suits with Mr. Smith, sold them away to Sergeant
Hele a great Lawyer, who considering the first foundation of Littletons Title,
that they might be the better defended, disposed of them to his five sons; but
such is the fate that follows these possessions, that for want of a public
adversary, these Brothers are now at suit among themselves for them. And as
none of the line of Gilbert Littleton to whom they descended (by the
fore-specified fraud) does enjoy a foot of them, so it is no less observable,
that the Son and Heir of George by the same Margaret, to wit Stephen Littleton
of Holbeach in Worcestershire was attended with a very hard fate, being one of
the Gunpowder Conspirators in 3 Iac. for which he lost his life and estate.

Full. Chur. hist. l. 2. cent. 11. p. 142. Burt. Mel. part. 3. 2. p. 452.
2. Earl Godwin cast a covetous eye on the fair Nunnery of Berkley in
Gloucestershire, and thus contrived it for himself: he left there a handsome
Young Man, really or seemingly sick, for their charity to recover, who quickly
grew well and wanton. He is toying, tempting, taking, such fire and flax
quickly make a flame; The Sisters lose their chastity, and without taking Wife
in the way, are ready to make Mothers. The Young Man if sick, returns to Earl
Godwin in health, leaving the healthful Nuns sick behind him. The fame hereof
^ills the Country, flies to Court, is complained of by Earl Godwin to the King:
Officers are sent to enquire, they return it to be true; the Nuns are turned
out, their house and lands forfeited, both bestowed on Earl Godwin: surprised
weakness being put out, and designing wickedness placed in the room thereof.

3. At another time the said Earl had a mind to the rich manor of Boseham in
Sussex, Full. Chur. hist. l. 2. cent. 11. p. 142.
and complemented it out of Robert Archbishop of Canterbury on this manner:
Coming to the Archbishop, he said Da mihi Basium, that is, give me a buss or
kiss, an usual favor from such a Prelate: The Archbishop returns, Do tibi
Basium, kissing him there with an holy Kiss (perchance) as given, but a crafty
one as taken, for Godwin presently poasts to Boseham, and takes possession
thereof, and though here was neither real intention in him who passed it away,
nor valuable consideration to him, but a mere circumvention; yet such was
Godwins power, and the Archbishops poorness of Spirit, that he quietly enjoyed
it. These rich and ancient Manors of Berkley and Boseham, (Earl Godwins brace
of Cheats) and distant an hundred miles from each other, are now both met in
the Right Honorable George Berkley as Heir apparent thereof, his Ancestors
being long since possessed of them.

4. Maccus, Eras. Collo. in Conviv. Fabul^s. p. 313.
a famous Cheat, came into the Shop of a Shoemaker at Leyden and saluted him,
casting his eye upon a pair of Boots that h^ng up; the Shoemaker asked if he
would buy them, the other seemed willing, they were taken down, drawn on and
fitted him very well: Now says he, how well would a pair of double sole Shoos
fit these Boots! They were found and fitted to his feet upon the Boots. Now,
says Maccus, tell me true, does it never so fall out, that such as you have so
fitted for a race as you have now done me, run away without paying? Never said
the other; but said he, if it should be so, what would you then do? I would
follow him said the Shoemaker. Well says Maccus I will try, and thereupon
began to run; the Shoemaker immediately followed crying stop thief, stop thief,
at which the Citizens came out of their Houses; but Maccus laughing, Let no
man, said he, hinder our race, for we run for a Cup of Ale; whereupon all set
themselves quiet spectators of the course, till Maccus had run quite away; and
the poor Shoemaker returned sweating and out of breath, and declared how he had
been dealt with.

5. At Antwerp not long since, Eras. Collo. in Conviv. Fabulos. p. 314.
there was a Priest, who had received a pretty round sum in Silver, which he
had put into a great Purse that hung upon his Girdle; a certain Cheat had
observed it, who came, and saluting of him civilly, tells him, that he was
appointed by the Parish where he lived to buy a new Surplice; he humbly begs
therefore, that he would please to go with him to the place where they were
sold, that he might be the better fitted, in as much as he was of the very same
pitch and habit of body with the Priest of their Parish; he prevailed and
together they went, a Surplice was brought forth, and put upon him; the Seller
said it fitted exactly; the cheat when he had surveyed the Priest, now before
and then behind, said it was too short before; that is not the fault of the
Surplice, said the Shopkeeper, but is occasioned by the distension of the
Purse: the Priest therefore laid down his Purse, that they might view it again,
but no sooner had he turned his back but the Cheat catched up the Purse, and
away he ran with it; the Priest followed in the Surplice as he was, the
Shopkeeper pursued the Priest, the Priest called stop the Thief, the
Shopkeeper said stop the Priest, the Cheat said stop the Priest for he is mad;
the people easily believed no less, when they saw him running in public, and
so habited, so that while one was a hindrance to the other, the Cheat got off
clear with the purse and money of the poor Pri^st.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 64. p. 290.
6. In the reign of King Francis the first of that name, King of France, a
notable Thief, apparrelled like a Gentleman, as he was diving into a great
pouch, which John Cardinal of Lorrain had by his side, was espied by the King
being at Mass and standing right over against the Cardinal; the Thief
perceiving himself discovered, held up his finger to the King, making a sign he
should say nothing, and he should see good sport. The King glad of such
merriment toward, let him alone, and within a while after coming to the
Cardinal, took occasion in talking with him, to make the Cardinal go to his
Pouch, who missing what he had put therein, begins to wonder; but the King who
had seen the Play, was merry on the other side: after the King had even we^ried
himself with laughter, he would gladly that the Cardinal should have again what
was taken from him, as indeed he made account that the meaning of the taker
was. But whereas the King thought he was an honest Gentleman, and of some
account, in that he had showed himself so resolute, and held his countenance so
well; experience showed that ^e was a most cunning Thief, that meant not to
jest, but making as if he j^sted was in good earnest. Then the Cardinal turned
all the laughter against the King, who using his wonted Oath, swore by the
faith of a Gentleman, that it was the first time that ever a Thief had made him
his Companion.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 64. p. 291.
7. The Emperor Charles the fifth, commanding a remove; while every man was
busied in putting up his stuff, there entered a good Fellow into the Hall, where
the Emperor then was, being meanly accompanied, and ready to take Horse; this
Thief (for so he was) having made great reverence, presently went about the
taking down of the Hangings; making great haste, as if he had much business to
do; and though it was not his profession, yet he went about it so nimbly, that
he whose charge it was to take them down, coming to do it, found that some body
had eased him of that labor, and which was worse, of carrying them away too.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 64. p. 291.
8. Great was the boldness of an Italian Thief, who in the time of Pope Paul the
third, played this prank. A certain Cardinal having made a great feast in his
house; and the Silver Vessels being looked up in a Trunk, that stood in a
Parlour next the Hall where the Feast had been; while many were sitting and
waiting in this room for their Masters, there came a man in, with a Torch
carried before him, bearing the countenance of the Steward, and having a Jacket
on, who prayed those that sat on the Trunk to rise up from it, because he was
to use the same* which they having done, he made it to be taken up by certain
Porters that followed him in, and went clean away with it. And this was done
while the Steward and all the Servants of the House were at Supper.

9. The Emperor Charles the fifth, Lonic. T^ea. p. 523.
had a little Watch, of admirable and rare Workmanship; in a great crowd he was
robbed of it, by a Courtier that attended upon him; but the Watch it self
betrayed the Thief, for it struck the hour of the day in his pocket: at the
sound of which, the poor man surprised and affrighted, cast himself on his
knees before the Emperor imploring his pardon, which the Emperor easily
granted, saying that the fear of ignominy had been far more to him than the
hope of gain could ever be.

10. When the Emperor makes his entrance into the Imperial Cities, Camer.
oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 65. p. 294.
the custom is that the Deputies of the said Cities (in congratulation of his
coming) present him with certain gifts: These gifts are most commonly great
Cups of Gold, or other Vessels curiously wrought, and of great value, filled
sometimes with pieces of Gold, stamped with the Impress of the Cities that have
the privilege to Coin money. In one of the chiefest Cities of Germany such
presents being made to the Emperor Maximilian the first in the presence of
some of his greatest favorites, they were left in his Chamber, and placed upon
the Cupboard, even as they were presented; at which time in the streets some
pleasant Pastimes, and Shows were made to delight the Emperor with: all the
Courtiers were so intent to look upon these, that they had filled all the
Windows of the Emperors Chamber. One of the Emperors greatest Familiars
thinking his Lord and Master would be as busy in beholding the sports as the
rest, pretending in kindness to leave his place to one that stood by him, a
greater man than himself, he withdrew himself back into the Chamber by the
Cupboard, and seeing all was clear, puts his hand into the Cup that was given,
and takes out an handful of Gold, and puts it into his Pocket, assuring himself
that no man saw him. But the Emperor who seemed as if he thought of nothing
but the Shows, took heed to something else; for he wore on his finger a Ring
set with a certain Stone, which would show all that was done behind him;
wherefore casting his eye upon it, he looked where one would not think he did.
The Pastimes ended, the Courtiers stood in the Chamber waiting what the
Emperor would say, when he called him that had fingered part of the Present,
bidding him to put his hand in the Cup, and to take out as much as he could of
that which was in it. The Thief not knowing whereunto it tended, and confounded
with the sting of a guilty Conscience, took but a very few of the pieces, which
having done, the Emperor willed him to tell them, while the rest waited very
attentively, not knowing what this Ceremony tended to; and thinking those
pieces should be distributed amongst them all. The Emperor smiling said to the
Thief, Draw me now out those other pieces which thou did put up into thy
Pocket a while since, that I may see whether thou did gripe more then, or
now. The poor soul confounded with that word, begins to frame excuses and
prayers; in the end he emptied his Pocket upon the Table, and tells before them
all the pieces of Gold he had put up; the number of which being far greater
than those he took the second time, the Emperor said unto him, Take all these
pieces to thee to defray the charges of thy Journey, and be gone, and take heed
thou never come any more in my sight; and thus was the Courtier banished the
Court with shame enough.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 64. p. 291, 292. Sabell. hist. Venet. decad.
3. l. 6. Zuin. Thea. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 604.
11. A certain Candiot called Stamat, being at Venice, when the treasure was
showed in kindness to the Duke of Ferrara, entered into the Chapel so boldly,
that he was taken for one of the Dukes domestical servants; and wondering at so
much wealth, instead of contenting himself with the sight, intended to purloin
thence a part at least for himself. St. Marks Church gilded well nigh all over
with pure Gold, is built at the bottom round about, within and without with
pieces or tables of Marble. This Grecian Thief with mavelous cunning, devised
to take out finely by night one of those tables or stones of Marble, against
that place of the Church, where the Altar stands, called the Childrens Altar,
thereby to make himself an entrance into the treasury; and having labored a
night, because in that time the Wall could not be wrought through, he laid the
Stone handsomely into its place again, and fitted it so well, that no man could
perceive any show of opening it at all. As for the Stones and Rubbish which he
took out of the wall, he carried it away so nimbly, and so cleanly, and all
before day, that he was never discovered. Having wrought thus many nights, he
got at length to the Treasure, and began to carry away much riches of diverse
kinds. He had a Godfather in the City, a Gentleman of the same Isle of Candy,
called Zacharias Grio, an honest man and of a good Conscience: Stamat taking
him one day aside, and near to the Altar, and drawing a promise from him that
he should keep secret that which he should impart to him, discovered from the
beginning to the end all that he had done, and then carries him to his House,
where he shows him the inestimable Riches he had stolen. The Gentleman being
virtuous, stood amazed at the sight; and quaking at the horror of the offense,
began to reel, and was scarce able to stand. Whereupon Stamat as a desperate
Villain was about to kill him in the place; and as his will of doing it
increased, Grio mistrusting him, stayed the blow by saying, That the extreme
joy which he conceived in seeing so many precious things, whereof he never
thought to have had any part, had made him as it were besides himself. Stamat
contented with that excuse, let him alone, and as a gift gave Grio a Precious
Stone, of exceeding great value, and is the same that is now worn in the fore
part of the Dukes Crown. Grio pretended some weighty matter to dispatch; forth
he goes and hastens to the Palace, where having obtained access to the Duke, he
reveals all the matter, saying withal, that there needed expedition,
otherwise Stamat might rowse himself, look about him, disguise himself and be
gone. To gain the more credit to his words, he drew forth of his bosom that
Precious Stone that had been given him: Which seen, some that were present were
immediately sent away to the House, where they laid hold on Stamat, and all
that he had stolen, which amounted to the value of two millions of Gold,
nothing thereof being as yet removed. So he was hanged betwixt two Pillars, and
the Informer besides a rich recompense, which he at that time received, had a
yearly pension assigned him out of the public treasury, for so long as he
lived.

12. Anno Dom. 1560. when Hadrianus Turnebas read in Paris Lectures upon
Aristophanes, Wieri oper. lib. de (...) p. 140, 141* 142.
he openly averred, That heretofore in that City, he had seen a crafty fellow,
called Petrus Brabantius, who as often as he pleased would speak from his
Belly, with his mouth indeed open, but his lips unmoved, and that this way he
put diverse cheats upon several persons; Amongst others this was well known:
There was a Merchant of Lions, who was lately dead, that had attained to a
great estate by unjust arts, as all men believed. Brabantius comes to Cornutus,
the only Son and Heir of this Merchant, as he walked in a Portico, behind the
Churchyard, and tells him that he was sent to inform him, of what was to be
done by him, that it was more requisite for him to think of the soul and
reputation of his Father, than his death. Upon the sudden, while they are
discoursing a voice is heard, as if it was that of the Father (which though it
proceeded from the belly of Brabantius, yet he feigned to be wonderfully
affrighted at it). The voice was to inform the Son, what state his Father was
now in, by reason of his injustice, what tortures he endured in Purgatory, both
upon his own and his Sons account, whom he had left Heir of his ill gotten
goods, that no freedom thence was to be expected by him, without just expiation
by his Son, by alms to such as stood most in need, which were the Christians
who were taken by the Turks; That he should credit the man, who was by special
providence come to him, to be employed by Religious persons, for the redemption
of such persons that were captive at Constantinople. Cornutus a good man
(though loath to part with his money) told him that he would advise upon it that
day, that on the next Brabantius should meet him in the same place. In the mean
time he suspected there might be some fraud in the place, because shady, dark,
and apt enough for echoes or other delusions. The next day therefore he takes
him into an open plain place, where no bush nor bryar was; where
notwithstanding he heard the same song, with this addition, that he should
deliver Brabantius six thousand Franks, and purchase three Masses daily to be
said for him, or else the miserable soul of his Father could not be freed.
Cornutus bound by Conscience, Duty and Religion (though loath) yet delivered him
the money, without witness of the receipt or payment of it; and having dismissed
him, and hearing no more of his Father, he was somewhat more pleasant than
usual. Those that sat at Table with him, wondered at it: at last he told them
what had befallen him; and thereupon was so derided by all, that at once he
should be cheated of brain and money, that for mere grief, within some few days
after he died.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of persons of base birth, who assumed the names of Illustrious
Persons.
THey say there is a Pool in Comagena that sends forth a mud, that burns in
such manner, as that it is no way to be quenched till a quantity of earth be
cast upon it; and Virgil has it of the Bees (those little Birds) that when
they swarm, and have furiously commenced a civil war amongst themselves, cast a
handful of dust upon them, and they return to their wonted quietness. Hi motus
animorum atque haec certamina tanta
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescunt.
Their fierce resolves, and bloody battles cease
When dust is thrown; and they return to peace.
The mud and dregs of men are sometimes so inflamed with a passionate desire
after greatness, that they cannot rest till they are forced to their old
obscurity, or laid down in the dust of death.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 188.
1. Andriscus was of so mean a condition in Macedonia, that he had no other way
to sustain himself, but by his daily labor; yet this man suddenly feigned
himself to be Philip, the Son of King Perseus, and the feature of his face was
somewhat like his. He said it, and others believed it, or at least pretended
they did; especially the Macedonians and Thracians, out of weariness of the
Roman Government, which with the novelty and rigor of it displeased them. He
had therefore speedily gathered mighty forces, with which he overthrew a Roman
Praetor; at last he was overcome by Metellus, led in chains to Rome, and there
triumphed over.

Speeds hist. p. 706.
2. Lambert Symnel, pretended himself to be Richard Duke of York, the second Son
of Edward the fourth, and thereupon came to claim the English Crown; after a
terrible battle fought in his quarrel, he was taken alive, and by order of King
Henry the seventh, put first into his Kitchen to turn the Spits, and was
afterward advanced to be his Falconer, in which office he lived and dyed.

Knowles T^rk hist. p. 255, 256, etc. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 200.
3. Amurath the second, having newly ascended the Throne of his Father Mahomet;
at Thessalonica an obscure fellow, crept as it were out of a Chimneys Corner,
took upon him the name and person of Mustapha, the Son of Bajazet, who was
slain many years before, in the great battle at Mount Stella against Tamerlain.
This counterfeit Mustapha, animated by the Greek Princes, set so good a
Countenance upon the matter, with such a Grace and Majesty, that not only the
Country people, but men of great place and calling repaired to him as their
Natural Prince and Sovereign; so that in a short time he was honored as a King
in all parts of the Turkish Kingdom in Europe. Amurath to repress this growing
mischief, sent Bajazet Bassa with a strong Army into Europe, where he was
forsaken of his Army, and for safety of his life compelled to yield up himself
to Mustapha. Much trouble he afterward created to Amurath, at last being
entrapped by the policy of Eivaces Bassa, he sled when none pursued, being
taken, he was brought bound to Amurath, then at Adrianople, by whose order he
was hanged from the battlements of one of the highest Towers in the City, and
there left to the Worlds wonder.

4. Herophilus a Farrier, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 15. p. 274.
by challenging C. Marius (who had been seven times Consul) to be his
Grandfather, gained such a reputation to himself, that diverse of the Colonies
of the Veterane Soldiers, diverse good Towns, and almost all the Colleges made
choice of him for their Patron. So that C. Caesar, having newly oppressed Cn.
Pompeius the younger in Spain, and admitting the people into his Gardens, this
man was saluted in the next Cloisters, by almost as great a Company, and unless
Caesar had interposed, the Republic had had a wound imprinted upon it by so
base a hand; but Caesar banished him from the sight of Italy, yet after his
death he returned, and then entered into a Conspiracy of killing all the
Senators, upon which account by their command he was executed in Prison.

5. In the reign of Augustus Caesar, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 15. p. 275.
there was one who pretended, that he was born of his Sister Octavia, and that
by reason of the extreme weakness of his body, he (to whom he was set forth)
kept him as his own Son, and sent away his own Son in his room; but while he
was thus carried with the full sayls of impudence to an act of the highest
boldness, he was by Augustus adjudged to tug at an Oar in one of the public
Galleys.

6. In the reign of Tiberius, Lips. Ex. polit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 188. Petr. Greg.
de Repub. l. 7. c. 18. p. 295.
there was one Clemens, who was indeed the servant of Agrippa Posthumus, the
Grandchild of Augustus by Iulia, and whom he had banished into the Isle
Planasia, but soon after by fraud and fame became Posthumus himself. For
hearing of the death of Augustus, he with great courage went to bring forth his
Master (by stealth) out of the Isle, and so to recommend him to the Germane or
other Armies: but sailing slowly, and finding that Agrippa was already slain,
he took his name upon him, came into Etruria, where he suffered his Hair and
Beard to grow, then gave out what he was, sometimes showed himself in private,
then went he to Ostia, and thence into the City, where he was applauded in
diverse Companies. At last Tiberius having notice thereof, by the help of
Salustius Crispus, at a convenient time, caused him to be suddenly apprehended,
his mouth stopped, and brought to the Palace; where Tiberius asking him how he
came to be Agrippa; How came you, said he, to be Caesar? He was secretly made
away, having expressed great constancy in his torments, for he would not
discover one of those that were in the Conspiracy with him.

7. Demetrius Soter, Justin. hist. l. 35. p. 268. Lips. Ex. polit. l. 2. c. 5.
p. 190. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 7. c. 18. p. 295.
who reigned in Syria, being for a certain and just cause offended with them of
Antioch, made War upon them; they fearing the worst, fly to new remedies, set
up a base person, whom they salute for Alexander the Son of Antiochus, and
encourage him to seek after his Fathers Kingdom of Syria; what through the
hatred of Demetrius, and the desire of novelty, this new Alexander was
generally followed and embraced: he admires himself at his new fortune, and the
Troops he commanded; he fought with Demetrius, and not only overcame, but slew
him upon the place. By this means he became the peaceable possessor of all
Syria for nine years and ten months, when giving up himself to all kinds of
debauchery, he was set upon by the young son of Demetrius (now grown up)
overthrown and slain: the end of this Scenick and imaginary King.

Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 5. p. 193.
8. In Germany, Anno 1284. in the Reign of Rudolphus of Hapsburg the then
Emperor, there arose one who gave out himself to be the old Emperor Frederick
(who had been dead more than twenty two years before.) The Emperor Rudolphus at
that time laid Siege to Colmaria, but not a little moved that this Impostour
had got together a great Force, and that diverse of the Nobles and Cities in the
Lower Germany took part with him, he desisted from his Siege, came down the
Rhine, as one that made have to pay his obeisance to the old Emperor: but
having once seized upon him, and demanded, Who? Whence? and for what reason he
had done such things? he caused him to be burnt in the Town of Witzlar.

Lips. Ex. polit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 194.
9. In the same Germany, Anno 1348. there was a notable Impostour about
Voldemarus Marquess of Brandenburgh; the Marquess had been abroad and missing,
whether lost or dead for thirty one years; when Rudolphus, Duke of Saxony,
considered which way he might deprive Ludovicus Bavarus of his Marquisate of
Brandenburgh. To this purpose, he kept privately about him a Miller, whom he
instructed with all requisite art and subtilty, and gave out that he was the
Marquess; diverse Castles and Towns were hereupon yielded up to him; the
Bavarians and their Assistants were overthrown by him in one great Battle,
wherein Rudolphus Count Palatine of the Rhine, with seventy nine Knights were
taken Prisoners; three years did this Miller bear up, till at last he was
taken, and adjudged to the ^lames, to the Infamy of his Abettours.

Lips. Ex. polit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 195.
10. Balwine the eighth, was Earl of Flanders and Hannonia, afterward Emperor
of Constantinople, slain in a Battle against the Bulgarians. Twenty years after
his death, Bernardus Rainsus a Campanian, gave himself out to be the Emperor,
long imprisoned but now at liberty; the gravity of his Countenance, the
remembrance of former men and things, the exact knowledge of his Pedigree,
deceived even the most cautious and circumspect; much trouble he created, till
at last cited before Lewis the eighth, King of France, and not able to answer
such questions as were by him propounded, he was reputed and sent away as an
Impostour; after which, taken in Burgundy, he was sent to I^anna, Countess of
Flanders, and by her order strangled.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 200.
11. The like to this fell out in Spain, when Alphonsus was King of Arragon; a
youth of about eleven years of age, and under the Government of his mother,
there rose up one who gave out of himself, That he was that old Alphonsus,
twenty eight years past reported to be slain at Fraga; to color his absence
all that while, he said, How that out of a weariness of humane affairs, he went
into Asia, and the Holy Land, where he had fought in the Wars for God and
Religion, that having now expiated his sins, he was returned to his Subjects.
The matter took with many, and he had undoubtedly raised some considerable
stirs there, but that being taken at Augusta, he there hanged himself.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the huge Ambition of some men, and their thirst after
Sovereignty.
HEliogabalus sometimes took his Courtiers, Cause. holy Cour. tom. 1. l. 2. p.
57.
and commanded them to be tied and trussed fast to a great Wheel, and then
turned and rolled them up and down in the water, taking infinite pleasure to
see them sometimes aloft, sometime below, sometime to taste the sweetness of the
air, and sometime to be deeply plunged in the water, where of necessity they
drank more than enough. Ambitious men daily act the same play, but they
personate it tragically; and therefore it was well advised by one of the Kings
of France, when his Chancellor showed him his own lively Effigies upon a piece
of Arras, standing upon the uppermost part of Fortunes Wheel: You would do
well, said he, to pin it fast lest it should turn again. Yet all considerations
of this kind are two little, to rebate the keenness of some men's soaring minds,
who are in continual Fevors to be great, though for never so little a time, and
at what rate soever.

1. At the Election of the Pope, Hist. of the Cardinals par. 3. l. 1. p. 248.
the great Ambition of Cardinal William Rhotomagensis was visible even in the
scrutiny, for being timorous and fearful things would not happen as he
expected, seeing Cardinal Aeneas going toward the Schedule, he said to him
with an humble and submissive voice, Aeneas, I recommend my self to thee,
remember me I beseech thee, and have compassion on me; Aeneas answered him only
thus, Poor Worm thou mistakest in recommending thy self to me. His Ambition was
moreover conspicuous in the prayers he went mumbling about, yet so as his
Neighbors might understand him, lifting up his eyes and his voice to Heaven,
and joining his hands, he cried out, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori, God be
merciful unto me a sinner. The scrutiny being published it appeared that Aeneas
had three voices more than Rotomagensis; and by the accession of Cardinal
Prosper Colonna was then made Pope.

2. When Stephen, Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 5. p. 223.
that good and great King of Poland was dead, and that the usual Assembly was
called for the Election of a new King, the Great Cham of Tartary was also there
by his Ambassadors, who in his name told them, That he was a Potent Prince
able of his own Subjects to lead many Myriads of Horse into the Field, for
either the defense or enlargement of Poland. That he was also frugal and
temperate; and setting aside all delicate dishes his manner was to assuage his
hunger with only Horses flesh. In the next place as to matters of Religion
(concerning which he heard they were in dispute) their Pope should be his Pope,
and their Luther his Luther. No marvel if this Embassy was received with
laughter, when they beheld a man ready to part at once with Religion and all
things Sacred, for the very desire he had after Rule.

3. After the Noble exploits of Sertorius in Spain, Plut. in Sertorie, p. 582.
had put those on his part almost in equal hopes with their enemies, Perpenna
too much rerelying upon the Nobility of his Descent ambitiously aspired to the
power of Sertorius: to that purpose he sowed the seeds of dissension in the
Army and amongst the Captains; and the Conspiracy being ripe he invited
Sertorius, with other his Officers (Confederate with him) to supper, and there
caused him to be murdered. Immediately the Spaniards revolted from Perpenna,
and by their Ambassadors yielded themselves to Pompey and Metellus. Perpenna
soon showed he was a man that knew neither how to command nor to obey; he was
speedily broken and taken by Pompey; nor did he bear his last misfortune in
such manner as became a General, for having the Papers of Sertorius in his
hands, he promised to Pompey to show him Letters from consular persons, and
under the hands of the chiefest men in the City, whereby Sertorius was invited
into Italy: Pompey burnt the Letters, and all Sertorius his Papers, not looking
upon any of them himself, nor suffering any other, and then caused Perpenna to
be dispatched, that he might free the City of a mighty fear; and this was the
end of the foolish Ambition of Perpenna.

Pezel. Mell. tom. 1. p. 333, 338. Clarks mir. c. 102. p. 472.
4. Alexander was at the Siege of Tyrus, when a second time there came to him
Ambassadors from Darius, declaring that their Master would give him ten
thousand Talents if he would set at liberty his Mother, Wife, and Children,
that were taken by him; moreover if he would marry the daughter of Darius, he
would give with her in Dowry all the Land that lay betwixt Euphrates and the
Hellespont. The Contents of this Embassage were discussed in Alexanders
Council, when Parmenio said, That for his part, were he in Alexanders stead, he
would accept of those conditions and put an end to the War. Alexander on the
other side answered, That were he Parmenio he would do so too, but whereas he
was Alexander, he would return such answer as should be worthy of himself,
which was this, That they should tell their Master that he stood in no need of
his money, neither would he accept of a part for the whole; that all his money
and Country was his own; that he could marry the daughter of Darius if he
pleased, and could do it without his consent; that if he would experience the
humanity of Alexander, he should speedily come in to him. After this, he sent
other Ambassadors with these offers, Thanks for his civilities to his captive
Relations, the greater part of his Kingdom, his daughter for his Wife, and
thirty thousand Talents for the rest of the Captives; to which he replied that
he would do what he desired, if he would content himself with the second place,
and not pretend to equality with him, but as the World would not endure two
Suns, neither could the earth endure two Sovereign Emperors, without
permutation of the state of all things; that therefore he should either yield
up himself to day, or prepare for War to morrow.

Clarks mir. c. 102. p. 471.
5. Solon, the Athenian Lawgiver, said it of one of his prime Citizens called
Pisistratus, That if he could but pluck out of his head the worm of Ambition,
and heal him of his greedy desire to Rule, that then there could not be a man
of more virtue than he.

Clarks mir. c. 86. p. 373.
6. Richard, Duke of Gloucester, afterward King of England, by the name of
Richard the third, stopped at nothing how impious or villainous soever, to
remove all obstructions between him and the Crown: He is said to have murdered
King Henry the sixth in the Tower, and his son Prince Edward at Tewksbury; he
caused his own brother George, Duke of Clarence, to be drowned in a Butt of
Malmsey; he was suspected to have made away Edward the fourth, his brother and
King, by poison; he beheaded Rivers, Vaughan, Gray, and the Lord Hastings, as
the known impediments of his Usurpation; and the Duke of Buckingham his old
friend, when he saw he declined his service in the murder of his Nephews, which
yet he got performed upon the bodies of those two innocent Princes: But the
just judgment of God overtook him for the spilling of all this innocent blood.
His only son was taken away by death; his own conscience was so disquieted,
that he was in continual fears in the day, and his sleeps disturbed and broken
with frightful Visions and Dreams. At last he was slain in Bosworth Field, his
Carcass was found naked amongst the slain, filthily polluted with blood and
dirt, trussed upon an Horse behind a Pursivant at Arms, his head and arms
hanging down on the one side of the Horse, and his legs on the other, like a
Calf, and so he was interred at Leicester, with as base a Funeral as he
formerly bestowed upon his Nephews in the Tower.

7. Caesar Borgia, Clarks mir. c. 86. p. 377.
the son of Pope Alexander, was a most ambitious man, he caused his brother
Candianus, then General over the Popes Forces, to be murdered in the Streets,
and his dead body to be cast into the River Tyber; and then casting off his
Priestly Robes, and Cardinals habit, he took upon him the leading of his
Fathers Army; and with exceeding prodigality he bound fast to him many
desperate Ruffians, for the execution of his horrible devices. Having thus
strengthened himself, he became a terror to all the Nobility of Rome; he first
drove out the honorable Family of the Columnii; and then by execrable
treachery poisoned or killed the chief Personages of the great Houses of the
Vrsini and Cajetani, seizing upon their Lands and Estates. He strangled at once
four Noble men of the Camertes; drove Guido Feltrius out of Vrbin; took the
City of Faventia from Astor Manfredus, whom he first beastly abused and then
strangled. In his thoughts he had now made himself Master of all Latium, when
he was cast down when he least feared. Being at supper with his Father,
prepared on purpose for the death of certain rich Cardinals, by the mistake of
a Servant, he and his father were empoysoned by deadly Wine prepared for the
Guests.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the great desire of Glory in some Noble and other ignoble
Persons.
PLiny considering with himself the Nature of the Element of fire, how
rapacious and devouring a thing it is, and quickly consumes whatsoever it lays
hold on, what store of it is in the World; how it is in every House, under every
foot in Pebbles and Flints; above us in fiery Meteors, and beneath us in
subterranean passages, begins to marvel that all the World was not consumed
with fire: When I consider that almost every soul is wrapped about with this
ardent desire of Glory, how far a man is liable to be transported thereby: and
that as Tacitus has well observed, it is the last Garment that man parts with
and denudes himself of; I cannot sufficiently wonder that it has done no more
mischief in the World, and that it has burnt, though destructively in some,
yet so harmlesly in others, as some of the following Examples will declare.

Sand. Relat. l. 2. p. 113.
1. The Tower of Pharos had the reputation of the Worlds seventh wonder, it was
built by King Ptolomy Philadelphus, but Sostratus, who was employed therein as
the chief Architect, engraved upon it this Inscription, Sostratus of Gnydos,
the son of Dexiphanes, to the Gods Protectors, for the safety of Sailers; this
Writing he covered with Plaster, and upon the Plaster he inscribed the Name
and Title of the King: he knew that would soon waste away, and then his own
name written in Marble, he hoped would (as he had desired) be celebrated to
Eternity.

Guaz. de civili conver. l. 2. p. 329.
2. We read of one who published a Book of his, the Title whereof was, Of the
Contempt of Glory; in this his work he endeavored to show by many and notable
arguments, that it was a vanity unworthy of a man to hunt for popular applause
by any of his performances. Yet this very person was afterward convinced of
the same error he had so severely reproved in others, in as much as he had set
his name in the Frontispiece of his Book.

Zain. Theat. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 154. Guaz. de civ. conver. l. 2. p. 330. Fulg.
Ex. l. 8. c. 15. p. 1102.
3. Cicero accounted it so great a matter to speak eloquently, and labored
therein with that anxiety, that being to plead a Cause before the Centumviri,
when the day was come before he was prepared so fully as he desired, and that
his Servant Eros brought him word that the Trial was put off to the next day,
he was so over-joyed, that he gave him his freedom, who had brought him so
acceptable tidings. So far also was he from dissembling this his thirst after
Glory, that in a long Epistle he openly and earnestly entreated Luceius a Roman
Citizen, that he would gratify him in these three things, First, that he would
write the Conspiracy of Catiline, distinctly from all Foreign and external
Wars, and thereby procure to him an immortal name. Secondly, That he would more
studiously adorn that than any other part of his Works, and that in some things
he would rather consult his love, than what the truth it self would bear. And
lastly, That he would do this with the greatest expedition, that he himself,
while yet living, might enjoy some part of his Glory.

Guaz. ibid. l. 2. p. 331.
4. When Alexander the Great had demolished the Walls of Thebes, Phryne, that
beautiful and rich Curtesan, went to the Thebans and proffered to rebuild them
at her own Charges, provided that to the eternal memory of her Name, she might
be permitted to engrave upon them these words, Alexander overthrew Thebes, and
Phryne did in this manner restore it.

Muret. var. lect. l. 12. c. 12. p. 317.
5. Thales the Milesian, was a man of great and high reach, he found out many
admirable things, as in other Arts, so also in that of Astronomy: when he had
found out what proportion the Suns greatness did bear to the greatness of that
Circle which he finisheth in his annual course, and how by the Rules of
Geometry this might be clearly demonstrated; he communicated th^s experiment of
his to a rich man of Priene, that was a curious enquirer into such matters, who
admiring the comprehensive wit of Thales, together with the excellency of the
Invention, bad him ask what reward he would: I, said Thales, ask no other
reward than this, That at no time you challenge the Glory of this Invention to
your self; but that if you are desirous at any time to impart the secret to any
other, you shall ever acknowledge that I was the man who first ^ound it out:
for (says my Author) even the wisest of men do not despise glory, much less
are we able (who are not wise) to bear it patiently if any with impudence and
injustice challenge to themselves any praise worthy observation of ours.

6. Erostratus, Solinus c. 43. p. 384. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14. p. 2^0. Lon.
Theatr. p. 638. Din. mem. l. 5. p. 346.
a young man, seeing he could not make himself famous by any virtuous or praise
worthy action, resolved to perpetuate the memory of himself by performing
something of the highest infamy: having settled his mind upon such a design, he
set the Temple of Diana at Ephesus on fire, which for the stately Fabric of it
was worthily reputed amongst the wonders of the World; he confessed it was for
this only end, that he might be discoursed of in after times: which occasioned
the Ephesians by a severe Decree to prohibit so much as the mention of his
name, that the memorial of him might be utterly abolished: which had
accordingly been, but that Theopompus an Historian of great eloquence did make
mention of him in his writings.

7. In the Reign of Henry the seventh, Bak. Chron. p. 349, 350. Poly Virg. Din.
l. 5. p. 347. Speeds hist^ p. 754.
there was a commotion begun in Cornwall about the payment of a Subsidy lately
granted; the Ringleaders in this Insurrection were Thomas Flamock, and Michael
Joseph, a Smith: for which they were soon after hanged, drawn and quartered. It
is memorable with what comfort Joseph the Blacksmith cheared up himself at his
going to Execution, saying, That yet he hoped by this that his Name and Memory
should be everlasting. So dear even to vulgar Spirits is perpetuity of name,
though joined with Infamy, what is it then to noble Spirits when it is joined
with glory?

8. Platerus speaks of a Student in Physic that came to Basil on purpose to
Commence Doctor, Plater. obsi l. 3. p. 862.
Anno 1598. and falling grievously sick, toward the close of his life, he had
an earnest desire that he might die a Doctor: to gratify him therefore he was
privately and in his bed created Doctor of Physic, with which he was well
satisfied.

9. Themistocles was exceedingly enflamed with the love of Glory, Plut. in
Themist. p. 113, 114. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14. p. 239. Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 17. p.
404. Fulg. Ex. l. 8. c. 15. p. 1001.
and the ambition of performing great matters: being yet but young, he
importuned with most earnest entreaties, Epicles an Harper (in great esteem
with the Athenians) to practice his Art at his house, not that he himself would
learn, but that diverse persons might enquire for his house, and by this means
discourse of him and it. When the Battle at Marathon was fought, and the famous
exploits of Miltiades were celebrated; he was observed to be thoughtful for the
most part, and to pass the nights without sleep, and to leave off his usual
compotations; and when they that were amazed at this change of his life, asked
him the reason of it: The Trophies of Miltiades, said he, will not suffer me to
sleep. Being chosen Admiral by the people, he referred the dispatch of all kind
of affairs that were brought before him, to that day wherein he was to take
Ship, that so at one and the same time, being busied in so many matters, and
called upon by so many several men, he might be looked upon as a person of
great Authority. And when chiefly by his means Xerxes had received that notable
defeat at Sea, Themistocles was present at the Olympic Games next after, where
the Spectators not regarding those that strove for the Masteries, fastened
their eyes upon him all the day; and (as admiring his virtue) showed him to
strangers with great applause; he (tickled with Glory) turning to his Friends,
told them he had now received the fruits of all his labors for Greece. The
same man being once asked in the Theater, whose voice it was that pleased him
best? His (said he) that sings most in my praise.

Iov. Elog. Din. l. 5. p. 347.
10. Gabrinius Fundulus, the Tyrant of Cremona, when he was to lose his head at
Millaine for all his horrible crimes, and was exhorted by some to repent
himself of his Villainies, and hope in God for pardon, he frowningly replied,
That he did not in the least repent himself of what he had done in the right of
War: but it was an especial grief to him, that he had not executed one act,
which once he had conceived in his mind to do, which was, That he had once
determined to throw down headlong the Emperor Sigismund, the Pope, and
Balthazar Cossa, from the top of an high Tower (whereinto they were invited)
into the Marketplace below. And now at the closing up of his life, when he was
not able to boast of the fact, yet he boasted of the will and purpose he had to
do it, and grieved he had lost the opportunity of doing a famous exploit as he
thought it.

Sueton. l. 1. c. 7. p. 8. Din. l. 8. p. 498. Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 18. p. 405.
11. C. Julius Caesar coming to Gades in Spain, and beholding there in the
Temple of Hercules the Statue of Alexander the Great, he sighed, detesting his
own sloth, who (as he said) had done nothing worthy of memory in such an Age
wherein Alexander had subjected the World unto himself. He therefore earnestly
desired a speedy dismission from that Province which had fallen to him as
Questor, that he might seek out occasions for great Enterprises as soon as
might be.

Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 18. p. 406.
12. Pericles was cited to the Assembly by the angry Athenians, for that he had
spent so much Treasure upon public Works and Ornaments in the City: he mildly
replied, Does it therefore repent you, O Citizens? I shall then make you this
Proposition, Let my name be inscribed upon each of these Works, and I will
defray the expenses therein at my own cost and charge. At this all the Assembly
cried out, That he should go on in the name of the gods, and that he should not
desist from expenses upon that account: behold an honorable contest for Glory
betwixt him and the people.

Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 14. p. 406.
13. Trajanus the Emperor, did openly and almost every where aim at this: for
whether he made any new Work, or repaired any that was old, even upon the most
inconsiderable things he caused his name to be inscribed, insomuch that
thereupon some in a scoffing manner termed him the Wall Flower, or Pellitory on
the Wall.

Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 14. p. 407.
14. Alexander the Great took Calisthenes along with him (a man famous for
wisdom and eloquence) on purpose to write the History of his Exploits; and by
his writings to spread abroad the glory of his Name. Fulg. Ex. l. 8. c. 15. p.
1099.
He also cherished Aristotle upon the same account, and gave him a most liberal
and magni^icent allowance of eighty Talents, toward the completing of that
one Book of his History of Animals, hoping his Name would thereby be
perpetuated. When he came to Sigaeum, and beheld there the Tomb of Achilles, he
sighed and cried out, O fortunate young man, who had a Homer to Trumpet out
thy fame. So also meeting with a Messenger, who by his gesture and countenance
seemed to have some joyful matter to relate, What good News have thou, said he?
is Homer alive again? By that saying, expressing his ardent desire to have had
the most excellent Writer to have been the describer of his Acts, and the
publisher of his Praises.

15. Commodus that blemish of the Empire, Lon. Theatr. p. 636. Fulg. Ex. l. 8.
c. 15. p. 1106.
was yet desirous of a great name and fame abroad, so that he called the City
of Carthage after his own name Commodiana. He took off Nero's head from the
Colossus, and set his own upon it instead of the other. He also caused some
Months to be called after him. But we find that fortune has still opposed them
that have sought Glory in an oblique line: For though in brave persons, such as
Alexander, Julius, Augustus, their names do yet continue in Cities and Months;
Yet not so to Nero, Caligula, Commodus, and others their like: For soon after
their death all those things were extinguished, from whence they hoped for an
eternity.

16. Pausanias, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14. p. 240.
one of near attendance upon the person of Philip King of Macedon, on a time
asked Hermocles which way a man might suddenly become famous? Who replied, If
he did kill some Illustrious Person, for by this means it would come to pass,
that the glory of that man should redound to himself: hereupon he slew Philip:
and indeed he obtained what he sought, for he rendered himself as well known to
posterity by his Parricide as Philip did by his virtue.

17. There went a fame of a certain Indian, Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 394.
Feltham's Resol. p. 47. Fulg. Ex. l. 8. c. 15. p. 1108, 1109.
that he had such a peculiar skill in shooting, that he could at pleasure pass
his Arrows, through a Ring set up at a convenient distance; this man was
brought Prisoner and presented to Alexander the Great, who desired him to give
him an instance of his Art in that kind. The Indian refused, whereat Alexander
was so incensed, that he commanded he should be led away and slain; while he
was leading on to the place of his intended punishment, he told the Soldiers,
That he had for some time disaccustomed himself from shooting, and that fearing
(through want of exercise) that he should not perform what he desired, he had
therefore refused the Emperors command. This was told again unto Alexander,
who thereupon not only commanded he should be set at liberty, but also gave him
many gifts, admiring the greatness of his Spirit, that had rather die, than
lose any of that reputation he had formerly gained.

18. Nero the Emperor was possessed with a desire (though an inconsiderate
one) of eternity, Sueton. l. 6. c. 55. p. 268.
and perpetual fame, and thereupon abolishing the old names of many things and
places, he gave them others from his own name. The Month April he would have
called Neroneus; and he had determined to have named Rome it self Neropolis, or
Nero's City.

19. Aelius Adrianus the Emperor was of an eager but various disposition,
Pezel. Mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 193.
he covered the impetuousness of his mind with a kind of Artifice, feigning
Continence, Courtesy, and Clemency, and on the other side dissembling and
concealing as he could that burning desire that he had after Glory. He envyed
great Wits, both living and dead; he endeavored to extenuate the glory of
Homer; and gave order to celebrate the memory of Antimachus in his stead,
whereas many had not so much as heard of his name before. He persecuted even
such Handicrafts men as excelled in any particular thing, many of which he
depressed and crushed, and many of them he caused to be slain: For whereas he
himself was desirous to be accounted superexcellent in all things, he hated all
others that had made themselves remarkable in any thing. Having bought peace of
diverse Kings by private presents, he boasted that he had done more sitting
still, than others by their Forces and Arms.

Fulg. Ex. l. 8. c. 15. p. 1104.
20. Pompey the Great pursued the Pirates in the Piratick War into Creet, where
when he found they were opposed by Metellus the Praetor in that Island, inflamed
with an over desire of Glory, he defended them against Metellus with his own
Forces, that he might have no Roman copartner with him in the Piratick Victory.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the intolerable Pride and haughtiness of some Persons.
Fullers hol. State, l. 1. c. 15. p. 45.
THe Pride of the Jesuits is as generally as justly taxed, who being the
youngest of all other Orders, and therefore by Canon to go last, will never go
in Procession with other Orders, because they will not come behind them. An
unworthy tumor of the soul this vice is, and such a misbecoming blister, that
seldom or never is observed to rise upon those minds that are truly noble and
generous; at least not till they are intoxicated and put besides themselves by
an over-liberal draught, out of the luscious cup of fortunes. Continued
prosperity and affluence of all things, has indeed unhinged the souls of many
that were otherwise brave men, and made them do things that signified they had
no sentiments of mortality left within them; so that Memento ^e esse hominem,
might seem no more than what is necessary, to some that are mentioned in the
following Examples.

Cause. holy Court. tom. 3. Max. 15. p. 418. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 38.
p. 164. Sabell. l. 4. dec. 1. Zuin. vol. 2. l. 4. p 364.
1. Dominicus Sylvius, Duke of Venice, married a Gentlewoman of Constantinople,
she was plunged into sensuality with so much profusion, that she could not
endure to lodge, but in Chambers full of delicious perfumes of the East; she
would not wash her self but in the dews of Heaven, which must be preserved for
her with much skill; her Garments were so pompous, that nothing remained but to
seek for new stuffes in Heaven, for she had exhausted the Treasures of Earth;
her Viands so dainty that all the mouths of Kings tasted none so exquisite; nor
would she touch her meat but with Golden Forks and precious stones. God to
punish this cursed Pride and superfluity, cast her on a bed, and assailed her
with a malady so hideous, so stinking and frightful, that all her nearest
Kindred were enforced to abandon her; none stayed about her but a poor old
woman, thoroughly accustomed to stench and death: the delicate Seniora was
infected with her own persumes in such manner, that from all her body there
began to drop a most stinking humor, and a kind of matter so filthy to behold,
and so noysom to the smell, that every man plainly perceived that her dissolute
and excessive daintiness had caused this infection in her.

2. Tigranes, Plut. in Lucullo* p. 505.
King of Armenia, had ever in his Court diverse Kings that waited upon him, four
of which always attended upon his Person, as his Footmen; and when he rode
abroad they ran by his Stirrup in their Shirts; when he sat in the Chair of
State, they stood about him holding their hands together, with countenances
that showed the greatest bondage and subjection imaginable, showing thereby
that they resigned all their liberty, and offered th^^r bodies to him, as their
Lord and Master, and w^^e persons more ready to suffer than to do any thing.

3. Sesostris, Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 14. p. 342. Raleigh's hist. Wo^ld, l. 2. c.
18.. 6. p. 430.
King of Egypt, though otherwise a Prince of great virtues, was yet of a most
intolerable Pride: For he caused ^our of his Captive Kings, instead of Horses,
to draw his Chariot, when he was dispose^ to be seen, and to ride in Triumph.
One of these ^our, at such time as Sesostris was carried out to take the air,
cast his head continually back upon the two foremost Wheels next him, which
Sesostris obs^rving, asked him What he found worthy of his admiration in that
motion. To whom the Captive King answered, That in those he beheld the
mutability of all worldly things, for that both the lowest part of the Wheel
was suddenly carried above, and becam^ the highest; and the uppermost part was
as suddenly turned downwards, and under all. Which when Sesostris had
judiciously weighed it helped to prick the blister of his Pride, and he
dismissed those Kings, and all other from the like servitude in the future.

4. Aldred, Bak. Chron. p. 40.
Archbishop of York, had a certain suit to William the Conqueror, and having
a r^pulse therein, the Archbishop in great discontent, offered to depart: The
King standing in awe of his displeasure, stayed him, fell down at his feet,
desired pardon, and promised to grant his suit. The King all this while being
down at the Archbishops feet, the Noblemen that were present, put him in mind
that he should cause the King to arise: Nay, says the Prelate, let him alone,
let him find what it is to anger St. Peter.

5. Anibal was so exalted with the Victory he had got at Cannas, Lon. Theat. p.
637.
that a^^erwards he admitted not any of his Citizens of Carthage into his Camp;
nor gave answer to any but by an Interpreter. Also when Maherbal said at his
Tent door, That he had found out a way whereby in a few days (if he pleased)
he might sup in the Capitol, he despised him. So hard is it for felicity and
moderation to keep company together.

6. King Henry the second of England, Polyd. Virg. l. 13. p. 212. Speeds hist.
p. 478.
Anno Dom. 1170. caused his son Prince Henry at seventeen years of age to be
Crowned King, that he might in his own lifetime participate in the Government
with him: And on his Coronation day (for honors sake) placed the first dish on
the Table himself, while the new King was sat down: Whereupon the Archbishop
of York said pleasantly to him, Be merry my best Son, for there is not another
Prince in the whole World that has such a Servitor at his Table. To whom the
young King scornfully answered, Why do you wonder at this? my Father does not
think that he does more than becomes him: for he being a King only by the
Mothers side, serves me who have a King to my Father, and a Queen to my Mother.

M. de Serres hist. of France, p. 113, 114. Lon. Theatr. p. 641. Sims. chapter
hist. l. 1. cent. 12. p. 114.
7. Frederick the first, Surnamed Barbarossa, in prosecution of Pope Alexander
the third, had sent his son Otho to pursue him with seventy five Galleys. The
Pope had saved himself at Venice, and Otho was made Prisoner and carried to
Venice by Cian the Venetian Admiral. Whereupon Frederick grew more mild, and
accepted conditions of Peace prescribed by Alexander, as that he should crave
absolution on his knees; and in his own person should lead his Army into Asia.
So Frederick comes to Venice, and being prostrate at the Popes feet, in a
solemn Assembly he asks pardon: The Pope sets his foot on his neck, and cries
with a loud voice, Super Aspidem, and Basiliscum ambulabis. The Emperor moved
with this disgrace, answers, Non tibi sed Petro: The Pope replied, Et mihi and
Petro. This happened at Venice, Anno 1171. in the presence of the Ambassadors
of the Kings and Princes, and of the greatest States in Europe.

D^lr. disq. magic. p. 245. P^lyd. Virg. hist. Angl. l. 15. p. 284. Bak. Chron.
p. 110. Full. Worth. p. 203.
8. Simon Thurway, born in Cornwall, bred in our English Universities, until he
went over unto Paris, where he became so eminent a Logician, that all his
Auditors were his Admirers. Most ^irm his memory, and fluent his expression,
and was knowing in all things, save in himself: For profanely he advanced
Aristotle above Moses, and himself above both: But his Pride had a great and
sudden fall, losing at the same instant both language and memory, becoming
completely (...), without Reason or Speech. Polydor Virgil says of him, Iuvene
nihil acutius, seen nihil obtusius, whilst others add, That he made an
inarticulate sound, like unto lowing. This great Judgment befell him about the
year of our Lord 1201.

Lon. Theatr. p. 628.
9. Julius Caesar, after he had overcome Pompey, was created Dictatour in the
Month of July, whereupon he gave it his name, whereas before it was called
Quintilis. The Dictatorship which was a Dignity only of six Months, he took
upon him for perpetuity. He greedily accepted of the Title of Imperatour, given
him by the Senate. He challenged to himself the Title of Pater Patriae; he
placed his own Statua amongst those of the Kings. In the Senate he used a Seat
of Gold to sit in; he also permitted divine honors to be given to him: Nay, he
was arrived to that excess of pride, that he would have whatever he spoke to be
received as Law; nor would he give the least respect unto any that came to him.
Through this insolency he fell into an inexpiable hatred, and was slain in the
Senate House with twenty three wounds, in the fifty sixth year of his age.

Lon. Theatr. p. 637.
10. The felicity and virtue of Alexander the Great was obscured by three most
evident tokens of insolency and Pride, scorning Philip, he would have Jupiter
Ammon for his Father; despising the Macedonian habit, he put on the Persian;
and thinking it little to be no more than a man, he would needs be adored as a
god. Thus dissembling at once the Son, the Citizen, and the Man.

11. Pallas the Freed-man of Claudius the Emperor was arrived to that excess
of Pride, Tacit. Ann. Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 16. p. 365.
that within doors (to beget a kind of veneration in those of his Family) he
used no other way to express what he would have done but with a nod of his
head, or some sign of his hand: or if things required any further explication
than such signs would admit of, he informed them of his pleasure by writing,
that he might save the labor of spending himself in speech.

12. Staveren was the chief Town of all Friesland, Grimston's hist. of the
Netherlands l. 1. p. 30.
rich and abounding in all wealth, the only Staple for all Merchandise, whither
Ships came from all parts. The Inhabitants thereof (through ease) knew not what
to do nor desire, but showed themselves in all things excessive and licentious,
not only in their apparel, but also in the furniture of their houses, gilding
the Seats before their Lodgings, etc. so that they were commonly called, The
debauched Children of Staveren. But observe the just punishment of this their
Pride. There was in the said Town a Widow, who knew no end of her Wealth, the
which made her proud and insolent; she did freight out a Ship for Dantzick,
giving the Master charge to return her in exchange of her Merchandise the
rarest stuff he could find. The Master of the Ship finding no better Commodity
than good Wheat, fraighted his Ship therewith, and so returned to Staveren;
this did so discontent this foolish and glorious widow, that she said unto the
Master, That if he had laden the said Corn on the Star-board side of the Ship,
he should cast it into the Sea on the Lar-board: the which was done, and all
the Wheat poured into the Sea. But the whole Town, yea all the Province did
smart for this one woman's error, for presently in the same place whereas the
Mariners had cast the Corn into the Sea, there grew a great Bar of Sand,
wherewith the Haven was so stopped as no great Ship could enter; and at this
day the smallest Vessels that will Anchor there must be very careful, lest they
strike against this Flat or Sand-bank, the which ever since has been called
Vrawelandt, that is to say, The Woman's Sand. Hereby the Town losing their
Staple and Traffic by little and little, came to decline. The Inhabitants also
by reason of their Wealth and Pride being grown intolerable to the Nobility,
who in sumptuousness could not endure to be braved by them: So that the said
Town is now become one of the poorest of the Province, although it be at this
day one that has the greatest Privileges amongst all the Hans Towns.

13. Plutarch, Burt. Mel. par. 1.. 2. p. 117.
in the Life of Artaxerxes, tells a story of one Chamus, a Soldier, that
wounded King Cyrus in Battle, and grew thereupon so proud and arrogant, that in
a short space after he lost his wits.

14. Alcibiades had his mind exceedingly puffed up with Pride, Aelian. var.
hist. l. 1. c. 28. p. 124.
upon the account of his Riches and large Possessions in Land, which when
Socrates observed, he took him along with him to a place where was hung up a
Map of the World, and desired him to find out Attica in that Map: which when he
had done, Now, said he, find me out your own Lands; and when he replied, that
they were not at all set down: How is it then, said Socrates, that thou art
grown proud of the Possession of that which is no part of the Earth?

Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 536.
15. Parrhasius was an excellent Painter; but withal grew so proud thereupon,
that no man ever showed more insolence than he. In this proud Spirit of his, he
would take upon him diverse Titles and additions to his name, he called himself
Abrodiaetus, that is, fine, delicate and sumptuous; he went clothed in Purple,
with his Chaplets of Gold, his Staff headed with Gold, and his Shooe-buckles of
the same; he called himself the Prince of Painters, and boasted That the Art by
him was made perfect and accomplished; he gave out, That in a right Line he was
descended from Apollo. Having drawn the Picture of Hercules according to his
full proportion, he gave out That Hercules had often appeared to him in his
sleep, on purpose that he might Paint him lively as he was: In this vein of
pride and vanity, he was put down, in the Judgment of all present, by
Timanthes a Painter in Samos, who showed a Picture of Ajax that excelled the
like that was made by the hand of Parrhasius.

Bish. Godwin, p. 90. Che^win's hist. collect. cent. 5. p. 158.
16. Hugo, the Popes Legate, coming into England, a Convocation was summoned at
Westminster, where Richard Archbishop of Canterbury being sat at the
right hand of the Legate, Roger Archbishop of York coming in, would needs have
displaced him, which when the other would not suffer, he sat down in his lap:
all wonder at this insolence, and the servants of Canterbury draw him by
violence out of his ill chosen place, threw him down, tore his Robes, trod upon
him, and used him very dispitefully: he in this dusty pickle goes and complains
to the King, who was at first angry, but when he was informed of the whole
truth, he laughed at it, and said he was rightly served.

Laert. vit. Phil. l. 7. p. 208.
17. Chrysippus was an ingenious and acute person, but withal so lifted up and
so conceited of his sufficiency, that when one craved his advice, to whom he
should commit his son to be instructed? his answer was, To me, for, said he, if
I did but imagine any person that excelled my self, I would read Philosophy
under him.

Plut. in vit. Sert. p. 579. Clark's mir. c. 102. p. 476.
18. Metellus, the Roman General, having once by chance overcome Sertorius in a
Battle, he was so proud of his Victory, that he would needs be called
Imperatour; would have the people set up Altars, and do Sacrifice to him in
every City where he came; he wore Garlands of Flowers on his head; sitting at
Banquets in a Triumphal Robe, he had Images of Victory to go up and down the
Room, moved by secret Engines, carrying Trophies of Gold, and Crowns and
Garlands; and lastly, had a number of delicate young and beautiful Boys and
Girls following, with Songs of Triumph that were composed in praise of him.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Insolence of some men in Prosperity, and their abject
baseness in Adversity.
QUeen Maud, the wife of King Henry the first, has this commendation left her,
Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem;
Aspera Risus ei; prospera terror erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, nec sceptra superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
When prosperous, not o'rejoy'd; when crossed, not sad;
Things flourishing made her fear, adverse made glad.
Sober, though fair; lowly, though in Throne placed;
Great, and yet humble; beautiful, yet chaste.
People of the disposition of this Princess, are as rare as black Swans, and
few but degenerate into Pride or baseness, according as the scene of their
fortune turns and changes to black or white.

1. Lepidus was one of that Triumvirate that divided the Roman Empire amongst
them; Oros. hist. l. 6. c. 18. p. 267.
coming out of Africa, he met with Octavianus Caesar in Sicily, who had newly
been beaten by Sextus Pompeius; here Lepidus puffed up with Pride, that he had
now about him twenty Legions of Soldiers, with terror and threats demanded
the chief place of command; he gave the spoil of Messana to his own Soldiers;
and when Caesar repaired to him, he rejected him once and again, and caused
same Darts to be thrown at him, which Caesar wrapping his Garment about his
left hand difficultly bare off: speedily therefore he set Spurs to his Horse,
and returned to his own Camp, disposed his Soldiers into Military posture, and
led them immediately against those of Lepidus: some were slain, and many
Legions of the adverse part were persuaded to come over to Caesar's part. Here
Lepidus finding whereunto his former insolency and vanity began now to tend,
casting off his Generals Coat, and having put on the habit of mourning, he
became a miserable suppliant to that Caesar whom he had but now despised, who
gave him his Life and Goods, but condemned him to perpetual banishment.

2. The Duke of Buckingham, Court of K. James, by A. W. p. 131, 132, etc.
that great Favorite, sent a Noble Gentleman to Bacon, then Attorney General,
with this Message, That he knew him to be a man of excellent parts, and as the
times were fit to serve his Master in the Keepers place: but he also knew him
of a base ungrateful disposition, and an arrant knave, apt in his prosperity to
ruin any that had raised him from adversity: yet for all this he did so much
study his Masters service, that he had obtained the seals for him, but with
this assurance, should he ever requite him, as he had done some others, he
would cast him down as much below scorn as he had now raised him high above any
honor he could ever have expected. Bacon patiently hearing this Message,
replied, I am glad my Noble Lord deals so friendly and freely with me: But,
says he, can my Lord know these abilities in me, and can he think when I have
attained the highest preferment my profession is capable of, I shall so much
fail in my judgment and understanding, as to lose those abilities, and by my
miscarriage to so noble a Patron, cast my self headlong from the top of that
honor to the very bottom of contempt and scorn? Surely my Lord cannot think so
meanly of me. Now Bacon was invested in his Office, and within ten days after
the King goes to Scotland: Bacon instantly begins to believe himself King; lies
in the Kings Lodgings; give Audience in the great Banqueting House; makes all
other Councillors attend his motions with the same state the King used to come
out, to give Audience to Ambassadors. When any other Councillors sat with him
about the Kings affairs, he would (if they sat near him) bid them know their
distance: upon which Secretary Winhood rose, went away, and would never sit
more, but dispatched one to the King, to desire him to make have back, for his
Seat was already Usurped. If Buckingham had sent him any Letter, he would not
vouchsafe the opening, or reading it in public, though it was said, it
required speedy dispatch, nor would vouchsafe him any answer: In this posture
he lived until he heard the King was returning, and began to believe the Play
was almost at an end, and therefore did reinvest himself with his old rags of
baseness, which were so tattered and poor, at the Kings coming to Windsor, that
he attended two days at Buckingham's Chamber, being not admitted to any better
place than the Room where Trencher-scrapers and Lacquies attended, there
sitting upon an old wooden Chest, with his Purse and Seal lying by him on that
Chest. After two days he had admittance, and at his first entrance he sell
down flat on his face at the Dukes foot, kissing it, and vowing never to rise
till he had his pardon; then was he again reconciled; and since that time so
very a slave to the Duke, and all that Family, that he durst not deny the
command of the meanest of the kindred, nor oppose any thing.

Plut. in Lucullo, p. 509. Clarks mir. c. 104. p. 500.
3. Tigranes, King of Armenia, when Lucullus came against him, had in his Army
twenty thousand Bow-men and Slingers, fifty five thousand Horsemen, whereof
seventeen thousand were men at Arms, Armed Cap-a-pee, and one hundred and ^ifty
thousand Armed Footmen, of Pioneers, Carpenters, etc. thirty five thousand
that marched in the Rear. He was so puffed up with the sight of his huge Army,
that he vaunted amongst his familiars, that nothing grieved him but that he
should fight with Lucullus alone, and not with the whole force of the Romans;
he had diverse Kings who attended upon his greatness, whom he used in a proud
and insolent manner; and when he saw the Forces of Lucullus upon the march
toward him, he said, If these men come as Ambassadors, they are very many; if
as Enemies, they are very few. Yet this man who bare himself so high in time of
his prosperity, when he saw his Horsemen give way, was himself one of the
first that fled out of the Field, casting away the very Diadem from his head
into the plain ^ield, lest any thing about him might retard the swift-ness of
his slight, deploring with tears his own fate, and that of his sons; and after
all this, in great humility he laid down his Crown or his Diadem at the foot of
Pompey, thereby resigning his Kingdom to his pleasure.

4. Perseus, Plut. in P. Aemyl. p. 269.
the last King of the Macedonians, as he had many vices, and was above measure
covetous, so he was also so puffed up with the pride of the Forces of his
Kingdom, that he carried himself with insolence enough diverse ways; he seemed
to contemn all the power of the Romans; he stirred up Gentius, King of the
Illyrians, against them for the reward of three hundred Talents; then provoked
him to kill the Roman Ambassador; and at last, when he saw he had far enough
engaged him, refused to pay him the money. This man was, at last, overcome by
and fell into the hands of Paulus Aemylius, and then he discovered as much
baseness in his Adversity, as he had done arrogance in his prosperity. For when
he came near the Consul, the Consul arose to him as to a great Person, who was
fallen into adversity by the frowns of fortune, and went to meet him with his
^riends, and with tears in his eyes: Then it was that Perseus in an abject
posture cast himself at the feet of the Consul, embraced his knees, and spoke
words, and made Prayers so far from a man of any Spirit, that the Consul could
no longer endure them, but looking upon him with a stern and severe
countenance, he told him, He was an unworthy enemy of the Romans, and one that
by the meanness of his Spirit had cast a dishonor upon his Victory. Stows A^.
p. 532, 54^.


5. Thomas Woolsey, Cardinal, when he went his last Embassy into France, had in
his retinue nine hundred Horse of Nobles, Gentry, and others: he rode like a
Cardinal very sumptuously on his Mule, with his spare Mule and spare Horse
trapped in Crimson Velvet upon Velvet, and his Stirrups gilt. Before him he had
his two great Crosses of Silver, his two great Pillars of Silver, the Kings
Broad S^al of England, and his Cardinals Hat, and a Gentleman carrying his
Valence of fine Scarlet all over richly embroydered with Gold, wherein was his
Cloak; and his Harbingers before in every place to prepare lodging for his
Train: As he was great in power, so no less in pride and insolence; he told
Edward, Duke of Buckingham, that he would sit on his skirts, for spilling a
little water on his Shoe; and did afterward procure his head to be cut off;
he presumed to carry the Great Seal of England with him beyond the Seas; he
demolished forty Monasteries to promote his own Buildings. And dared in
Conference to say familiarly, Ego and Rex meus, I and my King. But when once he
was declined in his favor with the King, and commanded to retire, he was upon
the way at Putney met by Mr. Norrice, who had some comfortable words to deliver
him from the King, and a Ring of Gold in token of his good will to him: The
Cardinal at hearing of this, quickly lighted from his Mule alone, as though he
had been the youngest of his men, and incontinent kneeled down in the dirt upon
both his knees, holding up his hands for joy of the Kings comfortable Message.
Mr. Norrice, said he, considering the joyful news you have brought me, I could
do no less than rejoice, every word pierced so my heart, that the sudden joy
surmounted my memory, having no regard or respect to the place, but I thought
it my duty that in the same place where I received ^his comfort, to laud and
praise God on my knees, and most humbly to render to my Sovereign Lord my
hearty thanks for the same. Talking thus upon his knees to Mr. Norrice, he
would have pulled off a Velvet nightcap, which he wore under his scarlet Cap,
but he could not undo the knot under his chin, wherefore with violence he rent
the Laces of his Cap, and pulled his said Cap from his Head, and kneeled
bare-headed, when Mr. Norrice gave him the Ring: he said, If I were Lord of the
Realm, one half were too small a reward for your pains and good news; but
desired him to accept a little Chain of Gold, with a Cross of Gold, wherein was
a piece of the Holy Cross, which he ware about his Neck next his body, and said
he valued at more than a thousand pounds.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Vainglorious Boasting of some men.
WHen Alcibiades (then but young) was boasting himself of his Riches and Lands,
Socrates took him into a room, and showed him the Map of the World; Now, said
he, where is the Country of Attica? When Alcibiades had pointed to it, Lay me
then, said he, your finger upon your own Lands there. When the other told him
they were not there described; and what, said Socrates, do you boast your self
of that, which is no part of the Earth? He that has most has nothing to boast
of, and great boasts (for the most part) as they betray great folly, so they
end in as great derision.

Cause. hol. Court, tom. 2. p. 465.
1. Oromazes had an enchanted Egg, in which this Impostor boasted that he had
enclosed all the happiness in the world; but when it was broken, there was
found nothing in it but wind.

Clark. lives of ten eminent divin. p. 12.
2. Mr. John Carter, Vicar of Bramford in Suffolk, an excellent Scholar, and a
modest person, being at Dinner at Ipswich in one of the Magistrat^s Houses,
where diverse other Ministers were also at the Table; one amongst the rest, (who
was old enough, and had learned enough to have taught him more humility) was
very full of talk, bragged much of his parts and skill, etc. and made a
challenge, saying, Here are many learned men, if any of you will propound any
question in Divinity or Philosophy, I will dispute with him, resolve his
doubts, and satisfy him fully. All at the Table (except himself) were silent
for a while; then Mr. Carter when he saw that no other would speak to him,
calling him by his name, I will, said he, go no further than my Trencher to
puzle you; here is a Sole, now tell me the reason, why this fish that has
always lived in the salt water, should come out fresh? To this the forward
Gentleman could say nothing, and so was laughed at, and shamed out of his
vanity.

Athen. deip. l. 12. c. 9. p. 539.
3. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus was a wise Prince, and learned amongst the best of
the Egyptians, but was so infatuated by unseasonable and high luxury, that he
grew to that degree of sottishness, as to boast that he alone had found out
immortality, and that he should never dye. Not long after being newly recovered
of a sharp fit of the Gout, and looking out of his Window, upon the Egyptians
that dined and sported on the banks of the River Nilus, with a deep sigh he
wished he was one of them.

4. Eunomius the Heretic, Full. hol. stat. l. 2. c. 4. p. 57.
boasted that he knew the Nature of God; at which time notwithstanding St.
Basil puzzled him in twenty one questions about the body of an Ant.

5. Paracelsus boasted that he could make a man immortal, Full. hol. stat. l.
2. c. 3. p. 54.
and yet himself dyed at forty seven years of age.

6. Pompey the Great (at such time as the news of Caesar's passing Rubicon came
to Rome) boasted that if he should but once stamp with his foot upon the ^arth
of Italy, Clark. mir. c. 102. p. 471.
forthwith armed troops of Horse and Foot would leap out thence; yet was he put
to a shameful flight, by that enemy he so much despised.

7. Sigismund, Knowles T^rk. hist. p. 205.
King of Hungary, beholding the greatness of his Army which he led against
Bajazaet the first, hearing of the coming of the Turks army, in his great
jollity proudly said, What need we fear the Turk who need not at all to fear
the falling of the Heavens, which if they should fall, yet were we able to hold
them up from falling upon us with the very points of our Spears and Halberds;
yet this Insolent was then vanquished, and enforced to fly not unlike another
Xerxes, being driven to pass the Danubius in a single and little Boat; this was
at the Battle of Nicopolis, Anno 1396.

8. Abel by bribes bestowed in the Court of Rome, Bi^h. Spots. hist. Chur.
Scotland. l. 2. p. 44.
from Archdean of St. Andrews, got himself to be preferred Bishop there, and
was consecrated by Pope Innocent the fourth; at his return he carried himself
with great insolence. They write of him, that in a vainglorious humor one
day, he did with a little Chalk, draw this line upon the Gate of the Church,
Haec mihi sunt tria, Lex, C^non, Philosophia;
Bragging of his knowledge and skill in those Professions; and that going to
Church the next day, he ^ound another line drawn beneath the former, which
said, Te levant absquetria, Fraus, Favor, Vanasophia.
this did so gall him, that taking his Bed, he dved within a few days, having
sat Bishop only ten months and two days; this was about Anno 1238.

CHAP. XL. Of the Unadvised Rashness and Temerity of some persons.
SUch men as expose themselves to great perils upon light causes, were compared
by Augustus, to them who f^sh with a Golden Hook, where all their gains would
not recompense their one loss. An heady and unconsulting precipitancy in
affairs of importance is the mother of all mischief; and when men rush upon the
thing without taking any due prospect of what is like to be the event, little
is to be expected from such inconsiderate hastiness, besides an unprofitable
repentance, after irreparable losses.

Cause. hol. Court, tom. 1. Max. 1. p. 342.
1. Bishop Audas, an ardent man, and unable to adapt his zeal to the occasion of
the times, would needs countenance the humor of the blind multitude, and went
out in the midst of the day, to destroy a Pyreum, which was a Temple wherein
the Persians kept fire to adore it. A great sedition was raised, which soon
came to the notice of King Ildegerdes; Audas is sent for, to give an account of
this act, he defends himself with much courage and little success for the
Christians benefit: The King condemns him upon pain of death to reedifie the
Temple he had demolished, which he refusing to do, was presently sacrificed to
the fury of the Pagans; a violent persecution followed, which almost proceeded
to the subversion of the foundations of the Christian Religion in Persia. Men
were every where seen to be sleyed and roasted, pierced with Bodkins and
Arrows, thereby becoming spectacles of pity and terror to all that beheld them.

Lips. ^onit. l. 2. c. 2. p. 154. Cause. hol. Court, tom. 1. l. 5. p. 144.
Zo^a^. Annal. ^om. 3. p. 123. Pezel. mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 293.
2. The Emperor Theodosius the younger, used to sign Petitions very rashly,
without so much as reading of them, reposing his confidence in the
recommendation, and supposed fidelity of others. His Sister Pulcheria
perceiving it, found out this honest fraud to amend it; She framed a Petition,
and tenders it to him, wherein she desired that his Empress Eudoxia should be
given to her as her slave; he receives the Petition and forthwith subscribes
it. She therefore kept Eudoxia with her for some time; the Emperor wonders at
it, and sends for his Wife, his Sister refuses to send her, and returns that
she was hers by all the right in the world: She produces her Petition with the
Emperors hand to it, at the sight of which he was confounded; She was restored
back to him, and it is probable he afterwa^ds learned to read before he sign^d
Petitions.

Val. M^x. l. 9. ^. 8. p. 261.
3. Annibal s^yling from Petilia to Africa, was brought into the narrow Sea
betwixt Sicily and Italy; he not believing there was so small a di^tance
betwixt those two, caused his Pilot to be forthwith slain, as one who had
treacherously misled him in his course; afterward having more diligently
considered the truth of the matter, he then acquitted him, when nothing further
than the honor of a Sepulture could be allowed to his innocence.

Schent. obs. medic. l. 1. p. 5.
4. Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor, had made a league, and joined his forces with
the Cities near the Rhine, against those, who in the dissension of the Princes
wasted Germany. While he was here, the Empress, Mary of Brabant, being at
Wer'd, wrote two Letters, sealed with one Seal, but yet with different Wax;
that with the black Wax was for the Emperor her Lord, that with the Red for
Henry Ruchon, a Commander in the Army, but through the mistake of him that
brought them, that with the red Wax was delivered to the Emperor, who having
read it, suspecting some love design, though causelessly, dissembled the thing,
and leaving the Army at the Rhine, by as great journeys as he could, night and
day he hasted to his Wife, whom (unheard) he condemned for Adultery, and caused
^o lose her head; as conscious with her he stabbed H^lica with a Penknife, and
caused the chief of the Ladies of honor, to be cast headlong from a Tower,
Anno 1256. Soon after this unadvised cruelty, he had a fearful vision in the
night, through the fear of which he was turned all gray in a nights space.

5. Otho the Emperor, Patric. de Reg. l. 6. tit. 14. p. 387.
when Vitellius came against him, was advised by all his to protract the fight
and to delay a while, seeing that the enemy was equally pressed and cumbred
with want of provisions, and the straitness of the places through which they
marched. Otho refusing to listen to this wholesome advice, with an
inconsiderate rashness, put all upon the trial of a Battle, and so losing at
once both his Army and the Empire, he laid violent hands upon himself, and was
buried at Brixellum without Funeral Pomp, or so much as a Monument over him.

6. The Athenians were rash even to madness it self, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 8. p.
262.
who at one time condemned to death ten of their chief Commanders, returning
from a glorious Victory, for that they had not interred the dead bodies of
their Soldiers, which they were hindered from doing, by the rage and
tempestuousness of the Sea: Thus they punished Necessity, when they should have
honored Virtue.

CHAP. XLI. Of such persons as were discontented in their happiest Fortunes.
IT is a fiction of the Poets concerning Phaethon, that notwithstanding he was
mounted up into Heaven, yet even there he wept for anger and despite, that
none would give him the rule and government of those Horses that drew the
Chariot of the Sun his Father. There is nothing more in it than this, than to
let us know that the heart of man widens according to the measure we endeavor
to fill it; and that very rarely there is a fortune so considerable in the
world, but labors of some such defect or other, as makes us either wish beyond
it, or sick and weary of it.

1. Abner, Vaug. Flor. solit. p. 126, 127.
an Eastern King, as soon as his Son was born, gave order for his confinement
to a stately and spacious Castle, where he should be delicately brought up, and
carefully kept from having any knowledge of humane calamities; he gave special
command that no distressed person should be admitted into his presence, nothing
sad, nothing lamentable, nothing unfortunate, no poor man, no old man, none
weeping, nor disconsolate was to come near his Palace: Youthfulness, pleasures
and joy were always in his presence, nothing else was to be seen, nothing else
was discoursed of in his company. But alas in process of time, the Prince
longed; this made him sad in the very midst of his joys, and what should he
long for, but not to be so cumbred with delights. The grief of pleasures made
him request his Father to loose the bonds of his miserable felicity; this suit
of the Son crossed the intentions of the Father, who was forced to give over
his device to keep him from sadness, lest by continuing it, he should make him
sad. He gave him his liberty, but charged his attendants to remove out of his
way all objects of sorrow; the blind, the maimed, the deformed, and the old
must not come near him. But what diligence is sufficient to conceal the
miseries of mortality? The Prince in his recreations meets with an old man,
blind and leprous, the sight astonishes him, he startles, trembles and faints,
like those that swound at the apparition of a Spirit, enquires of his followers
what that thing might be? And being inwardly persuaded that it was some fruit
of humane life; he disliked pleasures, condemned mirth, and despised life, he
rejected his Kingdom and Royal dignity, and bad adue to all the blandishments
of fortune at once.

Sueton. l. 4. c. 31. p. 184.
3. Caius Caligula used often to complain of the state of his times, that his
reign was not made remarkable with any public calamities; how that of Augustus
was memorable for the slaughter of the Legions under Quintilius Varus; that of
Tiberius by the ruin and fall of the Theater at Fidenae, but his should be
buried in oblivion, through the prosperous course of all things: and therefore
he often wished the slaughter of his Armies, Famine, Pestilence, Fires, or some
opening of the Earth, or the like might fall out in his time.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 216.
3. Bajazet the first, after he had lost the City of Sebastia, and therein
Orthobules his eldest Son; as he marched with his great Army against Tamerlane,
he heard a country Shepherd merrily reposing himself with his homely Pipe, as
he sat upon the side of a Mountain, feeding his poor Flock. The King stood
still a great while listening unto him, to the great admiration of his Nobility
about him; at last fetching a deep sigh, he brake forth into these words, O
happy Shepherd, which had neither Orthobules nor Sebastia to lose: bewraying
therein his own discontent, and yet withal showing that worldly happiness
consists not so much in possessing of much subject to danger, as enjoying in
a little contentment devoid of fears.

Cause. hol. Court, tom. 2.. 8. p. 471.
4. Sidonius Apollinaris relates, how one Maximus arriving by unlawful and
indirect means at the top of honor, was the very first day much wearied, and
fetching a deep sigh, said thus, Felicem te Damocle, qui non longius uno
prandio regni necessitatem tolerasti; O Damocles, how happy do I esteem thee
^or having been a King but the space of a Dinner; I have been one a whole day,
and can bear it no longer.

Bruson. sacet. l. 3. c. 36. p. 252.
5. Flavius Vespasianus the Emperor, upon the day of his Triumph was so
over-wearied with the slowness and tediousness of the pompous Show as it passed
on, that he brake forth into these words, I am, said he, deservedly punished,
who old as I am, must needs be desirous of a Triumph, as if it was either due
to, or so much a hoped for by any of my Ancestors.

Sueton. l. 2. c. 28. p. 69.
6. Octavius Augustus did twice think of resigning the Empire, and restoring the
Republic to its liberty; first after the overthrow of M. Antonius, as being
mindful that it was objected against him by him, that he alone was the person
that impeded it. Again, he had the same purpose, being wearied out and
discontented with the taedium of his continual and daily sicknesses: Insomuch
that sending for the Magistrates and Senate to his House, he put into their
hands the account of the Empire. But afterward considering that he could not
live private without danger, and that it was a piece of improvidence, to leave
the Supreme Power in the hands of many, he persisted in his resolution to
retain it himself.

7. C. Marius having lived to seventy years of age, Plut. in Mario, p. 432,
433. Patricit de Reg. l. 5. ^. 350.
and who was the first who amongst mortals was created Consul the seventh time,
having also the possession of such riches and treasures, as were sufficient for
many Kings, did yet lament and complain of his hard hap, that he should dye
untimely, poor, and in want of those things which he did desire. Pl^t. de
tranq. Animi, p. 147.
Alexander the Great, hearing Anaxarchus Philosopher discoursing, and showing
that according to the sense of his Master Democritus, there were in^inite and
innumerable Worlds; Iuvenal. Satyr. 9.
he (sighing) said, Alas, what a miserable man am I, that have not subdued so
much as one of all these? whereupon says Iuvenal, Vnus Pellaeo Iuveni non
sufficit Orbis,
Aestuat infoelix angusto limite Mundi.
For one Pellaean Youth the World's too small,
As one pent up, he cannot breath at all.


8. Pope Adrian the sixth, Pride. intro. to hist. i^ terv. 7. ^. 10. p. 144, 145.
perceiving that the Lutherans began to spread, and the Turks to approach, was
so discontented, and so heart-broken with these and some other things, that he
grew quite weary of the honor whereunto he had attained, so that he fell sick
and died in the second year of his Papacy, leaving this Inscription to be set
upon his Tomb, Hadrianus sextus hic situs est, qui nihil sibi infelicius im
hac vita, quam quod imperaret, duxit; that is, Here lies Hadrian the sixth,
who thought nothing fell out more unhappily to him in this world, than that he
was advanced to the Papacy.

9. Pope Pius the fifth, Clarks mir. c. 88. p. 388.
when advanced to the Papacy led but an uneasy life therein, as to the
satisfaction of his mind in so great a Dignity; for he was heard to complain
thus of himself, Cum essem Religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae meae,
Cardinalis factus extimui, Pontifex creatus pene despero; When I was a Monk, I
had some good hope of my Salvation; when I was made Cardinal, I had less; but
being now raised to the Popedom, I almost despair of it.

10. Dionysius, Plut. moral. lib. de Tran. anim. p. 154.
the elder of that name, was not contented and satisfied in his mind, that he
was the most mighty and puissant Tyrant of his time: But because he was not a
better Poet than Philoxenus, nor able to discourse and dispute so learnedly as
Plato the Philosopher, as an argument of his great indignation and discontent,
he cast the one into a Dungeon within the Stone-quarries where Malefactors,
Felons and Slaves were put to punishment, and confined the other as a Caytiff,
and sent him away into the Isle of Aegina.

11. Agamemnon, Plut. lib. d^ Tran. anim. p. 147.
the General of all the Grecian Forces against Troy, thought it an intolerable
burden to be a King, and the Commander of so great a People, insomuch that we
find him complaining in such language as this, You see the Son of Atreus here,
King Agamemnon hight;
Whom Jupiter clogs more with car^
Than any Mortal Wight.


Seleucus as it should seem found some more than ordinary irksomness in the
midst of all Royalty; Coel. Rod. Lect. Anti. l. 8. c. 1. p. 343.
for we read of him that he was wont to say, That if men did but sufficiently
comprehend how laborious and troublesome a thing it was, but to write and read
so many Epistles, as the variety and greatness of a Princes affairs would
require, they would not so much as stoop to take up a Royal Diadem, though they
should find it lying in the Highway.

CHAP. XLII. Of Litigious men, and bloody Quarrels upon slight occasions.
WHen a matter of difference was fallen out betwixt two persons, who were
notoriously known to be men of a turbulent and contentious nature, it was
brought before King Philip, that he might determine thereof according to his
pleasure; who is said to have passed this Sentence, You, said he (to one of
them) I command immediately to run out of Macedon; and you (said he to the
other) see that you make all imaginable haste after him. A good riddance of
such Salamanders as delight to live in the fire of contention, who commence
quarrels upon trivial accounts, and withal know no time wherein to end them.

Camb. Brit. Full. Worth. p. 256. Gloucest.
1. Gloucestershire did breed a Plaintiff and Defendant, which betwixt them
(with many alternations) traversed the longest suit that ever I read of in
England. For a suit was commenced betwixt the Heirs of Sir Thomas Talbot
Viscount Lis^e on the one part, and the Heirs of -- Lord Barkely on the other,
about certain possessions lying in this County not far from Woton Vnder-edge;
which suit began in the end of the reign of King Edward the fourth, was
depending until the beginning of King James, when (and was it not high time)
it was finally compounded.

Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 92. p. 429.
2. There was in Padua an ancient House called de Limino, two Brothers of this
Family being in the Country on a Summers day, went abroad after Supper, talking
of diverse things together. As they were standing and gazing upon the Stars that
twinkled in the Firmament (being then very clear) one of them began (in
merriment) to say to the other, Would I had as many Oxen as I see Stars in that
Sky; The other presently returns, And would I had a Pasture as wide as the
Firmament: and therewith (turning toward his Brother) where then, said he,
would thou feed thine Oxen? marry in thy Pasture said his Brother: But how if
I would not suffer thee said the other? I would, said he, whether thou would
or not: What, said he, in despite of my teeth? yea said the other, whatsoever
thou could do to the contrary. Hereupon their sport turned to outrageous
words, and at last to fu^y; in the end they drew their Swords, and sell to it
so hotly, that in the turn of a hand, they ran one the other through the body,
so that one fell one and the other the other way, both weltring in their blood.
The people in the House hearing the bustle, ran in to them, but came too late;
they carried them into the House, where both soon after gave up the Ghost.

3. An extraordinary accident has of late happened (says Iustinianus) in the
Confines of Tuscany. Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 92. p. 430.
John Cardinal de Medices, Son to Cosmo Duke of Florence, a young Prince of
Great estimation, got on Horseback to ride on hunting, accompanied with two of
his Brethren, Fernand and Cartia, attended with some others; their Dogs having
followed a Hare a long time in the Plains, at last killed her; The Brothers
thereupon began to debate about the first hold, each of them attributing the
honor thereof to his Dog: one speech drew on another, and from bare words they
fell at last to taunts; the Cardinal not enduring to be set light by, and being
of a haughty nature, gave his Brother Cartia (who expostulated with him) a box
on the Ear; Cartia carried away with his choler, drew his Sword and gave such a
thrust into his brother Cardinals thigh, that he presently dyed. A Servant of
the Cardinals (in revenge of his Master) gave Cartia a sore wound; so that with
the Venison, they carried home to Duke Cosmo one of his Sons dead; and for
Cartia, his wound was also such, as within a while after he dyed of it; thus
for a matter of nothing the Father lost two of his Sons, in a deplorable sort.

4. Sigebert was King of Essex, Beda. l. 3. c. 22. p. 118. Full. Chur. hist. l.
2. cent. 7. p. 83.
and the restorer of Religion in his Kingdom (which had formerly apostatized
after the departure of Mellitus) a Valiant and Pious Prince, but murdered by
two Villains; who being demanded the cause of their cruelty, why they killed so
harmless and innocent a Prince, had nothing to say for themselves, but they did
it because his goodness had done the Kingdom hurt; that such was his proneness
to pardon offenders (on their though but seeming submission) that his meekness
made many Malefactors. The great quarrel they had with him (it seems) was only
his being too good.

5. The Chancellor of Theodoricus Archbishop of Magdeburg, Lonic. Thea. p.
577.
was attending upon the Duke of Saxony, and was sat down with him at his Table
in the City of Berlin; when the Citizens brake in upon them, drew out the
Chancellor by a multitude of Lictors into the Market place of the City, and
there sever his head from his Shoulders, with the Sword of the public
Executioner; and all this for no other cause, but that a few days before going
to the Bath, he met a Matron, courteously saluted her, and jesting, asked her
if she would go into the Bath with him; which when she had refused, he laughing
dismissed her; but this was ground sufficient for the mad multitude, to proceed
to such extremities upon.

6. In the reign of Claudius Caesar, Fulgos. l. 9. c. 7. p. 1245. Joseph. Ant.
l. 20. c. 4. p. 519.
Cumanus being then President in Iewry; the Jews came up from all parts to
Jerusalem for the celebration of the Passover; there were then certain Cohorts
of the Roman Soldiers, that lay about the Temple as a guard, whereof one
discovered his privy parts, perhaps for no other reason than to ease himself of
his Urine; but the Jews supposing that the uncircumcised Idolater had done this
in abuse of the Jewish Nation and Religion, were so incensed against the
Soldiers, that they immediately fell upon them with Clubs and Stones; the
Soldiers on the other side defended themselves with their arms, till at last,
the Jews oppressed with their own multitudes, and the wounds they received,
were enforced to give over the conflict, but not before there were twenty
thousand persons of them slain upon the place.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94. Fitz-Herb. Rel. and Pol. part. 1. c. 7. p. 57.
7. Fabius Ambustus had two Daughters, the elder he married to Servius Sulpitius
then Consul, the younger to Licinius Stolo, a gallant man, but of the Plebeian
order. It fell out that the younger Fabia sitting at her Sisters House upon a
visit to her, in the interim came the Lictors, and smote upon the door of the
Consul, as the manner was when the Consul came home. The younger, Fabia, was
affrighted at the noise, as being ignorant of the custom, for which reason she
was mocked at, and derided by her Sister, as one ignorant of the City affairs.
This contempt of her was afterward an occasion of great troubles in Rome. For
the Father (vehemently importuned by his young Daughter) ceased not (though
contrary to the Law and the mind of the greater part of the Senate) till he had
made his Son Stolo Consul, though a Plebeian; and extorted a Decree (through
his practice with the people) that from thenceforth Plebeians might be Consuls.

Fitz-Herb. Rel. and Pol. part. 1. c. 7. p. 57.
8. In the reign of King Edward the sixth, there were two Sisters in Law, the
one was Queen Katharine Parre, late Wife to King Henry the eighth, and then
married to the Lord Thomas Seymour, Admiral of England; the other was the
Duchess of Sommerset, Wife to the Lord Protector of England, Brother to the
Admiral. These two Ladies falling at variance for precedence (which either of
them challenged, the one as Queen Dowager, the other as Wife to the Protector,
who then governed the King and all the Realm) drew their Husbands into the
quarrel, and so incensed the one of them against the other, that the Protector
procured the death of the Admiral his Brother. Whereupon also followed his own
destruction shortly after. For being deprived of the assistance and support of
his Brother, he was easily overthrown by the Duke of Northumberland, who caused
him to be convicted of Felony, and beheaded.

Fitz-Herb. Rel. and Pol. part. 1. c. 7. p. 58.
9. A famous and pernicious faction in Italy began, by the occasion of a quarrel
betwixt two Boys; whereof the one gave the other a box on the Ear, in revenge
whereof the Father of the Boy that was stricken, cut off the hand of the other
that gave the blow; whose Father making thereupon the quarrel his own, sought
the revenge of the injury done to his Son, and began the Faction of the Neri
and Bianchi, that is to say, Black and White, which presently spread it self
through Italy, and was the occasion of spilling much Christian blood.

Herb. Trav. l. 2. p. 172.
10. A poor distressed wretch, upon some business, bestowed a long and tedious
Pilgrimage from Cabul in India, to Asharaff in Hircania; where (e're he knew
how the success would be) he rested his weary limbs upon a Field Carpet,
choosing to refresh himself rather upon the cool Grass, than be tormented by
those merciless vermin of Gnats and Muskettos within the Town; but poor man he
fell a malo in pejus, from ill to worse; for lying asleep upon the way at such
time as Sha Abbas the Persian Monarch set forth to hunt, and many Nobles with
him, his pampered Jade winded and startled at him; the King examines not the
cause, but sent an eternal Arrow of sleep into the poor man's heart, jesting as
Iphicrates did, when he slew his sleepy Sentinel, I did the man no wrong, I
found him sleeping, and asleep I left him: The Courtiers also to applaud his
Justice, made the poor man their common mark, killing him an hundred times
over, if so many lives could have been forfei^ed.

I. Huighe^ Linschotens voyag. l. 1. c. 17. p. 30.
11. Anno 1568. the King of Sian had a white Elephant, which when the King of
Pegu understood, he had an opinion of I know not what holiness that was in the
Elephant, and accordingly prayed unto it. He sent his Ambassadors to the King
of Sian, offering him whatsoever he would desire if he would send the Elephant
unto him, but the King of Sian would not part with him, either for love, money,
or any other consideration. Whereupon he of Pegu was so moved to wrath, that
with all the power he could make he invaded the other of Sian. Many hundred
thousand men were brought into the field, and a bloody Battle was fought,
wherein the King of Sian was overthrown, his white Elephant taken, and he
himself made tributary to the Monarch of Pegu.

12. A needy Soldier under Abbas King of Persia, Herb. Trav. ^^ 2. p. 172.
draws up a Catalogue of his good services, and closing it in his pressing
wants, humbly entreats the favor, and some stipend from his god of war, for
such and such his exploits. The poor man for his sawciness, with many terrible
bastinadoes on the soles of his feet, was almost drubbed to death. Besides
Abbas enquires who it was that wrote it: the Clerk made his apology; but the
King quarrelled at his scurvy writing, and that he should never write worse
makes his hand to be cut off.

CHAP. XLIII. Of such as have been too fearful of death, and over desirous of
Life.
A Weak mind complains before it is overtaken with evil, and as Birds are
affrighted with the noise of the Sling, so the infirm soul anticipates its
troubles by its own fearful apprehensions, and falls under them before they are
yet arrived. But what greater madness is there, than to be tormented with
futurities, and not so much to reserve our selves to miseries against they
come, as to invite and hasten them toward us of our own accord? The best
remedy against this tottering state of the soul, is a good and clear
Conscience; which if a man want, he will tremble in the midst of all his armed
guards.

1. What a miserable life Tyrants have by reason of their continual fears of
death, Lonic. Thea. p. 356.
we have exemplified in Dionysius the Syracusan, who finished his thirty eight
years Rule on this manner; Removing his Friends he gave the custody of his body
to some strangers and Barbarians, and being in fear of Barbers, he taught his
Daughters to shave him; and when they were grown up he durst not trust them
with a Rasor, but taught them how they should burn off his hair and Beard with
the white filmes of Wallnut kernels. Whereas he had two Wives, Aristomache and
Doris, he came not to them in the night before the place was thoroughly
searched; and though he had drawn a large and deep Moat about the Room, and had
made a passage by a wooden Bridge, himself drew it up after him when he went
in. Not daring to speak to the people out of the common Rostrum or Pulpit for
that purpose, he used to make Orations to them from the top of a Tower. When he
played at Ball, he used to give his Sword and Cloak to a Boy whom he loved; and
when one of his familiar Friends had jestingly said, You now put your life into
his hands, and that the Boy smiled, he commanded them both to be slain, one for
showing the way how he might be killed, and the other for approving it with a
smile. At last overcome in Battle by the Carthaginians, he perished by the
treason of his own Subjects.

Plut. in vita Pericl. p. 167. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 14. p. 1345. Zuin. Thea. vol.
1. l. 1. p. 81.
2. Heraclides Ponticus writes of one Artemon, a very skilful Engineer, but
withal says of him, that he was of a very timorous disposition, and foolishly
afraid of his own shadow; so that for the most part of his time, he never
stirred out of his House. That he had always two of his men by him, that held a
Brazen Target over his head, for fear lest any thing should fall upon him; and
if upon any occasion he was forced to go from home, he would be carried in a
Litter hanging near to the ground, for fear of falling.

Baker. Chro. p. 270. Graston. vol. 2. p. 599.
3. The Cardinal of Winchester Henry Beaufort (commonly called the Rich
Cardinal) who procured the death of the good Duke of Gloucester, in the reign
of King Henry the sixth, was soon after struck with an incurable disease, and
understanding by his Physicians that he could not live, murmuring and repining
thereat (as Doctor John Baker his Chaplain and Privy-councellor writes) he fell
into such speeches as these, Fie, will not death be hired? Will money do
nothing? Must I dye that have so great Riches? If the whole Realm of England
would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy
it: But the king of Terrors is not to be bribed by the Gold of Ophir; it is a
pleasure to him to mix the Brains of Princes and Politicians with common dust;
and how loath soever he was to depart, yet go he must, for he dyed of that
disease, as little lamented as desired.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 38.
4. C. Mecaenas, the great Friend and Favorite of Augustus, was so soft and
effeminate a person, that he was commonly called Malcinus. He was so much
afraid of death, that (says Seneca) he had often in his mouth, All things are
to be endured so long as life is continued, of which those Verses are to be
read, Debilem facito mami,
Debilem pede coxa,
Tuber adstrue gibberum,
Lubricos quate dentes,
Vita dum superest been est.
Make me lame on either hand,
And of neither foot to stand,
Raise a bunch upon my back,
And make all my teeth to shake;
Nothing comes amiss to me
So that life remaining be.


5. The Emperor Domitian was in such fear of receiving death by the hands of
his Followers, Sueton. l. 12. c. 14. p. 338.
and in such a strong suspicion of treason against him, that he caused the
Walls of the Galleries wherein he used to walk, to be set and garnished with
the stone Phengites, to the end that by the light thereof, he might see all
that was done behind him.

6. Lewis the eleventh, Phil. de Comines, l. 6. c. 12. p. 214, 215. Li^s.
monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 23. De Serres genesis hist. p. 415.
King of France, when he found himself sick, sent for one Friar Robert out of
Calabria, to come to him to Toures; the man was a Hermit, and famous for his
sanctity, and while in his last sickness this holy man lay at Plessis, the King
sent continually to him, saying that if he pleased he could prolong his life.
He had reposed his whole confidence in Monsieur James Cothier his Physician, to
whom he gave monthly ten thousand Crowns, in hope he would prolong his life.
Never man (says Comines) feared death more than he, nor sought so many ways
to avoid it as he did: Moreover (as he adds) in all his life time he had given
commandment to all his Servants (as well to my self as others) that when we
should see him in danger of death, we should only move him to confess himself,
and dispose of his Conscience, not sounding in his ear this dreadful word
Death, knowing that he should not be able patiently to hear that cruel
sentence. His Physician aforesaid used him so roughly, that a man could not
have given his Servant so sharp language, as he usually gave the King; and yet
the King so much feared him, that he durst not command him out of his Presence:
For notwithstanding that he complained to diverse of him, yet durst he not
change him as he did all his other servants, because this Physician said once
thus boldly to him, I know that one day you will command me away, as you do all
your other Servants, but you shall not live eight days after it, binding it
with a great Oath; which word put the King in such fear, that ever after he
flattered him, and bestowed such gifts upon him, that he received from him in
five months time fifty four thousand Crowns, besides the Bishopric of Amiens
for his Nephew, and other Offices and Lands for him and his Friends.

7. Rhodius, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 78.
being through his unseasonable liberty of speech cast into a Den, by a Tyrant
was there nourished and kept as a hurtful beast, with great torment and
ignominy; his hands were cut off, and his face disfigured with wounds: In this
wretched case, when some of his Friends gave him advice, by voluntary
abstinence to put an end to his miseries, by the end of his days; he replied,
that while a man lives, all things are to be hoped for by him.

8. Cn. Carbo, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 13. p. 271.
in his third Consulship, being by Pompeys order, sent into Sicily to be
punished, begged of the Soldiers, with great humility, and with tears in his
eyes, that they would permit him to attend the necessity of nature before he
dyed, and this only that he might for a small space, protract his stay in a
miserable life: He delayed the time so long, till such time as his head was
severed from his body, as he sat in a nasty place.

9. D. Iunius Brutus bought a small and unhappy moment of his life, Val. Max.
ibid. Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 38.
with great infamy; for Antonius having sent Furius to kill him, when he was
taken, he not only did withdraw his Neck from the Sword, but being also
exhorted to lay it down with more constancy, he swore he would in these words,
As I live I will give but some wretched delay to my fate.

Clark. mir. c. 39. p. 138.
10. A certain King of Hungary, being on a time very sad, his Brother a jolly
Courtier, would needs know of him what ailed him: Oh, Brother, said he, I have
been a great sinner against God, and I fear to dye, and to appear before his
Tribunal. These are (said his Brother) melancholy thoughts, and withal made a
jest of them. The King replied nothing for the present; but the custom of the
Country was, that if the Executioner came and sounded a Trumpet before any man's
door, he was presently to be led to execution: The King in the dead time of the
night, sends the Headsman to sound his Trumpet before his Brothers door; who
hearing it, and seeing the messenger of death, springs in pale and trembling
into his Brothers presence, beseeching him to tell him wherein he had offended.
Oh, Brother, replied the King, you have never offended me; but is the sight of
my Executioner so dreadful? and shall not I that have greatly and grievously
offended God, fear that of his, that must carry me before his Judgment Seat?

Laert. in vit. philos. l. 5. p. 123. Cicer. Tusc. qu. l. 3. p. Zuin. Thea.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 38.
11. Theophrastus the Philosopher is said at his death to have accused nature,
that she had indulged a long life to Stags and Crows, to whom it was of no
advantage, but had given to man a short one, to whom yet the length of it was
of great concern, for thereby the life of man would be more excellent, being
perfected with all Arts, and adorned with all kind of Learning; he complained
therefore, that as soon as he had begun to perceive these things, he was forced
to expire, yet he lived to the eighty fifth year of his age.

Herodo. l. 2. p. 139, 140.
12. Mycerinus, the Son of Cleops King of Egypt, set open the Temples of the
Gods, which his Father Cleops, and Uncle Cephrenes had caused to be shut up; he
gave liberty to the people who were before oppressed, and reduced to extremity
of ^alamity. He was also a lover and doer of Justice above all the Kings of his
time, and was exceedingly beloved of his people. But from the Oracle of the
City Buti, there was this prediction sent him, that he should live but six
years and dye in the seventh. He resented this message ill, and sent back to
the Oracle reproaches and complaints; expostulating, that whereas his Father
and his Uncle had been unmindful of the gods, and great oppressors of men, yet
had they enjoyed a long life; but he having lived in great piety and justice,
must shut up his days so speedily. The Oracle returned, that therefore he dyed,
because he did not that which he should have done; for Egypt should have been
afflicted one hundred and fifty years, which the two former Kings well
understood, but himself had not. When Mycerinus heard this, and that he was
thus condemned; he caused diverse lamps to be made, which when night came on he
lighted; by these he carowsed and indulged his genius: this course he
intermitted not night nor day, but wandered through the Fenns and Woods, and
such places where the most convenient and pleasurable reception was; and this
he did for this purpose, that he might deceive the Oracle; and that whereas it
had pronounced he should live but six years, he intended this way to lengthen
them out to twelve.

Clark. mir. c. 79. p. 354.
13. Antigonus observing one of his Soldiers to be a very valiant man, and
ready to adventure upon any desperate piece of service, and yet withal taking
notice that he looked very pale and lean, would needs know of him what he
ailed? And finding that he had upon him a secret and dangerous disease, he
caused all possible means to be used for his recovery; which when it was
effected, the King perceived him to be less forward in service, than formerly;
and demanding the reason of it, he ingenuously confessed that now he felt the
sweets of life, and therefore was loath to lose it.

14. The most renowned of the Grecian Generals, Coel. Rhod. 4. Lect. l. 30. c.
2. p. 1389.
Themistocles, having passed the hundred and seventh year of his age, and
finding such sensible decays growing upon him, as made him see he was hastening
to his end; he grieved that he must now depart, when as he said it was but now
chiefly that he began to grow wise.

15. The Emperor Hadrianus a little before his death, Spartian. c. 25. p. 104.
Lonic. Thea. p. 706. Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 97. p. 452.
made this complaint, and sorrowful Soliloquy, Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca,
Palidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles dabis Iocos?


16. Titus Vespasianus the Emperor, Sueton. l. 11. c. 10. p. 324, 325.
going toward the territories of the Sabines, at his first lodging and baiting
place, was seized with a Fevor; whereupon removing thence in his Litter, it is
said that putting by the Curtains of the Window, he looked up to the Heavens,
complaining heavily that his life should be taken from him, who had not
deserved to dye so soon. For in all his life he had not done one action,
whereof he thought he had reason to repent, unless it were one only; what that
one was, neither did he himself declare at that time, nor is it otherwise
known: he dyed about the forty second year of his age.

17. C. Caligula, Sueton. l. 4. c. 51. p. 195.
the Emperor, was so exceeding afraid of death, that at the least thunder and
lightning he would wink close with both eyes, cover his whole head; but if it
were greater and any thing extraordinary, he would run under his Bed. He fled
suddenly by night from Messina in Sicily, as affrighted with the smoke and
rumbling noise of Mount Aetna. Beyond the River Rhine, he rode in a German
Chariot between the Straights, and the Army marched in thick squadrons
together; and when one on this occasion had said, here will be no small
hurliburly, in case any enemy should now appear; he was so affrighted that he
mounted his Horse, and turned hastily to the Bridges, and finding them full and
choked up with Slaves and Carriages, impatient of delay, he was from hand to
hand, and over men's heads conveyed on the other side of the water. Soon after
hearing of the revolt of the Germans, he provided to fly, and prepared Ships
for his flight, resting himself upon this only comfort, that he should yet have
Provinces beyond Sea, in case the Conquerors should pass the Alps, or possess
themselves of the City of Rome.

18. Amestis the Wife of the great Monarch Xerxes, Plut. de superstit. p. 268.
buried quick in the ground twelve persons, and offered them to Pluto for the
prolonging of her own life.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the gross Flatteries of some men.
AS the Heliotrope is always turning it self according to the course of the
Sun, but shuts and closes up its leaves, as soon as that great Luminary has
forsaken the Horizon: So the Flatterer is always fawning upon the Prosperous,
till their fortune begins to ^rown upon them; in this not unlike to other sorts
of Vermin, that are observed to desert falling Houses, and the Carcases of the
dying. Hope and fear have been the occasions that some persons (otherwise of
great worth) have sometimes declined to so low a degree of baseness, as to
bestow their Encomiums upon them who have merited the severest of their
reproofs. Even Seneca himself was a broad flatterer of Nero, which may make us
the less to wonder at that which,

^^el. Antiq. lect. l. 11. c. 12. p. 498. Tacit. hist. l. 1. p. 315.
1. Tacitus says of Salvius Otho, that he did ( adorare vulgus, projicere
oscula, and omnia serviliter pro imperio) adore the people, scatter his kisses
and salutes, and crouch unto any servile expressions, to advance his ambitious
designs in the attainment of the Empire.

Euripid. Iphig. in Aulid. p. 86. Bi^h. Reynold. T^eat. on the Passions. c. 17.
p. 189.
2. The like unworthy Arts Menelaus objects to his Brother Agamemnon, in the
Tragedian, thus, You know how you the Rule over Grecians got,
In show declining what in truth you sought;
How low, how plausible you apprehended
The hands of meanest men; how then you bended
To all you met; how your Gates open flew,
And spoke large welcome to the pop'lar crew:
What sweetened words you gave, even unto those
Who did decline, and hate to see you gloze.
How thus with serpentine and guileful Arts,
You screwed and wound your self into the hearts
O'^h' vulgar, and thus bought the poor, which now
Makes you forget, how then you used to bow.


^iphil. Cla^k^ ^ir. c. 53. p. 211.
3. Tiridates, King of Armenia, when he was overcome by Corbulo (and brought
prisoner to Nero at Rome) fal^^ng down on his knees, he said, I am Nephew to
the great Lord Arsaces, Bro^her to the two great Kings Vologesus and Pacorus,
and yet thy Servant, and I am come to worship thee no otherwise than I worship
my God the Sun: Truly I will be such an one as thou shall please to make me,
for thou art my fate and fortune. Which Flattery so pleased Nero, that he
restored him to his Kingdom, and gave him besides an hundred thousand pieces of
Gold.

Sueton. l. 4. c. p. Xip^il. Cla^ks mir. c. 53. p. 211.
4. Publius Asfranius a notable Flatterer at Rome, hearing that Caligula the
Emperor was sick, went to him, and professed that he would willingly dye, so
that the Emperor might recover. The Emperor told him that he did not believe
him, whereupon he confirmed it with an Oath. Caligula shortly after recovering,
forced him to be as good as his word, and to undergo that in earnest, which he
had only spoken out of base and false Fla^tery; for he caused him to be slain,
and as he said, lest he should be ^orsworn.

5. Canutus King of England and Denmark, Polyd. Virg. l. 7. Lips. monit. l. 2.
c. 14. p. 341. Baker. Chro. p. 23. Full. Chur. hist. l. 2. cent. 11. p. 140.
was told by a Court Parasite, that all things in his Realm were at his beck
and will, and that his pleasure once known, none durst oppose it. The King
therefore appointed his Chair of State to be set upon the Sands, when the Sea
began to ^low; and in the presence of his Courtiers he said unto it, Thou art
part of my Dominion, and the ground on which I sit is mine, neither was there
ever any that durst disobey my commaud, that went away with impunity; wherefore
I charge thee that thou come not upon my Land, neither that thou presume to wet
the Clothes or Body of me thy Lord. But the Sea (according to its usual course)
flowing more and more, wet his Feet. Whereupon the King rising up, said, Let
all the Inhabitants of the world know, that vain and frivolous is the power of
Kings; and that none is worthy the name of a King, but he to whose command the
Heaven, Earth and Sea, by the bond of an everlasting Law are subject and
obedient. After this it is said, that the King would never more wear his Crown.

6. Damocles was the Flatterer of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, Cicer.
Tusc. Zuin. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94. Pezel. melli. hist. tom. 2. p. 45.
crying up his Riches and Majesty, and the like, affirming that no man was ever
more happy than himself; Will thou then, said the Tyrant, taste and make trial
of my fortune? Damocles said he was very desirous of it. He caused him
therefore to be placed upon a Bed of Gold, the most exquisite delights to be
presented to him, the Table covered with the most exquisite and far fetched
dainties. And now when Damocles thought himself very fortunate in the midst of
all this preparation, he pointed him to a bright and drawn Sword that hanged
from the top of the Room; directly over his head was the point of it, and it
tied only with a Hor^e hair. Damocles therefore not daring to put his hand to
any of the Dishes, besought the Tyrant that he might have liberty to depart. By
this he convicted this Flatterer, and showed him that they were not happy, that
lived in perpetual dangers and fears.

7. When Agrippa had reigned three whole years over all Judea, Joseph. Ant.
Iud. l. 19. c. 7. p. 510, 511. Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 3. c. 18. p. 61.
Zonar. Ann. tom. 1. p. 48. Zuin. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 96.
in the City of Cesaria, which was formerly called the Tower of Straton; he set
forth public shows in honor of Caesar, to which resorted a multitude of the
Nobles, and great Persons throughout the Realm. Upon the second day of this
solemnity in the morning, Agrippa entered the Theater, clothed in a Garment all
of Silver, framed with a wonderful Art, which glanced upon by the Beams of the
rising Sun, and sending forth a kind of divine fulgor, begat a kind of
veneration and honor in the beholders. Whereupon there were a sort of
pernicious Flatterers that saluted him as a god, humbly beseeching him that he
would be propitious to them, saying that heretofore they had revered him as a
man, but now they did confess that th^re was something in him more excellent
than humane nature. This profane kind of Flattery, he neither rejected nor
reproved them for; soon after he beheld an Owl sitting upon a Rope (which
before had been to him a presage of good, and of which it had been predicted,
that when he saw the like sight again, it should be to him the sign of evil
fortune) at which he was exceedingly perplexed: immediately he was taken with
extreme torments in his belly, and pressures at his heart; upon which he said
to his Friends, Behold I that am your God (as you said) am now ready to depart
this life, and he who you said was immortal is now haled away by death. While
he was speaking these things, spent with pain, he was carried into his Palace,
where (having wrestled with his intolerable pains for ^ive days) he departed
this life, aged fifty four, and having reigned seven years, four under Cai^s,
and three under Claudius.

Plut. in Demetrio, p. 893.
8. The Athenians were the first that gave to Demetrius and Antigonus the title
of Kings; they caused them to be set down in their public records for Savior
Gods. They put down their ancient Magistracy of the Archontes, from whom they
denominated the year, and yearly elected a Priest to these Saviors, whose name
they prefixed to their decrees and contracts. In the place where Demetrius
dismounted from his Chariot, they erected an Altar, which they dedicated to
Demetrius the dismounter. They added two Tribes to the rest, which they called
Demetrias and Antigonis. Above all that of Stratocles is to be remembered, who
was a known designer of the grandest flattery; this man was author of a decree,
that those who by the people were publicly sent unto Demetrius and Antigonus
should not be cal^ed Ambassadors, but Theoroi, or Speakers to the gods.

Val. Max. in prolog. p. 1.
9. Valerius Maximus in the dedication of his book of memorable examples to
Tiberius the Emperor, thus flatteringly bespeaks him; Thee, O Caesar, do I
invoke in this my undertaking, who art the most certain safety of our Country,
in whose hands is the power of Sea and Land by an equal consent of gods and
men, and by whose celestial providence, all those virtues of which I am to
speak are benignely cherished, and the vices severely punished. For if the
ancient Orators did happily take their Exordiums from the great and best
Jupiter, if the most excellent Poets did use to commence their Writings by the
invocation of some one or other deity; by how much the more justice ought my
meanness to have recourse unto your favor; seeing that all other divinity is
collected by opinion, but yours by present evidence appears equal unto your
Grandfathers and Fathers Star; by the admirable brightness of which there is an
accession of a glorious splendor to our Ceremonies. For as for all other gods
we have indeed received them, but the Caesar's are made and acknowledged by our
selves.

Plut. de Adulat. and amic. disc. p. 194, 195.
10. Tiberius Caesar coming into the Senate, one of them stood up and said, that
it was fit the words of free men should be free also, and that nothing which
was pro^itable should be dissembled or concealed. All men were attentive to an
Oration with such a Preface, there was a deep silence and Tiberius himself
listened, when the Flatterer proceeds thus; Hear, O Caesar, what it is that we
are displeased with in thee, whereof yet no man dare openly make mention; you
neglect your self and have no regard to your own person, you wast your body
with continual cares and travails for our sakes, taking no rest or repose
either day or night.

CHAP. XLV. Of such as have been found guilty of that which they have
reprehended, or disliked in others.
AMongst others who came to be Spectators of the Olympic games, there was an
old man of Athens, he passed to and fro, but no man afforded him a seat room;
when he came where the Spartan Ambassadors sat, they (who had been taught to
reverence age) rose up and gave him place amongst them: Well, said the old man,
the Grecians know well enough what they ought to do, but the Spartans alone are
they who do it. The following examples afford too many too near allied to the
Grecians in this.

1. The Married Clergy of England would not hear of being divorced from their
Wives; Baker. Chro. p. 60. Full. Chur. hist. cent. 12. p. 23. Bish. Godw. p. 83.
the Bishops therefore were fain to call in the aid of the Pope. John de Crema
an Italian Cardinal, jolly with his youthful blood, and gallant equipage came
over into England with his bigness and bravery to bluster the Clergy out of
their Wives. He made a most gaudy Oration in the commendation of Virginity (as
one who in his own person knew well how to value such a Jewel by the loss
thereof) most true it is that the same night at London he was caught in Bed
with an Harlot.

2. Didymus the Grammarian, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 36.
wrote so much as no man more; it fell out that upon a time when he objected
against a story, endeavoring to make the vanity thereof appear, as a thing
utterly false, one of his own books was brought to him, and the page laid open
before him, where he had related it as a truth.

3. M. Crassus, Coel. Rhod. l. 12. c. 9. p. 541.
gaping after the Parthian riches, was leading against them a gallant Army, and
passing through Galatia, he found Deiotarus the King thereof, though in
extremity of old age, building a New City, wondering hereat, he thus played
upon the King; What is this, said he, that I see? the twelfth hour is just upon
the stroke with thee, and yet thou art about to erect a new City. Deiotarus
smiling replied, Nor is it over early day with my Lord General, as it should
seem, and yet he is upon an expedition into Parthia. Crassus was then in the
sixtieth year of his age, and by his countenance seemed to be older than indeed
he was.

4. Seneca that wrote so excellently of moral virtue, Xiphil. in vita Nero. p.
79. Clarks mir. c. 72. p. 315.
and the commendation thereof, yet himself allowed his Scholar Nero to commit
incest with his own Mother Agrippina; and when he wrote against Tyranny,
himself was Tutor to a Tyrant: when he reproved others for frequenting the
Emperors Court, himself was scarce ever out of it; and when he reproached
Flatterers, himself practiced it in a shameful manner, toward the Empress and
the Freed-men: whilst he inveighed against riches and rich men, he heaped
together in^inite riches by usury and unjust dealings; and whilst he condemned
luxury in others, himself had ^ive hundred costly Chairs made of Cedar, the
feet of them Ivory, and all other Furniture of his House answerable thereunto.

Fulgo^. Ex. l. 8. c. 6. p. 1023.
5. Pericles the Athenian might do what he pleased in his Country, and therefore
made a s^aw that no man's natural or illegitimate Son, should be reputed amongst
the number of the Citizens, or be admitted to their privileges; it f^ll out
a^terwards that all his own Sons law^ully begotten dyed, but he had a bastard
who was yet alive, him he would have to enjoy the freedom of the City, and so
was the first violator of that law which himself had made.

Fulgos. Ex. l. ^. c. 6. p. 1024.
6. In the reign of Theodosius the Elder, Gildo was the Pre^ect of Africa, who
upon the death of the Emperor, seized upon that Province for his own, and
sought to bring Mass^lzeres his Brother into society with him in his
disloyalty; but he slying the Country, the Tyrant slew his Wife and Children;
whereupon he was sent for by Arcadius and Honorius, who succeeded in the
Empire, to go against Gildo his Brother, for the recovery of that Province. He
went, overthrew Gildo in battle, having put him to death, easily regained all
that was lost, which he had no sooner done but he fell into the same
treasonable disloyalty, which he had formerly so much disapproved, and he
himself rebelled against the Emperor who had employed him.

Val. Max. l. 8. c. 6. p. 222.
7. C. Licinius surnamed Hoplomachus, petitioned the Praetor that his Father
might be interdicted from having to do with his estate, as being one that
prodigally wasted and consumed it. He obtained what he desired, but not long
after the old man deing dead, he himself riotously spent a vast sum of money,
and all those large lands that were lest unto him by his Father.

Val. Max. Ibid.
8. C. Licinius Stolo (by whose means the Plebeians were enabled to sue for the
Consulship) made a Law that no man should possess more than five hundred Acres
of Land; after which he himself purchased a thousand, and to dissemble his
^ault therein, he gave five hundred of them to his Son; whereupon he was
accused by M. Popilius Laenas, and was the first that was condemned by his own
Law.

Guil. M^^. p. 64.
9. Henry, the Son of Henry the fourth Emperor, in the quarrel of the Pope,
rose against his own Father; but when (his Father being dead) he himself was
Emperor, he then maintained the same quarrel about investiture of Bishops
against the Pope, which his Father before did.

CHAP. XLVI. Of such persons as could not endure to be told of their Faults.
DIseases are sometimes more happily cured by medicines made up with bitter
ingredients, than they are with such sweet potions as are more delightful to
the palate; but there are a sort of patients so wilful, that they can be
wrought upon by no persuasions to take them down. A just and home reproof
(though not very tastfull) where it is well digested, is of excellent use to
remove some maladies from the mind; the worst of it is, that there are but few
to be found (especially amongst the great ones) who can endure to be
administered to in this kind.

1. Cambyses King of Persia, Raleigh. hist. l. 3. c. 4.. 3. p. 37. Herod. l. 3.
p. 175. Wieri op^r. p. 821. lib. de ira. Pezel. mell. tom. 1. p. 39, 40.
on a time desired to be truly informed by Prexaspes his beloved favorite what
the Persians thought of his conditions, who answered That his virtues were
followed with abundant praise from all men; only it was by many observed that
he took more than usual delight in the taste of Wine; inflamed with this
taxation he made this reply, And are the Persians double tongued, who also tell
me that I have in all things excelled my Father Cyrus? Thou Prexaspes shall
then witness, whether in this report they have done me right, for if at the
first shot I pierce thy Sons heart with an Arrow, then it is false that has
been spoken, but if I miss the mark, I am then pleased that the fame be counted
true, and my Subjects believed; he immediately directed an Arrow toward the
innocent Child, who falling down dead with the stroke, Cambyses commanded his
body to be opened, and his heart being broached upon the Arrow, this monstrous
Tyrant greatly rejoicing showed it to the Father with this saying instead of an
Epitaph; Now Prexaspes thou may resolve thy self that I have not lost my wits
with Wine, but the Persians theirs who make such report.

2. You King of China had a Colao, Alvarez. seemed. hist. China. part. 1. c. 24.
p. 120.
who at the Royal audience would not fail to tell him freely of his faults; one
day whether the King had given more cause, or that the excess was on the Colaos
part, the Audience being ended the King returned into the Palace very much
offended, saying he would cut off the head of that impertinent Fellow. The
Queen asked him the cause of his displeasure; the King answered, There is an
unmannerly Clown that never cease to tell me of my faults, and that
publicly, I am resolved to send one to take off his head. The Queen took no
notice of it, but retired to her Apartment, and put on a particular Garment
proper only for Festivals and Visits, and in this habit she came to the King,
who wondering at it, asked her the cause of this novelty? she answered, Sir, I
am come to wish your Majesty much joy; of what replied the King? That you have
a Subject, said she, that fears not to tell you of your faults to your face,
seeing that a Subjects confidence in speaking so boldly must needs be founded
upon the opinion he has of the virtue and greatness of his Princes mind, that
can endure to hear him.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 510.
3. Aratus, the Sycionian, who by his valor freed and restored his Country to
its liberty, was taken away from this life by King Philip with a deadly poison,
and for this only cause, That he had with too great a freedom reprehended the
King for his faults.

Lord Remy his civil considerat. c. 84. p. 210.
4. Anno 1358. John, King of Spain, was extremely in love with a young woman his
Concubine, and it was to that degree, that for her sake he committed things
unworthy of a King, killed some Princes of his own blood with his own hands;
and at last, he was so besotted with the love of this woman, that he would have
all the Cities subject to his Crown to swear fealty unto her, and to do her
homage. The Gentlemen of Sevil did much marvel at this Commandment, so that
having cons^lted together, they appointed twelve Gentlemen to go as their
Ambassadors to the King, and gave them in charge modestly to reprehend the
King, to reprove him of those things which he did, and to assay by all
submission and humility, to withdraw him from that humor of having homage done
to his Minion, saying, They were bound by Oath to his Queen, and could not
transfer their fealty to another till they were absolved. The Ambassadors of
Sevil went, and modestly showed the King of his imperfection: the King gave
ear, and for answer (taking his Beard in his hand) he said, By this Beard I
certify you that you have not well spoken, and so sent them away. Few days
after the King went to Sevil, and remembering the reprehension which he received
from the Ambassadors, he caused them all to be massacred in one night in their
own houses.

Speeds hist. p. 290.
5. Vodine, Bishop of London, feared not to tell King Vortiger, that for
marrying a heathenish Lady, Rowena, daughter to Hengist, he had thereby
endangered both his soul and his Crown. The King could not endure this liberty,
but his words were so ill digested by him, that they shortly cost the Bishop
his life.

Pezel. Mell. tom. 1. p. 40.
6. Cambyses, King of Persia, had slain twelve Persians of principal rank, when
King Croesus thus admonished him, Do not, O King, said he, indulge thine age
and anger in every thing, refrain your self, it will be for your advantage to
be prudent and provident, and foresight is the part of a wise man: but you put
men to death upon slight occasions, your Countrymen, and spare not so much as
young Children: If you shall persist to do often in this manner, consider if
you shall not give occasion to the Persians to revolt from you. Your father
Cyrus laid his strict commands upon me, that as often as occasions should
require, I should put you in mind of those things which might conduce to your
profit and welfare. Cambyses snatched up a Bow, with intention to have shot
Croesus through, but he ran hastily away: Cambyses thus prevented, commanded
his Ministers to put him to death: but they supposing the King would repent
himself, and then they should be rewarded for his safety, kept him privately
alive. Long it was not e're Cambyses wanted the Counsel of Croesus, when his
servants told him that he yet lived: Cambyses rejoiced hereat, but caused them
to be put to death, who had disobeyed his Commandment in preserving him whom he
had condemned to death.

7. Sabinus Flavius being one of the Conspiratours against Nero, Trenchfeild
hist^ improved, p. 90.
and asked by him, Why he regarded the Military Oath so little as to conspire
his death? answered him, That he was faithful to him while he deserved to be
loved, but he could not but hate him since he was his Mothers, Brothers, and
Wives murderer, a Waggoner, a Minstril, a Stage Player, and an Incendiary of
the City: Than which speech, says the History, nothing could have happened to
Nero more vexatious: for though he was prompt to do wickedly; yet was he
impatient, and could by no means endure to hear of the Villainies he did.

8. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, Plut. Mar. lib. de liber. ^du^at. p. 13.
King of Egypt, married his own Sister Arsmoe, at which time one Sotades came
unto him, and said, You put your Aglet, Sir, through the Oilet that is not made
for it: For this saying, he was cast into Prison, where he remained a long time
in misery, and in the end there rotted.

9. Telemachus, Zuin. T^eat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 483.
a Monk, when the people of Rome were intentively gazing upon the Sword-Playes,
which at that time were exhibited, reproved them for so doing; whereupon the
people were so moved and exasperated against him, that they stoned him to death
upon the place. Upon this occasion the Emperor Honorius (in whose Reign this
fell out) put down for ever all Sword-playing in the Theater at Sharps, as they
were formerly wont to do.

10. Alexander the Great writing to Philotas, Quint. C^^t^ Clarks wir. c. 110.
p. 547.
one of his brave Captains, and the son of the excellent Parmenio, sent him
word in his Letter, how that the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon had acknowledged him
to be his son: Philotas wrote back, That he was glad he was received into the
number of the gods: but withal that he could not but be sensible of the
miserable condition of those men, that should live under one who thought
himself more than a man. This liberty of speech and reproof of his, Alexander
never forgot till such time as he had taken away his Life.

11. John, Plat. in vit. Po^tif. p. Clarks mir. c. 110. p. 546.
Bishop of Bergamum, a grave and devout person did freely reprove a King of the
Lombards for his wickedness: the impious King could not endure it, but caused
him to be set upon a sierce Horse, which used to cast his riders and to tear
them in pieces: In this manner, he sent home the good Bishop, expecting soon
after to have the news of his death brought to him. But no sooner was the holy
Prelate mounted, but the Horse laid aside his siereness, and carried him home
in safety.

12. Oraetes, Herod. l. 3. Zuin. Theat. vol. 12. l. 3. p. 2765.
Prefect of Sardis, was reproved by Mitrobates, that he had not added the Isle
of Samos to the Kings Dominions, being so near unto him; and over which
Polycrates then Tyrannized: Oraetes, by a wile, first seized upon Polycrates
and Crucified him; and when Cambyses was dead (mindful of this freedom) he slew
Mitrobates with his son Cranape.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the base Ingratitude of some unworthy persons.
HIppocratidas received Letters from a Noble man his friend, wherein he craved
his advice, what he should do with a Spartan, who knew of a Conspiracy that was
formed against his Life; but covering all in silence, had not given him the
least intimation thereof. His Counsel was in this manner, If, said he, thou
have formerly obliged him with any great benefit, kill him immediately: If not,
yet send him out of the Country, as a man too timorous to be virtuous. Thus the
Ancients adjudged ingratitude to be punished with death, and very worthily it
deserved to be so at least in the person of him who follows.

Bea^ds Theat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 237. Stows An. p. 465. Graston. vol. 2. p. ^15.
1. Humphrey Banister was brought up and exalted to promotion by the Duke of
Buckingham his Master; the Duke being afterward driven to extremity, by reason
of the separation of his Army which he had Mustered against King Richard the
Usurper, sled to this Banister as his most trusty friend, not doubting to be
kept secret by him, till he could find an opportunity to escape. There was a
thousand pound propounded as a reward to him that could bring forth the Duke:
and this ungrateful Traitor, upon the hopes of this sum, betrayed the Duke his
Benefactor into the hands of John Metton, Sheriff of Shropshire, who conveyed
him to the City of Salisbury, where King Richard then was, and soon after the
Duke was put to death. But as for this perfidious Monster, the vengeance of God
fell upon him to his utter ignominy in a visible and strange manner; for
presently after his eldest son fell mad, and died in a Boars Stye; his eldest
daughter was suddenly stricken with a foul Leprosy; his second son became
strangely deformed in his limbs, and lame; his youngest son was drowned in a
puddle; and he himself arraigned and found guilty of a murder, was saved by his
Clergy. As for his thousand pounds, King Richard gave him not a farthing,
saying, That he who would be so untrue to so good a Master, must needs be false
to all other.

I.on. Theat. p. 460. Plut. p. 288. i^ Pelopid. Fitzh. of Re^. and Fol. par. 1.
c. 20. p. 196. Plut. Amat. narrat. c. 3. p. 129.
2. Two young men of Sparta being sent thence to consult the Oracle of Apollo at
Delphos, in their Journey lodged at the house of one Scedasius in Leuctra, a
good man and much given to hospitality. This Scedasus had two daughters,
beautiful Virgins, upon whom these young men cast wanton eyes, and resolved at
their return to visit the same house: they did so, found Scedasus from home,
yet as kind entertainment from his daughters as they could desire; in requital
of which, having found an opportunity, they ravished them both: and perceiving
that they were all in grief and tears for the injury and dishonor done to
them, they added Murder to the Rape, and threw them into a pit, and so
departed. Not long after Scedasus came home, and missing his daughters, looked
up and down for them; at last a little Dog that he had came whining to him, and
ran out of doors as it were inviting him to follow him: he did, and the Dog
brought him to the pit into which they were thrown. He drew out his daughters,
and hearing by his Neighbors, that the two young Spartans had been again at
his house, he concluded them the murderers. Hereupon he went to Sparta, to
complain to the Magistrates of this barbarous cruelty; he first opened his
Cause to the Ephori, and then to the Kings: but to both in vain; he therefore
complained to the people, but neither did he find any redress there: wherefore,
with hands list up to Heaven, he complained to the gods, and then stabbed
himself. Nor was it long e're the Spartans were defeated in a great Battle by
the Thebans in that very Leuctra; and by the same deprived of the Empire of
Greece, which they had many years possessed. It is said, That the soul of
Scedasus appeared unto Pelopidas, one of the chief Captains amongst the
Thebans, encouraging him to give them Battle in those very Plains of Leuctra,
where he and his daughters lay buried, telling him, That their death should be
there revenged.

3. Pope Adrian the sixth having built a fair College at Lovain, Clarks mi^.
c. 88. p. 388. Luther. Coll. mensal. p. 305.
caused this Inscription to be written upon the Gates of it, in Letters of
Gold, Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium rigavit, Caesar dedit incrementum (with an
unworthy allusion to that of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians) Vtrecht
planted me, there he was born; Lovain watered me, there he was bred up in
Learning; and Caesar gave the increase, for the Emperor had preferred him. One
that had observed this Inscription, and withal his ingratitude, to meet at once
with that and his folly, wrote underneath, Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did
nothing.

4. When Tamberlain had overcome and taken Prisoner Bajazet the great Turk,
Clarks mir. c. 63. p. 318, 319.
he asked him, Whether he had ever given God thanks for making him so great an
Emperor? Bajazer consessed, That he had never so much as thought upon any such
thing: To whom Tamberlain replied, That it was no wonder so ungrateful a man
should be made a spectacle of misery, For, says he, you being blind of one
eye, and I lame of one leg, what worth was there in us, that God should set us
over two such mighty Empires to command so many men far more worthy than our
selves?

5. When Xerxes had resolved upon his Expedition against Greece, Raleighs hist.
world, l. 3. c. 6.. 2. p. 50. Wieri oper. lib. de ira p. 822. Herod. l. 7. p.
395, 398. Lon. Theat. p. 334.
he caused his Army to make their Randezvous at Sardis in Lydia; and when he
had Assembled to the number of seventeen hundred thousand foot, and 88000
Horse, as he entered the body of Celaenas, he was by one Pythius, the Lydian,
entertained, who out of his Flocks and Herds of Cattle, gave food to Xerxes and
his whole Army; the Feast ended he also presented him with two thousand Talents
of Silver, and in Gold four millions, wanting seven thousand of the Persian
Darici, which make so many of our Marks. Then Pythius besought him to spare one
of his five sons from his attendance into Greece (because himself was old) and
had none whom he could so well trust as his own son. But Xerxes like a
barbarous and ungrateful Tyrant, caused the body of the young man (for whom his
father had sought exemption) to be sundred into two parts, commanding that the
one half of his Carcass should be laid on the right, and the other half on the
left hand of the common way, by which the Army was to march.

Zon. Annal. tom. 3. p. 153. Lon. Theat. p. 337. H^yw. Hierarch. l. 8. p. 528.
6. That is a remarkable one that is reported by Zonaras and Cedrenus of the
Emperor Basilius Macedo, who being hunting (as he much delighted in that
exercise) a great Stagg turned f^riously upon him, and fastened one of the
Brouches of his Horns into the Emperors Girdle, and lifting him from his
Horse, bare him a distance off to the great danger of his life, which when a
Gentleman in the Train espied, he drew his sword and cut the Emperors Girdle,
by which means he was preserved and had no hurt at all. But observe his reward:
The Gentleman for this act was questioned, and adjudged to have his head struck
off, because he presumed to expose his drawn-sword so near the person of the
Emperor, and he suffered according to his sentence.

Plut. in Ciceron. p. 885. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 138. Lon. Theat. p. 333.
Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 4. p. 433. Bruson. facetiar. l. 3. c. 11. p. 191.
7. Cicero flying for his life was pursued by Herennius, and Popilius Lena: this
latter at the request of M. Caelius, he defended with equal care and eloquence,
and from a hazardous and doubtful cause sent him home in safety. This Popilius
afterward (not provoked by Cicero in word or deed) of his own accord, asked
Antonius to be sent after Cicero, then proscribed, to kill him. Having obtained
license for this detestable employment, with great joy he speeded to Cajeta,
and there commands that person to stretch out his throat, who was (not to
mention his dignity) the Author of his safety, and in private to be entertained
by him with little less than veneration: There did he with great
unconcernedness cut off the head of the Roman Eloquence, and the renowned
right hand of peace. With that burden he returned to the City, nor while he was
laden with that execrable portage, did it ever come into his thoughts that he
carried in his Arms that head which had heretofore pleaded for the safety of
his.

Q.^urt. l. 7. p. 187, 188. Raleighs hist. part. 1. l. 4. c. 2.. 17. p. 168.
8. Parmenio had served with great fidelity, Philip the father of Alexander, as
well as himself, for whom he had first opened the way into Asia. He had
depressed Attalus the Kings enenemy; he had always, and in all hazards the
leading of the Kings Vanguard; he was no less prudent in counsel than fortunate
in all attempts; a man beloved of the men of War, and to say the truth, that
had made the purchase for the King of the Empire of the East, and of all the
glory and fame he had. After he had lost two of his sons in the Kings Wars,
Hector and Nicanor, and the other lost in torments upon a suspicion of Treason;
This great Parmenio, Alexander resolved to deprive of life by the hands of
murderers, without so much as acquainting him with the cause, and would choose
out no other to expedite this unworthy business, but the greatest of Parmenio's
friends, which was Polydamus, whom he trusted most and loved best, and would
always have to stand at his side in every fight. He and Cleander dispatched
this great man as he was reading the Kings Letter in his Garden in Media. So
fell Parmenio who had performed many notable things without the King, but the
King without him did never effect any thing worthy of praise.

Cael. Rhod. l. 7. c. 28. p. 327. I^on. Theat. p. 336. Bruson. facetiar. l. 3.
c. 11. p. 192.
9. Philip, King of Macedon, had sent one of his Court to Sea, to dispatch
something he had given him in command, but a storm came and he was shipwrack'd,
but saved by one that lived there about the Shore in a little Boat wherein he
was taken up: He was brought to his Farm, and there entertained with all
civility and humanity, and at thirty days end dismissed by him, and furnished
with somewhat to bear his charges. At his return he tells the King of his Wrack
and dangers, but nothing of the benefits he had received: The King told him he
would not be unmindful of his fidelity and dangers undergone in his behalf. He
taking the occasion, told the King he had observed a little Farm on the Snore,
and besought him he would bestow that on him as a monument of his escape, and
reward of his Service. The King orders Pausanias the Governor to assign him
the Farm to be possessed by him. The poor man being thus turned out, applied
himself to the King, told him what humanity he had treated the Courtier with,
and what ungrateful injury he had returned him in lieu of it. The King upon
hearing of the Cause, in great anger commanded the Courtier presently to be
seized, and to be branded in the sorehead with these Letters, Hospes ingratus,
The ungrateful Guest, restoring the Farm to its proper owner.

10. When the Enmity brake out betwixt Caesar and Pompey; Cael. Rhod. l. 21. c.
9. p. 975. Lon. Theatr. p. 337.
Marcellinus a Senator (and one of them whom Pompey had raised) estranged
himself so far from his party unto that of Caesar's, that he spoke many things
in Senate against Pompey: who thus took him up, Art thou not ashamed
Marcellinus to speak evil of him, through whose bounty of a mute thou art
become eloquent; and of one half starved, art brought to such a plenty as that
thou art not able to ^orbear vomiting? Notably taxing his ingratitude, who had
attained to all his Dignity, Authority, and Eloquence, through his favor, and
yet abused them all against him.

11. Henry Keeble, Full. Worth. c. 11. p. 33.
Lord Major of London 1511. besides other Benefactions in his lifetime,
rebuilded Aldermary Church, run to very ruins, and bequeathed at his death one
thousand pounds for the finishing of it: yet within sixty years after, his
bones were unkindly, yea inhumanely cast out of the Vault, wherein they were
buried; his Monument plucked down for some wealthy Person of the present times
to be buried therein. Upon which occasion, says Dr. Fuller, I could not but
rub up my old Poetry, which is this, Fuller to the Church.
Ungrateful Church o'rerun with rust;
Lately buried in the Dust,
Utterly thou had been lost
If not preserved by Keeble's cost:
A thousand pounds might it not buy
Six foot in length for him to lie?
But outed of his quiet Tomb,
For later Corpse he must make room.
Tell me where his dust is cast?
Though It be late, yet now at last
All his bones with scorn ejected
I will see them recollected:
Who fain my self would Kinsman prove
To all that did Gods Temples love.
The Churches Answer.
Alas! my innocence excuse,
My Wardens they did me abuse,
Whose Avarice his Ashes sold,
That goodness might give place to gold.
As for his Relics all the Town
They are scatt'red up and down.
See a Church repaired well?
There a sprinkling of them sell.
See a new Church lately built?
Thicker there his Ashes spilt.
Oh, that all the Land throughout
Keeble's dust were thrown about:
Places scatt'red with that s^ed
Would a crop of Churches breed.


Ion. Theatr. p. 338.
12. Anno 1565. upon the fifth of February, one Paulus Suitor, of the Village of
Bresw^il, near the City of Basil, came into the house of Andreas Hager, a
Bookseller, he was then old and sick, and had been the others Godfather at the
Font, and performed to him all the good offices that could be expected from a
father. Being entered his house, he told him he was come to visit him, as one
that esteemed him as his father. But as soon as the Maid was gone out of the
Parlor, that attended upon the sick man, he caught up a hammer, gave him some
blows, and then thrust him through with his knife. As soon as the Maid
returned, with the same fury, he did the like to her; and then s^ising the
Keys, he searched for the prey intended, he found eight pieces of plate, which
afterward in want of money, he pawned to a Priest of St. Blasms, who
suspecting the man, sent the plate to the Senate at Basil, by which means the
Author of the detestable murder was known, he was searched after, taken at the
Village of Hagenstall, brought prisoner to Basil, where he had his legs and
arms broken upon the Wheel, and his head being (while yet alive) tied to a part
of the Wheel, he was burnt with ^laming Torches till in horrible tortures he
gave up the Ghost.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 136. Hak. A^^l. l. 4. c. 1^ ^. ^. 4. p. 134.
13. Furius Camillus was the great safety of Rome, and the sure defense of the
Roman power, a person whom the Romans had styled the second Romulus for his
deserts of them: yet being impeached by L. Apuleius, a Tribune of the people,
as having secretly embezzelled a part of the V^^entine spoils, by a hard and
cruel sentence he was adjudged to banishment, and that at that very time, when
he was in tears for the loss of a son of admirable hopes, when he was rather to
be cherished with comfort than oppressed with new miseries: Yet Rome unmindful of
the merits of so great a man, to the Funerals of the son added the condemnation
of the father, and all this for fifteen thousand Asses, which was the poor sum
he was charged with, and banished for.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 136. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 4 p. 434.
14. Scipio Africanus the elder, did not only restore the Commonwealth sore
bruised and torn by the arms of the Punick War, but brought in a manner the
Queen of Africa upon her knees, and even to deaths door; whose most renowned
acts yet the people of Rome rewarded, by forcing him to live in a base obscure
Village Linternum in Campania, standing upon a forlorn Lake: neither did he die
altogether silent, as being sentible of the bitterness of this his banishment,
but at his parting, gave order, that upon his Sepulcher should be Engraven this
Memorandum, Ingrata patria, ne^ ossa quidem mea ^abes, Ungrateful Country that
have not so much as my Bones.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 137. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10. 4. p. 435.
15. Scipio Africanus the younger, was to the former nothing inferior in
virtue, nor his end less unhappy; for after he had utterly razed those two
great Cities of Numantia and Carthage, which had long threatened ruin to Rome
and its Empire, he found one at home ready to spoil him of his life in his bed
and sleep: but no man in the Court of Justice that offered to revenge so horrid
and execrable a murder.

16. In latter times, that great and famous Captain Gonsalvo, Clarks mi^. c.
74. p. 321.
after he had conquered the Kingdom of Naples, and driven the French beyond the
Mountains, and brought all the Italian Princes to stand at the Spaniards
devotion, was most ungratefully called home by his Master the King of Spain,
where he died obscurely, and was buried without any solemnity or tears.

17. Miltiades, Lon. Theat. p. 334. Clarks mir. c. 73. p. 317.
a renowned Captain of the Athenians, after that glorious Victory at Marathon,
and other great Services, having miscarried in an Enterprise, whereof the
consequence was of small value, he was ^ined ^i^ty Talents, and being not able
to pay it, was kept bound in Prison (though sore wounded in the thigh) till his
son Cymon, to redeem his father, paid the money, and set him at liberty; but he
soon after died of his wounds.

18. Theodatus was adopted, Lon. Theatr. p. 334. Fulg. l. 5. c. 3. p. 611.
and made partner and successor in the Kingdom by Amalasuntha, Queen of the
Goths, as soon as she was deprived of her son Athalaricus; who in reward of so
great and noble a favor, sent her to an Island in the Vulsinian Lake, where
she was put into Prison, and not long aster strangled by his order, putting her
to an unworthy death, by whose bounty he had received a Kingdom.

19. Cardinal Charles Caraffa, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 58, 59.
and Duke John his brother, were they that managed all affairs under Pope Paul
the fourth. He being dead Pius the fourth was made Pope, and that chiefly by
the favor and diligence of these Carassa's; and as a reward of their good
Service, he made it his first business to over throw them; he sent the Cardinal
and his brother Duke, together with Count Alifane, and many others of their
Kindred and Clients to Prison in the Castle of St. Angelo: there were they nine
months indurance, and expectation of death. At last, by order from the Pope,
the Cardinal was hanged; the Duke and Count beheaded, and their dead bodies
exposed as a public spectacle to the people.

20. Anaxagoras was of singular use to Pericles the Athenian, Pl^t. in Pericle.
p. 162. Zuin. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 204, 205.
in the Government of the Commonwealth, but being now burdened with old age,
and neglected by Pericles, that was intent upon public affairs, he determined
by obstinate fasting to make an end of himself. When this was told to Pericles,
he ran to the Philosophers house, and with prayers and tears sought to withdraw
him from his purpose, entreating him to live for his sake, if he refused to do
it for his own. The old man being now ready to expire, O Pericles, said he,
such as have need of the Lamp use to pour in oil, upbraiding him with the
neglect of his friend who had been of such advantage to him.

21. Belisarius was General of all the Forces under the Emperor Justinian the
first, F^lg. l. 5. c. 3. p. 612. I^on. Theatr. p. 336.
a man of rare valor and virtue; he had overthrown the Persians, Goths and
Vandals; had taken the Kings of these people in War, and sent them Prisoners to
his master; he had recovered Sicilia, Africa, and the greater part of Italy: he
had done all this with a small number of Soldiers, and less cost; he had
restored Military Discipline by his authority, when long lost; he was allied to
Justinian himself; and a man of that uncorruped fidelity, that though he was
offered the Kingdom of Italy he refused it. This great man, upon I know not
what jealousy and groundless suspicion, was seized upon, his eyes put out, all
his house rifled, his estate confiscate, and himself reduced to that miserable
state and condition as to go up and down in the common Road with this form of
begging, Give a halfpenny to poor Belisarius, whom virtue raised, and envy
has overthrown.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 137. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 4. p. 435.
22. Scipio Nasica deserved as much by the Gown as did either of the Africans by
Arms: he rescued the Commonwealth out of the jaws of Tiberius Gracchus; was
the Prince of the Senate, and adjudged the honestest person in all Rome: yet
his virtues being most unjustly undervalued, and disesteemed by his fellow
Citizens, under pretense of an Embassage, he retired to Pergamus, and there
spent the rest of his life, his ungrateful Country not so much as finding him
wanting, or desiring his return.

Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. p. 137. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 4. p. 435.
23. P. Lentulus, a most famous man, and a dear lover of his Country, when in
Mount Aventine he had frustrated the wicked attempts of C. Gracchus, and in a
pious fight (wherein he had received many dangerous wounds) had put to flight
the Traitors Army; he bare away this reward of that and other his gallant
actions, that he was not suffered to die in that City, the Laws and peace and
liberty whereof, he had by his means settled: So that forced by envy and
slander to remove, he obtained of the Senate an Employment abroad, and in his
Farewell Oration, prayed the immortal Gods, That he might never return again to
so ungrateful a people: nor did he, but died abroad.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 443, 444.
24. Achmetes, the Great Bassa, was by the confession of all men, the best man
of War, and the most expert Captain amongst the Turks: Bajazet made him the
General of his Army against his brother Zemes, where the conduct and valor of
the General brought Bajazet the Victory. At his return to Court, this great
Captain was invited to a Royal supper, with diverse of the principal Bassa's,
where the Emperor in token they were welcome, and stood in his good grace,
caused a garment of pleasing color to be cast upon every one of his Guests,
and a gilt Bowl full of Gold to be given each of them: but upon Achmetes was
cast a Gown of black Velvet: all the rest rose and departed, but Achmetes, who
had on him the Mantle of death (amongst the Turks) was commanded to sit still,
for the Emperor had to talk with him in private. The Executioners of the
Emperors wrath came, stripped and tortured him, hoping that way to gain from
him what he never knew of (for Bassa Isaac, his great enemy, had secretly
accused him of an intelligence with Zemes) but he was delivered by the
Ianizaries, who would no doubt have slain Bajazet, and rifled the Court at his
least word of command: but though he escaped with his life at the present, he
not long after was thrust through the body as he sat at supper in the Court,
and there slain. This was that great Achmetes, by whom Mahomet the father of
this Bajazet had subverted the Empire of Trapezond, took the great City of
Caffa, with all the Country of Taurica Chersonesus, the impregnable City of
Croja, Scodra, and all the Kingdom of Epirus, a great part of Dalmatia, and at
last Otranto to the terror of all Italy.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Perfidiousness and Treachery of some men, and their just
rewards.
THere is nothing under the Sun that is more detestable than a Traitor, who is
commonly followed with the execrations and curses of those very men to whom his
Treason has been most useful. All men being apt to believe that he who has
once exposed his Faith to sale, stands ready for any Chapman, as soon as any
occasion shall present it self. It is seldom that these perfidious ones do not
meet with their just rewards from the hands of their own Patrons: however the
vengeance of Heaven (where the justice of men fails) does visibly fall upon
them.

1. Charles, Ph. de Com. l. 4. c. 12. p. 133. Id. l. 5. c. 8. p. 155, 156.
Duke of Burgundy, gave safe conduct to the Constable the Earl of St. Paul, and
yet notwithstanding after he found that Lewis the eleventh, King of France, had
taken St. Quintins, and that he did solicit him either to send him Prisoner to
him, or else to kill him within eight days after his taking, according to the
agreement heretofore made betwixt them; he basely delivered him up to Lewis,
whom he knew to be his mortal enemy, by whom he was beheaded. But the Duke who
heretofore was great and mighty, with the greatest Princes in Christendom, who
had been very fortunate and successful in his affairs, from thenceforth never
prospered in any thing he undertook: but was betrayed himself, by one whom he
trusted most, the Earl of Campobrach; lost his Soldiers, his formerly gained
glory, Riches and Jewels, and finally his life, by the Swissers, after he had
lived to see himself deserted of all, that had entered into any league with him.

2. The Emperor Charles the fourth, made War upon Philip, Duke of Austria,
Camer. oper* subc. cent. 1. c. 7. p. 60.
and both Armies were got near together with a resolution to fight, but the
Emperor perceiving he was far surmounted in force by the enemy, determined to
do that by subtilty which he could not by strength. He caused three of the
Dukes Captains to be sent for, agrees with them to strike a fear into their
Master, that might cause him in all have to retire. Upon their return, they
tell the Duke, That they had been out, and particularly viewed the power of the
Emperor, and found it thrice as great as his own, that all would be lost if he
did not speedily retreat; and that he had no long time to deliberate. Then said
the Duke, Let us provide for our selves, waiting for some better opportunity.
It is no shame for us to leave the place to a stronger than our selves: So
Philip fled away by night, no man pursuing him. The Traitors step aside to the
Emperor to receive their reward, who had made provision of golden Ducats, all
counterfeit, the best not worth sixpence, and caused great bags of the same to
be delivered to them, and they merrily departed. But when employing their
Ducats, they found them to be false, they return to the Emperor, complain of
the Treasurer and Master of the Mint. The Emperor looking on them with a
frowning countenance, said to them, Knaves as you are, get ye to the Gallows,
there to receive the reward of your Treason: false work, false wages, an evil
end befall you: They wholly confounded, withdrew themselves suddenly, but
whither is not known.

Camer. oper. su^c. cent. 2. c. 60. p. 254.
3. The Bohemians having gotten the Victory and slain Vratislaus, they set his
Country on fire, and after finding a young son of his, they put him into the
hands of Gresomislas the Prince, called also Neclas, who pitying the child his
Cousin, committed him to the keeping of the Earl Duringus, whose Possessions
lay along by the River Egra, and a person who a-fore-time had been much
favored by Vratislaus. This Earl (thinking to insinuate himself into the
favor and good liking of Neclas) as the child was one day sporting himself
upon the Ice, came upon him and with one blow of his Scimitar smote off his
head; and speeding presently to Prague, presents it to Neclas all bloody,
saying, I have this day made your Throne sure to you, for either this Child or
you must have died: you may sleep henceforth with security, since your
Competitour to the Crown is disposed of. The Prince retaining his usual
gravity, and just indignation at so cruel a Spectacle, said thus unto him,
Treason cannot be mitigated by any good turns: I committed this Child to thee
to keep, not to kill: Could neither my command nor the memory of thy friend
Vratislaus, nor the compassion thou ought to have had of this Innocent, turn
away thy thoughts from so mischievous a deed? What was thy pretense? to procure
me rest? Good reason I should reward thee for thy pains: of three punishments
therefore choose which thou will, Kill thy self with a Poynard, hang thy self
with an Halter, or cast thy self headlong from the Rock of Visgrade. Duringus
forced to accept of this Decree, hanged himself in an Halter upon an Elder
tree, not far off: which ever after, so long as it stood, was called Duringus
his Elder tree.

Plut. in Camillo, p. 134. Din. mem. l. 3 p. 212. brason. Exempl. l. 5. c. 6.
p. 356.
4. In the War with the Falisci, Camillus had besieged the Falerians, but they
secure in the Fortifications of their City, were so regardless of the Siege,
that they walked Gowned as before up and down the Streets, and oftentimes
without the Walls. After the manner of Greece they sent their Children to a
common School, and the treacherous Master of them used to walk with them day by
day without the Walls: he did it often; and by degrees trained them so far
onwards, that he brought them unawares into the danger of the Roman Stations,
where they were all taken. He bids them lead him to Camillus: he was brought
into his Tent, where standing in the middle, I am, said he, the Master of these
Boys, and having a greater respect to thee than to my relation, I am come to
deliver thee the City in the pledges of these Children. Camillus heard him, and
looking upon it as a base action, he turned to them about him, War, said he, is
a cruel thing, and draws along with it a multitude of injuries and wrongs: yet
to good men there are certain Laws of War, nor ought we so to thirst after
Victory, as to purchase it at the price of unworthy and impious actions. A
great Captain should rely upon his own virtue, and not attain his ends by the
treachery of another. Then he commands his Lictours to strip the Schoolmaster,
and having tied his hands behind him, to deliver rods into the hands of his
Scholars, to whip and scourge the Traitor back into the City. The Faliscans had
before perceived the Treason, and there was an universal mourning and outcry
within the City for so great a Calamity; so that a concourse of Noble persons,
both men and women, like so many mad creatures, were running to and fro upon
the Walls: when came the Children driving with lashes their Master before them,
calling Camillus their Preserver and Father. The Parents, and the rest of the
Citizens, were astonished at what they beheld; and having the justice of
Camillus in great admiration, they called an Assembly, and sent Ambassadors to
let him know, That (subdued by his virtue) they rendered up themselves and
theirs freely into his hands.

5. Agathocles was very prosperous in Africa, Diod. Sicul. l. 20. p. 674, 686.
had taken all the rest of the Cities, and shut up his enemies in Carthage
alone, about which he lay, when he invited Ophellas the Cyrenian to join with
him, promising that the Crown of Africa should be his: Ophellas won with this
hope, came to him with great Forces, and was together with his Army cheerfully
received, and provided for by Agathocles: but soon after a great part of his
power being gone forth to Forage, and Ophellas but weak in the Camp, he was
fallen upon and slain in the fight, and his whole Army by vast promises won to
the Colors of Agathocles. But observe how successful this treachery proved: It
was not long e're Agathocles was forced to fly out of Africa; his Army lost,
and two of his sons slain by the fury of the mutinous Soldiers; and which is
worthy of observation, this was done by the hands of them that came with
Ophellas, and in the same Month, and day of the Month that he had treacherously
slain Ophellas, both his friend and his Guest.

6. Ladislaus Kerezin, Camer. oper. sub^. cent. 2. c. 61. p. 259. H^yl. Cosm.
p. 544.
a Hungarian, traitorously delivered up Hiula (a strong place) to the Turks,
and when he looked to receive many and great Presents for this his notable
piece of Service, certain Witnesses were produced against him (by the command
of S^lymus himself) who deposed, That the said Ladislaus had cruelly handled
certain Musulmans that had been Prisoners with him. Whereupon he was delivered
to some friends of theirs, to do with him as they should think good. They
enclosed this Traitor stark-naked in a Tun or Hog^head set full of long sharp
nails within side, and rolled it from the top of a high Mountain (full of
steepy downfals) to the very bottom: where being run through every part of the
body with those sharp nails, he ended his wretched life.

7. Leo Armenius, Zonar. An. tom. 3. p. 146. Din. mem. l. 3. p. 215.
Emperor of Constantinople, was slain by some Conspiratours in the Temple
there, and Michael Balbus set up to succeed in his room. He also dead,
Theophilus his son was advanced to the Imperial place of his father, who was no
sooner confirmed in his Empire, but he called together the whole Senate into
his Palace, and bids those of them that assisted his father in the slaughter of
Leo, to separate themselves from the rest, which when they had cheerfully done,
turning to the Prefect over Capital offenses, he commanded him to seize, and
carry them away; and to execute condign punishment upon them.

8. When the Emperor Aurelian marched against Thyana, Fulg. l. 6. c. 5. p.
766. Bruson. Ex. l. 5. c. 6. p. 354.
and found the Gates of the City shut against him, he swore he would make such
a slaughter that he would not leave a Dog alive in the whole City: The
Soldiers enticed with the hope of spoil, did all they were able to take it,
which one Heracleon perceiving, and fearing to perish with the rest, betrayed
the City into their hands. Aurelian having taken it, caused all the Dogs in the
City to be slain: But gave to all the Citizens a free pardon as to life, except
only the treacherous Heracleon, whom he caused to be slain, saying, He would
never prove faithful to him, that had been the betrayer of his own Country.

Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 61. p. 259.
9. Solomon the magnificent employed one in the Conquest of the Isle of Rhodes,
promising the Traitor to give him for his wife one of his daughters, with a
very great Dowry. He after his service done, demanding that which was promised;
Solomon caused his daughter to be brought in most Royal Pomp, assigning him the
Marriage of her according to his desert. The Traitor could not keep his
Countenance he was so transported with joy. Thou see, said Solomon, I am a
man of my word: but for as much as thou art a Christian, and my daughter, thy
Wife that shall be, is a Mahumetan by birth and profession, you cannot so live
in quietness; and I am loath to have a Son-in-law that is a not Musulman both
within and without; and therefore it is not enough that thou abjure
Christianity in word, as many of thy Sect are wont to do, but thou must
forthwith doff thy skin, which is Baptized and uncircumcised. Having so said,
he commanded some that stood by to flea alive the pretended Son-in-law; and
that afterward they should lay him upon a bed of Salt, ordaining, That if any
Mahumetan skin came over him again, in place of the Christian, that then, and
not before, his promised Spouse should be brought unto him to be married; the
wretched Traitor thus shamefully and cruelly s^outed, died in most horrible
torments.

Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 61. p. 260.
10. The Venetians put to death Marinus Falierus, their Duke, for having
conspired against the State: and whereas the Pictures of their Dukes, from the
first to him that now lives, are represented and drawn, according to the order
of their times, in the great Hall of the General Council; yet to the end that
the Picture of Falier, a pernicious Prince, might not be seen amongst other of
those Illustrious Dukes, they caused an empty Chair to be drawn and covered
over with a black Veil, as believing that those who carried themselves
disloyally to the Commonwealth, cannot be more severely punished than if their
names be covered with a perpetual silence and secret detestation.

Zon. Annal. tom. 3. p. 135, 136. Din. l. 3. p. 164, 165.
11. The Saracens were shamefully forced to leave the Siege of Constantinople by
Constantinus Pogonatus, and a Tempest lighting also upon their Navy, had
reduced them to such terms, that they besought him for Peace, which was granted
them upon these conditions, That the Truce should continue for thirty years,
and that the Arabians or Saracens, as a Tribute, should pay to the Emperors of
Constantinople three thousand pieces of Gold, eight Slaves, and as many
excellent Horses. But Iustinianus the Successor of Pogonatus, forming an Army
of thirty thousand choice Youth, breaks the League, and undertakes an
Expedition against these Arabians, pretending that the Tribute money bare not
the stamp of the Romans but Arabians. The Arabians fastening the Tables of
their League to a Standard, bare them as an Ensign amongst them, and seeing
they could prevail nothing at all with the Emperor by entreaties, they remit
all to a Trial with him in Battle, wherein the Emperor was overthrown with a
great slaughter; and compelled to a shameful and dishonorable flight, with a
few of his Servants he scarcely escaped. Soon after by a Sedition amongst his
Subjects, he was thrust out into Exile, and the principal of those his
Counselors, who had persuaded him to this wickedness, were publicly burnt.

12. King Edgar hearing of the admirable beauty of Elfrida, Bak. Chron. p. 16,
17. Mon. Angl. tom. 1. p. 256. Speeds hist. p. 388.
the only daughter of Ordgarus, Duke of Devonshire (Founder of Tavestock Abbey
in that County) sent his great Favorite Earl Ethelwold (who could well judge
of beauty) to try the truth thereof: with Commission, That if he found her such
as fame reported, he should seize her for him, and he would make her his Queen.
The young Earl upon sight of the Lady was so surprised, that he began to woo
her for himself; and had procured her fathers good will in case he could obtain
the Kings consent. Hereupon the Earl posted back to the King, relating to him
that the Maid was fair indeed, but nothing answerable to the fame that went of
her: Yet desired the King that he might marry her, as being her fathers heir,
thereby to raise his fortune. The King consented, and the Marriage was
solemnized. Soon after the fame of her beauty began to spread more than before:
so that the King (much doubting that he had been abused) meant to try the truth
himself: and thereupon taking occasion of hunting in the Dukes Park, came to
his house: whose coming Ethelwold suspecting, acquainted his Wife with the
wrong he had done both her and the King: and therefore to prevent the Kings
displeasure, entreated her by all the persuasions he could use, to cloth her
self in such attire as might be least sit to set her forth. But she considering
that now was the time to make the most of her beauty, and longing to be a
Queen, would not be accessory to her own injury, but decked her self in her
richest ornaments: which so improved her beauties, that the King was struck
with admiration at the first sight, and meant to be revenged of his perfidious
favorite: yet dissembling his passion till he could take him at advantage, he
then with a Javelin thrust him through, and having thereby made the fair Elfrid
a Widow, took her to be his Wife.

13. Rhomilda was the Wife of Prince Sigulphus, Dinoth. l. 3. p. 214. Camer.
oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 7. p. 59. Bruson. Ex. l. 5. c. 6. p. 355.
her husband being slain by Cacanus, King of the Henetians, and she her self
besieged by the same enemy, she yet nevertheless fell so far in love with him,
that upon the promise of marriage, she agreed to deliver into his hands, the
City of Friol, who burnt it, slew the men, and carried the women and children
Captives into Austria. Cacanus took Rhomilda into his bed for one night only,
and then delivered her to be abused with the lust of twelve Henetians; and soon
after caused her to be impaled alive upon a sharp Stake.

14. Bassianus Caracalla made an Expedition into the East, Din. l. 3. p. 163,
164.
against the King of the Parthians, and despairing to subdue him by fine force,
he fradulently solicits him to enter with him into a League of amity. The other
not trusting the Romans, and supposing that their Faith and friendship would be
but short and unstable, sent back his Embassadous with a refusal o^ what they
came about. Caracalla sends them back again to the King to remonstrate to him,
That a perpetual and firm Peace and Amity betwixt both Nations would be
mutually advantageous: and that to the establishment of it, there wanted
nothing but that he would consent to a Marriage betwixt Caracalla and his
daughter. The King did willingly harken and consent to it. The day of the
Nuptials being come, the Parthians (not suspecting any thing of Hostility) in
honor of the Kings Son-in-law, went out to meet him unarmed, and many of them
leaping from their Horses, mixed themselves with the Romans in great alacrity:
when on a sudden the signal being given, on every side the Roman Soldiers,
being in good order and armed, set upon the other unprovided and naked, and
cruelly slew many of them, Artabanus hardly escaping in the throng and tumult:
But he mindful of the injury, and greedy of revenge, slew to Arms against these
treacherous Truce Breakers: and in a just Battle with them (which lasted three
days) not without great slaughter, he compelled them to sue for Peace, to
restore the Prisoners they had taken, and also to pay him a considerable sum
of money.

Herod. l. 7. p. 330. Fulg. l. 6. c. 5. p. 765. B^uson. Ex. l. 5. c. 6. p. 354.
15. In the Reign of Maximinus there was a revolt of the Soldiers, and of the
Osroheni, who by accident lighting upon Carcino (not thinking of any such
thing, and altogether unwilling to it) they forced him to be their Leader,
clothed him with the Purple, and saluted him Emperor. Not long after, he
sleeping in his Tent, was treacherously slain by Macedonius his bedfellow, who
thinking it would be very acceptable to Maximinus, presented him with the head
of Carcino. Maximinus was indeed well pleased with the gift (being thereby
freed of so great a danger:) but withal, he caused Macedonius to be slain, as
the betrayer of his friend.

Plut. in Romulo, p. 27. ^ iv. decad. l. 1. p. 5. Zon. Annal. tom. 2. p. 55.
16. Tarpeia, the daughter of Tarpeius, the Warden of the Capitol, agreed to
betray it into the hands of the Sabines, upon this condition, That she should
have for her reward that which they carried upon their left arms, meaning the
golden Bracelets they wore upon them. Being let in by her according to compact,
Tatius, the Sabine King (though well pleased with carrying the Place) yet
abhorring the manner in which it was done, commanded the Sabines to deliver her
all they carried on their left arms: and himself in the first place, pulling
his Bracelet from his arm, cast that, together with his Shield upon her, and
all the rest doing in the same manner; hurt on every side with Gold, and
Bucklers, she was oppressed and overwhelmed at once with the multitude and
weight of her rewards, and so miserably died.

Fulg. l. 6. c. 5. p. 765.
17. A. Vitellius being saluted Emperor by the Soldiers in Germany (against
Galba then Reigning) having afterward overcome Otho, amongst his Writings he
found a Roll of one hundred and twenty men, who had Petitioned Otho for a
reward, as having been present or assisting in the murder of Galba: but though
Vitellius was Galba's enemy, yet he thought it unfit, not only that such men
should receive a reward, but that they should be suffered to live, seeing that
they had set the life of their Prince to sale: He therefore caused diligent
sear^h to be made for them, and as many as he could lay hands upon he caused to
be slain.

18. Guntramus, Fulg. l. 6. c. 5. p. 770.
King of the Burgundians, when he Warred against Gondoaldus (who under a false
name, as if he were his Brother, had seized upon part of Burgundy, and Usurped
the Title of a King) contracted with Sagittarius, and Monnialus (two Bishops
whom Gondoaldus used as his entire Friends) about the slaying of Gondoaldus;
which done, he caused the Bishops also, who had been his Ministers therein, to
be slain, lest a villainous Example should remain, upon which any man should
presume to betray him, whom he had once owned and acknowledged for his Lord.

19. The City of Sfetigrade defended against Amurath the second, Knowles Turk.
hist. p. 320. Barlet. hist. of Scanderbeg, l. 5. p. 181, 186.
was then watered but with one great Well in the midst of the City, into which
a Traiterous person (who had contracted for a mighty reward, to cause the City
to be yielded up unto the Turks) had cast a dead Dog; this had been no great
matter to other men, but he well knew that the Garrison consisted of the
Soldiers of Dibra, who as they were the most valorous of all Epirus, so were
they more superstitious than the Jews about things clean and unclean; and he
knew these would starve, die any manner of death, or yield up the City, rather
than drink of that polluted drink; nor was he deceived, for it was straight
yielded up on certain conditions. He that corrupted the water, was rewarded
with three Suits of rich Apparel, fifty thousand Aspers, and a yearly Pension
of two thousand Ducats: but short was his joy, for after he had a few days
vainly triumphed in the midst of Amurath his favors, he was suddenly gone, and
never afterward seen or heard of, being secretly made away (as was supposed)
by the commandment of Amurath, whose noble heart could not but detest the
Traitor, although the Treason served well for his purpose.

20. Luther was once asked, Lon. Theatr. p. 577.
Whether if one had committed a murder, and confessed it to the Priest, in case
the Magistrate should otherwise hear of it, and cite the Priest for a Witness,
the Priest was bound to reveal what he had learned by confession? Luther
answered no, and added this Example, At Venice a woman had privily killed one
that had lain with her, and thrown his body into the Sea, and then having
confessed all to a Monk, received from him a Schedule in testimony of her
Absolution. Afterward corrupted with money he betrayed her: the woman produces
the Schedule of the Monks Absolution, and thereby would excuse her self. The
Senate therefore gave sentence, That the Monk should be burnt, and the woman
banished: this Judgment of the prudent Senate Luther did highly applaud.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Voluptuous and Effeminate Persons.
Tiberius the Emperor is said to have instituted a new Office at Rome, for the
invention of new pleasures; over whom he appointed as their Prefect, T.
Caesonius Priscus; had he wanted Officers he might have been more than
sufficiently supplied out of these that follow.

1. The Kings of Persia were so addicted to pleasure, that their manner was to
spend their Winter at Susa; their summer at Ecbatana; their Autumn in
Persepolis; and the rest of the year in Babylon.

Solin. c. 48. p. 402.
2. Plotius the brother of L. Plotius, twice Consul, was proscribed by the
Triumvirate, and in his place at Salernum where he lay hid, he was betrayed to
his murderers, by the smell of his sweet unguents and perfumes which he had
upon him.

(...). va^. (...). l. 9. c. (...) p. ^50. Id. l. ^^. c. 124. p. 316.
3. Sinyndirides, the Sybarite, was of that softness and effeminacy, that he
excelled therein all those of his Nation, though the world it self had not a
more luxu^ious generation than they; this man upon a time had cast himself upon
a bed prepared for him of the leaves of Roses: and having there taken a sleep,
at his rising complained, that he had Pustules made upon his body by reason of
the hardness of his bed. The same person was moreover so addicted to his belly,
that when he went to Sicyone, as a servant to Agarista, the daughter of
Clisthenes, he took along with him a thousand Cooks, a thousand Fowlers, and as
many Fishers.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 9. c. 9. p. 238.
4. Demetrius Poliorcetes when he had taken diverse Cities by Siege, exacted
yearly from them one thousand two hundred Talents, the least part of which went
to his Army, the greatest he consumed in all kinds of Luxury; both himself and
the Pavements where he resided slow'd with Unguents; and throughout every part
of the year, the fresh leaves of Flowers were strow'd for him to walk upon. A
man immoderate and excessive in his loves both of women and young men; and his
great endeavor was to seem beautiful, and to that purpose studiously composed
his hair into curles, and sought by artifice to have it of a Golden color.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 7. c. 2. p. 199.
5. Straton of Sidon, and Nicocles the Cypriot, strave not only to excel all
other men in luxury and effeminate pleasures, but there was also an emulation
betwixt themselves, enkindled by the relations they heard of each other; their
Feasts were attended with musical women, and Harlots of selected faces for
beauty, were to Sing and Dance before them while they Feasted: but they could
not long indulge themselves in these kind of delights, for both of them
perished by a violent death.

At^e. Deip. l. 12. c. 7. p. 530.
6. Sardanapalus, King of Assyria, was the most effeminate of all men, he was
continually hid in the apartments of the women, and there sat disguised amongst
them, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 97. p. 450. Oros. hist. l. 1. c. 19. p. 25.
in a habit like unto theirs: where he also was busied with the Distaff as
they. Upon his Sepulcher he caused a Statue to be cut attired like a woman,
holding her right hand over her head, with some of the fingers close, after the
manner of one that is ready to give a fillip, and by it these words were
engraven, Sardanapalus, the son of Anacyndaraxes, has
builded Anchiala and Tarsus in one day.
Eat, drink and be merry, the rest is not worth
the fillip of a finger.
Cicero says, Cicer. Tusc. Quest. l. 5. p.
That Aristotle lighting upon this Tomb and Inscription, said it should have
been written upon the grave of a Beast, not upon the Tomb of a King.

7. Muleasses, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 2. c. 30. p. 128, 129. Id. cent. 1. c.
20. p. 107.
King of Tunis, was a man of pleasure, it is said of him, That his manner was to
vail his eyes, that he might catch the harmony of Music more deliciously, as
having learned that two Senses are not at once to be gratified in the highest
manner. Iovi^^ says of him, That having fought (but unfortunately) with his
son Amida, for the recovery of his Kingdom, being all disfigured with dust and
sweat, and his own blood; amongst a numerous crowd of them that sled, he was
known to his enemies by nothing so much as the odor of his Unguents, and
sweetness of his perfumes: thus betrayed he was brought back, and had his eyes
put out by his sons command.

8. The City Sybaris is seated two hundred furlongs from Crotona, Camer. oper.
subc. cent. 2. c. 30. p. 127. Id. cent. 1. c. 20. p. 107.
betwixt the two Rivers of Crathis and Sybaris, built by Iseliceus; the
affairs of it were grown to that prosperity, that it commanded four Neighbor
Nations, and had twenty five Cities subservient to its pleasure; they led out
three hundred thousand men against them of Crotona: all which power and
prosperity were utterly overturned by means of their luxury. They had taught
their Horses at a certain tune to rise on their hinder feet, and with their
fore-feet to keep a kind of time with the Music; a Minstril who had been ill
used amongst them fled to Crotona, and told them, If they would make him their
Captain, he would put all the enemies horse (their chief strength) into their
hands: it was agreed: he taught the known Tune to all the Minstrels in the
City; and when the Sybarites came up to a close charge, at a signal given, all
the Minstrels played, and all the Horses fell to dancing, by which being
unserviceable, both they and their Riders were easily taken by the enemy.

9. The old Inhabitants of Byzantium were so addicted to a voluptuous life,
Aelian. var. hist. l. 3. c. 14. p. 100.
that they hired out their own houses familiarly, and went with their Wives to
live in Taverns: they were men greedy of Wine and extremely delighted with
Music: but the first sound of a Trumpet was sufficient almost to put them
besides themselves: for they had no disposition at all to War, and even when
their City was besieged they left the defense of their Walls that they might
steal into a Tavern.

CHAP. L. Of the libidinous and unchaste life of some Persons, and what
Tragedies have been occasioned by Adulteries.
Cause. hol. Court, treat. of passions, ^. 8. p. 18.
IN an ancient Emblem pertaining to John Duke of Burgundy, there was to be seen
a Pillar which two hands sought to overthrow, the one had Wings and the other
was figured with a Tortoise, the word Vtcunque as much as to say, by one way or
other. There are Amourists who take the same course in their prohibited amors;
some strike down the Pillars of Chastity by the sudden and impetuous violence
of great promises, and unexpected presents; others proceed therein with a
Tortoises pace, with long patience, continual services and profound
submissions: yet when the Fort is taken, whether by storm or long siege, there
is brought in an un^^pected reckoning sometimes, that drenches all their sweets
in blood, and closes up their unlawful pleasures in the ^ables of death; Thus,

Mandelsl. Trav. l. 2. p. 191.
1. A certain Merchant of Iapan, who had some reason to suspect his Wife,
pretended to go into the Country, but returning soon after surprised her in the
very act. The Adulterer he killed, and having tied his Wife to a Ladder, he
left her in that half hanging posture all night. The next day he invited all
the Relations on both sides as well Men as Women, to dine with him at his own
house, sending word that the importance of the business he had to communicate
to them, excused his non-observance of the custom they have to make
entertainments for the women distinct from those of the men. They all came, and
asking for his Wife, were told that she was busy in the Kitchen, but Dinner
being well nigh past they entreated the Husband to send for her, which he
promised to do. Whereupon rising from the Table, and going into the room where
she was tied to the Ladder, he unbound her, put a Shroud upon her, and into her
hands a Box, wherein were the privy Members of her Gallant covered with
Flowers; and saying to her, go and present this Box to our common Relations,
and see whether I may upon their mediation grant you your life. She came in
that equipage into the Hall where they sat at Dinner, and falling on her
knees, presented the Box with the precious relics in it to the kindred, but
as soon as they had opened it she swounded; her Husband perceiving that it went
to her heart, and to prevent her returning again (now she was going) cut off
her head, which raised such an horror in the Friends, that they immediately
left the room, and went to their several homes.

Ol^a^. trav. l. 6. p. 330.
2. Schach Abbas King of Persia, coming to understand that one of his menial
servants who was called Iacupzanbeg, Kurtzi Tirkenan (that is to say, he whose
Office it was to carry the Kings Bow and Arrows) had a light Wife, sent him
notice of it with this message, that if he hoped to continue at Court in his
employment, it was expected he should cleanse his House. This message, and the
affliction he conceived at the baseness of his Wife, and his reflection that it
was known all about the Court, put him into such a fury, that going immediately
to his House (which was in the Province of Lenkeran) he cut in pieces not only
his Wife, but also her two Sons, four Daughters, and five Chamber-maids, and so
cleansed his House, by the blood of twelve persons, most of them innocent.

3. The Egyptians do not presently deliver the dead bodies of the Wives of
eminent persons to Conditure and embalming, Herodot. l. 2. p. 121. Ko^am. de
mirac. mort. l. 7. c. 22. p. 15.
nor the bodies of such women who in their lifetime were very beautiful, but
detain them after death at least three or four days, and that upon this
reason. There was once one of these Embalmers empeached by his Companion, that
he had carnal knowledge of a dead body, committed to his care to be Salted and
Embalmed. Dr. Brown in his Vulgar Errors, speaking of the like villainies used
by these Pollinctors, elegantly writes, Deformity needs not now complain, nor
shall the eldest hopes be ever superannuated, since Death has Spurs, and
Carcases have been Courted.

4. After King Edred, Baker. Chro. p. 15. Speed. hist. p. 385.
(not any of his Sons) but his Nephew Edwin the eldest Son of King Edmund
succeeded, and was anointed and Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Otho
Archbishop of Canterbury in the year 955. This Prince though scarce fourteen
years old, and in age but a Child, yet was able to commit sin as a man; for on
the very day of his Coronation, and in sight of his Lords as they sat in
Council, he shamefully abused a Lady of great estate, and his near Kins-woman;
and to mend the matter, shortly after slew her Husband, the more freely to
enjoy his incestuous pleasure. For this and other infamous acts, a great part
of his Subjects hearts were so turned against him, that the Mercians and
Northumbrians revolted and swore fealty to his younger Brother Edgar, with
grief whereof after four years reign he ended his life, and was buried in the
Church of the New Abbey of Hide at Winchester.

6. Eugenius the third, Bish. Spots. hist. Churc. Scotland, l. 2. p. 29.
King of Scotland, made a beastly Act, which appointed the first night of the
new married Woman to appertain to the Lord of the Soil. This infamous Law was
repealed by King Malcolme Anno 1057. granting the Husband liberty to redeem the
same by payment of an half mark of Silver, which Portion they call marchetas
Mulierum, and is yet disponed by Superiors in the Charters they give to their
Vassals.

6. Augustus, Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1. c. 49. p. 220.
though of so great a fame for a good Emperor, was yet so lustfully given,
that if he saw any beautiful Lady, he caused her to be privately brought to
him, without all respect of Nobility, Dignity or Honesty. The Philosopher
Athenodorus was very inward with him, yet not acquainted with his libidinous
practices; but one day understanding that Augustus had sent a Litter, closed
with his Seal, for a certain Noble Lady, whose Husband lamented exceedingly,
and the Chaste Woman was also moved extremely thereat; He besought them both to
be patient, and forthwith conveyed himself secretly into the Litter in place of
the Lady, with a Sword in his hand: when the Litter was brought, Augustus
coming as his manner was to open it himself, Athenodorus rushed forth upon him,
with his drawn Sword in his hand, and (said he) Art thou not afraid that some
one should kill thee in this manner? Augustus much amazed at this unexpected
accident, yet gently bore with the boldness of the Philosopher, thanking him
afterward, and making good use of so good a warning.

Lonic. Thea. p. 482.
7. There was a Surgeon of no mean City, who (neglecting his own) followed
the wife of another man, and when (on a time) he had mounted his Horse with a
purpose to ride to her, his Wife asked him whither he went? who in derision
replied, to a Brothel House. These words spoken in such a petulant levity, were
not unheard by Divine Justice; for when he had performed with the Adulteress,
what he intended, and was mounting his Horse to return, one of his feet catched
and was entangled in the Reins, which the Horse (frighted at) ran away as if
mad, shook him off the Saddle, one of his feet hanging in the Stirrup, he drew
him in such manner along the way, that his Brains were beat out upon the
Stones, nor could he be stopped till he had dragged him into a Brothel House,
and made good those words that before he had spoken with an inconsiderate
perverseness.

Senec. not. Qu^^st. l. 1. c. 16. p. 439. Coel. Rhod. l. 4. c. 3. p. 631.
8. Hostius was a man of a most prostigate baseness; after what manner he abused
himself with both Sexes, and what Glasses he caused to be made, on purpose to
enlarge the imagination of his impurities by the delusion of his eyes, I had
rather should be declared by the Pen of Seneca than mine; but it is even
pleasant to remember that the villainies of this monster had a due recompense
even in this world, for when he was slain by his own Servants, Augustus the
Emperor judged his death unworthy of revenge.

Syms. Chur. hist. l. 1. cent. 16. p. 220.
9. The Duke of Anjou coming to assist the Netherlanders against the Spaniards,
while his Army was yet upon the Frontiers to enter into Henault; it happened that
one Captain Pont was lodged in the House of a rich Farmer, named John Mills, of
whom he demanded his Daughter Mary to Wife, but being denied, he chased the
whole Family out of the House, keeping only this poor Virgin, whom he ravished,
and caused three or four of his Soldiers to do the like; which done he set her
at the Table by him, and flouted her with ^ilthy and dissolute speeches: She
big with revenge, as the Captain turned his head to speak with a Corporal,
catched up a Knife, and stabbed him therewith to the heart, so that he fell
down presently dead: the Soldiers took and bound her to a Tree, and shot her
to death.

Iosep. Anti. Iudaic. l. 18. c. 4. p. 467. Wier. oper. de praestig. daem. l. 3.
c. 24. p. 242, 243. Lonic. Thea. p. 468. Lavat. de Spect. part. 1. c. 6. p. 23,
24. Zonar. Ann. tom. 1. fol. 46. Purch. Pil. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 4. p. 732.
10. Paulina was the Wife of Saturninus, illustrious as well for the chastity of
her life, as the Nobility of her birth; Decius Mundus none of the meanest of
the Knights of Rome, was inflamed with her incomparable beauty, so that he
offered her two hundred thousand Drachmes for a single night; she despising his
gifts, he determined to famish himself. I Would the Freed-woman of his Father was
aware of this, and told him that for fifty thousand Drachmes she would procure
him the embraces of Paulina; which having received, and knowing Paulina
vehemently addicted to the worship of Isis, she delivers twenty five thousand
Drachmes to some of the Priests, declares the love of Dec^^s, solicits their
help, and that done she promised to deliver them as much more in Gold. The
elder of these Priests thus corrupted, gets to Paulina and admitted to private
conference, tells her that the god Anubis was taken with her beauty, and
commanded that she should repair to him; she obtained leave of her Husband to
go, the more easily for that he knew she was of approved chastity. To the
Temple she went, and when it was time to rest she was locked in by the Priests,
and there in the dark was encountered by Mundus, whose pleasure that night she
obeyed, supposing that she had gratified the god. He went thence before the
Priests that were conscious of the abuse were risen. Paulina magnified her
happiness to her Husband and Equals. Upon the third day after Mundus met her;
It was well done Paulina, said he, to save me two hundred thousand Drachmes,
and yet withal to fulfill what I desired; for I am not ill satisfied that you
despised Mundus, and yet embraced him under the pretext of Anubis, and so
departed. Paulina now first apprehending the abuse, tare her Garments and Hair,
discovered all to her Husband, conjuring him not to suffer so great a Villainy
to pass unpunished. Her Husband informed the Emperor Tiberius of the matter,
who having caused strict examination to be had of all persons concerned; he
commanded all those Impostor Priests to be crucified, together with I Would the
Inventrix and Contriver of this mischief: He ordered the Temple to be pulled
down, and the Statue of Isis to be cast into the River Tyber. As for Mundus he
condemned him to perpetual banishment, in part (as he said) excusing him,
because of the rage of his loves.

11. That is a prodigious example in Athenaeus; Athen. Deip. l. 12. c. 5. p.
522.
The Tarentines having spoiled Carbinas a Town of the Iapyges, they gathered
all the boys, Virgins, and Women of the most flourishing years, into the
Temples of the Town, and there exposed them naked in the broad day to all
comers; giving liberty to all sorts to satisfy their Lust as they pleased, and
that in open view; thus was the miserable people oppressed, by an unheard of
wickedness, in contempt of the Divinity: But God was so offended therewith,
that as many of the Tarentines as had committed this Villainy, were struck dead
with lightning from Heaven; and their own friends were so far from pitying
them, that they made Sacrifices to Thundering Jupiter.

CHAP. LI. Of the Incestuous Loves and Marriages of some Men.
IT is the saying of St. Augustine, that the commixture of Brothers and
Sisters, the more ancient it is in respect of the compulsion of necessity, the
more damnable it is now afterward become through the prohibition of Religion.
Amongst those where Religion has had but little to do, whole Nations are at
this day at once both polluted and delighted with all sorts of incestuous
copulations. The Persians and Parthians approve of incest in their Royal
Families, by reason of which it is often committed, but seldom so punished as
in the following history.

Mandelsl. Trav. l. 1. p. 32, 33.
1. About a league and a half from the City of Amadabat, the Metropolis of
Guzuratta, we were showed a Sepulcher, which they call Betti Chuit, that is to
say the Daughters shame discovered; there lies interred in it a rich Merchant,
a Moor, named Hajam Majom, who falling in love with his own Daughter, and
desirous to show some pretense for his incest, went to an Ecclesiastical Judge,
and told him in general terms, that he had in his youth taken pleasure to plant
a Garden, and to dress and order it with great care, so that now it brought
forth such excellent fruits, that the neighbors were extremely desirous
thereof, that he was every day importuned to communicate unto them, but that he
could not yet be persuaded to part therewith, and that it was his design to
make use of them himself, if the Judge would grant him in writing a license to
do it. The Kasi (who was not able to dive into the wicked intentions of this
unfortunate man) made answer, that there was no difficulty in all this, and so
immediately declared as much in writing. Hajam showed it his Daughter, and
finding nevertheless that neither his own authority, nor the general permission
of the Judge would make her consent to his brutish enjoyments, he ravished her.
She complained to her Mother, who made so much noise about it, that the King
Mahomet Begeran coming to hear thereof, ordered him to lose his head.

^ Orosii hist. l. 1. c. 4. p. 14.
2. Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians, was a woman of incessant and insatiable
lust, to gratify which she selected the choice young men in her Army, and
after the act commanded them to be slain. She had also incestuous society with
her Son, and covered her private ignominy with a public impiety, for she
commanded that without any regard of reverence had unto nature, it should be
held lawful for Parents and Children, to marry each other as they pleased.

Orosii hist. l. 5. c. 10. p. 194.
3. Ptolomeus King of Egypt, did first violate the chastity of his own Sister,
and afterward made her his Wife; nor was it long before he as basely dismissed
her, as he had impiously received her; for having sent her away, he then took
to Wife the Daughter of that his Sister whom he had but lately divorced: he
murdered the Son he had by his Sister, as also his Brothers Son; being
therefore become hateful for his Incests and Murders, he was expelled the
Kingdom by those of Alexandria, Anno ab V. C. 622.

Herodot. l. 3. p. 173, 174.
4. Cambyses King of Persia, falling in love with his own Sister, sent for the
Judges of his Kingdom, and enquired of them if there were any Law, that
permitted him to marry his own Sister; to whom (fearing to exasperate the
natural cruelty of his disposition) they replied that they found not any such
Law as he had mentioned, but they found another Law, whereby the Kings of
Persia were enabled to do whatsoever they pleased; whereupon he married her,
and after that another of his Sisters also.

Sabel. Ex. l. 3. c. 9. p. 166.
5. In the family of the Arsacidae (that is the Kings of Parthia) he was looked
upon as no lawful Heir of the Kingdom and Family, who was not conceived in
incestuous copulation of the Son with the Mother.

^onic. Thea. p. 486.
6. Luther in his Comment upon Genesis, tells that at Erford there was a young
man (the Son of a Widow woman of good quality) who had often solicited his
Mothers Maid to admit him to her Bed; Luthe. Coll. mensal. p. 257.
she wearyed with his continual importunity, acquainted her Mistress with it.
The Mother intending to chastise the petulant lust of her Son, bad the Maid to
appoint him an hour, and agreed amongst themselves to exchange Beds. The Mother
lay expecting the Son, intending to give him a very severe chiding; but while
she thus went about to deceive the young man, she her self was by the delusion
of Satan deceived also, for taking flame she silently admitted her Son, and
unknown by him, was at that time got with Child: at the usual time she was
delivered of a Daughter, which was brought up by her as one that was Fatherless
and Motherless. When this Girl was grown up, the young man her Son fell in love
with her, and notwithstanding the Mother labored with anxiety against it,
would needs have her to his Wife; so that though unwittingly, the young man lay
at once with his Sister and Daughter, as well as his Wife. The Mother through
grief being ready to lay violent hands upon her self, confessed the whole to
the Priest, and Divines being acquainted with the case, agreed that seeing the
whole was unknown to both, they should not be divorced lest their Consciences
should be burdened.

7. C. Caligula familiarly polluted himself with all his Sisters; Sueton. l. 4.
c. 24. p. 179.
and at any great Feast he evermore placed one or other of them by turns
beneath himself, while his Wife sat above. He is believed to have defloured
his Sister Drusilla while a Virgin, and he himself but a Boy; and was one time
surprised in the Act of uncleanness with her, by his Grandmother Antonia, in
whose House they were brought up together. Afterward when she was married to
L. Cassius Longinus, a Consular person, he took her from him, and kept her
openly as if she had been his lawful Wife. When he lay sick, he ordained her
his Heir, and his Successor in the Empire; for the same Sister deceased, he
proclaimed a general cessation of Law in all Courts, and a time of solemn
mourning, during which it was a capital crime to have laughed, bathed or supped
together with Parents, Wife or Children. And being impatient of this sorrow, he
fled suddenly out of the City; and having passed through all Campania, he went
to Syracuse, and from thence returned with his Hair and Beard overgrown;
neither at any time after, in his Speeches to the People or the Soldiery,
about the most weighty affairs, would he swear otherwise than by the name or
Deity of Drusilla.

8. Strabo reports of the Arabians, Purch. Pil. tom. 1. l. 3. c. 1. p. 260.
that they used incestuous copulation with Sister and Mother. Adultery with
them is death, but that only is adultery which is out of the same Kindred;
otherwise for all of the same blood to use the same woman, is their incestuous
honesty. When fifteen Brothers (Kings Sons) had by their continual company,
tired their one and only Sister; she devised a means to rid her self, or at
least to ease her somewhat of that trouble. And therefore whereas the custom
was, that he which went in left his Staff at the Door to prohibit others
entrance; she got like Staves, and always having one at the Door, was
disburdened of their importunity, every one that came, thinking some other had
^een there before them: but they being once all together, one of them stole
from his Fellows, and finding this Staff at the Door, accused his Sister to his
Father of adultery, whereof by discovery of the truth she was cleared.

P^zel. mell. hist. tom. 2. p. 209.
9. Bassianus Caracalla the Emperor, after he had slain the Son of Iulia his
Mother-in-law, did also take her to his Wife, upon this occasion. Iulia was a
most beautiful woman, and she one day (as if through negligence or accident)
having discovered a great part of her body naked to the eyes of her Son,
Bassianus sighing said thereupon, I would if I might; Iulia replied, If you
please you may, know you not that you are Emperor, and that it is your part to
give, and not to receive Laws? Hearing this, he publicly married her, and kept
her as his Wife. Not long after being slain by the hand of Martialis; Macrinus
having burnt his body, sent the relics thereof in an Vrn to Iulia his Wife
and Mother, then at Antioch in Syria; who casting her self upon the Urn, slew
her self; and this was the end of this incestuous copulation.

Diodor. Sic. Clarks mir. c. 71. p. 313.
10. Artaxerxes Mnemon King of Persia, fell in love with his own Daughter, a
beautiful Virgin called Atossa; which his own Mother Parysatis perceiving,
persuaded him to marry her, and so to take her for his Wife: and though the
Persian Laws forbad such incestuous Marriages; yet by the counsel of his wicked
Mother, and his own lust, he had her for his Wife, after which time he never
prospered in any thing he took in hand.

Sandys in l. 10. Ovid. Metam. p. 199.
11. Lucretia the Daughter of Pope Alexander the sixth, not only lay with the
Pope her Father, but also with her Bother, the Duke of Candy, which Duke was
also slain by Caesar Borgia, for being his Rival in his Sisters Bed. Of this
Lucretia, is this Epitaph extant.

Hic jacet in tumulo, Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri Filia, Sponsa, Nurus.
Here Lucrece lies, a Thais in her life,
Pope Sixtus Daughter, Daughter-in-law, and Wife.
Ferdinand Mendez. Pinta. his voyages, c. 8. p. 22.
12. When we came to the Court of the King of Queda, we found that (with a great
deal of Pomp, excellent Music, Dancing and largess to the poor) he was
solemnizing the Funerals of his Father, whom he himself had stabbed, on purpose
to marry his own Mother, after he had already gotten her with Child. As a
remedy in these evils he made proclamation, that on pain of a most rigorous
death, no person whatsoever should be so daring, as to speak a word of that
which had passed; and it was told us, how for that cause he had already put to
death diverse principal personages of his Kingdom, and a number of Merchants.

CHAP. LII. Of such as have been warned of their approaching death, who yet
were not able to avoid it.
WHen Alexander the Great (then in India) had been told by an Oracle, that he
should dye by Poison at Babylon, and that within the compass of the next eight
months; he was importunate to know further, who was the person that should give
him that Poison? But he had no other answer than this, That the Fates cannot be
deceived. So it seems, for when the appointed time is come, it is easy to
observe how some push on themselves by a wilful and presumptuous foolhardiness;
and to others their very caution and circumspection has proved as fatal to
them, as any other thing.

1. Adv^rtisements were come from all parts, De Serres Genesis hist. France, p.
821.
both within and without the Realm from Spain, Rome, Lorrain and Savoy, to give
notice to Henry of Lorrain Duke of Guise (in the reign of Henry the third of
France) that a bloody catastrophe would dissolve that assembly he had then
occasioned of the Estates. The Almanacks had well observed it; it was generally
bruited in the Estates, that the execution should be on St. Thomas day, the
very Eve before the Dukes death; the Duke himself sitting down to Dinner, found
a scrole under his Napkin, advertising him of a secret ambush of the King and
his; but he writ underneath with his own hand They dare not, and threw it under
the Tab^e; seeing therefore that no warning would abate his confidence nor
awake his security, his murder was performed on this manner; Upon December 23.
1588. the King assembles his Council, having before prepared seven of his
Gentlemen that were near his person to execute his will. The Duke of Guise
came, and attending the beginning of the Council, sends for an Handkerchief:
Pericart his Secretary not daring to commit this new advertisement to any man's
report, ties a note to one of the corners thereof, saying Come forth and save
your self, else you are but a dead man. But Larchant the Captain of the Kings
Guard staid the Page that carried it, and caused another to be given to him by
St. Prix the chief Groom of the Kings Chamber. The spirit of man does often
prophecy the mischief that does pursue him; the Duke in the Council feels
strange alterations, and extraordinary distemperatures, and amidst his distrust
a great fainting of his heart. St. Prix presents unto him some Prunes of
Brignolles, and Raysins of the Sun; he eats, and thereupon the King calls him
into his Cabinet, by Revol one of the Secretaries of State, as it were to
confer with him about some secret of importance; the Duke leaves the Council to
pass into the Cabinet, and as he lift up the Tapestry with one hand to enter,
they charge him with Swords, Daggers and Partisanes, and so he was slain.

2. Certain it is that some good while before the Duke of Buckinghams death,
Reliq. wort. p. 114.
by the Knife of Felton, Sir Clement Throckmorton, a Gentleman then living
advised him to wear a privy Coat, whose Council the Duke received very kindly;
but gave him this answer, That against any popular fury, a Shirt of Male would
be but a silly defense, and as for any single man's assault, he took himself to
be in no danger, so dark is destiny.

Baker. Chro. p. 53, 54.
3. The night before King William the second was killed, a certain Monk dreamed
that he saw the King gnaw the Image of Christ cruci^ied with his teeth, and
that as he was about to bite away the legs of the same Image, Christ with his
feet spurned him down to the ground, and that as he lay on the earth, there
came out of his mouth a flame of fire, with abundance of smoke; this being
related to the King by Robert Fitz Mammon, he made a jest of it, saying This
Monk would sain have something for his dream, go give him an hundred Shillings,
but bid him look that he dream more auspicious dreams hereafter. Also the same
night the King himself dreamed, that the veins of his arms were broken, and
that the blood issued out in great abundance, and many other like passages
there were; by which it seems he had Friends somewhere (as well as Julius
Caesar) that did all they could to give him warning; but that as Caesar's, to
his malus Genius would not suffer him to take it; for King William
notwithstanding forewarned by many signs would go a hunting in the New Forest,
yet something moved with the many presages, he staid within all the Forenoon,
but about Dinner time an Artificer ca^e, and brought him six Crossbow Arrows
very strong and sharp, whereof four he kept himself, and the other two he
delivered to Sir Walter Tyrrel a Knight of Normandy, his Bowbearer, saying,
Here Tyrrel take you two, for you know how to shoot them to purpose: and so
having at Dinner drank more liberally than his custom, as it were in contempt
of presages, out he rides to the New Forest, where Sir Walter Tyrrel shooting
at a Deer, at a place called Charingham, the Arrow glanced against a Tree, or
as some say grazed upon the back of the Deer, and flying forward hit the King
upon the Breast, with which he in^tantly fell down dead. Thus dyed William
Rufus in the forty third year of his age, and twelfth, and some months of his
reign; his Body was drawn in a Colliers Cart, with one Horse to the City of
Winchester, where the day following he was buried in the Cathedral Church of
St. Swithin.

Baker. Chro. p. 320, 321.
4. The Lord Hastings by Richard the third, the then Protector, was arrested of
high Treason, who wished him to make have to be confessed, ^or he swore by St.
Paul, his usual Oath, that he would not touch bread nor drink till his Head was
off; so he was led forth unto the Green before the Chapel within the Tower,
where his Head was laid down upon a Log of Timber and there stricken off. In
this man's death we may see how inevitable the blows of destiny are, for the
very night before his death the Lord Standley sent a secret messenger to him at
Midnight, in all haste to acquaint him with a dream he had, in which he thought
that a Boar with his Tushes so goared them both in the heads that the blood ran
about their shoulders; and forasmuch as the Protector gave the Boar for his
Cognizance, the dream made so fearful an impression upon his heart, that he was
thoroughly resolved to stay no longer, and had made his Horse ready, requiring
the Lord Hastings to go with him, and that presently to be out of danger before
it should be day: But the Lord Hastings answered the Messenger, Good Lord,
leans your Master so much to such trifles, to put such faith in dreams, which
either his own fear fantasieth, or else do rise in the nights rest, by reason
of the days thoughts? Go back therefore to thy Master and commend me to him,
and pray him to be merry, and have no fear, for I assure him I am as sure of
the man he woteth of, as of mine own hand: the man he meant was one Catesby who
deceived him, and was himself the first mover to rid him out of the way.
Another warning he had the same morning in which he was beheaded, his Horse
twice or thrice stumbled with him almost to falling, which though it often
happen to such to whom no mischance is toward, yet has it of old been observed
as a token foregoing some great misfortune.

5. The night before Henry the second King of France was slain, Lonic. Thea. p.
410. Baker. Chro. p. 475.
Queen Margaret his Wife dreamed that she saw her Husbands eye put out; there
were Justs and Tournaments at that time, into which the Queen besought her
Husband not to enter because of her dream; but he was resolved, and there did
things worthy of himself: when almost all was now done, he would needs run at
Tilt with a Knight who refused him, his name was Montgomery; the King was bent
upon it, they shivered their Lances in the course, and a splinter of one of
them took the King so full into the eye, that he thereby received his deadly
wound.

6. There was one who dreamed that he was bitten to death by a Lion of Marble,
Lonic. Thea. p. 410.
that was set at the entrance of the Temple: being in the morning to go to that
Temple, and beholding the Marble Statue of the Lion, laughing he told his dream
to them that went with him; he put his hand into the Lions mouth, and jestingly
said, Bite now my valiant enemy, and if thou can, kill me: he had scarce
spoken the words, when he was deadly stung by a Scorpion that there lay hid,
and thereby unexpectedly found the truth of his dream.

7. Croesus King of Lydia had two Sons, Herodot. l. 1. p. 14, 15. Val. Max. l.
1. c. 7. p. 23. Heyw. Hier. l. 4. p. 225.
the one dumb and of little use, the other a person of excellent
accomplishments above all the rest of his Companions, his name was Atys;
concerning this Son Croesus dreamed that he was transfixed with a Javelin
headed with Iron: being awake and having considered of it he takes a Wife for
his Son, and whereas he was before General of all the Lydian forces, he would
not suffer him thenceforth to head them; all Spears, Javelins, Lances and such
like he removed from the Walls into inward Chambers, lest any should fall upon
his Son and kill him. About this time near the mount Olympus in Mysia, there
was a wild Boar of extraordinary bigness, destroying the labors of the
Mysians; and though they had diverse times assaulted him, yet were they
destroyed, and he no way endamaged. They therefore sent Ambassadors to Croesus
to beseech him to send them his Son, with a party of select young men, together
with some Dogs, that the Boar might be slain. Croesus remembering his dream,
refused to send his Son, but granted all the rest. His Son hearing their
Embassy and his refusal, expostulated with him the cause why he would not
suffer him to go with the rest? He thereupon tells him his dream; the young man
replied, That seeing it was upon the point of a weapon that he should dye, he
need not fear to send him to the Mysians, for his dream was not that he should
dye by Teeth, Tushes or the like. Croesus hereupon changed his determination,
and having resolved his Son should go this expedition, he called for Adrastus,
a valiant person who had ^led out of Phrygia to him, and told him that to his
care he would entrust his Son, in case they should be suddenly set upon by
Robbers in the way. To Mysia they went, found out the Boar, and having enclosed
him round, cast Darts and Javelins at him; here Adrastus threw a Javelin at the
Boar, but missing his aim he unfortunately therewith so wounded the Prince that
he presently dyed, and Adrastus unable to bear the grief of his error, slew
himself.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 22. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 21. c. 3. p. 762.
8. Alexander the Great was admonished by the Chaldeans that he should not enter
Babylon as being a place fatal to him, and not only so, but he had in his sleep
the Image of Cassander his Murderer presented to him; he thought he was killed
by him, and that he was advised to be a more careful preserver of his own life;
afterward when Cassander came first into his sight, (for he had never before
seen him) he enquired whose Son he was; when he was told it was the Son of
Antipater, though he knew it was that face whose image had appeared to him in
the night, he repeated a Greek verse, which would have no credit given to
dreams; and so clearing his mind of that suspicion he had conceived, gave
opportunity to Cassander to administer that poison which was already prepared
for him.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 19, 20. Sueton.
9. The last night that Julius Caesar was alive upon earth, he was told by
Calpurnia his Wife, that she had then newly dreamed, that she saw him lie dead
in her bosom done to death by many wounds, and being in great perplexity and
fright with her vision she desisted not with most importunate entreaties to
deterr him from going the next morning to the Senate House; he had also notice
by Spurina to beware of the Ides of March in which he was slain; nay in the
morning as he passed to the Senate, one thrust into his hands a note of all the
Conspirators, which he also shu^fled amongst the rest of his Papers and never
looked upon.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 21, 22. Lonic. Thea. p. 408. Heyw. Hier. l. 4. p. 225.
10. Aterius Ruf^us a Knight of Rome (when a great Sword-play was to be
performed by the Gladiators of Syracuse) dreamed the night before that one of
those kind of Fencers, which are called Retiarii (which use Nets in the Theater
to entangle their Adversaries with, that they should neither offend nor defend)
gave him a mortal wound, which dream he told to such of his Friends as sat
next him. It happened presently after that one of those Retiarii was forced by
his Adversary to the place where Aterius and his Friends were seated as
Spectators, whose face he no sooner beheld, but he started and told his
Friends, that he was the man from whose hands he had dreamed he received his
death, and would thereupon have departed; his Friends endeavor to detain him
by discussing his fear, and so occasioned his murder, for the Retiarius having
then compelled his Adversary to that very place, and overthrown him; while he
was busy to thrust his Sword through him as he lay prostrate, he so wounded
Aterius that he dyed upon it.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 5. p. 124.
11. Mauritius the Emperor dreamed that both himself and his whole Stock were
killed by one Phocas, not without some fearful apprehensions; he discourses
this dream of his unto Philippicus his Son-in-Law. Exact enquiry is made if any
could be found of that name, and in so numerous an Army as he had then, there
was but one, and he a Notary; he therefore supposed himself secure enough from
one of so low and mean a Fortune. But before he took any further course
therein, there was a mutiny in the Army, upon the detention of their pay; in
that tumult Phocas was saluted Emperor; the Army returning toward
Constantinople, Mauritius fled to Chalcedon, where both he and his whole
Progeny by the commandment of Phocas were put to death.

12. Marcus Antonius Taurellus Earl of Guastalla warring in the Kingdom of
Naples, Fulgos. l. ^. c. 5. p. 139.
one morning (as he rose) told the Soldiers that stood round about him, that
he dreamed that night that he was drowned in the Water, and that thereupon he
was determined to give over his swimming whereunto he had so much accustomed
himself; but the same day after Dinner walking by the side of a Lake, and
spying therein diverse of his acquaintance, and having only an upper Garment
upon him, he forgot his dream, leapt in amongst them, and was drowned before
any of his Friends could come in to his assistance.

13. Archias the Thebane Tyrant being at a Feast, Zuin. Thea. vol. 3. l. 3. p.
698.
where were present all sorts of merriment and mirth; there was brought him a
Letter, wherein he was certified of a plot that was upon his life; he never
read it, but gave order that as a thing serious it should be deferred to the
morrow; but neglecting that warning, he did not live to read it, for he was
slain that night.

14. It is a very memorable thing, Baker. Chro. p. 374. Drum. hist. Scotland,
p. 143, 144.
which (from the mouth of a very credible person who saw it) George Buchanan
relates, concerning James the fourth King of Scotland, that intending to make a
Wa^ with England, a certain old man of a venerable aspect, and clad in a long
blew Garment came unto him, at the Church of St. Michaels at Linlithgow, while
he was at his devotion, and leaning over the Canons Seat, where the King sat,
said, I am sent unto thee, O King, to give thee warning, that thou proceed not
in the War thou art about, for if thou do, it will be thy ruin; and having so
said, he withdrew himself back into the press; the King after service was ended
enquired earnestly for him, but he could no where be found, neither could any
of the standers by feel or perceive how, when or where he passed from them,
having as it were vanished in their hands; but no warning could divert his
destiny, which had not been destiny if it could have been diverted. His Queen
also had acquainted him with the visions and affrightments of her sleep, that
her Chains and Armlets appeared to be turned into Pearls, she had seen him fall
from a great Precipice, she had lost one of her eyes; but he answered these
were but dreams, arising from the many thoughts and cares of the day, he
marched on therefore and fell with a number of his Nobility, at the battle of
Flodden field, September 9. 1513.

15. There was an Italian called David Risio, Spotsw. hist. Chur. Scotl. l. 4.
p. 194.
who had followed the Savoyan Ambassador into Scotland, and in hope of
bettering his fortune, gave himself to attend the Queen Mary at first in the
quality of a Musician; afterward growing in more favor he was admitted to
write her French Letters, and in the end preferred to be principal Secretary of
State; had only the Queens Ear, and governed all the affairs at Court. To that
excess of Pride and Arrogance was he grown, that he would out-brave the King in
his Apparel, in his domestic Furniture, in the number and sorts of his Horses,
and in every thing else. This man had warning given him, more than once, by
John Damiott a French Priest, who was thought to have some skill in Magic, to
do his business and be gone, for that he could not make good his part; he
answered disdainfully, The Scots are given more to brag than fight. Some few
days before his death, being warned by the same Priest to take heed of the
Bastard, he replied, that whilst he lived he should not have credit in
Scotland to do him any hurt; for he took Earl Murray to be the man, of whom he
was advertised to take heed; but the first stroke was given him by George
Douglass, base Son to the Earl of Angus, after whom every man inflicted his
wound till he was dispatched, this was in the year 1565.

CHAP. LIII. Of such as have unwittingly, or unwarily procured and hastened
their own death and downfall.
THe Ancients erected no Altars to death, because it is inexorable, and no way
to be prevailed upon, or to be escaped by any of us; agreeable to this is that
of Mr. Benlows in his Divine Poem; Time posts on loose rein'd Steeds; the Sun
er't face
To West, may see thee end thy Race,
Death is a Nown, yet not declined in any Case.
No certainly we cannot decline it, for we run into the Jaws of death, by the
very same ways we endeavor to avoid it. The Sons of Esculapius sometimes dig
our graves even then while they are contriving for our health; rather than fail
we bespeak our Coffins with our own tongues, not knowing what we do; as in the
following Examples.

Davii. hist. of Civil Wars in France, l. 5. p. 357.
1. King Francis of France had resolved upon the murder of the chief Lords of
the Hugonots, this secret of Council had been imparted by the Duke of Anjou, to
Ligneroles his familiar friend; he being one time in the Kings Chamber,
observed some tokens of the Kings displeasure, at the insolent demands of some
Hugonot Lord, whom he had newly dismissed with show of favor: Ligneroles
either moved with the lightness incident to Youth, which often over-shoots
discretion, or moved with ambition not to be ignorant of the nearest secrets,
told the King in his ear, That his Majesty ought to quiet his mind with
patience, and laugh at their insolence, for within a few days, by that meeting
which was almost ripe, they would be all in his Net, and punished at his
pleasure: with which words the Kings mind being struck in the most tender
sensible part of it, he made show not to understand his meaning, and retired to
his private Lodgings, where full of anger, grief and trouble he sent to call
the Duke of Anjou, charged him with the revealing of this weighty secret; he
confessed he had imparted the business to Ligneroles, but assured him he need
not fear he would ever open his Lips to discover it; no more he shall, answered
the King, for I will take order that he shall be dispatched before he have time
to publish it; he then sent for George de Villequier Viscount of Guerchy, who
he knew bare a grudge against Ligneroles, and commanded him to endeavor by all
means to kill him that day, which was accordingly executed by him and Count
Charles of Mansfield, as he hunted in the field.

2. Candaules the Son of Myrsus and King of Lydia doted so much upon the beauty
of his own Wife, Herodot. l. 1. p. 5. Raleighs hist. World, part 1. l. 2. c.
25. p. 510. Just. hist. l. 1. p. 21. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 20. c. 1. p. 751.
that he could not be content to enjoy her, but would needs enforce one Gyges
the Son of Dascylus to behold her naked body, and placed the unwilling man
secretly in her Chamber where he might see her preparing to bedward. This was
not so closely carried, but that the Queen perceived Gyges at his going forth,
and understanding the matter, took it in such high disdain, that she forced him
the next day, to requite the Kings folly with treason; so Gyges being brought
again into the same Chamber by the Queen, slew Candaules, and was rewarded not
only with his Wife, but the Kingdom of Lydia also, wherein he reigned thirty
eight years.

3. Fredegundis was a woman of admirable beauty, M. de Serr. hist. Franc. p.
23. Lips^monit. l. 2. c. 2. p. 148. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 9. p. 1275. Fabia. hist.
tom. 1. p. 109.
and for that reason entertained by Chilperick King of France, over whose heart
she had gained such an empire that she procured the banishment of his Queen
Andovera, and the death of his Mother Galsuinda; yet neither was she faithful
to him, but prostituted her body to Landric de la Tour, Duke of France, and
Mayor of the Palace. Upon a day the King being to go a hunting, came up first
into her Chamber, and found her dressing her Head with her Back toward him; he
therefore went softly and struck her gently on the backpart with the hinder end
of his hunting Spear; she not looking back, What do thou do my Landrick, said
she, it is the part of a good Knight to charge a Lady before rather than
behind. By this means the King found her falsehood, and went to his purposed
hunting, but she perceiving her self discovered, sent for Landrick, told him
what had happened, and therefore enjoined him to kill the King for his and her
safety, which he undertook and effected that night as the King returned late
from his hunting.

4. Muleasses the King of Tunis was skilled in Astrology, Iov. Elog. p. 359.
Dinoth. memor. l. 6. p. 412.
and had found that by a fatal influx of the Stars he was to lose his Kingdom,
and also to perish by a cruel death; when therefore he heard that Barbarossa
was preparing a Navy at Constantinople, concluding it was against himself, to
withdraw from the danger, he departed Africa and transported himself into
Italy, to crave aid of Charles the Emperor against the Turks, who he thought
had a design upon him. In the mean time he had committed the government of his
Kingdom to Amida his Son, who like an ungrateful Traitor assumed to himself the
name and power of the King; and having taken his Father upon his return put out
his eyes: Thus Muleasses drew upon himself that fate he expected, by those very
means by which he hoped to have avoided it.

Wieri Oper. lib. de ira, p. 148.
5. There was an Astrologer, who had often and truly predicted the event of
diverse weighty affairs, who having intentively fixed his eyes upon the face of
Ioannes Galeacius, and contemplated the same; Dispose Sir, said he, of your
affairs with what speed you may, for it is impossible that you should live long
in this world: Why so, said Galeacius? Because, replied the other, the Stars
whose sight and position on your birthday I have well observed, do threaten
you, and that not obscurely, with death before such time as you shall attain to
maturity. Well, said Galeacius, you who believe in these positions of the
birth-day-stars, as if they were so many Gods; how long are you to live through
the bounty of the Fates, said he? I have a sufficient tract of time allotted
for my life; But, said Galeacius, that for the future (out of a foolish belief
of the bounty and clemency of the Fates) thou may not presume further upon
the continuance of life, than perhaps it is fit, thou shall dye forthwith,
contrary to thy opinion; nor shall the combined force of all the Stars in
Heaven be able to save thee from destruction, who presumest in this manner to
dally with the destiny of Illustrious persons; and thereupon commanded him to
be carried to Prison, and there strangled.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 163. Plat. de futili loquacitate p. 200.
6. Some persons at Syracuse discoursing in a Barbers shop concerning Dionysius,
they said his tyranny was adamantine, and utterly in^^^ugnable; What said the
Barber, do we speak thus of Dionysius, under whose throat I ever and anon hold
a Rasor? As soon as Dionysius was informed of this, he caused his Barber to be
crucified, and so he paid for his folly at the price of his life.

F^^th^m Resolv. cent. 2. c. 29. p. 220.
7. Though the Mushroom was suspected, yet was it Wine wherein Claudius the
Emperor first took his Poison; for being Maudlin-cupped he grew to lament the
destiny of his Marriages, which he said were ordained to be all unchaste, yet
should not pass unpunished: This threat being understood by Agrippina, she
thought it high time to look about her, and by securing him with a ready
poison, she provided to secure her self; so Claudius stands indebted to his
unwary tongue for his untimely death.

Joseph of the Jewish Wars, l. 1. c. 21. p. 606.
8. Herod overcome with pain, troubled with a vehement Cough, and almost pined
with fasting, was determined to hasten his own death; and taking an Apple in
his hand he called for a Knife, and then looking about him lest any stander by
should hinder him, he lifted up his Arm to strike himself; But Achiabus his
Cousin ran hastily unto him and stayed his hand, and presently there was great
lamentation made throughout all the Kings Palace, as if the King had been dead.
His Son Antipater then in Prison having speedy news hereof was glad, and
promised the Keepers a piece of money to let him go; but the chiefest of them
did not only deny to do it, but also went and immediately acquainted the King
with it. Herod hearing this, commanded his guard to go and kill Antipater and
bury him in the Castle called Hircanium. Thus was that wicked man cast away by
his own temerity and imprudence, who had he had more patience and discretion
might probably have secured both his life and the Kingdom to himself; for Herod
outlived his death but five days.

Ios. Antiq. l. 15. c. 4. p. 388.
9. Anthony being at Laodicea, sent for King Herod to answer what was objected
against him touching the death of Young Aristobulus. He was an impotent Lover
of his Wife Mariamne, and suspecting that her beauty was one cause of his
danger; before he went he committed the care of his Kingdom to Joseph his
Uncle, withal leaving him order to kill Mariamne his Wi^e in case he should
hear that any thing evil had befallen him. He had taken his journey, and Joseph
in Conversation with the Queen, as an argument of the great love the King bare
her, acquainted her with the order he had left with him. Herod having appeased
Anthony retur^ed with honor, and speaking to the Queen of the truth and
greatness of his love, in the midst of Embraces, Mariamne said to him, It was
not the part of a Lover to give commandment that if any thing should befall
thee otherwise than well with Anthony, I should presently be done to death. No
sooner were these words out of her mouth, but the King entered into a strange
passion, and giving over his embraces, he cried out with a loud voice, and tore
his hair, saying that he had a most evident proof that Joseph had committed
adultery with her, for that he would not have discovered those things which had
been spoke to him in secret, except they had greatly trusted the one the other;
and in this emotion or rage of Jealousy hardly contained he from killing his
Wife; yet he gave order that Joseph should be slain, without admitting him
audience or justification of his Innocence: Thus Joseph by his imprudent
revealing of a dangerous secret, unwarily procured his own death.

10. The Emperor Probus, Imperial hist. p. 290.
a great and excellent Prince, having well nigh brought the Empire into a quiet
and peaceable, from a troublesome and turbulent posture, was heard to say, that
he would speedily take such a course, that there should be no more need of Men
of War: This Speech was so distasted by the Soldiers, that they conspired
against him and procured his death.

CHAP. LIVE. Men of unusual misfortune in their Affairs, Persons or Families.
THe Ancients accounted him for a fool, who being himself but a man, would yet
upbraid another of his kind, with his calamity or misfortune. For what reason
can any man have to boast of his own estate, or to insult over another
unhappiness; when how pleasant a time soever he has for the present, he has
yet no assurance that it shall so continue with him until the evening; and
though he be never so near unto good fortune, yet he may possibly miss it, as
did the three Princes in the following Example.

1. Anastasius Emperor of Constantinople being greatly hated, Ca^s. h^l^
Court, tom. 2.. 5. p. 287.
and foreseeing he could not make much longer abode in the world; he began to
reflect on his Successors, desiring to transfer to the Throne one of his three
Nephews, whom he had bred up, having no male issue to succeed him. There was
difficulty in the choice, and he having a soul very superstitious, put that to
the lot which he could not resolve by reason, for he caused three Beds to be
prepared in the Royal Chamber, and made his Crown to be hanged within the
Tester of one of these Beds; being resolved to give it to him who by lot should
place himself under it: this done he sent for his Nephews, and after he had
magnificently entertained them, commanded them to repose themselves, each one
choosing one of the Beds prepared for them: The eldest accommodated himself
according to his fancy, and he hit upon nothing, the second did the same; he
then expected the youngest should go directly to the Crowned Bed, but he prayed
the Emperor he might be permitted to lie with one of his Brothers, and by this
means not any of them took the way of the Empire which was so easy to be had,
that it was not above a pace distant. Anastasius amazed, well saw God would
transfer the Diadem from his Race; and indeed Justin succeeded a stranger to
his blood.

Davil. hist. of Civil Wars of France, l. 4. p. 239.
2. Anne Momorancy was a man of an exquisite wit and mature wisdom, accompanied
with a long experience in the changes of the World, by which Arts he acquired
happily for himself and for his Posterity exceeding great wealth, and the chief
dignities of the Kingdom; himself having attained to be Constable of France.
But this man in his military commands, had always such ill fortune, that in
all the wars of which he had the Government, he ever remained either a loser,
or grievously wounded, or a Prisoner, which misfortunes were the occasion that
many times his fidelity was questioned; even in that last action, where
fighting he lost his life, he wanted not accusers.

Full. Worth. p. 334. Essex.
3. Thomas Tusser, while as yet a Boy, lived in many Schools, Wallingford, St.
Paul's and Eaton, whence he went to Trinity-hall in Cambridge; when a man, he
lived in Staffordshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and where not? He was
successively a Musician, Schoolmaster, Servingman, Husbandman, Grasier and
Poet, more skilful in all, than thriving in any Vocation; he traded at large,
in Oxen, Sheep, Dairies, Grain of all kinds to no profit; whether he bought or
sold he lost, and when a Renter impoverished himself, and never enriched his
Landlord, yet has he laid down excellent Rules of Husbandry and Huswifery, so
that the observer thereof must be rich in his own defense. He spread his Bread
with all sorts of Butter, yet none would stick thereon; yet I hear no man
charge him with any vicious extravagancy or visible carelessness, but imputing
his ill success to some occult cause in Gods Counsel.

Louic. Thea. p. 685. Canon. Chro. l. 3. p. 528.
4. The Emperor Sigismumd passing a River, his Horse stood still and pissed in
it, which when one of his Servants perceived that rode not far before him, he
said jestingly, the Horse had directly the same quality with his Master. Caesar
heard him, and bade him explain the meaning of what he said. The horse, said
he, pisses in a river where there is no want of water, and so Caesar is liberal
to them that are otherwise rich. The Emperor observed that he was modestly
taxed for that as yet he had given nothing to him, who had been his old
servant; and thereupon replied, that he had indeed been always a faithful
servant, but that the gifts of Princes are not properly theirs that deserve
well, but theirs to whom they are destinied by fate, and that he would convince
him of the same as soon as he had some leisure. Afterward Caesar commanded two
boxes to be made, of the same bigness and form, in the one he put gold, in the
other lead of the same weight, caused his servant to be called and bade him
choose which box he would, who takes them up, poises both in his hands, and at
last fixes upon that box that had the lead in it; which when the Emperor saw
at the opening of the box; Now said he thou may plainly see, that not my good
will has been hitherto wanting, but that it was through thine own ill fortune
that hitherto thou have had no reward from me.

5. It was observed as it were in the destiny of King Henry the sixth of
England, Baker. Chro. p. 283.
that although he was a most pious man, yet no enterprise of war did ever
prosper where he was present.

6. Franciscus Busalus a Citizen of Rome, Job. Textor. Officin. l. 2. c. 23. p.
98.
was so extremely unfortunate in his Children, that he saw two of his Sons fall
dead by mutual wounds they had received at each others hands; two other of his
Sons beheaded, for a sedition which they had been authors of; a fifth Son of
his slew his Mother-in-law; and his Daughter poisoned her self in the presence
of her Husband.

7. Helvius Pertinax (commonly but corruptly called Aelius) was so variously
exercised with the chances of inconstant fortune, Voss. Instit. Orator. l. 4.
c. 6.. 10. p. 97.
and so often from a good, thrust down into an adverse condition, that by
reason hereof he was called Fortunes Tennis-ball.

8. Robert the Norman, Son to William the Conqueror, was chosen King of
Jerusalem, Full. holy war, l. 2. c. 1. p. 44. Camb. Brit. p. 255.
but he refused this honorable proffer; whether he had an eye to the Kingdom
of England, now void by the death of William Rufus, or because he accounted
Jerusalem would be encumbred with continual war. But he who would not take the
Crown with the Cross, was fain to take the Cross without the Crown; and it was
observed that afterward he never prospered in any thing he undertook. He lived
to see much misery in prison and poverty, and he felt more, having his eyes put
out by King Henry his Brother; and at last sound rest, when buried in the New
Cathedral Church of Gloucester under a wooden Monument, bearing better
proportion to his low fortunes than high birth, and since in the same Quire he
has got the company of another Prince as unfortunate as himself, King Edward
the second.

9. Tiberius being at Capreas, Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 8. p. 476, 477.
fell into a lingering disease, and his sickness increasing more and more, he
commanded Euodus whom he most honored amongst all his Freemen, to bring him
the young Tiberius and Caius, because he intended to talk with them before he
dyed, and it should be at the break of day on the morrow next. This done he
besought the gods of that place, to give him an evident sign whereby he might
know who should succeed him; for though he vehemently desired to leave the
Empire to his Sons Son (that was Tiberius) yet made he more account of that
which God should make manifest to him. He therefore conceived a presage, that
he who the next day should enter first to salute him, it should be he who in
the Empire should necessarily succeed him. And having settled this thing in his
fancy, he sent unto the young Tiberius his Master, charging him to bring him
unto him by break of day, supposing that the Empire should be his. But by the
evil fortune of Tiberius it fell quite contrary to his Grandfathers
expectation: For being in this thought he had commanded Euodus, that as soon as
day should arise he should suffer him of the two young Princes to enter in unto
him, who should arrive the first. Who walking out met with Caius at the door of
the Chamber, and saying to him that the Emperor had called for him, suffered
him to enter; Tiberius the mean while being at breakfast below. When the
Emperor beheld Caius, he suddenly began to consider of the power of God, who
deprived him of the means to dispose of the Empire according as he had
determined with himself; so Caius was declared successor in the Empire, and no
sooner was the old Emperor dead, but the young unfortunate Tiberius was made
away.

Brus. faceti. l. 3. c. 22. p. 223.
10. Antiochus was overcome in battle by his brother Seleucus; whereupon he fled
to Artamenes King of Cappadocia, his brother-in-law; where after some days he
found there was a Conspiracy against him to betray his life. He got him
therefore away from thence with all speed, and put himself into the protection
of Ptolomaeus his Enemy, supposing that he might better rely upon his
generosity, than any kindness he could expect from his brother. But Ptolomaeus
at his first arrival put him into custody under special guards. Here he
remained a while, till by the help of a certain Harlot, he escaped from his
prison, and recovered his liberty; but this unfortunate Prince had not
traveled far but he was set upon by thieves, and by them murdered.

Ferd. Mend. Pinto his Voyages, c. 1. p. 1, 2.
11. Ferdinand Mendez Pinto a Portuguese, in the Book of his travels and
adventures sets forth of himself, that nothing being to be met with in his
Fathers house besides poverty and misery, an Uncle of his put him into the
service of a Lady at Lisbon, when he was about twelve years old; where he
remained but a year and a half, before he was constrained by an accident to
quit her house and service, for the safety of his life. With this unfortunate
beginning he put himself upon travel, and the seeing of remote parts, where all
along Fortune continued so extremely unkind to him, that in the space of twenty
one years, wherein he was abroad (besides the hardships and variety of evil
accidents that strangers are liable unto) he suffered shipwreck five times, was
thirteen times a Captive, and sold for a slave seventeen times; in the Indies,
Aethiopia, Arabia, China, Tartaria, Madagascar, Sumatra, and diverse other
Kingdoms.

CHAP. LV. Of the Loquacity of some men, their inability to retain entrusted
secrets, and the punishment thereof.
Bruson. Ex. l. 6. c. 6. p. 418.
THe City of Amyclas is said to have perished through silence, and it was on
this manner: Diverse rumors and false reports had been brought to the
Magistrates concerning the coming of an enemy against them; by reason of which
the City had several times been put into disorderly and tumultuous frights;
they therefore set forth an Edict, that for the future no man should presume to
make any such report; by this means when the enemy came indeed no man durst
discover it for fear of the Law, so they were suddenly oppressed and
overthrown; but how numberless are they who have perished through the
intemperance of the tongue?

1. Fulvius one of the favorites and minions of Augustus the Emperor, Plat.
Mor. lib. de ^util. loquacit. p. 199.
having heard him toward his later days lamenting and bewail^ng the desolate
estate of his House, in that he had no Children of his own body begotten; and
that of his three Nephews or Sisters Children two were dead, and Posthumous
(who only remained alive) upon an imputation upon him confined and living in
banishment, whereupon he was enforced to bring in his Wifes Son, and declare
him his successor in the Empire. Notwithstanding upon a tender compassion, he
was sometime in deliberation with himself, and minded to recall his Sisters Son
from banishment. Fulvius, I say, being privy to these moans and designs of his,
when home and told his Wife all that he had heard; she could not hold, but went
to the Empress Livia Wife of Augustus, and reported what her Husband Fulvius
had told her. Whereupon Livia in great indignation did sharply expostulate with
Caesar in these terms, Seeing, said she, you had so long projected such a thing
as to call home your Nephew, why sent you not for him at the first, but exposed
me to hatred and enmity with him, who shall be Emperor after your decease? The
next morning betimes when Fulvius came as his manner was to salute Caesar, and
give him good morrow; after he had said God save you, Caesar; he resaluted him
with this, God make you wise Fulvius. Fulvius soon sound him, and conceived
presently what he meant thereby; he retired then to his House with all speed,
and having called his Wife; Caesar, said he, is come to the knowledge, that I
have not concealed his secret, and therefore I am resolved to make away my self
with mine own hands. And well worthy, quoth she, for justly have you deserved
death, who having lived so long with me, knew not all this while the
incontinency of my tongue, nor would beware of it; yet suffer me first to dye
upon your Sword, and so killed her self before her Husband.

2. A Barber who kept Shop at the end of the Suburbs called Pyraeum, Plut.
moral. lib. de sutil. loquacit. p. 200, 201.
had no sooner heard of the great discomfiture of the Athenians in Sicily, from
a certain slave fled from thence out of the field, but leaving his Shop at six
and sevens, he ran directly into the City, to carry the tidings fire new. For
fear some other might the honor win,
And he too late, or second should come in.
Now upon the broaching of these unwelcome tidings, there was a great stir
within the City; the people assembled to the Market place; search was made for
the author of this rumor; hereupon the Barber was haled before the body of the
people, and examined, he knew not so much as the name of the party of whom he
heard the news. The whole assembly was so moved to anger, that they cried out
Away with the Villain, set the Varlet upon the Rack, have him to the Wheel who
has devised this story of his own singers ends. The Wheel was brought, the
Barber her was stretched upon it; mean while came certain news of that defeat,
then brake up the assembly, leaving the Barber racked out at length upon the
Wheel till it was late in the evening, when he was let loose, and no sooner was
he at liberty, but he must enquire news of the Executioner what they heard
abroad of the General Nicias, and in what manner he was stain.

Plut. moral. lib. de sutil. loquac. p. 291.
3. The Temple of Juno at Sparta was robbed, and within it was found an empty
Flagon; great running there was and a concourse of people thither, and men
could not tell what to make of the Flagon; when one that was there said, My
conceit of the Flagon is, that these Church-robbers had first drunk the juice
of Hemlock before they entered into this action, and afterward brought Wine
with them in this Flagon, that in case they were not taken in the manner, they
might save their lives by drinking a good draught of Wine, the nature of which
is (as you know) to dissolve the strength of that Poison, but if they were
taken, they might by the means of that Hemlock dye an easy death, before they
were put to torture by the Magistrate. The whole company that heard these
words, concluded that such a reach as this came not from one that barely
suspected the matter, but knew it was so indeed; whereupon they flocked round
about him; one asked who and whence he was, a second who knew him, a third how
he came to the light of all he had delivered? and in short they handled the
matter so well, that they in the end forced him to confess, that he was one of
them that committed the Sacrilege.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Succession of the Roman and Western Emperors.
1. JVlius Caesar, the last of Dictatours and first of Emperors; in memory of
whom the following Emperors were called Caesar's; his Exploits are famous in
the Gallick, German, British and Civil Wars, in which he is said to be
Victorious in fifty set Battles. He reformed the Calendar; from him we retain
the Julian Account. His Motto was Semel quam semper; and he was murdered in the
Senate with twenty three wounds. Sueton. Heyl. Sympson. Joseph. etc.

2. C. Octavianus Caesar, to him the Senate gave the name of Augustus; he added
to the Roman Empire the Provinces of N^ricum, Pannonia, Rhaetia, a great part
of Spain, and all Egypt: In the forty second of his Reign the Lord Christ was
born. His Motto was, Festina lent, sut cito si sat been; having Reigned fifty
six years he died at Nola. Sueton. Heyl. etc.

3. Tiberius Nero, Son-in-law of Augustus, subdued many German Nations, and
added Galatia and Cappadocia to the Empire; in the fifteenth of his Reign our
Savior suffered. His Motto was, Melius est tondere, quam deglubere; he Reigned
twenty two years. Suet. Joseph.

4. C. Caligula, the son of Germanicus. His Motto was, Oderint dum meluant; he
was slain by Cassius Cherea and Cornel. Sabinus, after he had lived twenty nine
and Reigned three years. Suet. Joseph.

5. Claudius Caesar, in his time fell the Famine predicted by Agabus; his Motto
was, Generis virtus Nobilitas. He was poisoned by his Wife Agrippina with a
Mushrome, after he had Reigned thirteen years.

6. Domitius Nero, he was the Author of the first great Persecution; he fired
Rome and charged it upon the Christians; his Motto was, Quaevis terra. Artem
alit; despairing of safety he slew himself after he had Reigned thirteen years.
Suet. Joseph.

7. Sergius Sulpitius Galba, elected by the French and Spanish Legions; his
Motto was, Legendus est miles non emendus; he was slain by the Soldiers, aged
seventy three, and having Reigned seven Months. Sueton.

8. M. Salvius Otho made Emperor by the Praetorian Soldiers; his Motto was,
Vnus promultis; he stabbed himself in the thirty eighth year of his age, having
Reigned but ninety five days. Sueton.

9. Aul. Vitellius was elected by the German Legions; his Motto was, Bonus est
odor hostia, melior civis occisi; he was slain by the Soldiers in the fifty
seventh year of his age, having Reigned eight Months or thereabouts. Sueton.

10. Flavius Vespasianus, chosen by the Syrian and Iudaean Armies; he brought
Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Samos, Thrace, and Syria Comagene, under the form of
Roman Provinces; his Motto was, Bonus odor lucri ex re qualibet; he died of a
Flux, aged sixty nine, and having Reigned nine years. Sueton.

11. Titus Vespasianus, the Conqueror of the Jews; his Motto was, Princeps
Bonus orbis amor; he is supposed to be poisoned by his brother Domitian in the
^orty first year of his age, and having Reigned but two years and two Months.
Sueton.

12. Flavius Domitianus raised the second Persecution against the Christians;
his Motto was, Fallax bonum Regnum; he was stabbed by Stephanus in the forty
fifth of his age, having Reigned fifteen years. Sueton.

13. Nerva Cocceius, a Noble Senator; his Motto was, Men's bona Regnum
possidet; he died of a weakness in the stomach in the sixty sixth year of his
age, having Reigned one year and four Months. Symps. chapter hist. cent. 1. p. 17.

14. Vlpius Trajanus, a Spaniard, made Dacia a Province of the Empire, subdued
Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, and caused the third Persecution; his Motto
was, Qualis Rex, talis Grex; he died suddenly, aged sixty one, having Reigned
nineteen years six Months.

15. Aelius Adrianus his Motto was, Non mihi sed populo; he died aged sixty
three, having Reigned twenty years. Syms.

16. Antoninus Pius his friendship was sought by the very Indians; his Motto
was, Melius est servare unum, quam occidere mill; he died of a Fevor, aged
seventy five, and Reigned twenty three. Symps.

17. Antoninus Philosophus associated with him his brother L. Verus, by whom he
subdued the Parthians; he raised the fourth Persecution; his Motto was, Regni
clementia custos; he Reigned nineteen years. Symps. chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 21.

18. L. Anton. Commodus, his Motto was, Pedetentim and Paulatim; he was
strangled in the thirty first year of his age, after he had Reigned thirteen
years. Symps. chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 23.

19. P. Aelius Pertinax, made Emperor against his will; his Motto was,
Militenius; he was slain by the Praetorian Guards in the seventieth year of his
age, having Reigned six Months. Symps. chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 24.

20. Didius Iulianus bought the Empire of the Soldiers; his Motto was, In
pretio pretium; he was slain by the Soldiers, having Reigned but sixty six
days.

21. Septimius Severus, he raised the fifth Persecution; his Motto was,
Laboremus; he died at York in the fifty sixth of his age, having Reigned
seventeen years eight Months.

22. Bassianus Caracalla, his Motto was, Omnis in serro salus; he was slain by
Martialis; aged twenty nine, having Reigned seven years six Months.

23. Opilius Macrinus made Emperor by the men of War; his Motto was, Ferendum
ac Sperandum; he was slain in the City of Chalcedon, aged fifty four, having
Reigned not full one year.

24. Antoninus Heliogabalus, a prodigious belly god; his Motto was, Suns sibi
quisque haeres optimus; he was murdered by the Praetorian Soldiers, aged
nineteen, having Reigned four years.

25. Aurel. Severus Alexander, his Motto was, Quod tibi hoc Alteri; he was
slain by the Soldiers, aged twenty nine, having Reigned thirteen years and
nine days.

26. Maximinus, a Thracian of obscure birth; he raised the sixth Persecution;
his Motto was, Quo major hoc laboriosior; he was slain in his Tent by the
Soldiers at the Siege of Aquileia, having Reigned three years.

27. M. Antonius Gordianus, elected by the Senate; his Motto was, Pro patria
mori pulchrum; he and his son cut off Pupienus and Balbinus, and Gordianus,
Nephew to the former, succeeded: the two former made away by the Soldiery,
young Gordianus held the Empire alone; his Motto was, Princeps miser quem latet
veritas; he is accounted to have Reigned six years, and was then slain.

28. Julius Philippus, supposed by some to be a Christian, his Motto was,
Malitia Regno idonea; he Reigned five years, seven says Eusebius, and was
slain by the Soldiery.

29. Decius, Author of the seventh Persecution; his Motto was, Apex Magistratus
autoritas; he was slain by the Goths, after he had Reigned two years.

30. Trebonianus Gallus, with his son Volusianus, his Motto was, Nemo amicus
idem and Adulator; they were both slain in Battle, having Reigned two years.

31. Aemilianus his Motto was, Non Gens, sed Men's; he was slain by the
Soldiery when he had Reigned three Months.

32. Valerianus, Author of the eighth Persecution, his Motto was, Non acerba
sed blanda; at seventy years of age he was taken by Sapores the Persian, and
made his footstool; he Reigned seven years.

33. Galienus, son of the former, in his time stood up the thirty Tyrants that
were confounded by one another; his Motto was, Prope ad summum, prope ad
exitum; he was slain after he had Reigned eight years.

34. Claudius his Motto was, Rex viva lex; having Reigned two years he fell
sick, and dying left the Empire to his brother.

35. Quintilius, who finding himself too weak to retain it, voluntarily bled to
death, after he had Reigned seventeen days, to whom succeeded

36. Valerius Aurelianus, Author of the ninth Persecution, his Motto was, Quo
major eo placabilior; he Reigned six years, and was slain by the procurement of
Mnestheus his Secretary.

37. Annius Tacitus, elected by the Senate, his Motto was, Sibi bonus, aliis
malus; he died of a Fevor in Tarsus, having Reigned but six Months left all to
his brother

38. Florianus, who died voluntarily bleeding, having Reigned but two Months,
to whom succeeded

39. Aurelius Probus subdued the Germans and Persians; his Motto was, Pro stipe
labor; he was murdered by the Soldiers, having Reigned six years and three
Months.

40. Carus, with his two sons, Carinus and Numerianus, their Motto's were,
Bonus dux, bonus comes; that of Carinus was Cedendum multitudini; and
Numerianus had Esto quod audis. The Father was slain by Lightning, Carinus in
Battle, and Numerianus by his Father-in-law Arrius Aper; all three Reigned
about three years.

41. Aulus Valor. Diocletianus, he raised the tenth Persecution; his Motto was,
Nil difficilius quam been imperare; he resigned the Empire, and lived
privately; he Reigned twenty years with Maximinianus, and five Caesar's, one
whereof was

42. Constanti^^ Chlorus was a virtuous and valiant Prince, a great favourer of
the Christians. Many of his Servants about him were professed Christians: these
he told that unless they would Sacrifice to Idols, they must resolve to quit
his Service; a day of trial was appointed, and then such as Sacrificed he
turned away, saying, That such as were unfaithful to God, could never be
otherwise to him: but the other who could not be drawn to Sacrifice, these he
kept with him, and both commended and honored; his Motto was, Virtus dum
patitur vincit.

43. Flavius Constantinus, son of Chlorus, surnamed Magnus, or the Great, the
first Emperor who countenanced the Gospel, and embraced it publicly, which he
is said to have done on this occasion. At the same time that he was saluted
Emperor in Britain, Maxentius was chosen at Rome by the Praetorian Soldiers,
and Licinius, named successor by Maximus, the Associate of his Father Chlorus.
Being pensive and solicitous upon these distractions, he cast his eyes upwards
toward Heaven, where he saw in the Air a lightsom Pillar in the form of a
Cross, whereon he read these words, In hoc vince, in this overcome. The next
night our Savior appeared to him in a Vision, commanded him to bear that
Figure in his Standard, and he should overcome all his enemies; this he
performed, and was accordingly Victorious. From this time he not only favored
the Christians, but became a zealous Professor of the Faith and Gospel; his
Motto was, Immedicabile vulnus Ense rescindendum; he died aged sixty five,
having Reigned thirty one years.

44. Constans, the youngest son of Constantinus the Great, his brother
Constantine being dead, in the third year of his Reign, remained sole Emperor
of the West; his Motto was, Crescente superbia decrescit Fortuna.

45. Constantius, the other of Constantines sons, succeeded Constans in his
part, after his decease uniting the divided Empire into one Estate. He turned
Arian, Persecuted the Orthodox, and died of a bloody Flux in the forty fifth
year of his age, and twenty fifth of his Reign.

46. Valentinian, Emperor of the West, his brother Valens Ruling in
Constantinople and the Eastern parts: a good and virtuous Prince, restored to
the Church her Liberties and Possessions; his Motto was, Princeps servator
justus.

47. Valentinian the second, youngest son of the former Valentinian.

48. Honorius the second, son of Theodosius the Emperor; in his time Alarick,
with the Goths, invaded Italy, Sacked Rome, and made themselves Masters of the
Country; his Motto was, Male partum male disperit.

49. Valentinian the third, during his time Atila and the Hunnes made foul work
in Italy; and the Vandals seized upon Africa, as they did on Italy and Rome
also, after his decease. He was murdered by Maximinus, a Roman, whose Wife he
had trained to the Court and ravished; his Motto was, Omnia mea mecum porto.

50. Maximinus having slain Valentinian the third, succeeded in the Empire: but
on the coming of the Vandals, whom Eudoxia the former Empress l^ad drawn into
Italy, he was stoned to death by his own Soldiers.

51. Avitus chosen Emperor in a Military Tumult.

52. Majoranus.

53. Severus.

54. Anthemius at the end of five years was slain by Recimer, a Suevian born,
the chief Commander of the Army: this man had an aim at the Empire himself, but
he died as soon as he had vanquished and slain Anthemius.

55. Olybrius an Emperor of four Months only.

56. Glictrius, another of as little note.

57. Julius Nepos, deposed by Orestes a Noble Roman, who gave the Empire to his
son, called at first Momillus: but after his assuming the Imperial Title he was
called as in contempt

58. Augustulus, the last of the Emperors who resided in Italy, vanquished by
Odoacer, King of the Heruli and Turingians: Thus an Augustus raised this
Empire, and an Augustulus ruined it. After this, the Goths and Lombards, and
other Nations obtained the Dominion of the West: yet notwithstanding their
prevailing power for about three hundred years, they all of them abstained from
the Name, Dignity and Style of Emperors, till at length

59. Carolus Magnus was Anointed and Crowned Emperor by Leo the third in Rome,
a prudent and Godly Emperor, favored the Christians; died in the seventy
first year of his age, and was buried at Aken.

60. Ludovicus Pius, so called for his gentle and meek behavior; he gave away
that right, That no man should be elected Pope without the consent and
allowance of the Emperor; and thereby opened a door to all mischief, which
after followed; he Reigned twenty six years; his Motto was, Omnium rerum
vicissitudo.

61. Ludovicus the second, Surnamed the Ancient, Reigned twenty one years, and
dying without Children, his brother

62. Carolus Calvus, King of France, by gifts obtained at the hands of the
Bishop of Rome, to be anointed Emperor; he enjoyed the Title but two years,
and was poisoned by one Zedechias a Jew, his Physician.

63. Carolus Crassus, son of Lewis the Ancient, he Reigned ten years; in his
time the Normans made desolations in France; Crassus for his negligence and
evil Government, was deposed; his Motto was, Os garrulum intricat omnia.

64. Arnulphus, Nephew of the former, Crowned Emperor by Pope Formosus,
besieging the Wife of Guido, Duke of Spoleto, she hired some of his Servants,
who gave him a cup of poison, which brought him into a Lethargy, and three
days sleeping continually; after this he arose sick, left the Siege and died;
his Motto was, Facilis descensus averni.

65. Lewis the third his son succeeded: in his time the Hungars invaded Italy,
France, and Germany, as the Saracens did Calabria and Apulia; he Reigned ten
years; his Motto was, Multorum manus, paucorum consilium.

66. Conrade, the son of Conrade, the brother of Lewis the third; he was the
last of the Offspring of Charles the Great, who had enjoyed the Empire of the
West one hundred and twelve years, after whom the Empire was transferred to the
Saxons; his Motto was, Fortuna cum blanditur fallit.

67. Henricus Auceps, or the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, for wisdom and magnanimity
worthy of so high a place; he vanquished the Hungars, made the Slavonians and
Bohemians Tributaries to him; and purged his Dominions from Simony, an
universal fault almost in those days his Motto was, Piger ad poenas, ad
praemia velox.

68. Otho the first his son succeeded, was molested with many Foreign and
Domestic Wars: his son Lyndolphus Rebelled against him, but was by him
overcome: Otho prospering in all his Enterprises, had the Surname of Great;
after he had declared his son to be Emperor, he died and was buried at
Magdeburg in a Church himself had builded; his Motto was, Aut mors, aut vita
decora.

69. Otho the second, son of the former, succeeded: a virtuous Prince: he
prevailed against Henry, Duke of Bavaria, who contended with him for the
Empire; he died at Rome, was buried in the Church of St. Peter; his Motto was,
Pacem cum hominibus, cum vitiis bellum.

70. Otho the third, but eleven years of age when his Father died: he was wise
above his years, and therefore called Mirabile mundi, or the wonder of the
World; by his advice Gregory the fifth instituted the seven Electors of the
Empire. Unhappy in his Wife Mary of Arragon, a barren Harlot. A pair of
empoysoned Gloves sent him by the Widow of Crescentius, procured his death; he
was buried at Aken; and his Motto was, Vnita virtus valet.

71. Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria, declared to be Emperor by the Princes
Electors: a wise, valiant and good Emperor: he subdued all his Rebels, and
expelled the Saracens out of Italy. In his time Swain, King of Denmark,
invaded England, and subdued it to his obedience; he Reigned twenty two years,
say some, eighteen says Platina; his Motto is, Ne quid nimis.

72. Conrade the second, Duke of Franconia, elected three years after the death
of Henry; in the interregnum, many Cities of Italy desirous of Liberty,
deserted their subjection to the Emperor: but Conrade was a wise and valiant
Warrior, and soon reduced them to their wonted obedience; his Symbol was,
Omnium mores tuos imprimis obser^a; he was buried at Spires.

73. Henry the third, Surnamed Niger; he removed three seditious Antipopes, and
appointed for the true Pope Clemens the second; he married the daughter of
Canutus the Dane, then King of England; Reigned seventeen years, and died in
the thirty fifth year of his age; his Motto was, Qui litem aufert, execrationem
in benedictionem mutat.

74. Henry the fourth, son of the former, in whose days the Popes began to
usurp Authority over the Emperors, insomuch that Leo the ninth having received
the Popedom at the Emperors hands, repented himself of it, put off his Papal
Vestments, went to Rome a private person, and was there new chosen by the
Clergy. This was done by the persuasion of a Monk called Hildebrand, who being
afterward made Pope by the name of Gregory the seventh, Excommunicated this
Henry, the first Prince that was ever Excommunicated by a Pope of Rome; he was
valiant, wise and eloquent; his son being stirred up against him, he died
partly of sickness, and partly of sorrow; his Motto, Multi multa sciunt, se
autem nemo.

75. Henry the fifth succeeded his Father, went to Rome to be Crowned Emperor
by Pope Paschalis the second. The Pope would not consent to his Coronation,
except he did first give over all right of Election of the Pope, and all right
of investment of Bishops by Staff and Ring; the Emperor grieved with the proud
carriage of the Pope, laid hands upon him and his Cardinals, and compelled them
to perfect his Coronation, and to confirm his Privileges of Electing Popes and
investiture of Bishops. But the Emperor once returned into Germany, the Pope
revoked all he had done, and Cursed the Emperor: who hearing what was done,
marched to Rome with an Army: the Pope fled into Apulia: the Emperor departed
into Germany again; when wearied with his seditious Bishops, over affectionate
to the Pope, he bought some Peace by yielding up his rights; and was the last
Emperor of the House of Franconia; his Motto was, Mortem optare malum, timere
pejus.

76. Lotharius, Duke of Bavaria, seized on the Empire without any Election, was
reconciled to the German Princes by the means of St. Bernard. Contention being
betwixt Innocentius and Anacletus for the Popedom, the Emperor with an Army
established Innocentius; he Reigned thirteen years; his Motto was, Audi and
alteram partem.

77. Conrade the third, Duke of Sueve, and Sisters son to the Emperor Henry
the fifth, was Elected Emperor. The Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria Rebelled
against him, whom he easily subdued. After which he led an Army against the
Turks and Saracens, but was betrayed by the deceitful promises of Emanuel the
Greek Emperor, who sent him to the Siege of Iconium Meal mingled with Lime,
whereby the Army was empoysoned, huge numbers of them died, so that Conrade
left the Siege of Iconium, and went back to Thracia. He Reigned fifteen years;
his Motto, Pauca cum aliis tecum multa.

78. Frederick the first, Surnamed Barbarossa, Duke of Sueve, Crowned at Rome
by Adrian the fourth: and not long after Excommunicated by Pope Alexander the
third, to whom he was fain at last to submit himself, the Pope insolently
treading on his neck, and abusing the words of Scripture, Super Aspidem and
Basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis leonem and draconem: the Emperor
answered, Non tibi sed Petro: the proud Pope replied, Et mihi and Petro. The
Emperor not willing to give any further occasion of offense, held his peace,
and so was absolved and his son then Prisoner at Venice (for love of whom he
had done all this) set at Liberty. He went after to the Holy Land, where he
discomfited the Turks in three great Battles: there he died, being drowned in a
River, into which he went to bathe himself; he Reigned thirty and nine years;
was buried at Tyrus; his Motto was, Qui neseit dissimulare, nescit regnare.

79. Henry the sixth his son was declared Emperor, Crowned by Pope Celestine
the second, who took Constantia, the daughter of Rogerius, out of a Monastery
and gave her to him in Marriage, with both Sicilyes in a way of Dowry.
Whereupon Henry took Tancredus, the young King of Sicily, put out his eyes,
thrust him into a Monastery, and used great cruelty against the Bishops and
other Inhabitants of Sicily; the Pope did Excommunicate him for this: but he
went to Rome, acknowledged his fault, and obtained his pardon, together with a
confirmation of the Kingdom of Sicily. After this the Pope solicited him to the
holy War; in his Journey toward Asia he died at Messina; his Motto was, Qui
nescit tacere, nescit loqui.

80. Philip, Duke of Sueve, brother of Henry the sixth, took on him the
Imperial Title contrary to the mind of Innocentius the then Pope: For this the
Pope did Excommunicate him, and caused the Bishop of Colen, and other Electors,
to make Otho Duke of Saxony Emperor, between whom and Philip were fought
diverse Battles: but Philip so defended himself, that he held the Crown Imperial
all his lifetime in despite of both. In the end, Peace was made betwixt the
Emperor and the Pope; not long after which, the Emperor was cruelly murdered
in his own Chamber by Otho Count Palatine; he Reigned ten years; his Motto was,
Satius est currere quam male currere.

81. Otho the fourth, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria (who married the daughter of
Philip, and was appointed his Successor) was Crowned Emperor by Pope Innocent
the third; he neglecting the usual largess at his Coronation, the Romans abused
his Servants, whereupon he departed Rome in great discontent, fell upon certain
Towns belonging to the Pope, for which he was Excommunicated, and vanquished in
Brabant by the Faction raised up against him; he relinquished the Empire to his
Competitor; he Reigned nineteen years; his Motto was, Anser strepit inter
olores.

82. Frederick the second, King of Sicily and Naples, son to Henry the sixth,
was consecrated and called Augustus by Pope Honorius the third, where he
admitted what constitutions the Pope would: who notwithstanding, supported his
Rebels against him. The Emperor did expostulate the unseemliness of the deed
with him, who thereupon was so chafed, that he Cursed and Excommunicated the
Emperor: but they were reconciled. Then he led an Army into Asia, where he
recovered the Possession of the Realm of Jerusalem. At his return again
Excommunicated: not long after poisoned.

83. Contradus the fourth, son of Frederick last Emperor of the House of
Schwaben, subdued his Rebels in Apulia, and the Kingdom of Naples, but he was
soon cut off by his brother Manfred, who caused him to be empoysoned, after he
had Reigned two years.

84. Rodolphus the first, by the joint consent of the Princes Electors
Assembled at Frankfort, was chosen Emperor; he was the raiser of the Austrian
Family; had deadly War with Ottocarus, King of Bohemia, whom he overthrew and
slew in Battle; he Reigned eighteen years: was buried at Spires; his Motto was,
Melius been imperare quam imperium ampliare.

85. Adolphus, Count of Nassau, was chosen Emperor; he was unfortunate in all
things he went about: and therewith so needy and poor, that when he had
received money of King Edward the first of England, to aid him against the
French, he spent the money upon his Household, and had not wherewith to fulfill
his promise when time required. He was overthrown by Albert, Duke of Austria,
in the Fields of Spire, and there slain, having Reigned six years; his Motto
was, Animus est qui divites facit.

86. Albert, son of Rodulphus, the Emperor, himself being Duke of Austria; in
his time happened seven things remarkable: As 1. The removal of the Papal seat
from Rome to Avignion. 2. The subversion of the Knights Templars. 3. The
settling of the Knights of St. John in the Rhodes. 4. The Scaligers in Verona.
5. Estei in Ferrara. 6. The first Jubilee at Rome in the West. And 7. The
beginning of the Ottomans in the East. He Reigned ten years, and was slain by
his brothers son; his Motto was, Quod optimum illud and jucundissimum.

87. Henry the seventh, Earl of Luxemburg, a pious, prudent and valorous
Prince; having composed matters in Germany, he hastened to do the like in
Italy, where he omitted no opportunity to give all content: Yet he was
tumultuously driven out of Rome by the Faction of the Vrsini, and through
hatred of the Florentines poisoned in the Eucharist, by one Bernard an hired
Monk; that passes for his Motto which he uttered upon the first feeling of the
operation of the poison, Calix vitae, Calix mortis.

88. Lewis the fourth, Duke of Bavaria, Crowned at Aix in the wonted manner; he
was opposed by Frederick, Duke of Austria, who was chosen by another Faction;
cruel Wars were between the Competitours, wherein at last Lewis overcame, took
the other Prisoner: then came to this agreement, Both to keep the Title of
Emperors, but Lewis to have the right and power; after which he was
Excommunicated, and the Electors commanded to choose a new Emperor, which they
obeyed; his Motto was, Sola bona quae honesta.

89. Charles the fourth, son of John, King of Bohemia, and Grandson to Henry
the seventh; against him were set up Edward the third of England, Frederick of
Misui, and Gunter of Swartzburg: whereof the first waved the dignity with such
trouble; the second was bribed off with money; the third made away by poison.
Charles was Crowned with the Iron Crown at Millaine. As he was Learned himself,
so was he a savourer of Learning: Founded the University of Prague; was the
Author of the Golden Bull, called Lex Carolina, which requires Emperors to be
good Linguists to confer themselves with Ambassadors, and prescribes the
Solemnity of their Election; he Reigned thirty two years; procured at the hands
of the Princes Electors, That his son Wenceslaus should be proclaimed King of
the Romans in his own lifetime; his Motto was, Optimum est alie^a frui insania.

90. Wenceslaus granted diverse Privileges to the Norimbergers for a Load of
Wine; Executed Barthold Swartz for inventing Gunpowder: a man very unlike his
Father, for he was sluggish and careless, more inclined to riot, excessive
drinking and voluptuous pleasures, than to any Princely virtue. In his time
Bajazet the Great Turk was enclosed in an Iron Cage by Tamberlain. This
Emperor for his beastliness was deprived of the Imperial Dignity by the
Princes Electors; he Reigned twenty two years; his Motto was, Morosophi
moriones pessimi.

91. Rupertus, Duke of Bavaria and Count Palatine, was elected in his place,
and from him came the four Palatine Families, Heidleberg, Neuberg, Simmeren,
and Swibrooke. He passed into Italy for the recovery of the Dukedom of
Millaine, sold by Wenceslaus, but was well beaten by John Galeazzes, and so
returned. In his time two Popes were deposed by the Council of Pisa; his
merciful Motto was, Miseria res digna misericordia; he Reigned ten years.

92. Iodocus Barbatus, Marquess of Moravia, and Uncle to Wenceslaus, of whom I
find so little, that by diverse he is not so much as mentioned in the Series and
Succession of the Emperors.

93. Sigismund, brother of Wenceslaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, and Earl of
Luxembourg, was Crowned at Rome on Whitsunday 1432. He traveled exceedingly
for establishing the Peace of Christendom, distracted at that time with three
Popes at once; a great promoter of the Council of Constance. He is reported
nine times to have assailed the Turk, but never with success; for though he was
a Prudent, Witty, Learned, Noble Prince, yet was he ever unfortunate in his
Wars at home and abroad; he Reigned twenty seven years; his Motto was, Cedunt
munera fatis.

94. Albertus the second, Duke of Austria, Son-in-law of Sigismund, whom he
succeeded in all his Estates and Titles, excepting only Luxembourg: for his
liberality, justice and manhood in Wars he was greatly renowned; he subdued the
Bohemians; carried a heavy hand over the Jews and Hussites; subdued Silesia and
the people of Moravia; Governed eight years; his Motto was, Amicus optima vitae
possessio. It Is thought he ^urfeited upon Melons, and died thereof; in his time
the Hungarians, and other Christians received from the Turks that terrible blow
in the Fields of Varna.

95. Frederick the third, Duke of Austria, the son of Ernestus of Austria, and
next heir of Albert the second; he procured the calling of the Council of Basil
for the Peace of Christendom: traveling for that cause to Rome, he was there
declared Emperor, being a person of agreeable accomplishments to so high a
Calling. In his time Printing was Invented by John Gutenberg at Mentz; the
Noble Scanderbeg defended with great valor his Dominions against all the
Forces of the Turks. Constantinople was taken by Mahomet, and made the chief
Seat of the Turkish Empire. The Emperor Frederick Reigned fifty and three
years; his Motto was, Rerum irrecuperabilium foelix oblivio.

96. Maximilian, son of Frederick, Duke of Austria, so great a Scholar that he
spoke Latin and other Tongues elegantly, and in imitation of Julius Caesar
wrote his own Acts. Scaligers testimony of him was, That he excelled all his
Predecessors; great stirs he had with the Venetians, whom at last he brought
to submit by his marriage with Mary of Burgundy: he added the Estates thereof
to the house of Austria. He was coursely used in the Low Countries by a company
of rude Mechanics detained in Prison, which he endured with patience, and
after nine Months freed himself with admirable prudence. He was joined Emperor
with his Father in his Fathers lifetime, with whom he Reigned seven years: and
after his decease, he Reigned alone twenty five years more; his Motto was, Tene
mensuram and respice finem.

97. Charles the ^i^th; this man was the glory of the House of Austria, a
Puissant Prince: he liked three Books especially, Polybius's History;
Machiavel's Prince; and Castalion's Courtier. In fifteen Wars which he waged
(for the most part) he was successful; the last of which was by Cortez and
Pizarro in the newly discovered parts of America, where in twenty eight
Battles, he be^ame Master of so many Kingdoms. Near home he took Rome, by the
Duke of Burbon, captivated the French King Francis in the Battle of Pavia;
frighted Solomon the Turk from Vienna, settled Muly Hassen in his Kingdom in
Africa; he defeated Barbarossa, that formidable Pirat, and took Tunis. By the
Popes continual instigations, he carried a hard hand toward the Protestants,
whose patience and perseverance with intervenient crosses abated his edge at
last. Wearied at length with the Worlds incessant troubles, he divested himself
of all Imperial Authority, and retired to a Monastery; his Motto was, Plus
Vltra, opposite to that of Hercules. He Reigned thirty and seven years.

98. Ferdinand the first, Archduke of Austria, the brother of Charles, King of
Hungary and Bohemia, elected King of the Romans by the procurement of Charles,
Anno 1531. upon whose resignation he was chosen Emperor Anno 1558. a complete
and judicious Prince. Under him in the treaty of Passaw was granted Liberty of
Conscience to the Professors of the Augustane Confession, which much startled
the Fathers of the Trent Council; as also did the grant to the Bohemians for
receiving the Supper in both kinds. He subdued John Sepusius, Vaywode of
Transylvania, and strongly kept back the Turk from encroachments upon his
Dominions; his Motto was, Fiat Iustitia and pereat mundus.

99. Maximilian the second, the son of Frederick, elected King of the Romans in
the life of his Father, Anno 1562. succeeded in the Empire after his decease.
He was constant to the Tenent that men's Consciences are not to be forced in
matters of Religion. In his time began the Wars in the Low Countries, chiefly
occasioned by the Spanish cruelty, executed by the Duke of Alva; the Civil Wars
in France, the Massacre of the Protestants began at Paris; the famous defeat
was given to the Turks in the Sea-sight at Lepanto; he Reigned twelve years;
married his two daughters to two Puissant, Princes, Elizabeth to Charles the
ninth King of France; and Anna his eldest to Philip, King of Spain; his Motto
was, Dominus providebit.

100. Rodolphus the second, the eldest son of Maximilian, a Prince much
addicted to Chemistry; he granted liberty of Religion to the Protestants; had
great Wars against the Turks, with whom in the year 1600. he concluded a Peace:
but being undermined by his brother Matthias, was forced to surrender to him
the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, and to content himself with Austria and
the Empire only. In his time Henry the fourth King of France was stabbed by
Ravilliac; and the Gunpowder Treason was hatched here in England; his Motto
was, Omnia ex voluntate Dei.

101. Matthias, brother of Rodolphus, King of Hungary, Bohemia, and Archduke
of Austria, succeeded, in whose time were sown the seeds of that terrible War,
which had almost destroyed the Empire; the Protestants standing for their
Privileges in Bohemia were withstood by some of the Emperors Council, of whom
they threw Slabata and Fabritius Smesantius, with a Secretary, out of a Window
at Prague; his Motto was, Concordia lumine major. Having no children he declared

102. Ferdinand the second, of the House of Gratz, to be Emperor; this Prince
was more zealously affected to the Sea of Rome, than any of his Predecessors;
and a great enemy of the Protestant Religion, occasioning thereby that long and
bloody War in the Empire of Germany. The King and Queen of Bohemia, forsaken of
their States, are forced to ^ly; he is proscribed and put out of his
El^ct^rship. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, like a tempest falls upon
Germany, and fr^es diverse oppressed Princes, but at last was slain in the
Battle at Lutzen, uncertain whether by the ^nemy, or the Treason of his own;
his Motto was, Legitime certantibus.

103. Ferdinand the third, son of Ferdinand the second, broke the great power
of the Swedes, who were called in for the support of the German liberty,
against the violent resolutions of Ferdinand the second: For he overthrew them
at the Battle of Norlingen. This Prince is the twelfth Emperor of the House of
Hapsburg, an^ the ninth of the House of Austria, without intermission: The
cause of which is to be attributed to Charles the fifth, who procured in his
lifetime that his broth^r might be chosen King of the Romans, as his
Successor in the Empire. A Policy which has ever since been continued by his
Successors: and the Germans are the more willing to h^arken to it, because the
Austrian Princes are not only Natives, but also better able to back the Empire
in its complete Majesty than any other of the Nation. The Motto of this
Emperor is, Pietate and Iustitia.

In the Collection of these Emperors I have made use of Suetonius, Zonaras,
Carrion,....... Heylen, Sympson, Prideaux, and others.

CHAP. II. Of the Eastern, Greek and Turkish Emperors.
1. COnstantinus, aged thirty one in the year 306. took upon him the care of
the Empire; he overcame Maxentius and Licinius; restored Peace to the Church;
took Byzantium, and having enlarged it, called it Constantinople, and New Rome.
He died in Nicomedia, Anno 337. aged sixty five. Gault. tab. Chronogr. p. 279.

2. Constantius his son succeeded him in the East; he favored the Arrians;
hearing that Iulianus his Kinsman conspired against him, he made Peace with
Sapores the Persian King, and moved toward him: but in his march seized with a
Fevor he died, Anno 361. Gaulter. tab. Chron. p. 283.

3. Iulianus succeeded, Surnamed the Apostate, son of Constantius, the brother
of Constantine the Great, at first a Christian, afterward a professed enemy of
the Gospel; fortunate in his Wars against the Almanes, Franks, and other
Transalpine Nations whilst he was a Christian. Prodigiously slain in the
Persian War, when become a Persecutor, aged thirty eight, his Motto was, Pennis
suis perire grave; he Reigned but one year and eight months: dying he threw his
blood up into the Air, saying, Satiare Nazarene. Zon. tom. 3. fol. 119.

4. Iovian or Iovinian, chosen by the Army: a Religious Prince; made Peace with
the Persian; settled the affairs of the Church; who being dead, Valentinian, one
of mean birth, but great abilities in War, was elected Emperor; he Reigned
seven Months twenty two days; his Motto was, Scopus vitae Christus.

5. Valens, the brother of Valentinian, made Partner with him in the Empire,
ruled in Constantinople and the East. Valentinian took more delight in Rome and
the Western Parts; a great Patron of the Arrian Faction, who first brought the
Goths on this side the River Danow, to the destruction of himself and the
Empire; he Reigned fourteen years; his Motto was, Alienus ab ira alienus a
Iustitia.

6. Gratian, St. Ambrose was much esteemed by him; distressed by the Goths, he
made Theodosius Partner in the Empire with him, and was treacherously murdered
by Andragathius, by the command of the Tyrant Maximus; his Motto was, Non quam
diu, sed quam been. In his time was a great Earthquake at Alexandria, says
Cedrenus.

7. Theodosius, a Spaniard, defeated Maximus; vanquished the Goths; utterly
suppressed the Pagan superstitions; humbled himself by Penance and Tears for the
rash massacring the Citizens of Thessalonica, and strengthened the Church of
God with good Laws and Ordinances; his saying was, Eripere telum non dare irato
decet.

8. Arcadius his eldest son succeeded him in the East; Ruffinus his Tutor
sought to betray him to the Goths, but was timely discovered to his ruin:
after which Eudoxia his Wife, and Gaina his General, ruled him at their
pleasure; his Symbol was, Summa cadunt subito; he Reigned twelve years three
months and odd days.

9. Theodosius the second made Peace with the Goths; called the Council of
Ephesus against Nestorius; overthrew Atila by his General Aetius; was a lover
of Learning; and died by a fall from his Horse; his Motto was, Tempori
parendum; he died aged about fifty years, having Reigned the most part of them.

10. Martianus, an able experienced Soldier, succeeded his Master, by the
Marriage of Pulcheria, his Masters Sister; he called the Council of Chalcedon
against Dioscorus; his Motto was, Pax bello potior.

11. Leo, a Thracian, elected by the joint consent of Senate and Soldiery, a
worthy man, and so propense to mercy, that his Motto was, Regis clementia
virtus. He was a great favourer of Learning and the Learned.

12. Zeno, as misshapen in body as untoward in manners, a Tyrant and great
drinker: in one of his drunken fits he was buried alive by his Empress Ariadne.
In his time Constantinople was almost wholly destroyed by fire, in which,
amongst other things, perished one hundred and twenty thousand Volumes of good
Manuscripts; his Motto, Malo nodo malus cuneus.

13. Anastasius, a mean Officer of the Court, by favor of the Empress created
Emperor; a great Patron of Eutyches; in his time the burning Glasses of
Proclus saved the besieged City, by firing the enemies Navy; fortunate in his
Wars with the Persians and Arabians; his Motto was, Mellitum venenum blanda
oration.

14. Justinius, the son of a Thracian Shepherd, a Patron of the Orthodox Clergy,
though himself had no Learning. Much ado he had with Theodorick the persidious
Arrian Goth; the ruin of Antioch by Earthquake almost brake his heart; his
word was, Quod pudet hoc pigeat. He Reigned but four years and twenty days.

15. Justinian, recovered Africa from the Vandals by Belisarius, and Italy from
the Goths by Narses; and reduced the Laws of Rome into form and method; his
Motto was, Summum jus, summa injuria.

16. Justinius the second instituted the Exarchate of Ravenna, and lost a great
part of Italy to the Lombards; a covetous Pelagian, and one that had nothing of
worth in him; his Motto was, Libertas res inestimabilis.

17. Tiberius, a Christian and a worthy man, liberal to the poor, happy in
finding of hidden Treasures, and who repressed the daring boldness of the proud
Persian Cosroes; his Motto was, Stips pauperum, Thesaurus divitum.

18. Mauritius drove the Hunnes out of Pannonia; recovered Mesopotamia from the
Persians; lost the love of the Soldiery by refusing to ransom some Prisoners
at an easy rate; his Motto, Quod timidum idem and crudele.

19. Phovas, a common Soldier, in a Military Tumult chosen Emperor; murdered
his Master with his Wife and Children; made Pope Boniface supreme Bishop or
Head of the Church; was slain in a popular Tumult; his Motto, Fortunam citius
reperias quam retineas.

20. Heraclius chosen by a general consent; repaired the ruins of the Empire;
vanquished the Persians; recovered Jerusalem, brought home the Cross to
Constantinople; turns Monothelite and incestuous with his brothers daughter;
his Motto, A Deo victoria.

21. Constantinus the second, or Constans, unfortunate in his Wars against the
Saracens, defaced and plundered Rome of all its choicest Ornaments, and
Ransacking the Isle of Sicil, was there slain by the women; his Motto, Parendum
necessitati.

22. Constantinus the third, Pogonatus his son repulsed the Saracens; made
Peace with the Bulgarians; held the great Council in Trullo against the
Minotheli^es, where the Pope was condemned; his word was, Quod cito fit cito
perit.

23. I^stinian the second his son subdued Mesopotamia, Armenia, and some part
of Persia; made the Saracens tributary; was dethroned by Leontius: restored by
Trebellis Prince of Bulgaria, afterward murdered at the Altar; his Motto wa^,
Multi nimium nemo satis.

24. Philippicus Bardanes, Admiral of the Navy elected by the Soldiers, an
enemy of Images, which he caused to be cast out of the Church: where began that
bloody Controversy of the East and Western Churches; his Motto, Fortuna cito
reposcit quae dedit.

25. Anastatius the second, principal Secretary to the former, thrust himself
into the Empire, was forced to relinquish it by that Army he had raised against
the Saracens, in which Tumult the City was sacked and spoiled; his Motto was,
Si non des accipit ultro.

26. Theodosius the third in this Tumult made Emperor by the Soldiers,
hearing of the approach of Leo, Commander of the Eastern Armies, resigned the
Empire, and to save his life took Orders; his Motto was, Patientia remedium
malorum.

27. Leo Isauricus; the Saracens in his time, for more than two years, besiege
Constantinople, but forced to leave it by Famine and other disasters, having
lost three hundred thousand men: at this Siege Wild-^ire was invented; a great
enemy to Images, whereupon Excommunicated by the Pope: yet he Reigned long, and
died honorably; his Motto was, Occulti inimici pessimi.

28. Constaminus the fourth, his son was Surnamed Coproaimus, for that when he
was Baptized he berayed the Font; zealous also against Images, which created
him much trouble; his Motto was, Quid sine pectore corpus?

29. Leo the third his son, an enemy of Images, and fortunate in his Wars
against the Saracens; his word, Quo fortuna si non uteris?

30 Constantinus the fifth, son of Leo and Irene, first governed with his
Mother, by whom at last he was supplanted, and being deprived of sight, he died
of melancholy; his word said to be, Mulieri imperare res desperata.

31. Irene, wife of Leo the third, for her better support in her Estate, sided
with the Popes of Rome, called the second Council of Nice for support of
Images. In her time Charles the Great was by the Pope and People of Rome
created Emperor of the West, whereby the Greek Emperors became much weakened;
her Motto was, Vive ut vivas.

32. Nicephorus made Emperor by the Soldiers, persuaded that Irene had made
choice of him to be her Successor; he was slain in a pitched Field against the
Bulgarians; a bad man he was, and Reigned nine years.

33. Michael, Surnamed Cyropalates, i. e. Major of the Palace, his former
Office; assumed the Empire, but finding his own weakness, he soon relinquished
it, and betook himself to a Monastery, having Reigned but two years.

34. Leo the fifth, Surnamed Armenius from his Country, General of the Horse to
Michael; demolished the Images his Predecessors had set up, and was slain in
the Church during the time of Divine Service, having Reigned seven years and
five Months.

35. Michael the second, Surnamed Balbus, having murdered Leo, assumed the
Empire: unfortunate in his Government, and died of madness; a great enemy to
all Learning; he Reigned eight years and nine months.

36. Theophilus his son, an enemy of Images as his Father, and as unfortunate
as he, losing many Battles to the Saracens, at last died of melancholy, having
Reigned twelve years and three months.

37. Michael the third, his son, ruled first with his Mother Theodora; after,
himself alone, his Mother being made a Nun; he was a Prince of great
prodigality, and slain in a drunken fit, having Reigned twenty five years.

38. Basilius, Surnamed Macedo from his birthplace, being made Consort in the
Empire by the former Michael, he basely murdered him, and was himself casually
killed by a Stag, having Reigned twenty years.

39. Leo the sixth, for his Learning Surnamed Philosophus, a vigilant and
provident Prince, most of his time, with variable success, he spent in War with
the Bulgarians; he Reigned twenty five years three months.

40. Constantine the sixth, son of Leo, Governed the Empire under Romanus
Lacopenus, under whom he was so miserably depressed, that he was fain to get
his livelihood by Painting: but Lacopenus being deposed and turned into a
Monastery by his own sons, he obtained his rights, and restored Learning unto
Greece, and Reigned fifteen years after.

41. Romanus, the son of Constantine, having abused the Empire for three years,
died as some think of poison.

42. Nicephorus, Surnamed Phocas, Protector to the former young Emperor, upon
his death was elected; he recovered the greatest part of Asia Minor from the
Saracens, and was slain in the night by John Zimisces, his Wife Theophania
being privy to it: he then aged fifty seven years, having then Reigned six
years six months.

43. John Zimisces Governed the Empire better than he obtained it, vanquishing
the Bulgarians, Rosses, and other barbarous Nations; rescinded the acts of his
Predecessor, died by poison, having Reigned six years six months.

44. Basilius the second subdued the Bulgarians and made them Homagers to the
Empire; Reigned alone above fifty years.

45. Constantinus the seventh, his brother, did nothing memorable: a man of
sloth and pleasure; he Reigned three years.

46. Romanus the second, for his prodigality Surnamed Argyropolus, husband of
Zoe, was drowned in a Bath by the Treason of his Wife, and her Adulterer as was
thought, having Reigned five years and a half.

47. Micha^^ the fourth, Surnamed Paphlago from his Country, first the
Adulterer and then the Husband of Zoe, but died very penitent, having Reigned
with equity and clemency seven years, some say more.

48. Michael the fi^th, Surnamed Calaphates, a man of obscure birth, adopted by
Zoe, whom he deposed and put into a Monastery: out of which being again taken
in a popular Tumult, she recovered the Government, and put out the eyes of
Calaphates, Reigning with her Sister Theodora, until that

49. Constantine the eighth married Zoe, then sixty years of age, and had the
Empire with her; Reigned twelve years and eight months.

50. Theodora, Sister to Zoe, after the death of Constantine, managed for two
years the affairs of the Empire, with great contentment to all people, but
grown aged surrendered it, by persuasion of the Nobles, to

51. Michael the sixth, Surnamed Stratioticus, an old but Military man, who
kept it two years and was then deposed. Demanding what reward he should have
for resigning the Crown? it was replied a heavenly one.

52. Isaacius of the Noble Family of the Comneni, a valiant man of great
courage, and diligent in his affairs, which having managed for two years, he
left it at his death by consent of the Senate and People to another; he was no
Scholar, yet, a great lover of Learning.

53. Constantine the ninth, Surnamed Ducas, a great Justicer, and very devout,
but exceeding covetous, whereby he became hated of his Subjects and contemned
by his enemies; he Reigned seven years and somewhat more.

54. Romanus the third, Surnamed Diogenes, married Eudoxia the late Empress,
and with her the Empire: took Prisoner by the Turks and sent home again; he
found a Faction made against him, by which Eudoxia was expelled; himself
deposed; and he died in Exile, having both his eyes put out; he Reigned three
years eight months.

55. Michael the seventh, Surnamed Parapinacius by reason of the Famine that
fell in his time; in a Tumult was made Emperor: but found unfit, was deposed
and put into a Monastery, having Reigned six years six months.

56. Nicephorus, Surnamed Belionates, of the House of Phocas, succeeded: but
deposed within three years by the Comneni; he put on the habit of a Monk in the
Monastery of Periblepta.

57. Alexius Comnenus, son of the Emperor Isaacius Comnenus, obtained the
Empire, in whose time the Western Christians with great Forces prepared for the
recovery of the Holy Land: he jealous of them denied them passage through his
Country, but was forced to find them Victuals, etc. he died having Reigned
thirty seven years some months.

58. Calo Johannes his son, had a good hand against the Turks, vanquished the
Tartars passing over the Ister; conquered the Servians and Bulgarians,
transporting many o^ them into Bythinia; he died by a poisoned Arrow of his
own, that had rased the skin, but could not be cured.

59. Manuel his younger Son, was an underhand enemy to the Western Christians,
and an open enemy to the Turks, by whom intrapped in the straights of Cilicia,
and his Army miserably cut off, he was on honorable terms permitted to return
again; he Reigned thirty eight years within three months.

60. Alexius the second, his son, was deposed and barbarously murdered by
Andronicus the Cousin German of his Father; his Wife and Mother were also made
away by him, when the young man had Reigned but three years.

61. Andronicus Comnenus by ambitious practices and pretense of reformation,
got the Empire: but not long after cruelly torn in pieces in a popular Tumult,
his dead Corpse used with all manner of contumely.

62. Isaacius Angelus, a Noble man of the same race, designed to death by
Andronicus, was in a popular election proclaimed his Successor, deposed by
Alexius his own brother, and his eyes put out.

63. Alexius Angelus deprived his brother, and excluded his Nephew from the
Empire, but it held not long.

64. Alexius Angelus the second, the son of Isaac Angelus, being unjustly
thrust out of his Empire by his Uncle Alexius, had recourse to Philip the
Western Emperor, whose daughter he had married: so an Army was prepared to
restore him. On the approach whereof Alexius the Usurper fled, and the young
Emperor seated in his Throne, was not long after slain by Alexius Ducas; in
revenge whereof, the Latins assault and win Constantinople, make themselves
Masters of the Empire, share it amongst them: the main body of the Empire with
the Title of Emperor was given to

65. Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, first Emperor of the Latins Reigning in
Constantinople, was taken in Fight by John, King of Bulgaria, and sent Prisoner
to Ternova, where he was cruelly put to death.

66. Henry, the brother of Baldwin, repelled the Bulgarians out of Greece, and
died a Conqueror.

67. Peter, Count of Auxerre in France, succeeded in the Empire after his
decease: was cunningly entrapped by Theodorus Angelus a great Prince in Epirus,
whom he had besieged in Dyracchium: but of an enemy being persuaded to become
his Guest, was there murdered by him.

68. Robert, the son of Peter, having seen the miserable usage of his beautiful
Empress, whom a young Burgundian, formerly contracted to her, had most
despitefully mangled, cutting off both her Nose and Ears, died of hearts grief
as he was coming back from Rome, whither his melancholy had carried him to
consult the Pope in his Affairs.

69. Baldwin, the second son of Robert by a former Wife, under the protection
of John de Brenne, the Titulary King of Jerusalem, succeeded in his Fathers
Throne, which having held for the space of thirty three years, he was forced to
leave it, the City of Constantinople being regained by the Greeks, and the poor
Prince compelled in vain to sue for succors to the French, Venetians, and
other Princes of the West. When Constantinople was lost to the Latins, the
Empire of the Greeks was transferred unto Nice a City of Bythinia, by Theodorus
Lascaris, Son-in-law to Alexius the Usurper: there it continued till the Empire
was restored to the Greeks in the person of

70. Michael the eighth, Surnamed Palaeologus, extracted from the Comnenian
Emperors, most fortunately recovered Constantinople, the City being taken by a
Party of fifty men, secretly put into it by some Country Laborers under the
ruins of a Mine. This Prince was present in person at the Council of Lions, at
the persuasion of the Pope, he admitted the Latin Ceremonies into the Churches
of Greece, for which he was greatly hated by his Subjects, and denied the
honor of Christian burial.

71. Andronicus the second vexed with unnatural Wars by his Nephew Andronicus,
who rebelled against him.

72. Andronicus the third, first Partner with his Grandfather, afterward sole
Emperor.

73. John Pelaeologus, son of Andronicus the third, in whose minority
Contacuzenus his Protector usurped the Empire, and held it sometimes from him,
and sometimes with him till the year 1357. and then retired unto a Monastery,
leaving the Empire unto John, during whose Reign the Turks first planted
themselves in Europe.

74. Andronicus the fourth, the son of Johannes Palaeologus.

75. Emanuel Palaeologus, brother of Andronicus the fourth; in his time
Bajazet, King of the Turks, did besiege Constantinople, but found such notable
resistance that he could not force it.

76. John the second, son of Andronicus the fourth.

77. John the third, son of Emanuel Palaeologus, was in person at the Council
of Florence for reconciling of the Churches, in hope thereby to get some aid
from the Western Christians, but it would not be.

78. Constantinus Palaeologus, the brother of John the third; in his time the
famous City of Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the Great, Anno Dom. 1452.
The miserable Emperor being lamentably trod to death in the Throng, who had in
vain gone from door to door to beg or borrow money to pay his Soldiers, which
the Turks found in great abundance when they took the City. It had in vain been
besieged by King Philip of Macedon, siding with Niger in his War against
Severus the Emperor: it endured a Siege of three years against all the Forces
of the Romans: The Caliph Zulciman had besieged it, and was forced to desist
with the loss of three hundred thousand men: but now it stooped under the
weighty Scepter of

79. Mahomet the second, Surnamed the Great, and first Emperor of the Turks;
he Conquered the two Empires of Constantinople and Trebisond; twelve Kingdoms,
and two hundred Cities. He had mighty Wars with the two renowned Captains
Huniades and Scanderbeg, in Hungary and Epirus, from whom he received diverse
overthrows. He left the Siege of Belgrade with dishonor, as he also was
compelled to do that of the Rhodes. By Achmetes Bassa he Landed an Army in
Apulia, foraged all the Country, took the City of Otranto by assault, to the
terror of Sixtus the fourth, then Pope, and of all Italy. Being passed over
into Asia to go against the Caramanian King, a days journey short of
Nicomedia, a City in Bythinia, at a place called Geivisen he fell sick and
died, as some say of the Cholick, as others of poison, having lived about fifty
two years, and thereof Reigned thirty one, in the year of our Lord 1481. He was
of an exceeding courage and strength, of a sharp wit, and thereunto very
fortunate; but withal, he was faithless and cruel: in his time the death of
eight hundred thousand men.

80. Bajazet the second subdued the Caramanian Kingdom, and part of Armenia,
and drove the Venetians from Moraea, and their part of Dalmatia. Invaded
Caitbeius the Sultan of Egypt, by whom, the Arabians and Mountainers of
Aladeules his subjects, he was diverse times shamefully overthrown, and enforced
by his Ambassadors to conclude a Peace. He bribed the Bishop of Rome to the
empoysoning of his brother Zemes, thither fled for security. This Prince by
nature was given to the study of Philosophy, and conference with learned men,
more than to the Wars, which gave encouragement to his son Selymus to raise
himself to the Throne, as he (by the Treason of the great Bassa's of the Court)
shortly did, and then caused his father to be poisoned by his Physician a Jew,
when he had Reigned thirty years; this Prince died in the year of our Lord 1512.

81. Selymus having poisoned his father, subverted the Mamalukes of Egypt,
bringing it with Palestine, Syria, and Arabia, under the yoke of the Turks. He
invaded the Kingdom of Persia; subdued and slew Aladelues, the Mountainous King
of Armenia, reducing his Kingdom into the form of a Turkish Province. He
repressed the Forces of the Hungarians by a double invasion, and intending to
turn all his Forces upon the Christians, he was suddenly seized with a Cancer
in the Reins of his back, whereby he rotted above ground, and died near unto
the City Chiurli, in the same place where he had formerly unnaturally assaulted
his aged Father Bajazet; a man he was of a fierce, bloody, and faithless
disposition; he died 1520.

82. Solomon, Surnamed the magnificent, surprised Rhodes, Belgrade and Buda,
with a great part of Hungary, Babylon, Assyria, Mesopotamia, spoiled Austria,
sharply besieged and assaulted Vienna it self, took the Isle of Naxos and
Paros, and made them Tributaries to him; War'd upon the Venetians and invaded
the Islands of Corfu and Malta; besieging the Town of Sigeth upon the Frontiers
of Dalmatia, he there fell sick of a looseness of his belly, upon which he
retired for recovery of his health to Quinque Ecclesiae, a City near Sigeth,
and there died the fourth of September, Anno 1566. having lived seventy six
years, and Reigned thereof forty six: a Prince more just and true to his word,
than any other of his Predecessors, but a great terror unto all Christendom.

83. Selymus the second, an idle and effeminate Emperor, by his Deputies took
from the Venetians the Isle of Cyprus, and from the Moors the Kingdoms of Tunis
and Algiers. Over this Emperor the Christians were Victorious in that famous
Sea Fight called the Battle of Lepanto, where of the enemies Galleys were taken
an hundred threescore and one, forty sunk of burnt, and of Galliots, and other
small Vessels, were taken about sixty, besides the Admiral Galley, which for
beauty and riches had none in the whole Ocean to compare with it. Selymus spent
with Wine and Women died December. 9. 1574. A man of a heavy disposition, and of
the least valor of all the Othoman Kings.

84. Amurath the third, took from the disagreeing Persians, Armenia, Media, and
the City Tauris, and the Fort Gaino from the Hungarians. To rid himself of all
Competitors, he at his first coming to the Crown caused his five Brethren to be
all strangled in his presence. He himself was a Prince unactive, managing the
Wars by his principal Bassa's Mustapha, Sinan, Osman, and Ferat. The insolent
Ianizaries made such a tumult at Constantinople, that the Emperor for grief
and anger, fell into a fit of the Falling Sickness, which vexed him three days
and three nights; his death not long after followed, the 18 Ian. Anno 1595.
when he had lived fifty one years, and thereof Reigned nineteen. At the time of
his death such a sudden and terrible tempest arose, that many thought the World
would then be dissolved.

85. Mahomet the third took Agria in Hungary, which Kingdom in all likelihood
had been lost, if he had pursued his Victory at the Battle of Keresture: he was
never but then in any Battle, and then was so frighted, that he durst never see
the face of an Army afterward; great harm was done him by Michael the Vayvod
of Valachia, and the Army of Sinan Bassa utterly routed by the Prince of
Transylvania. He was altogether given to sensuality and pleasure, the marks
whereof he still carried about with him, a foul swollen unweildy overgrown
body, and a mind thereto answerable, no small means of his death, which fell
out at the end of January, in the year of our Lord 1604. when he had lived
about forty four years.

86. Achmet, who the better to enjoy his pleasures made peace with the German
Emperor, and added nothing to his Empire. Cicala Bassa his General was
overthrown by the Persians, and diverse of his Armies (under several Bassa's)
cut off by the fortunate Rebel the Bassa of Aleppo. This Prince was of good
constitution, strong and active, he would cast a Horse-man's Mace of nine or
ten pounds weight farther than any other of his Court. He was much given to
sensuality and pleasure: had three thousand Concubines, one reason perhaps of
his death at thirty years, having Reigned fifteen.

87. Mustapha, brother to Achmet, succeeded, which was a Novelty never before
heard of in this Kingdom, it being the Grand Signiors Policy to strangle all
the younger brothers: howsoever this Mustapha was preserved, either because
Achmet being once a younger brother took pity on him, or because he had no
issue of his own body, and so was not permitted to kill him. It is said Achmet
once intended to have shot him, but at the instant was seized with such a pain
in his arm and shoulder, that he cried out, Mahomet would not have him die; he
carried himself but insolently and cruelly, and was deposed.

88. Osman succeeded his Uncle Mustapha, and being unsuccessful in his War
against Poland, was by the Ianizaries slain in an uproar, and Mustapha again
restored, yet long he enjoyed not his Throne, for the same hand that raised him
did again pluck him down.

89. Morat, or Amurath the fourth, brother of Osman, of the age of thirteen
years, succeeded on the second deposition of his Uncle Mustapha; he proved a
stout and masculine Prince, and bent himself to the reviving of the ancient
discipline. To the great good of Christendom he spent his stomach on the
Persians from whom he recovered Babylon.

90. Ibraim, the brother of Morat, preserved by the Sultaness his mother in his
brothers life, and by her power deposed again for interdicting her the Court.
He spent a great part of his Reign in the War of Creet against the Venetians,
but without any great success.

91. Mahomet the fourth, now Reigning, was the son of Ibraim, Lord of all this
vast Empire, containing all Asia and Greece, the greatest part of Slavonia and
Hungary, the Isles of the Aegaean Sea, and a great part of the Taurican
Chersonese in Europe; most of the Isles and Provinces in Asia; and in Africa of
all Egypt; the Kingdoms of Tunis and Algiers, with the Ports of Snachem and
Erocco: nor is their style inferior to so vast an Empire: Solomon thus stiling
himself to Villerius great Master of the Rhodes, at such time as he intended to
Invade that Island, i. e. Solomon King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and high
Emperor of Constantinople and Trab^sond, the most mighty King of Persia,
Syria, Arabia, and the Holy Land, Lord of Europe, Asia, and Africa, Prince of
Meccha and A^^ppo, Ruler of Jerusalem, and Sovereign Lord of all the Seas and
Isles thereof.

It remains, That I acknowledge to whom I have been beholden in the making up
this Catalogue of the forementioned Princes, which I acknowledge to have
borrowed from Mr. Prideaux his Introduction to History, Carion's Chronology,
Dr. Heylin's Cosmography, Knowles his Turkish History, Zuingerus, Nicaetas,
Zonaras, Gaulterus, Symson, and such others as a slender Country Library would
admit of.

CHAP. III. Of the Bishops and Popes of Rome, and their Succession.
1. SAint Peter was Crucified at Rome with his head downwards, and was buried
about the Vatican in the Aurelian way, not far from the Gardens of Nero, having
sat, says Platina, in that See twenty five years. He together with the Apostle
Paul was put to death in the last year of Nero's Reign, and was succeeded by

2. Linus, by Nation a Tuscan, who continued from the last year of Nero, unto
the times of Vespasian the Emperor; was Martyred by Saturninus the Consul; he
sat eleven years.

3. Cletus, a Roman; he was Martyred under Domitian, and his body laid in the
Vatican, near to that of St. Peter, after he had sat twelve years one month and
eleven days.

4. Clemens, a Roman, a modest and holy man; he was thrown into the Sea with an
Anchor tied to his neck, in the third year of Trajan, having sat nine years two
months and ten days.

5. Anacletus the first, was a Grecian, born at Athens; he ordained that no
Bishop or Clergyman should wear his beard or hair overlong, and that no less
than three Bishops should assist in the Ordination of a Bishop; he sat nine
years two months and ten days.

6. Euaristus, a Grecian, he had three Ordinations in the month of December; he
ordained, That the peoples Accusation should not be received against a Bishop;
he sat nine years ten months and two days.

7. Alexander the first, a Roman, young in years, old in his composed manners;
he ordered that holy water mixed with salt, should be used; and that water mixed
with Wine should be in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; he sat ten years
seven months and two days.

8. Sixtus the first, a Roman, ordered that holy things and vessels should be
touched by none but Ministers, and that Priests should minister in Linen
Surplices; he was buried in the Vatican, having sat ten years three months and
one and twenty days.

9. Telesphorus a Grecian, instituted the Lent of seven weeks before Easter,
and the celebration of three Masses the night of our Saviors birth; he sat
eleven years three months and twenty two days.

10. Hyginus a Grecian of Athens, he ordained that one Godfather or God-mother
at least, should be present at the Baptism of a Child; he sat four years three
months and four days.

11. Pius the first an Italian, he ordained that none of the Jewish heresy
should be received to Baptism, that the Feast of the Passover should be on the
Sunday; he sat eleven years four months and three days.

12. Anicetus a Syrian, was crowned with Martyrdom, buried in the Churchyard
of Calistus, in the Appian way, having sat eleven years four months and three
days.

13. Soter a Campanian, little remembered of him besides some decrees about
Marriage, and that he sat nine years three months and one and twenty days.

14. Eleutherius a Grecian of Nicopolis, he sent Fugatius and Damianus into
Britain, at the request of King Lucius to baptize him and his people; he sat
fifteen years three months and two days.

15. Victor the first an African, in his time was the controversy about the
keeping of Easter; he sat ten years three months and ten days.

16. Zephyrinus a Roman, ordained that Wine in the Sacrament should be
consecrated in a vessel of Glass, and not of Wood as before; he sat eight
years seven months and ten days.

17. Calistus the first, a Roman of Ravenna, ordained a threefold fast in a
year, in the fourth, seventh and tenth month, beginning the year as the Jews
do; he sat six years ten months and ten days.

18. Vrbanus the first, a Roman, ordained that Churches should receive Farms
and Lands given by devout persons, and the Revenues to be parted amongst the
Clergy; he was martyred, having sat four years ten months and twelve days.

19. Pontianus a Roman, was banished into Sardinia, where he suffered great
torments for the faith of Christ, and dyed, having sat nine years five months
and two days.

20. Anterus a Grecian, he decreed that the noble acts of the Martyrs should be
recorded and kept in the treasury of the Church; he was martyred, having sat
eleven years one month and twelve days.

21. Fabianus a Roman, he ordained that the Chrism in the Lords Supper should
be renewed every year, and the old one burnt in the Church; he was martyred,
having sat fourteen years eleven months and eleven days.

22. Cornelius a Roman, he was banished and then beheaded, having sat two
years two months and three days. Many friendly Epistles passed betwixt him and
Saint Cyprian.

23. Lucius the first, a Roman, was martyred, having sat three years three
months and three days.

24. Stephanus the first, a Roman, a controversy fell out betwixt him and St.
Cyprian concerning the rebaptizing of the baptized by Heretics, which Cyprian
would not endure, but Stephanus was high for; he was beheaded, having sat
seven years five months and two days.

25. Sixtus the second, an Athenian, while he endeavors to confute, and to
extinguish the opinions of the Chiliasts, is taken, accused and martyred; he
sat two years ten months and three and twenty days.

26. Dionysius withstood to his power the Pride and Heresy of Paulus
Samosatenus, he is said to have converted the Wife and Daughter of the Emperor
Decius; he dyed having sat six years two months and four days.

27. Foelix the first, he appointed yearly Sacrifices in the memory of the
Martyrs, that no Mass should be said but by Sacred persons, and in a consecrate
place, but upon pre^^ing necessity; he dyed a Martyr, and sat four years three
months fifteen days.

28. Eutychianus a Tuscan, he is reported to have buried with his own hands
three hundred forty two Martyrs, and to have blessed Grapes and Beans, and such
like upon the Altar; and would have the Martyrs buried in Purple: he sat one
year one month and one day, as Damasus says.

29. Caius of Dalmatia, was Kinsman to Dioclesian the Emperor; his Brother
Gabinius had a Daughter called Susanna, who should have married Galerius the
Emperor, but all these were martyred; Caius sat eleven years four months
eleven days.

30. Marcellinus a Roman, out of fear offered Incense to Mars or Isis, of which
he was questioned by the Council of Sinuessa, but no man condemned him;
repenting his fear, he reproached the Tyrant to his face, and was martyred; he
sat nine years two months sixteen days.

31. Marcellus the first, a Roman, Maxentius was incensed against him, for that
Lucina a noble Matron had made the Church her Heir; hereupon the holy man was
doomed to keep beasts in a Stable, and was choked with the stench and filth,
he sat five years six months twenty one days.

32. Eusebius a Grecian, his Father a Physician, the Cross of Christ was found
in his time by Judas a Jew, and adorned and honored by Helena the Mother of
Constantine; he dyed having sat six years one month and three days.

33. Miltiades an African, Constantine gave him the House of Plantius Lateranus
proscribed by Nero, which has continued to this day by the name of the
Laterane Palace; some say he was martyred having sat four years seven months
nine days.

34. Sylvester the first, a Roman, is said to have baptized Constantine the
Emperor; others say it was done by Eusebius of Nicomedia. Constantine
appointed this man to wear a Crown of Gold; he sat twenty three years ten
months and eleven days.

35. Marcus the first, a Roman, brought in the singing of the Nicene Creed, and
the giving of the Pall to the Bishop of Ostia; which when others have since
fetched there, they have paid sweetly for; he sat two years eight months and
twenty days.

^6. Julius the first, a Roman, Athanasius made hi^ Creed in his time at Rome,
which was then aproved by Julius and his Clergy. He ordained Prothonotaries to
Register the passages of the Chrch, and sat fifteen years two months and six
days.

37. Liberius the first, a Roman, either through fer or ambition, subscribed to
Arrianism, and A^anasius his condemnation; but recovered himself, and sat six
years three months and for days.

38. Foelix the second, a Roman, condescended to communicate with the Arrians,
though he were none of them; but afterward in a tum^lt was made away by them;
he sat one y^^r four months and two days.

39. Damasus the first, a Spaniard, a friend to S^ Jerome, who by his
procurement much amende^ the Vulgar Latin edition. He accursed U^urers, and
appointed Gloria Patri, etc. to c^ose up every Psalm; he sat nineteen years
three months and eleven days.

40. Syricius the first, a Roman, he excluded t^ose that were twice married,
and admitted Monks into Holy Orders. In his time the Tempe of Serapis was
demolished and the Idol broken; he sat fifteen years, eleven months, twenty
five days.

41. Anastasius the first, a Roman, he was carefu^ to repress the errors of
Origin, was the first that brought in the standing up at the reading of the
Gospel; he sat three years and ten days.

42. Innocentius the first, an Albane, a great sticklet against the Pelagians,
in his time Alaricus plundered Rome; Innocentius being then at Ravenna; he sat
fifteen years, two months, and twenty five days.

43. Zosinues brought the use of Tapers into the Church, forbad Priests to
drink in public, or servants to be received into the Priesthood; he sat one
year, three months, and twelve days.

44. Bonifacius the first, a Roman, the son of Iocundus a Priest; he was chosen
in a hubub and sedition of the Clergy, was shrewdly opposed by Eulalius the
Deacon, but at last carried it against him, he sat three years eight months
and seven days; To whom there succeeded,

45. Coelestinus the first, a Campanian, he it was that sent Germanus and Lupus
hither into England; Paladius into Scotland, and Patrick into Ireland; he first
caused the Psalms to be sung in Antiphony; he sat eight years ten months.

46. Sixtus the third, he was accused by one Bassus for getting a Nun with
Child, but was acquitted by the Synod, and his accuser sent into Exile; he
built much, and therefore had the title of Inrich^r of the Church; he sat
eight years.

47. Leo the first dissuaded Attila from sacking Rome; Peter and Paul
terrifying the Hunno, while Leo spoke to him. In his time the Venetians settled
themselves in the Gulf, now so famous; he sat twenty one years one month and
thirteen days.

48. Hilarious the first, in his time was the rectifying of the Golden Number,
by Victorinus of Aquitaine; and the bringing in of the Letany, by Mamerius
Claudius of Vienna; he sat seven years three months and ten days.

49. Simplicius the first, a Tiburtine, he took upon him the jurisdiction of
the Church of Ravenna; decreed that none of the Clergy should hold a Benefice
of any Layman; he sat fifteen years one month and seven days.

50. Foelix the third, Son of a Roman Priest, decreed that no Church should be
consecrated but by a Bishop; opposed the proposal of Union by the Emperor
Zeno, to the great confusion of the Eastern and Western Churches; sat eight
years.

51. Gelasius the first, an African, ordered the Canon of Scripture, branding
counterfeit books that before passed ^or Canonical or Authentical; banished the
Manichees, and burnt their Books; he sat four years eight months and seventeen
days.

52. Anastasius the second, a Roman, excommunicated Anastasius the Greek
Emperor, for favoring the Heretic Acatius, whose heresy afterward himself
favored; he sat one year, ten months and twenty four days.

53. Symmachus the first, a Sardinian, carried it against Laurentius his
Competitor; he was a Lover of the poor, and bountiful to the exiled Bishops and
Clergy; he sat fifteen years six months and twenty two days.

54. Hormisda the first, the Emperor Justinius sent him his Ambassadors with
the confirmation of the authority of the Apostolic seat; he condemned the
Eutychians in a provincial Synod; and sat nine years and eighteen days.

55. Johannes the first, a Tuscan, a man of great learning and piety; was cast
into prison by Theodorick, and there killed with the stench and filth of it; he
sat two years and eight months.

56. Foelix the fourth, a Samnite, excommunicated the Patriarch of
Constantinople; divided the Chancel from the Church; commanded extreme Unction
to be used to dying men; he sat four years two months and thirteen days.

57. Bonifacius the second, a Roman, decreed that no Bishop should choose his
Successor; and that the Pope (if it might be) should be chosen within three
days after his Predecessors death; he sat two years two days.

58. Johannes the second, a Roman, condemned Anthemius the Patriarch of
Constantinople; was surnamed Mercury for his eloquence; Writers say no more of
him, but that he sat two years and four months.

59. Agapetus the first, a Roman, sent Ambassador by King Theodatus to pacify
Justinian the Emperor for the death of the Noble and Learned Queen
Amalasuntha; he sat eleven months and nineteen days.

60. Sylverius a Campanian, was deposed by the Empress for refusing to put out
Menna, and restore Anthemius her Favorite; he dyed in exile having sat one
year five months and twelve days.

61. Vigilius the first, for breach of promise to the Empress, was fetched to
Constantinople, there with a halter about his neck drawn about the streets and
banished; he sat seventeen years seven months and twenty days.

62. Pelagius the first, ordained that Heretics and Schismatics should be
punished with temporal death, that no man for money should be admitted into
Orders; he sat eleven years ten months and twenty eight days.

63. Johannes the third, in his time the Armenians did receive the faith of
Christ; he was settled in his Chair by Narses, and sat twelve years eleven
months and twenty six days.

64. Benedictus the first, a Roman, in his time the Lombards forraged Italy,
the grief of this and other the Calamities of Italy was the death of this Pope,
when he had sat four years one month and twenty eight days.

65. Pelagius the second, a Roman, was made Pope in the siege of the City by
the Lombards, without the Emperors consent, which election he sent Gregory to
excuse; he sat ten years two months and ten days.

66. Gregorius the first, surnamed the Great, called himself Servus servorum
Dei, sent Austin into England to convert the Eastern Saxons, withstood the
claim of Universal Bishop; he sat thirteen years six months and ten days.

67. Sabinianus the first, the last of the Roman Bishops not having that
arrogant title of Universal Bishop, or Head of the Church; he opposed all that
Gregory had done; distinguished the hours of Offices, and sat one year five
months and nine days.

68. Bonifacius the third, obtained of Phocas, a murderer of his Lord, that
Popish Supremacy, which to this day is so much stood upon, and Volumus and
Iubemus to be the style of this Priest; he enjoyed his pomp but a while, he
sat but nine months.

69. Bonifacius the fourth, he instituted All-hallow day, dedicated the Temple
of Pantheon to the Virgin Mary; made his Fathers House a Monastery, and dyed
having sat six years eight months and thirteen days.

70. Deus dedit the first, a Roman, he loved and enriched the Clergy, is said
to have cured a Leper with a Kiss, ordered that Gossips should not marry; he
dyed having sat only three years and three and twenty days.

71. Bonifacius the fifth, a Campanian, he privileged Murderers and Thieves
that took Sanctuary, that the hands of Justice should not pluck them thence; he
dyed having sat five years and ten days.

72. Honorius the first, he covered the Church of Saint Peter with the Brazen
Tiles taken from the Capitol; he also instituted the Feast of the Exaltation of
the Cross; and dyed having sat twelve years eleven months and seventeen days.

73. Severinus the first, a Roman, in his time Isaacius the Exarch of Italy
took away the Laterane treasure to pay his Soldiers, for which yet the Pope
dared not to excommunicate him; he sat one year and two months.

74. Johannes the fourth, a Dalmatian, with the remainder of the Treasure,
redeemed some Exiles of his Countrymen; he busied himself about the
celebration of Easter, and translation of the bones of Martyrs, sat only nine
months.

75. Theodorus the first, a Grecian, Son to the Bishop of Jerusalem, he
deprived Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople for the heresy of the Acephali;
he dyed having sat six years five months and eighteen days.

76. Martinus the first, an Italian, ordained Priests to shave their Polls, and
to keep themselves single; he excommunicated Paulus Patriarch of
Constantinople, for which he was banished into Pontus; he sat six years one
month and twenty six days.

77. Eugenius was less active and sped better, he would that Bishops should
have Prisons for their Priests, to repress their over boldness; he sat only
one year and nine months.

78. Vitalianus the first, first brought Organs into the Divine service of the
Church of Rome; he excommunicated Maurus the Archbishop of Ravenna. Theodorus
and Hadrian were sent by hi^ into England to introduce the Latin Service, he
sat fourteen years and six months.

79. Adeodatus the first was formerly a Mon^, Earthquakes, Comets and Tempests
such ^ never were before did amaze men in his time, he dyed having sat four
years two months an^ five days.

80. Donus the first had the Church of Ravena subjected to him by Theodorus the
Arch-b^shop, which before-time pretended equality wi^^ that of Rome, he adorned
the Church Porch ^^ St. Peter with Marble, and sat five years.

81. Agatho the first, a Sicilian, ordained that the Popes Sanctions should be
as firmly kept, ^ those of the Apostles. He sent John Abbot ^^ St. Martins into
England to have our Church service in tune; and with other superstitious in
junctions: he is said to have dyed of the Plague* and sat one year six months
and fifteen days.

82. Leo the second, a Sicilian skilled in Greek Latin and Music; he ratifyed
the sixth Synod to confirm the Mass, and restrain the Wester^ Priests
marriages, brought in the kissing of the Paxe, sat only ten months.

83. Benedictus the second, a Roman, he got to be first styled the Vicar of
Christ, and that the Popes should be freely elected by the Clergy, without
consent of the Exarchs or Emperors; this Pope (as his Predecessor) sat but
ten months.

84. Johannes the fifth, a Syrian, of whom nothing is remarkable, but that he
was consecrated by the three Bishops of Ostia, Portua and Veliternum; he dyed
in the first year of his Popedom; the same manner of his consecration being
still observed by his Successors.

85. Conon the first, a Thracian, sent St. Killian the Scot with some others to
convert some places of Germany, where they were martyred; he sickned upon his
election, and sat only eleven months.

86. Sergius the first, a Syrian, for refusing to receive the Canons of Trullo,
he was sent for by the Emperor, but rescued by the Italians; he was taxed with
Adultery, sat twelve years eight months.

87. Johannes the sixth, a Grecian, some say he was famous for feeding the Poor
in a great famine, and that he dyed a Martyr, but none tells why, or by whom;
he sat two years three months.

88. Johannes the seventh, some say the Son of the former, was noted for
nothing so much as building some Churches, and erecting Images; he sat one
year seven months and seventeen days.

89. Sisinnius the first, this man had the Gout both in his hands and feet, yet
left he provisions and materials for the building and repairs of the City Walls
and Temples; he sat but three weeks; it is suspected he had foul play.

90. Constantinus the first, going to Constantinople, Justinian the second
kissed his feet in sign of honor, which the ambitious succeeding Popes drew,
first into example, at last into custom as it now continues; he sat six
years and twenty days.

91. Gregorius the second, a Roman, excommunicates Leo Isaurus the Emperor,
for standing against Images; forced Luitprandus King of Italy to confirm the
donations of his predecessor Arithpert; he sat fifteen years nine months.

92. Gregorius the third, a Syrian, espouses the quarrel about Images;
Excommunicates the Emperor; drives the Greeks out of Italy by the Lombards:
and afterward over-tops the Lombards by the French, under conduct of Charles
Martell; he sat nine years eight months.

93. Zacharias the first, a Grecian, deposes Childerick, King of France, and
by the same high hand turns Rachis, King of Lombardy, and Caroloman of France,
from their Thrones to be Monks; he held the Chair for ten years and three
months.

94. Stephanus the second, a Roman, he wrought so with Pepin of France, that he
outed Aistulphus of Lombardy, and bestowed it on the Pope, for freeing him of
his Oath: for this success, he was the first that was carried upon men's
shoulders; he sat four years and one month.

95. Paulus the first, a Roman, and brother of Stephen, Excommunicated
Constantine Copronimus the Emperor upon the old quarrel; he was a great
honourer of St. Petronilla, the daughter of St. Peter; he sat nine years one
month.

96. Stephanus the third, a Sicilian, he brought in the Worshipping and censing
of Images, and subjected Millaine to his See; he sat three years and five
months:

97. Adrianus the first; the Pope having done Charles the Great a piece of
Service, he to reward him, confirmed his Fathers gifts to the Roman See, adding
the Dukedoms of Spoleto and Benevent unto it; perhaps this they call
Constantines Donation; he sat twenty two years ten months.

98. Leo the third, to get the favor of Charles the Great, prostituted his
Keys and the Roman Liberties at his feet: for which the Romans plucked him
from his Horse and whipped him; Charles coming to Rome in favor of the Pope is
pronounced Emperor; he sat twenty one years.

99. Stephanus the fourth, Decreed it should be in the power of the Clergy to
Elect the Pope but not to consecrate him, but in the presence of the Emperors
Ambassador; he sat but six months and some days.

100. Paschalis the first caused certain Parish Priests in Rome to be called
Cardinals, now Mates for Kings, numbered about seventy, but more or less at the
sole pleasure of the Popes; he sat six years and three months.

101. Eugenius the second took the authority in the territories of the Church
to create Dukes, Earls, and Knights, as the Exarchs of Ravenna had used to do;
he was called the Father of the poor, and sat four years.

102. Valeminus the first was a man of too good hopes to hold the Chair long;
great his accomplishments, and exemplary his life, but he was soon gone, for he
died upon the fortieth day after his Election.

103. Gregorius the fourth; in his days great was the Luxury of the Clergy,
against which a Synod was held at Aquisgrave* this Pope sat almost sixteen
years.

104. Sergius the second was the first that changed his disgraceful name of
Bocca di porca, or Swines mouth, into Sergius, which precedent his Successors
have since followed, at their Creation changing their names.

105. Leo the fourth, a Romish Monk; he compassed the Vatican with a Wall;
dispensed with Ethelwolfe to leave his Monastery and Reign in England, for
which he gratified his Holiness with yearly Peter Pence; he sat seven years
three months and six days.

106. Johannes the eighth, is by most confessed to be a woman, and is usually
called Pope Joan: to avoid the like disgrace, the Porphyry Chair was ordained;
she died in Childbirth in going to the Lateran, having sat one year one month
and four days.

107. Benedictus the third, a Roman, was withstood by one Anastasius, but to no
purpose; he made show of great humility, and therefore would not be buried in
but without the Threshold of St. Peter's Church; he sat one year six months nine
days.

108. Nicholaus the first, was the first that by Law prohibited marriage to the
Roman Clergy; deprives John of Ravenna for not stooping to him; swaggers with
Michael the Emperor of......., and sat six years nine months and thirteen
days.

109. Adrianus the second, the Emperors Ambassador excepted against his
election, but had a delusive answer. The Emperor Lotharius came to Rome to
receive absolution of him, which is much stood upon; he sat four years nine
months twelve days.

110. Johannes the ninth Crowned three Emperors, Charles the Bald, Charles the
Gross, and Lewis; held a Council at Trecas; drove the Saracens out of Italy
and Sicily, and died, having sat ten years and two days, and was buried in St.
Peter's.

111. Martinus the second, a French man, his father Palumbus was a Conjurer,
and the son got the Popedom by evil arts; he did nothing worthy of memory, but
died, having sat only one year and five months.

112. Adrianus the third ordained that the Emperor should no more have to do
with the Election or Confirmation of the Pope, but that it should be left
wholly to the Roman Clergy; he died in the first year and second month of his
Popedom.

113. Stephanus the fifth, a Roman, did nothing of note, only he abrogated the
purging of Adultery and Witchcraft by going over burning Coulters, and casting
the suspected into the water; he died having sat six years and eleven days.

114. Formosus the first, was so ill beloved, that Pope Stephen the sixth
caused his body to be unburied, all his acts reversed, two of his fingers to be
cut off, and then buried amongst the Laity: Sergius the third took him up
again, caused his head to be cut off, and the body to be thrown into Tyber;
died the sixth month of his fifth year.

115. Bonifacius the sixth, a Tuscan, is inserted into the Catalogue, not for
any thing he did, but because rightly elected, and indeed what could be
expected to be done by him, who had no longer time wherein to enjoy his
Popedom, for he died upon the twenty sixth day from his Election.

116. Stephanus the sixth, a Roman, abrogated all the acts of Formosus his
Predecessor, which afterward grew customary through this example, the
following Popes infringing, if not fully cancelling all that was done by their
immediate Predecessor; this Pope died in the first year and third month of his
Popedom.

117. Romanus the first, a Roman, voided all the Decrees and Acts of Pope
Stephen that was before him; besides this, he had not time to do any thing
worthy of memory, for he died in the third month of his Popedom.

118. Theodorus the second, a Roman, restored the acts of Formosus, and his
followers were in great esteem with him; in his time the Saracens broke into
Apulia and made great spoil, but were repelled by the Italians; the Pope died,
having sat in his Chair only twenty days.

119. Johannes the tenth, a Roman, restored the acts of Formosus, and being
therein opposed by the people, he got to Ravenna, had a Council of seventy four
Bishops, and therein restored the acts of Formosus, and rescinded those of
Stephen; which done he died on the fifteenth day of his second year.

120. Benedictus the fourth, a Roman, for his humanity and clemency created
Pope; nothing, says Platina, was done in his time that was worthy of much
praise; but that in a bad time he preserved much gravity and constancy in his
life, and died in the fourth month of his third year.

121. Leo the fifth, Historians give no account of his Country, he was made
Prisoner by his familiar friend Christopher, and thereupon is thought to have
died of grief upon the fortieth day after his arrival to the Popedom.

122. Christophorus the first, was so base that his Country is not known,
having obtained the Papacy by evil arts; he speedily lost it, was thrust into a
Monastery, the then only refuge of the miserable: and this in the seventh month
of his Usurpation of that Seat, whereof he had deprived his friend.

123. Sergius the third ordained the beating of Candles in the Feast of the
Purification of the Virgin Mary, thence called Candlemas day, imprisoned
Christopher, rescinded the acts of Formosus, and died having sat seven years
four months.

124. Anastasius the third, a Roman, made no mark of ignominy upon any of his
Predecessors, and lived himself with that modesty and integrity, that there
was nothing to be reprehended in him; he died in the second year of his Popedom.

125. Landus the first, a Roman, his life is so obscure, that some will not
allow him any place amongst the Popes; nothing is said of him, but that he died
in his sixth month and on the twenty first day of it, and buried in St. Peter's.

126. Johannes the eleventh, the Bastard of Pope Sergius, overthrew the
Saracens; in a Sedition he was taken and put in bonds, where he was sti^led by
a Pillow, having sat thirteen years two month and three days.

127. Leo the sixth, a Roman, a modest and honest man, who took care of the
Service of God as much as the corruption of that time would bear, but died on
the fifteenth day of his seventh month, much lamented by the Romans.

128. Stephanus the seventh, a Roman* in his time Spireneus, Duke of Bohemia,
received the Christian Faith; the Pope himself was a man of much meekness and
Religion, and died having sat two years one month and twelve days.

129. Johannes the twelfth, a wicked cruel and libidinous man, was taken in
Adultery and slain by the husband of the woman; was supposed, to have poisoned
Leo and Stephen his Predecessors; he sat four years ten months.

130. Leo the seventh, a Roman, in his time Boson Bishop of Placentia, and
Theobald Bishop of Millaine, and another great Prelate, were all Bastards of
King Hugh, by his Concubines Bezola, Rosa, and Stephana; he sat three years six
months and ten days.

131. Stephanus the eight, a German, vexed with Seditions, and in them so
deformed with wounds, that he was ashamed to be seen in public: so that
nothing being done by him of any note, he died in the third year the fourth
month and twelfth day of his Papacy.

132. Martinus the third, a Roman, gave himself to peace and piety, rebuilded
ruinous Churches, and gave great Alms to the poor: nothing else is remembered of
him, but that he died in the third year sixth month and tenth day of his Papacy.

133. Agapetus the second, a Roman; in his time the Hungarians brake into
Italy, and were overcome in two set Battles by Henry, Duke of Bavaria; this
Pope was a man of great innocence, and died in the ninth year seventh month and
tenth day of his Papacy.

134. Johannes the thirteenth, a man from his youth polluted with all kind of
villainy and dishonesty; he was deposed by Otho in a Council, and slain in the
act of Adultery, after he had arrived to the ninth year the third month and
fifth day of his Papacy.

135. Benedictus the fifth, a Roman, from a Deacon advanced to the Papacy, but
the Emperor approved not the Election, took the Pope with him into Germany,
who died of grief at Hamburg, his place of banishment, having sat only six
months and five days.

136. Leo the eighth, Crowned Otho Emperor, remits unto him the right of
choosing Popes, before in the hands of the Clergy and people, for which was
ratified unto the Papacy Constantines (or rather Pipin's) Donation; he died in
his first year and fourth month.

137. Johannes the fourteenth, Bishop of Narnia, was also wearied with
Seditions, and imprisoned, but freed by the Emperor Otho; in his time Bells
began to be Baptized, and had names given them; he died in the eleventh month
of his sixth year.

138. Benedictus the sixth, a Roman, by Cintius a potent Citizen first
imprisoned, and then strangled in the Castle of St. Angelo; Platina fears
Benedict deserved all he suffered, because none stirred in his quarrel; he died
in the sixth month of his first year.

139. Donus the second, a man of that modesty that though he did not any thing
much worthy of praise, yet he received no injury, nor had any infamous note
upon him; he died in the first year of his Papacy, and was buried in St. Peter's.

140. Bonifacius the seventh, the Citizens opposed him, so he stole away the
Church ornaments and treasure, and fled to Constantinople; he returns and
recovers his place, but soon after dies of an Apoplexy, having sat only seven
months and five days.

141. Benedictus the seventh, a Roman, he turned out Gilbert the Conjurer from
the Archbishopric of Rhemes, and restored Arnulphus: he was a good man, says
Platina, and died in the sixth month of his eighth year.

142. Johannes the fifteenth, was taken by the Romans, imprisoned and there
made to die with famine, grief of mind, and the filth of his Prison, by
Ferrucius the father of Boniface; he died in his third month.

143. Johannes the sixteenth, a hater of the Clergy, and hated by them; he was
all for the enriching of his Kindred; and his example therein has been ever
since followed; he died, says Platina, by the Will of God in his eighth month.

144. Johannes the seventeenth, reputed a great Scholar; he was driven from
Rome into Hetruria by Crescentius the Roman Consul, but he submitting himself,
John returned, and died in the sixth month and tenth year of his Papacy.

145. Gregorius the fifth, projected the Election of the future Emperors by
the Princes of Germany, by which the Germans were distracted into Factions, the
Romans weakened, and way made that the Popes might the better have their ends
upon them.

146. Johannes the eighteenth, a Thief and a Robber, says Platina, who entered
not in by the door, having bribed Crescentius, and others to receive him; but
he died with ignominy in the tenth month of his Papacy.

147. Sylvester the second, a French man, first called Gerebertus, a Magician,
and who contracted with the Devil for the Papacy, whereof he is said to have
repented; he died having sat three years and ten days.

148. Johannes the nineteenth was given to Magic; took off the choice of the
Popes from the people; appointed the Feast of All Souls, and died the twentieth
day of the fourth month of his Papacy.

149. Johannes the twentieth Crowned the Emperor Conrade, and was always
protected by him; he did nothing worthy of memory, but died in the fourth month
of his fourth year.

150. Sergius the fourth, was the first that on Christmas night consecrated
Swords, Roses, or the like, to be sent as tokens of love and honor to such
Princes as deserved best, and whom he desired to oblige.

151. Benedictus the eighth, a Tuscan, is said to be seen upon a black Horse
after his death; he Crowned the Emperor Henry, also in his time there was such
a Plague as the living scarce sufficed to bury the dead; he died in the first
month of his eleventh year.

152. Johannes the twenty first, a Roman, son to the Bishop of Portua, some say
not in Orders before he took the Popedom; Platina says, He was a man of
excellent life, and died upon the ninth day in the eleventh year of his Papacy.

153. Benedictus the ninth, a Conjurer, wont with Lawrence and Gratian the
Conjurers (whom he made Cardinals) to wander in the Woods to invocate Devils,
and bewitch women to follow, them; he sat ten years four months and nine days.

154. Sylvester the third made Pope while Benedict was living, but the other
soon recovered his Seat, when Sylvester had sat but forty nine days, and had
made Casimir a Monk King of Poland.

155. Gregorius the sixth, received the Keys, so that three Popes were extant
at one time: but Henry the Emperor expelled Benedict, Sylvester, and Gregory,
this last having sat two years and seven months, of whom the Historian says He
did many things well.

156. Clemens the second caused the Romans to renounce by Oath the right they
claimed in choosing Popes: but Henry the Emperor gone, they poisoned this Pope
when he had sat not full nine months.

157. Damasus 2. a Bavarian, without consent of the Clergy or people seized on
the Popedom: but he enjoyed it but a short time, for he died upon the twenty
third day after his Usurpation.

158. Leo the ninth, a German, a man, says Platina, of great Piety, Innocence
and Hospitality to strangers and the poor; at Vercellis he held a Council
against Berengarius; he sat four years two months and six days.

159. Victor the second, a Bavarian, made Pope by the favor of Henry the
Emperor; he held a great Council at Florence; deprived diverse Bishops for
Fornication and Simony, and died in the third month of his second year.

160. Stephanus the ninth, brought the Church of Millaine under the obedience
of the Popes of Rome, which till that time challenged equality with them, and
died at Florence the eighth day of his seventh month.

161. Benedictus the tenth, a Campanian, made Pope by the Faction of the
Nobles, but by a Council held at Sutrinum he was deposed and banished, having
sat eight months and twenty days.

162. Nicholaus the second took from the Roman Clergy the Election of the
Popes, and gave it to the College of Cardinals; caused Berengarius to recant
his Opinion against Transubstantiation, and died in the sixth month of his
third year.

163. Alexander the second, a Millanois, inclining to the Emperors right in
choosing the Pope, is first boxed, then imprisoned, and at last poisoned by
Hildebrand, having sat ten years and six months.

164. Gregorius the seventh, commonly called Hildebrand, a turbulent man,
Excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fourth: but the Emperor made him fly out
of Rome, and die in Exile in his twelfth year.

165. Victor the third, an Italian, defended all the doings of Gregory, but not
long after he was poisoned by his Subdeacon in the Chalice, having sat but one
year and four months.

166. Vrbanus the second, an Hetrurian, Excommunicates the Emperor, and sets
all Christendom in Combustion, and thence was called Turbanus; he died in the
twelfth year of his Papacy.

167. Paschalis the second caused the Emperor Henry the fourth to submit to
him, and to attend barefoot at his door; also Excommunicated Henry the fifth;
interdicted Priests marriages, and sat seventeen years.

168. Gelasius the second, a Campanian, was vexed with Seditions all his time;
some say the Knights Templars had their beginning in his Papacy; he sat but one
year and five days.

169. Calistus the second, a Burgundian; he appointed the four Fasts; Decreed
it Adultery for a Bishop to forsake his See; interdicted Priests marriages; he
sat five years ten months and six days.

170. Honorius the second, an Italian, a lover of Learned men; Arnulphus an
English man was murdered in his time for taxing the vices of the Clergy; he
died lamented, having sat five years and two months.

171. Innocentius the second, opposed by an Antipope called Anacletus; he
ordained, That none of the Laity should lay hand on any of the Clergy, and died
in the fourteenth year and seventh month of his Papacy.

172. Celestinus the second was the Inventor of that mad manner of Cursing with
Bell, Book and Candle: besides which it is only said of him, That he died in
the fifth month of his Papacy.

173. Lucius the second, a Bononian; he mightily incited men to the Holy War;
in his time a Synod was held in France, against Petrus Abelardus, who thereupon
changed his opinion; Lucius sat eleven months four days.

174. Eugenius the third, a Pisan, a Monk with the Abbot St. Bernard; he would
not permit the Romans to choose their own Senators; by which a quarrel grew:
that composed, he died, having sat eight years four months.

175. Anastasius the fourth, a Roman; in his time was a Famine all over Europe;
little is said of him, but that he gave a great Chalice to the Church of
Laterane, and died, having sat one year four months.

176. Adrianus the fourth, an English man; he forced Frederick the Emperor to
hold his Stirrup, and then Excommunicated him for claiming his right, and
writing his name before the Popes, being choked with a fly at Anagnia, he
died, having sat four years and ten months.

177. Alexander the third Excommunicated the Emperor Frederick the first, and
brought him to that exigent as to prostrate himself at his feet, when the Pope
trod upon his neck; he sat twenty one years and more.

178. Lucius the third strove to abolish the Roman Consuls, for which he was
forced to quit Rome and retire to Verona, where he also died, having sat four
years and two months.

179. Vrbanus the third, a Millanois; in his time Jerusalem was retaken by
Saladine, with grief whereof the Pope died; he sat one year ten months.

180. Gregorius the eighth incited the Christian Princes to recovery of
Jerusalem, in which endeavor he died the fifty seventh day of his Papacy.

181. Clemens the third Excommunicated the Danes for maintaining the marriage
of their Clergy: composed the differences at Rome, and died in the third year
and fifth month of his Papacy.

182. Celestinus the third put the Crown on the Emperors head with his feet,
and then struck it off again, saying, Per me Reges regnant: he sat six years
seven months.

183. Innocentius the third brought in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation;
ordained a Pix to cover the Host, and a Bell to be rung before it; and first
imposed Auricular Confession upon the people.

184. Honorius the third confirms the Orders of Dominick and Francis, and sets
them against the Waldenses; exacted two Prebends from every Cathedral in
England; he sat ten years 7 months.

185. Gregorius the ninth thrice Excommunicates the Emperor Frederick; in his
time began the deadly feud of the Papal Guelphs, and the Imperial Gibbelines;
he sat fourteen years and three months.

186. Celestinus the fourth, a man of great Learning, and Piety, says Platina,
but being very old (and perhaps poisoned) at his entrance, he kept his Seat but
eighteen days.

187. Innocentius the fourth, in a Council at Lions deposed the Emperor
Frederick; terrified with a dream of his being cited to Judgment, he died,
having sat eleven years six months.

188. Alexander the fourth condemns the Book of William de Sancto Amore, Saints
Clara, pills England of its Treasure, and dies at Viterbium in the seventh year
of his Papacy.

189. Vrbanus the fourth, formerly Patriarch of Jerusalem; he instituted the
Feast of Corpus Christi day, solicited thereto by Eva an Anchoresse; he sat
three years one month and four days.

190. Clemens the fourth, the greatest Lawyer in France, had before his
Election a Wife and three Children; sent Octobonus into England to take the
value of all Church Revenues; he sat three years.

191. Gregory the tenth, an Italian, held a Council at Lions, wherein was
present Michael Paleologus the Greek Emperor, who acknowledged there the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from Father and Son; this Pope sat four years two
months and ten days.

192. Adrianus the fifth, a Genoway, before called Octobonus, and Legate here
in England in the days of Henry the third; he died before he was consecrated
in the fortieth day of his Popedom.

193. Johannes the twenty second, a Spaniard and Physician; though a Learned
man, yet unskilled in Affairs; he did many things with folly enough; he sat but
eight months.

194. Nicholaus the third first practiced to enrich his Kindred; he raised a
quarrel betwixt the French and Sicilians, which occasioned the Massacre in the
Sicilian Vesper; he sat three years.

195. Martinus the fourth, a French man; he kept the Concubine of his
Predecessor Nicholas: removed all Pictures of Bears from the Palace, lest his
Sweetheart should bring forth a Bear; sat four years.

196. Honorius the fourth confirmed the Augustine Friars, and caused the white
Carmelites to be called, Our Ladies Brethren; he did little more, but died,
having sat two years and one day.

197. Nicholaus the fourth preferred persons solely upon respect to their
virtue; and died of grief to see Church and State in a remediless combustion,
having sat four years one month.

198. Celestinus the fifth, an Hermit, was easily persuaded to quit the Chair:
the Cardinals persuading it was above his ability: so he resigned, was
imprisoned and died; he sat one year and five months.

199. Bonifacius the eighth, by his general Bull exempted the Clergy from being
chargeable with Taxes and Payments to temporal Princes; first set forth the
Decretals, and instituted the Feast of Iubilee.

200. Benedictus the eleventh, a Lombard, was a man of great humility, desired
to compose all Brawls: but was poisoned in a Figg, as some say, having sat
eight months and seventeen days.

201. Clemens the fifth, first made Indulgences and Pardons saleable; he
removed the Papal See from Rome to Avignon in France, where it continued for
seven years; he sat eight years.

202. Johannes the twenty third, he Sainted Thomas of Aquine, and Thomas of
Hereford, challenged Supremacy over the Greek Church, and died, having sat
nineteen years and four months.

203. Benedictus the twelfth, a man of that constancy, as by no means to be
swayed from that which he judged to be right; he died in the seventh year and
third month of his Papacy.

204. Clemens the sixth; a dreadful Pestilence in Italy was in his time, so
that scarce a tenth man remained alive; he died, having sat ten years six
months and twenty eight days.

205. Innocencius the sixth, a Lawyer, burnt John de Rupe scissa, for
foretelling shrewd things of Antichrist; he sat nine years.

206. Vrbanus the fifth, a great Stickler for Popish Privileges; he confirmed
the Order of St. Brigitt; being poisoned (as it is thought) he died, having sat
eight years and four months.

207. Gregorius the eleventh returned the Papal Chair again to Rome; he
Excommunicated the Florentines, and sat seven years five months.

208. Vrbanus the sixth; Gunpowder was Invented in his time; he made fifty four
Cardinals, held a Jubilee to gather money, and died having sat eleven years and
eight months.

209. Bonifacius the ninth, scarce thirty years old when made Pope; very
ignorant, and a great seller of Church Livings; he sat fourteen years and nine
months.

210. Innocentius the seventh demanded the Moiety of Ecclesiastical Benefices
both in France and England, but was stoutly denied; he sat but two years.

211. Gregorius the twelfth swore to resign for the peace of the Church, but
collusion discerned betwixt him and Benedict, both were outed.

212. Alexander the fifth, a Cretan, a man of great Sanctity and Learning; he
deposed Ladistaus, King of Naples and Apulia; and sat but eight months.

213. Johannes the twenty fourth of Naples; by his consent a Council was
Assembled at Constance, where himself was deposed.

214. Martinus the fifth condemned Wickcliffe, burnt John Husse, and Jerome of
Prague his Followers; he sat fourteen years odd months.

215. Eugenius the fourth, a Venetian, refused to appear at the Council of
Basil, who thereupon deposed him; he sat sixteen years.

216. Nicholaus the fifth, of Genoua; in his time the Turks took
Constantinople; he built the Vatican, and died in the eighth year of his Papacy.

217. Calistus the third, a Spaniard, sent Preachers throughout Europe, to
animate Princes to War against the Turks; sat but three years.

218. Pius the second, an Italian, approved of the marriage of the Clergy; and
turned out diverse Cloystered Nuns; and sat six years.

219. Paulus the second exceeded all his Predecessors in Pomp and Show,
enriched his Miter with all kind of precious Stones; honored the Cardinals
with a Scarlet Gown, and reduced the Jubilee from fifty to twenty five years.

220. Sixtus the fourth ordained a Guard to attend his Person; was the first
Founder of the Vatican Library, and brought in Beads; sat thirteen years.

221. Innocentius the eighth, of Genoua, much given to excess in drinking and
venery; he sat seven years and ten months.

222. Alexander the sixth first openly acknowledged his Nephews (as they call
their Bastards) to be his sons, was incestuous with his daughter, and gave
himself to the Devil; he sat eleven years.

223. Pius the third sought to hunt the French men out of Italy, but died in
the interim of an Ulcer in his Leg, having sat twenty five days.

224. Julius the second, more Soldier than Prelate, passing over a Bridge of
Tyber, threw his Key into the River, and brandished his sword; Excommunicated
Lewis of France, and sat nine years three months.

225. Leo the tenth burnt Luther's Books, declaring him an Heretic: Luther did
the like at Wittenberge with the Popes Canon Law, declaring him for a
Persecutor, Tyrant, and the very Antichrist.

226. Adrian the sixth, a Low Country man, made show at his entrance of
Reformation, but was diverted; the Lutherans began to spread, and the Turks to
approach: these and other things broke him so that he died in his second year.

227. Clemens the seventh, of Florence; in his time Rome was Sacked, and the
Pope made Prisoner by the Duke of Burbon; the Popes Supremacy cast off in
England by King Henry the eighth; some say he died of the lousy disease.

228. Paulus the third called the Council at Trent; prostituted his Sister;
committed incest with his daughter; poisoned her husband; attempted the
chastity of his Niece, found in the act he was marked by her husband; he was a
Necromancer.

229. Julius the third gave his Cardinals Hat to a Sodomitical boy, called
Innocentius; in his time Casa, Archbishop of Beneventum, Printed a Book in
defense of Sodomy; England reconciled to the Mother Church in Queen Mary's
days.

230. Marcellus the second, an Hetruscan; he esteemed the Lutherans worse than
Turks; and persuaded Charles the fifth and Ferdinand, rather to turn their
Forces against them; he was Pope but twenty three days.

231. Paulus the fourth, the Neapolitane, a great Patron of the Jesuits and
Inquisition, in which had been made away one hundred and fifty thousand persons
for Religion; being hated for his cruelty, after his death his Statue was cast
into Tyber.

232. Pius the fourth continued the Council at Trent, and brought it to an end,
and thereby settled and confirmed the interest of the Church of Rome: caused it
to be received as Ecumenical; his Legates forbid footing in England by Queen
Elizabeth. Venery and Luxury shortened this Popes days: and then succeeded.

233. Pius the fifth, a Lombard, commanded the Whores in Rome to be married or
whipped. He had a hand in the death of Prince Charles of Spain, and of our King
James his Father, and in most of the Treasons against Queen Elizabeth, whom he
Excommunicated by Bull; he left his Seat to

234. Gregorius the thirteenth, a Bononian; the Massacre at Paris was by this
man's procurement. He altered the Calendar to his New Style, which anticipates
ten days the old account; he Excommunicated and outed the Archbishop of
Collen, because he married; would have disposed of the Kingdom of Portugal, but
was prevented.

235. Sixtus the fifth, of Marca Anconae, Excommunicates and praises the Murder
of Henry the third of France by Iaquez Clement: blesses the Banner of Spain
against England in 88. quarrels with Spain for Naples, and wiped the Jesuits
of a great mass of money. The Cardinal Bellarmine Dedicates his Controversies
to him, yet being asked his judgment of him when dead, said, He thought he was
damned.

236. Vrbanus the seventh, a Genoway, ascended the Chair after him, o^ whom
there is the less to be said in that he enjoyed his Popedom but a fourteenth
night, and then he left it to who should come after, dying before his
inauguration. The Seat not long empty was supplied by

237. Gregorius the fourteenth, of Millaine; he held a Jubilee, and exhausted
the Treasury of the Church, which Sixtus before had sealed by an Oath, to be
employed in the recovery of the Holy Land; he cursed King Henry of Navarre as a
relapsed Heretic; his Bulls were burnt by the hands of the Hangman; he died of
the Stone before he had sat one year out.

238. Innocentius the ninth, a Bononian, for the two months he was in, he
expressed an hatred against the King of Navarre, and a good liking of the
Jesuits: one year four months and three days made an end of four Popes: and
then came

239. Clemens the eighth made Henry of France turn Papist to be quiet; much
troubled with the Gout, but eased, as he says, when the Archduke Maximilian
had kissed his gouty Toes.

240. Leo the eleventh came in with this Motto over his Arch-triumphal Pageant,
Dignus est Leo in virtute Agni, accipere librum and solvere septem signacula
ejus: but a Fevor ended him before he had sat twenty eight days.

241. Paulus the fifth, an Italian, promoted the Powder Plot; interdicted the
State of Venice, whereupon the Jesuits were banished; the Oath of Allegiance
to King James forbidden by Breves from this Pope.

242. Gregorius the fifteenth, a Bononian, Elected by way of Adoration; he
instigates the French against the Protestants, Saints Ignat-Loyola, and
quarrels with the Venetians; after two years was chosen

243. Vrbanus the eighth, a Florentine, he advances his Kindred; in his time
the Archbishop of Spalato turned from Papist to Protestant; and thence to
Papist again; he was a politer Scholar than most of them.

244. Innocentius the tenth.

245. Alexander the seventh.

CHAP. IV. Of such men as have been the Framers and Composers of Bodies of Laws
for diverse Nations and Countries.
IT was the saying of Plato, That there was a necessity that Laws should be
made for men, and that they should be obliged to live according to them: or
otherwise, men would differ but very little from the Beasts themselves. The
reason of this is, That no man is naturally so well composed, as rightly to
understand what things do best conduce to the public good of humane life, or
if he do, yet he either cannot or will not always act according to that which
in his judgment is the best Hence it is that so many Nations have submitted to
the wisdom of some one that has been eminent amongst them, and contended to
live by the rules they have prescribed.

1. Lycurgus was the Lawgiver to the Lacedaemonians; Plut. in Ly^urg. p. 57.
Justin. hist. l. 3. p. 55, 56.
and when by his Institutions he had brought Sparta to that form of a
Republic, which he had desired: He then Assembled them all, where he told them
that in most parts the Commonwealth was so framed, as it might rightly serve
to the improvement both of their virtue and felicity. But that there was now
behind the chiefest and most important head of all, which he should not take
upon him to impart unto them, till such time as he had consulted the Oracle.
That they should therefore firmly cleave to the present Laws, nor should
deviate from, nor change any thing therein till such time as he should return
from Delphos. They all promised him, and having taken an Oath of the Kings,
Senate and People to that purpose, he went to Delphos, where when he came, he
enquired of Apollo, if the frame and model of his Laws were such, as that his
Citizens might in the observation of them be made virtuous and prosperous?
Apollo made answer that all was well done, and that so long as they lived
thereby, they should be most famous. This answer he sent back to Sparta, which
done he resolved, that the Spartans should never be freed from their Oath they
had given him, and to that purpose he underwent a voluntary banishment and
death in Crcet (says Aristocrates) having beforehand besought his Host and
entertainer, That as soon as he was dead, he should cause his body to be burnt,
and the ashes thereof cast into the Sea, that so no remainder of him might be
brought to Sparta, lest they thereby pretending he was returned, should
disengage themselves from their Oath, and attempt any change in the
Commonwealth.

2. Solon was the Lawgiver to the Athenians, Plut. in Solon. p. 81. Aelian.
var. hist. l. 8. c. 10. p. 221. Justin. hist. l. 2. p. 38.
and when Anacharsis did deride his endeavors in this kind, that went about to
repress the injuries and extravagancies of his Citizens with a few written
words, Which, said he, are no better than Spiders Webs, and which the stronger
will break at their pleasure; Solon returned, that men will be sure to stand to
those Covenants which will bring manifest disadvantages to the infringers of
them. Adding that he had so framed and tempered his Laws for Athens, that it
should manifestly appear to all of them, That it was more for their concern
strictly to observe, than in any thing to violate and infringe them.

Plut. in Solon. p. 87.
3. Draco was also before him a Lawgiver at Athens, whose Laws were antiquated
by Solon, by reason o^ their severity and rigor: for he punished all sorts of
faults (almost) with death. He that was convicted of Idleness died for it; and
he that had stolen an Apple or handful of Herbs, was to abide the same
sentence, as i^ h^ had committed Sacrilege: So that Demades afterward said
wittily, That Draco's Laws were not written with Ink but blood. They say that
Draco himself being asked, Why he punished even petty Larcenies with death?
made this answer, That the smallest of them did deserve that, and that there
was not a greater punishment he could find out for greater Crimes.

H^^l. Cosm. p. 6^8. Texto. Offi^. l. 1. c. 8. p. 25.
4. Z^molxis was the Lawgiver of Thrace, a Native of that Country, who having
been brought up under Pythagoras, and returning home prescribed them good and
wholesome Laws; assuring them, That if they did observe the same, they should go
unto a place when they left this World, in which they should enjoy all manner
of pleasure and contentment. By this means having gotten some opinion of a
Divinity amongst them, he absented himself, and was afterward worshipped by
them as a god.

Diodor Sic. Biblioth. l. 13. p. 336.
5. Diocles was the Lawgiver of the Syracusans, he punished offenses with
inexorable severity, and for such as transgressed, there was no hope of pardon.
Amongst others of his Laws this was one, That no man should presume to enter
armed into the Forum, and Assembly of the people; in case any should, he should
suffer death, no exception being made in case of imprudence, or any kind of
necessity. One day when the news was, That the enemy had broke into their
Fields, Diocles hasted out against them with his Sword by his side. Upon the
way as he went, it sell out, That there was a Sedition and tumult amongst the
people in their Assembly, whither he imprudently diverts, armed as he was, when
presently a private person that had observed him, began to cry out, That he had
broken the Laws which himself had made: Diocles turning toward his Accuser,
No, said he (with a loud voice) but they shall now have their Sanction; which
said, he drew out his Sword, and thrust it through his own throat that he died.

Diod. Sic. Bi^l. l. 12. p. 283. Lips. manit. l. 2. c. 9. p. 237. H^yl Cos^. p.
76. Zuin. Theat. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 56. Aelian. var. hist. l. 13. p. 24. p. 375.
6. Zalencus was the Lawgiver of the Locrians; he made a Law, That the
Adulterer should be punished with the loss of both his eyes: his own son
happened to be the first offender in that kind, therefore to show the love of a
Father, and the sincerity of a Judge, he put out one of his sons eyes, and one
of his own. He also provided by his Laws, That no woman should be attended in
the Street, with more than one Maid, but when she was drunk. That no woman
should go abroad at night, but when she went to play the Harlot. That none
should wear Gold or embroidered apparel, but when they meant to set themselves
to open sale. And that men should not wear Rings and Tissues, but when they
went about some act of uncleanness; and many others of this mould: By means
whereof, both men and women were restrained from all extraordinary trains of
attendance and excess of apparel: the common consequents of a long and
prosperous tranquillity.

7. Charondas the Lawgiver of the Thurians in Greece, Diod. Sic. Bibl. l. 12
p. 282. Lips. mon. l. 2. c. 9. p. 238. Lon. T^eat. p. 416.
amongst others of his Laws, had made this against civil factions, and for
prevention of sudden and tumultuary slaughters, That it should be Capital for
any man to enter the Assembly of the people armed with any weapon about him. It
fell out that as he returned from abroad, he appointed a Convention of the
people, and (like unto the forementioned Diocles) appeared therein armed as he
was. When his opposers told him, That he had openly broken the Law of his own
making, by entering the place in such manner as he did: It is very true, said
he, but withal I will make the first sanction of it, and thereupon drawing his
Sword, he fell upon it, so that he died in the place.

8. Pharamond was the first King of the French, D' Avila. Civil Wars, l. 1. p.
0. Heyl. Cosm. p. 177.
and a Lawgiver amongst them; it is said, That he was the Maker of the Law
called the Salick Law, by which the Crown of France may not descend unto the
Females, or (as their saying is) fall from the Lance to the Distaff. Whence
this Law had its name of Salique is uncertain, some say from the words Si
aliqua so often used in it; others because it was proposed by the Priests
called Salii: or that it was decreed in the Fields which take their name from
the River Sala: But Haillan, one of their best Writers affirms, That it was
never heard of in France, till the time of Philip the long, Anno 1315. Others
say it was made by Charles the Great, after the Conquest of Germany, where the
incontinent lives of the women living about the River Salae (in the modern
Mis^ia) gave both the occasion and the name, De terra vero Salica nullae portio
haereditatis mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexum tota terr^ haereditas
perveniat, are the words of the Law. This terra Salica the Learned Seldom, in
his Titles of Honor, Englishes, Knights Fee, or Land holden by Knights
Service, and proves his Interpretation by a Record of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, cited by Bodinus.

9. King Richard the first of England, H^y^. Cosm. p. 230.
as Lord paramount of the Seas, immediately on his return from the Holy Land,
the Island of Oleron being then in his possession, as a member of his Dukedom
of Aquitaine, did there declare and establish those Maritime Laws, which for
near five hundred years have generally been received by all the States of the
Christian World, which frequent the Ocean, for the regulating of Sea affairs,
and deciding of Maritime Controversies: From thence they are called the Laws of
Oleron; Quae quidem leges and Statuta, per Dominum Richardum quondam Regem
Angliae, in reditu a terra Sancta correcta fuerunt, interpretata, declarata,
and in Insula de Oleron publicata, and nominata in Gallica Lingua la Loy d'
Oleron, etc. says an old Record, which I ^ind cited in a Manuscript discourse
of Sir John Buroughs, entitled the Sovereignty of the British Seas.

10. Nicodorus was a famous Wrastler and Champion in his younger time, Aelian.
var. hist. l. 2. c. 23. p. 63.
but having taken leave of those youthful exercises, and grown into years, he
became the Lawgiver of the Mantineans, amongst whom he lived; and by the
prudent composure of his Laws he brought much greater honor to his Country,
than when he was publicly proclaimed Victor in his former Achievements. It is
said, That the body of his Laws were framed for him by Diagoras Melius.

Laert. l. 1. p. 19.
11. Pittacus made Laws for the Mitylenians, and having ten years presided
amongst them, after he had well settled the affairs of their Republic, he
voluntarily resigned up his power. Amongst other his Laws, this was one, That
he who committed a fault in his Drunkenness should undergo a double punishment,
one for his fault, and the other for being drunk. This Law he made on purpose
to preserve his Mitylenians in temperance, because their Island abounded with
Wine.

(...). in (...) N^^e p. 70, 71. Live. hist. l. 1. p. 8.
12. Numa Pompilius was the first Lawgiver amongst the Romans, and he gave out
that he conversed in the Woods with the Goddess Aegeria, that so by that
celestial converse, which he would have it thought he enjoyed, he might procure
the greater estimation to himself, and the more reverence unto those Laws that
he sought to establish amongst them. He ordered and disposed of the year into
twelve Months, appointed Priests to Mars, an Altar to Jupiter, a Temple to
Faith, and another to the god Terminus. He was the Author of the Vestal
Virgins, and of sundry Rites and Ceremonies amongst the Romans, seeking to
withdraw them from their Martial humor, by endeavoring to render them in love
with devotion and peace, and the Arts of Tillage and Husbandry in the Fields.

Plut. in T^^seo, p. 7. Diod. l. 2. p. 74. Halica^^nas. Antiq. l. 2. p. 45.
13. Minos was the first who is said to have constituted the Republic of the
Cretans, which Homer says was the most ancient of all other; nine years was
this Prince daily busied in the framing and composing of his Laws; for the
better ordering of which, he is reported to have retired himself into a Cave,
and there to make his abode under ground.

Zuin. Theat. ^ol. 6. l. 1. p. 1566.
14. Aegidius Fontana (after the irruption of Atila) with diverse Patrician
Families, retired to the parts, whereabout Venice now is; thither also was
there a great con^lux of the most Noble Persons from all the Neighboring
Cities: and this was the man who first gave Laws to the new City of Venice, and
from their Author they are at this day called The Aegidian Laws.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 6. l. 1. p. 1567.
15. Tuisco, said to be the son of Noah, the Father and first King of the
Germans and Sarmatians, considering that without justice and sense of Religion,
people could neither improve into a Commonwealth, nor have their licentious
practices under any restraint, framed Laws and Ordinances for them; these he
comprehended in Verses, and caused them to be publicly and privately sung,
lest any should pretend to the oblivion or ignorance of them.

16. Donvallo Molmicius, Po^yd. l. 1.
King of the Britains, whereas the former Kings passed their inglorious lives
in idleness and sloth, and in the use of those Laws only which were made by
Martia the Wife of King Gintoline, he restored the Military Art almost utterly
extinct, and withal established new, and those wholesome Laws, called from him
the Molmician Laws; he gave the right of Sanctuary to Churches; was the first
who wore a Crown of Gold; countenanced and rewarded such as were Students in
good arts; constituted a Standard for Weights and Measures; severely punished
Thieves, and all manner of Rogues; decreed the breadth of diverse Roads and
Highways, and that the right of them should remain in the King. And lest
there should be a frequent scarcity of Corn through the abundance of Cattle, he
ordered upon a penalty, how many Ploughs each County should have in it; and
that no Magistrate, or Creditor should seize upon any Cattle employed in
draught, in case any other Goods were remaining sufficient to satisfy the debt.

17. Cangius or Cingis Chan, Zuin. Theat. vol. 6. l. 1. p. 1568.
at first a man of base condition, and a Brazier or Blacksmith, afterward
raised to high degree, was the Lawgiver to the Scythians or Tartars. His
Decrees were to this purpose, That they should avoid pleasures, be content with
such things as came next to hand: That they should love one another, and ever
prefer the public welfare to any private emolument whatsoever. That they
should do nothing rashly, possess no grounds, marry many Wives, and when need
required do any of those things, which no necessity would before compel them to
do; and that they should preserve truth in their words, and justice in their
deeds, that no man might be deceived or circumvented by them.

18. S. Olaus, King of Norway, Zuin. Theat. vol. 6. l. 1. p. 1567.
whereas the people in those days lived without any known Rule, and were
scattered up and down like a sort of wild men; he gave them Laws, and thereby
reduced them to a more civil and better state of life: the ancient Monuments of
his Laws are to this day held in great veneration by that people.

19. Euricus, King of the Goths in Spain, Zuin. Theat. vol. 6. l. 1. p. 1566.
first gave Laws to his own Subjects, which King Leovigildus afterward
augmented and increased, making void such as were found to be superstuous.

CHAP. V. Of Ambassadors, what their Negotiations, and after what manner they
have behaved themselves therein.
IT highly concerns Princes and Republics to make choice of such men for their
Ambassadors, as are of an acuteness beyond other men; of great judgment and
experience in affairs, and of an uncommon diligence in the observations of all
things, with the measures and moments of them. A natural courage is also
(sometimes perhaps) as requisite a qualification as any of the rest; where most
of these are, there business is most happily effected, and where a defect is
observed, the Negotiation for the most part miscarries that way. Val. Max. l.
c. p. Live. hist. l. 44. p. Zon. Annal. tom. 2. p. 70. Ius^in. hist. l. 34. p.
266. Plin. not. hist. Plut. Apoth. reg. etc. p. 437. Camer. oper. subc. cent.
1. c. 22. p. 153. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. in Heliotrop. l. 5. c. 12. p. 588.


1. Publius Popilius Laena being sent from the Senate and People of Rome to
King Antiochus, to forbid him to make any enterprise upon Egypt, and to
command him to depart away in case he was entered upon it: At his coming the
King offered to embrace and welcome him, because they were friends, ever since
the time wherein Antiochus had been Hostage at Rome. But Popilius gave back,
saying, That particular friendship was at that time to be laid aside, when the
concerns of the Public were to be treated: Thereupon he delivered into his
hand the commands of the Senate; when the King delayed to return his answer,
and demanded some time wherein he might advise thereof with his friends,
Popilius with a Wand he had in his hand, began to mark out a Circle somewhat
spacious about the Chair of Antiochus, and said, Sir, call hither what friends
you please, to resolve with them touching this affair within this Round that
you see, and think not to go out from hence without a Declaration of War or
Peace, between the People of Rome and you. This severe manner of proceeding
abated the Pride of Antiochus, so that he presently made answer, That he would
obey the Senate.

Herod. l. 4. p. 266. Bruson Facetiar. l. 3. c. 30. p. 238.
2. When Darius, the son of Hystaspis, made an Expedition into Scythia, the
Scythians had wasted the Country of necessary Provisions: for want of which
Darius his Army was brought into great streights: which the Kings of Scythia
understanding, they sent an Ambassador to him with these Presents, a Bird, a
Mouse, a Frogg, and five Arrows. The Persians enquired o^ him that brought
them, what they intended by them? The Scythian told them, That he had no other
thing in charge, but that as soon as he had delivered them, he should return
with all speed, only to declare, That if the Persians were ingenious, they
should interpret what these Presents meant and signified. When the Persians
heard this, they consulted about it: The opinion of Darius was, That the
Scythians did yield themselves, together with the Earth and Water, upon this
reason, That the Mouse is bred in the Earth, and seeds upon the same food with
man, the Frog lives in the Water, the Bird might represent the Horse, and that
by sending Arrows, they seemed to deliver up themselves. But Gobryas, one of
the seven Princes that had ejected the Magi, was of opinion, That those
Presents intimated thus much, O ye Persians, unless as Birds ye fly in the Air,
or as Mice ye retreat under the Earth, or as Froggs ye swim in the Water, ye
shall not return whence ye came, but shall be slain by these Arrows. The
Persians interpreted it according to his opinion; and had it not been by very
accident, neither Darius, nor any of his Army, had ever seen Persia more, being
glad to fly, and happy that he found a way of escape, for the Scythians though
in pursuit missed of him, as thinking he had taken another way.

Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 744.
3. Alexander the Great was vehemently incensed against the Lampsacenians, who
sent Anaximenes as their Ambassador to appease him: Alexander at the first
sight of him, that he might cut off all occasion of being prevailed with, as to
any favor in their behalf, solemnly swore, That although Anaximenes was his
Master, yet he would not either grant or do any of those things that he should
desire of him. Then said the other, I desire of thee O King, that thou would
utterly destroy the Country of Anaximenes thy Master. Alexander for his Oaths
sake was thus constrained (though otherwise much against his mind) to pardon
the Lampsacenians.

4. Nicholaus de Book, Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 746.
a Knight, was sent by Valdemarus the Marquess of Brandenburg, as his
Ambassador to Franckfurt, in his Princes name, about the Election of a King of
the Romans. The Competitors were Philippus Pulcher, Duke of Austria, and Lewis,
Duke of Bavaria; the Marquess had sent his Letters in favor of Frederick that
he might be King, but his Ambassador expecting to receive nothing from
Fredederick; and perceiving that most men's minds were inclinable to Lewis, he
scraped out the name of Frederick out of all his Princes Parchments; and
contrary to his mind, instead thereof put in the name of Lewis; for which
In^idelity, the Marquess upon his return kept him in Prison, and suffered him
there to dye of Famine.

5. The people of Florence sent one Franciscus, Zuin. Theat. vol. 3. l. 4. p.
746.
a Lawyer, but indeed an unlearned Person, as their Ambassador to Joan Queen
of Naples. At his coming, he was informed by a Courtier, That it was her
Majesty's pleasure, that he should return on the morrow. In the mean time he
had heard that the Queen had no aversion to a handsome man; and therefore upon
his return, having had his Audience, and discoursed with her about many things,
at last he told her, That he had something to deliver to her in private: The
Queen withdrew with him into a Privy Chamber, supposing that he had something
to impart to her, which was not fit to communicate with others: here it was
that the fool, prepossessed with an opinion of his own handsomness, desired the
Queen that he might be admitted to her bed: the Queen, without alteration of
her Countenance, looking him in the face, demanded if the Florentines had made
that part of his Commission? And while the Ambassador remained silent, and
covered with blushes, she bad him return, and caused it to be entered with the
rest of his instructions, and dismissed him without any other sign of her Anger.

6. Arnald Whitfeild, Stowes An. p. 789.
Chancellor of the Realm of Denmark, with Christian Barmkan, his Assistant,
came Ambassador from the King of Denmark to Queen Elizabeth. His request was,
That the King his Master might make a motion of Peace betwixt her Majesty and
the King of Spain, and proceed farther therein, if he found both Parties
addicted thereto; he also desired open Traffic with Spain; and that Goods
might not be stayed on the Narrow Seas as it had been heretofore. And having
Audience upon the day that her Majesty was born, he took occasion to say, That
since it had pleased God on that day (which he was informed was her Majesty's
birthday) to glorify the World with so gracious a Creature, who had brought
so great happiness to the Realm, and the Neighbor Kingdoms, he doubted not but
that the King his Master should in that happy day have an happy Answer of his
request, etc. I blame you not (said the Queen) to expect a reasonable and
sufficient Answer: but you may think it a great Miracle, that a Child born at
four a clock this morning should be able to Answer so wise and learned a man as
you are, sent from so great a Prince as you be, about so great and weighty
Affairs you speak of, and in an unknown Tongue, by three of the clock in the
afternoon: and with like prudent and gracious words, she gave him leave to
depart.

7. There was a Treaty on the part of Spain for a Marriage with our Prince
Henry, Court of K. James by A. W. p. 170, 171.
wherein Salisbury, then Secretary (a little man but a great Statesman)
instantly discovered the juggling before any other did think of any: For
although it went forward cunningly, yet did Salisbury so put the Duke of Lerma
unto it, that either it must be so, or they must confess their juggling: The
Duke of Lerma denied that there ever had been any treaty, or any intention from
that State; Salisbury sent for the Ambassador to a ^ull Council, told him how
he had abused the King and State, about a Treaty for Marriage, which he had no
Commission for, that therefore he was liable to the Laws of our Kingdom: for
when any Ambassador does abuse a State by their Masters Commission, then the
servant was freed, but without Commission was culpable and liable to be
punished by the Laws of that State, as being disavowed to be Servant to the
King his Master: The Ambassador answered gravely, He did not understand the
cause of his coming, therefore was then unprepared to give any answer: but on
Monday he would come again (this being Saturday) and give his Answer. On Monday
he comes, begins with these words, My Soul is my God's, my Life my Master's, my
Reputation my own, I will not forfeit the first and last to preserve the
second; then lays down his Commission and Letters of Instruction under the
Kings own hand; he acquitted himself honestly to this State, but was lost to
his own, being instantly sent ^or home, where he lived and died in disgrace.

P^^^l. M^ll. tom. 1. p. 12^.
8. The Spartans sent their Ambassadors to Athens, who declared in the open
Senate, That they came from their State, with full power to comprimise all
matters of difference betwixt them, and to put an end to all Controversy.
Alcibiades, that in emulation to Nicias had a desire to continue the rupture,
was terrified with this Declaration of theirs, and thereupon made means for a
private conference with the Ambassadors; when he came, What mean you my Lords,
said he? have you forgotten that our S^nate is humane and moderate toward
those they treat with? But the people are high spirited and desirous of great
matters. If therefore in the Assembly of the people, you shall declare you come
with full power, they will impose upon you what they please; rather deal so
with them as if you had not the full power: and I for my part, will do all I am
able in favor of your State; and confirmed it to them with an Oath. Next day
at the Assembly of the people, Alcibiades with great civility demanded of the
Ambassadors in what quality they came, whether as Plenipotentiaries or not?
They denied what they had said before in the Senate, and declared before the
people, that they had not full power to conclude matters. Hereupon Alcibiades
immediately cried out, That they were a sort of unfaithful and inconstant men,
no way to be trusted: by this means he so excited both the Senate and People
against them, that they could do nothing.

CHAP. VI. Of such as were eminent Seamen, or discoverers of Lands, or
Passages by Sea, formerly unknown.
WHen Anacharsis was once asked, which he thought to be the greatest number, of
the living or the dead? Of which sort, said he, do you take those to be that
Sail upon the Seas? He doubted, it seems, whether they were to be reputed
amongst the living, who permitted their lives to the pleasure ^f the Winds and
Waves. Had all others been possessed with the same timorous Sentiments, the
World had wanted those Noble Spirits, who could not rest satisfied, till by
their own hazards they had brought one Hemisphere to some acquaintance with the
other.

1. Christopher Columbus born at Nervy in the Signiory of Genoa, Iov. Elog. l
4. p. 192. H^yl. Co^m. p. 1012, 1013.
being a man of great abilities, and born to undertake great matters, could not
persuade himself (the motion of the Sun considered) but that there was another
World, to which that glorious Planet, did impart both his life and heat when he
went from us. This World he purposed to seek after, and opening his design to
the State of Genoa, Anno 1486. was by them rejected. Upon this repulse he sent
his Brother Bartholomew to King Henry the seventh of England, who in his way
happened unfortunately into the hands of Pirates, by whom detained a long
while, at last he was enlarged. As soon as he was set at liberty, he repaired
to the Court of England, where his proposition found such a cheerful
entertainment at the hands of the King, that Christopher Columbus was sent for
to come thither also. But Christopher not knowing of his brothers imprisonment,
and not hearing from him, conceived the offer of his S^rvice to have been
neglected, and thereupon made his desires known at the Court of Castile; where
after many delays, and six years attendance on the business, he was at last
furnished with three Ships only, and those not for conquest but discovery. With
this small strength he sailed on the Ocean more than sixty days, yet could see
no Land, so that the discontented Spaniards began to mutiny, and refused to
move a foot forwards: just at that time it happened that Columbus did discern
the Clouds to carry a clearer color than they did before, and therefore
besought them only to expect three days longer, in which space, if they saw
not Land, he promised to return toward the end of the third day. One of the
company called Roderigo de Triane descried fire, an evident token they drew
near unto some shore. The place discovered, was an Island on the Coast of
Florida, called by Columbus St. Saviors, now counted one of the Lucaios.
Landing his men, and causing a Tree to be cut down, he made a Cross thereof,
which he erected near the place where he came on Land, and by that ceremony
took possession of the New World for the Kings of Spain, October 11. 1492.
Afterward he discovered and took possession of Hispaniola, and with much
Treasure and content returned to Spain, and was preferred by the Kings
themselves for this good service, first to be Admiral of the Indies, and in
conclusion to the title of the Duke De la Vega in the Isle of Iamaica. The next
year he was furnished with eighteen ships for more discoveries; in this second
Voyage he discovered the Islands of Cuba and Iamaica, and built the Town of
Isabella, after called Domingo in Hispaniola; from whence for some severities
used against the mutinous Spaniards, he was sent Prisoner to Castile, but very
honorably entertained, and absolved of all the crimes imputed to him. In 1497.
he began his third Voyage, in which he discovered the Countries of Pana and
Cu^^na on the firm land, with the Islands of Cubagna and Margarita, and many
other Islands, Capes and Provinces. In 1500. he began his fourth and last
Voyage; in the Course whereof coming to Hispaniola, he was unworthily denied
entrance into the City of Domingo, by Nicholas de Ovendo then Governor
thereof. After which scowring the Seacoasts, as far as Nombre de Trias; but
adding little to the fortune of his ^ormer discoveries, he returned back to
Cuba and Iamaica, and from thence to Spain; where six years after he dyed, and
was buried honorably at Sevil, Anno 1506.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 1014.
2. Columbus having led the way, was seconded by Americus Vesputius an
adventurous Florentine, employed therein by Emanuel King of Portugal, Anno
1501. on a design of finding out a nearer way to the Molucca's, than by the
Cape of good Hope: who though he passed no further than the Cape of St.
Augustines in Brasile; yet from him (to the great injury and neglect of the
first Discoverer) the Continent or main Land of this Country has the name of
America, by which it is still known and commonly called.

Heyl. Cosm. ibid.
3. To him succeeded John Cabott a Venetian, the Father of Sebastian Cabott, in
behalf of Henry the seventh King of England, who discovered all the North
Out-coasts of America, from the Cape of Florida in the South, to
New Foundland, and Terra de Laborador in the North, causing the American
Roytolets to turn homagers to the King and Crown of England.

Iovii ^log. l. 6. p. 348.
4. Ferdinandus Cortesius, was (as I suppose) the most famous of all the
Spaniards, for the discovery of new Lands and People. For passing the
Promontory of Cuba, that points directly to the West, and is under the Tropic
of Cancer, and leaving Iucatana and Colvacana on the left hand; he bent his
course till he attained the entrance of the great River Panucus, where he
understood by Interpreters he had in his former Voyage, that these were the
Shores of the Continent; which by a gentle turning was on this side connected
with the Shores of Vraban: but on the other, Northward, after a vast tract o^
Land did conjoyn it self with those Countries, which Seamen call Baccalaurae.
He also was informed that the large and rich Kingdoms of Mexico were extended
from the South to the West: these Kingdoms he was desirous to visit, as
abounding in Gold, and all kind of plenty; the Clime temperate, as situate
under the Equator. Here making advantage of the difference betwixt two Kings,
contending with each other, having strengthened himself, but especially by the
terror of his Guns and Horses, he overcame Montezuma, the most potent of all
the Kings, made himself Master of the great City Temistitana, and took
possession of that rich and fertile Country in the Name of his Master. But long
he did not enjoy it, for the same of these great actions drew the envy of the
Court upon him, so that he was sent for back, having (as a reward of his
virtue) received the Town of Vallium, from Charles the Emperor, to him and his
Posterity for ever. He afterward followed Caesar in his African Expedition to
Algier, where he lost his precious Furniture by Shipwreck. Of a mean man's Son
of the poor Town of Medelinum, Caesar raised him to the degree of a Nobleman;
some few years after which he dyed at home, not as yet aged.

5. Sir Francis Drake was born nigh South Tavestock in Devonshire, Full. Holy
state, l. 2. c. 22. p. 123, etc. Hack^uyts Voyages vol. 3. p. 730, etc. Heyl.
Cosm. p. 1075. Stow. C^^^. p. 689.
and brought up in Kent, being the Son of a Minister, who fled into Kent for
fear of the six Articles, and bound his Son to the Master of a small Bark,
which traded into France and Zealand; his Master dying unmarried bequeathed his
Bark to him; which he sold, and put himself into farther employment, at first
with Sir John Hawkins; afterward upon his own account, Anno 1577. upon the
thirteenth of December with a fleet of five Ships, and Barks, and one hundred
seventy four men, Gentlemen and Sailors, he began that famous Navigation of
his, wherein he sailed round about the world, with great vicissitude of
Fortune; he finished that Voyage, arriving in England November the third 1580.
the third year of his setting out, having in the whole Voyage, though a curious
searcher after the time, lost one day through the variation of several
climates. He feasted the Queen in his Ship at Dartford, who Knighted him for
his service, being the first that had accomplished so great a design. He is
therefore said to have given for his device, a Globe with this Motto, Tu primus
circumdedisti me, Thou first did Sail round me. A Poet then living directed
to him this Epigram.

Drake pererrati novit quem terminus Orbis,
Quemque simul Mundi vidit uterque Polus:
Si Taceant homines, facient te sydera notum,
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.
Drake whom th'encompast Earth so fully knew,
And whom at once both Poles of Heaven did view:
Should Men forget thee, Sol could not forbear
To Chronicle his fellow Travailer.
6. Sebastian Cabot, Hackl. voy. vol. 3. p. 7, etc.
a Venetian rigged up two Ships at the cost of Henry the seventh, King of
England, Anno 1496. intending to the Land of Cathai, and from thence to turn
toward India: to this purpose he aimed at a passage by the Northwest, but
after certain days he found the Land ran toward the North; he followed the
Continent to the fifty sixth degree under our Pole; and there finding the Coast
to turn toward the East, and the Sea covered with Ice, he turned back again,
sailing down by the Coast of that Land toward the Aequinoctial, which he
called Baccalaos, from the number of fishes found in that Sea like Tunnies,
which the Inhabitants call Baccalaos. Afterward he sailed along the Coast unto
thirty eight degrees, and provisions failing he returned into England, was made
Grand Pilot of England by King Edward the sixth, with the allowance of a large
pension of one hundred sixty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence,
during life.

7. Mr. Thomas Candish of Trimley in the County of Suffolk Esquire, Hackl. voy.
vol. 3. p. 803, etc.
departed out of Plymouth Thursday the twenty first of July 1586. with the
Desire, Stow. Chr^. p. 720.
a Ship of one hundred and twenty Tun, the Content of sixty Tun, and the
Hugh-gallant, a Bark of forty Tun, with one hundred twenty three Persons of all
sorts; with these he made an admirable and successful Voyage into the South
Sea; and from thence about the circumference of the whole Earth; and the ninth
of September 1588. after a terrible Tempest which carried away most part of
their Sayls, they recovered their long wished for Port of Plymouth in England,
whence they set forth in the beginning of their Voyage.

CHAP. VII. Of the Eloquence of some men, and the wonderful power of persuasion
that has been in their Speeches and Orations.
AMongst the Heathen, Mercury was accounted the God of Eloquence, and with the
rest of his Furniture, they allotted him a Rod or Wand, by virtue of which, he
had the power of conducting some souls to Hell, and ^reeing others from thence.
By which they would signify that the power of Eloquence is such, as it frees
from death such as the Hangman waited for; and as often exposes innocence to
the utmost severity of the Law. See something of the force of it in the
following Examples.

Val. Max. l. 8. c. 9. p. 231.
1. Hegesias, a Cyrenean Philosopher, and Orator, did so lively represent the
miseries of humane life in his Orations, and fixed the Images of them so deep
in the minds and hearts of his Auditors, that many of them sought their freedom
thence by a voluntary death. Insomuch that King Ptolomaeus was enforced to send
him a command, that he should forbear to make any public Orations upon that
Subject for the future.

Plut. in Pericl. p. 156. Sabell. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. p. 42.
2. Pericles the Athenian, was said to thunder and lighten, and to carry a
dreadful thunderbolt in his tongue, by reason of his Eloquence. Thucydides the
Milesian, one of the Nobles, and long his enemy in respect of State matters;
being asked by Archidamus the Spartan King, which was the best Wrastler of
Pericles or him? As soon, says he, as (wrestling with him) I have cast him to
the ground, he denies it, and persuades that he had not the fall, and withal
so efficaciously, that he makes all the Spectators to believe it. Whenever
Pericles was to make an Oration, he was very solicitous in the composure of it;
and whenever he was to speak in any cause, he ever used first to pray to the
gods, that no single word might fall from his lips, which was not agreeable to
the present matter in hand.

S^lin. c. 7. p. 196.
3. Many were famous amongst the Romans for Eloquence, but this was never an
hereditary privilege, save only in the family of the Curio's, in which there
were three Orators in immediate succession to each other.

4. John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, was bred in Baliol College; he was the
first English person of honor that graced Learning with the study thereof,
Full. Eccles. hist. in dedic. to lib. 2. p. 48.
in the days of King Edward the fourth, both at home and in foreign
Universities. He made so eloquent an Oration in the Vatican, in the presence of
Pope Pius the second (one of the least bad, and most learned of his Order) that
his Holiness was divided betwixt weeping and wondering thereat.

5. Demades was the Son of Demaeas a Mariner, Plut. in Demost. p. 850.
and from a Porter betook himself to the Commonwealth, in the City of Athens;
all men confess of him, that where he followed his own nature, he outshined all
others; and that the studied preparations of Demosthenes himself were excelled
by his extemporray Eloquence. Being sent Ambassador to Antipater who then lay a
dying, both He and his Son were slain by Cassander a Tribune of the Soldiers,
as being found to have sided with the enemy.

6. Demosthenes was the Son of a Cutler, Plut. in Demost. p. 859, 86^. Zuin.
Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1119.
or Sword-smith, the Scholar of Isaeus, whence he betook himself to the
Commonwealth, and though he had a stammering tongue, an undecent motion of the
shoulders, a weak hearing and want of breath; yet he corrected all these
imperfections, and by exercise at last surmounted them. He opposed King Philip
in his Orations, was the Author of the League betwixt the Thebans and
Athenians, and so the cause of the overthrow King Philip received at Chaeronea.
This was that Demosthenes who brought unto the Art of Speaking all that nature
and exercise, diligence and learning was able to contribute to it. He excelled
all his equals who pleaded in the Forum, in a sinewy and strong way of
speaking; in gravity and splendour he surpassed those that dealt in the
demonstrative way of Eloquence; as he also did the Sophists in Wit and Art.
When Antipater was become the Prince of Greece, he demanded the ten Orators by
his Ambassadors; whereupon Demosthenes fled to Calauria, to the Temple of
Neptune; but fearing to be drawn thence by Archias Antipater's Ambassador, he
sucked Poison out of his Ring where he had preserved it, to assist him in his
last extremity, and so dyed in the eighty second year of his age.

7. King Pyrrhus was so powerfully persuasive, Chetw. hist. coll. cent. 1. p.
11, 12.
that the Romans commanded their Ambassadors not to speak with him but by an
Interpreter, having had experience that those whom they had ^ormerly sent,
returned his Advocates.

8. Aeschines the Athenian, Zu^n. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1120.
was the Son of Atrometus, at first an Actor of Plays, then a Notary, and
afterward an Orator, wherein he proved excellent, had a sweet, easy and
pleasant pronunciation; he intermixed the Dorick with the Attick way; and was
highly praised for that he first found out how to speak copiously extempore;
indeed when he spoke in matters unpremeditated, he seemed to have a gift
altogether Divine. He heard Plato and Isocrates, but added much more to them by
his own ingenuity. He had in his speaking much of perspicuity and ornament, and
with gravity a certain pleasantness; so that as to the whole, the form of his
Orations was such, as was unimitable. Leaving Athens he went to Rhodes, where
being Advocate in a Cause, he corrupted the Judges, and thereupon together with
them was cast into Prison, where he drank Poison and dyed.

9. Lysias the Son of Cephalus a Syracusan, Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1119.
came to Athens by the persuasion of Pericles; of those Orations that go under
his name, A. Gell. l. 2. c. 5. p. 49.
two hundred and thirty were supposed to be genuine: his manner of speaking
seems facile, and yet is not easily imitated; none followed him in the purity
of his words save only Isocrates. Cicero says, he followed a slender way of
speaking, though there is something so strong in him as nothing is stronger. He
lived at Athens mostly, and died at the age of eighty three years. Phavorinus
used to say of Plato and him, Take or change any word in an Oration of Plato's
and you take from the eloquence; and the like will you do, if you take from or
change a word in any sentence of Lysias.

Coel. Rhod. l. 25. c. 3. p. 1157. Plut. in Cicer. p. 881.
10. M. Tullius Cicero was not only eloquent but the miracle of Eloquence,
representing the vigor of Demosthenes, the copiousness of Plato, and the
pleasantness of Isocrates all at once. He not only attained (by his study) to
all that was excellent in any; but by himself, he advanced and improved all
that was great in them; brought sorth by a peculiar gift of providence, as one
in whom Eloquence might make experiment of its utmost force: by the men of his
time he was said to reign in Causes, and by posterity so accounted of, that he
is said to have profited well, who is highly pleased with his Writings. He was
slain by the command of Antonius: so ^ell he whose Eloquence Caesar himself was
not able to resist; but found Ligarius wrested out of his hands by his
persuasive force, whom but just before he was resolved not to pardon.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1120.
11. Hyperides was one of the ten Orators of Athens, the Scholar of Plato and
Isocrates; so great was he in this art, that he is by many preferred before
Demosthenes. There are extant of his Orations fifty two which are thought to be
legitimate. King Antipater fetched him out of the Temple of Ceres at Hermi^ne,
whither he had fled, by the means of Archias, whom he employed to that purpose;
this man cut out the tongue of the Orator and slew him. His Son Glaucippus
disposed his bones into the Monument of the Family.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1119.
12. Isaeus was born at Chalcis, whence he went to Athens, where he was assisted
by Lysias; so that unless a man is well skilled in their forms, he knows not by
which of the two the Oration he reads was made, so like are they in the frame
of words and things. He taught Demosthenes at the price of ten thousand
Drachmes, for which he was famous. He left sixty four Orations, whereof yet
there are but fifty only that are verily thought to be his.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1120.
13. Dinarchus a Corinthian, was a young man at such time as Alexander made his
Expedition into Asia, about that time he removed himself to Athens with purpose
to live there. He heard Theophrastus who had taken up the School of Aristotle;
was familiar with Demetrius Phalerius, contended with the best Orators not by
public pleading, but making Orations for their enemies, siding with Antipater
and Cassander he was proscribed, and lived fifteen years an Exile.

Zuin. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1121.
14^ Cyneas a Thessalian, was the hearer of Demosthenes, and Ambassador of King
Pyrrhus. When he was sent to the Cities, he thought with Euripides that a fine
word might do as much as the sharp Sword; and King Pyrrhus used to profess,
that more Cities were subdued to him by the Eloquence of Cyneas, than by force
of his own Arms.

15. Scopelianus, when Domitianus the Emperor had set forth his Edict that no
Vines should be had in Asia (as supposing that plenty of Wine incited them to
Sedition) this affair seemed to require a prudent eloquent person who might be
publicly sent to deprecate the displeasure of the Emperor. Cael. Rhod. l. 20.
c. 11. p. 935.
Scopelianus was he who was pitched upon by all men, who by the force of his
Eloquence not only obtained what he went about, that men might plant Vines
there without offense to the Government; but further, that such men should be
punished, who neglected to do it; and departed well rewarded.

16. Eustathius a Cappadocian, Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1121.
was the Scholar of Iamblicus, a man of great Eloquence, sent Ambassador to
King Sapores of Persia, whom he so pleased at a Feast, that little wanted but
that Sapores had cast off his Tiara and Robe of State, for the Bishops Miter.
But his Courtiers prevented him, saying that he was a mere Impostor and
Enchanter instead of an Ambassador. All Greece made vows for his safe return
from thence, but he never came back again.

17. C. Julius Caesar learned of Apollonius Molon at Rhodes, Su^ton. l. 1. c.
55. p. 34. Zuin. Thea. vol. 4. l. 2. p. 1121.
he is said to be admirably fitted for the City Eloquence, and had so improved
his parts by his diligence, that without all question he merited the second
place in point of Eloquence; the first he would not have, as one that intended
rather to be the first in Power and Arms. Cicero himself writes to Brutus,
that he knew not any to whom Caesar should give place, as one that had an
Elegant, Splendid, Magnificent and Generous way of Speaking: And to Cornelius
Nepos, Whom, says he, will ye prefer before this man, even of those who have
made Oratory their busineC^ess, who is more acute or frequent than he in
sentences, who more Ornate or Elegant in words? He is said to have pronounced
his Orations with a sharp voice, and earnest motion and gesture, which yet was
not without its comeliness.

CHAP. VIII. Of the most famous Greek and Latin Historians.
BY the singular providence of God, and his great goodness it was, that where
the prophetic history of the Holy Scriptures breaks off, there we should have
an immediate supply from elsewhere; and we may almost say that in the very
moment where they have left, there it was that,

1. Herodotus the Halicarnassian began his History, who relates the Acts of
Cyrus, and the affairs of the Persian Monarchy, even unto the War of Xerxes,
the Histories of the Kingdoms of Lydia, Media, and especially of Egypt are set
down by him. An account he gives of the Ionians, the City of Athens, and the
Spartan and Corinthian Kings; excelling all profane Writers of History, both
in the Antiquity of the things he treats of, the multitude of Examples, and the
purity and sweetness of his Style. His History is continued for the series of
two hundred and thirty years, from Gyges the King of Lydia, the contemporary
with Manasses King o^ Judah, to the flight of Xerxes and Persians out of
Greece, which was in the year of the world 3485. Herodotus himself flourished
in the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, which was about the year of the
world 3540.

2. Thucydides the Athenian immediately succeeds him, who imbraceth in his
History the space of seventy years, that is from the flight of Xerxes unto the
twenty first year of the Peloponnesian war; for although he professedly
describes only that war betwixt the Athenians and Peloponnesians, wherein
himself was a General, yet by way of digression he has inserted an account of
those fifty years that are betwixt the end of Herodotus his History, and the
beginning of this war. Here he explains the affairs of Cities, as the former
had done of Monarchies, and has framed so illustrious and express an Image of
all those things that usually happen in the government of a Commonwealth; has
so lively represented the miseries that attend upon war, especially a civil and
intestine one, has composed his many Orations with that artifice and care;
that nothing can be thought more sinewy, and agreeable unto all times in the
world than his History.

3. Xenophon the Attick Be, whose unaffected sweetness and elegancy of Style
is such, that Antiquity admiring thereat, said the Graces had framed and
directed his Speech. He beginning at the end of Thucydides, has in seven Books
comprehended the events of forty years wars betwixt the principal Cities of
Greece, as far as to the battle of Mantinea, and the year of the world 3600.

4. Diodorus Siculus has set forth his Bibliotheque, or an universal history
of almost all the habitable world, accurately distinguished by times and years
in forty Books. In the five first of which he discourses the original of the
world; the Egyptian, Assyrian, Libyan, Greek Antiquities, and the affairs of
other Nations, before the Trojan War. The other thirty five, contain a Series
of years, no less than 1138. from the Trojan War to Julius Caesar: of all these
there are but fifteen Books extant: his sixteenth Book almost immediately
follows Xenophon, in which he treats of Philip of Macedon, who began to Reign
Anno Mumd. 3604. From thence he passes to Alexander and his Successors; and in
the end of his twentieth Book, which is the last of his extant, he reaches to
the year of the World 3664. which year falls directly into the tenth Book of
Livy; and upon the four hundred fifty second year from the building of Rome.

5. Titus Livius, born at Padua, was the Prince of the Latin History, excelling
all Latin Writers in the admirable gravity, copiousness and beauty of his
Speech. He has written a continued History of seven hundred forty six years,
from the building of Rome, in the year of the World 3212. to the fourth year
before the birth of Christ, which was the thirty seventh year of Augustus. Now
although of fourteen Decades, or one hundred and forty Books of Livy, there are
only three Decades, and half a fifth left; yet the Arguments of the rest of the
Books, and the Series of the principal Histories, may easily be observed from
Florus his Epitome. Livy died the twenty first year after the birth of Christ.

6. C^esias G^idius, a famous Historian of the Assyrian and Persian Affairs,
about the year of the World 3564. in the Expedition of Cyrus the younger
against his brother Artaxerxes was taken Prisoner, and for his skill in
Physic, was received into the Kings House and Family, where out of the Royal
Commentaries and Records, he composed the ancient History of the Kings of
Assyria, Babylon, and Persia, in twenty Books, having brought it down from
Ninus, as far as the seventh year after the taking of Athens by Lysander.

7. Plutarchus, of Cheronaea, flourished about the year of our Lord 100. the
ample Treasury of the Greek and Latin History; he wrote about fifty Lives of
the principal men amongst the Greeks and Romans, full of the best matter, wise
sentences, and choice rules of life. The Greek Lives, he begins with Theseus,
King of Athens, and ends with Philopoemenes, General of the Achaeans, who died
one hundred and eighty years before the birth of Christ. The Roman Captains, he
describes from Romulus as far as to Galba and Otho, who contended for the
Empire in the seventeenth year after the birth of Christ.

8. Arrianus, of Nicomedia, flourished Anno Christi 140. and in eight Books
wrote the Life and Acts of Alexander the Great; his Affairs in India, are
handled most copiously by him of all other, the whole is wrote in a singular
sweetness and elegancy of style.

9. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus wrote accurately the Roman History; the Original
of the City, Magistracy, Ceremonies, and Laws, are faithfully related by him;
and his History continued to the beginning of the first Punick War, and the
four hundred eighty ninth year from the building of the City. His first eleven
Books are all that are extant, in which he reaches to the two hundred and
twelfth year of the City. He ^lourished in the time of Augustus Caesar, and is
said to have lived in the Family of M. Varro.

10. Polybius, of Megalopolis, was the Master Counselor and daily Companion
of Scipio the younger, who in the year of the World 3800. razed Carthage: he
begins his Roman History, from the first Punick War; and of the Greek Nation
the Achaeans, from the fortieth year after the death of Alexander the Great; of
forty Books he wrote but five are left; and the Epitomes of twelve other, in
which he reaches to the Battle at Cynoscephale, betwixt King Philip of Macedon
and the Romans.

11. Salustius wrote many Parts of the Roman History, in a pure and quaint
brevity, of all which, little is left, besides the Conspiracy of Catiline,
oppressed by the Consul Cicero sixty years before the birth of Christ; and the
War of Iugurth, managed by C. Marius the Consul, in the forty fourth year
before the Conspiracy aforesaid.

12. Julius Caesar has wrote the History of his own Acts in the Gallick and
Civil Wars from the 696 year ab V. C. to the 706. and comprised them in
Commentaries upon every year, in such a purity and beautiful propriety of
expression, and such a native candor, that nothing is more terse, polite, more
useful and accommodate to the framing of a right and perspicuous expression of
our selves in the Latin Tongue.

13. Velleius Paterculus in a pure and sweet kind of speech has composed an
Epitome of the Roman History, and brought it down as far as the thirty second
year after the birth of Christ, that is, the sixteenth year of Tiberius, under
whom he flourished and was Questor.

14. Cornelius Tacitus, under Adrian the Emperor was Prefect of the Belgic
Gaul; he wrote a History from the death of Augustus to the Reign of Trajan, in
thirty Books; of which the five first contain the History of Tiberius; the last
eleven Books, from the eleventh to the twenty first, which are all that are
extant, reach from the eighth year of Claudius to the beginning of Vespasian,
and the besieging of Jerusalem by Titus, which was Anno Dom. 72. He has
comprised much in a little, is proper, neat, quick, and apposite in his style,
and adorns his discourse with variety of Sentences.

15. Suetonius was Secretary to Adrian the Emperor, and in a proper and
concise style, has wrote the Lives of the twelve first Emperors to the death
of Domitian, and the ninety eighth year of Christ; he has therein exactly kept
to that first and chief Law of History, which is, That the Historian should not
dare to set down any thing that is false: and on the other side, That he have
courage enough to set down what is true. It is said of this Historian, That he
wrote the Lives of those Emperors with the same liberty as they lived.

16. Dion Cassius was born at Nice in Bythinia; he wro^e the History of nine
hundred eighty one years from the building of Rome to Ann. Dom. 231. in which
year he was Consul with Alexander Severus the Emperor, and finished his
History in eighty Books: of all which scarce twenty ^ive Books, from the thirty
sixth to the sixty first, and the beginning of Nero, are at this time extant.

17. Herodianus wrote the History of his own time, from the death of M.
Antoninus the Philosopher, or the year of Christ 181. to the murder of the
Gordiani in Africa, Ann. Dom. 241. which is rendered purely into Latin by
Angelus Politianus.

18. Johannes Zonaras, of Byzantium, wrote a History from Augustus to his own
times, and the year of our Lord 1117. the chief of the Oriental Affairs and
Emperors he has digested in the second and third Tomes of his Annals; from
whence Cuspinianus, and others, borrow almost all that they have. Zonaras is
continued by Nicaetas Gregoras, and he by Chalc^ndylas.

19. Eutropius wrote the Epitome of the Roman History in ten Books, to the
death of Iovinian, Anno Dom. 368. He was present in the Expedition of Julian
into Persia, and flourished in the Reign of Valens the Emperor.

20. Ammianus Marcellinus, a Grecian by birth, War'd many years under Julian in
Gallia and Germany, and wrote the History of the Romans in thirty one Books:
the fourteenth to the thirty first are all that are extant, wherein at large,
and handsomely, he describes the acts of Constantius, Julian, Iovinian,
Valentinian, and Valens the Emperors, unto the year of Christ 382.

21. Iornandes, a Goth, has wrote the History of the Original Eruptions,
Families of their Kings, and principal Wars of the Goths, which he has
continued to his own time, that is, the year of our Lord 550.

22. Procopius, born at Caesarea in Palestine, and Chancellor to Belisarius,
the General to Justinian the Emperor, being also his Counselor and constant
companion, in seven Books wrote the Wars of Belisarius, with the Persians,
Vandals, and Goths, wherein he also was present.

23. Agathias, of Smyrna, continues Procopius, from the twenty seventh of
Justinian, Anno Dom. 554. to the end of his Reign, Anno Dom. 566. the Wars of
Narses with the Goths and Franks; with the Persians at Cholchi^, wherein he
recites the Succession of the Persian Kings, from Artaxerxes, who, Anno Dom.
230. seized on the Parthian Empire, to the Reign of Justinian, Anno Dom. 530.
and in the end treats of the irruption of the Hunnes into Thrace and Greece,
and their repression by Belisarius now grown old.

24. Paulus Diaconus, of Aquileia, Chancellor to Desiderius, King of the
Lombards, Writes the entire History of the Lombards to Ann. Dom. 773. in which
Charles the Great took Desiderius the last King, and brought Lombardy under his
own power.

25. Haithonus, an Armenian, many years a Soldier in his own Country,
afterward a Monk at Cyprus, coming into France about the year of Christ 1307.
was commanded by Pope Clement the fifth to write the Empire of the Tartars in
Asia, and the Description of other oriental Kingdoms.

26. Laonicus Chalchondylas, an Athenian, wrote the History of the Turks in ten
Books, from Ottoman, Anno 1300. to Mahomet the second, who took Constantinople,
Anno Dom. 1453. and afterward continued his History to Ann. 1464.

27. Lui^prandus, of Ticinum, wrote the History of the principal Affairs in all
the Kingdoms of Europe in his time, at most of which he himself was present;
his History is comprised in six Books, and commencing from Anno Dom. 891.
extends to Ann. Dom. 963.

28. Sigebert, a Monk in a Abbey in Brabant, wrote his Chronicon, from the death
of Valens the Emperor, or Anno Dom. 381. to the Empire of Henry the fifth,
Anno Dom. 1112. wherein he has digested much of the French and British
Affairs, and acts of the German Emperors.

29. Saxo Grammaticus, Bishop of the Church of Rotschilden, wrote the Danish
History from utmost Antiquity to his own time, and King Canutus the sixth,
almost to the year of Christ 1200. but more like a Poet than Historian,
commonly also omitting an account of the time.

30. Conradus, Abbot of Vrsperga, a Monastery in Suevia, as worthy of reading
as any of the German Writers, has described the Affairs of Germany, beginning
two hundred years after the Flood, and carrying on his relation to the
twentieth year of Frederick the second, that is, Anno Dom. 1230.

31. Johannes Aventinus wrote the Annals of the Boii, and memorable matters of
the Germans in seven Books, beginning from the Flood, and continuing his
History to Ann. 1460.

32. Johannes Nauclerus, born not far from Tubinga, has an entire Chronicon
from the beginning of the World to his own time, and the year of our Lord 1500.
in two Volums.

33. Albertus Crantzius has brought down the History of the Saxons, Vandals,
and the Northern Kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden, Gothland, and Norway, to Ann.
1504.

34. Johannes Sleidanus has faithfully and plainly written the History of
Luther especially, and the contests about matters of Religion in the Empire of
Germany; the Election and Affairs of Charles the fifth, Emperor: and other of
diverse of the Kings of Europe, from Anno Dom. 1517. to Ann. 1556.

35. Philippus Comineus wrote five Books of the Expedition of Charles the
eighth, into Italy and Naples, and eight Books of the Acts of L^wis the
eleventh, and Charles Duke of Burgundy, worthy to be read of the greatest
Princes.

36. Froisardus wrote the sharp Wars betwixt the French and English from Anno
1335. to Ann. 1400.

37. Hi^ronymus Osorius wrote the Navigation of the Portugals, round Africa
into India; and the Acts of Emanuel, King of Portugal, from Anno 1497. to his
death in twelve Books.

38. Antonius Bonfinius in four Decades and an half, has wrote the History of
the Hungarian Kings, to the death of Matthias, the son of Huniades, and the
beginning of the Reign of Vladislaus.

39. Polydor Virgil has wrote the History of England in twenty six Books, to
the death of Henry the seventh.

40. Justinius flourished Anno Christi 150. and wrote a compendious History of
most Nations, from Ninus the Assyrian King, to the twenty fifth year of
Augustus, compiled out of forty four Books of Trogus Pompeius, a Roman.
Ecclesiastical Writers I have here no room for, but am content to have traced
thus far the steps of David Chytraeus in his Chronology, whose help I have had
in the setting down of this Catalogue.

CHAP. IX. Of the most famous and ancient Greek and Latin Poets.
THE Reader has here a short account of some of the most eminent of Apollo's
old Courtiers, as they succeeded one another in the favor of the Muses; not
but that those bright Ladies have been (I was about to say) equally propitious
to others in aftertimes; nor is it that we have given these only a place here,
as if our own Land were barren of such Worthies: Our famous Spencer, if he was
not equal to any, was superior to most of them, of whom Mr. Brown thus: He
sung the Heroic Knights of Fairy Land
In lines so elegant, and such command,
That had the Thracian played but half so well,
He had not left Eurydice in Hell.
But it is fit we allow a due reverence to Antiquity, at least be so ingenuous
as to acknowledge at whose Torches we have lighted our own: The first of these
Lights,

Greek Poets.
1. Orpheus was born in Libethris, a City of Thrace, the most ancient of all
Poets; he wrote the Expedition of the Argonauts into Colchis, in Greek Verse,
at which he was also present: this Work of his is yet extant, together with his
Hymns, and a Book of Stones. The Poets make him to be the Prince of the
Lyricks, of whom Horace in his Book De Art Poetica: Sylvestres homines sacer
interpresque deorum,
Caedibus and foedo victu deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tygres, rabidosque leones.
His Father was Oeagrus, his Mother Caliopea, and his Master was Linus a Poet
and Philosopher; Orpheus is said to have flourished Anno Mundi 2737. Vid.
Quenstedt. Dial. de Patr. vir. illustr. p. 453. Voss. de Not. and Constit.
artis Poet. cap. 13. sect. 3. p. 78. Patrit. de Instit. reipub. l. 2. t^. 6. p.
83.

2. Homerus, the Prince of Poets, born at Colophon, as Cluverius doubts not to
affirm: but more Cities besides that strove for the honor, according to that
in Gellius: Septem urbes certant de stirpe illustris Homeri,
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Ios, Argos, Athenae.
Many are the Encomiums he has found amongst learned men, as, The Captain of
Philosophy,; The first Parent of Antiquity, and Learning of all sorts; The
original of all rich Invention; The Fountain of the more abstruse Wisdom; and
the father of all other Poets. -- a quo cen font perenni
Vatum Pieriis ora rigantur aquis.
Of him this is part of Quintilians Chara^ter; In great things no man excelled
him in sublimity, nor in small matters in propriety. In whom, says Paterculus,
this is an especial thing, that before him there was none whom he could
imitate, and after him none is found that is able to imitate him. He flourished
Anno Mund. 3000. Vid. Quenstedt. dialog. p. 483. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 3.
cap. 11. p. 104. Quintil. instit. orator. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 466.

3. Hesiodus was born at Cuma, a City in Aeolia, bred up at Ascra, a Town in
Boeotia; a Poet of a most elegant genius: memorable for the soft sweetness of
his Verse, called the son of the Muses by Lipsius; the purest Writer, and whose
labors contain the best Precepts of Virtue, says Heinsuis. Some think he was
contemporary with Homer; others that he lived an hundred years after him; I
find him said to flourish Anno Mundi 3140. Vid. Quintil. instit. orat. lib. 10.
cap. 1. p. 466. Vell. P^tercul. hist. lib. 1....... Voss. de Poet. Graec. cap.
2. p. 9. Quenstedt. dial. p. 478.

4. Alcaeus a famous Lyrick Poet was born in the Isle of Lesbos, in the City of
Mi^ylene, whence now the whole Isle has its name; what Verses of his are left,
are set forth by Henricus Stephanus with those of the rest of the Lyricks.
Quintilian says of him, That he is short and magnificent in his way of
speaking, diligent, and for the most part like Homer; he flourished Olymp. 45.
Vid. Quenstedt. dialog. p. 433. Quintil. instit. orat. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 468.

5. Sappho, an excellent Poetress, was born in the Isle of Lesbos, and in the
City of Eraesus there; she was called the ninth Lyrick, and the tenth Muse; she
wrote Epigrams, Elegies, Iam^icks, Monodies, and nine Books of Lyrick Verses;
and was the Invetress of that kind of Verse which from her is called the
Sapphick; she attained to no small applause in her contention, first with
Stesichorus, and then with Alcaeus; she is said to flourish about the 46
Olympiad, Voss. Inst^t. Poet. lib. 3. cap. 15. p. Quenstedt. Dial. p. 434.
Patrit. de instit. reipub. lib. 2. tit. 6. p. 90.

6. Stesichorus was born at Himera, a City in Sicily, a Lyrick Poet, some of
whose Poems are yet extant, writ in the Dorick Dialect: his Works declare the
strength of his wit, while he sings of great Wars and noble Chieftains; and
with his Harp sustains the burden of an Epick Verse; he preserves the due
dignity of his persons, both in their speech and actions; and had he retained
himself within bounds, he might have seemed the next to a Rival with Homer, but
he is too copious and luxuriant; he flourished Olymp. 54. Vid. Quintil. Instit.
orator. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 468. Quenstedt. dial. p. 399.

7. Phocyllides, a Philosopher and Poet, was born at Miletum, a City in Caria:
he wrote in Heroic Verse, as also some Elegies, was contemporary with
Theognis, and flourished Olympiad 59. Quenstedt. dial. p. 477.

8. Theognis, born in Maegara, or Maegaris, a City in Sicily, heretofore called
Hybla: he was Gnomographus, whose Sentences are cited by almost all Greek
Authors that are of any great name: Vossius says he was born not in the
Sicilian but Attick Maegaris, as may clearly be collected from Theognis
himself. He is said to live in the time of King Croesus: but so long survived
him, that he reached the beginning of the Persian War; he flourished Olympiad
58. Quenstedt. dial. p. 402. Voss. de Poet. Graecis, cap. 4. p. 21.

9 Epimenides was born at Gnossus, a City in Cr^^t, a Philosoper and Epick
Poet; hence the Apostle when he cites him, calls him, Titus 12. A Prophet of
your own. He wrote a Book of Oracles, says St. Ierom, and was contemporary
with Solon, so that he flourished Olymp. 45. Quenstedt. dial. p. 429.

10. Anacreon was born in Teos, a place in the middle of Ionia; he was one of
the nine Lyricks: and both in his Writings and whole manner of life petulant
wanton. He was famil^ar with Polycrates the Samian Tyrant, whom he also
celebrated in his Verses. Though aged, he fell in love with Bathyllus a young
Boy, o^ whose hard-heartedness he complains; he lived about the 64 Olympiad,
Patrit. de instit. Reipub. lib. 4. tit. 11. p. 169. Voss. de Poet. Graecis,
cap. 4. p. 22. Quenstedt. dial. p. 482.

11. Simonides is of somewhat a slender style, otherwise he is commendable for
the propriety, and a kind of pleasantness in his Speech; he had a peculiar
faculty in the exciting of men to pity and compassion, insomuch, that in this
respect he is by some preferred before all the Authors of his time; he was a
Lyrick Poet, wrote Iambicks, and was born in the Isle of Amorgus; diverse others
there were of this name, but none more eminent than this in Poetry; Quintil. de
Instit. orat. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 468. Carol Steph. in voce.

12. Aeschylus was born in the City of Athens, the first Author of Tragedies,
say the ancient Greek Writers, whence Horace, -- personae pallaeque repertor
honest^^
Aeschylus and modicis instravit pulpita tignis,
Et docuit mag numque loqui, nitique cothurno.
He fought valiantly in the Battle of Marathon; his Poems were sublime and
grave; and he therein Grandiloquus usque ad vitium, says Quintilian, flying
into Sicily in the fifty eighth year of his age, an Eagle, as he sat on a Rock,
dropped from her tallons a Tortoise upon his bare head, by the stroke of which
he died. He flourished Olymp. 74. Horat. de Art Poet. verse. 279. Voss. de
Poetis Graecis, cap. 4. p. 25. Quenstedt. dial. p. 421. Quintil. instit.
orator. l. 10. c. 1. p. 468.

13. Pindarus born at Thebes, a City in Boeotia; of all the nine Lyricks, says
Quintilian, Pindarus is far the superior in Spirit, Magnificence, Sentences,
Figures, happily copious both in things and words, and therefore Horace thinks
him inimitable: Pindarum quisquis studet aemulari I^
Vle, ceratis open Daeda^^a
Nititur pennis, vitreo daturus
Nomina ponto.
Monte decurrens velut amni^ imbres
Quem super not as al^^re ripas
Fervet, immensusque ruit, profundo
Pindarus ore.
He also made some Tragedies, Epigrams, and other things, and flourished
Olympiad 75. Voss. de Poet. Graec. cap. 5. p. 29. Quintil. instit. orator. lib.
10. cap. 1. p. 468. Horat. Ode 11. lib. 4. Quensted^ dial. p. 411.

14. Sophocles was a Tragedian born in Athens; he was called the New Siren, The
Flower of Poets, and the Be from the sweetness of his Speech: he was by some
thought to excel Euripides in the Majesty of his Style, and Quintilian will not
determine which was the better Poet; he flourished Olympiad the 83. Voss. de
Poet. Graecis, cap. 4. p. 26. Quenstedt. dial. p. 422. Quintil. instit. orator.
lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 468.

15. Euripides, a noble Tragic Poet, was born at Athens: a Poet of excellent
wit, says Vossius; Cicero much esteemed him; he was a familiar friend to King
Archelaus, from whom as he returned home, he was torn in pieces by Dogs: his
Tomb is near Athens. He contended with Euphorion and Sophocles; was Scholar to
Anaxagoras in Physics, to Prodicus in Rhetoric, and to Socrates in Morals; he
flourished Olympiad 83. Voss. de Poet. Gr^^c. cap. 6. p. 36. Quenstedt. dial.
p. 422. Quintil. instir. orator. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 468.

16. Aristophanes was a famous Comic Poet, but of his Country nothing is
certain: some say he was an Athenian, others a Rhodian, and some an Egyptian;
he is at this day the only Greek Comedian extant, but scarce extant in the
fourth part of him; he is said to be the excellent Exemplar of the Attick
Lepidity, as one in whom all the ornaments of that Tongue are cont^ined. A
sharp observer and reprover of Vices; he flourished Olympiad 96. Quenstedt.
Dial. p. 424.

17. Menander, son of Diopithes, and Scholar of Theophrastus, the ancient
Comic Poet; he lived in Athens: Plutarch compares him with Aristophanes; and
for weight in Sentences, elegance and beauty of expression, and for wit, he
prefers before him this Prince of Comicks (as he is by some called.) He wrote
one hundred and eight Comedies, of all which, besides a few Verses, nothing
remains but the memory; he flourished Olympiad 118. Quintil. de Instit. orat.
lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 469. Gell. no^t. Attic. lib. 3. cap. 16. p. 109. Voss. de
Poet. Graec. cap. 8. p. 57. Quenstedt. dial. p. 424.

18. Theocritus was of Coos, and went thence to Syracuse; his sweet Poems are
yet extant, and taught in Schools: he wrote Bucolicks in the Dorick Dialect;
Suidas notes, that of old there were three Poets Writers of Bucolicks, this
Theocritus, Moschus the Sicilian, and Bion of the City of Smyrna. Our Poet
lived in the time of Ptolemaeus Lagus, and Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, A. ab V. C.
475. Olympiad 123. Quenstedt. dial. p. 397. Voss. de Poet. Graec. cap. 8. p.
61. Quintil. de instit. orator. lib. 10. cap. 1 p. 467.

19. Aratus was born at Soli or S^loe, a Town of Cilicia, afterward called
Pompeiopolis; he was Physician to A^tigonus, King of Macedon, a most Learned
Poet, and one that wrote diverse things, amongst others a Book of Astronomy
called (...), in which he elegantly describes in Heroic Verse the whole frame
of the Celestial Sphere, the Image, Figure, rise and set of all the Stars
therein: which was Translated into Latin by Cicero, and others; Chytraeus says
he was of Tarsus, and that St. Paul his fellow Citizen, cites in his Sermon at
Athens an Hemistick of this his fellow Citizen; he flourished in the time of
Ptolomaus Philadelphus, Olympiad 124. Chytr. de Poet. lect. p. 217. Voss. de
Poet. Graec. cap. 8. p. 63.

20. Lycophron was a Grammarian and Tragic Poet, born at Chalcis, heretofore a
rich Town in Euboea: he was one of the seven which they call the Pleiades: the
rest were Theo^ritus, Nicander, Callimachus, Apollonius, Aratus, and Homerus
junior; he wrote many Tragedies which are all lost: all that is extant of him
is his Alexandra, or Cassandra, an obscure Poem; he flourished Olympiad 127.
Voss. de Poet. Graec. cap. 8. p. 64 Quenstedt. dial. p. 432.

21. Oppianus (born in Anazarbus, as some, in Corycus, says Suidas, both
Cities of Cilicia) was a Grammarian and Poet, sweet, generous, and
incomparable, says Rosinus. He wrote Halieutica, or of Fishes and Fishing five
Books, and four of Hunting, all which are extant: Alexander S^v^rus so much
delighted in them, that for every Verse he gave him a Stater of Gold, upon
which they were called Golden Verses, Quenstedt. dial. p. 499.

22. Musaeus, the same who wrote the Loves of Hero and Leander: though he is
said by Julius Scaliger, to be before Homer himself: Yet, says Vossius,
nothing is more manifest, than that he lived under the Caesar's, and that after
the fourth Age, and is therefore in old Books called Musaeus the Grammarian,
Voss. de Poet. Graec. Pap. 9. p. 81.

Latin poets.
1. Quintus Ennius, born at Rudiae, say some, at Tarentum say Eutropius and
Eusebius; from him Virgil, the Phoenix of the Latin Poets, borrowed not a few
Verses, and with some light change, transferred them into his own Poems. Once
being found reading of Ennius, and asked what he was about? I am, said he,
gathering of Gold out of Ennius his Dunghill. Ennius has the first place
amongst the Latin Epick Poets; he wrote the Roman War in Heroic Verses; he
died of the Gout at past seventy years of age, was buried in the Monument of
the Scipio's, in the Appian way, a mile from the City; he ^^ourished A. ab. V.
C. 570. Voss. p. 4.

2. Pacuvius was born at Brundusium; he was a Tragedian of great account, and
the son of Ennius his sister; he lived at Rome, where he painted and sold
Plays; thence he went to Tarentum, where he died almost ninety years of age,
Voss. de Poet. Latin. cap. 1. p. 6.

3. Plautus was by birth from Vmbria, through a scarcity that was at Rome, he
was fain to hire out himself to a Baker to work at his hand-mill, where as often
as he had leisure from his work, he wrote and sold his Comedies; he flourished
in the latter end of the second Punick War, and in the succeeding seventeen
years, and died in the 149 Olympiad, Voss. de Latin. Poet. cap. 1. p. 8.

4. Publius Terentius, the most elegant Writer of Latin Comedy, was born at
Carthage betwixt the second and third Punick War. He served Terentius Lucanus,
a Senator in Rome, by whom for his wit and person, he was not only civilly
treated, but soon obtained his freedom; Cicero says, he was the best Author of
the Latin Tongue, and his bosom companion, because he used frequently to read
in him; he wrote six Comedies, and flourished Olympiad 151. but died in
Arcadia, Quenstedt. dial. p. 671. Voss. de Lat. Poet. cap. 3. p. 41.

5. C. Lucilius was born at Suessa Arunca, a Town in Italy; he was a Writer of
Satyrs, yes the chief of the Latin Satyrists, says Tully, a Learned man, and
a very ingenious person, of a sharp wit, a man of excellent life himself, and a
stinging accuser of the villainies of others; he was the Great Uncle of Pompey
the Great, and war'd under Scipio Africanus in the Numantine War, he died at
Naples in the ^orty sixth year of his age, in the 160 Olympiad, A. Gell. noct.
Attic. lib. 18. cap. 8. p. 490. Voss. de Lat. Poet. cap. 2. p. 9. Quintil. de
instit. orator. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 472. Plin. not. hist. lib. 1. cap. p.
Quenstedt. dial. p. 379.

6. Titus Lucretius Carus; he wrote a Book of the nature of things, according
to Epicurus his doctrine, in whose footsteps he trod; all his Philosophy tends
to the extirpation of Religion: and himself frequently confesses, That he wrote
what he did for that purpose, that he might free men from the burden of
Religion, and the fear of the gods; by a Philtre or Love-potion he was made
mad, and in the forty fourth year of his age slew himself; he flourished Anno
ab V. C. 680. and about 174. Olympiad. Voss. de Poct. lat. cap. 1. p. 13.
Quenstedt. dial. p. 362.

7. M. Annaeus Lucanus was born at Corduba in Spain; I. Scaliger says of him,
That he is long and the father of tediousness: but Quintilian gives him this
Character, That he is ardent and sprightful: remarkable for his Sentences, and
rather to be numbered amongst Orators than Poets. An excellent describer he is
of the Civil War betwixt Caesar and Pompey; a great speaker, and full of
Heroic Spirit; being found in the Conspiracy of Piso, he cut his veins and
bled to death; he flourished Anno Christi 62. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 3. p.
41. Quintil. de Instit. orator. lib. 10. cap. 1. p. 471. Quenstedt. dial. p. 10.

8. Publ. Virgilius Maro, is, by general consent, The Prince of the Latin
Poets; he was born at Andes, a Village near unto Mantua in Italy; Iul. Scaliger
says of him, That he ought to be the Pattern, Rule, beginning and end of all
Poetical imitation. Josephus Scaliger says, He not only excess all humane
ingeny, but has raised himself to a kind of equality with nature it self: his
Bucolicks, Georgicks, and Aeneads, are in every hand. He died at Brundusium,
his bones were translated to Naples, and buried about two miles from the City,
with an Epitaph of his own making: Thus, Mantua me genuit, Calabri rapuere,
tenet nunc
Parthenope, cecini Pascua, Rura, Duces.
he flourished Anno ab V. C. 728. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 2. p. 26. Quenstedt.
dial. p. 299.

9. Q. Horatius Flaccus, the Prince of the Latin Lyrick Poets, was born at
Venus^^m in Italy; he is (says Quintilian) the chief at noting the manners of
men, very pure and accurate, worthy almost alone to be read; he rises high
sometimes, is full of jucundity, and various Figures, and has a most happy
boldness in words; he died at Rome aged about fifty, and flourished in the
Reign of Augustus, Anno ab. V. C. 735. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 2. p. 26.
Quenstedt. dial. p. 382. Quintil. de Instit. orator. l. 10. c. 1. p. 472.

10. Publ. Ovidius Naso was born at Sulmo, an old Town of the Peligni in Italy;
thus says he himself, Trist. lib. 4. Eleg. 10. Sulmo mihi patria est, gelidis
uberrimus undis,
Millia qui novies, distat ab urbe december.
He excels all others in Elegy, and therefore by Dempster is called The Prince
of Elegy; in the judgment of Seneca, he is a most ingenious Poet, had he not
reduced that plenty of wit and matter into childish toys: his Medaea, says
Quintilian, shows how much that man was able to perform, had he chose rather to
govern than indulge his wit; he died in his banishment, and is buried near the
Town of Tomos; he flourished Anno Dom. 4. Quintil. de Instit. orator. lib. 10.
cap. 1. p. 473. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 2. p. 29. Senec. not. Quaest. cap. 27.
p.

11. C. Valerius Catullus, was born at Verona, of no obscure Parentage, for his
father was familiar with Julius Caesar, and he himself was so accepted at Rome,
for the facility of his wit and learning, that he merited the Patronage of
Cicero, as he himself acknowledges with thanks. He loved Clodia, whom by a
feigned name he calls Lesbia; Martial prefers him before himself; he died at
Rome in the thirtieth year of his age, and that was commonly said of him,
Tantum parva suo debet Verona Catullo
Quantum magna suo Mantua Virgilio.
He flourished Olympiad 180. Anno Dom. 40. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 1. p. 14.
Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 7. cap. 20. p. 220.

12. Albius Tibullus, of an Equestrian Family in Rome, a Poet famous for his
Elegies, in which he was the first amongst the Romans that excelled, says
Vossius; he was in familiarity with Horace and Ovid. He loved Plancia under the
feigned name of Delia: whereas he was very rich, by the iniquity of the times
he complains he was reduced to poverty; he composed four Books of Elegies, and
died young; for the elegancy of his Verse, it is said of him, Donec erunt
ignes, arcusque Cupidinis arma,
Discentur numeri culte Tibulle tui.
He flourished A. ab V. C. 734. Quenste dt. dial. p. 369. Petr. Crinit. de
Poet. Lat. lib. 3. p. 71.

13. Sex. Aurel. Propertius was born in Mevania, a Town in Vmbria, as he
himself somewhere says, Vt nostris tumefacta superbiat Vmbria libris,
Vmbria Romani patria Callimachi.
He complains that he was put out of his fathers Lands, in that division that
was made amongst the Soldiers of the Triumvirate. The true name of his Cynthia
was Hostia, says Apuleius. We have four Books of his Elegies; some write that
he died in the forty first year of his age; he flourished with Ovid, Catullus,
and Tibullus, Petr. Crinit. de Poet. Lat. lib. 3. p. 71. Voss. de Poet. Lat.
cap. 2. p. 31.

14. Cornelius Gallus, born at Forojulium, was an Orator and famous Poet; from
a mean fortune, he was received into the friendship of Augustus, and by him
made the first President of Egypt, when it was become a Roman Province:
Through his discourse in his Wine at a Feast, he came into suspicion of a
Conspiratour, and being turned over to the Senate to be condemned, for very
shame he slew himself in the sixty third year of his age; he wrote four Book of
Elegies, his Lycoris was one Cytheris a freed Maid of Voluminous; most of his
Writings are lost; he flourished Olympiad 188. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 2. p.
25.

15. Decius Iunius I^venali^, was born at Aquinum in Italy; he spent his
studies in writing Satyrs, following the examples of Lucilius and Horace, in
which kind he has gained no mean reputation amongst the learned: The Prince of
Satyrists, says I. Scaliger; his Verses are far better than those of Horace;
his Sentences are sharper, and his phrase more open; having offended Paris the
Pantomime at eighty years of age, in show of honor he was made Prefect of a
Cohort, and sent into Egypt; he flourished Anno Dom. 84. Quenstedt. dial. p.
372. Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap. 3. p. 41.

16. A. Persius Flaccus was born at Volaterra, an ancient and noble City in
Italy, seated by the River Caecina. He wrote Satyrs, wherein he sharply taxes
the corrupted and depraved manners of the Citizens of Rome, sustaining the
person of a Philosopher; while he severely reprehends, he is instructive; much
he borrowed out of Plato, says Chytraeus; by some he is under censure for his
obscurity; he flourished in the Reign of Nero, Anno Dom. 64. died in the twenty
ninth year of his age, about the 210 Olympiad, Quenstedt. dial. p. 322. Voss.
de Po^t. Lat. cap. 3. p. 41.

17. N. Valor. Martialis was born at Bilbilis in Cel^iberia, in the Reign of
Claudius the Emperor. At twenty years age he came to Rome under Nero, and
there continued thirty five, much favored by Titus and Domitian. He was
Tribune, and of the Order of Knights in Rome; after Domitian's death, he was
not in the like honor, and therefore in Trajans time, returned into his own
Country: and there having wrote his twelfth Book of Epigrams, weary of his
Country and Life, as being ill treated by his Countrymen, he deceased, Voss.
de Poet. Lat. cap. 3. p. 46.

18. Statius Papinius, born at Naples, lived under Domitian; he left five Books
Sylvarum, twelve Thebaidos, five Achilleidos; Martial liked not that he was so
much favored, and in his Writings never mentions him, Voss. de Poet. Lat. cap.
3. p. 45.

19. Ausonius the Poet, and also Consul at Rome, was born in Gascony at
Burdigala, now called Bordeaux, at he tells us himself thus, Diligo Burdigalam,
Roman colo, civis in illa,
Consul in ambabus, cunae hic, ibi sella curulis.
Scaliger says of him, That he had a great and acute wit; he Style is somewhat
harsh; he flourished Anno Dom. 420. Quenstedt. dial. p. 36. Voss. de Poet. Lat.
cap. 4. p. 55.

20. Marcellus Palingenius wrote the Zodiac of like, that is, of the right way
of institution of the life, study, and manners of men in twelve Books, a Work
of great Learning and Philosophical; he flourished Anno Dom. 1480. Quenstedt.
dial. p. 392.

21. Baptista Mantuanus, Surnamed Hispaniolus, a Monk and excellent Poet, to
whom Mantua gave both birth and name; he was accounted the almost only Poet in
his age, and another Maro; he taxed with great freedom and liberty, the
corruption of the Roman Church, the impiety, and villainies of the Popes;
amongst others he thus writes of the Simony and Covetousness of the Popes, --
Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, Thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deusque.
He wrote diverse Verses in praise of the Saints, and other excellent Books, and
flourished Anno Dom. 1494. Quenstedt. dial. p. 300.

CHAP. X. Of Music; the strange efficacy of it, and the most famous Musicians.
THere are four sorts of Music which were most celebrated amongst the
Ancients, the Dorian or Dorick, as a promoter of wisdom and chastity; the
Phrygian, transporteth the mind to quarrelling and fury; the Aeolian, conjures
down the evil Spirit of anger, and enclines the appeased soul to sleep; and
then the Lydian, raises and elevates the minds of men from terrence and earthly
things, and enkindles devout desires after such as are heavenly: Thus large is
the Empire which Music exercises over the soul of man, and what it has been
further able to do as to the body, for this I refer you to some of the
following Examples.

Treasury of Ancient and Mod. times, l. 8. c. 28. p. 806.
1. Concerning the efficacy and might of Music, I am desirous to set down what
my self saw practiced upon De la March, a Gentlewoman near to Garet, young,
virtuous and passable for beauty; upon report of her husbands inclination to
change, and novel affections, she fell into such a fury, that on the sudden she
would throw her self into the fire, or out at the window, or into a Fish Pond
near her house, out of which she had been twice rescued: and so was more
diligently kept: The Physicians attended her to no purpose, notwithstanding all
their endeavors: but a Capuchin passing that way to crave Alms, and hearing
what had befallen her, advised, That some skilful and experienced person upon
the Lute, should continue to play by her: and that in the night some pleasing
Ditties should consort with the Music: it was accordingly performed, and in
less than three month the violent passion forsook her, and she is at this time
sound both in body and mind.

2. I likewise knew another Person of Honor at Roane, Treasury of Anti^nt and
Mod. times, l. 8. c. 28. p. 806.
whose name may be best known by Dis Parrea^, who all her lifetime did never
use the help of any Physic, how great soever her infirmities were: but in all
her hurts, diseases, childbirth and lameness, she only de^red one who could
skillfully play on the Tabou^ ^^d Pip^, instead of a Physician. Being well
^^^^ed ^^to Age, an extreme pain seized upon her knee, supposed some spice of
the Gout, she caused her Tabourer instantly to play her a pleasant and lively
Coranto. The Tabourer striving to exceed himself in art and dexterity, in
readiness of wind and agility of hand, fell down in a swoon, and so continued
for three quarters of an hour, the Lady then complained that her pain and
affliction was never so extraordinary as in the time of the Musicks so sudden
cessation: The Musician being recovered and refreshed with a glass of brisk
Wine, fell a^resh to his former skillful musical playing, and the Lady was
thereby so eased of her pain, that it utterly left her; I my self was in the
Chamber when this accident happened, and do avouch upon my credit, That the
Gentlewoman thus lived an hundred and six years.

3. Clinias, Athen. d^ip l. 14. c. 5. p. 623, 624. Aelian. var. hist. l. 14. c.
23. p. 409.
the Pythagorean, was a person very different both in his life and manners from
other men: and if it chanced at any time, that he was inflamed with anger, he
would take his Harp, play upon, and sing to it, saying, as often as he was asked
the cause of his so doing, That by this means he found himself reduced to the
temper of his former mildness.

4. Tyrtaeus the Spartan Poet, Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 18. p. 99.
having first rehearsed his Verses, and afterward made them to be sung with
Flutes well tuned together, he so stirred and enflamed the courage of the
Soldiers thereby; that whereas they had before been overcome in diverse
conflicts, being then transported with the fury of the Muses, they remained
conquerours, and cut in pieces the whole Army of the Messenians.

5. Timotheus, Alex. ab Alex. in. dieb. Genia. l. 4. c. 2. s^l. 178. Sabel. Ex.
l. 10. c. 8. p. 579. Epiph. Ferdinand. cas. medic. hist. 81. p. 267.
a Milesian, was so excellently skilled in Music, that when he played and sung
a Song, composed in honor of Pallas, in the presence of Alexander the Great,
the Prince as one transported with the Gallantry, and Martial humor of the
air, started up, and being stirred in every part, called for his Armor: But
then again the Musician changing into more sedate and calmer Notes, sounding as
it were a Retreat, the Prince also sat quiet and still.

6. There was a Musician in Denmark that did so excel in his Art, that he was
wont to boast, That he could with his Music set his hearers besides
themselves, Camer. oper. s^be. cent. 2. c. 81. p. 319. Camer. oper. subc. cent.
2. cap. 81. p. 320.
or make them merry, pensive, or furious, as he pleased; which he also
performed upon trial, at the command of one of the Danish Kings, viz. Ericus
the second, Surnamed the Good.

7. At such time as the Tyrant Eugenius raised that perilous War in the East,
Nicep. l. 12. c. 23. p. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 18. p. 99.
and that money grew short with the Emperor Theodosius, he determined to raise
Subsidies, and to gather from all parts more than before he had ever done; the
Citizens of Antioch bare this exaction with so ill a will, that after they had
disgorged many outrageous words against the Emperor, they pulled down his
Statues, and those also of the Empress his Wife. A while after, when the heat
of their fury was past, they began to repent themselves of their folly, and
considered into what danger they had cast themselves and their City: Then did
they curse their rashness, confess their fault, implore the goodness of God,
and that with tears, That it would please him to calm the Emperors heart.
These supplications and prayers were solemnly sung with sorrowful Tunes, and
lamenting voices. Their Bishop Flavianus employed himself valiantly in this
needful time, in the behalf of the City, made a Journey to Theodosius, and did
his utmost to appease him: but finding himself rejected, and knowing that the
Emperor was devising some grievous punishment; and on the other side, not
having the boldness to speak again, and yet much troubled in his thoughts
because of his people, there came this device into his head: At such time as
the Emperor sat at meat, certain young boys were wont to sing musically unto
him; Flavianus wrought so, that he obtained of those that had the charge of the
boys, that they would suffer them to sing the supplications and prayers of the
City of Antioch: Theodosius listening to that grave Music, was so moved with
it, and so touched with compassion, that having then the Cup in his hand, he
with his warm tears watered the Wine that was in it, and forgetting all his
conceived displeasure against the Antiochaeans, freely pardoned them and their
City.

^^in. Theat. ^^l. 5. l. 3. p. 1283.
8. The sons of Ludovicus the first (then Emperor) had conspired against him,
and amongst diverse of the Bishops that were confederate with them, was
Theodulphus, Bishop of Orleans, whom the Emperor clapped up in Prison in Anjon;
in this place the Emperor kept his Easter, and was present at the Procession
on Palm Sunday, in imitation and honor of Christ's entrance into Jerusalem. All
the Pomp passing by the place where Theodulphus was under restraint, the Bishop
in foresight of that solemnity, had prepared a most elegant Hymn in honor of
that Procession, and as the Emperor passed by, opening his Casement, with a
clear and musical voice, he sang it, so as to be heard of the multitude that
passed by: The Emperor enquired What voice that was, and who that sung? It was
told him the Captive Bishop of Orleans. The Emperor diligently attending both
the purport of the Verses, and sweetness of the voice, was therewith so
delighted, that he restored the Prisoner forthwith to his liberty.

^^iph. Fer^^^^^d. cas. ^^^ic. hist. (...) p. 248, (...), 250, (...) (...) var.
(...) l. 14. (...) p. 366. (...) oper. (...) cent. 2. (...) p. 317, (...) (...)
relat. Voyages, (...) p. 249. (...). ab (...) dier. (...) l. 2. (...) p.
9. In part of Calabria are great store of Tarantula's, a Serpent peculiar to
this Country, and taking that name from the City of Tarentum. Some hold them to
be a kind of Spiders, others of Effts: but they are greater than the one, and
less than the other: The sting is deadly, and the contrary operations thereof
most miraculous: For some so stung, are still oppressed with a leaden sleep;
others are vexed with continued waking. Some s^ing up and down; and others are
extremely lazy: he sweats; a second vomits; a third runs mad; some weep, and
others laugh continually, and that is the most usual: The merry, the mad, and
otherwise actively disposed, are cured by Music, at least it is the cause, in
that it incites them to dance indefatigably, for by labor and sweat the poison
is expelled. And Music also by a certain high excellency, has been found by
experience to stir in the fad and drowsle so strange an alacrity, that they
have wearied the Spectators with continued dancing: in the mean time the pain
has assuaged, the infection being driven from the heart, and the mind released
of her sufferance: if the Music in^ermit, the malady renews; but again
continued and it vanishes.

10. Asclepiades, Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 3. p. 1291.
a noble Physician, as often as he had Phrenetick Patients, or such as were
unhinged, or evil affected in their minds, did make use of nothing so much for
the cure of them, and restoration of their health, as Symphony, and sweet
harmony and consent of voices.

11. Ismen^as, Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 3. p. 1292. A. Ge^l. noct. Attic. l. 4.
c. 13. p. 133.
the Theban, and Scholar of Antigenidas, used to cure diverse of the Boeotians
of the Sciatica, or Hip-gout, by the use of Music; and says Gellius, It is
reported by diverse, and Memorials are made of it, that when the Sciatica pains
are the most exquisite, they are allayed and assuaged with Music.

12. There was a young man, Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 3. p. 1291.
a Taurominitanian by birth, who having his head intoxicated with Wine, and
besides all inflamed with anger, hastened to the House of his Mistress, with a
purpose (because she had received his Rival thereinto) to set it on fire: he
was about his design, when Pythagoras caused a Musician to play a lesson of the
graver Music, composed with Spondees, or long Notes, by which he was so
reclaimed, that he immediately desisted from his angry enterprise.

13. When Apollonius was inquisitive of Canus, Philost. l. 5. c. 7. p. 205.
Burt. mel. par. 2. ^sect;. 2^ p. 277.
a Rhodian Musician, what he could do with his instrument, he told him that he
could make a melancholy man merry, and him that was merry, much merrier than he
was before; a lover more enamoured, and a Religious man more devout, and more
attentive to the worship of the gods.

CHAP. XI. Of such as by sight of the Face, could judge of the Inclinations,
Manners, and Fortunes of the person.
IT is said of Paracelsus, That he had such notable skill in Herbs, that at the
first sight he could discern and discover the quality, virtue and operation of
any such as were showed to him: There have been some men as skillful in the
perusal of faces, so that Momus needed not wish every man a casement in his
breast, seeing both the inclinations and successes of men have been dexterously
judged at by their outward appearance.

1. Julius Caesar Scaliger had a singular skill herein, Fuller's holy State, l.
2. c. 8. p. 71.
for it is credibly averred, That he never looked on his Infant son Audectus
but with grief, as sorrow struck with some sad sign of ill success he saw in
his face: which child at last, was found stifled in bed with the embraces of
his Nurse, being fast asleep.

2. Peter de Pinat, M. de S^i. hist. of France, p. 528.
the last of that name, Primate of France, Archbishop and Earl of Lions, died
in the beginning of January, Anno 1599. The Duke of Biron did see him in his
sickness, and assisted at his Funerals. No man living did better judge of the
nature of men, by the consideration of their Visages, than he. He did divine of
the Duke of Biron's fortune by his countenance, and the proportions and lines
of his face: for having considered it somewhat curiously, he said unto his
Sister, after his departure from his Chamber, This man has the worst
Physiognomy that ever I observed in my life, as of a man that will perish
miserably: the event made good his Prediction.

Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 19. p. 311. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 57.
p. 251, Nicep. l. 10. c. 37. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 2. p. 1223.
3. Nazianzen, as soon as he beheld Julian the Apostate, made a conjecture of
his manners and disposition, concerning whom these are his words in his second
Oration against the Gentiles: The deformity of his gestures made me a Prophet,
as to him: for these following did in no wise seem to be the signs of a good
man, The sudden and frequent turnings of his head; his heaving up now this, and
then the other shoulder; his eyes were stern, wandering, and expressing
something of furious in them; his feet were instable, and his geniculations
frequent; his nose was such as betokened scorn and contempt, and the whole
Figure of his face was framed to derision; his laughter was often and loud; he
would nod with his head when he spoke not; his speech was interrupted, and
broken off before it came to the period of the Sentence; his questions
frequent, confused and foolish; his answers unapt, heaped one upon another,
disagreeing with themselves, and without order: and who can describe the rest?
Such I saw him before his deeds, as his deeds did afterward show him to be:
and if they were here present, who were then with me, and beheld the same
things, they would justify this narration of mine: and withal would remember
that I then spoke these words, How great a plague does the Roman Empire at this
time nourish, etc.

Patrit. de regno l. 5. tit. 15. p. 331, 332. Ciceron. lib. de Fato p. 201.
4. Zopyrus did profess, That he could make a discovery of the nature,
inclination, and dispositions of men by the habit of their bodies, and
inspection of their eyes, face, and forehead, etc. Being desired by some to
give his judgment of Socrates, he said he was a stupid and dull person, and a
stranger unto all kind of virtue. Those that were present, when they heard him
pass this sentence upon Socrates, whom they knew to be a man of the contrary
perfections, they laughed this conjecturer to scorn: but Socrates himself said,
That he had spoken nothing but what was the truth, only by the study of wisdom,
he had overcome and amended all^ these faults of his nature.

Iov. Elog. Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 465.
5. Bartholomaeus Cocles had foretold one Coponus, That e're long he should be a
wicked Homicide; and in like manner he said of Hermes, the son of a Tyrant,
that being a banished man he should be slain in Battle. Hermes therefore
possessed with a fear of his fate, gave secret order to Coponus, that he should
kill Cocles, that wicked Artist. Cocles did forsee the disaster that was coming
upon him, and therefore did arm his head with a privy Helmet, and usually went
with a two handed sword, which he could skilfully manage. But Coponus, in the
habit of a Porter, came one time behind him, and as he was putting his key into
the lock of his door, he struck him on the hinder part of his head with a
Hatchet, and slew him. He afterward confessed, that he had no other cause of
the commitment of this murder, but only that Cocles had told him, That shortly
he would be a murderer.

6. We learn out of Proclus, Coel. Antiq. lect. l. 6. c. 1. p. 229. A. Gel.
noct. Attic. l. 1. c. 9. p. 18.
that it was the manner of the Pythagoreans, curiously and exactly to weigh and
consider of such as came unto them; and by signs imprinted on their bodies, to
judge of their aptitude and inclination to a better life: Pythagoras did thus
in his choice of his Scholars, and such as he judged fit for Learning he
admitted.

7. Antiochus Tibertus was famous for his skill in Chiromancy and Physiognomy;
Iov. Elog. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 3. p. 1271.
he foretold Guido Balneus, that he should be slain by an intimate friend of
his, upon a conceived suspicion against him: He also told Pandulphus Malatesta,
the Ariminensian Tyrant, That he should be driven out of his Country, and that
being in exile, he should perish in great want: not long after Pandulphus
caused Guido to be beheaded, as being jealous of his valor and virtue, and
shuts up Antiochus himself in prison, determining to expect at leisure the
fulfilling of the rest of his presage. Antiochus had so prevailed with the
daughter of the Keeper of the Tower wherein he was enclosed, that she furnished
him with a Rope, and by the help of that let him down into the Tower-ditch: but
being betrayed with the noise of his Fetters, he was fetched back, and both he
and the over-kind Maid were beheaded together. Pandulphus at length was forced
to quit his Country, and being an Exile, and in great want, he was deserted of
all men, and old as he was he died in a common Inn. Thus Antiochus was able to
predict the fate of other men, but could neither foresee nor prevent his own.

8. That Egyptian Philosopher, Camer. op^^. subc. cent. 2. c. 6. p. 16. Plut.
in Anton. p. 950.
that ( Plutarch says) was the constant companion of Marcus Antonius, was well
skilled in these observations, especially if there was nothing of Magic
therein. He professed, That he knew the different natures and Fortunes of men
by looking upon their ^aces; and he told his Patron Antonius, That his fortune
was splendid; but withal he exhorted him to shun the Society of Octavius, for
that his Genius, who of himself was great and high, was yet inferior to, and
afraid of the Genius of that other Prince.

9. The Nobles of Muscovy gave their judgment of Johannes Basilides, Camer.
(...) subc. (...). c. 6. p. 1^.
while he was yet a Boy: they observing that his speech was foolish and
monstrous, his manners malignant and perverse; by these and the like
discoveries, they conjectured of his disposition for the future: and believing
that when he should ascend to the Imperial power, he would prove a scourge, and
a heavy calamity to their Country; they thereupon thought of taking him away
betimes by poison, which if they had, they had freed themselves of that bloody
Tyranny, which he afterward exercised amongst them.

10. Democritus had so great skill in this Art of Physiognomy, La(...) Zuin.
Th^^^ vol. 5. (...) p. 1222^
that thereby he rendered Hippocrates an admirer of him. When one day a Maid
came to him, he saluted her by the name of Virgin: when she came to him the
next day, he called her woman, for she had lost her honor overnight: he also
bought Diagoras the Milesian, as knowing by Physiognomy that he would prove an
excellent servant.

11. When L. Sylla went in quality of a Legate into Cappadocia, Plut. Syll^,
4^3.
there was then there one of the Retinue of Orobasus, the Parthian Ambassador,
who beholding the face of Sylla, considering of the motions of his body and
mind, and comparing of his nature with the Rules of his Art, he said it could
not possibly be otherwise than that he should be a great man, and that he
wondered how he could yet bear it, that he was not already the chiefest and
first of all others.

Sueton. in Tito l. 11. c. 2. p. 318.
12. Titus Vespasian was bred up at Court with Britannicus, the son of Claudine
by Messalina, had the same Tutors and instructions with the young Prince, at
which time it was that there came a Physiognomist, who by the order of
Narcissus, the Freed-man of Claudius the Emperor, was to consider of the
aspect and countenance of Britannicus: this man did then most constantly
affirm, That Britannicus should never be Emperor: but he said of Titus (who at
that time stood by) that e're long he should attain unto the Empire.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 2. p. 1222.
13. Strepsiades the first time he saw his son (when he was returned from the
School of Socrates) said of him (by the view of his face and forehead) that he
would make a good pleader in a bad cause, for that he seemed to carry in his
visage something of the Attick subtilty and impudence.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 2. p. 1223.
14. Isidorus, the Hispalensian Bishop, chanced to behold Mahomet in Spain,
before such time as he had raised so great a ^lame, and even then by the Rules
of Physiognomy, he presaged, That he would prove the pest and plague both of
the Church and the Commonwealth, and thereupon commanded him to be seized: But
Mahomet being warned by the Devil of the approaching danger, consulted his own
safety by a speedy flight.

Plut. in Caes. p. 737.
15. It should seem that C. Julius Caesar had some knowledge in these matters,
for when Antonius and Dolabella were accused to him, as if they intended to
disturb the present state of things, Caesar said, he feared not such as were
fat, and had much hair on their head: but such as were pale-faced, and of a
lean habit of body, meaning thereby Brutus and Cassius, who afterward were the
chief heads in the Conspiracy against him.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 2. p. 1223.
16. The Sultan of Egypt having heard of some Pilgrims of Jerusalem of great
quality, when he had admitted them to his presence, and reached them his hand
to kiss, he easily apprehended that Frederick, Duke of Saxony, was the chief
amongst them by the proportion and heroic make of his body.

CHAP. XII. Of the Painters in former times, and the principal Pieces of the
best Artists.
FOr the reputation of this Art Pliny tells us, That first in Sicyone, Plin. l.
35. c. 10. p. 537.
and then throughout all Greece it was ordained, That Gentlemen's sons and
freeborn, should be first sent to a Painting School, there to learn (before
any other thing) the way to Paint and Draw Pictures upon Box Tables: It was
also ordained, That the Art it self should be ranged in the first degree of
Liberal Sciences. Certain it is, That in former times it was had in that
honor, that none but Gentlemen and freeborn might meddle with it; as for
Slaves, by a strict and perpetual Edict they were excluded from the benefit of
this mystery; nor might they learn or be taught it. By what degrees it attained
to its height, may be seen as follows.

1. Theon had many pieces wherein he discovered the excellency of his Art;
Alian. var. hist. l. 2. c. 44. p. 84.
but amongst the chief was that of a man with his sword in his hand, and his
Shield stretched out before him, ready prepared for the Fight, his eyes seem to
sparkle with fire, and the whole frame and posture of his body, is represented
so threatening, as one that is entirely possessed with a Martial fury.

2. Nicias exceedingly delighted himself in his profession of Painting, Aelia.
var. hist. l. 3. c. 31. p. 126. Plin. l. 35. c. 31. p. 547.
and withal was so intent upon it, that when he Painted Necya, he frequently
forgot to eat his meat, and used to ask his servants, Whether he had dined or
not? When this incomparable piece of Art was finished, King Ptolomy sent to
purchase it of him at the price of sixty Talents, but he refused to part with
it, though for so vast a sum.

3. Conon Cleoneus was the man that perfected the Art of Painting, Aelia. var.
hist. l. 8. c. 8. p. 220.
whenas before his time it was but rudely and inartificially exercised, and
therefore his Pictures were sold at a price above any other Artists in that Age
wherein he lived; he was the first that drew Pictures side-waies.

4. Bularchus Painted in a Table the Battle of the Magnetes with such rare
skill, Plin. l. 35. c. 8. p. 533.
that Candaules, King of Lydia, paid willingly for it as much gold as it came
to in weight.

5. Polygnotus, Plin. l. 35. c. 9. p. 533. Patrit. de regno l. 2. tit. 10. p.
114.
the Thasian, was the first that Painted women in gorgeous and light apparel,
with their Hoods, and other head attire, of sundry colors. His Invention it
was to paint Images with the mouth open, to make them show their teeth; and
represented much variety of countenance, far different from the stiff and heavy
look of the Visage before-time: of his Workmanship is that Picture in a Table
which now stands in the stately Gallery of Pompeius of a man upon a Scaling
Ladder, with a Target in his hand: but done with that art and dexterity, that
whoever looks upon it, cannot tell whether he is climbing up or coming down;
he also beautified the great Gallery of Athens with the History of the Trojan
War; and being requested by Elpinice, the daughter of Miltiades to Paint her
amongst the Trojan women, he did it so exquisitely that it seemed to be alive.

6. Apollodorus, Plin. l. 35. c. 9. p. 534.
the Athenian, who lived in the ninety third Olympiad, brought the Pencil into
a glorious name and especial credit. Of his making there is a Priest at his
devotion, praying and worshipping; another of Ajax all on a flaming fire, with
a flash of Lightning, which at this day is to be seen at Pergamus, as an
excellent piece of work: and to speak truth, before his days there can hardly
be showed a Table which any man would take pleasure to look long upon.

7. Zeuxis, Plin. l. 35. c. 9. p. 534.
of Heraclea, lived about the ninety fifth Olympiad; of him the forementioned
Apollodorus said, That he had stolen the cunning from all the rest: in process
of time he grew to vast wealth, by the only means of his excellent hand: at
last he resolved to work no longer for money, but to give away all his
Pictures: his Alomena, Penelope, Pan, Helena are famous pieces. Much speech
there is of a Wrastler or Champion of his, wherein he pleased himself so well
that he subscribed to it, Invisurus aliquis, facilius quam imitaturus, sooner
envyed than equalled. Another stately piece there is of his Workmanship,
Jupiter sitting upon the Throne of his Majesty, with all the other Gods
standing by, and making court unto him. The imperfection of this Artist was,
that the head and joints of his Pourtraictures were somewhat of the biggest.

Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p 535.
8. Parrhasius was born at Ephesus, he was the first that gave true Symmetry to
his Pictures, that best couched the hair of the head, and expressed the lovely
grace and beauty about the Mouth and Lips; he was bold openly to challenge
Zeuxis for the victory in this Art. Zeuxis brought upon the Stage a Tablet
wherein clusters of Grapes were so lively represented, that the Birds of the
Air came flocking to them. Parrhasius to show his Workmanship brought a Tablet,
wherein he had only depainted a Curtain, but so lively, that Zeuxis in a
glorious bravery because the Birds had approved of his Handiwork, said to him
in scorn, Come Sir, away with your Curtain that we may see your goodly Picture;
but perceiving his error he was mightily abashed, yielded him the Victory, and
said, Zeuxis has beguiled poor Birds, but Parrhasues has deceived Zeuxis, a
professed Artist.

Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 536. Patrit. de repub. l. 1. tit. 10. p. 55.
9. Timanthes had an excellent wit, and was full of rare invention; he it was
that made the famous Picture of Iphigenia, wherein was represented that
innocent Lady standing by the Altar ready to be slain for Sacrifice; he had
painted by her Chalchas the Priest looking sad, Ulysses sadder, but her Uncle
Menelaus above the rest full of an extreme sorrow: and having in these spent
all the signs whereby the Pencil was able to express a real hearts grief; being
yet to pourtray her own Father Agamemnon, he drew his Visage covered with a
Veil, leaving it to the imagination of the Spectators, to conceive of an
unexpressible grief and extraordinary sorrow that was in him to behold his
Daughter bathed in her innocent blood. He painted a Cyclops lying a sleep, and
little elvish Satyrs by him, with long Perches taking measure of one of his
Thumbs. But his picture of a Prince was thought to be most absolute; the
majesty whereof is such, that all the Art of painting a man seems to be
comprised in that one Pourtrait; this piece remains at this day within the
Temple of Peace, in Rome.

Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 537.
10. Pamphilus a Macedonian, was the first of all Painters that was skilled in
Arithmetic and Geometry, without which he judged it impossible to be a perfect
Painter; he was renowned for drawing a Confraternity or Kindred, the battle
fought before Phlius, and the victory of the Athenians. He taught none his
skill under a talent of silver for ten years together; and thus much paid
Apelles and Melanthus to learn his Art.

Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 538, 539.
11. Apelles surmounted all that ever came before or followed him; giving his
Pictures a certain lovely and inimitable grace. Having heard of the fame of
Protogenes, he sailed to Rhodes on purpose to see him; but finding him absent
from his Shop, he took a Table and drew therein a fine and small line athwart
it; Protogenes at the sight of it said Apelles had been there, and he himself
drew a second with another color in the midst of it, and so left it. Apelles
upon his return drew a third, with a distinct color so small as left no
possibility for a fourth; which when Protogenes saw, he confessed he had met
both with his Match and Master. This Table was kept a long time, and better
esteemed than any other rich or curious work, till it was destroyed by fire in
the Palace of Caesar in the Palatine Hill. Being abused by one in the Court of
King Ptolomy whose name he knew not, nor could see in the presence, he took a
coal from the hearth, and drew his face so exactly, that he was immediately
known. His Picture of Venus arising out of the Sea, in the nether part of it
had catched some hurt by mischance, but there never could be found that Painter
who would take in hand to repair the same to make it suitable with the rest: he
flourished about the hundred and twelfth Olympiad.

12. Aristides the Theban was a famous Painter, Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 541.
the first that would seem to paint the conceptions of the mind, and to express
the inward disposition and actions thereof, yea the very perturbations and
passions of the soul; but his colors were unpleasant and somewhat too harsh.
He painted the taking of a Town by assault, wherein was an Infant, making means
to creep to the Mothers Pap, who lay a dying upon a mortal wound received in
her Breast; but it passed how naturally the poor woman's affection was expressed
in this Picture; how a certain sympathy and tender affection might be perceived
to her Babe in the midst of her deadly pangs. This Table King Alexander the
Great translated from Thebes to Pella, the City where himself was born. He
painted a fight of an hundred Greeks and Persians, and sold it to Mnason the
Tyrant of Elate for ten pounds for every head therein depainted. King Attalus
also gave him for one Table and the Picture in it, one hundred Talents of
Silver.

13. Protogenes was born at Caunos a City in Cilicia, Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p.
542.
subject to the Rhodians; his Picture of Ialysus, and a Dog in that Table is
accounted his Masterpiece, which is now dedicated at Rome within the Temple of
Peace. It was so highly esteemed, that King Demetrius when he might have forced
the City of Rhodes on that side where Protogenes dwelt, forbear to set it on
fire, because he would not burn it amongst other painted Tables, and thus for a
Picture he lost the opportunity of winning a Town.

14. Asclepiodorus was admired by Apelles himself for his singular skill in
observing symmetry and just proportion; Plin. l. 35. c. 10. p. 543.
he pourtrayed for the King of the Elateans, the twelve principal gods, and
received for every one of them three hundred pound of Silver.

15. Nicomachus painted the ravishment of Proserpina by Pluto, Plin. ibid.
which stands in the Chapel of Minerva in the Capitol, and the Mermaid Sylla
which at this day is to be seen at Rome in the Temple of Peace; a ready Workman
he was, and no Painter had a quicker hand than he.

16. Philoxenus painted a Table for King Cassander, containing the Battle
betwixt Alexander the great, and King Darius, which for exquisite art comes
not behind any other whatsoever.

17. Cydias was he who in a Table represented the Argonautes, Plin. l. 35. c.
11. p. 547.
or Knights that attended Prince Jason in his expedition to Colchos; Hortensius
the Orator was content to pay for this Pi^ce one hundred forty four thousand
Sesterces, and Shrined this Picture in an Oratory or Chapel, built on purpose
for it in a House of Pleasure that he had at Tusculum.

Plin. l. 35. p. 11. p. 548.
18. Timomachus the Byzantine flourished in the days of Julius Caesar, for whom
he painted Ajax and Medea, which Pictures when he bought of him for eighty
talents, he caused to be hung up in the Temple of Venus; by talent, I mean the
Attick talent, which is six thousand Roman deniers, his pieces of Orestes and
Iphigenia are also much praised; but especially he is renowned for his Medusa's
head which he painted in Minerva's shield.

CHAP. XIII. Of the most eminent Artists for making of Statues and Images in
Clay, Marble, Ivory, Brass, etc.
THat of Painting is a noble Art, but this of the framing of Statues is perhaps
no whit inferior to it, since it makes a nearer approach unto nature than the
other. Pictures may be seen indeed, but these are also to be felt; have an
entire and solid body, and thereupon are also the more durable. The most
excellent Artificers in this kind, were such as follow.

Plin. l. 35. c. 12. p. 552.
1. Lisistratus of Sicyone was the first that in Plaster or Alabaster
represented the shape of a man's visage in a mould from the lively face indeed;
which Image he after took in Wax; nor stayed he there, but begun to make Images
to the likeness of the person; when before him every man studied only to make
the fairest faces, and never regarded whether they were like or no.

Plin. l. 36. c. 5. p. 565.
2. Phidias was the most excellent Graver that ever was, as all Nations will
confess, that have ever heard of that Statue of Jupiter Olympius which he made
at Olympia, or the stately Statue of Minerva, which he wrought at Athens, in
height six and twenty Cubits, all made of Ivory and Gold; upon the swelling
round of the shield of this Goddess, he engraved the Battle wherein the Amazons
were defeated by Theseus; in the hollower part, he enchased the conflict
between the Gods and the Giants. Upon the Shoos and Pantophles she wears, he
framed the fight betwixt the Centaures and Lapithae. In the Base or Pedestal of
the Statue, he cut the Genealogy of Pandora, and the nativity of the Gods to
the number of thirty, and amongst them the Goddess of Victory, of most
admirable Workmanship, with a Serpent and Sphinx of Brass; under the Spear that
Minerva holds in her hand, admired by all Workmen, he flourished the eighty
third Olymp^ad.

Plin. l. 36. c. 5. p. 566. Sandys on Ovid. Met. l. 10. p. 197.
3. Praxiteles his Venus which he wrought for them of Gnidos, surpasses all
Images that ever were made by others or himself; and in truth so exquisite and
singular it was, that many a man has sailed to Gnidos for no other business
but only to behold it. King Nicomedes offered to free their City of all debts
(which were great sums) for this piece of work; but they resolved to stand to
all hazards rather than part with it. It is reported that a wretched fellow was
enamoured of this Venus, as one Alchidas a Rhodian loved his naked Cupid, that
he made for them of Parium a City within Propontis.

4. Scopas deserves praise for his worthy workmanship, Plin. l. 36. c. 5. p.
567.
in which most account is made of those Images in the Chapel of Cn. Domitius in
the Cirque of Flaminius, viz. Neptune, Thetis and her Son Achilles; the Sea
Nymphs or Nereides mounted upon Dolphins, Whales and mighty Sea-horses; The
Tritons with all the Quire attending upon Phorcus a Sea-God, and the mighty
Fishes called Pristes, besides many other Monsters of the Sea; all of them
wrought by him so curiously, that had he sat about the making of them all his
lifetime and done nothing else, a man would have thought it work enough.

5. Menestratus his Hercules, Plin. l. 36. c. 5. p. 568.
men have in high admiration, as also his Hecate which stands in a Chapel at
Ephesus behind the great Temple of Diana; the Sextons or Wardens of which
Chapel give warning unto those that come to see it, that they look not too long
upon it, for dazzling and hurting their eyes, the luster of the Marble is so
radiant and resplendent.

6. Apollonius and Tauriscus were the makers of that brave piece of Zetus,
Plin. l. 36. c. 5. p. 569.
Amphion, Dirce, the Bull, and the Bond wherewith Dirce was tied, all in one
entire Stone, which was brought from Rhodes to Rome.

7. Lysias made a Chariot drawn with four Horses, Plin. ibid^
Apollo and Diana all of one Piece: and it appears how highly it was esteemed
by the honorable place wherein it stood; for Augustus Caesar to the honor of
Octavius his Father, dedicated it in Mount Palatine, over the triumphant Arch
there, and placed it within a Shrine or Tabernacle, adorned with Columns.

8. Agesander, Plin. ibid.
Polydorus and Athenodorus, Rhodians, most excellent Workmen all, agreed by one
consent to express lively in one entire stone, Laocoon himself and his
Children, and the wonderful intricate windings of the Serpents clasping about
them. This work remains to be seen in the Palace of the Emperor Titus; a
piece of Art to be preferred (no doubt) before all Figures, cut or cast Images
whatsoever.

9. Lysippus was the founder of the Coloss or stately Image of Hercules at
Tarentum, Plin. l. 34. c. 7. p. 495.
which is forty Cubits high, and miraculous is the device which is commonly
reported of this Colosse, that a man may move and stir it easily with his hand,
so truly balanced it stands, and equally counterpoised by Geometry, and yet
no wind, no storm or tempest is able to shake it. He also expressed the
personage of King Alexander the great in Brass; and many Images he made of him,
beginning at the very Childhood of the said Prince; nor would that great
Monarch suffer any other besides this principal Workman, to represent his
Effigies in Brass. He was at first but a poor Tinker or plain Brasier, and then
took heart to proceed further by an answer that Eupompus a Painter gave him,
who being asked what pattern he had best follow of all the Workmen that were
gone before him; he showed him a multitude of people, and told him he should do
best to imitate nature her self.

Plin. l. 34. c. 7. p. 495.
10. Charles of Lindus was Apprentice to Lysippus; he made the Colosse of the
Sun, which stood at Rhodes and was of all others the most admirable, for it
carried seventy Cubits in height; but it stood but sixty six years, being
overthrown by an Earthquake, yet lying along, a wonderful and prodigious thing
to behold. The Thumbs and great Toes of it are so big, as few men are able to
fathom one of them; the Fingers and Toes are bigger than the most part of other
whole Statues and Images: twelve years the Artificer was in framing it, and the
bare Workmanship cost three hundred Talents, given by King Demetrius.

Plin. l. 34. c. 7. p. 496.
11. Zenodorus framed that huge and prodigious Colosse of Mercury, at Auvergne
in France, ten years he was about it, and the Workmanship came to four hundred
thousand Sesterces. Having made su^ficient proof of his Art there, Nero the
Emperor sent for him to Rome, where he cast and finished a Colosse, an hundred
and ten foot long, to the similitude and likeness of the said Emperor as it
was first appointed and as he began it; but Nero being dead, it was dedicated
to the honor of the Sun.

Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 497.
12. Polycletus the Sicyonian made that which Workmen call the Canon, that is to
say one absolute piece of work, from whence Artificers do fetch their Draughts,
Symmetries and Proportions as from a perfect Pattern or Rule, which guides and
directs them in their work. So as we may truly judge that he alone reduced the
skill of Foundery and Imagery, into an Art and Method. He made Diadumenus in
Brass, an effeminate young man, with a Diadem about his head; a piece of work
of great account and much spoken of, for it cost an hundred Talents.

Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 498.
13. Myro born at Eleutherae and Apprentice to Agelades; the piece of work that
brought him into name and made him famous, was an Heifer of Brass, which diverse
Poets have celebrated in their Verse. He seems to have been the first that
wrought not his Images after one sort, but altered his work after many
fashions, as being fuller of invention, and given more to device in his Art;
more curious also and precise in his Symmetries and Proportions, yet he went no
farther than the outward lineaments of the body, as for the inward affections
of the mind he did not express in any of his work.

Plin. ibid.
14. Leontius expressed lively in Brass, Astylos, the famour Runner in a Race,
which Image is showed for a rare piece of work in Olympia, also the
pourtraicture of one that seemed lame, and to halt by reason of an Ulcer; but
the same was so lively and naturally done, that as many as beheld the same,
seemed to have a compassion and fellow-feeling with him of some pain and
grievance of his sore; and this piece of work a man may see at Syracusa.

Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 502.
15. Euphranor was the maker of that Paris, the excellent Art and Workmanship
whereof is seen in this, that it represented unto the eye all at once, a Judge
between the Goddesses, the Lover of Helena, and yet the Murderer of Achilles.

Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 501.
16. Calamis made Chariots drawn with two, and at other times with four Horses;
and for absolute Workmanship about Horses, wherein he never missed, he had not
his fellow in the world; and that he might appear to have the like Art in
framing Humane Statues, he made one in the resemblance of the Lady Alcmena,
which is so exquisitely wrought, as that no man could set a better piece of
work by it.

17. Bryaxis his most excellent piece in Brass, Plin. ibid.
was a man grievously wounded, fainting and ready to dye thereupon, which he
did so lively, that one might perceive therein how little life and breath was
left in his body.

18. Chanachus with his Apollo had another exquisite and curious work by him
devised and wrought; Plin. ibid.
it was a Stag standing so lightly upon his feet, that a man might draw a thread
under them, and the same take hold of the floor underneath so daintily, that he
seems to touch it with one foot by the claw, with another by the heel, and
the same after such a winding manner, twining and turning, as well with the one
as the other, that a man would think one while he would bounce and spring
forward, and another while start and cast himself backward.

19. Leocras made the Eagle that ravished Ganymedes and flew away with him,
Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 502.
but so artificially, that as if she knowing what a fair and dainty Boy she had
in charge, and to whom she carried him, clasped the Child so tenderly, that she
forbear with her Talons to pierce through so much as his Clothes.

20. Theodorus who made the Labyrinth of Samos, Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 503.
cast his own Image in Brass, which besides the near and wonderful resemblance
of himself, was contrived so artificially besides, and set out with other fine
devices, that he was much renowned for it; in his right hand he had a File, and
in his left he bare with three Fingers a little pretty Coach with four Horses,
but both the Coach, Horses and Coachman were couched in so small a room, that a
little Fly, which he also devised to be made with the rest, covered all with
her pretty wings.

21. Callimachus was a Workman of great note, Plin. l. 34. c. 8. p. 504.
but he was surnamed Cacizotechnos, for he would always be finding fault with
his own Workmanship, and could never see when to make an end, still thinking he
had not showed Art enough. There is a dance of Lacedemonian Women of his
making, a piece of work which he went about also to amend; and when he thought
to make it better, he marred it in such manner, that it lost all the grace that
it had before.

CHAP. XIV. Of the most applauded Actors upon Theaters, and the Name, Riches
and Favor of great Persons they have thereby attained unto.
SOme of these have been Masters of that grace and sweetness in their
pronunciation, and have expressed things so much to the life, by their choice
and befitting gesture, that they have wonderfully gained upon the minds of men
thereby; which being observed, the most famous Orators that ever were, were
not ashamed to become the Scholars of such men as these, and had they not so
done, they had never obtained the perfection of their own Art.

B^k. Chron. p. 581.
1. Richard Burbadge and Edward Allen, were two such Actors in Queen Elizabeth's
time, as no Age must ever look to see the like: and to make their Comedies
complete, Richard Tarleton, who for the part called the Clowns part, never had
his match, never will have.

Iani Nicii pinacoth. imag 1. 35. p. 62, 63.
2. Andreas Salvadorus was an excellent Scenick Poet, in which it was his
peculiar happiness to have Lauretus Victorius for an Actor, whose praise will
continue to late posterity: his voice was clear, sweet and loud: he had a
distinct and luscious pronunciation; an excellent singer: by all which he gave
as it were something of divine to every thing he had to deal in, which appeared
in that when he was gone, the things he had pronounced seemed not the same in
the mouths of others.

Lips. de constable. l. 1. c. 8. p. 32.
3. Polus was a famous Actor at Athens, of whom it is said, that when he was to
play such a part, as required to be presented with a remarkable passion, he
privily brought in the Urn and bones of his dead son, whereby he so excited his
own passion, and was moved to deliver himself with that efficacy both in his
words and gesture, that he filled the whole Theater with unfeigned lamentations
and tears.

Patrit. de regno l. 5. tit. 19. p. 349. Coel. Antiq. lect. l. 14. c. 17. p.
658.
4. Roscius was so incomparable an Actor, that he excelled all Mimicks and
Players that came upon the Stage: so that whenever any thing was frigidly, or
but indifferently personated upon the Theater, the Spectators would commonly
cry out, Ro^cius plays not. This man with his utmost study and diligence, was
subservient to the eyes and ears of the people: and therefore he would
familiarly glory in this; That he did never bring any gesture before the
people, which he had not well practiced at home, and there approved of
beforehand.

Plut. in Cic. p. 863.
5. When Tullius Cicero began to plead in Causes, it is said of him, That he
applied himself to Roscius the Comedian, and Aesopus the Tragedian for
instructions. This Aesopus was famous in Rome for action: and they say, That
once playing the part of Atreus, deliberating upon the punishment of Thyestes,
he was so transported, that he struck and slew a servant as he suddenly passed
by with the Scepter he then had in his hand. This Aesopus in this employ
attained to a vast Estate, which was afterward consumed in as much vanity as
that whereby it had been gotten.

Plut. in Alex. p. 681.
6. Nicocreon, of Salamine, and Pasicrates the Solian, contended with great
earnestness, since in the Shows that Alexander made at his return out of Egypt
into Phoenicia, it fell to their lot to exhibit such Players as were far more
conspicuous for their art than any others: Pasicrates stood for Athenodorus,
and Nicocreon for one Thessalus, whom Alexander himself favored; yet he
discovered not this his inclination, till such time as the Judges had
pronounced Athenodorus the Victor. Then Alexander as he departed, said, He did
commend the Judges, nevertheless he had rather have lost a part of his Kingdom,
than to have seen Thessalus overcome. Also when Athenodorus (being fined by the
Athenians for being absent from their Bacchanals) had besought Alexander to
intercede by his Letter in his behalf; he denied his request therein, but paid
for him the fine that was imposed upon him.

Plut. in Agesi. p. 607.
7. Callipedes, an Actor of Tragedies, had a celebrious name amongst the
Grecians, and a mighty fame amongst all men for his surpassing skill and
dexterity in that faculty. Coel. Rho* l. 11. c. 16. p. 505.
This man meeting with Agesilaus, saluted him first, and then proudly joining
himself with those that were walking, made ostentation of himself, supposing
Agesilaus would take occasion to speak familiarly to him: but perceiving no
notice was taken; Do thou not know me, O King, said he? Agesilaus looking
upon him, Are you, said he, Callipedes, the Dicelict? so the Spartans term
those that are Mimicks; and the word does signify an Idol, or Image. By this
means he repressed the tumor of this man's pride, and met with that humor of
self-admiration, that he was so far over-gone with.

8. Demosthenes being once exploded by the people, Plut. in Demost. p. 849.
hasted home with his head covered, and his mind troubled: Satyrus the
Tragedian followed him, to whom Demosthenes lamentably complained, That whereas
he was more laborious than all other Orators, and that he had much empaired the
state of his body, in the prosecution thereof, yet he could not please the
people; but that Drunkards, and Mariners, and illiterate persons held the
Pulpit, while in the mean time he was rejected. You say true, said Satyrus: but
I shall soon remove the cause, if you will repeat me some Verses of Euripides
or Sophocles without Book: Demosthenes pronounced some of them, which Satyrus
repeated after him with such a decency of countenance, and such aptness of
gesture, that Demosthenes scarce knew them to be the same. Here it was that he
first understood what an accession of dignity and grace is to an Oration by
action, and thenceforth he accounted a declamation, a thin and vain thing,
where pronunciation and action was neglected.

9. Hippias and Sergius were two Tragedians and Mimicks in Rome, Plut. in
Anton. p. 920.
who were in such favor with Marcus Antonius, that they could do with him
almost what they pleased. Also Cytheris a woman of the same profession was so
much beloved by him, that he carried her with him in his Licter, as he went
from City to City: and no less a Retinue waited upon her Licter, than if it had
been that of his mother.

10. Theodorus Zuingerus soon after his childhood gave instance of what his
Country might expect from him: Melch. Adam. in vit. Germ. med. p. 301.
for in a Play that was publicly exhibited by Thomas Platerus (the Father of
Foelix) when he sustained the person of Cupid, with his sweet variety of
gesture, his becoming action, and pleasant pronunciation, he so turned the
faces, eyes and minds of all men upon him, that tears of joy dropped from the
eyes of some of the Spectators; others witnessed the applause they gave him, by
the sighs that parted from them; and others again cried out with the Poet,
Ingenium coeleste suis velocius annis
Surgit, and ingratae fert male damna morae.
A Heaven-born wit, preventing his own years,
Is rise, and loss by base delays he fears.


11. Claudius Rufus has left in writing that many years agone, Plut. Mor. in
quaest. Romans qu. 107. p. 885.
in those days when Caius Sulpitius, and Licinius Stolo were Consuls, there
Reigned a great Pestilence at Rome, such a mortality as consumed all the
Stage Players, indifferently one with another: Whereupon at their instant
prayer and request, there repaired out of Tuscany to Rome many excellent and
singular Actors in this kind, amongst whom, he who was of greatest reputation,
and had carried the name longest in all Theaters for his rare gift and
dexterity that way, was called Hister, of whose name all other afterward were
called Histriones.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 163.
12. Astydamas, the son of Morsymus, was a Player so noted in his time, that the
people decreed he should have a Statue erected in the Theater, in honor of
him, more especially for that in the acting of Parthenopaeus, he had performed
it with that dexterity and grace, as merited an applause from them all: This
Player therefore framed a Title and Inscription for his own Statue, In which he
had not been oversparing in his own praises: this Title he read amongst the
people, that in case it should be approved by them, it might be disposed with
his Statue: but the people were so offended with the man for being so very
lavish in his own praises, that by general vote it was decreed, That so
arrogant a Title as that should not be admitted. Suidas says, This Title was
to this purpose: Would I had lived with them, or they with me,
Who for sweet speaking so renowned be:
I then (no doubt) had gained the chiefest praise,
This they Envy, who can no Envy raise.


CHAP. XV. Of men notably practiced in Swimming; and how long some have
continued under Water.
CUstom and long practice of any thing does seem to divest man of his own
nature, and to adopt another instead thereof, a^ we may perceive upon diverse
occasions: and particularly in respect of what follows.

Clarks Geograph. descript. p. 196.
1. Spunges are gathered from the sides of Rocks, fifteen fathom under water,
about the bottom of the Streights of Gibraltar. The people that get them, are
so trained up in diving from their childhood, that they can endure to remain
under water, such a continuance of time, as if it was their own proper element.

Alex. ab Alex. genia. di^r. l. 2. c. 21. p. 91. Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p.
120.
2. Amongst those remarkables which have been in our time, we knew of late a
man, not of any generous extraction, but of the meaner sort, who was a Mariner
at some times for a stipend; and at other times, got his living by fishing.
This man was known in a sharp season of the year, and some times in a troubled
Sea, in one day to have swimmed from Aenaria, an Island amongst the Pithecusae,
over against Naples, as far as to Prochytas, which is almost ^ifty Furlongs,
and at some times to have returned in one and the same day. When this seemed
unto all men utterly incredible, he voluntarily made offer of himself to
perform it, multitudes came to behold this sight, and when at Aenaria he had
leaped into the Sea, a Boat that followed him on purpose, observed him swimming
at some distance before them that were in it, till such time as he came to
shore at Prochyta in safety.

3. Historians do much admire the valor and strength of Sertorius; Patrit. de
Regno l. 3. tit. 4. p. 167.
his first Warfare was under Scipio, against the Cimbrians, who had passed over
into Gaul: in this War, when a Party of the Romans had fought unfortunately, it
happened that Sertorius was grievously wounded, and had lost his Horse: in this
case, with his Breastplate upon him, and his Shield and arms in his hand, he
threw himself into the Rhodamus, a swift River, and striving against the
adverse Waves, he swam over it, and not without great admiration of the enemy,
he got over in safety, to their own Army on the other side.

4. Scaevola, Patrit. de regno l. 3. tit. 4. p. 168.
a man of admirable valor, having alone defended a Rock all the day from the
whole Forces of the Britains, when night came on threw himself into the Sea,
and laden with a heavy Shield, and two Coats of Mail, by swimming he gat safe
unto Caesar, who having publicly applauded him, of a private Soldier made him
a Centurion.

5. Those few people that dwell in the Islands of Lar and Cailon, Purch. pilg.
tom. 1. l. 5. c. 14.. 2. p. 659.
are almost transformed into the nature of Fishes: so excellent swimmers are
they, that seeing a Vessel on the Seas, though stormy and tempestuous, they
will swim to it, though it be distant from them five or six miles, and this
only to beg an Alms, their own food being nothing but Fish, and they very poor.

6. They fish for Pearl in the South Sea near Panama, Vincent le Blan^'s
Travels, tom. 3. c. 13. p. 386.
and in the North Sea in diverse places, as in the Isle Margareta toward the
coast of Paria, where the Oysters feed upon Cubuca. The Pearls of greater price
are called Quilates, or Carats: For this fishing they choose the best winded
men, and such as can contain longest under water. At Barlovento, Cula, and
Hispaniola, I have seen them stay three quarters of an hour under water, and I
was told they have had some who have continued the whole hour. The General of
Margaita keeps many of these men, who are Slaves to him called Bo^ze: one of
these Pearls was brought to the King of Spain as big as a Pigeons egg, valued
at 14000. Ducats, by some at 100000. and it was called a Peregrina.

7. The Grecians did use to breed up their children with liberal education:
Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 386.
they were well instructed in Wrestling, and also were taught to swim well.
This was the reason that very few of the Greeks perished in the Naval fight
with Xerxes at Salamine, for being well skilled in swimming, when any of their
Ships were broken, or in danger of sinking, they quit them, and leaping into
the Sea, swam safely to Salamine; on the otherside, the Persians being
generally unpractised herein, for the most part perished in the Sea.

8. Henry the third, the Emperor of the Romans, Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 5. p.
387.
in revenge of the death of Peter, King of Hungary, besieged Pisonium. It was
here that a certain Hungarian, his name was Zothmundus, an incomparable
swimmer, was sent in the dead of the night by the Governor, to get by swimming
privily under the enemies Ships: this he did, and with a small Wimble or
Piercer, he so bored them in the bottom of the Keel, that about two and three a
clock in the morning diverse of them began to sink. By this Artifice, the Forces
of the Germans were so broken and impaired, that they were constrained to break
up the Siege and to depart.

9. Alphonsus, King of Sicily and Arragon, besieged the City of Bonifacia, a
Colony of the Genowayes in the Island of Corsica; Fulg. Ex. l. 7. c. 4. p. 969.
he had there more especially one vast Ship which was called the Round Head,
which created the Genowayes a great deal of trouble and danger in their Naval
fights with him: whereupon by the command o^ Johannes Campo-Fulgosus, one
Andreas Mergus, a Genoan, cast himself into the Sea with his Helmet on his
head, and a short knife in his hand, and being (as he was) an excellent Diver
under water, with little ado he cut all the Cables of the Anchors of this Ship
in pieces, in the time when the Battle was at hottest. Then this vast heap of
Wood began at first to move it self, then to turn the Beak of it another way,
and after to draw along with it other Ships: so that Alphonsus was constrained
to retire, and to give leave to the Genowayes to enter in safety their City of
Bonifacia, and to relieve it.

Plut. in Caesar. p. 731. Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 387. Patrit. de regno l.
3. tit. 4. p. 165.
10. C. Julius Caesar by swimming and resting himself upon blown bladders, would
pass over Rivers with that celerity and speed, that oftentimes he has
prevented and arrived before such messengers, as he had before appointed to
carry the news of his coming. At Alexandria, by a sudden eruption of the enemy,
he was constrained to leap into a Boat (and when too great a number cast
themselves into it after him) he was enforced to leap thence into the Sea,
where he swam two hundred paces to get into one of his own Ships, holding in
the mean time his Writings in his left hand above the water, lest they should
be damnified that way, and drawing his Generals Coat after him with his teeth,
that the enemy might not boast of having such a spoil in their power.

^uin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 387.
11. Scyllias was the best Swimmer and Diver of all other men in his time, he
attended upon Xerxes in his Expedition into Greece: and in the Wrack of part of
his Navy at Pelion, this man was of special use: much money he saved for the
Persians, and much he gained to himself. He had resolved, and waited
opportunity, to pass over to the Greeks: so one time casting himself into the
Sea at Aphetas, where Xerxes his Navy was, he swam to Artemisium, which is well
nigh eight hundred Furlongs: there he told the Greeks of the Persians
Shipwreck at Pelion, and the Ships that were sent to fetch a compass about
Euboea. He and his daughter called Cyana, whom he had also taught to Swim and
Dive with great dexterity, these two swimming under water, cut in pieces the
Cordage of the Persian Ships in a very vehemently tempestuous time, by which
means a great destruction was made of Xerxes his Galleys. The Grecians were
mindful of this good turn, and in honor of his memory, and that of his
daughter, the Amphictions decreed them a Statue of each of them to be kept
enshrined at Delphos.

CHAP. XVI. Of the most famous Philosophers, Academicks, Stoics, Cynicks,
Epicureans, and others.
A Larger account of the ancient Sages and Philosophers, would not comport with
my present design, and therefore I have contented my self with this abstract
from Laertius, whither I refer my Reader, if he is desirous of further
satisfaction, in their Doctrines and Tenants.

1. Thales, a Phoenician, some say a Milesian, of an Illustrious Family; it is
said, That he first found out the Eclipses and Declinations of the Sun; was the
first that said Souls were immortal; and that the Sun was six hundred and
twenty times bigger than the Moon; and first described the Triangle of a Circle
in straight lines; he held water the beginning of all things; that the World
had a Soul; and he first divided the year into three hundred sixty and five
days: he was born in the thirty first Olympiad, and died in the seventy eighth
year of his age; or as Sosicrates in the ninetieth; he was the first of the
seven wise men, and his saying was, Know thy self, Laert. lib. 1. p. 6, 7.

2. Solon, a Salaminiah by birth, he first eased the burden of the Athenians,
occasioned by Usury; discovered and resisted the intended Tyranny of
Pisistratus, and finding it in vain, laid down his Arms at the Gate of the
Common Hall, saying, O my Country, I have assisted thee both in word and deed.
He made Laws for the Athenians; he flourished in the forty sixth Olympiad, and
died in Cyprus when he was eighty years of age, Laert. lib. 1. p. 11, 12.

3. Chilon, the son of Damagetus, was a Spartan; he was acquainted with the
Fable-maker Aesop: being asked what was hardest to do? he said, To keep
secrets, to dispose well of our leisure hours, and to bear an injury; His
Precepts were, to restrain the Tongue, especially in Feasts; to speak no evil
of our Neighbors; to threaten none because it is womanish; to visit our Friends
most in Adversity; not to speak evil of the dead; to honor age; to prefer loss
to a reproachful gain; not to wish things that cannot be, etc. he was old in
the fifty second Olympiad, and died at Pisa in the arms of a son of his,
Victorious in the Olympic Games. His joy it seems was too strong for his weak
body; his saying was, A promise and loss lie near together, Laert. lib. 1. p.
17, 18.

4. Pittacus, the son of Hyrrhadius was a Mitylenian; he with the Brethren of
Alcaus slew Melanchrus the Tyrant of Lesbos; refused money sent him by Croesus;
the supreme Magistracy amongst the Mitylenians was given him by universal
consent, which he held ten years, and having settled their State, Resigned his
Government. He pardoned the Murderer of his son, saying, That Pardon was better
than Repentance; he said, That Magistracy shows the man; and being asked what
was best? answered, To do well that which the present time required; his advice
was not to discover what we are about till we have attained it; his saying was,
Know the opportunity; he lived beyond seventy years, and died in the third year
of the fifty second Olympiad, Laert. lib. 1. p. 19, 20.

5. Bias, the son of Teutamis, was born at Priene, and thought by Satyrus to be
the chiefest of the seven wise men of Greece; he said strength was a gift of
nature, riches of fortune: but to comprehend things profitable for our Country,
was the prerogative of the mind and prudence. When asked what was most
difficult? To bear with constancy, said he, the changes of our affairs to the
worse. Sailing with wicked persons in a Storm, who then prayed: Hold your
peace, said he, lest the gods know you are here; he advised so to love, as that
possibly we may hereafter hate; not to speak hastily; to say of the gods, That
they are; to lay up wisdom in youth for the support of old age; to acknowledge
God the Author of all the good we do. He lived till old, and having pleaded the
cause of one, he laid his head down in the lap of his Grandchild, and the
Judges having passed sentence for his Client, and dismissed the Court, he was
found dead. His saying was, Most men are bad. Laert. lib. 1. p. 20, 21.

6. Cleobulus, the Lindian, was the son of Evagoras; he advised men to marry
their daughters when Virgins for age, and women for wisdom, thereby obscurely
hinting, that Virgins were to be instructed. To do good to friends and enemies,
to oblige the one, and reconcile the other; that going forth, we should ask
what we are about to do, and returning, what we have done; to be more ready to
hear than speak; not to dally, nor quarrel with our Wives in the presence of
others; to overcome pleasure; and not to be insolent in prosperity; he died
seventy years of age; his saying was, A Measure is the best, Laert. lib. 1. p.
23, 24.

7. Periander, the Corinthian, was the son of Cypselus; he seized upon the
Government, and became the Tyrant of Corinth, being the first that kept a
Lifeguard about him; he said, They that would Rule safely, must be rather
fenced with love and good will than arms: that rest is desirable, petulancy
dangerous; gain ^ilthy, pleasures fading, but honor is immortal. He advised to
keep promises, reveal no secrets, to be the same toward our friends fortunate
or otherwise; and to punish not only those that commit a fault, but those also
that are about to do it; he held his Tyranny forty years, and flourished in the
thirty eighth Olympiad; his saying was, In meditation there is all, Laert. lib.
1. p. 24, 25.

8. Anacharsis, the son of Gnurus, and brother of Cadvides, King of the
Scythians, came to Athens, and was received by Solon as his friend; he used to
say, That the Vine had three Clusters, the first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, and the third of sorrow and repentance; that Seamen are but four
inches distant from death; and that the Marketplace is a spot of ground where
men meet on purpose to deceive o^e another. Being asked what Ships were the
^afest? he replied, Those in the Haven; when reproached by one of Athens for
being a Scythian, My Country, said he, is a reproach to me: but thou art so to
thy Country. When abused by a young man at a Feast, Youngster, said he, if you
cannot bear your Wine while young, you will carry Water when you are old. He is
said to have found out the Anchor, and the Potters Wheel; returning into
Scythia, he highly commended the Laws of Greece, and endeavoring to abolish
those of his own Country, he was shot dead at a hunting by the King his
brother, Laert. lib. 1. p. 26.

9. Epimenides, the son of Phaestius, a Cretans; is said to have slept fifty
seven years; was illustrious amongst the Greeks, and a friend of the gods; he
purged the City of Athens, and thereby freed it of the pestilence; Phlegon
says he lived one hundred fifty seven years; he was contemporary with Solon,
Laert. lib. 1. p. 29.

10. Pherecydes, the son of Badys, was a Syrian; strange things are reported of
him, as that walking upon the Shore, and seeing a Ship sailing with a
prosperous wind, he said that Ship would be presently cast away, as it was in
their sight; also having drank water out of a pit, he foretold there would be
an Earthquake within three days, which also came to pass; coming to Messana,
he warned Perilaus his Host to depart thence with all that he had, which he
neglecting to do, Messana was taken; he is said to have died of the lousy
disease; he lived in the fifty ninth Olympiad, Laert. lib. 1. p. 31.

11. Anaximander, the Milesian, held Infinity^ to be the beginning and element
of all things (not air or water) which changed in its parts, but immutable in
the whole; that the Earth is the Center, and round; that the Moon has no light
of her own; the Sun is bigger than the Earth, and is the purest fire; he found
out the Gnomon upon Dials; first described the compass of Sea and Land, and
made a Sphere; he lived to sixty two years, and died about the fifty eighth
Olympiad, Laert. lib. 2. p. 33.

12. Anaxagoras, the son of Eu^ulus, a Clazomenian, was noble and rich, but
left all to his friends; when (one said) he had no care of his Country, Yes but
I have (said he) pointing toward Heaven. He said the Sun was a red hot iron,
bigger than Peloponnesus; that the Moon was habitable, and that there were
Hills and Valleys therein; that the Milky way was the reflex light of the Sun;
that the Origin of Winds is the extenuation of the air by the Sun. Being asked
what he was born for? To contemplate, said he, the Sun, Moon, and Heavens; he
said the whole frame of Heaven consisted of Stone, and that it was kept from
falling by the swift turning of it; He died at Lampsacum in the first year of
the seventy eighth Olympiad, Laert. lib. 2. p. 34.

13. Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus, was an Athenian; he was valiant,
patient, constant, and contented. His food was so wholesome, and he so temperate,
that though the Pestilence was often in Athens, yet he alone was never sick;
seeing a multitude of things exposed to sale, What a number of things (said he)
have I no need of? He took no notice of those that reproached or backbited him.
He was powerful in persuasion and dissuading, as he apprehended the occasion
for either; he said it was a strange thing that all men could tell what Goods
they had, but no man how many friends he has, so remiss are they in that
matter; that knowledge is the only good thing, and ignorance the only evil;
that Riches and Nobility have nothing of worth in them; that his Genius did
presignifie future things to him; that other men lived to eat, but he did eat
to live. Being asked what was the principal virtue of youth? He replied, Not to
over-do; and Whether it were best to marry or live single? he answered, In both
you will repent. He advised youth daily to contemplate themselves in a glass:
that if handsome, they might make themselves worthy of it; if deformed, they
might cover it with Learning. By the Oracle of Apollo, he was judged the wisest
of men, by which he fell into the envy and hatred of many; was accused as the
despiser of the old, and a setter forth of new gods, and thereupon being
condemned, he drank poison; the Athenians soon after bewailed the loss of him;
he died in the ninety fifth Olympiad, aged seventy, Lae^t. lib. 2. p. 37, 38.

14. Aristippus, the Cyrenian, moved with the glory of Socrates, came to
Athens, and there professing himself a Sophist, was the first of the Socraticks
that exacted a reward; he was a man that knew how to serve every place, time
and person; and he himself aptly sustained what person he pleased, upon which
account he was more gracious with Dionysius than any other: and by Diogenes
called the Royal Dog. Being asked what he had learned by Philosophy? To use all
men, said he, with confidence. When one upbraided him that he lived
sumptuously: If that were evil (said he) we should not use it in the Festivals
of the gods. Dionysius asked him the reason, Why Philosophers came to the
houses of rich men, but rich men went not to theirs? Because replied he, those
know what they want, but these do not. One asked him what difference there was
betwixt one wise, and another not so? Send, said he, both naked where they are
not known, and you will soon discover it. Having entreated Dionysius in the
behalf of his friend, and in vain, he threw himself at his feet, and being
blamed for so doing, Not I, said he, but Dionysius is in fault, who has his
ears in his feet. Many were his witty and acute sayings and replies; a number
of which may be found whence these were borrowed, that is from Laert. lib. 2.
p. 49, 50.

15. Stilpon of Megara so far surpassed all others in Learning, and a copious
way of speaking, that little wanted but that all Greece, fixing its eye upon
him, had passed over unto the Megarick Sect. He had an unchaste Daughter, and
when one told him that she was a dishonor to him; Not so much, said he, as I
am an honor to her. He was in great favor with Ptolomaeus Soter, and when
Demetrius the Son of Antigonus had taken Megara, he gave express order for the
saving his House, and caused all his goods to be restored. He was commanded
immediately to depart Athens by the Areopagites for having spoken slightingly
of Minerva, the work of Phidias; certain it is that he was in such honor at
Athens, that the Tradesmen would run out of their Shops to see him; and when
one said, they wonder at thee Stilpon as at a wild Beast, No, said the other,
but as a True man. Laert. lib. 2. p. 61, 62.

16. Plato an Athenian was the Son of Ariston, and descended from Solon by his
Mother Perictione. In matters of Philosophy that fall under sense, he followed
Heraclitus, in things only comprehended by the mind, Pythagoras, and in
Politics Socrates. He was of that reputation, that when he went up to the
Olympic Games, the eyes of all the Grecians were bent upon him. He got the
name of Plato, say some, from the breadth of his Forehead. Aristotle says, the
manner of his Speech was a middle sort betwixt Verse and Prose. He professed
Philosophy in the Academy, whence that Sect of Philosophers that came from him
were called by him Academicks. He said the soul is immortal, that the seat of
Reason is in the head, of Anger in the heart, of Love in the Liver. That Matter
and God, are the two Principles of all things; he dyed in the first year of the
one hundredth Olympiad, aged eighty one, and was buried in the Academy. Laert.
lib. 3. p. 70, 71, etc.

17. Spetisippus Son of Eurymedon the Athenian, succeeded Plato; he set up the
Images of the Graces in his School; he held the same Opinions with his Master
Plato, but was inferior to him in his manners, as one that was passionate and
a lover of pleasures. In his age he fell into the Palsy, and then with grief
being made weary of life, he willingly exchanged it for death. Laert. lib. 4.
p. 96.

18. Xenocrates Son of Agathenor was born at Chalcedon, the Scholar of Plato;
he was naturally dull, and of a sad countenance, but of singular chastity, and
so famous for his veracity, that the Athenians received his testimony without
an oath: being sent with others Ambassadors from Athens to King Philip, he
alone returned uncorrupted with money; yet this so great a man the Athenians
caused to be sold because he was not able to pay the tribute of an Inhabitant.
Demetrius Phalareus bought him, paid the Tribute, and set him at liberty. He
succeeded Speusippus and taught in the Academy twenty five years: and dyed in
the night by a fall, in the second year of the one hundred and tenth Olympiad,
being at that time aged eighty two years. Laert. lib. 4. p. 98, 99.

19. Bion the Son of a Publican about Borysthenes, was a man of a quick wit;
being asked whether a man should do well to marry? If, said he, she be fair,
she will be common, and if foul, a torment. He said old age was the haven of
evils, and that thereupon all things hastened unto it; that it was a great evil,
that we are not able to bear evils; that the way to the grave was easy, as
being found by us when our eyes are shut. He was so vainglorious, that at
Rhodes he persuaded Seamen to follow him in the habit of Scholars. He sucked in
Atheism from Theodorus, and having lived impiously, no wonder he was so loath
and afraid to dye; He fell sick and dyed at Chalcis. Laert. lib. 4. p. 110.

20. Aristoteles, the Son of Nicomachus was born at Stagira; he stammered in
his speech, his legs were small, and his eyes little, his habit was commonly
rich, and he wore Rings upon his fingers; he fell off from his Master Plato
while yet alive, and finding Xenocrates to succeed him in the Academy, he
walked in the Lyceum, and there discoursed Philosophy daily to his Scholars,
from whence he had the name of Peripatetick. He went thence to Philip of
Macedon, and became Tutor to his Son Alexander; he loved Hermeas a Harlot to
that degree, that he composed a Hymn in honor of her, and sacrificed to her
after the same manner as the Athenians did to the Eleusinian Ceres; for which
accused of impiety he fled from Athens to Calchis and there drank Poison, or as
some say dyed of a disease aged sixty three years. His sayings were such as
these; being asked what a Liar gains? he answered, Not to be believed when he
speaks truth; being upbraided for showing mercy to a bad man, I pitied, said
he, not the manners but the man; being asked what Hope was? he replied, The
dream of a waking man; being told of one that spoke ill of him behind his back,
Let him beat me too when I am absent. He said the roots of learning were
bitter, but the fruit sweet; being asked what a friend was? Two souls, said he,
dwelling in one body; and what he had gained by Philosophy? he answered, To do
that freely which others do only out of fear of the Laws; he dyed in the third
year of the one hundred and fourteenth Olympiad. Laert. lib. 5. p. 116, 117.

21. Theophrastus the Son of Melanta an Eresian Fuller, he succeeded Aristotle
in his School; he was a studious and a learned man^ of that esteem at Athens
that he had almost two thousand Scholars, and accused by Agonides of impiety,
little wanted but that the Athenians had fined his accuser. He used to say that
the loss of time is the greatest expense; that an ungoverned tongue is less to
be trusted than an unbridled Horse; that for the love of glory, man proudly
loses many of the pleasures of life, that we then dye, when we begin to live.
He wrote many Books, and dyed at eighty five years of age; having remitted
something of the former course of his studies, he is conceived thereby to have
hastened his death. Laert. lib. 5. p. 122, 123.

22. Antisthenes an Athenian, was the Scholar of Socrates; of whom when he had
learned tolerance, and was a lover of freedom from perturbations; he became the
first Author of the sect of the Cynicks. He said that labor was good, and
often used to say, Let me rather be mad than affected with pleasure. As Iron is
consumed with its own rust, so (says he) is the envious man with his own
manners; and that it was better to be exposed to Ravens and Crows than to fall
into the hands of Flatterers; for those only prey upon the dead, but these upon
the living: being praised once by some bad men, I doubt, said he, I have done
something that is evil; when taxed for keeping ill company, So, said he, do
Physicians, and yet have not their Fevors. He would say, Nothing is new to a
wise man, and that the weapons of virtue are not to be wrested from us. He was
the Prince of the sect of the Stoics, Laert. lib. 6. p. 138.

23. Diogenes the Son of Icesius was born at Sinope, being forced to quit his
Country for counterfeiting Coin, he went to Athens, where he became the Scholar
of Antisthenes; lived exceeding frugally, and exercised himself in all manner
of hardship; he slept his old Cloak, carried his provisions in a Bag; embraced
Statues when covered with Snow in Winter; tumbled himself upon the hot Sands in
Summer, and a Tub was the only House he had. He said when he saw Magistrates,
Physicians and Philosophers, that he thought man was the wisest of all
creatures; but when he looked upon Diviners, Interpreters of Dreams, and such
as confided in them, or men puffed up with Honor and Riches, he took man for
the vainest and emptiest of all other. Alexander the great used to say, that
were he not Alexander he could wish to have been born Diogenes; being commanded
by that Prince to ask him what he would, Stand then, said he, out of my
Sunshine. He said his manner was to oppose boldness to Fortune, Nature to the
Laws, and Reason to Passions and Perturbations. Being asked what hour was best
to Dine in; If, said he, thou art rich, when thou will, if poor, when thou
can. Lighting up a Candle at Midday, he said he sought for a Man. A rich man
unlearned (he said) was a Sheep with a Golden Fleece. Being compelled by
poverty, he begged of one on this manner, If you have given others give me
also; if you have never given to any, begin with me. Being asked of what
Country he was; I am, said he, a Citizen of the World. Hearing a handsome Youth
speak undecently; What, said he, are you not ashamed to draw a Leaden Sword out
of an Ivory Scabbard? He lived till he was near ninety years of age, and is
supposed to have dyed then, by purposely holding in his breath; he dyed at
Corinth the same day that Alexander dyed at Babylon, and was an old man, in the
one hundred and thirteenth Olympiad. Laert. lib. 6. p. 138.

24. Crates the Son of Ascondus was a Theban, the Scholar of Diogenes, he was
nobly descended, and whereas his estate amounted to near three hundred Talents,
he gave it all amongst his Citizens, addicting himself to Philosophy with great
constancy. He said it was impossible to find a man without fault; but that as
in a Pomgranate, there would ever be some rotten Kernels. He did studiously
reproach whores, that he might exercise himself in hearing evil speeches; he
drank water, and wore a rough hairy skin, sewed withinside of his sordid Cloak.
He was a deformed person to look upon, and crooked in his old age: When
Alexander asked him, if he desired that Thebes wherein he was born, being
demolished, should again be rebuilded? To what purpose, said he, when perhaps
another Alexander shall again subvert it? That he had poverty and obscurity for
his Country, which was out of the power of Fortune, and was fellow Citizen with
Diogenes, who was now safe from the snares of envy; he flourished in the one
hundred and thirteenth Olympiad. Laert. lib. 6. p. 159.

25. Menedemus a Cynick Philosopher, was the Scholar of Colotus the
Lampsacenian; he arrived to that degree of madness, that he went up and down in
the habit of a Fury, saying he was come from Hell to observe the sins of men,
and that he was again to descend thither to give the Gods there an account of
what he had discovered. His usual habit was a black Coat reaching to his
Ancles, a Phoenician Girdle about him, an Arcadian Cap upon his Head, in which
were twelve Letters woven, Tragical Buskins, a mighty Beard and an Ashen Plant
in his hand. Laert. lib. 6. p. 162.

26. Zeno Son of Demeus, Scholar of Crates, was born in Cyprus a small Town in
Greece; was Father of the Stoics, much honored by the Athenians, who deposed
the Keys of their City in his hands, and highly favored by Antigonus. He told
a loquacious Young man that his ears were fallen into his tongue; he said
nothing was more undecent than Pride, and especially in a Young man. Being
asked what a friend was, he replied, another my self. He had beaten a thievish
Servant of his, and when he excused himself, saying it was his sat to steal,
It is also, said he, thy fate to be beaten for stealing. In continence and
gravity he excelled all the rest, and in felicity too; for he lived ninety
eight years, and that in health without any disease. Going out of his School he
fell down and brake his finger, when striking the earth with his hand, he spoke
that of Niobe, I come, wherefore do thou call me? so he hastened his death by
suffocating himself. The Athenians decreed him a Sepulcher, and honors at his
Funeral. Laert. lib. 6. p. 169.

27. Cleanthes the Son of Phanius the Assian, came to Athens with four
Drachmes; was a Champion at first, and then the Scholar of Zeno; being very
poor, he labored a nights in Gardens to earn something, and learned in the
day. He was naturally heavy and dull, called by his Schoolfellows the Ass,
which he also did patiently bear. He was wont to chide himself; whereupon
Aristo asked him, whom he chid, An old fellow, said he, that has white hairs
but no soul. What he learned from Zeno he wrote (being not able to buy Paper)
upon Shells and the Bones of Beasts. He succeeded Zeno in his School, and dyed
by voluntary fasting, having lived eighty years. Laert. lib. 7. p. 206.

28. Chrysippus the Son of Apollonius of Tarsus, was the Scholar of Cleanthes,
an ingenious and most acute man, famous for Logic, and studious beyond all
that went before him, but not a little proud of his knowledge; he lived to
seventy and three years, and dyed as some say with excessive laughter: for when
an Ass had eaten up all his Figs, he bad the old woman (his Housekeeper) to
give him some Wine after them; a sudden conceit took him hereupon, that falling
into a vehement laughter, he suddenly expired. Laert. lib. 7. p. 209.

29. Pythagoras the Son of Mnesarchus a Ringmaker, or Marmacus a Samian, when
young being desirous to improve himself, he traveled Greece, Egypt, to
Epimenides in Creet, and to the Magi in Chaldaea; thence he returned to Samos,
which (being oppressed under the Tyranny of Polycrates) he forsook, and settled
at Crotona in Italy. He held the transmigration of souls, his Scholars
possessed all things in common, and kept silence for five years. The
Philosopher himself had great command over his passions, lived inoffensively,
permitted no bloody sacrifices, nor to swear by the gods; used Divination
himself, and permitted it to his, whom yet he interdicted from feeding upon
Beans; he held all things to be ruled by fate; that there are Antipodes; that
the Sun, Moon and Stars are gods; and that all the Air is full of Souls; that
all things (even God himself) do consist of Harmony. He forbad to taste of that
which fell from the Table, whether as belonging to the dead, or to use men to
temperate eating is uncertain. Sitting in the house of Mylo it was set on fire,
supposed by them of Crotona, fearing to fall under Tyranny; the Philosopher
running away was pursued and killed, having lived eighty, some say ninety
years; he flourished in the sixtieth Olympiad; the form of his Discipline
remained for nineteen ages. Laert. lib. 8. p. 214.

30. Empedocles of Agrigentum was the Son of Meton, and Scholar of Pythagoras,
of noble birth, a great Rhetorician and Physician; he is said to have refused a
Kingdom when proffered him: having cured one of a disease that seemed incurable,
he was sacrificed to as a god; whence he went to Aetna, and to beget an opinion
that he was a god, he cast himself into the midst of the flames that he might
not be found, but one of his Shoos detected the matter, for it was cast up
again, being of Brass as he used to wear them; others say he went into
Peloponnesus and returned not, which makes the time of his death uncertain. In
his way to Messana he fell and broke his Leg, of which falling sick he dyed,
says Aristotle, in the sixtieth year of his age, others in the seventy and
seventh; his Sepulcher was at Megaris. Laert. lib. 8. p. 226.

31. Heraclitus an Ephesian, he used to play with the Boys in the Temples of
Diana; and to the Ephesians that stood about him; O ye worst of men, what,
says he, do you wonder at, is not this better than to have to deal with you in
the Commonwealth? He declined the society of men, lived in the mountains, and
fed upon Grass and Herbs. He heard no man, but learned all of himself. He held
that all things came of fire, and should be destroyed by it; that all places
are full of Devils and Souls. Darius the King was desirous of his society as
appears by his Letter to him to come to him, which he refused to do: some say
he dyed of a Dropsy, others that being covered with Cowdung he was worried
with Dogs; he flourished in the sixty ninth Olympiad. Laert. lib. 9. p. 237.

32. Democritus of Abdera, when young, heard the Magi, and Chaldeans,
afterward Anaxagoras, dividing the Patrimony with two other Brothers, his part
came to an hundred Talents, with which he traveled to Egypt, to Aethiopia and
India say some; he had great knowledge in natural and moral things, great
experience in the Mathematics and all the liberal Sciences, and lived
solitarily amongst the Tombs, and so poor that he was maintained by his Brother
Damasus; afterward he became very famous for his predictions of future things,
was honored with great Presents and Statues, and buried at the public
charges; he held that all things came of Atoms, that there are infinite Worlds;
he protracted his death three days by smelling to hot Bread, dyed near the
eightieth Olympiad, having lived to an hundred and nine years. Laert. lib. 9.
p. 245.

33. Anaxarchus of Abdera, lived in great honor with Alexander the great;
Nicocreon the Tyrant of Cyprus was his mortal enemy, being taken by him he was
pounded in a Mortar; he spat his Tongue into the Tyrants Face; he flourished in
the one hundred and tenth Olympiad. Laert. lib. 9. p. 251.

34. Pyrrhon followed Anaxarchus, he held all things indifferent, that only
Custom and the Laws made them otherwise to us; accordingly he led his life,
and did all things indifferently; he endeavored to live free from
perturbations, and bare torments with invincible patience; his followers were
called Scepticks; he himself lived much in solitudes, yet honored in his
Country; he lived to ninety years, Laert. lib. 9. p. 253.

35. Timon, the son of Timarchus, a Phliasian, lived mostly at Athens, had but
one eye, was a lover of Gardens, equally acute in Invention, and for derision
of others; he himself loved a quiet life; was well known to Antigonus and
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, Laert. lib. 9. p. 264.

36. Epicurus was the son of Neocles an Athenian; he is charged by Timocrates
as a man of pleasure, a Glutton and a Lecher: but the honors he had in his
Country, the number of his friends, the continuance of his discipline, when
that of others was extinct; his Piety to his Parents, love and bounty to his
Brethren, and mildness to his servants, are luculent testimonies of an
excellent person: he lived upon bread and water, and when he fared sumptuously
he required a little Cheese; he lay sick of the Stone fourteen days, died in
the hundred and seventh Olympiad, leaving Hermachus as his successor in his
School: he ordained by his will the Annual celebration of his birthday, the
first ten days of the month Gamelion: and that on the twentieth day of every
month all his Scholars should be feasted at his charges, and he and Metrodorus
should then be remembered; he lived seventy and two years, Laert. lib. 10. p.
267.

CHAP. XVII. Of the most famous Printers in several places.
THe Art of Printing does with wonderful celerity convey Learning from one
Country and Age unto another, so that the Verse is not altogether untrue:
Imprimit ille die, quantum vix scribitur Anno.
The Press transfers within a day, or near,
All that which can be written in a year.


Treas. of Ancient and Mod. times, l. 8. c. 25. p. 790.
1. This worthy Science was brought into Italy by two Brethren named Conrades.
They Printed at Rome in the house of the Maxims, where the first Book that was
ever Printed there, was Augustinus de civitate Dei; and next, the Divine
Institutions of Lactantius Firmianus.

Ibid. p. 791.
2. An Invention of this merit could not be concealed, but it succeeded in
diverse Countries, and by diverse worthy men, who besides their Art of Printing,
were Learned and judicious Correctors of Errors and falsifications, easily
over-slip'd by unskilful workmen: Amongst these men of note are especially
commended, Aldus Manutius at Venice, a great restorer of the Latin Tongue,
Francis Priscianez at Rome; Baldus, Colinetus, Frobenius, and Oporinus at
Basil; Sebastian Gryphius at Lions; Robert Stephanus at Paris and Antwerp; and
William Caxton at London.

Clarks mir. p. 224.
3. Christopher Plantin of Antwerp, was a most famous and learned Printer.

Clarks mir. p. 224.
4. Paulus Manutius succeeded his father Aldus Manutius, and was also a famous
Printer at Venice.

5. Daniel Bombergus was an excellent Printer of the Hebrew Bible, Clarks mir.
p. 224.
and many other Hebrew Books, etc.

6. In France, Clarks mir. p. 224.
Crispinus, Henry Stephens, father to Charles, and Charles to Robert, Robert to
Henry, and Henry to Paul, were all famous Printers.

CHAP. XVIII. Of such men as were of unusual Dexterity in Shooting with the Bow
or otherwise.
AMongst all those who have excelled in this Art, Pl^t. parral. p. 9^8.
none is more worthy of memory than he who is first mentioned in this Chapter.

1. Philip intending to force the City of Olynthus, as he labored with much
ado to pass over the Rivers Sandavus, chanced to be shot in the eye by an
Olynthian, whose name was Aster, who had before written upon his Arrow, Philip
beware, have at thine eye,
After this deadly Shaft lets fly.


2. Domitianus the Emperor had such an extraordinary skill herein, Suet. l.
12. c. 19. p. 341. Sabell. Ex. l. 10. c. 11. p. 588. Patrit. de regno l. 3.
tit. 5. p. 168.
that when a Boy has stood at a great distance, with his hand extended upon a
Wall, he would shoot his Arrow so happily, that it should pass betwixt his
fingers, without any harm done to his hand; at two shoots he would fix his
Shafts in the fronts of wild beasts like a pair of Horns.

3. The Emperor Commodus, Sabell. Ex. l. 10. c. 11. p. 588. Herod. l. 1. p. 55.
son to Marcus Antoninus and Faustina, had a singular skill as well as
strength, in the casting of Darts and Javelins; at a hundred throws, he slew so
many Lions in the sands of the Theater, he cast them with that incredible
force, that he transpierc'd an Elephant, and the Horn of an Oryx; sometimes he
slew diverse wild beasts with one cast of a Spear; and his hand was of that
sureness and certainty, that whatsoever he had marked out with his eye, he
would hit with his dart and arrow.

4. The Emperor Gratianus had that singular skill in shooting, Zon. Annal.
tom. 3. p. 121.
that it was ordinarily said, That his Arrows had a Soul and reason within
them; no man shot quicker, nor any man surer than he did.

5. Toko, Zuin. Thea. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 106.
a private Soldier in the Army of Harold, the fourth King of the Danes,
boasted amongst others at a Feast, that he had so great a dexterity in
shooting, that he could shoot through an Apple, though but a small one, that
was set at a distance from him upon the top of a staff: This coming to the
Kings ear, he compelled him to make the trial in his own son: and that unless
at the first shot he should take off the Apple which should be laid on his sons
head, he should lose his own head as the reward of his vain boasting. Toko
reduced to this necessity, advises the boy to stand with his head immovable at
the twang of the string, and turned his face from him, that he might not fright
at the sight of the Arrow, and then taking Arrows out of his Quiver, at the
first shot he performed it. The King asked wherefore he took more Arrows than
one, To revenge my self on thee (said he) if I had miscarried, which the King
took not amiss.

Olaus Mag. l. 15. c. 1. p. 103.
6. Paulus Diaconus says of the Goths, That they accustom themselves unto no
weapon, so much as that of the Bow; and lest their children should either
languish through sloth, or addict themselves unto any prohibited acts, they are
instructed in diverse exercises, but especially in Archery, insomuch, that they
are not suffered to touch a bit of Bread, before such time as they have hit the
mark that was set up before them. There are therefore found boys amongst them
scarce twelve years of age, that are so accurate in this Art, that being
commanded, they will infallibly hit with their Arrow the head, breast, or legs
of a small bird that is at a good distance from them; and the old men amongst
them that yet retain their perfect sight will do the like.

7. Catenes, a Soldier, would shoot his Arrows with so certain an aim, Curt.
de gestio. Alex. l. 6. p.
and so steady a hand, that that thereby he would fetch down the birds that
flew in the air at a great distance from him.

Sabell. l. 10. c. 11. p. 589.
8. Andreas Agidarius, though not so skilful in the Bow, as the forementioned
were (for it is not so usual in Italy) had yet such a singular command and
skill in the use of his Pistol, that there was nothing so small that he could
reach with his eye, but he would undoubtedly hit it.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 394.
9. Alphonsus, King of Arragon, would sometimes throw four Arrows out of an
handsling, to the distance of forty paces: these being pulled out of the places
wherein he had shot them; at a second trial, he would fix again in the same
holes; and at a third, with four other Arrows would hit each of the former on
the top.

Vincent le Blancs Tra. vels, tom. 1. c. 36. p. 164.
10. When the King of T^ansiana goes into the Field, whether to chase or War, he
has a Vantguard of an hundred women, who carry Cross-bows, wherein they will
shoot so directly, they will hit the breadth of a penny: they call these women
Memeytas; by their Cross-bows they will also discharge three Arrows at a time,
with such celerity and vigor, that lighting upon a Tree they are not to be
drawn out they strike themselves so deep.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Heretics of former Ages, and the Heresies maintained by
them.
THat is a memorable thing which is related by more than one, That the same day
whereon Pelagius was born in Britain, Full. Eccles. hist. l. 1. cent. 3. p. 32.
Dempst. hist. Scotl. l. 15. number. 1012.
St. Augustine was also born in Africa: divine Providence so disposing it, that
the Poison and the Antidote should be in a manner Twins, in respect of the same
time. It is indeed an old observation that God has laid poisons and their
antidotes close together: and so in this case; for no sooner did any Heretic
arise in the Church of God, but there arose with him such as were well able to
confute him.

1. Nicholas, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 26. p. 51. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4.
p. 1318. Ross. his view of Relig. 7. p. 188.
of whom are the Nicholaltans was a Proselyte of Antioch, and one of the seven
Deacons, mentioned Acts 6. he had a most beautiful Wife, and being upbraided by
the Apostles, that he was jealous of her, he brought her out before them, and
to clear himself, gave her liberty to marry to whom she pleased; neither did he
afterward marry any other, but taught his son and his daughters to follow
chastity. But certain perverse men, who boasted that they were his followers,
gave themselves to all uncleanness, teaching that men ought to have their Wives
in common; they scrupled not to eat of things offered to Idols; at their
Love Feasts they used to put out their lights, and commit promiscuous
Adulteries with each others Wifes. They said, That not God but Angels created
the World. Not long did they retain this name, but were called Gnostics from
(...), knowledge, as if therein they excelled other men. They taught also that
in faithful men were two souls, one holy of the divine substance, the other
adventitious by divine insufflation, common to man and beasts. Their Doctrine
began to spread about the beginning of Domitians Reign, after Christ fifty two
years.

2. Corinthus was a Jew by birth, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 25. p. 50. Zuin.
Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1318. Ross. in his view of Relig. 7. p. 189.
and circumcised, taught that all Christians ought to be so also; he taught
that it was Jesus that died and rose again, but not Christ; he denied the
Article of eternal life, and taught that the Saints should enjoy in Jerusalem
carnal delights for one thousand years; he denied the divinity of Christ; he
owned no other Gospel but that of St. Matthew; rejected Paul as an Apostate
from the Law of Moses; and Worshipped Judas the Traitor: in most things they
agreed with the Ebionites, so called from Ebion a Samaritan; St. John would not
enter the same bath with the pernicious Heretic Corinthus: but against his and
the Heresy of Ebion he wrote his Gospel; he spread his Heresy in Domitian's
time about sixty two years after Christ.

3. Carpocrates, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 7. p. 59. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l.
4. p. 1318.
of whom came the Carpocratians, was born at Alexandria in Egypt; he
flourished about the year of Christ 109. in the time of Antoninus Pius.
Eusebius accounts him the father of the Gnostics: and says, That his
followers gloried of charmed love-drinks, Ross. his view of Relig. 7. p. 189.
of devilish and drunken dreams, of assistant and associate Spirits: and
taught, That he who would attain to perfection in their mysteries, must commit
the most filthy acts, nor could they but by doing evil avoid the rage of evil
Spirits. They said that Christ was a mere man, and that only his soul ascended
into Heaven. They held Pythagorean transmigration, but denied the Resurrection.
They said, not God, but Satan made this World: And that their Disciples should
not publish their abominable mysteries, they bored their right ear with a
Bodkin.

Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 11. p. 61. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1318.
Ross. view of Rel. 7. p. 190, 191.
4. Valentinus, an Egyptian, lived in the time of Antoninus Pius. When Hyginus
was Bishop of Rome, he began to spread his Heresy: He held that there were
many gods; and that he that made the World was the author of death. That Christ
took flesh from Heaven, and passed through the Virgin, as water through a Pipe
or Conduit. He said there were thirty Ages or Worlds: the last of which
produced the Heaven, Earth and Sea: Out of the imperfections of this Creator,
were procreated diverse evils, as darkness from his fear, evil Spirits out of
his ignorance, out of his tears springs and rivers, and out of his laughter
light. They have Wives in common, and say that both Christ and the Angels have
Wives. They celebrated the heathenish Festivals; were addicted to Magic, and
what not. This Heretic was of great reputation in Rome, from whence he went to
Cyprus, and thence into Egypt.

Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 11. p. 61. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1318.
^oss. his view of Relig. 7. p. 194.
5. Marcion (of whom came the Marcionites) was of Sinope, a City of Pontus, or
Paphlagonia; being driven from Ephesus by S. John, he went to Rome; he was the
son of a Bishop in Pontus, and by his father exiled for Fornication: being not
received by the Brethren in Rome, he fell in with Cerdon, maintained his
Heresy, and became his successor in the time of Marcus Antoninus Philosophus
one hundred thirty three years after Christ. He held three gods, a visible,
invisible, and a middle one; that the body of Christ was only a Phantasm; that
Christ by his descent into hell, delivered thence Cain, and the Sodomites, and
other Reprobates. He condemned the eating of flesh, and the married life; he
held that souls only were saved; permitted women to baptize; and condemned all
War as unlawful: Polycarpus called him the first begotten of the Devil. Justin
Martyr wrote a Book against him.

Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 27. p. 73. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1318.
Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p. 196.
6. Tatianus (whence come the Tatiani) was a Syrian by birth, an Orator, and
familiar with Justin Martyr, under whom he wrote a profitable Book against the
Gentiles; he flourished one hundred forty two years after Christ: his Disciples
were also called Encratit^, from (...), temperance or continence, for they
abstain from Wine, Flesh, and Marriage. When Justin Martyr was dead he composed
his Tenants out of diverse others. He held that Adam after his Fall, was never
restored to mercy; that all men are damned besides his Disciples; that women
were made by the Devil; he condemned the Law of Moses; made use of water
instead of wine in the Sacrament; and denied that Christ was the seed of David;
he wrote a Gospel of his own which he called Diatessaron: and spread his
Heresy through Pisidia and Cilicia.

7. Montanus, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 14. p. 86. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4.
p. 1318. Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p. 196.
Father of the Montanists; his Heresy began about one hundred forty five years
after Christ; by Nation he was a Phrygian, and carried about with him two
Strumpets Prisca and Maximilla, who sled from their husbands to follow him:
These took upon them to Prophecy; and their dictate were held by Montanus for
Oracles: but at last, he and they for company hanged themselves; his Disciples
ashamed either of his life or ignominious death, called themselves
Cataphrygians; he confounded the Persons in the Trinity, saying, That the
father suffered; he held Christ to be mere man, and gave out that he himself
was the Holy Ghost; his Disciples baptized the dead, denied repentance and
marriage, yet allowed of Incest; they trusted to Revelations and Enthusiasms,
and not to the Scripture. In the Eucharist they mingled the bread with the
blood of an Infant of a year old. In Phrygia this Heresy began, and spread it
self over all Cappadocia.

8. Origin gave name to the Origenists, Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p. 202.
whose errors began to spread Anno Dom. 247. under Aurelian the Emperor, and
continued above three hundred thirty four years. They were condemned first in
the Council of Alexandria two hundred years after his death; and again in the
fifth General Council at Constantinople, under Justinian the first. They held a
revolution of souls from their estate and condition after death into the bodies
again. They held the Devils and Reprobates after one thousand years should be
saved. That Christ and the Holy Ghost do no more see the Father, than we see
the Angels. That the son is co-essential with the Father, but not coeternal:
Because, say they, the Father created both Him and the Spirit: That souls were
created long before this World, and for sinning in Heaven, were sent down into
their bodies, as into prisons. They did also overthrow the whole Historical
truth of Scripture by their Allegories.

9. Paulus Samosatenus, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 26. p. 138. and c. 29. p.
139. Zuin. Theavol. 5. l. 4. p. 1319. Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p. 202.
so called from Samosata near Euphrates, where he was born: a man of infinite
pride, commanding himself to be received as an Angel; his Heresy brake out two
hundred thirty two years after Christ, and has continued in the Eastern parts
ever since. He held that Christ was merely man, and had no being till his
Incarnation: that the Godhead dwelt not in Christ bodily, but as in the
Prophets of old, by grace and efficacy, and that he was only the external, not
the internal Word of God: Therefore they did not baptize in his name, for which
the Council of Nice rejected their Baptism as none, and ordered they should be
rebaptized, who were baptized by them; he denied the divinity of the Holy
Ghost; allowed Circumcision; took away such Psalms as were sung in honor of
Christ; and instead thereof ordered some in honor of himself to be sung in
Churches by women. In the Synod of Antioch he was convicted by Malchion a
Presbyter, and condemned Anno 273. This Heresy was also embraced by Photinus,
a Galatian, Bishop of Syrmium, and propagated by him, Anno 323. and thence they
took the name of Photinians.

10. Manes, a Persian by birth, and a Servant by condition, was father of the
Manichaean Sect; Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 30. p. 141. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l.
4. p. 1319. Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p. 203.
he was flayed alive for poisoning the King of Persia's son: yet his wicked
opinions raged in the World for three hundred and forty years after his death.
He held two principles or Gods, one good, one bad; condemned eating of flesh,
eggs, and milk; held that God had members, and was substantially in every thing
how base soever, but was separate from them by Christ's coming, and the elect
Manichaeans. He rejected the Old Testament, and curtailed the New, by excluding
Christ's Genealogy. He held Christ was the Serpent which deceived our first
Parents; denied the divinity and humanity of Christ, saying, That he feigned to
die, and rise again; and that it was really the Devil, who truly was
Crucified. He denied the Resurrection, and held Transmigration. He affirmed
that he was the Comforter whom Christ promised to send; they Worshipped the Sun
and Moon, and other Idols. They condemned Marriages, and permitted promiscuous
copulation; they rejected Baptism as needless, and all works of Charity; they
taught that our will to sin is natural, and not acquired by the Fall; that sin
is a substance and not a quality, communicated from Parents to Children; they
say they cannot sin; deny the last Judgment: and affirm that their souls shall
be taken up into the Globe of the Moon.

Socrat. Schol. l. 1. c. 3. p. 215. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1319. Ross.
his view of Relig.. 7. p. 205.
11. Arrius, whence sprang the Arrians, was a Libyan by birth, by profession a
Presbyter of Alexandria: his Heresy brake out two hundred and ninety years
after Christ, and overran a great part of the Christian World. They held
Christ to be a Creature, that he had a man's body, but no humane soul, the
divinity supplying the room thereof; they also held the Holy Ghost a Creature,
proceeding from a creature, that is, Christ: their Doxology was, Glory be to
the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost; they rebaptized the Orthodox
Christians. This Heresy was condemned by the Council of Nice under
Constantine: And Arrius himself, in the midst of his Pomp, seized with a
Dysentery, voided his Guts in the draught, and so died.

12. Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, gave name to the Macedonians,
Socrat. Schol. l. 3. c. 8. p. 303. Zuin. Th^a. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1320. Russ.
view of Relig.. 7. p. 206.
they held that the Holy Ghost was a creature, and the servant of God: and that
by the Holy Spirit, was meant only a power created by God, and communicated to
the creatures. This Heresy sprung up, or rather was stiffly maintained under
Constantius, the son of Constantine, three hundred and twelve years after
Christ, and was condemned in the second Ecumenical Council at Constantinople,
under Theodosius the Great. The Heretics were called (...). Macedonius himself
being deprived by the Arrian Bishops, died private at Pylas.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 3021. Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p. 206.
13. The Aerians, so called from Aerius the Presbyter, who lived under
Valentinian the first three hundred and forty years after Christ; he held that
there was no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, that Bishops could
not ordain that there should be no set or Anniversary Fasts; and they admitted
none to their communion, but such as were continent and had renounced the
World; they were also called Syllabici, as standing captiously upon words and
syllables. The occasion of his maintaining his Heresy, was his resentment that
Eustathius was preferred before him to the Bishopric.

10. Florinus or Florianus, Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p. 209.
a Roman Presbyter, lived under Commodus the Roman Emperor one hundred fifty
three years after Christ: hence came the Floriani: they held that God made
evil, and was the Author of sin: whereas Moses tells us that all things which
he made were very good. They retained also the Jewish manner of keeping Easter,
and their other Ceremonies.

15. Lucifer, Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1320. Ross. his vi^w of Relig. c. 7.
p. 212.
Bishop of Caralitanum in Sardinia, gave name to the Luciferians; he lived
under Julian the Apostate three hundred thirty three years after Christ. He
taught that this World was made by the Devil; that men's souls are corporeal,
and have their being by propagation or traduction; they denied to the Clergy
that fell any place for repentance; neither did they restore Bishops, or
inferior Clarks to their dignities, if they fell into Heresy, though they
afterward repented.

16. Tertullianus, Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p. 213.
that famous Lawyer and Divine, was the leader of the Tertullianists; he lived
under Severus the Emperor about one hundred and seventy years after Christ.
Being Excommunicated by the Roman Clergy as a Montanist, he fell into these
heretical Tenets, That God was corporeal, but without delineation of members;
that men's souls were not only corporeal, but also distinguished into members,
and have corporeal dimensions, and increase and decrease with the body; that
the original of souls is by traduction; that souls of wicked men after death
are converted into Devils; that the Virgin Mary after Christ's birth did marry
once, they bragged much of the Paraclete or Spirit, which they said was poured
on them in greater measure than on the Apostles; they condemned War amongst
Christians: and rejected second Marriages as no better than Adultery.

17. Nestorius, Socrat. Schol. l. 7. c. 32. p. 393. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4.
p. 1320. Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p. 219.
born in Germany, and by fraud made Patriarch of Constantinople, was the head
of the Nestorians; he broached his Heresy under Theodosius the younger four
hundred years after Christ; he taught that in Christ were two distinct Persons,
the Son of God, and the Son of Mary; that the Son of God in Christ's Baptism,
descended into the son of Mary, and dwelt there as a lodger in a House; he made
the humanity of Christ equal with his divinity: and so confounded their
properties and operations. A great part of the Eastern Bishops were of his
persuasion; his Heresy was condemned in the Council of Ephesus, under
Theodosius the younger, in which Cyrill, Bishop of Alexandria, was President,
and the Author Nestorius deposed and banished into the Thebean Deserts, where
his blasphemous Tongue was eaten out with Worms. Zeno the Emperor razed to the
ground the School in Edessa called Persica, where the Nestorian Heresy was
taught.

18. Eutyches, Evagr. Schol. l. 1. c. 9. p. 4 i l. Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p.
215. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1321.
Abbot of Constantinople, from whence came the Eutychians in the year after
Christ 413. set forth his Heresy, holding opinions quite contrary to
Nestorius, to wit, That Christ before the Union had two distinct natures, but
after the Union only one, to wit, the divinity, which swallowed up the
humanity: so confounding the properties of the two natures, affirming, That the
divine nature suffered and died, and that God the Word did not take from the
Virgin humane nature. This Heresy condemned first in a Provincial Synod at
Constantinople, was set up again by Dioscurus, Bishop of Alexandria; at last
condemned in the General Council of Chalcedon, under Marcian the Emperor.

Socrat. Schol. l. 4. c. 7. p. 319. Ross. view of Relig. 9. 7. p. 206. Zuin.
Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1320.
19. Eunomius, Bishop of Cyzicum, embraced the Heresy of Arrius; he said
blasphemously, God of his own Essence understands no more than we do:
whatsoever we know of it, the same knows he: and look what his capacity
reaches to, the same thou shall find in us. His followers rebaptized Orthodox
Professors, and baptized in the name of the Father uncreated, the Son created,
and the Holy Ghost created by the Son. They affirmed the Trinity to be three
different substances, as Gold, Silver and Brass; he was a Cappadocian by birth,
and lived under Valens the Emperor.

Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 42. p. 116, 117. Ross. his view of Relig.. 7. p.
200. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1319.
20. Novatus, Father of the Nevatians, was an African born; he lived under
Decius the Emperor, after Christ two hundred and twenty years: his Heresy
lasted one hundred forty eight years; they denied repentance to those that fell
after Baptism; they bragged much of their sanctity and good works; they
condemned second Marriages as adulterous: and used rebaptization as the
Donatists; he was a Priest of Carthage, and father of the Cathari, or Puritans.

Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1320. Ross. view of Relig.. 7. p. 210.
21. Donatus (whence arose the Donatists) was a Numidian, who because Cecilianus
was preferred before him to the Bishopric of Carthage, accused him and all the
Bishops that Ordained him to be Traditores, that is, such as had delivered
their Bibles to be burnt by Idolaters under the Persecution of Maximinus.
Though this accusation was found faulty, yet Donatus continued obstinate, and
separated himself and Congregation from all others, accounting that no Church,
where any spot of infirmity was to be found: that such a pure Church was only
amongst them: yet they would have no man forced to a godly life; they slighted
the Magistracy, and would not suffer them to punish Heretics; they held the
efficacy of the Sacraments to depend upon the dignity of the Minister; they
rebaptized all that were admitted to their communion; they held it no sin to
kill themselves rather than fall into the hands of the Magistrate, and scrupled
not to kill such as were not of their faith; they used certain Magical
Purifications, and bragged of Enthusiasms and Revelations. With the Arrians
they made the Son less than the Father, and the Holy Ghost than the Son; the
Circumcelliones were part of these, who lived in Cells and Caves, and murdered
all they met that were not of their Religion.

Vost. hist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 40. p. 101. Zuin. Theat. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1321.
Ross. view of Rel.. 7. p. 214.
22. Pelagius, a Britan by birth, and a Monk at Rome, was the Ringleader of the
Pelagians; he was afterward a Presbyter under Theodosius the younger, three
hundred eighty two years after Christ; thence he went into England, and
poisoned the whole Island with his Opinions, which were such as these, That
death was not the wages of sin, but that Adam should have died though he had
not sinned; that Adam's sin was hurtful only to himself, and not to his
posterity; that concupiscence was no sin; that Infants did not draw original
sins from their Parents; that Infants might be saved without Baptism; that they
should have eternal life, but out of the Kingdom of God; that man after the
Fall had free will to do good, and ascribed no more to grace, but that by it we
had our nature, and that by our good works we obtain grace; they also rejected
the Doctrine of Predestination; they say the number of the Elect may be
increased or diminished; that faith is by nature, but the increase of it from
God, and that Charity is from men; they hold that their Elect ones have no sin,
nor can sin if they would; that the concupiscence of the flesh is from God: and
that rich men that are baptized, cannot be saved unless they give away all that
they have: Celestinus and Iulianus were his chief followers in these errors:
St. Augustine and Alypius his friend wrote against them. They were condemned by
sive African Councils: and also by a sixth Synod at Carthage, Anno Christi 419.
in the tenth year of Honorius.

23. Priscillianus, Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 1321. Ross. view of R^lig. 7.
p. 210.
a Spaniard, some say a Galatian, father of the Priscillianists, under Gratian
the Emperor, spread his Heresy first in Spain three hundred forty eight years
after Christ, from thence like a Canker it run through all the West. This
Heresy was made up of former Heresies: for with the Manichees, he held the
World was made by an evil God; with the Sabellians he consounded the persons of
the Trinity; with the Origenists, he held the pre-existence of souls; with
Astrologers, that all humane events depended upon the Stars; with the Stoics,
that we sin necessarily, and coactively; with the Encratites, they abstained
from flesh; and with the Gnostics, they rejected the ancient Prophets as
ignorant of the Will of God. He was condemned in his absence by the Synod of
Aquitaine: but at his return into Spain he troubled all things. At last, he was
put to death with Felicissimus, Armenius, Latronianus, and Euchocia, his
companions. Priscillianus himself confessed unto Euclius the Prefect, That he
kept Conventicles in the night with filthy women; and that he used to pray
naked amongst them. He was condemned of Heresy at Rome by Damasus, from whom
he appealed to the Emperor Maximus, who put him to death; his body was carried
into Spain by his Party, by whom he was esteemed first as a Saint, then as a
Martyr: insomuch that at last, in matters of Religion, they used to swear by
his name.

24. Apollinaris, Socrat. Schol. l. 2. c. 36. p. 292. Ross. view of Relig.. 7.
p. 207. Zuin. Thea. vol. 5. l. 4. p. 132 o.
Presbyter in Laodicaea, was the Author of the Apollinarists; he divided
Christ's humanity, affirming, That he assumed man's body, and a sensitive soul,
but not the reasonable or intellective soul of man, because that was supplied
by the divinity. Instead of the Trinity, they acknowledge only three distinct
degrees of power in God, the greatest is the father, the lesser is the Son, and
the least of all the Holy Ghost. They held that Christ's soul was consubstantial
with his divinity, and that he took not his flesh from the Virgin, but brought
it from Heaven, that Christ had but one will; that souls did propagate others;
and that after the Resurrection, the Ceremonial Law should be kept as before.
This Heresy brake out three hundred and fifty years after Christ, under Valens
the Emperor. It was confuted in the Roman Synod by Damasus, Bishop of Rome,
and Petrus, Bishop of Alexandria, and in the Synod at Constantinople utterly
condemned and exploded.

CHAP. XX. Of the most famous Magicians, Witches, and Wizards, and their mutual
Contests; their Diabolical illusions and miserable ends.
COnsidering the notable pranks that have been played by these Disciples of the
Devil, it might seem strange that there is no more hurt done in the World, did
we not remember, that the power of their black Master himself is so limited,
and restrained by a superior hand of goodness, that he cannot perform what he
would.

Spotswood's hist. chapter of Scotland l. 6. p. 383.
1. Amongst the Witches and Sorcerers in Scotland, Agnes Sampson (commonly
called the wise wife of Keith) was most remarkable: a woman not of the base and
ignorant sort of Witches, but Matron-like grave, and settled in her answers. In
her Examination she declared, That she had a familiar Spirit, who upon her call
did appear in a visible form, and resolve her of any doubtful matter,
especially concerning the life or death of persons lying sick: and being asked
what words she used when she called the Spirit? she said her word was Holla
Master, and that he had learned her so to do: that her Spirit had undertaken to
make away the King; but failing in the performance, and challenged by her,
confessed it was not in his power, speaking words she understood not, but as
she did take them, the words were, Il est Homme de dieu: this was Anno 1591.

Delr. disq. mag. l. 2. qu. 30. p. 365. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 70. p.
314. Delr. disq. mag. l. 2. qu. 6. p. 129. Schot. Phys. curios. l. 1. c. 16. p.
57.
2. Wenceslaus, son to the Emperor Charles the fourth, marrying Sophia, the
Duke of Bavaria his daughter; when the marriage was to be solemnized, the Duke
knowing that his Son-in-law delighted much in such ridiculous shows and
conjuring tricks, sent to Prague for a Wagon load of Conjurers. While the
skilfullest amongst them were studying for some rare and unusual illusion,
Wenceslaus his Magician called Zyto (who had sneaked into the crowd, and looked
on amongst the rest) suddenly presents himself, having his mouth (as it seemed)
cloven on both sides, and all open to his very ears, and so coming amongst
them, he takes the Dukes chief Conjurer and swallows him up with all that he
had about him, saving his Sh^o^s because they seemed all dirty, and therefore
he spit them a great way from him: which when he had done, and being not able
to digest so great a morsel, he goes and empties himself in a great Fat that
stood full of water, voids the man downwards into it, and brings him in again
all wet, and shows him to the company, who laughed to purpose at this pleasant
jest, but the other companions would play no more. This story my Author cites
from the History of Bohemia, written by Dubravius, the Bishop of Olmutz: but
this Zyto the Impostor was at last alive body and soul carried away by the
Devil; which afterward begat a care in Wenceslaus, to bethink himself of more
serious and religious matters. It is also said of this Bohemian Conjurer, That
he appeared now with one face, straight with another, and in different stature;
sometimes he showed himself to the King in purple and silks; at others in a
sordid and base attire; when the King walked on the Land, he sometimes seemed
to swim on the water to him; when the King was carried in a Litter with Horses,
he seemed to follow him in another Litter born up with Cocks instead of Horses.
He played sundry pranks with such as sat at the table with the King, he changed
their hands sometimes into the feet of an Ox, at others into the hoofs of a
Horse, that they could not reach them to the Dishes, to take any thing thence;
if they looked out of the Window, he beautified their heads with Horns. To show
that he could command money at any time for his use, he caused of so many wisps
of Hay, thirty well fatted Swine to appear, and sells them to a rich Baker at
what price he pleased, with this only condition, He should not suffer them to
enter into any water: The Baker unmindful of the condition, instead of his
Hoggs found only so many wisps swimming upon the surface of the water:
whereupon in a great chase he sought out for Zyto, and finding him sleeping all
along upon a form, he pulls him by the one leg to awake him, and both the leg
and thigh seemed to remain in his hand; at which astonished, he was glad to be
content with his ill bargain.

3. Apollonius Tyanaeus was a Pythagorean Philosopher, Camer. oper. subsc.
cent. 1. c. 70. p. 317. Philostrat. in vita Apollon.
and withal a great Magician: being at Rome in the presence of the Emperor
Domitian, and by him commanded to be bound hand and foot, he suddenly
disappeared and vanished out of their sight that were present, and was at the
same time hurried as far as Puteoli, to keep a former appointment with some
whom he had promised to meet there. He had the knowledge of things done at
great distances, in the very time of their performance: The day and hour that
Domitian was killed at Rome by Stephanus and other Conspiratours, the
Philosopher was reading a public Lecture in the City of Ephesus, to a very
great number of Auditors; suddenly as one amazed, he made a stop in his
discourse, and continued some space without speaking a word, and then cries out
aloud, Courage Stephanus, strike the Villain: thou have stricken him, thou have
wounded him, thou have slain him. News after came that the murder was acted the
same day, and in that hour exactly.

4. There was within the memory of our fathers (says Camerarius) John Faustus
of Cundligen, Camer. oper. subsc. cent. 1. c. 70. p. 314, 315. Wier. de.
praest. daem. l. 2. c. 4. Lonic. Thea. p. 140.
a German, he had learned the Black Art at Cracovia in Poland; he meeting one
day at the Table with some who had heard much of his Magical tricks, was
earnestly entreated by the company to show them some sport: he (overcome in the
end by the importunity of his pot-companions, who were also well armed in the
head) promised to show them whatsoever they would have: they with a general
consent require him to bring into the place a Vine laden with ripe Grapes ready
to be gathered; for they thought because it was in the month of December,
Faustus could not show them that which was not: he condescended to them,
saying, That forthwith before they stirred from the Table, they should see the
Vine they desired, but upon this condition, That they should not speak a word,
nor offer to rise from their places, but should all tarry till he bad them cut
the Grapes, and that whosoever should do otherwise, was in danger to lose his
life: They having all promised to obey him, Faustus so charmed the eyes of
these drunken Revellers, that they saw (as it seemed to them) a mavelous
goodly Vine, and upon the same so many Bunches of ripe Grapes (extraordinary
great and long) as there were men sitting at the Table. Enflamed with the
daintiness of so rare a thing, and being very dry with much drinking, every man
takes his Knife in his hand, looking when Faustus would give the word, and bid
them cut the Clusters. But he having held them a while in suspense, about this
vain piece of Witchcraft, behold all the Vine and the Bunches of Grapes were in
the turn of a hand quite vanished away. And every one of these drunken
Companions thinking he had a Cluster of Grapes in his hand ready to cut off,
was seen to hold his own Nose with one hand, and the sharp Knife with the other
to lop that off: so that if any of them had forgot the Conjurers lesson, and
had been never so little too forward, instead of cutting a Bunch of Grapes, he
had whipped off his own Nose. This Faustus, says I. Wierus, was found dead by a
Bedside in a certain Village within the Duchy of Wirtenburg, having his Neck
broken, and the House when rein he was, beaten down at midnight.

Schot Phys. curios. l. 1. c. 16. p. 56. Camer. over. subc. cent. 1. c. 72. p.
333. Delr. disq. mag. l. 14. c. 4. p. 42.
5. Fazelus writes, that a certain Sicilian called Lyodor, a most famous
Magician, got himself a great name in the City of Catana by his wonderful
illusions; he seemed by the extraordinary working of his Charms and Spells to
transform men into bruit Beasts, and to bestow upon all things else such form
and likeness as himself pleased; and by general report he drew to him, as soon,
and as easily, persons that were distant from thence many days journey, as
those that were in the same place. He did also many injuries and shameful
outrages to the Citizens of Catana, so that they bewitched with a fearful and
false opinion fell to worshipping of him; and when for his wicked deeds he was
condemned to dye, by virtue of his Charms he escaped out of the Hangmans hands,
causing himself to be carried in the air by Devils from Catana to
Constantinople, and after that brought back again from thence into Sicilia.
This made him admired of all the people, who thinking the Divine power was laid
up in him, they ran into an execrable error, offering him Divine honors. But
at last Leo Bishop of Catana inspired suddenly with the Spirit of God, in an
open place and before all the people, laid hands upon this devilish Magician,
and caused him to be cast alive into a hot burning Furnace, where he was
consumed to ashes.

Camer. oper. s^bc. cent. 1. c. 72. p. 333.
6. Bodinus reports that of late one of the Earls of Aspremont used to
entertain with great magnificence all Comers, who received great contentment by
the delicate dainties, the curious services and great abundance of all things;
but the men and Horses were no sooner out of the House, but they were ready to
starve with hunger and thirst.

Camer. oper. s^bc. cent. 1. c. 70. p. 316.
7. There was a young man in Friburg, that by the help of a Magician, hoped to
enjoy a Maid whom he earnestly loved; the Devil appeared to them in the
likeness of the same Maid, and the young man putting forth his hand without the
enchanted Circle to embrace her, was presently grasped of the wicked Spirit,
who crushed him against a wall, and made the pieces of him fly this way and
that way, and afterward cast the remnant of the dead body so torn in pieces at
the Conjurer, who therewith fell down in the place sore bruised, and not able
to stir from thence, till some hearing a cry and noise ran to him, took him up,
and carried him away half dead.

8. A German in our time (says Camerarius) went to the Wars in Italy, Camer.
oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 70. p. 317.
and put himself into the company of a Soldier that was a Conjurer, and by
whom he suffered himself to be governed. One time this Conjurer made him stand
within a Circle, fortified with I know not what Characters. Here after many
invocations and horrible menaces, there appeared at last, as it were much
against his will, a Spirit like a man sore frighted, wearing a Hat all torn,
with a great Toss-pot Feather in it, having about him a torn and tattered
Sheet, looking like a dead Corpse, that had been dried in the Sun, and
afterward gnawn with Worms; with a ghastly look, and his feet having other
shape than a man's feet. As he thus stood the Conjurer would know of him, if
that Gouletta were taken by the Turks or not; the Spirit answered that he could
not tell for the present, but that the day before the Besieged had defended
themselves valiantly. He also complained of the Conjurer that by his horrible
Enchantments he did importune Spirits too much, and having spoken of some other
of his hard courses, craved a time to think upon that he was asked, and then
vanished, leaving behind him such a terror and stink, that these curious
Inquisitors had like to have dyed in the place with fear. This German would
afterward often swear, that as often as the remembrance of this dreadful
apparition together with his voice (which was small, hoarse, cut off, and
choked as it were between every word) did but touch his mind never so little,
he was ready to swound with fear.

9. Bodinus mentions one Triscalinus, Wier. de praest. daem. l. 2. c. 4. p. 95.
Delr. disq. magic. l. 1. c. 4. p. 42.
who in the presence of Charles the ninth King of France, and diverse others,
caused the several links of a Gold-chain of a certain Noble man that stood a
good distance off, to fly as it were one by one into his hand, and yet by and
by the Chain was found whole and entire. He also caused a Priest that was going
with his Breviarie under his arm, to believe that he carried a pack of Cards,
so that the Priest blushing threw away his Book; afterward being convicted of
many such things, as could not be done by any humane power, he at last
confessed he had performed them by the Cooperation of the Devil.

10. In the year 876. the Emperor Lewis then reigning, Camer. oper. subc.
cent. 1. c. 70. p. 318. Delr. disq. magic. l. 1. c. 4. p. 42. and l. 2. qu. 12.
p. 172. Schot. phys. curios. l. 1. c. 16. p. 55. Lavat. de Spect. par. 2. c.
17. p. 160, 161.
there was one Zedechias, by Religion a Jew, by profession a Physician, but
indeed a Magician; he seemed in the presence of great Persons to devour men
whole, to eat up at once a man armed at all points, to swallow a Wagon laden
with Hay, together with the Horses and him that drove them; to cut off heads,
hand and feet, and throw them dropping with blood into a great Basin, and yet
to restore every man his own limb, the men remaining perfect, entire and
without hurt. He represented Huntings, Races and Military sports, such as Justs
and Turneaments in the Air. In the midst of Winter in the Emperors Palace, he
suddenly caused a most pleasant and delightful Garden to appear, with all sorts
of Trees, Plants, Herbs and Flowers, together with the singing of all sorts of
Birds to be seen and heard.

Delr. disq. magic. l. 2. qu. 6. p. 132. Schot. phis. curios. l. 1. c. 16. p.
58.
11. Delrio tells of a contest betwixt two Magicians in this manner, the one had
stolen a fair and beautiful Maid, had mounted her behind him upon a wooden
Horse, and so rode with her aloft in the air. While they were thus in their
journey, the other Magician was at that time at a noble Feast in a Castle in
Burgundy, and being sensible of their flight by the Castle, he by his Charms
compells the Ravisher to descend, and to the view of all presents him in the
Court of the Castle looking sadly, and not able to stir, together with his
blushing Prize. But the Ravisher was not wanting to himself in this exigent,
but privily inchaunts him that had thus bound him, and as he was looking from a
high Window of the Castle into the Court, he sitted his head with so large and
spreading a pair of Horns, that he was neither able to pull in his Head from
betwixt the strong Iron bars, nor durst he cast himself down from so high a
place. Being therefore thus horned, he was compelled to enter into an agreement
with the other, and recalling his Charm suffered him to depart with his pray,
involved in a hollow cloud, as also the other suffered him to cast his Horns
and return to the Feast, not without great laughter of the Company that was
present.

Delr. in disq. magic. l. 2. qu. 30. p. 364.
12. Two Magicians (says the same Author) met together in the Queen of Englands
Court, as I have it from unquestionable witnesses; these two agreed, that in
any one thing they should infallibly obey one another; the one therefore
commands the other to thrust his head out of the Casement of a Window, which he
had no sooner done, but a large pair of Stags Horns were seen planted on his
forehead, to the great pleasure of the Spectators, who flouted him with a
thousand mocks and taunts. He resenting the disgrace, and thirsting after
revenge, when his turn came to be obeyed, he with a Charcoal drew the
lineaments of a man upon the Wall, and then commanded the former Magician to
stand under that Picture, and that forthwith the wall should give place to
receive him; the other apprehensive of the extreme danger he was in, began to
beseech him that he would hold him excused, but the other refuses, being
therefore compelled he stands under it; then the wall seemed to open, and he
therein being entered was never afterward more seen.

Ibid.
13. He sets down a third in the words of C. Germanus, as a thing known unto him
for an undoubted truth. A notable Conjurer, as a Specimen of his Art, had cut
off the head of the Innkeepers Servant where he lodged, and when he was about
to set it on again, he perceived he was hindered by the presence of another
Conjurer that fortuned to be by; he therefore besought him that he would not
oppose him, but the other not regarding his request, the first Magician caused
a Lily to spring out upon the top of the Table; and when he had lopped off the
head of it, together with its flowers, upon the sudden down falls the Magician
that had hindered him, headless to the ground; that done he sets on the head of
the Servant again, and speedily conveys himself away, lest he should be
questioned for the murder of his Rival.

H^yw. Hier. l. 4. p. 253.
14. Iamblichus a notorious enchanter having sacrificed to the Devil, was raised
up ten Cubits from the earth, seeming to the wonder and amazement of all there
present to walk in the air, and as Evanippus testi^ieth of him, his garments
were strangely altered, as if they had been newly dipped in a thousand several
glorious colors.

15. Michael Sidecita a great Magician, Nicaet. Cho. Annal. l. 4. fol. 19.
H^yw. Hier. l. 9. p. 613, 614. Schot. phys. curios. l. 1. c. 16. p. 58.
sporting with others upon the Battlements of the great Imperial Palace in
Constantinople, in that part which prospects upon the water, espied a Lighter
or Boat which was laden with Pots, Pipkins, Pottingers, Dishes and all kind of
Earthen Vessels, some plain, some curiously painted with diverse colors. Now to
show some sport to those Courtiers that were in his company (by whispering some
charm to himself) he caused the owner of that Boat suddenly to arise from his
seat, and with his Oar never cease beating the brittle Vessels, until he had
almost pounded them to powder; which done he was perceived to recollect
himself, to wring his hands, to pluck himself by the beard, and to express
signs of extraordinary sorrow. And after being demanded what madness was in him
to make such spoil of his wares, and whereas they were all vendible, by his
folly to make them worth nothing? He sadly answered, that as he was busy at
his Oar he espied a huge ugly Serpent crawling toward him ready to devour him,
who never ceased to threaten his life, till he had broken all his Merchandise
to pieces, and then suddenly vanished: this Magician for other and worse pranks
had his eyes put out by Manuel Comnenus the Emperor.

16. Pythagoras near to Tarentum, Coel. Antiq. Lect. l. 19. c. 7. p. 892. Heyw.
Hier. l. 7. p. 473.
spying an Ox to feed upon Beans, called the Herdsman and bade him drive away
the beast, and to forbid him from eating any more of that kind of grain; to
whom the other laughing replied, that his Ox was not capable of such
admonition, and that his advice had been better bestowed in his School amongst
his Scholars. This said Pythagoras having murmured some few words to himself,
the Ox left eating, ran to his Manger in the City; could never after be coupled
to the Yoke, but like a domestic Spaniel would take food from the hands of any
man: Pythagoras was burnt alive in the House of Milo the Crotonian, says
Laeret. lib. 8. p. 223.

17. Anno Dom. 1323. Frederick Duke of Austria, Lavat. de Spect. tom. 2. c. 17.
p. 161. Camer. oper. subc. cent. 1. c. 70. p. 316.
who was chosen Emperor against Lewis was betwixt Otinga and Molensdorf
overcome in a great battle, and by Lewis sent to be kept Prisoner in a strong
Castle. It fell out afterward that a Magician coming into Austria to Leopold
his Brother, promised that by his Art and the assistance of Spirits, he would
free Frederick, and within the space of an hour set him safe in his presence,
if he would give him a good reward. The Duke replied, That if he performed his
promise he would worthily reward him. The Magician placed himself together with
Leopold in a Circle, and by conjurations called up the spirit that was wont to
obey him, who appearing in shape of a man, he commanded that he should speedily
go and free Frederick, and bring him to him in Austria immediately without
hurt. The Spirit answered I shall willingly obey thy commands if the captive
Prince will come with me. This said, the Spirit flew into Bavaria, and in the
form of a stranger came to the Prince in custody, to whom he said, If thou will
be freed from thy Captivity mount this Horse, and I will carry thee safe into
Austria to Leopold thy Brother. Who art thou said the Prince? Ask me not, said
the Spirit, who I am, for that is nothing to the purpose, but do as I desire,
and I will perform what I say. Which heard, a certain horror seized upon the
Prince, though otherwise a man of a bold spirit, so that signing himself with
the Cross the Spirit and Horse disappeared, and returned to the Conjurer, by
whom he was chid for not bringing with him the Prisoner, he told him all that
had passed. At last Frederick was freed out of Prison, and confessed that upon
the same day, the same thing had happened to him. But Leopold was (says
Camerarius) so frighted with the Spirit he had seen, that within a while after
he dyed.

Schot. curio. phys. l. 1. c. 37. p. 190. Lonic. Thea. p. 140. Mel. Adam. in
vit. Ger. med. p. 17, 18.
18. Iovius extols the prodigious wit of Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, saying that
with immense understanding and vast memory, he had comprehended the accounts of
all Arts and Sciences, the inmost secrets and highest heads of them all; and
then adds, that not being as yet old, he departed this life at Lions in a base
and obscure Inn, with the curses of many persons, as one that was infamous, and
under the suspicion of Necromancy, for that he was ever accompanied with a
Devil in the shape of a black Dog; so that when by approaching death he was
moved to repentance, he took off the Collar from his Dogs neck, which was
inscribed with magical characters by the Nails that were in it, and brake into
these last words of his, Abi perdita bestia, quae me perdidisti, be gone thou
wretched beast which have utterly undone me. Nor was that familiar Dog from
that time forth ever seen more, but with hasty flight he leapt into Araris, and
being plunged therein over head, he never swam out again, as is affirmed by
them that saw it.

Delr. in dis. magic. l. 2. ques. 6. p. 128. Schot. phys. curios. l. 1. c. 16.
p. 54.
19. Clemens Romanus says of Simon Magus, that he framed a man out of air, that
he became invisible as often as he pleased, he animated Statues, stood unhurt in
the midst of slames; sometimes he would appear with two faces as another Ianus,
change himself into the shape of a Sheep or Goat, and at other times would fly
in the air. That he commanded a Sith to go mow o^ its own accord, and that it
mowed down ten times more than any other. When Selene the Harlot was shut up in
a Tower, and thousands of people went to see her, and had compassed the castle
about for that end, he caused that her face seemed to show it self out at every
Window in the Castle at the same time; to which Anastasius Nicenus adds, that
he would seem all made of Gold, sometimes a Serpent, or other beast; in Feasts
he showed all kind of Specter, made Dishes come to the Table without any
visible Servitor; and he caused many shadows to go before him, which he gave
out were the Souls of Persons deceased.

De^r. in dis. magic. l. 2. qu. 6. p. 128. C^el. Antiq. le^t. l. 9. c. 23. p.
424.
20. Pasetes had many Magical pranks, he would cause the appearance of a
sumptuous Feast to be upon the sudden, and at his pleasure all should
immediately vanish out of sight; he would also buy several things and pay down
the just price, but then the money would soon after return to him again.

H^yw. Hier. l. 4. p. 253.
21. Johannes Teutonicus a Canon of Halberstadht in Germany, after he had
performed a number of prestigious Feats almost incredible, was transported by
the Devil in the likeness of a black Horse, and was both seen and heard upon
one and the same Christmas Day, to say Mass in Halberstadht, in Mentz^ and in
Collen.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Primitive Fathers and Doctors of the Church.
LIpsius in an Epistle of his to Thuanus, tells him that these new things did
little please his Palate, that for his part, he was a lover of the ancient both
manners and men; and then goes on, -- Hos utinam inter
Heroas natum tellus me prima tulisset.
Would I with ancient Heroes had been born.
He could not wish to be born amongst greater Heroes than some of these that
follow, who for their Learning and Piety, Christian Courage and Fortitude, are
more renowned than Alexander the Great for all his Victories.

1. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 36. p. Simps. hist. Chapter cent.
1. p. 254.
in the reign of Trajan the Emperor, he was the Scholar of the Apostle St.
John, when he had sat nine years in Antioch, he was by ten Soldiers brought
to Rome to be devoured by wild Beasts; when his martyrdom drew near he said,
Let me be ground in the Teeth of wild Beasts, that I may be found fine ^lower
in the House of my Father; he was thrown to the Lions, Anno 110.

2. Polycarpus was also the Scholar of St. John, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. p. Simps.
Chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 259.
and by him constituted Bishop of Smyrna; he went to Rome probably to compose
the controversy about Easter. Three days before he was apprehended by his
Pers^cutors, he dreamed that his Bed was set on fire and hastily consumed,
which he took for a Divine advertisement, that he should glorify God by
suffering in the fire. Being urged to deny Christ by the Roman Deputy, he said
that he had served him fourscore years and received no injury by him, and
therefore could not now renounce him. He refused to swear by the fortune of
Caesar, and so patiently suffered death at Smyrna, being aged eighty six years.

3. Justinius Martyr was a Philosopher, Simps. Chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 25^.
afterward converted to Christianity by an old man, who counseled him to be a
diligent Reader of the Prophets and Apostles who spoke by Divine inspiration,
who knew the truth, were neither covetous of vain glory, nor awed by fear;
whose Doctrine also was confirmed with miraculous works which God wrought by
their hands. This Justinius wrote two Books of Apology for Christians to the
Emperor Antoninus Pius, and to his Sons and the Senate of Rome. In the second
Book of his Apology, he declares that Christians were put to death, not for
any crime they had committed, but only for their Profession; in witness whereof
if any of them would deny his Christian Profession, he was straightway
absolved; he was beheaded at Rome, Anno Dom. 166.

4. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 5. p. Sims. Chapter hist.
cent. 2. p. 259.
a Disciple of Polycarpus in his Youth, his meek Conversation and peaceable
carriage answered to his name (...), that is, Peaceable; and made his name to
be in great account amongst Christian^, yet he lacked not his infirmities in
Doctrine, (...) was entangled with the error of the Chiliasts, and he supposed
that Christ was fifty years of age when he suffered; he flourished in the reign
of Commodus, suffered Martyrdom in the reign of Severus, Anno Dom. 176.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 2. p. 259.
5. Clemens Alexandrinus was the Disciple of Pantenus, these two seem to be the
Authors of Universities and Colleges, for they taught the people the grounds
of Religion, not by Sermons and Homilies to the people, but by Catechetical
Doctrine to the Learned in the Schools; he flourished in the reign of Commodus.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 3. p. 268.
6. Tertullianus a learned Preacher of the City of Carthage in Africa, a man of
a quick pregnant wit; coming to Rome, he was envyed and reproached by the Roman
Clergy, whereat moved with anger, he declined to the Opinion of the Heretic
Montanus. He wrote learned Apologies for the Christians, and mightily confuted
the error of Marcion; he flourished in the reign of the Emperor Severus, Anno
Christi 197.

Ibid.
7. Origin the Son of Leonidas an Egyptian, he was so pregnant in his youth, and
so capable of all good instruction, that his Father would often uncover his
Breast when he was asleep and kiss it, giving thanks to God who had made him
the Father of so happy a Son. He was very learned, yet had he failings; he took
the words of Matthew. 19. 12. in a literal sense and guelded himself; he held
many worlds successive to one another, and that the pains of men and Devils
after long torments should be finished; he offered to Idols rather than suffer
his chaste body to be abused; he dyed in Tyrus and was there buried in the sixty
ninth year of his age, having lived until the days of Gallus and Volusianus.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 3. p. 270.
8. Cyprianus Bishop of Carthage, in his youth altogether given to the study and
practice of Magical Arts; his conversion was by the means of Cecilius a
Preacher, and hearing of the History of the Prophet Jonah; after his Conversion
he distributed all his substance to the Poor; he was a man full of love and
modesty, was banished in the persecution of Decius, and Martyred under
Valerian: he held that erroneous opinion, that such as had been baptized by
Heretics should be rebaptized; he ^lourished Anno Dom. 250.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 4. p. 278.
9. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, he duelled with the whole world when it was
become Arrian, and stood for the Truth with an undaunted resolution amidst all
oppositions; and after he had governed the Church of Alexandria forty six
years, full of days he dyed in peace, in the reign of Valens though an Arrian
persecutor.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 4. p. 286.
10. Eusebius Pamphili Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, lived and was familiar
with Constantine the Emperor; he refused the Chair of Antioch tumultuously
made void by the Arrians, for which the Emperor commended his modesty, and
counted him worthy to be Bishop of the whole world; yet he was not altogether
free of the heresy of Arrius before the Nicene Council; he dyed about the year
of our Lord 342.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 4. p. 287.
11. Gregorius Nazianzenus born in a Town of Cappadocia called Nazianzum, he was
trained up in learning at Alexandria and Athens, where his familiarity with
Bazil began. He detected the Heresy of Apollinaris, and the abominations of
Heathenish Idolatry under Julian, more than any other had done; so peaceable
that like another Jonas he was content te be thrust out of his place to procure
unity and concord amongst his Brethren. He had excellent gifts, and flourished
under Constantius, Julian, and Theodosius.

12. Basilius Magnus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia; Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 4.
p. 289.
he repented he spent so much time in searching out the deepness of humane
learning, as things not necessary to eternal life. The Arrians and Eunomians
who seemed excellently learned, when they encountered with him and Nazianzenus,
were like men altogether destitute of learning; when the Emperors Deputy
threatened him with banishment or death, he astonished him with his resolute
answer. The Emperors Son Galaces fell sick, and the Empress sent him word she
had suffered many things in her dream for the Bishop Basilius, whereupon he was
dismissed and suffered to return to Caesarea.

13. Gregorius Nysse was Brother of Basilius, Ibid.
and Bishop of Nyssa a City in Mysia: in the second General Council, the
oversight of the Country of Cappadocia was committed to him. Though his works
are not extant, yet he is renowned in the mouths of the Learned as a man of
Note and remark.

14. Epiphanius was born at Barsanduce a Village in Palestine, Ibid.
was Bishop of Salamina, the Metropolis of the Island Cyprus; he refuted the
heresies preceding his time in his Book called Panarium. He had so great a
regard to the poor that he was called Oeconomus Pauperum. He opposed St.
Chrysosthom in Constantinople, and returning to Cyprus dyed in the way.

15. Lactantius Firmianus was the Disciple of Arnobius, Sims. Chapter hist. cent.
5. p. 291.
in Eloquence nothing inferior to his Master, yet it is thought that he
opposed errors with greater dexterity, than he confirmed the Doctrine of the
Truth.

16. Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers in France, Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 5. p. 292.
a man constant in Religion, in Manners meek and courteous, he was banished to
Phrygia; he took great pains to purge France from the poison of the Arrian
heresy, whereof he there saw both the growth and decay; he dyed in the reign
of Valentinian.

17. Ambrosius the Son of Symmachus, Ibid.
was Governor of Lyguria under Valentinian; appeasing a Sedition at Millain he
was there chosen Bishop, and confirmed therein by the Emperor. He lived also
under the Emperor Theodosius, whom he sharply reproved and excommunicated for
the slaughter of the innocent people at Thessalonica; and dyed in the third
year of the reign of Honorius, having sat at Millain twenty two years.

18. Jerome was born at Stridona Town of Dalmatia, Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 5. p.
294.
instructed in the rudiments of Learning at Rome, where he acquainted himself
with honorable women, such as Marcella, Sophronia, Principia, Paula and
Eustochium, to whom he expounded places of holy Scripture. His great gifts were
envyed at Rome, wherefore he left it and went for Palestine, and there chose
Bethlehem the place of our Lords Nativity to be the place of his death; he
there guided a Monastery of Monks; he was a man of a stern disposition, he dyed
in the ninety first year of his age, in the twelfth year of the reign of
Honorius.

19. John Chrysosthome had been an helper to Flavianus Bishop of Antioch; Sims.
Chapter hist. cent. 5. p. 298.
thence he was called by the Emperor Arcadius to be Bishop of Constantinople.
In Oratory he had profited in the School of Libanius, and in Philosophy in that
of Andragathius above his fellows. His liberty in reproving sin, both in Court
and Clergy, procured red him the hatred of Eudoxia the Empress, and of the
whole Clergy. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria was his great enemy, by whose
malice and that of Eudoxia, he was deposed, then banished, and journeyed to
death; he governed the Church in Constantinople seven years.

Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 5. p. 306, 307.
20. Augustinus in his young years was infected with the error of the
Manicheans; his Mother Monica with prayers and tears begged of God his
conversion to the truth, and God heard her; for being sent to Millain to be a
Teacher of Rhetoric, by the Preaching of Ambrose the Bishop, and the devout
behavior of the People in singing Psalms to the praise of God, he was much
affected: Also by reading the life of Antonius the Hermit, he was wonderfully
moved to dislike his former Conversation. He went then to a Garden, where with
his friend Alypius he bewailed the insolency of his past life, wishing the time
to be now, that his soul should be watered with the dew of the converting grace
of God. As he was pouring out the grief of his wounded heart to God with a
flood of tears, he heard a voice saying Toll and lege, take up and read; at
first he thought it to be the voice of Boys and Girls in their sport; but
seeing no body, he received it as a Celestial admonition; he took up then the
Bible he had there with him, and in the opening of the Book, the first place he
met with was Romans 13.13, 14. Not in Gluttony nor Drunkenness, not in Chambering
nor Wantonness, not in Strife or Envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. At the reading
hereof he was fully resolved to become a Christian, and was baptized by Ambrose
Bishop of Millain. Thence he returned into Asrick, and there was an Assistant
to Valerius Bishop of Hippo, whom he succeeded, being incessant in teaching the
people, and confuting Heretics, the Donatists, Pelagians and Manichees; when
he had lived seventy six years he rested from his labors.

21. Gregorius the first, Sims. Chapter hist. cent. 6. p. 314.
surnamed the Great, was chosen Bishop of Rome both by the Clergy and people,
which Office he sought by all means to avoid; he brought into the Roman Church
the form of the Greek Liturgies. He first styled himself servus servorum Dei;
and whereas John the Patriarch of Constantinople called himself Universal
Bishop, he said of him that he was the forerunner of Antichrist; he sat in
Rome thirteen years, six months and ten days.

22. Bernardus Abbot of Claraval, Sims: Chapter hist. cent. 12. p. 369.
born in Burgundy, was respected in his Country above others; though he lived
in a most corrupt age, yet he was found in the point of Justification. He
detested the corruption of manners that abounded in his time. He subdued his
body by fasting beyond all measure; he dyed in the sixty fourth year of his age.

23. Thomas Aquinas otherwise called Doctor Angelicus, Sims. Chapter hist. ce^t.
13. p. 376, 377.
was Disciple to Albertus Magnus, and profited in Philosophy and Theology above
others; while he was young at School, he was quiet and still, more inclined to
hear others than himself speak, whereupon he was called by his School-fellows
The Ox, because he was so silent; yet afterward by his Pen this Ox lowed
louder than all his Compeers, and filled all Nations with the sound of his
Doctrine. He was of the Order of the Dominick or Preaching Friars, and defended
his Order against Gulielmus de Sancto Amore. He dyed in the way as he was
journying to the Council of Lions, and was Canonized by Pope John the twenty
second, and was supposed to have wrought Miracles after his death.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Dreams, and what has been revealed to some persons therein.
ALthough it is too great a vanity to give overmuch credit to our Dreams, and
to distress and distract our selves about the ^ignifications and successes of
them: yet they are not altogether unuseful to us. Zeno Eleates was wont to say,
that any of his Scholars might judge of their proficiency in Philosophy by
their Dreams; for if they neither did nor suffered any thing therein but what
was virtuous, they had made some good progress in Philosophy. By the same way
we may discover much of our own natural inclinations and the constitution we
are of. Besides this, there has been so much of highest concernment revealed
to some in their sleep, that is enough to make us believe there is not
altogether so much of vanity in Dreams, as some men are of opinion.

Just. hist. l. 1. p. 16. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 23. Sabellic. Ex. l. 1. c.
1. p. 7. Herodot. l. 1. p. 46, 47. Loni^^r. Theatr. p. 409. Lips. monit. l. 1.
c. 5. p. 67, 68.
1. Astyages the last King of the Medes saw in his dream a Vine to spring forth
from the womb of his only daughter, and at last so to flourish, and spread out
it self, that it seemed to overshadow all Asia with its very fruitful branches.
He consults with the Soothsayers upon this dream, who answer him, that of his
daughter should be born a Son that should seize on the Empire of Asia, and
divest him of his; terrified with this prediction, he forth with bestowed his
daughter upon Cambyses, a Foreigner, and then an obscure person: when his
daughter drew near the time of delivery, he sends for her to himself, that
whatsoever should be born of her should perish by his own command. The Infant
therefore is delivered to Harpagus to be slain; a man of known fidelity, and
with whom he had long communicated his greatest secrets. But he fearing that
upon Astyages his death, Mandane his daughter would succeed in the Empire,
since the King had no issue Male, and that then he should be sure to be paid
home for his obedience, does not kill the Royal Babe, but delivers it to the
Kings chief Herds-man to be exposed to the wide world. It fell out that the
wife of this man was newly brought to bed, and having heard of the whole
affair, she earnestly importunes her Husband to bring the child home to her,
that she might see him: the Husband is overcome, goes to the Wood where he had
left him; he finds there a Bitch, that at once saved the Babe, and kept off the
birds and beasts from it; and also suckled it her self. Affected with this
miracle, and thus instructed by a brute in humanity, he takes up the child,
carries it to his wife, she sees, and loves it, breeds him up till he grew
first to a man, and then to a King: he overcomes Astyages his Grandfather, and
translates the Scepter from the Medes to the Persians. Ios. l. 11. c. 8. p.
285. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 407. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 5. p. 119. Lips. monit. l. 1. c.
2. p. 8, 9.


2. Alexander the Great in the long and difficult Siege of Tyrus, bordering
upon Iudaea, sent to the Jews for assistances, but was by them rejected, as
having a more ancient League with Darius. When therefore he had taken the City,
full of indignation, he leads his Army against the Jews, resolved upon revenge,
and devoting all to slaughter and spoil. But Iaddus the then High Priest,
admonished by God in a dream, meets him upon the way, accompanied with a number
both of Priests and people, himself with his Priestly attire, with his Mitre
upon his head and upon that the Name of God: whom as soon as Alexander saw, with
all mildness and submission he approaches him, salutes him, and adores that
wonderful Name. Those who accompanied him were some of them amazed, others
displeased; amongst these was Parmenio, who asks the King wherefore he adored a
man, himself being now almost every where reputed as a God? To whom Alexander
replied, that he worshipped not the man, but God in him, who heretofore (in
that form) had appeared to him in Dio, a City of Macedonia, in his dream,
encouraging him to a speedy Expedition against Asia, which through his divine
power and assistance he would subject to him. And therefore (...) not only
pardoned, but honored and enriched the City and Nation of the Jews, pronounced
them at liberty to live after their own Laws, and made choice of some of them
to serve him in his own Troops.

3. Ertucules having slept after dinner, Lips. monit^ l. 1. c. ^. p. 70.
when he awaked was confounded with the thoughts of what he had seemed to see
in his dream; and therefore according to the Religion of the Turkish Nation, he
first bathes his body in water to purify himself, and then goes to Edebales, a
person in great reputation amongst them, as well for his wisdom as sanctity;
and thus he speaks: I dreamed (venerable Sir) that the brightness of the Moon
did proceed from your bosom, and thence afterward did pass into mine: when it
was thither come there sprang up a tree from my navel, which overshadowed at
once many Nations, Mountains, and Valleys. From the roots of this tree there
issued waters sufficient to irrigate Vines and Gardens; and there both my dream
and my sleep forsook me. Edebales when he had heard him (after some pause) thus
bespake him: There will be born unto you (my good Friend) a Son whose name
shall be Osman, he shall wage many Wars, shall acquire to himself Victory and
Glory, and your posterity shall be Lords and Kings of many Nations. But my
Daughter must marry to your Son Osman, and she is that brightness which you saw
come from my bosom into yours, and from both sprang up the tree. A strange
prediction, and the more remarkable for that of the Moon, seeing we know that
the Crescent is the prime and most remarkable Ensign of the Turkish Nation.

4. There was amongst the Tartars that of old lived in Imaus (a part of the
Mountain Taurus) a sort of Shepherds, Gregor. d^ Repub. l. 19. c. 1.. 1^. p.
707.
who lived after the manner of wild beasts, without Law or truth, wandering up
and down in the Woods. Amongst these there were certain Families called
Malgotz, that kept together in one place, and at first chose themselves
Leaders: Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 715. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 125.
Platin. in Honorio, An. 1225. Herberts Travels, l. 1. p. 55. Purchase. Pil. tom.
1. l. 4. c. 11.. 2. p. 455.
but yet were subject to their neighbor Nations, and oppressed with excessive
burdens. Till at last there was an old Blacksmith amongst them, that was
stirred up by vision, whose name was Cangius; and it was on this manner. There
appeared to him in a dream a certain person in Armor, sitting upon a white
Horse, who thus spoke to him: Cangius, it is the will of the Eternal God, that
thou shortly shall be the King and Ruler of the Tartars that are called
Malgotz; thou shall free them from that servitude, under which they have long
groaned, and the neighbor Nations shall be subjected to them. Cangius in the
morning before the seven Princes and Elders of the Malgotz, rehearses what he
had dreamed, which they all at the first looked upon as ridiculous: but the
next night all of them in their sleep seemed to behold the same person he had
told them of, and to hear him commanding them to obey Cangius. Whereupon
summoning all the people together, they commanded them the same, and the
Princes themselves in the first place, took the Oath of Allegiance to him, and
entitled him the first Emperor in their language Chan, which signifies King
or Emperor. All such as succeeded him were after called by the same name of
Chan, and were of great Fame and Power. This Emperor freed his people, subdued
Georgia and the greater Armenia, and afterward wasted Polonia and Hungary.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 69. Plut. in Demetrio, p. 890.
5. Antigonus dreamed that he had sowed Gold in a large and wide field, that the
seed sprang up, flourished, and grew ripe: but that straight after he saw all
this golden harvest was reaped, and nothing left but the worthless stubble and
stalks: and then he seemed to hear a voice, that Mithridates was fled into the
Euxine Pontus, carrying along with him all the golden harvest. This Mithridates
was descended of the Persian Magi, and was at this time in the Retinue of this
Antigonus King of Macedonia, his Country of Persia being conquered, and his own
Fortunes ruined in that of the public. The dream was not obscure, neither yet
the signification of it. The King therefore being awaked, and exceedingly
terrified, resolves to cut off Mithridates, and communicates the matter with
his own Son Demetrius, exacting of him a previous oath for his silence.
Demetrius was the Friend of Mithridates, as being of the same age, and by
accident he encounters him as he came from the King. The young Prince pities
his Friend, and would willingly assist him: but he is restrained by the
reverence of his oath. Well, he takes him aside, and with the point of his
Spear writes in the sand, Fly, Mithridates: which he looking upon, and
admonished at once with those words, and the countenance of Demetrius, he
privily flies into Cappadocia, and not long after founded the famous and potent
Kingdom of Pontus, which continued from this man to the eighth descent; that
other Mithridates being very difficulty overthrown by all the Power and Forces
of the Romans.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 19. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 409.
6. The night before the Battle at Philippi, Artorius (or as others M. Antonius
Musa) Physician to Octavianus had a dream, wherein he thought he saw Minerva,
who commanded him to tell Octavianus, that though he was very sick, he should
not therefore decline his being present at the Battle; which when Caesar
understood, he commanded himself to be carried in his Litter to the Army, where
he had not long remained, before his Tents were seized upon by Brutus, and
himself also had been, had he not so timely removed.

7. Quintus Catulus, Xiphil. in Augusto, p. 21. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 5. p. 112.
Heyw. Hierarch. l. 4. p. 223.
a noble Roman, saw (as he thought) in his depth of rest Jupiter delivering
into the hand of a child, the Ensign of the Roman People; and the next night
after, he saw the same child hugged in the bosom of the same God. Whom Catulus
offering to pluck from thence, Jupiter charged him to lay no violent hands on
him, who was born for the Weal and preservation of the Roman Empire. The very
next morning when Q. Catulus espied by chance in the street Octavianus, then a
child (afterward Augustus Caesar) and perceiving him to be the same, he ran
unto him, and with a loud acclamation said; Yes this is he whom the last night
I beheld hugged in the bosom of Jupiter.

8. Julius Caesar was excited to large hopes this way; Sueton. in Iulio, p. 8.
Sabellic. Ex. l. 9. c. 6. p. 502.
for he dreamed that he had carnal knowledge of his Mother, and being
confounded with the uncouthness of it, he was told by the Interpreters, that
the Empire of the World was thereby presaged unto him; for the Mother which he
beheld subject unto him, was no other than that of the Earth, which is the
common Parent of all men.

9. Arlotte, Bakers Chron. p. 28. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 5. p. 126.
the Mother of William the Conqueror, being great with him, had a dream like
that of Mandane the Mother of Cyrus, the first Persian Monarch; namely, that
her bowels were extended and dilated over all Normandy and England.

10. Whilst I lived at Prague (says an English Gentleman) and one night had
sat up very late drinking at a Feast; Morisons Itiner. part. 1. c. 2. p. 19.
A. B. Annot. on Relig. med. p. 294, 295.
early in the morning the Sunbeams glancing on my face, as I lay in my bed, I
dreamed that a shadow passing by told me that father was dead. At which awaking
all in a sweat, and affected with this dream, I rose and wrote the day, and
hour, and all circumstances thereof in a Paper-book, which Book with many other
things I put into a Barrel, and sent it from Prague to Stood, thence to be
conveyed into England. And now being at Nuremberg, a Merchant of a noble
Family, well acquainted with me and my Relations, arrived there; who told me,
that my father dyed some two months past. I list not to write any lies, but
that which I write is as true as strange: when I returned into England some
four years after, I would not open the Barrel I sent from Prague, nor look into
the Paper-book, in which I had written this dream, till I had called my
Sisters, and some other Friends to be witnesses, where my self and they were
astonished to see my written dream answer the very day of my fathers death.

11. The same Gentleman says thus also: Morisons Itiner. part. 1. c. 2. p. 19.
A. B. Annot. on Relig. medici, p. 295, 296.
I may lawfully swear that which my Kinsmen have heard witnessed by my Brother
Henry whilst he lived, that in my youth at Cambridge I had the like dream of my
mothers death, where my Brother Henry lying with me, early in the morning I
dreamed that my mother passed by with a sad countenance, and told me, that she
could not come to my Commencement (I being within five months to proceed Master
of Arts, and she having promised at that time to come to Cambridge:) when I
related this dream to my Brother, both of us awaking together in a sweat, he
protested to me, that he had dreamed the very same: and when we had not the
least knowledge of our mothers sickness, neither in our youthful affections
were any whit affected with the strangeness of this dream; Bishop Hall Mist. of
Godliness, l. 1.. 8. p. 169. Full. Worth. p. 196.
yet the next Carrier brought us word of our mothers death.

12. Doctor Joseph Hall, then Bishop of Exeter, since of Norwich, speaking of
the good offices which Angels do to Gods servants: Of this kind, says he, was
that no less than mavelous cure, which at St. Madernes in Cor^wall was
wrought upon a poor Creeple; whereof, besides the attestation of many hundreds
of the neighbors, I took a strict and impartial examination in my last
Visitation. This man for sixteen years together, was fain to walk upon his
hands, by reason the sinews of his legs were so contracted. And upon monitions
in his dream to wash in that Well, was suddenly so restored to his limbs, that
I saw him able both to walk and get his own maintenance. I found here was
neither Art nor collusion. The name of this Creeple was John Trelille.

Herodot. l. 3. p. 210. Camerar. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 57. p. 242.
13. The night before Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos departed thence to go to
Oraetes the Lieutenant of Cyrus in Sardis; his Daughter dreamed, that she saw
her Father lifted up in the air, where Jupiter washed him, and the Sun anointed
him, which came to pass: for as soon as he was in his Power, Oraetes caused him
to be hanged upon a Gibbet, where his body so remaining, was washed of the
rain, and the Sun melted the fat of it.

14. Alexander the Philosopher (a man known to be free of superstition)
reports of himself, that sleeping one night, he saw his Mothers Funerals
solemnized, being then a days journey from thence: whereupon he waking in great
sorrow and many tears, told the dream to diverse of his acquaintance and
friends. The time being punctually observed, certain word was brought him the
next day after, that at the same hour (as his dream was) his mother expired.

H^ywoods Hierarch. l. 4. p. 224.
15. Iovius reports, that Anno 1523. in a morning slumber, Sfortia dreamed,
that falling into a River, he was in great danger of drowning; and calling for
succor to a man of extraordinary stature and presence, who was on the further
side upon the shore, he was by him slighted and neglected. This dream he told
to his Wife and Servants; but no further regarded it. The same day spying a
child falling into the water, near the Castle of Pescara, he thinking to save
the child, leapt into the River; but over-burdened with the weight of his
Armor, he was choked in the mud, and so perished.

Barletii hist. de gistis Scand. l. 1. c. 82. p. 130.
16. The Mother of Scanderbeg dreamed she saw a Serpent that covered all Epiru^;
his head was stretched out into the Turks Dominions, where he devoured them
with bloody jaws; his tail was amongst the Christians, and in the Government of
the Venetians; all which very exactly prefigured her Son.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 5. p. 130.
17. A Citizen of Millain was demanded a debt, as owing by his dead father; and
when he was in some trouble about it, the image of his dead father appears to
him in his sleep, tells him the whole process of the business, that the debt
was by him paid in his life time; and that if he looked in such a place, he
should ^ind a Writing under the hand of his Creditor, wherein he did
acknowledge himself satisfied. Awaking therefore from his sleep, and reflecting
upon his dream, he searched and found all things agreeable to what he had
dreamed. St. Austin says, that this very Writing was seen by him.

Schott. physic. cur^os. l. 3. c. 25. p. 501. Coel. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 27.
c. 9. p. 1250.
18. When Galen had an inflammation about the Diaphragma, he was admonished in
his sleep, that if he purposed to be freed from it, he should forthwith open
that vein which was most apparent betwixt the thumb and the forefinger, and
take a quantity of blood from thence: he did as he was advised, and was
presently restored to his former health.

19. I remember, Co^l. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 27. c. 9. p. 1250.
says Coelius, when I was two and twenty years of age, being busied in the
interpretation of Pliny, and while as yet the learned emendations of Hermolaus
Barbarus upon that excellent Author, had not performed to him almost all that
was requisite, I light upon that place which we have in his seventh Book,
concerning such as grow up beyond the usual proportion, which Nature has
assigned, and they are called by the Greeks Ectrapeli. That word was some
trouble to me. I knew I had read something concerning it; but could neither
recall to my memory the Author from whom, nor the Book wherein. Fearing the
censure of unskilfulness, I laid my self down to rest, the best remedy for a
perplexed mind; where while my thoughts were still employing themselves about
it, methought I remembered the Book, yea the page, and place of the page wherein
that was written I sought for. When I awaked I recalled what was offered to me
in my sleep, but valued all as a mere illusion; yet being still haunted with the
apprehensions of being reputed an Ignoramus, that I might leave nothing
unattempted, I caught up the Book of which I had dreamed, and there found it
accordingly.

20. When St. Bernards Mother was with child of him, Heidfeld. in Sphinge^ cap.
37. p. 893.
she dreamed she had a little white and barking Dog in her Womb; which when she
had communicated to a certain religious person, he as by a Spirit of Prophecy,
replied, Thou shall be the mother of an excellent Dog indeed, he shall be the
Keeper of Gods House, and shall incessantly bark against the Adversaries of it;
for he shall be a famous Preacher, and shall cure many by the means of his
medicinal tongue.

21. Francis Petrarch had a Friend so desperately sick, Fulgos. l. ^. c. 5. p.
134.
that he had no expectation of his life; when therefore (wearied with grief and
tears) he was fallen into a slumber, he seemed to see his sick Friend to stand
before him, and to tell him, that he could now stay no longer with him; for
there was one at the door that would interrupt their discourse, to whom he
desired, that he would recommend his weak estate; and that if he should
undertake him, he should be restored. Presently enters into Petrarchs Chamber a
Physician, who came from the sick, and had given him over as a dead man. He
came therefore to comfort him. But Petrarch with tears recounts to him his
dream, and with great importunity, prevails with him to return to the care of
his Friend: he did so, and e're long the man was restored to his wonted health.

22. Two Arcadians of intimate acquaintance traveled together to the City of
Maegara, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 24. Lonicer. Theatr. p. 408. Dr. More in
Immor. of the Soul, l. 2. c. 16. p. 129.
where when they were arrived, the one goes to lodge with a friend of his, and
the other betakes himself to an Inn. He that was at his friends house saw in
his sleep his Companion beseeching him to assist him, for he was circumvented
by his Host; and that by his speedy resort to him, he might deliver him from a
very imminent danger. Awaked with what he had seen, he leaps from his bed, and
intends to go to the Inn: but by an unhappy Fate he desists from his
compassionate purpose; and believing that his dream had nothing in it, he
returns both to his bed and his sleep. When the same person appears to him (a
second time) all bloody, and requested him earnestly, that seeing he had
neglected him as to the preservation of his life, at least he would not be
wanting to him in the revenge of his death; That he was killed by his Host, and
that at this very time he was carried out in a Cart toward the gate all
covered with dung: The man, overcome with these entreaties of his friend,
^mmediately runs out to the gate, where he finds the Cart he had seen in his
dream; he sei^es, and searches it; finds there the body of his friend, and
drags the Innkeeper to his deserved punishment.

Diodor. Sicul. l. 17. p. 575. Cic. de Divinat. l. 1. page Just. hist. l. 1^.
p. 144.
23. Upon a Sally made upon some of the Forces of Alexander the Great, out of
Harmata, a City of the Brachmans, many of his Soldiers were wounded with
empoysoned Darts; and as well those that were lightly, as those that were
deeper wounded, daily perished. Amongst the wounded was Ptolomy, a great
Captain, and exceeding dear to Alexander: when therefore in the night he had
been solicitous about his welfare, as one whom he tenderly loved, he seemed (in
his sleep) to see a Dragon holding a certain herb in his mouth, and withal
informing him both of the virtue it had, and of the place where it grew. He
rises, finds the herb, bruises it, and applies it to Ptolomy's Wound: and by
this means that great Ancestor of the Royal Family in Egypt was speedily
restored.

Heywoods Hierarch. l. 4. p. 224.
24. A rich Vessel of Gold being stolen out of the Temple of Hercules, Sophocles
(by a Genius) was showed the resemblance and name of the Thief in his sleep,
which for the first and second time he neglected: but being troubled a third
night, he went to the Areopagi, to whom he made relation of what had passed.
They upon no other evidence summoned the party before them; who (after strict
examination) confessed the fact, and made restitution of the Vessel. For which
discovery the Temple was ever after called Templum Herculis Indicis, The Temple
of Hercules the Discoverer.

Val. Max. lib. 1. c. 7. page 21. Cic. de Divinat. l. 1. page
25. When Marcus Cicero was forced into Exile by an opposite Faction, while he
abode at a Village in the fields of Atinas, in his sleep he thought that while
he wandered through desert places, and unknown Countries, he met with C. Marius
in all his Consular Ornaments; and that he asked him wherefore his countenance
was so sad, and whither he intended that uncertain journey of his? And when he
had told him of his misfortune, he took him by the right hand, and gave him to
the next Lictor, with command to lead him into his Monument, in as much as
there was reserved for him a more happy Fortune, and change of his condition.
Nor did it otherwise come to pass. For in the Temple of Jupiter erected by
Marius, there it was that the Senate passed the Decree, for the return of
Cicero from his Exile.

Iz. Waltons life of Sir Henry Wotton, p. 13, 14.
26. In the year of our Redemption 1553. Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury,
being then Ambassador in France, dreamed that his Nephew Thomas Wotton was
inclined to be a party in such a project, as if he were not suddenly prevented,
would turn to the loss of his life, and ruin of his family. The night
following he dreamed the same again: and knowing that it had no dependence upon
his waking thoughts, much less on the desires of his heart, he did then more
seriously consider it; and resolved to use so prudent a remedy (by way of
prevention) as might introduce no great inconvenience to either party. And to
this end he wrote to the Queen (it was Queen Mary) and besought her, that she
would cause his Nephew Thomas Wotton to be sent for out of Kent; and that the
Lords of her Council might interrogate him in some such feigned questions, as
might give a color for his Commitment into a favorable Prison: declaring,
that he would acquaint Her Majesty with the true reason of his request, when he
should next become so happy, as to see and speak with Her Majesty. It was done
as the Dean desired, and Mr. Wotton sent to Prison. At this time a Marriage was
concluded betwixt our Queen Mary and Philip King of Spain, which diverse persons
did not only declare against, but raised Forces to oppose: of this number Sir
Thomas Wyat, of Bexley Abbey in Kent (betwixt whose Family and that of the
Wottons there had been an ancient and entire friendship) was the principal
Actor, who having persuaded many of the Nobility and Gentry (especially of
Kent) to side with him, and being defeated and taken Prisoner, was arraigned,
condemned, and lost his life: so did the Duke of Suffolk and diverse others,
especially many of the Gentry of Kent, who were then in several places executed
as Wyats assistants. And of this number (in all probability) had Mr. Wotton
been, if he had not been confined. For though he was not ignorant that another
man's treason is made mine by concealing it: yet he durst confess to his Uncle,
when he returned into England, and came to visit him in Prison, that he had
more than an intimation of Wyats intentions, and thought he had not continued
actually innocent, if his Uncle had not so happily dreamed him into a Prison.

27. This forementioned Thomas Wotton also a little before his death, Iz.
Waltons life of Sir Henry Wotton, p. 20.
dreamed that the University Treasury was robbed by Townsmen and poor Scholars,
and that the number was five: and being that day to write to his Son Henry at
Oxford, he thought it was worth so much pains, as by a Postcript in his Letter,
to make a slight inquiry of it. The Letter (which was writ out of Kent) came to
his Sons hands the very morning after the night in which the robbery was
committed; and when the City and University were both in a perplexed inquest
after the Thieves, then did Sir Henry Wotton show his Fathers Letter, and by it
such light was given of this work of darkness, that the five guilty persons
were presently discovered, and apprehended, without putting the University to
so much trouble as the casting of a figure.

28. Aristotle writes of one Eudemus his familiar Friend, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c.
5. p. 121. Heyw. Hierarch. l. 4. p. 223.
who traveling to Macedonia, came to the noble City of Phaecas in Thessaly,
then groaning under the immanity of the barbarous Tyrant Alexander. In which
place falling sick, and being forsaken of all the Physicians, as one desperate
of recovery, he thought he saw a young man in his dream who told him, that in a
short space he should be restored to his health; that within a few days the
Tyrant should be removed by death; and that at the end of five years he himself
should return home into his Country. The two first happened accordingly; but in
the fifth year, when (encouraged by his dream) he had hope to return from
Sicily into Cyprus, he was engaged by the way in a Battle fought against the
Syracusans, and there slain. It seems the soul parting from the body, is said
to return into its own Country.

29. Actia the Mother of Augustus, Sabel. Ex. l. 1. c. 1. p. 6.
the day before she was delivered of him, dreamed that her bowels were carried
up as high as Heaven it self, and that there they were spread out in such
manner, that they covered the whole Earth: a notable presignification of the
mighty Empire and Grandeur which her Son afterward attained unto.

30. When Themistocles lived in Exile (far from Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 9. p. 111.
his own Country) he made his abode in a City, the name of which was
Lions-head: one night as he lay in his bed he dreamed, that he saw the Goddess
Cybele, who advised him to flee the Lions head, unless he intended to fall into
the Lions mouth: he rose therefore, and immediately packed up and went his way;
he was no sooner gone, but there came some (to the place where he had lodged)
with a purpose to kill him, being stirred up thereto by Epixia the Persian.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 5. p. 166.
31. When Flavius Vespasianus was yet a private man, and was with Nero in
Achaia, he dreamed one night, that a person unknown to him told him, that then
his good Fortune should begin, when Nero should have a tooth drawn. Being
awaked, and risen from his bed, the first he afterward met with was a
Pysician, who showed him a tooth that he had newly taken out of Nero's mouth.
Not long after followed the death of Nero, and that of Galba, as also the
discord betwixt Otho and Vitellius; which was no mean furtherance to Vespasian
in his attainment of the Empire.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. p. 45. Joseph. Antiq. l. 17. c. 15. p. 461.
32. When Archelaus had reigned ten years in Iudaea, he was accused by his
Subjects (at the Tribunal of Caesar) of Cruelty and Tyranny; by him he was
immediately sent forth, and the Cause being heard, his Wealth was seized upon,
and he himself sent into Banishment. This event and sorrowful issue of his
affairs was before declared to him in a dream: he saw ten Ears of Corn, strong,
full and fruitful, which were eaten up of Oxen. This dream of his was diversely
interpreted by diverse; but Simon an Essaean told him, that thereby was
portended to him a change, and that an unhappy one: For Oxen are the emblem of
misery, as being a creature that is burdened with work; and they signified
mutation and change, because in ploughing the earth is turned up by them. The
ten Ears did signify so many years, in which space the harvest should be, and
those completed, there should be an end of the Principality of Archelaus.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. p. 45. Noraman. de miracul. mortuor. l. 4. c. 171. p.
70. Joseph. Antiq. l. 17. c. 15. page 461.
33. His Wife Glaphyra had also a notable dream: she had first been married to
Alexander, the Brother of this Archelaus; he dead, she married to Iuba King of
Libya, who had newly divorced his Wife Marianne, afterward to Archelaus,
though she had children by his Brother. This Princess did one night dream, that
Alexander her first Husband stood by her bed side, and said to her, Glaphyra,
thou have eminently confirmed the truth of that saying, That Wives are
unfaithful to their Husbands. For whereas thou were married to me, in thy
Virginity, and also had children with me, thou did yet make trial of a
second Match: and not content to do me that af^ront, thou have gone into bed
with a third Husband, and he my Brother; but I will free thee from this
reproach, and e're long challenge thee for mine only. Glaphyra was troubled
with this dream, told it to the Ladies of her acquaintance that were near her,
and not long after she departed this World.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 5. p. 138.
34. While as yet St. Austin was a Manichee, his Mother Monica dreamed, that she
stood upon a wooden Rule, and being sad, was by a glorious young man asked the
cause: when she declared that it was for her Son, who now was in the ready way
to destruction, he bad her be of good cheer, and observe that she should see
her Son upon the same Rule with her self, and so she saw him standing. All this
was confirmed by the after Conversion of her Son.

35. Famous Salmasius intending to see Rome, Vit^ Salmas. per Anton. Cle^.
Salmas. Epist. praefixa.
was admonished in his dream, that if he went, he should not return alive; and
had he gone, probably he had not, as being one that had so much provoked the
Papists by his learned labors, especially in his care of publishing and
polishing Nilus and Barlaam, two eager Enemies of the Papal Monarchy.

36. Pope Innocent the Fourth dreamed, Simps. Chapter hist. cent. 13. p. 449*
that Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, came to him, and with his staff
struck him on the side, and said, Surge miser, and veni ad Iudicium: Rise
Wretch, and come to Judgment: after which dream within a few days the Pope
ended his life.

37. Alcibiades (a little before his death by Tismenias and Bagoas) dreamed,
Plut. in Alcibiad. page* 213. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. p. 24.
that he was covered with his Mistresses Mantle; his murdered body being cast
out into the streets of the City naked, his Lover covered it with her Mantle,
to preserve him from the derision and scorn of his barbarous enemies.

CHAP. II. Of such Presages as have been to diverse persons and places of their
good or evil Fortune; also of Presages by men to themselves or others by casual
Words or Actions.
SEldom were there any remarkable revolutions in the Fortunes of considerable
places or persons, whether for the better, or for the worse, but that
Historians have taken notice of certain previous Presages and Presignifications
thereof. Some of these may seem to be casual, and afterward adapted to the
occasion by the ingenuity of others; but there want not familiar instances of
such as may seem to be sent on purpose from above, with no obscure intimations
of what Providence was about to bring to pass in the places where they happened.

1. Josephus sets down this as a Prodigy presaging the destruction of the Jews.
Ios. Jewish wars, l. 7. c. 12. page 738, 739. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 8. p.
40. Dr. Hamnotes on Rev. 8. 13. p. 953.
There was, says he, one Jesus, Son of Ananias, a Countryman of mean birth,
four years before the War against the Jews, at a time when all was in deep
peace and tranquillity, who coming up to the Feast of Tabernacles, according to
the custom, began on a sudden to cry out, and say, A voice from the East, a
voice from the West, a voice from the four Winds, a voice against Jerusalem and
the Temple, a voice against Bridegrooms and Brides, a voice against all the
people. Thus he went about all the narrow lanes, crying night and day, and
being apprehended and scourged, he still continued the same language under the
blows without any other word. And they upon this supposing (as it was) that it
was some divine motion, brought him to the Roman Prefect; and by his
appointment being by Whips wounded, and his flesh torn to the bones, he neither
entreated nor shed tear; but to every blow in a most lamentable mournful note
cried out, Woe, woe to Jerusalem. This he continued to do till the time of the
siege, seven years together; and at last to his ordinary note of Woe to the
City, the People, the Temple, adding Woe also to me, a stone from the
Battlements fell down upon him, and killed him.

Howels hist. of Lewis XIII. p. 8.
2. Henrietta Maria, Her Majesty of Great Britain, at the death of her Father
Henry the Fourth was a Cradle infant, and Barberino at that time Nuntio in
France (and afterward created Pope, by the name of Urban VIII.) coming to
congratulate her Birth, and finding that the Queen Mother had been better
pleased, if she had born a Male, he told her, Madam, I hope to see this, though
your youngest Daughter, a great Queen before I dye; the Queen answered, And I
hope to see your Pope: both which prophetic Complements proved true, and
within a short time one of another.

Reliq. Wottonian. p. 116, 117, 118.
3. I have spent some inquiry (says, Sir Henry Wotton) whether the Duke of
Buckingham had any ominous presagement before his end; wherein, though ancient
and modern stories have been infected with much vanity, yet oftentimes things
fall out of that kind which may bear a sober construction, whereof I will glean
two or three in the Dukes case. Being to take his leave of my Lord his Grace of
Canterbury (then Bishop of London) after courtesies of course had passed
betwixt them: My Lord, says the Duke, I know your Lordship has very worthily
good successes unto the King our Sovereign, let me pray you to put His Majesty
in mind to be good (as I no ways distrust) unto my poor Wife and Children. At
which words, or at his countenance in the delivery, or at both, my Lord Bishop,
being somewhat troubled, took the freedom to ask him, if he had never any
secret abodement in his mind? No, replied the Duke; but I think some adventure
may kill me, as well as another man. The very day before he was slain, feeling
some indisposition of body, the King was pleased to give him the honor of a
visit, and found him in his bed: where (and after much serious and private
conference) the Duke at His Majesty's departing embraced him in a very unusual
and passionate manner, and in like sort his Friend the Earl of Holland, as if
his soul had divined he should see them no more; which infusions toward fatal
ends have been observed (by some Authors) of no light Authority. On the very
day of his death, the Countess of Denbigh received a Letter from him, whereunto
all the while she was writing her Answer, she bedewed the paper with her tears;
and after a bitter passion (whereof she could yield no reason, but that her
dearest Brother was to be gone) she fell down in a swound; her said Letter
ended thus: I will pray for your happy return, which I look at with a great
cloud over my head, too heavy for my poor heart to bear without torment, but I
hope the great God of Heaven will bless you. The day following, the Bishop of
Ely (her devoted Friend) who was thought the fittest preparer of her mind, to
receive such a doleful accident, came to visit her; but hearing she was at
rest, he attended till she should awake of her self, which she did with the
affrightment of a dream; Her Brother seeming to pass through a field with her
in her Coach, where hearing a sudden shout of the people, and asking the
reason, it was answered to have been for joy, that the Duke of Buckingham was
sick: which natural impression she scarce had related to her Gentlewoman before
the Bishop was entered into her Bedchamber, for a chosen Messenger of the Dukes
death.

Bakers Chron. p. 28, ^9.
4. Before, and at the Birth of William the Conqueror, there wanted not
forerunning tokens which presaged his future Greatness. His Mother Arlotte
great with him, dreamed her bowels were extended over all Normandy and England.
Also as soon as he was born, being laid on the Chamber-floor, with both his
hands he took up rushes, and shutting his little fists, held them very fast:
which gave occasion to the gossipping Wives to congratulate Arlotte in the
birth of such a Boy, and the Midwife cried out, The Boy will prove a King.

5. Not long before C. Julius Caesar was slain in the Senate house, Sueton. in
Iulio. p. 47^
by the Julian Law there was a Colony sent to be planted in Capua, and some
Monuments were demolished, for the laying of the foundations of new Houses. In
the Tomb of Capys, who is said to be the Founder of Capua, there was found a
brazen Table, in which was engraven in Greek Letters, that whenever the bones
of Capys should be uncovered, one of the Julian Family should be slain by the
hands of his own party, and that his blood should be revenged to the great
damage of all Italy. Id. ibid. p. 48.
At the same time also, those Horses which Caesar had consecrated after his
passage over Rubicon, did abstain from all kind of food, and were observed with
drops falling from their eyes, after such manner, as if they had shed tears.
Also the Bird called Regulus, having a little branch of Laurel in her mouth,
flew with it into Pompey's Court, where she was torn in pieces by sundry other
birds that had her in pursuit: where also Caesar himself was soon after slain
with twenty and three wounds by Brutus, Cassius, and others.

6. As these were the presages of the personal end of the great Caesar; Sueton.
in Galba c. 1. p. 269. Ral^ighs Hist. l. 5. c. 6.. 11. p. 662. Zonar. Annal.
Tom. 2. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 4. p. 80.
so there wanted not those of the end of his whole Family, whether natural or
adopted, which was concluded in Nero: and it was thus. Livia was newly married
to Augustus, when (as she went to her Villa of Veientum) an Eagle gently let
fall a white Hen (with a branch of Laurel in her mouth) into her lap. She
received this as a fortunate presage; and causing the Hen to be carefully
looked after, there came of her abundance of white Pullets. The branch of
Laurel too was planted, of which sprang up a number of the like Trees: from
which afterward, he that was to triumph, gathered that branch of Laurel, which
during his Triumph he carried in his hand. The Triumph finished, he used to
plant that branch also: when it did wither, it was observed to presage the
death of that Triumphe^ that had planted it. But in the last year of Nero, both
all the stock of white Hens and Pullets dyed, and the little wood of Laurel was
withered to the very root; the heads also of the Statues of the Caesar's were
struck off by Lightning, and by the same way the Scepter was thrown out of the
hands of the Statue of Augustus.

7. Before the death of Augustus, Zonar. Annal. Tom. 2. p. 94. H^yw. Hierar^h.
l. 8. p. 544.
in Rome where his Statue was set up, there was a flash of Lightning, that from
his name Caesar took away the first Letter C. and left the rest standing. The
Aruspices and Soothsayers consulted upon this, and concluded, that within an
hundred days Augustus should change this life; for AESAR in the Hetrurian
Tongue signifies a God, and the Letter C. amongst the Romans stands for an
hundred; and therefore the hundredth day following Caesar should dye, and be
made a God, as they used to dei^ie their dead Emperors.

8. While the Grandfather of Sergius Galba was sacrificing, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1.
c. 4. p. 81.
an Eagle snatched the bowels of the Sacrifice out of his hand, and left them
upon the branches of an Oak, that grew near to the place. Upon which the Augurs
pronounced, that the Empire (though late) was certainly portended thereby to
his Family. He to express the great improbability he conceived of such a thing,
replied, That it would then come to pass, when a Mule should bring forth. Nor
did any thing more confirm Galba, in the hope of the Empire, (upon his Revolt
from Nero) than the news brought him of a Mule that had brought forth, as being
mindful of the speech of his Grandfather.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 4. p. 83.
9. In the Villa of Sabinus, not far from the City of Rome, there was an huge
Oak, which as Vespasia his Wife successively brought forth three Children, so
did this Oak put forth at the root of it three young ones; the last of which
did flourish, and prosper exceedingly. Upon which Sabinus told his Mother, that
his Wife had brought her a Grandchild, who in time would be Emperor. She
smiling replied, That she wondered the Grandfather should have his perfect
senses, and that yet his Son should be in his dotage. But the virtue of
Vespasian, the younger Son of Sabinus, served to confirm the truth of this
presage; for he succeeded Vitellius in the Empire.

Muret. variar. lect. l. 13. c. 9. p. 343.
10. L. Septimius Severus, when he was but a Child, would play at no other sport
with the Boys his equals, but that of Judges: then with his counterfeit Fasces
and Ax carried before him, would be ascend the Tribunal (with a multitude of
children about him) and thence he gave the Law to them. Not long after the
sport was turned into earnest, and he performed amongst men what he had begun
amongst children; for he was advanced to the Empire of Rome.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. sol. 123.
11. Marcianus, when a private Soldier, and the Legion (wherein he was) sent
upon an Expedition, fell sick in Lycia, and being there left by his fellow
Soldiers, he abode with two Brothers, Julius and Tatianus. Upon the recovery
of his health, he went out with them one day a hunting: and having wearied
themselves, they laid themselves upon the ground about noon to sleep a little.
Tatianus waking first, saw an Eagle, that with extended wings made a shade for
Marcianus, and kept off the heat of the Sun from his face; he softly awaked his
Brother, and showing him that unusual thing, they both admired, believing that
thereby the Empire was portended to Marcianus: which when he awaked they told
him, desiring, that when he had attained it, he would think of them; and having
given him two hundred Crowns, they sent him away. Afterward warring under
Aspar against the Vandals, he was taken with many others, and kept Prisoner in
a certain Court. The Prince of the Vandals looking out at a Window upon the
Prisoners, he beheld an Eagle balancing her self with her wings, so as to make
a shade for Marcianus; whereupon he also conjectured, that the Empire was
thereby presaged to him. He therefore sent for him, and having agreed with him,
in case he should prove Emperor, that he should make no War upon the Vandals,
he gave him his liberty. Now when the Emperor Theodosius was dead, his Sister
Pulcheria sent for this man, and told him, that if he would solemnly swear, he
would not assault her Virginity, which she had consecrated to God, she would
accept of him for her Husband, and he should have the Empire with her in Dowry.
It was agreed, and he made Emperor; whereupon he speedily sent for the two
Brothers, with whom he had before lodged, created Tatianus Prefect of the City
of Constantinople, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 71. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 4. p.
86.
and to Iulianus he gave the Province of Illiricum.

12. Timoleon by the Corinthians was declared their General against the
Sicilians, and while he consulted the Oracle at Delphos, from amongst the
consecrated things and offerings that were fixed on high in the Temple, there
fell down a Garland, so exactly upon his head, as if it had been studiously
placed there with some hand: which was then interpreted, that he should carry
away the Victory in that War, as it accordingly came to pass. A light shined
before him also all night upon the Sea, as he sailed toward the Enemy. And a
little before the fight, whereas there was an nourable controversy betwixt two
Centurions, which of them should first lead up his men against the Enemy; He,
to determine the matter, called for both their seals, and that which he drew
out first had a Trophy engraven upon it. His Army encouraged by these things,
fell fiercely upon the Army of Icetes that marched against them, and overcame
it.

13. The Dignity of a Bishop was presignified to Athanasius. Muret. va^. lect
l. 13* c. 9. p. 343^
In a childish sport upon a Festival day, many of his equals of like age with
himself, playing upon the shores of Alexandria, in sport created him Bishop,
and then brought to him some young children, as yet unbaptized, who sprinkled
them with water, exactly observing all the Rites of the Church. Alexander the
then Bishop of Alexandria, had observed this sport, and it disliked him from
the beginning: he caused therefore the children to be brought before him, and
understanding the whole matter, pronounced the children to be rightly baptized,
and that it should not be reiterated, only such prayers to be added, as was
usual to be performed by the Priest in that mystery. Athanasius was the
Successor of this Alexander in that See.

14. Paulinus the Bishop of Nola, Muret. var. lect. l. 13. c. 9. p. 343.
writes of St. Ambrose, that while as yet he was a little Boy, he would (as in
jest) give his hands to his Sisters to kiss (perceiving they gave that honor
to the Priests) for, said he, I shall be a Bishop. He was afterward, contrary
to his expectation, chosen Bishop of Millain, and the choice confirmed by the
Emperor.

15. When Caius Marius was yet an Infant, Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 387. Plut.
in Mario, p.
seven young Eagles are said to have fallen into his lap: about which the
Augurs being consulted, answered, That he should seven times undergo the chief
Magistracy in Rome: his seventh Consulship gave a clear proof of the truth of
that presage.

16. There was an Apparition (says Mr. Rosse) to Mr. Nicholas Smith, Rosse his
Arcana microcosm. c. 2. p. 217.
my dear Friend, immediately before he fell sick of that Fever that killed
him. Having been late abroad in London, as he was going up the stairs into his
Chamber, he was embraced (as he thought) by a Woman all in white: at which he
cried out; nothing appearing, he presently sickneth, goes to bed, and within a
week or ten days dyed.

17. Alexius Angelus having deprieved his Brother of the Empire, Dinoth. l. 6.
p. 422. Nicet. Chon^ Annal. fol. 52.
and coming forth of the Temple of Sophia, where the custom was to be crowned:
the Solemnity being over, he was to mount a gallant Arabian Horse; but the
Horse bounded and reared, and by no means would suffer him to get upon his
back: but after many times stroking of his neck, and with like arts he had
appeased him, he then gets upon his back, and takes the reins into his hand.
The Horse (as if he found himself deceived in his Rider) grew fierce as before:
with loud neighings he raises his fore-feet into the air, nor did he cease
bounding and corvetting, till he had first shaken off the double Crown from his
head, which was broken in the fall, and (soon after) had cast himself to the
ground. This was looked upon by most as an unfortunate Omen: for after many
Civil and Foreign Wars he was deposed, and his Brother restored.

Cause. holy Court, tom. 2. p. 176.
18. The three Sons of Eustachius, the Earl of Bononia, were playing together,
and ran and hid themselves under the Coat of their Mother Ida: the Earl comes
in upon the interim, and asks his Lady what it was that she hid under her
garments? Three great Princes, replied the Lady smiling, whereof the one is a
Duke, the second a King, and the third an Earl: and the event made good her
words. For the eldest of those Children, Godfrey of Bolloigne, succeeded his
Uncle Godfrey in the Dukedom of Lorraine: the second, which was Baldwin, was
King of Jerusalem; and the youngest Eustachius, was Earl of Bononia.

L^igh of Relig. and Lear^. p. 160.
19. Daniel Chamier, a learned Minister in France, being Mountabon upon a
Sunday, was asked that morning, Whether he preached that day? He answered No;
for it was the day of his repose and rest. So indeed it proved (though in
another sense than he meant it) for he was that day slain at the place
forementioned with a Cannon Bullet, which had a C. upon it, as if it was marked
out only for Chamier.

Dinoth. l. 6. p. 424.
20. When Philip the Lantgrave of Hesse endeavored to restore Christopher Duke
of Wittenberg to his Fathers Principality, Ferdinand of Austria, King of the
Romans (that he might preserve what he had gotten) sent Forces by the way of
Bohemia, under the Command of Philip the Palatine, to oppose the design of the
Lantgrave. The Palatine hearing the Enemy was prepared to fight, and upon their
March against him, stood still with his Army in a Valley near a place called
Lauffen; and sent out thence a Party (as Scouts) to discover what countenance
the Enemy bore. The Lantgraves Scouts met with these, and so a Skirmish was
betwixt them: the Lantgrave inquiring of the Scouts that were returned,
Whereabouts the Enemy was? and they telling him they were in Lauffen: My
Soldiers (said he) courage, for I take this as a fortunate Omen of our assured
Victory, seeing we understand that our Enemies are in slight (for Lauffen in
the German language signifies slight.) Nor was his presage in vain: for all the
Forces of the King turned their backs and fled; their flight being the more
ignominious and dishonorable, in that they departed without staying the trial
of a Battle.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 72.
21. Thomas Sarzanus went as Legate from Pope Eugenius the Fourth into Germany;
and as he passed the Alps, he met with Aenea^ Picolomineus, Ambassador to the
Emperor Frederick the Third. They lodged both in the same Inn; and when Aeneas
was somewhat saving, and would discount of the reckoning, said Thomas to him
smiling, Why should we be so sparing in our expenses, seeing both of us shall
live to be Popes? He spoke that in sport, which yet afterward the Fortune and
Virtue of them both brought to pass. Thomas by the name of Nicholas the Fifth,
and Aeneas by that of Pius the Second.

Su^^on. l. 6. cap. 46. page 263, 264. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 60, 61.
22. Nero the Emperor speaking (in the Senate) of Vindex, who had revolted from
him: E're long, said he, such lewd Fellows as these will have the punishment
they deserve. The Senate in the usual acclamation replied: Thou Augustus shall
be he, meaning that should inflict it; but the event proved it was he who was
to undergo it. It was observed too, that in the last Tragedy (which was that of
the banished Oedipus) which he sang (in Greek) upon the Stage, that he
pronounced this Verse: My Father, my Mother, and my Wife
Condemn me to abandon life.
Which was understood as a presage against himself, that the Ghost of his
Mother Agrippina and his Wife Poppaea Sabina, whom he had killed, and Claudi^^
whom he had poisoned, that he might succeed him in the Empire, were ready to
cite and summon him to death.

23. The War with Perses King of Macedon fell not by Lot, Plut. in Aemylio,
page 260. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 4. p. 12.
but was decreed by the Senate to L. Paulus Aemylius the Consul: which done, he
returned (honorably attended) from the Senate to his house. In the entrance of
which he found a little Daughter of his called Tertia (then very young) looking
sad, as one that had been lately weeping; he asked her therefore wherefore she
looked so sorrowfully? she answered, that Perses was dead: it was a little Dog
so called, that the young Girl delighted in. Paulus received the Omen of that
casual word, and then firmly preconceived in his mind the certain hope of his
future illustrious Triumph over the conquered Perses, which not long after fell
out.

24. When M. Crassus was come as far as Brundusium, Plut. in Crasso 2 p. 557.
Dinoth. l. 6. p. 420. Fulgos. l. 4. c. 3. p. 59.
with a purpose to pass over his Army toward the Parthian War, it was
observed, that a Seller of Fruit, whereas he used to cry up and down Cauneas
(that is a sort of figs, so called from the place where they grow) instead of
that his cry seemed to all men to be Cave-ne-eas, beware of going: and upon the
very day that he fought with the Parthian (by accident, and not thinking what
he did) he put upon him a black Paludamentum or Generals Coat, whereas it is
the custom of the Roman Generals to put on a Crimson one in the day of Battle.
From this accident the Army conceived an ill Omen, in respect of the Battle
that was to follow. Nor did they fail in their presage; for Crassus himself,
and his Son were both slain, and the whole Army overthrown almost to an entire
destruction.

25. In the Reign of the Emperor Valentinian, Cause. holy Court, tom. 2. p. 176.
Ambrosius, a Citizen of Rome, was sent Governor to Millaine. Probus the then
Prefect of Rome, according to the custom, was to admonish and advise him how to
demean himself in his place. Amongst other things he told him he was to go to
his new Office, not as a Judge so much as a Bishop. Probus thought nothing
further than to let him understand, what chaste and incorrupt behavior was
requisite for him in his Jurisdiction. But it proved, that he who was sent as
their Governor, was by them elected their Bishop: he accepted the place after
much importunity, and no man did better demean himself therein.

26. Di^ius Iulianus (being as yet but a private man) on a time presented the
Son of his Brother to the Emperor Aelius Pertinax. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p.
63.
The Emperor was exhorting the young man, that he should obey his Uncle; and
as he turned from him, See (said he) that you reverence my Colleague and
Successor. Iulianus and Pertinax had been Consuls together, and he had
succeeded Pertinax in his Proconsulship; but it seems the Emperors words did
mean something yet further, for in a short time after he succeeded him also in
the Empire.

27. When Severus was returning from Britain to Rome, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3.
p. 64.
a Negro Soldier, crowned with a Garland of Cypress, met him upon the way;
Severus troubled with this sad aspect, commanded them to remove him from his
Retinue; the Soldier intending, with some facetious speech, to remove that
trouble he had given him (by his countenance and funeral Garland) instead of
that did increase it: speaking thus to the Emperor, You have enjoyed all
things, you have subdued all things, and now you shall be made a God. Not long
after Severus dyed in Britain, and his body being brought back to Rome (as it is
usual for the dead Emperors) he was numbered amongst their Gods.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 68.
28. When the Emperor Iulianus departed out of Antioch to march against the
Persians (where he lost his life) being much displeased with that City for some
seditious words and actions that had been amongst them, turning himself to the
people, I will come hither no more, said he. And when he sacrificed to Mars
(near the City of C^esiphon) and perceived, that the entrails afforded no sign
of prosperity, he said he would sacrifice to Mars no more: supposing (when he
spoke) that both these should remain in his choice; but he was deceived, they
were as pr^sages, that he should be hindered both from the o^e and the other by
death.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 70.
29. Clodovaeus King of France, when he had determined to wage War in Spain with
Alarick King of the Goths* before such time as he would begin to march against
him, he sent Messengers with Presents to the Shrine of St. Martin, commanding
them, that upon their entrance of the Temple they should observe such things as
might a^^o^d a conjecture touching the event of the suture War. Entering
therefore the Temple, they heard the Monks who were at their Vespers, singing
those words in the Psalms: Thou O Lord have g^rded me with strength to the
battle. They took this as a presage of felicity to the King, and departed; who
also hereupon full of hope, undertook the War, and having routed the Enemy,
compelled him to fly.

L^v. Hist. l. 30. p. 360. Dinoth. l. 6. p. 419.
30. Anibal was commanded back from Italy into Africa to look to the
Carthaginian Affairs nearer home, which at that time went but ill with them;
and drawing near the African shore, he caused one of the Mariners to ascend the
top of the Mast, and thence to discover in what manner the Country did appear,
and what he should first observe therein. He tells Anibal that he saw an old
ruinated Sepulcher. Anibal abominating this answer (for that he thought the
place ominous to land at) turned aside, and put his Forces ashore near the Town
of Leptis: whence sending a H^rald to Scipio the Roman General, he demanded a
personal Treaty with him, in which he offered Conditions of Peace; which being
refused by Scipio, he was constrained to decide the matter by Battle, where he
was overthrown, and the whole Force and Power of the Carthaginians broken with
him.

Sueton. in Domitiano, cap. 16. page 339.
31. The Emperor Dominitianus (the day before he was slain) when some Mushrooms
were sent him for a Present, he commanded that they should be kept for him till
the next day; adding, if I may have leave to enjoy them: then turning to them
who stood about him, he told them, that the day following the Moon would be in
Aquarius, and that an Action should follow thereupon, that should give occasion
to the whole World to discourse upon it. In like manner, when he had scratched
a Pustule upon his Forehead, till such time as the blood dropped out of it: I
could wish, said he, that this is all the blood that shall be shed, and that
this little might suffice. By all these words presaging that his end was not
far off, whether occasioned by some prediction he had met with, or some evil
abodement of his own mind, or that they all proceeded casually from him.

32. Pope Paul the Second upon that very day he had promoted Franciscus Ruvenus
to a Cardinalship, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 3. p. 72.
when by accident he was speaking of it, I have this day, said he, chosen my
Successor: the event made it app^ar that he had spoken the truth: For Pope
Paul being dead, Franciscus Ruverus succeeded him in the Popedom, by the name
of Sixtus the Fourth.

33. Leonardus Ruverus was Cousin to the forementioned Cardinal, Fulgos. Ex. l.
1. c. 3. p. 73.
being his Brothers Son, and upon the account of his poverty and mean parts,
was the mockery of his Country. For when any man called him, he told them they
ought to call him the Count: and if in a way of jest any man at any time
propounded a Wife to him, he would say that he would not marry any other than
such a one as was the Kinswoman of a King. And the Fortune of his Uncle brought
all that to pass, which he used to say of himself: for being honou^ed with the
Dukedom and Earldom of the City Sora, and especially being raised to the
Dignity of the Roman Prefect, he afterward had for his Wife the Niece of
Ferdinando King of Naples.

34. The day before the Battle of Actium, Zonar. tom. 2. Dinoth. l. 6. p. 421.
Octavianus Augustus went out of his Tent to take view of the Ships, and
meeting a Muletter, he asked him his name, who told him his name was Eutychus
or good Fortune; and being asked his As^es name, it was (he said) Nicon, or
Victory. Octavianus took it for a good Omen, that the names seemed to favor
him so much; and soon after he had that Victory, that made him Lord of the
whole Roman Empire, without any Competitor able to stand against him.

35. Richard the Second, Dinoth. l. ^. p. 223.
King of England, being at Flint-Castle, and having received in thither Henry
the Duke of Lancaster, he was by him conveyed thence to Chester. Being about to
remove they loosed a Greyhound of the Kings, as was usual whenever the King
got on Horseback, which Greyhound used to leap upon the Kings shoulders, and
fawn upon him exceedingly. Being loosed (at this time) he leapt upon the Duke
of Lancaster, and fawned upon him in the same manner, as he used to do upon his
Master. The Duke asked the King what the Dog meant or intended: It is an ill
and an unhappy Omen to me, said the King, but a fortunate one to you; for he
acknowledges thee to be the King, and that thou shall reign in my stead. This
he said with a presaging mind upon a light occasion, which yet in short time
came to pass accordingly.

36. The Swissers being besieged by the French in Novaria, Dinoth. l. 6. p. 424.
and both parts being intent upon the Battle to be, the Sun being now ready to
set, all the Dogs of the French left their Camp, and in a great Body made to
Novaria; where received by the Swissers, they licked their legs, shook their
tails, as if the Swissers were already become their Lords. They therefore
received it as a good Omen, presaging that by an unfortunate Battle the French
should lose the Lordship over them, as indeed the success was.

37. There was a noted Beggar in Paris called Mauritius, Fulgos. l. 1. c* 3. p.
73. Cause. holy C* ^. 2. p. 176^
who used to say he should be a Bishop: and although he was never so hungry or
in want, yet would he not receive an alms at the hands of any man, who
beforehand (as it is usual to jest) went about to make him promise, that he
would never be a Bishop. This man from this abject condition came at last to be
Bishop of Paris.

Heylins life of La^d Ep. of Cant. part 2. l. 5. p. 450.
38. Dr. Heylin, in his Life of William La^d Archbishop of Canterbury, mentions
these as the sad presages of his fall and death. On Friday night, the 27. of
December 1639. there was raised such a violent tempest, that many of the Boats
which were drawn to Land at Lambeth, were dashed one against another, and were
broke to pieces: the snafts of two Chimneys were blown down upon the roof of
his Chamber, and beat down both the Lead and Rafters upon his Bed, in which
ruin he must needs have perished, if the roughness of the water had not forced
him to keep his Chamber at Whitehall. The same night at Croyden (a retiring
place belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury) one of the Pinnacles fell from
the Steeple, beat down the Lead and Roof of the Church above twenty foot
square. The same night too at the Metropolitical Church in the City of
Canterbury, one of the Pinnacles upon the Belfrey Tower, which carried a Vane,
with this Archbishops Arms upon it, was violently struck down (but born a good
distance from the Steeple) and fell upon the Roof of the Cloister, under which
the Arms of the Archiepiscopal See it self were engraven in stone; which Arms
being broken in pieces by the former, gave occasion to one that loved him not
to collect this inference; That the Arms of the present Archbishop of
Canterbury breaking down the Arms of the Sea of Canterbury not only portended
his own fall, but the ruin of the Metropolitical Dignity by the weight
thereof. Of these he took not so much notice, as he did of an accident, which
happened on St. Simon and Iude's Eve not above a week before the beginning of
the late long Parliament, which drew him to his final ruin. On which day going
to his upper Study to send some Manuscripts to Oxon, he found his Picture at
full length, and taken as near unto the life, as the Pencil was able to express
it, to be fallen on the floor; and lying flat upon its face, the string being
broke, by which it was hanged against the Wall. At the sight whereof he took
such a sudden apprehension, that he began to fear it as an Omen of that ruin,
which was coming toward him, and which every day began to be threatened to him,
as the Parliament grew nearer and nearer to consult about it. These things
occasioned him to look back on a former misfortune, which chanced on the 19. of
September. 1633. being the very day of his translation to the Sea of Canterbury,
when the Ferry-boat, transporting his Coach and Horses, with many of his
Servants in it, sunk to the bottom of the Thames.

CHAP. III. Of the famous Predictions of some men, and how the Event has been
conformable thereunto.
SOcrates had a Genius that was ever present with him, which by an audible
voice gave him warning of approaching evils to himself or friends, by dehorting
(as it always did when it was heard) from this or that counsel or design, by
which he many times saved himself; and such as would not be ruled by his
counsel (when he had this voice) found the truth of the admonition by the evil
success of their affairs: Aelian. var. hist. l. 8. c. 1. p. 212.
as amongst other Charmides did. I know not whether by such way as this, or
some other as extraordinary, the ministry of good or evil Spirits, some men
have come to the knowledge of future events, and have been able to foretell them
long before they came to pass.

1. Anno Christi 1279. there lived in Scotland one Thomas Lermouth, Spotswood.
hist. of Chapter of Scotland, l. 2. p. 47. Clarks Mir. c. 101. p. 467.
a man very greatly admired for his foretelling of things to come. He may
justly be wondered at for foretelling so many ages before the union of the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland in the ninth degree of the Bruces blood, with
the succession of Bruce himself to the Crown, being yet a Child; and many other
things which the event has made good. The day before the death of King
Alexander he told the Earl of March, that before the next day at noon, such a
tempest should blow, as Scotland had not felt many years before. The next
morning proving a clear day, the Earl challenged Thomas as an Impostor; he
replied that noon was not yet past; about which time a Post came to inform the
Earl of the Kings sudden death: and then, said Thomas, this is the tempest I
foretold, and so it shall prove to Scotland, as indeed it did.

2. Duncan King of the Scots had two principal men, Heylins Cosmogr. page 336.
whom he employed in all matters of importance, Mackbeth and Banquho: these two
traveling together through a Forest, were met by three Witches ( Weirds as the
Scots call them) whereof the first making obeisance unto Mackbeth saluted him
Thane (that is Earl) of Glammis; the second Thane of Cauder, and the third King
of Scotland. This is unequal dealing, said Banquho, to give my friend all the
honors, and none unto me; to which one of the Weirds made answer, That he
indeed should not be King; but out of his loins should come a Race of Kings,
that should for ever rule the Scots. And having thus said, they all vanished.
Upon their arrival to the Court, Mackbeth was immediately created Thane of
Glammis, and not long after some new service requiring new recompense, he was
honored with the Title of Thane of Cawder. Seeing then how happily the
prediction of the three Weirds fell out in the two former, he resolved not to
be wanting to himself in fulfilling the third. He therefore first killed the
King, and after by reason of his Command amongst the Soldiers he succeeded in
his Throne. Being scarce warm in his seat, he called to mind the prediction
given to his Companion Banquho, whom (hereupon suspecting as his Supplanter) he
caused to be killed, together with his whole posterity, only Fleance one of his
Sons escaping with no small difficulty into Wales: freed, as he thought, of all
fear of Banquho and his issue, he built Dunsinan Castle, and made it his
ordinary Seat; afterward on some new fears, consulting with his Wizards
concerning his future estate, he was told by one of them, that he should never
be overcome, till Bernane Wood (being some miles distant) came to Dunsinan
Castle; and by another that he should never be slain by any man, which was born
of a Woman: secure then, as he thought, from all future dangers, he omitted no
kind of libidinous cruelty for the space of eighteen years; for so long he
tyrannized over Scotland. But having then made up the measure of his
iniquities, Mackduffe the Governor of Fife, with some other good Patriots,
privily met one evening at Bernane Wood, and (taking every one of them a bough
in his hand, the better to keep them from discovery) marched early in the
morning toward Dunsinan Castle, which they took by storm. Mackbeth escaping,
was pursued by Mackduffe, who having overtaken him, urged him to the Cambat, to
whom the Tyrant (half in scorn) returned, that in vain he attempted to kill
him, it being his destiny never to be slain by any that was born of a Woman.
Now then, said Mackduffe, is thy fatal end drawing fast upon thee; for I was
never born of a Woman, but violently cut out of my mothers belly: which so
daunted the Tyrant (though otherwise a valiant man) that he was easily slain.
In the mean time Fleance so prospered in Wales, that he gained the affection of
the Princes Daughter of the Country, and by her had a Son called Walter, who
^lying Wales, returned into Scotland, where (his descent known) he was restored
to the Honors and Lands of his House, and preferred to be Steward of the House
of Edgar (the Son of Malcolme the Third surnamed Conmer) King of Scotland, the
name of Steward growing hence hereditary unto his Posterity. From this Walter
descended that Robert Steward, who succeeded David Bruce in the Kingdom of
Scotland, the Progenitor of nine Kings of the name of Stewart, which have
reigned successively in that Kingdom.

Full. Worthies, page 154. Wiltshire.
3. Oliver, a Benedictine Monk of Malmesbury, was much addicted to the
Mathematics and to Judicial Astrology: a great Comet happened to appear in his
^^e, which he entertained with these expressions. Venisti? Venist^? multis
matribus lugendum malum? Dudum te vidi, sed multo jam terribilius, Anglicae
minans prorsus excidium.

Art thou come? Art thou come? thou evil to be lamented by many mothers? I saw
thee long since, but now thou art much more terrible, threatening the English
with utter destruction.

Nor did he much miss his mark herein; for soon after the coming in of the
Norman Conqueror deprived many English of their lives, more of their Laws and
Liberties. This Oliver dyed 1060. five years before the Norman Invasion, and so
(prevented by death) saw not his own prediction performed.

Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 8. p. 475.
4. Agrippa the Son of Aristobulus was accused to Tiberius Caesar, and by his
command cast into bonds; standing thus bound amongst others before the Palace
gates, by reason of grief, he leaned against a Tree, upon which there sat an
Owl. A certain German that was also in bonds, beholding the Bird, inquired of a
Soldier, what Noble man that was? who told him that it was Agrippa, a Prince
of the Jews. The German desired he might be permitted to come nearer to him; it
was granted, when he thus said: Young man, this sudden and unexpected mutation
of Fortune does torment and perplex thee; but in a short time thou shall be
freed of these bonds, and raised to a dignity and power, that shall be the envy
of all these who now look upon thee as a miserable person; know also that
whenever thou shall see an Owl perch over thy head after the manner of this
now present, it shall betoken to thee, that thy fatal end draws nigh. All
this was fulfilled: for soon after Tiberius dyed; Caius succeeded; who loosed
the bonds of Agrippa, and placed the Crown of Iudaea on his head: there he
reigned in great splendor, when one day having ended a Royal Oration he had
made to the people, with great acclamation and applause, turning back his head,
he spyed the fatal Owl sitting over his head; whereupon he was seized with
torments of the belly, carried away, and in few days dyed.

5. When Flavius Vespasianus made War in Iudaea, Sueton. p. 307.
amongst the noble Captives there was one called Joseph, who being cast into
bonds by his order, did nevertheless constantly affirm, that those shackles of
his should in a short time be taken off by the same person who had commanded
them to be put on; but by that time he should of a private man become Emperor,
which soon after f^ll out: for Nero, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius the Emperors
being slain, in a short space Vespasian succeeded, and commanded Joseph's
setters not to be unlocked, but for the greater honor to be broken off.

6. Manahem a Jew, Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. fol. 41. Joseph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 13.
p. 408.
an Essaean, beholding on a time Herod the Ascalonite at School amongst the
rest of the youth, saluted him King of the Jews; Herod supposing he either
mocked, or knew him not, told him he was one of the mean^r sort. Manahem
smiling, and giving him a gentle blow or two, Thou shall reign, said he, and
prosperously too, for so is the pleasure of God: and remember then these blows
of Manahem, which may admonish thee of mutable Fortune: but I foresee thou will
be unmindful both of the Laws of God and man, though otherwise most fortunate
and illustrious. Herod lived to fulfill all this.

7. Judas of the Sect of the Essaeans amongst the Jews (being not used to fail
in his predictions) when he beheld Antigonus, Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. fol. 36.
Joseph. de bello Iud. l. 1. c. 3. p. 562. Joseph. Antiq. l. 13. c. 19. page 340.
the Brother of Aristobulus, the Brother of Aristobulus, to pass by the Temple
of Jerusalem, of whom he had predicted that he should that day be slain in the
Tower of Strato, he turned to his friends, wishing that himself might dye since
he was alive. The Tower of Strato, said he, is six hundred furlongs off, so
that my prediction is not possible to be fulfilled on this day, as I
pronounced: but scarce had he finished his discourse, when news comes that
Antigonus was slain in a Cave, that was called the Tower of Strato; and thus
the prediction was fulfilled, though not well understood by him who was the
Author of it.

8. While Julius Caesar was sacrificing, Sueton. page 48. in Iul*
Spurina a Soothsayer advised him to beware of the Ides of March; when
therefore they were come, and that there was no visible appearance of danger,
Caesar sent for Spurina; Well, said he, the Ides of March are come, and I see
nothing in them so formidable as thy caution to me would seem to import. They
are come indeed, said Spurina, but they are not past, that unhappy accident,
which was threatened, may yet fall out; nor was he mistaken: for upon the same
day Julius was slain in the Senate house by Brutus and Cassius, and the rest of
their Accomplices.

9. When Vitellius the Emperor had set forth an Edict, Sueton. l. 9. c. 14. p.
299^
that the Mathematicians should at a certain day depart the City and Italy it
self, there was a Paper affixed to a public place, wherein was writ, that the
Cha daeans did predict good Fortune; for before the day appointed for their
departure, Vitellius should no where be found; nor did it miscarry in the
event, Vitellius being slain before the day came.

10. Proclus Larginus (having in Germany predicted that Domitian the Emperor
should dye upon such a day) was laid hold upon, Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 79.
Zonar. Annal. tom. 2. fol. 100. Suet. l. 12. c. 26. p. 340.
and for that cause sent to Rome; where when before Domitian himself he had
affirmed the very same, he was sentenced to death, with order to keep him till
the day of his prediction was past, and then that on the next he should dye, in
case what he had foretold of the Emperor proved false; but Domitian was slain
by Stephanus upon the very day as he had said: whereupon the Soothsayer
escaped, and was enlarged with great honor.

Suet. p. 399. Zonar. Annal. tom. 2. fol. 100. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 79.
11. Ascletarion was one singularly skilled in Astrology, and he also had
predicted the day and hour of Domitians death; and being asked by the Emperor,
what kind of death he himself should dye? I shall shortly, said he, be torn in
pieces by Dogs; the Emperor therefore commands that he should be slain
forthwith, publicly burnt; and to mock the vanity and temerity of his Art, he
ordered that the ashes of his body should be gathered, put into an Urn, and
carefully buried. But the body was no sooner laid upon the funeral pile, in
order to his burning, but a sudden tempest and vehement shower of rain
extinguished the fire, and caused the attendants of the Corpse to betake
themselv^s to shelter, when came the Dogs and pulled in pieces the half-burnt
carcass. Domitian being certified hereof, began to grow into more fearful
apprehensions of his own safety; but the irresistible force of Destiny is no
way to be eluded, but he was slain accordingly.

Lamprid. in ejus vita, p. 588.
12. Alexander Severus the Emperor marching out to the German Wars, Thrasybulus
a Mathematici^n and his Friend, told him that he would be slain by the Sword of
a Barbarian; and a Woman Druid cried out to him in the Gallick Tongue, Thou
may go, but neither hope for the Victory, nor trust to the faith of thy
Soldiers. It fell out accordingly; for before he came in sight of the Enemy he
was slain by some German Soldiers that were in his own Camp.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 394. Iovil Elog. p. 320.
13. A Greek Astrologer, the same that had predicted the Dukedom of Tuscany to
Cosmo de Medices, did also to the wonder of many foretell the death of
Alexander, and that with such assuredness, that he described his Murderer to
be such a one as was his intimate and familiar, of a slender habit of body, a
^mall face, and swarthy complexion, and who with a reserved silence was almost
unsociable to all persons in the Court; by which description he did almost
point out with the singer Laurence Medices, who murdered Prince Alexander in
his Bedchamber, contrary to all the Laws of Consanguinity and Hospitality.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 395. Sleid. Com. l. 19. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 5. lib.
3. page 1269.
14. Pope Paul the Third wrote to Petrus A^oisius Farnesius his Son, that he
should take special care of himself upon the 10. of September; for the Stars
did then threaten him with some signal misfortune. Petrus giving credit to his
Fathers admonition, with great anxiety and fear took heed to himself upon that
day, and yet notwithstanding all his care, he was slain by thirty six, that had
framed a conspiracy against him.

Zon^r. Annal. tom. 1. sol. 33. Diodor. S^^ul. bibl. l. 17. p. 571.
15. Alexander the Great returning out of India, and being about to enter
Babylon, the Chaldean Soothsayers sent him word, that he would speedily dye, if
he entered the Walls of it. This prediction was derided by Anaxarchus the
Epicurcan; and Alexander not to show himself over-timerous or superstitious in
this kind, would needs put himself within the City, where, as most hold, he was
poisoned by Cassander.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. fol. 31.
16. The very same day that the formentioned Alexander was born, the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus was set on fire, and certain Magicians that were then present
ran up and down, crying, that a great calamity and cruel scourge to Asia was
born that day: nor were they mistaken; for Alexander overran all Asia with
conquering Arms, not without a wonderful slaughter of the men, and desolation
of the Country.

17. When Darius in the beginning of his Empire had caused the Persian Scimitar
to be made after the manner of the Greeks, Q. Curtil hist. l. 3.^^
and commanded all men to wear them so, forthwith the Chaldeans predicted, that
the Empire of the Persians should be devolved into the power of them whose Arms
and Weapons they thus imitated: which also came to pass; for Darius overcome in
three Battles, and in his flight left treacherously wounded by some of his own
men, lost his life, and left his Empire to his Conqueror the Grecian Alexander.

18. While Cosmo Medices was yet a private man, Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 390.
and little thought of the Dukedom of Florence, Basilius the Mathematician
foretold, that a wonderful rich inheritance would certainly fall to him, in as
much as the Ascendant of his Nativity was beautified and illustrated by a happy
conspiracy of Stars in Capricorn, in such manner as had heretofore fallen out
to Augustus Caesar, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth: upon the 5. of the Ides
of Ian. he was advanced to the Dignity of the Dukedom.

19. Belesus a Babylonish Captain skilled in Astrology and Divination beyond
all the Chaldeans, Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. p. 7, p. 55.
told Arbaces the Prefect of Media, that he should be Lord of all that
Sardanapalus did now possess, since his Genesis was favored as he knew with a
lucky Position of Stars. Arbaces encouraged by this hope, conspired with the
Babylonians and Arabians: but the Revolt being known, the Rebels were thrice in
plain field overthrown by Sardanapalus. The Confederates amazed at so many
unhappy chances, determined to return home. But Belesus having all night made
observation of the Stars, foretold, that a considerable body of friends were
coming to their assistance, and that in a short time their affairs would go on
more prosperously. Thus confirmed, they waited the time set down by Belesus; in
which it was told them, that the Bactrians were come in aid of the King. It
seemed good to Arbaces and the rest to meet the Bactrians with an expedite and
select Body, and persuade them to the same Revolt, or force them; he prevailed
without stroke, they joined with his Forces. In the night he fell upon the Camp
of Sardanapalus, who feared nothing less, and took it; twice after they
overcame him in the field with great slaughter, and having driven him into
Niniveh after two years siege, took that also, and so fulfilled the prediction
of Belesius.

20. The great Picus Mirandula, Gaffar. enrios. c. 7. p. 252.
who (for writing more against the Astrologers, and also more reproachfully
than others, or indeed than any man ever did) was called Flagellum
Astrologorum, the Scourage of Astrologers, met at last with one Bellantius of
Syena, who was not at all deceived in the Judgment that he gave upon his
Nativity; for he foretold him that he should dye in the thirty fourth year of
his age, which accordingly came to pass.

21. Iunctin an Italian of the City of Florence, Id. ibid. p. 252.
foretold that himself should dye of some violent death, and upon the very same
day was knocked on the head by the Books in his own Study falling upon him.

22. The Duke of Biron, M. de Serres his general hist. of Frances, p. 1051.
being then only Baron of Biron, and in some trouble by reason of the death of
the Lord Cerency and others slain in a quarrel, is said to have gone disguised
like a Carrier of Letters, unto one la Brosse, a great Mathematician, whom they
held to be skilful in casting Nativities, to whom he showed his Nativity drawn
by some other, and dissembling it to be his, he said it was a Gentleman's whom
he served, and that he desired to know, what end that man should have. La
Brosse having rectified this Figure, said to him, that he was of a good House,
and no elder than you are, said he to the Baron, asking him, if it were his:
The Baron answered him, I will not tell you; but tell me, said he, what his
life, and means, and end shall be? The old man, who was then in a little
Garret, which served him for a Study, said unto him, My Son, I see that he
whose Nativity this is shall come to great honor by his industry and military
valor, and may be a King, but there is a Caput Algol which hinders it; And
what is that, said the Baron; Ask me not, said la Brosse, what it is? I must
know it, replied he. In the end, he said to him, My Son, it is that he will do
that which shall make him lose his head: Whereupon the Baron beat him cruelly;
and having left him half dead, he went down, and carried with him the key of
the Garret door, whereof he afterward bragged. He had also conference with one
Caesar, who was a Magician at Paris, who told him, that only a back blow of the
Bourguignon would keep him from being a King. He remembered this prediction,
being a Prisoner in the Bastille, and entreated one that went to visit him, to
learn if the Executioner of Paris was a Bourguignon; and having found it so, he
said, I am a dead man, and soon after was beheaded for his Conspiracy.

Bakers Chr. p. 252. Graft. vol. 2. p. 490.
23. Upon St. Nicholas day, in the year 1422. Queen Katherine, Wife to King
Henry the Fifth, was brought to bed of a Son at Windsor, who was by the Duke of
Bedford and Henry Bishop of Winchester, and the Countess of Holland christened
by the name of Henry, whereof when the King had notice, out of a prophetic
rapture, he said, Good Lord, I Henry of Monmouth shall small time reign, and
much get; and Henry born at Windsor shall long time reign and lose all; but
Gods will be done.

Bakers. Chr. p. 339.
24. On the 30. day of October 1485. was Henry the Seventh, with great
Solemnity, anointed and crowned King of England, and even this was revealed to
Cadwallader last King of the Britains 797 years past, that his Offspring
should reign and bear dominion in this Realm again.

Bakers Chr. p. 55.
25. Although Henry the First came not to the Crown of England by the gift of
his Father the Conqueror, as his Brother William did: yet he came to it by the
Prophecy of his Father; for when his Father made his Will, and divided all his
Estate in Land between his two eldest Sons, giving to Henry his youngest only a
Portion in Money, with which division he perceived him to be much
discontentend, he said unto him, Content thy self, Harry, for the time will
come that thy turn shall be served as well as theirs. His prediction was
accomplished August the 5. An. 1100. he being then crowned in Westminster.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 418.
26. The Great Cham Cublai intending to besiege the Metropolis of the Province
of Mangi, made one Bajan Chiusan the General of his Army, which name signifies
the light of an hundred eyes; the Queen that was within the Walls of the City,
with a Garrison sufficient, hearing the name of the General, not only delivered
the City, but also the whole Province, into the hands of Cublai; for that she
had before heard it predicted by the Astrologers, that the City should be taken
by him that had an hundred eyes.

27. Thrasyllus the Mathematician was in the Retinue of Tiberius, Xiphil. in
Augusto, p. 61. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 77, 78. Tacit.
when he lived at Rhodes as an Exile; and though under that cloud, and that
Caius and Lucius were both alive, whose pretenses were before his; yet he
constantly told him, that he should be Emperor. Tiberius believed him not, but
suspecting he was suborned by his Enemies to betray him into dangerous words,
he determined privily to make him away. He had a house in Rhodes, in which
there was a Tower built upon a Rock, which was washed by the Sea; hither he
brought him, accompanied by a Servant of his own of great strength, resolved to
cast him headlong from thence. When therefore they were come up, Tell me, said
he, by all that is dear unto thee, if that is true which thou have hitherto so
confidently affirmed to me concerning the Empire? It is, said Thrasyllus, a
certain truth, and such is the pleasure of the Stars: If then, said Tiberius,
you have such assurance of my Destiny, what say you of your own? Presently be
erected a Scheme, and considering the situation and distance of the Stars, he
began to fear, look pale, and cried out, I am in doubtful and hazardous state,
and the last end of my life seems nearly to approach. At this Tiberius embraced
him, and told him, he doubted not his skill in predictions, acquainting him
with his design against his life. The same Thrasyllus not long after walking
with Tiberius upon the shore of Rhodes, having discovered a Ship under Sail
afar off, told him that Ship came from Rome, and therein were Messengers with
Letters from Augustus, concerning his return: which also fell out accordingly.

28. Apollonius Tyanaeus was at Ephesus in Asia, Lips. moni^. l. 1. c. 5. p. 80.
reading a Lecture in a Grove there, a great space both of Land and Sea
interposed betwixt him and Rome; when he began to speak low, and then more
slowly, straight he looked pale, and stood silent; at last stepping hastily on
some paces, as one transported, O brave Stephanus, said he, strike the Tyrant,
kill the Murderer, thou have struck him, thou have wounded him, thou have slain
him. This spoke in public, was carefully gathered up, the time diligently
observed, and as it was after well known, that Domitian the Emperor was slain
in Rome that day and the same hour of the day by one Stephanus that was of his
Bedchamber.

29. Diocletian being in Gallia with the Roman Army, Fulgos. Exempl. l. 1. c.
3. p. 65.
and at that time but a Knight of Rome* and of a slender Fortune, paid his
quarters but indifferently; his Hostess upbraided him, that he paid her too
sparingly, and he on the other side jestingly replied, that he would discharge
his Reckoning more bountifully as soon as he should be Emperor; the Woman who
was a Witch told him, that he should be Emperor as soon as he had slain the
Boar; he thereupon betook himself to hunting, and had killed many wild Boars,
yet still found himself never the nearer: at last, Numerianus the Emperor,
being slain by the fraud of Aper his Father-in-law, Diocletian slew Aper in the
Council, his name in English is a Boar, and thereupon was elected Emperor.

30. William Earl of Holland, Camerar. hor. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 11. p. 42.
upon the death of Henry Lantgrave of Hassia, and King of the Romans, was
chosen King in his stead; after which he warred upon Frisia, and subdued it;
when (near unto a City there) he light upon a Tomb adorned with great curiosity
of Workmanship, and asking who was intombed therein, he was told by the
Inhabitants, that at present there was not any body interred therein, but that
by a secret Fate it was reserved for a certain King of the Romans. The King
having assured his new Conquest, was marching out of Frisia, and rode himself
before with few of his Attendance, to seek out a convenient place for the
quartering of his Army; when it chanced that his Horse, breaking into the Ice,
overthrew him. There were certain fugitive Frisons that lay hid in the reeds
thereabouts, who observing his misfortune, brake out upon him, and before any
could come in to his assistance, he was partly slain by them, and partly
choked with his Helmet about him in the water. Upon this accident there was an
Insurrection of the Frisons, the Hollanders were by them driven out or slain,
and the Body of King William was seized, and laid in the forementioned Tomb
according to the prediction. Twenty seven years after his bones were removed by
Earl Florence his Son, and the fifth of that Name, to a Nunnery in Middleburg
in Zealand: he was slain An. 1255.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 29.
31. Appius Claudius Proconsul of Achaia at the time of the difference betwixt
Pompey and Caesar, was desirous to know the event of so great a Commotion; and
thereupon consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, when he was told on this
manner: Thou art not concerned in these things, O Roman, in Euboea thou shall
find Caesar; he supposing he was warned by the Oracle to sit down there in
quiet, not interessing himself for either Party, he retired thither, where he
fell into a disease whereof he dyed, before such time as the matter was decided
in the fields of Pharsalia.

Cambd. Annal. rer. Angl. part. 2. p. 277.
32. Walter Devoreux, Earl of Essex, having wasted his spirits with grief, fell
into a Dysentery whereof he dyed, after he had requested of such as stood by
him, that they would admonish his Son, who was then scarce ten years of age,
that he should always propound and set before him the thirty sixth year of his
life as the utmost he should ever attain unto; which neither he nor his father
had gone beyond, and his Son never reached unto; Id. part. 4. p. 80^.
for Robert Devereux his Son and also Earl of Essex, was beheaded in the thirty
fourth year of his age: so that his dying Father seemed not in vain to have
admonished him as he did, but to speak by divine inspiration and suggestion.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 8. c. 11. p. 1081.
33. Guido Bonatus showed the wonderful effects of Astrology, when he foretold
to Guido Count of Montsferat the day wherein, if he would sally out of
Forolivium, and set upon his Enemies, he should defeat them; but withal himself
should receive a wound in the Hip: to show how certain he was of the event, he
would also himself march out with him, carrying along with him such things as
were necessary for the wound not yet made. The fight and victory was as he
said; and which is most wonderful, the Count was also wounded in the very place
predicted.

CHAP. IV. Of several illustrious persons abused and deceived by Predictions of
Astrologers, and the equivocal Responses of Oracles.
SUch is the inveterate envy and malice of the Devil which he bears to poor
man, that from the Creation to this day he never was without his engines and
subtle contrivances, whereby he might undo him, or at the least dangerously
deceive and delude him. In subservience to these his designs; he set up his
places of Oracular residence; and though it was a lower way of trading, amused
the World with Judicial Astrology, by both which he continually mocked and
abused the curiosity and credulity of over-inquisitive men, and still does
(which is no wonder) notwithstanding all Ages by their experience have detected
his falsehood.

1. Henry the Second, Cause. holy Court tom. 1. Max. 5. p. 360.
to whom Cardan and Guuricus, two Lights of Astrology, had foretold verdant and
happy old age, was miserably slain in the flower of his youth in games and
pleasures of a Turnament. The Princes his Children, whose Horoscopes were so
curiously looked into, and of whom wonders had been spoken, were not much more
prosperous, as France well knew.

2. Zica King of the Arabians, Id. ibid.
to whom Astrology had promised long life to persecute Christians, dyed in the
year of the same prediction.

3. Albumazar, Idem, page 361.
the Oracle of Astrology, left in writing that he found Christian Religion,
according to the influence of the Stars, should last but one thousand four
hundred years; he has already belied more than two hundred, and it will be a
lie to the Worlds end.

4. The year 1524. wherein happened the great Conjunction of Saturn, Id. p. 361.
Jupiter, and Mars in the Sign Pisces; Astrologers had foretold the World
should perish by water, which was the cause that many persons of Quality made
Arks in imitation of Noah, to save themselves from the Deluge: all which turned
into laughter.

5. It was foretold a Constable of France well known, Idem, page 361.
that he would dye beyond the Alps, before a City besieged, in the 83. year of
his age, and that if he escaped this time, he was to live above an hundred
years: which was notoriously untrue, this man deceasing in the 84. year of a
natural death.

6. Croesus King of Lydia having determined to war upon Cyrus, Her^dot. l. 1.
p. 20. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 409.
consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos touching the success, whence he
received this Answer. Croesus Halyn penetrans, magnam disperdet opum vim.
When Croesus has the Halys past,
A world of Treasure shall he wast.
He interpreted this of the riches of his Adversaries; but the event showed
they were his own; for he lost his Army, Kingdom, and Liberty in that
Expedition.

7. Cambyses King of Persia was told by the Oracle that he should dye at
Ecbatana; Herodot. l. 3. p. 187. Zonar. Annal. tom. 1. fol. 29.
he therefore concluding, that he should finish his life at Ecbatana in Media,
did studiously decline going thither; but when by the falling of his Sword out
of its Scabbard, and his falling upon it, he was deadly wounded in his Thigh;
being then in Syria, he inquired the name of the place; and being informed it
was Ecbatana, he acknowledged it was his Fate to dye there, and that he had
hitherto mistaken the name of the place.

8. Anibal was told by the Oracle, Di^oth. memorab. l. 6. p. 410. Plut. in
Flaminio, p. 380.
that the Earth of Libyssa should cover the Corpse of Anibal; while therefore he
was in a foreign Country, he was not very apprehensive of any danger, as
thinking he should dye in his own Country of Libya. But there is a River in
Bythinia called Libyssus, and the fields adjoining Libyssa: in this Country he
drank poison, and dying, confessed that the Oracle had told him truth, but in a
different manner to what he had understood it.

Plut. in Pyrrho, p. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 410. Tull. in finibus ad finem.
9. Pyrrhus King of Epirus had resolved a War against the Romans, and consulting
the Oracle of Apollo about the success, had this Verse for his Answer. Aio te
Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.
Achilles Son the Romans may overcome.
The sense was ambiguous, and might be construed in favor of Pyrrhus, or the
Romans; but he interpreted it to his own advantage, though the event proved
quite otherwise.

Plut. paral. p. in Nicia. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 410.
10. There was an Oracle, that e're long it should come to pass, that the
Athenians should be Masters of all the Syracusans. They therefore equipped a
great Navy, and in favor of the Leontines warred upon them of Syracusa. It so
fell out, that when their Navy drew near to Syracuse, they seized a Ship of the
Enemy, which carried the Tables wherein were enrolled the names of all the
Syracusans that were able to bear Arms; by which means the Oracle was
fulfilled, but not agreeable to the hopes of the Athenians; for they became not
the Lords of the Syracusans, as they supposed they should, but were beaten by
them.

Joseph. de bello Iud. l. 3. c. 1. p. 645. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 411.
11. It was a received opinion, and confirmed by Oracles, that out of Iudaea
should come the Lord of the Universe; the Jews interpreting this to their
advantage, rebelled, and assembling in Mount Carmel, brake out into Sedition,
they flew the Prefect, forced to flight the Legate of Syria, a Consular person,
who came in with Forces to reduce them, and endeavored to drive out the Roman
Name from Iudaea. To repress this Commotion, when it was thought fit to send a
strong power, and an able Leader, Flavianus Vespasian was pitched upon as the
fittest person. He having reduced the Jews, upon the death of Otho was saluted
Caesar by his Army; and having overcome Vitellius, obtained the Roman Empire.
Thus the Oracle was fulfilled, which being ill understood by the Jews, had
administered occasion to them to rebel.

Dinoth. ib. p. 411. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 116.
12. An Astrologer having viewed the Nativity of Constans the Emperor,
predicted that he should dye in the lap of his Mother: now he had been trained
up by Helena his Grandmother, his Mother Fausta being dead before; but when his
Grandmother was dead also, he looked upon the prediction as altogether vain;
but there was a Town in Spain called by the name of his Grandmother Helena,
there he was slain, and so after his death the obscurity of the prediction was
unridled.

Dinoth. l. 6. p. 412.
13. There were some ancient Verses of the Sibyls in which was contained, that
when Africa should again fall under the power of the Romans, Mundum cum pro^e
sua interiturum. This Prophecy of the Sibyls affrighted very many, extremely
solicitous, lest the Heavens and the Earth together with all Mankind should
then perish. But Africa being reduced by the fortunate virtue of Belisarius, it
then appeared, that the death of Mundus the then General and of Mauritius his
Son, was predicted by the Sibyl, who in a Battle against the Goths, were both
slain at Salona, a City in Dalmatia.

Su^ton. l. 6. c. 40. p. 259. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 78.
14. Nero Caesar consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos touching his future
Fortune, and was thereby advised to beware of the sixty and third year; he
concluded that he should not only arrive to old age, but also that all things
should be prosperous to him; and was so entirely possessed, that nothing could
be fatal till that year of his age, that when he had lost diverse things of
great value by shipwreck, he doubted not to say amongst his Attendants, that
the fishes would bring them back to him. But he was deceived in his
expectation; for Galba being in the sixty third year of his age, was saluted
Emperor by his Soldiers, and Nero being forced to death, was succeeded by him
in the Empire.

15. Alexius the Emperor having long delayed the time of his return to
Blachernas, Nicet. Ch^niat. Annal. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 84.
at the last Election was made of a prosperous time according to the Position
of the Stars, as to the day and hour he set forth, and the truth is so happily,
that so soon as ever he began his journey, the Earth opened before him, he
himself escaped, but Alexius his Son-in-law, and diverse of his Nobles fell in;
one of his Eunuchs also that was in principal favor with him, was presently
killed by it.

16. The Sicilians and Latins had blocked up the Seas near to Constantinople,
Nicet. Chon^at. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 85.
and both infamy and loss being daily presented before his eyes, Manuel the
then Emperor set forth a Navy against them again and again, which was still
repulsed with slaughter and ignominy. Whereupon the Astrologers were consulted,
Election is made of a more fortunate day, and then the success is not doubted
in the least. Constantius Angelus an illustrious person prepares himself to
conduct them, and sets out against the Enemy: but he is called back by hasty
Messengers when he was half way, and that upon this account, that the Emperor
did understand that the matter had not been sufficiently discussed amongst the
Astrologers, and that there was some error committed in the election of that
time. A Scheme therefore was erected a second time, and a long dispute held
amongst the most skilful in that Art. At last they agreed upon a time, wherein
there was a benevolent and propitious Aspect of the Planets. Constantius sets
forth again, and you would now expect that the Victory should be his: but it
fell out otherwise; for scarce had he put forth to Sea, when, which was the
worst that could come, both he and his were taken Prisoners.

17. Alexander King of Epirus consulted the Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona, Alex.
ab Alexandr. dies Genial. l. 5. c. 2. fol. 219. Fitzherb. of Relig. and Policy,
part 1. c. 36. p. 446. Just. l. 12. p. 134.
a City of Epire, about his life; he was answered, that he should shun the City
of Pandosia and the River Acherusius as fatal places; he knew there were such
places amongst the Thesproti: warring therefore upon the Brutii, a warlike
people, he was by them overthrown and slain near unto places amongst them
called by the same names.

18. I have heard, says Bodinus, of Constantine, who of all the French is the
chief Chemist, and of the greatest Fame in that Country, that when his
Associates had long attended upon the Bellows, without hope of profit, they
then had recourse to the Devil, and inquired of him, if they rightly proceeded,
and if they should attain to their desired end? The Devil returned his answer
in this one word Travaillez, which is, Labor. The firemen were so encouraged
with this word, that they went on and blowed at that rate, that they multiplied
all that they had into nothing, and had yet further proceeded, but that
Constantine told them, that this was the guise of Satan to make ambiguous
Responses; that the word Labor signified they should say aside Alchymy, and
betake themselves to some honest Art or Employment; that it was the part of a
man purely mad, so fancy the making of that Gold in so small a space of time,
seeing that in the making of it, Nature it self is wont to spend more than a
thousand years.

Socrat. l. 4. c. 15. page 326. Wieri oper. lib. 1. de Praestig. Daem. c. 10.
p. 25. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 120. Lonicer. Theatr. page 138. Fitzherb. of
Relig. and Policy, part. 1. c. 36. p. 446. Wieri oper. l. 1. de Praestig. Daem.
c. 5. p. 475. Platina de vit. Pontis. p. 160. Heyw. Hierarch. page 226. Pride
aux Introd. hist. Interv. 7.. 8. p. 112.
19. The Emperor Valens consulted the Devil about the name of him that should
succeed him in the Empire; the Devil answered in his accustomed manner, and
showed the Greek Letters (...). THEOD. intimating that the name of his
Successor should begin with those Letters. Valens therefore caused as many as
he could to be slain, whose names began in that manner, the Theodori, Theodoti,
Theoduli, and amongst others Theodosiolus a Noble person in Spain: others in
fear of this new danger changed their names; but for all this he could not
prevent Theodosius from succeeding him in the Empire.

20. Pope Sylvester the Second, before called Gilbertus, by Nation a French
man, obtained the Popedom by evil Arts: and though while Pope he dissembled his
skill in Magic; yet he had a brazen Head in a private place, from which ^e
received Responses as often as he consulted the evil Spirit* On a time he
inquired of the Devil how long he should enjoy the Popedom. The fallacious
Spirit answered him in equivocating terms, If thou come not at Jerusalem,
thou shall live long. Whilst therefore in the fourth year, the first month, and
tenth day of his Papacy he was saying Mass in the Church of the Holy Cross in
Jerusalem, he was suddenly seized with a Fever, and then knew he should dye by
the busle of the Devils, who expected what they had contracted with him for: he
was made Pope An. 1000. or as others 997.

Herod. l. 1. p. 21. and 39.
21. Croesu^ sent to Delphos to know of the Oracle, if his Empire and Government
should be durable or not; the Answer he received was, Regis apud Medos mulo jam
sede potito,
Lyde, ^ugam mollis, scruposum corripe ad Hermum
Ne've mane, ignavus, posito sis Lyde pudore.
When the Verses came to Croesus, he took great pleasure therein, hoping it
would never come to pass, that amongst the Medes a Mule instead of a man should
reign, and that therefore he and his posterity should preserve their Empire
unabolished. But when after he was overcome he had got leave of Cyrus to send
to Delphos, to upbraid the Oracle with the deceit, Apollo sent him word, that
by the Mule he meant Cyrus, because he was born of Parents of two different
Nations, of a more noble Mother than Father; for she was a Mede, the Daughter
of Astyages King of the Medes, the Father a Persian, and Subject to the Medes;
and though a very mean person, had yet married Mandane the Daughter of his King.

Xiphil. in Iulio, p. 3.
22. Pompey the Great was called Agamemnon, because he ruled over 1000 Ships; he
dyed within those eight days wherein he had triumphed over Mithridates and the
Pirates. This is wonderful, that when he held all the Family of the Cassii
(amongst the Romans) suspected, none ever conspired against him; though he was
warned to take heed of Cassius, it was not meant of a man, but he dyed near the
Mount Cassius, and was buried in it.

Bak. Chron. p. 410, 411.
23. In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, a Friar Observant called Friar
Forest, who had taken the Oath of Supremacy himself, yet privily persuaded
others, that the King was not supreme Head of the Church, was examined,
convicted, and condemned, and on a pair of Gallows prepared for him in
Smithfield, he was hanged by the middle and arm holes alive, and under the
Gallows was made afire, wherewith he was consumed. A little before his
Execution, a huge great Image was brought to the Gallows, fetched out of Wales,
which the Welsh men had in great reverence, called Dawel Gatheren, of which
there went a Prophecy, that this Image should set a whole Forest on fire, which
was thought to take effect, in setting this Friar Forest on fire, and
consuming him to nothing.

24. There was a Prophecy of Merline, Bak. Chron. p. 140.
that Leoline Prince of Wales should be crowned with the Diadem of Brute: this
so over-weighed him, that he had no care for Peace with King Edward the First,
though offered; and therefore shortly after had no head. For when the Earl of
Pembroke had taken Bear Castle, the Seat of Leoline, he was himself slain in
Battle, and his head cut off by a common Soldier, was sent to King Edward, who
caused the same to be crowned with Ivy, and to be s^t upon the Tower of London.

25. Philip King of Macedon was admonished to preserve his life from the
violence of Quadriga, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 31.
which is a Coach with four Horses: the King upon this caused the Chariots and
Carts throughout his whole Realm to be unharnassed, and drawn only with two
Horses. He also very carefully shunned that place in Boetia which is called
Quadriga; and yet for all this he could not avoid that kind of Fate which was
predicted to him: for Pausanias who slew him, had a Coach and four Horses
engraven upon the Hilt of that Sword which he lift up against him.

26. Daphida was one of those whom they call Sophists, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p.
31.
and out of a foolish insolency he went to Delphos to consult the Oracle of
Apollo for no other purpose but to deride it. He inquired therefore if he
should find his Horse, whereas indeed he had none of his own. Apollo answered,
that he should undoubtedly find his Horse; but should be so troubled with him,
that it would be his death. The Sophist returned back jesting, as supposing
that he had deluded the Deity; but in his way he fell into the hands of King
Attalus, one whom he had often bitterly provoked by his abusive speeches in his
absence: The King therefore gave order they should take him to the top of that
Rock which is called Equus, or the Horse, and cast him down headlong from
thence.

27. Alexander Bala King of Syria, Vshers Annals, page 473. A. M. 3859.
being in C^licia, consulted the Oracle of Apollo touching his Destiny and
death, whence he is said to have received this Answer, That he should beware of
that place which had brought forth a rare sight to be seen, a thing having two
shapes: this was thought to refer to Abas, a City in Arabia, whither he fled
when he was defeated by Ptolomeus Philometor in a Fight near the River
Oenopara, there was he slain by the Commanders of his own Party, his head cut
off by Zabdiel a powerful Arabian (to whom he had fled for protection) and by
him presented to Ptolomy, who was exceedingly delighted with the sight: but
being at that time sore wounded, dyed upon the third day after. Now herein lay
the equivocation of the Oracle; for that in this City. Abas there was a certain
Woman called Herais (having Diophantus a Macedonian for her Father, and an
Arabian Woman her Mother, and married to one Samjades) who changed her sex, and
of a Woman became a man, taking upon her her Fathers name Diophantus.

28. The Emperor Iulianus while at Antioch is said to have seen in his sleep a
young man with yellow hair, Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 119.
who told him that he should dye in Phrygia; when therefore he was wounded in
Persia, he demanded of them that ^tood by, what the place was called, who told
him Phrygia: upon which he cried out, O Sol Iulianum perdidisti, O Apollo thou
have undone Iulianus.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 5. l. 3. page 1270.
29. Johannes Martinus, born in Belgia, was a very good Painter, and being in
Italy, he was told by an Astrologer, that when he came to Geneva, he should
then dye, he gave not much credit to this prediction; but it so fell out, that
he was sent for to Bern by Thomas Schopsius a Physician, on purpose to
illustrate the Jurisdiction o^ Bern by Chorographical Tables. He had now almost
finished the designed Tables, and was entered upon that which contains Geneva:
when while he was about the place of the City, and writing down the name of
that City, he was suddenly seized upon with the Plague, which at that time
furiously raged thereabouts, and dyed An. 1577. in the month of August.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 5. l. 3. page 1269. Sueton. l. 4. c. 57. page 198.
30. C. Caligula consulted Sylla the Mathematician about his Nativity, who told
him, that a certain death was now near unto him. He was also admonished by the
Sorts Antiatinae, that he should beware of Cassius; upon which he gave order
for the killing of Cassius Longinus the then Proconsul of Asia, being
altogether unmindful that Chaerea the Tribune was also called Cassius, by whose
Conspiracy and Sword he dyed.

^betwinds hist. collect. cent. 5. page 143. Marian. hist. de Esp. p. 340.
31. Alvaro de Luna, who had been thirty years Favorite to John King of
Castile, fell at last into disgrace, was condemned and beheaded. An Astrologer
or a Wizard had told him, that he should dye in Cadahalso. Now the King had
given him a County so called, which for that reason he would never enter into,
not minding that Cadahalso signifies a Scaffold, on which indeed he ended his
life.

Speeds hist. p. 672.
32. Walter Earl of Athol conspired the Murder of James I. King of Scotland, in
hopes to be crowned, and by the encouragement of certain Sorcerers whom he kept
about him, who had assured him that he should be crowned, and crowned he was,
but not with the Crown of the Kingdom, but of red hot Iron clapped upon his head;
which was one of the Tortures, by which at once he ended his wicked days and
traitorous designs.

Polychron. fol. 296.
33. Stephen Procurator of Anjou, under King Richard the First, consulted with a
Necromancer, who sent him to inquire his mind of a brazen Head, that had a
Spirit enclosed; he therefore asked it, Shall I never see King Richard? The
Spirit answered, No. How long, said he, shall I continue in my Office? To thy
life's end, replied the Spirit. Where shall I dye? In p^uma, said the other.
Hereupon he forbad his Servants to bring any feathers near him; but he
prosecuting a Noble man, the Noble man fled to his Castle called Pluma; and
Stephen following, was there killed.

Polychron. fol. 296.
34. Albericus Earl of Northumberland, not contented with his own Estate,
consulted with a Wizard, who told him he should have Graecia; whereupon he went
into Greece, but the Grecians robbed him of what he had, and sent him back. He
after (weary of his travel) came to King Henry in Normandy, who gave him a
noble Widow to Wife, whose name was Graecia.

CHAP. V. Of the magnificent Buildings, sumptuous and admirable Works of the
Ancients, and those of later times.
AVgustus Caesar had several ways adorned and fortified the City of Rome, and
(as much as in him lay) put it into a condition of bravery and security for
aftertimes; whereupon he gloried, that he found Rome of Brick, but he left it
of Marble. Certainly nothing makes more for the just glory of a Prince, than to
leave his Dominions in better state than he received them. The vast expenses of
some of the following Princes had been more truly commendable, and their mighty
Works more really glorious, had they therein consulted more of the public
good, and less of their own ostentation.

1. Immediately after the universal Deluge Nimrod the Son of Chus, Heyl. Cosm.
p. 785.
the Son of Cham persuaded the people to secure themselves from the like
after-claps, by building some stupendous Edifice, which might resist the fury
of a second Deluge. The counsel was generally embraced, Heber only and his
Family (as the Tradition goes) contradicting such an unlawful attempt. The
major part prevailing, the Tower of Babel began to rear a head of Majesty five
thousand one hundred forty six paces from the ground, having its Basis and
circumference equal to its height. The passage to go up went winding about the
outside, and was of an exceeding great breadth; there being not only room for
Horses, Carts, and the like means of carriage to meet and turn, but Lodgings
also for man and beast. And (as Verstegan reports) Grass and Cornfieldsd for
their nourishment. But God, by the confusion of Tongues, hindered the proceeding
of this Building, one being not able to understand what his fellow called for.

2. On the Bank of the River Nilus stood that famous Labyrinth, Herod. l. 2. p.
147. Sandys Relat. l. 2. p. 113. Heyl. Cosm. p. 925.
built by Psammiticus (King of Egypt) situate on the South Side of the
Pyramides, and North of Arsinoe, it contained within the compass of one
continued Wall a thousand houses (three thousand and five hundred, says
Herodotus) and twelve Royal Palaces all covered with Marble, and had one only
entrance, but innumerable turnings and returnings, sometimes one over another,
and all (in a manner) invious to such as were not acquainted with them. The
Building more under ground than above; the Marblestones laid with such Art,
that neither Wood nor Cement was employed in any part of the Fabric; the
Chambers so disposed, that the doors upon their opening did give a report, no
less terrible than a crack of Thunder; the main entrance all of white Marble,
adorned with stately Columns and most curious Imagery. The end at length being
attained, a pair of stairs of ninety steps conducted into a gallant Portico,
supported with Pillars of Theban Marble, which was the entrance into a fair and
stately Hall (the place of their general Convention) all of polished Marble,
set out with the Statues of their Gods. A Work which afterward was imitated by
Daedalus in the Cretan Labyrinth, though that fell as short of the glory of
this, as M^n^s was inferior unto Psammitisus in power and riches.

Dinoth. l. 2. p. 43. Heyl. Cosm. p. 785.
3. Babylon was situate on the Banks of the River Euphrates, the ancientest City
of the World, on this side the Flood: the compass of its Walls was three
hundred eighty five furlongs, or forty six miles; in height fifty cubits, and
of so great breadth, that Carts and Carriages might meet on the top of them. It
was finished in one year by the hands of two hundred thousand Workmen employed
in it: Aristotle says, it ought rather to be called a Country than a City.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 676.
4. In the Island of Rhodes was that huge Colossus, one of the seven Wonders of
the World. It was made by Chares of Lindum, composed of Brass; in height
seventy cubits, every finger of it being as big as an ordinary man. It was
twelve years in making, and having stood but sixty six years, was thrown down
in an instant by an Earthquake, which terribly shook the whole Island. It was
consecrate to the Sun; and therefore the Brass and other materials of it, were
held in a manner sacred, nor meddled with, till Mnavias, the General of Osman,
the Mohammedan Caliph, after he had subdued this Island, made prey thereof,
loading nine hundred Camels with the very Brass thereof.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 658. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 36. c. 14. page ^80.
5. Ephesus was famous amongst the Gentiles for that sumptuous and magnificent
Temple there consecrated to Diana, which for the largeness, furniture, and
workmanship of it was worthily accounted one of the Wonders of the World; the
length thereof is said to be four hundred twenty five foot, two hundred twenty
foot in breadth, supported with one hundred twenty seven Pillars of Marble,
seventy foot in height, of which twenty seven were most curiously engraven, and
all the rest of Marble polished. The Model of it was contrived by one
Ctesiphon, and that with so much art and curiosity of Architecture, that it
took up two hundred years before it was finished. When finished, it was fired
seven times, the last by Erostratus only to get himself a name amongst
posterity thereby.

Diodor. rer. Antiq. l. 2. c. 1. p. 46. Dinoth. l. 2. p. 43.
6. Niniveh, as it was more ancient than almost any other City; so in greatness
it excelled all those that were famous in old time. The Plat or ground of it is
said to be four hundred and eighty furlongs; the Walls were in height one
hundred foot, and the breadth of them such, that three Carts might meet upon
the top of them. On the Walls there were one thousand five hundred Towers, each
of them two hundred foot high. It was called Tetrapolis, as being divided (as
it were) into four Cities, Niniveh, Resena, Forum, and Cale.

Herod. l. 2. p. 137. Heyl. Cosm. p. 923. Lithgows Travels, p. 311. Diod.
Sicul. rerum Antiq. l. 1. c. 2. p. 29. Sandys Relat. l. 2. p. 128, 129. Bellon.
7. The Pyramids of Egypt are many in number, but three of them the most
celebrated; the principal of all is situated on the South of the City of
Memphis, and on the Western Banks of Nilus. It is accounted chief of the Worlds
seven Wonders, square at the bottom, and is supposed to take up eight Acres of
ground. Every square is 300 single paces in length, it is ascended by 225
steps, each step above three foot high, and a breadth proportionable, growing
by degrees narrower and narrower, till we come to the top, and at the top
consisting but of three stones only, yet large enough for sixty men to stand
upon. No stone (in the whole) is so little, as to be drawn by any of our
Carriages; yet brought thither from the Arabian Mountains: how brought, and by
what Engine mounted, is an equal wonder. It was built for the Sepulcher of
Cheops, an Egyptian King, who employed in it day by day (twenty years together)
no fewer than three hundred sixty six thousand men continually working on it.
The charges which they put him to (in no other food than Garlic, Rhadishes,
and Onions) being computed at a thousand and eight hundred Talents. Diodorus
Siculus says of this Pyramid, that it stands an hundred and twenty furlongs
from Memphis, and forty five furlongs from Nilus. It has stood (says he)
almost a thousand years unto our time, but as the Tradition is above three
thousand and four hundred.

8. Wales anciently extended it self Eastward to the River Saverne, Heyl. Cosm.
p. 322.
till by the puissance of Offa, the great King of the Mercians, the Welsh or
Britains were driven out of the plain Country beyond that River, and forced to
betake themselves to the Mountains, where he caused them to be shut up, and
divided from England with an huge Ditch, called in Welsh Claudhoffa, that is,
Offa's Dike. Which Dike beginning at the influx of the Wie into the Severne,
not far from Chepstow, extends eighty four miles in length, even as far as
Chester, where the Dee is mingled with the Sea. Concerning this Ditch, there
was a Law made by Harold, that if any Welsh-man was found with a Weapon on this
side of it, he should have his right hand cut off by the Kings Officers.

9. The Bridge of Caligula was a new and unheard of spectacle, Xiphil. in
Caligula, p. 99. Sueton. l. 4. c. 19. page 175. Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 8.. 2. page
394. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 81. p. 370. Ios. Antiq. l. 19. c. 1. p.
489.
it reached from Putzol to Banli three miles and a quarter; he built it upon
Ships in a few days, and in emulation of Xerxes. Over this he marched with the
Senate and Soldiery in a triumphant manner, and in the view of the people.
Upon this he feasted, and passed the night in dalliance and gaming. A
mavelous and great work indeed: but such as the vanity thereof deprived it of
commendation; for to what end was it raised but to be demolished? Thus sported
he, says Seneca, with the power of the Empire, and all in imitation of a
foreign, frantic, unfortunate and proud King.

10. The Capitol of Rome, Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 8.. 6. p. 402.
seated on the Tarpeian Rock, seemed to contend with Heaven for height: and no
doubt but the length and breadth were every way answerable. The excessive
charge that Domitian was at in the building of it, Martial (after his
flattering manner) has wittily described, and which I may thus translate: So
much has Caesar given the Gods above,
That should he call it in, and Cred'tor prove, Martial. l. 9. Epist. 4. p. 347.

Though Jove should barter Heaven it self away,
This mighty debt he never could repay.
We may (in part) give a guess at the Riches and Ornaments of it by this, that
there was spent only upon its gilding above twelve thousand Talents; it was all
gilded over, not the inner Roof only, but the outward Covering which was of
Brass or Copper, and the doors of it were overlaid with thick plates of Gold,
which remained till the Reign of Honorius.

11. Suetonius thus describes that House of Nero's, Su^ton. l. 6. c. 31. page
250.
which Nero himself called Domum Auream, the Golden House. In the Porch was set
a Colossus, shaped like himself, of one hundred and twenty foot high. The
spaciousness of the House was such, that it had in it three Galleries, each of
them a mile long, a standing Pool like a Sea, beset with Buildings in manner of
a City; Fields in which were arable grounds, Pastures, Vineyards, and Woods,
with a various multitude of tame and wild beasts of all kinds. In the other
parts thereof all things were covered with Gold, and distinguished with
precious Stones, or Mother of Pearl. The Supping-rooms were roofed with Ivory
Planks that were moveable, for the casting down of Flowers, and had Pipes in
them, for the sprinkling of Ointments. The Roof of the principal Supping-room
was round, which like the Heavens perpetually day and night wheeled about. This
House when he had thus finished and dedicated, he so far forth approved of it,
that he said he had began to live like a man.

Plut. in Demetr. p. Panciroll. de rebus nuper inventis, tit. 38. p. 51.
12. Ptolomaeus Philopater built a Ship (says Pancirollus) that the like was
never seen before or since. It was two hundred and eighty cubits in length,
fifty two cubits in height from the bottom to the upper D^cks. It had four
hundred Banks or Seats of Rowers, four hundred Mariners, and four thousand
Rowers: and on the Decks it could contain three thousand Soldiers. There were
also Gardens and Orchards on the top of it, as Plutarch relates in the Life of
Demetrius.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 864. Herber^s Trav. l. 3. p. 377.
13. China is bounded on the North with Altay, and the Eastern Tartars, from
which it is separated by a continued chain of Hills, and where that chain is
broken off, with a great Wall extended four hundred leagues in length, built,
as they say, by Zaintzon, the hundred and seventeenth King hereof: six fadom
high, twelve yards think, twenty seven years erecting by continued labor of
70050000 men.

Plin. not. hist. l. 36. c. 15. page 583. Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 8.. 2. p. 393.
14. M. Scaurus (the Son-in-law to Sylla) when he was Aedile caused a wonderful
piece of Work to be made, exceeding all that had ever been known by man's hand,
not only those which have been erected for a month (or such a thing) but even
those that have been destined for perpetuity; and a Theater it was: The Stage
had three heights one above another, wherein were three hundred and sixty
Columns of Marble, the middle of glass, an excessive superfluity never heard of
before or after. As for the uppermost, the Boards, Planks, and Floors were
gilded. The Columns beneath were forty foot high wanting two, and between these
Columns there stood of Statues and Images of Brass, to the number of three
thousand. The Theater it self was able to receive 80000 persons to sit well and
at ease. As touching the other Furniture of this Theater, in rich Hangings
(which were of Cloth of Gold) painted Tablets (the most exquisite that could be
found) Players Apparel, and other stuff meet to adorn the Stage) there was such
abundance thereof, that there being carried back to his House of Pleasure at
Tusculum the surplusage thereof (over and above the daintiest part whereof he
had daily use at Rome) his Servants and Slaves there (upon indignation for this
waste and monstrous superfluity of their Master) set the said Country House on
fire, and burnt as much as came to an hundred millions of Sesterces. Yet was
this magnificent piece of Building (by the testimony of Pliny) but a temporary
Theater, and scarce to endure for a month.

Plin. not. hist. l. 36. c. 15. p. 584. Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 11.. 4. p. 447.
15. C. Curio, desirous to show pleasure unto the people of Rome, at the
Funerals of his deceased Father, and seeing he could not out go the
forementioned Scaurus in rich and sumptuous Furniture, devised to surpass him
in Wit. This Curio then (in emulation) caused two Theaters to be framed out of
Timber, and those exceeding big; yet so, as they might be turned about, as a
man would have them approach near one to the other, or be removed farther
asunder, as one would desire: and all by the means of one Hook apiece they hung
by, which bare the weight of the whole Frame, the counterpoise was so even, and
all the whole Fabric thereof sure and ^irm. Now he ordered the matter thus;
that to behold the several Stage Plays and Shows in the forenoon, they should
be set back to back; that the Stages should not trouble one another, and when
the people had taken their pleasure that way, he turned the Theaters about in a
trice against the afternoon, so that they fronted one another; and toward the
latter end of the day (when the Fencers and Sword-players were come in place)
he brought both Theaters nearer together, and yet every man suit still, and
kept his place according to his rank and order. In so much that by the meeting
of the horns or corners of them both together, he made a fair round
Amphitheatre of it, wherein he exhibited to them Fencers fighting at sharps.
Thus the bold man carried the whole people of Rome round about at his pleasure
(bound sure enough for stirring or removing) supported betwixt heaven and
earth, and sitting at the devotion only of two Hooks or Pins. A mavelous work
in the Framer, and as strange a folly in them that sat there.

16. The Temple of Peace was built by Vespasian three hundred foot in length,
He^o^ian. Joseph of the destruct l. ^. Pliny not. hist. l. 34. c. 8. p. 503.
Hak^w. Apol. l. 4. c. 8.. 6. p. 403.
and in breadth two hundred, so as Herodian deservedly calls it the greatest
and fairest of all the Works in the City of Rome, and the most sumptuous in
Ornaments of Silver and Gold. Josephus writes, that upon this Temple were
bestowed all the rarities, which (before) men traveled through the World to
see, and Pliny says, of all the choice Pieces I have spoken of in the City,
the most excellent are laid up, and dedicated by Vespasian in the Temple of
Peace, which were before in the Golden House of Nero.

17. The Amphitheatre begun by Vespasian, Hakew. Apol. l. 4. c. 8.. 3. p. 394.
but finished and dedicated by Titus, was most famous, the height of which was
such (says Ammianus) that the eye of man could hardly reach it. It was reared,
says Cassiodore, with Rivers of Treasure poured out. It contained only upon
the steps or degrees sufficient and easy seats for eighty seven thousand
persons; so as the vacant places besides might well contain ten or twenty
thousand more. Martial prefers it before all the rare and great Works at Rome:
It stood in the place where sometimes were Nero's Ponds.

18. The Escurial or Monastery of St. Laurence in New Castile, Heyl. Cosm. p.
271.
was built by Philip the Second; a place (says Quade) of that magnificence,
that no Building in times past, or the present is comparable to it. The Front
toward the West is adorned with three stately Gates, the middlemost whereof
leads into a most magnificent Temple, a Monastery (in which are one hundred
and fifty Monks of the Order of St. Jerome) and a College. The Gate on the
right hand opens into diverse Offices belonging to the Monastery, that on the
left unto Schools, and Outhouses belonging to the College. At the four
corners there are four Turrets of excellent workmanship, and for height
majestical. Toward the North is the Kings Palace, on the South part diverse
beautiful and sumptuous Galleries, and on the East side sundry Gardens and
Walks very pleasing and delectable. It contains in all eleven several
Quadrangles, every one encloistered; and is indeed so brave a Structure, that a
Voyage into Spain were well employed, were it only to see it, and return.

19. The Aquaduct, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 36. c. 15. page 582.
vaulted Sinks, and Draughts of Tarquinius Priscus King of the Romans were the
greatest Works of all his other which he devised, by undermining and cutting
through the seven Hills whereupon Rome is seated, and making the City hanging
as it were in the Air between heaven and earth (like unto the ancient City of
Thebes in Egypt) so as a man might pass under the streets and houses with
Boats. And if this were the marvel of men in those days; how would they be
astonished now to see how M. Agrippa in his Edileship (after he had been
Consul) caused seven Rivers to meet together under the City in one main Chanel,
and to run with such a swift stream and current, that they take all before them
whatsoever there is in the way, and carry it down into Tyber; and being
sometimes increased with sudden showers and Land-slouds, they shake the paving
under them, they drive against the sides of the Walls about them; sometimes
also they receive the Tyber water into them when he rises extraordinarily; so
as a man shall perceive the stream of two contrary waters affront and charge
one another with great force and violence within and under ground. And yet for
all this, these Waterworks aforesaid yield not a jot, but abide firm and fast,
without any sensible decay occasioned thereby. Moreover these streams carry
down ever and anon huge and heavy pieces of stones within them, mighty loads
are drawn over them continually: yet these arched Conduits neither settle and
stoop under the one, nor are endamaged by the other. Many a house falls of it
self upon them, many are made to fall by frequent fires, and sometimes terrible
Earthquakes shake the whole Earth about them; yet for all these injuries they
have continued since the days of Tarquinius Priscus inexpugnable, and that is
almost eight hundred years.

Plin. Not. Hist. l. 36. c. 15. p. 586.
20. Of all the Aquaducts that ever were before this time, that which was begun
by Caligula, and finished by Claudius his Successor surpassed in
sumptuousness; for they commanded the two Fountains Curtius and Ceruleus, whose
heads were forty miles distant, and these they carried with such a force before
them, and to such a height, that they mounted up to the highest Hills in Rome,
and served them that dwelt thereupon. This Work cost three hundred millions of
Sesterces. Certainly if a man consider the abundance of water that is brought
thereby, and how many places it serves, as well public as private, the Bains,
Stews, and Fish-Pools, Kitchens, and other Houses of Office; for Pipes, and
little Rivulets to water Gardens, as well about the City, as in Manors and
Houses of Pleasure in the fields near unto the City: besides the mighty way
that these waters are brought, the number of Arches that must of necessity be
built to convey them; the Mountains that are pierced and wrought through; the
Valleys that are raised and made even and level, he will confess that there
never was any design in the whole World enterprised and effected more admirable
than this.

CHAP. VI. Of the choicest Libraries in the World, their Founders, and number
of Books contained in them.
AS Treasures both publicly and privately are collected and laid up in the
Republic to be made use of when necessity requires; and the greater and rarer
they are, the more precious they are accounted: So the Treasures of Learning
and of all good Arts and Sciences, which are contained in Books (as so many
silent Teachers) are worthily collected by public and private persons, and
laid up amongst the choicest goods of the Commonwealth, where they may be made
use of to all sorts of persons, as their studies incline them, or as necessity
shall require at any time, whether in peace or war. The most famous
Repositories of Books were as follows.

1. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus (the Son of Ptolomaeus Lagus) reigning in Egypt,
T^rzag. Musaeum Septal. p. 156. Oros. l. 6. c. 15. p. Gell. l. 6. c. 17. Pet.
Gregor. de Repub. l. 46. c. 7. p. 670.
and also by the concurrent and laborious endeavors of Demetrius Phalareus
there was an excellent Library founded in Alexandria, the noblest City of all
Egypt, in the year before Christ's birth 280. and of the World 3720. This
Library, says Baronius, was enriched with more than 200000 Volumes, brought
out of all places in the World with exquisite care and diligence. Amongst these
were also the Books of the Old Testament translated by the LXX. After which
Translation the King also procured so many Greek, Chaldee, Egyptian Books, and
Latin ones translated into Greek, as also of diverse other Notions, that at
last he had heaped up therein (says Gellius) seven hundred thousand Volumes.
But alas! in how short a time did the splendor of so much virtue suffer an
Eclipse! for in the 183 Olympiad, from the building of the City, Caesar
fighting in Alexandria, that fire which burnt up the Enemies Navy took hold
also of this, burnt the greatest part of the City, says Orosius, together with
four hundred thousand Books; so that from the founding of it to its destruction
there were elapsed only 224 years.

2. Eumenes the Son of Attalus (and Father of that Attalus, T^rzag. mus. sept
p. 157. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 76. c. 7. p. 670.
who was the last King of Pergamus, and who dying, made the people of Rome ^is
Heir) was the Founder of that excellent Library at Pergamus, in the year from
the Creation 3810. wherein were contained above twenty thousand choice Books.

3. Queen Cleopatra, Terzag. mus. sept. p. 157.
about the year of the World 3950. and thirty years before the Birth of Christ,
gathered together such Books as had escaped the fire of Caesar in Alexandria,
built a place for them in the Temple of Serapis near to the Port, and
transferred thither 200000 Books from the Attalick or Pergamenian Library.

4. M. Varro, Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 16. c. 7. p. 669. Terzag. mus. sept. p.
158.
by the appointment of Julius Caesar, had the peculiar care committed to him of
erecting a public Library; but it had come to nothing but for the helping hand
of Augustus, who succeeded him. It was he that erected a famous Repository for
Books in the Hill Aventine, adorned it with Porticoes and Walks, for the
greater convenience of Students, and enriched it with the spoils of conquered
Dalmatia: this was a little before the Birth of Christ, and in the year of the
World 3970. Nor did the bounty of this great Prince rest there, but always
aspiring to greater things, he opened two other little inferior to that in the
Aventine, one whereof he called the Octavian, from the name of his Sister, and
the other the Palatine, from the Mount or Hill on which it was erected. Over
the Keepers of which (by his Imperial Order) was C. Julius Hyginnius, an
excellent Grammarian.

5. Fl. Vespasianus about the sixth year of his Empire, Terzag. mus. sept. p.
158.
the seventy seventh from the Birth of Christ, and of the World 4050. founded a
Library in the Forum at Rome, and contiguous to the Temple of Peace, as if he
thereby intended to show that nothing was so requisite to advance men in
Learning as times of peace.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 159.
6. The Emperor Trajanus in the tenth year of his Reign, one hundred and eight
years after the Birth of Christ, and from the Creation of the World 4092. built
a sumptuous Library in the Marketplace of Trajan, which he called after his
own surname, the Vlpian Library. Dioclesian afterward being to edify some,
and adorn other Baths, translated this Library unto the Viminal Hill, which at
this day has the Gate of St. Agnes opening upon it.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 159.
7. Domitianus the Emperor erected another near to his own house, which he had
built upon the Capitoline Hill, which yet soon after was reduced to ashes in
the Reign of Commodus, which happened, as Eusebius, Dion, and Baronius witness,
in the eighth year of Commodus his Empire, the 189. year from the Nativity of
Christ, and from the Creation of the World about the four thousand one hundred
sixty and third.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 159.
8. Gordianus Senior about the two hundred and fortieth year after Christ, built
a Library which contained sixty and two thousand Books, the greater part
whereof were left as a Legacy to the Emperor by Geminicus Gammonicus.

Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. Zuing. Th^atr. vol. 3. l. ^. p. 6^0. Cedren.
9. Constantinus the Emperor, by the testimony of Baronius, erected a sumptuous
Library in the Province of Thrace, at Byzantium, called New Rome, which was
enriched with an hundred and twenty thousand Volumes: he called that City
Constantinople, in the year from the Birth of Christ 324. but through the
discord of his Sons (about the year of the World 4321. and from the Birth of
Christ 340.) to wit, of Constantinus, Constantius, and Constance the Emperors,
in the deplorable declination of the Empire, and much more by fire, it lost its
fame and name, being burnt by the people, in hatred of Basilius the Emperor
(as says Zonaras and Cedrenus) which happened about the year from the Nativity
of Christ 476. but being repaired and increased by the accession of three
hundred and three Volumes, Leo Isaurus in hatred of sacred Images, burnt both
it and its Keepers, who were Counselors of great renown. This happened about
the year of Christ 726. as witnesses Zonaras, Cedrenus, and others. In this
Library was (as is reported) the gut of a Dragon 120 foot long, upon which was
written Homers Poems, Iliads, and Odysses in Letters of Gold.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 151.
10. The S^ptalian Lib^a^y (now in the possession of Manfr^d Septala, a
Pat^ician of M^ll^ine 1664.) contains seven thousand two hundred ninety
Volumes, amongst which are many Greek Authors, and six hundred Manuscripts:
they are set upon three hundred shelves, ^itly disposed, with that peculiar
order as the study of every particular Science does require. First, such as
t^ach the first Elements of humane Life, and the more polite Learning.
Secondly, not a few that contain the Greek, Latin, Italian Histories, and
those of other Nations. Thirdly, such as contain the Precepts of Ethics, the
Politics, and the Axioms of Moral Philosophy. Fourthly, such as pertain to
Astronomy, Geometry, Music, Arithmetic and the Mathematics. Fifthly,
Philosophy and Physic, the prints of living Creatures, the History of
Minerals, and such like. Sixthly, the Books of both Laws. Seventhly, School,
and Practical Divinity, Greek and Latin Fathers, Comm^ntaries upon Scripture,
and the General and Provincial Councils and Synods of the Church.

11. The Vatican Library taking its beginning by very m^an degrees (through the
officious propensity of some Popes of Learning, Terzag. mus. sept. p. 16^.
who enjoyed peace) began so to increase, that now it even labors under its
own greatness and singularity. For it is plain, that Sixt^s the Fourth, and
especially Sixtus the Fifth, did studiously endeavor the increase of it, and
withal Clemens the Eighth showed out his great clemency and love of virtue,
when he took care (upon the entreaties of the most learned Cardinal Baronius)
that the precious Library which Anarcas Fulvius Vrsinus, a most l^arned person,
had heaped together; as also all those Manuscripts collected by the most
eminent Odoardus Farnesius, should be transferred to the Vatican, Pope Paulus
the Fifth also brought hither the select Manuscripts of Cardinal Altemps, to
which he adjoined the Library of Heide^berg. At such time as the Palatine of
the Rhine was expelled, it then received an accession of three hundred Greek
Volumes in Manuscript. Also Pope Urban the Eighth enriched it with diverse Greek
Copies, and when he had appointed Leo Allatius, a man exactly skilled in the
Greek Learning, to be the Keeper thereof, there were numbered six thousand
Manuscipts: an absolute Index of which was expected, at the intimation of
Cardinal Rusticutius; but by what chance or misfortune it came not to light, is
yet altogether uncertain.

12. The Escurial, Terzag. mus. sept. p. 162.
whereof Philip the Second, the most potent King of Spain, was the Founder,
has in it a most noble Lib^ary, in which there are to be numbered seven
thousand Greek and Latin Manuscripts, which he had collected from several
Libraries in Spain and Italy. To this Library Cardinal Sirletus, a most learned
person, gave all his Books. It is also reported, that two other Libraries did
conspire to enrich this, that of Antonius Augustu^, Archbishop of Tarracon; and
the other of Don. N. the Ambassa^our of the King of Spain to the Republic of
Venice; for this last disposed all his Books to the King by his Will. It has
also three thousand Arabic Books, teaching the Secrets of Physic, Astrology,
and Surgery, and such as represent the Instruments subservient to the two
last mentioned Facu^ti^s, graphically described: which Books it fell to the lot
of Philip the Third, by his Ships, to take from the King of Tunis, at such time
as fear of a War from the King of Algier persuaded him to convey them to ^ know
not what Castle, in hope of greater ^^curity.

13. M^llaine has a sumptuous Library, T^rzag. mus. sept. p. 164.
the first founding of which it owes to Cardinal Charles Borrom^us, who gave
his own noble Library unto it; and that the nobler, in respect of Annotations
upon diverse Books of the Fathers, which he l^ft to it written with his own
hand. Soon after Cardinal Frederick Borromaeus, Archbishop also of the same
M^llaine, assisted it with his endeavors, and gave it not the name of his
Family; but from St. Ambrose, who was once A^chbishop there, and the Patron of
M^llaine, he gave it the title of the Ambrosian Library; and being resolved to
replenish it with Exotic Books, he sent forth diverse learned and virtuous men,
furnished with Chalices, Patens, and such other things as were for Church
furniture, into Asia to the Monks and Greek Bishops, that by exchange or other
price, they might purchase Greek and Arabic Copies, those esp^cially of the
Fathers; nor was he disappointed. In this Library were twelve thousand
Manuscripts, forty six thousand printed Volumes in the year 1645. Afterward
being yet increased, and the former place too strait, another was added as a
supplement to it. An. 1660.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 165.
14. In the higher part of the Palace of the Barberini in Rome, the Cardinal
Franciscus Barberini, Nephew to Pope Urban the Eighth by his Brother, erected a
Library, in which is contained twenty five thousand choice Books, of which
number there are no less than five thousand Manuscripts.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 167.
15. The Augustan Library is enriched with a multitude of Books, and contains
almost innumerable Greeks Copies in Manuscript, if at least we may believe that
Index of it, which was imprinted at Augusta, An. 1595.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 166.
16. That at Paris was founded by the most eminent Cardinal Julius Caesar
Mazarini, in the endowing of which with a most precious Furniture of Books, he
neither spared gold or diligence. Hither he caused to be transferred from the
Archbishop of Trevers forty Chests replete with Manuscripts, besides those
other Books which he brought thither from the Library of Cardinal Richelieu,
and from some Provinces of France. Of this Library there is an imprinted Index
that gives a distinct account both of the number of the Books, and names of the
Authors, in a very faithful relation.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 166.
17. At Florence near to the Church of St. Laurence, there is a Library that
owes its founding to the Medicaean Family, the Nurse of all kind of Virtues. It
was built by that Laurence Medices, who (in his Son) gave the World that mild
and meek Pastor of the Catholic Flock, Pope Leo the Tenth. The singularity of
the Books in this Library may make amends for their multitude, as will appear
by the Index of it imprinted at Antwerpe.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 166.
18. At the University of Leyden the choicest Monument of it is the Library
there, enriched with many manuscript Copies, brought thither out of the East.
To this so flourishing an Academy, Joseph Scaliger, the Son of Julius Caesar
Scaliger (who was called the very Soul of Sciences) left his own Manuscripts:
amongst which were diverse Hebrew, Syriack, Greek, and Latin ones, the Index of
which was published at Paris, An. 1630. by Iacobus Golius, a most excellent
Linguist in that University.

Terzag. mus. sept. p. 166. Histor. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. l. 2. p. 52, 53.
19. The famous Library at Oxford (now called the Bodleian) had a good
Benefactor of King Henry the Eighth, who employed persons into diverse parts of
the World to collect Books, and from Constantinople (by means of the Patriarch
thereof) he received a Ship laden with Arabic and Greek Books, together with
diverse Epistles of the Fathers; amongst which was that Epistle of St. Clement
to the Corinthians, which Baronius in the second Volume of his Annals so
lamented as lost, and which An. 1657. was printed and illustrated with Notes by
[ N.] the Prefect of this Library. The great Founder of it was Sir Thomas
Bodley, formerly a Fellow of Merton College; he began to furnish it with Desks
and Books about the year 1598. after which it met with the liberality of diverse
of the Nobility, Prelacy, and Gentry. William Earl of Pembroke procured a great
number of Greek Manuscripts out of Italy, and gave them to this Library.
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury bestowed 1300 choice Manuscripts upon it,
most of them in the Oriental Tongues. At last, to complete this stately and
plentiful mansion of the Muses, there was an accession to it of above eight
thousand Books, being the Library of that most learned Antiquary Mr. John
Seldom. By the bounty of these noble Benefactors and many others, it is
improved in such manner, that it is a question, whether it is exceeded by the
Vatican it self, or any other Library in the World.

CHAP. VII. Of such persons, who being of mean and low Birth, have yet attained
to great Dignity and considerable Fortunes.
IT was the dream of some of the Followers of Epicurus, that if there were any
Gods, they were so taken up with the fruition of their own happiness, that they
mind not the affairs or miseries of poor mortality here below, no more than we
are wont to concern our selves with the business of Ants and Pismires in their
little Molehills. But when we see on the one side pompous Greatness laid low as
contempt it self; and on the other hand baseness and obscurity raised up to
amazing and prodigious heights, even these to a considering mind are sufficient
proofs of a superior and divine Power, which visibly exerts it self amongst
us, and disposes of men as it pleases, beyond either their fears or hopes.

1. The great Cardinal Mazarini, Lovedays Let. Ep. ^. p. 17, 18.
who not long since sat at the Stern of the French Affairs, was by birth a
Sicilian, by extraction scarce a Gentleman; his education so mean, as that he
might have wrote man before he could write; but being in Natures debt for a
handsome face, a stout heart, and a stirring spirit, he no sooner knew that
Sicily was not all the World, but he left it for Italy, where his debonaire
behavior preferred him to the service of a German Knight, who played as deep as
he drank while his skill in the one maintained his debauches in the other. The
young Sicilian deemed this shaking of the elbow a lesson worth his learning,
and practiced his art with such success amongst his Companions, that he was
become the master of a thousand Crowns. Hereupon he began to entertain some
aspiring thoughts; so that his Master taking leave of Rome, he took leave of
his Master; after which being grown intimate with some Gentlemen that attended
the Cardinal, who steered the Helm of the Papal interest, he found means to be
made known to him, and was by him received with affection into his service;
after his Cardinal had worn him a year or two at his ear, and distilled his
State-maxims into his fertile Soul, he thought fit the World should take notice
of his pregnant abilities. He was therefore sent Coadjutor to a Nuntio, who was
then dispatched to one of the Princes of Italy, whence he gave his Cardinal a
weekly account of his transactions: here the Nuntio's sudden death let fall the
whole weight of the business upon his shoulders, which he managed with that
dextrous solidity, that his Cardinal wrought with his Holiness to declare him
Nuntio. His Commission expired, and the Affairs that begot it, happily
concluded, he returns to Rome, where he received, besides a general grand
repute, the caresses of his Cardinal, and the plausive benedictions of St.
Peter's Successor. About this time Cardinal Richelieu had gotten so much glory
by making his Master Lewis the Thirteenth of a weak man a mighty Prince, as he
grew formidable to all Christendom, and contracted suspicion and envy from Rome
it self: this made the Conclave resolve upon the dispatch of some able
Instrument to countermine and give check to the cariere of his dangerous and
prodigious successes. This resolved, they generally concurred in the choice of
Mazarini, as the fittest Headpiece to give their fears death in the others
destruction. To fit him for this great employment, the Pope gives him a
Cardinals Hat, and sends him into France with a large Legantine Commission:
where being arrived, and first complying with that grand Fox, the better to get
a clue to his Labyrinth, he began to screw himself into Intelligence; but when
he came to sound his Plots, and perceive he could find no bottom, and knowing
the other never used to take a less vengeance than ruin for such doings, he
began to look from the top of the Enterprise, as people do from Precipices,
with a frighted eye; then withal considering his retreat to Rome, would neither
be honorable nor safe, without attempting something, he resolves to declare
himself Richelieu's Creature, and to win the more confidence, unrips the bosom
of all Rome's designs against him. This made the other take him to his breast,
and acquainted him with the secret contrivance of all his Dedalaean Policies,
and when he left the World declared him his Successor; and this was that great
Cardinal that umpired almost all Christendom, and that shined but a while since
in the Gallick Court with so proud a Pomp.

History of late Revolutions in Naples translated by J. Howel, p. 8. and p. 76.
Iani Nicii pinocath. tertia, page 304, etc.
2. There was a young man in the City of Naples about twenty four years old, he
wore linen Slops, a blue Wastcoat, and went barefoot, with a Mariners Cap upon
his head, his profession was to angle for little fish with a Cane, Line and
Hook, and also to buy fish, and to carry and retail them to some that dwelt in
his quarter. His name was Tomaso Anello, but vulgarly called Masaniello by
contraction; yet was this despicable creature the man that subjugated all
Naples, Naples the Head of such a Kingdom, the Metropolis of so many Provinces,
the Queen of so many Cities, the Mother of so many glorious Hero's, the
Rendezvous of so many Princes, the Nurse of so many valiant Champions and
sprightful Cavaliers. This Naples by the impenetrable Judgment of God (though
having six hundred thousand Souls in her) saw her self commanded by a poor
abject Fisherboy, who was attended by a numerous Army, amounting in few hours
to one hundred and fifty thousand men. He made Trenches, set Sentinels, gave
signs, chastised the Banditi, condemned the guilty, viewed the Squadrons,
ranked their Files, comforted the fearful, confirmed the stout, encouraged the
bold, promised rewards, threatened the suspected, reproached the coward,
applauded the valiant, and marvellously incited the minds of men (by many
degrees his superiors) to battle, to burnings, to spoil, to blood, to death.
He awed the Nobility, terrified the Viceroy, disposed of the Clergy, cut off
the heads of Princes, burnt Palaces, rifled houses at his pleasure, freed
Nap^es from all sorts of Gabels, restored it to its ancient Privileges, and
lest not until he had converted his blue Wastcoat into Cloth of Silver, and
made himself a more absolute Lord of that City, and all its Inhabitants, and
was more exactly obeyed in all his orders and commands, than ever Monarch had
the glory to be in his own Kingdom. This most astonishing revolution in the
City of Naples, began upon Sunday the seventh of July, An. 1647. and ended with
the death of Masaniello, which was upon July the 16. 1647 the tenth day from
its beginning.

3. The Lord Cromwell was born at Putney, Bak. Chron. p. 412, 413.
a Village in Surrey, near the Thames-side, Son to a Smith, after whose decease
his Mother was married to a Sheer-man. This young Cromwell, for the pregnancy of
his wit, was first entertained by Cardinal Wolsey, and by him employed in many
great Affairs. The Cardinal falling, the King (that was Henry the Eighth) took
him to his service, and finding his great abilities, advanced him by degrees to
these Dignities, Master of the Kings Jewelhouse, and of the Kings Privy
Council, Secretary to the King, and Master of the Rolls, Lord Keeper of the
Privy Seal, made Lord Cromwell, and Vicar General under the King over all the
Spirituality, created Earl of Essex, and at last Lord High Chancellor of
England.

4. In the Reign of King Henry the Second, Bak. Chron* p. 83.
one Nicholas Breakspear, born at St. Albans, or (as others write) at Langley
in Hartfordshire, being a Bondman of that Abbey (and therefore not allowed to
be a Monk there) went beyond Sea, where he so profited in Learning, that the
Pope made him first Bishop of Alba, and afterward Cardinal, and sent him as
his Legate to the Norways, where he reduced that Nation from Paganism to
Christianity; and returning back to Rome, was chosen Pope by the name of Adrian
the Fourth.

5. The War betwixt the Chinese and Tartars began in the year 1206. which
lasting 77 years, Martin. in bello Tartaric. p. 2^6.
at last the Tartars, in the year 1288. having totally subdued all that mighty
Empire, extinguished the Imperial Family of the Sunga's, and erected a new
Royal Family, which they called Iuena; of which Tartarian Race nine Emperors
by descent ruled the Kingdom of China for the space of 70 years in peace and
quietness. In this tract of time (the Tartars declining from their ancient
vigor, and having their warlike Spirits softened by the pleasures and delights
of the Country) there was a contemptible person called Chu, he was Servant to
one of those that were deputed to offer Sacrifice to their Idols (a Native of
China) and this man presumed to rebel against them. At the first he acted the
part of a Thief or High way man, and being of a generous nature, bold, quick of
hand and wit, he gathered such a multitude in a short time, that they made up
the body of a great Army; then deposing the person of a Thief, he became a
General, set upon the Tartars, and fought many Battles with them, with such
fortune and success, that in the year 1368. he drove them quite out of the
Empire of China; receiving for so illustrious an action the whole Empire of
China, as a worthy reward of his Heroical Exploits. It was he that first
erected the Imperial Family of the Taminges, and was the first Emperor of that
Race, stiling himself by the name of Hunguu^, which is the famous Warrior. He
placed his Court at Nanking, near the great River of Kiang: and having speedily
ordered and established that Empire, he made an irruption into Tartary it self,
and so followed the course of his Victories, that he defeated them several
times, wasted their Territories, and finally brought the Oriental Tartars to
such streights, as he forced them to lay down their Arms, to pay Tribute, and
to beg an inglorious Peace.

6. Sinan that great Bassa in the Court of Selymus the First, Heyl. Cos^. p.
1072. Knowles Turk. Hist. p. 538.
was born of base Parentage; as he being a child, was sleeping in the shade, he
had his Genitals bitten off by a Sow. The Turkish Officers, which usually
provided young Boys for the service of the Grand Signior, being in Epirus (for
that was Sinans Country) and hearing of this so extraordinary an Eunuch, took
him amongst others with them to the Court: where under Mahomet the Great,
Bajazet the Second, and his Son Selymus, he so exceedingly thrived, that he was
made the chief Bassa of the Court; and so well deserved it, that he was
accounted Selymus his right hand, and was indeed the man to whose Valor
especially the Turks owe their Kingdom of Egypt, in which Kingdom then not
fully settled, he was also slain.

H^yl. Cosm. p. 609.
7. Eumenes being a poor Carriers Son, attained to such an ability in the Art of
War, that after the death of Alexander the Great, under whom he served, he
seized on the Provinces of Cappado^ia and Paphlagonia, and siding (though a
Stranger to Macedon) with Olympias and the Blood Royal against the Greek
Captains, he vanquished and slew Craterus, and diverse times drove Antigonus
(afterward Lord of Asia) out of the field; but being by his own Soldiers
betrayed, he was by them delivered to Antigonus, and by him slain.

Curt. hist. l. 4. p. Diodor. Sicul. bibl. l. 17. page 548. Camer. oper.
subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 38. p. 141, 142. Justin. hist. l. 11. page 126. P^zel.
mellific. tom. 1. p. 328.
8. When Alexander the Great had taken the City of Tire, he permitted Ephestion
his chief Favorite to choose whom he would to be King there. Ephestion
proffered it to him with whom he had lodged, a rich and honorable person; but
he refused it, as not touching the blood of their Kings in any degree. Then
being asked by Ephestion, if he knew any of the Royal Lineage yet living, he
told him there was a wise and honest man remaining, but that he was in
extremity of poverty. Ephestion went to him forthwith with the Royal Robes, and
sound him in a Garden, lading water out of a pit for a little money, and in
ragged apparel. Ephestion tells him the intent of his coming, clothes him in
all the Royal Ornaments, and brings him into the Forum, where the people were
convented, and delivers him the Sovereignty over them. The people cheerfully
accepted of a person that was so accidentally and wonderfully found out to rule
over them. His name was Abdolonymus, or as others Ballonymus.

Martin. bell. Tartaric. p. 271, 275.
9. Licungzus, at first a common Thief, then a Captain of a Troop of Robbers, by
degrees arrived to that force and power in China, that he took all the Province
of Honan, subjected the Province of Xensi, and gave Sigan the Metropolis of it,
as a prey to his Soldiers. These and many other his fortunate Exploits caused
him to take the name of King, with the addition of Xungvan, which sounds as
much as Licungzus the prosperous: and at last thinking himself secure of the
Empire, he took the name of Emperor upon him, and styled the Family wherein he
thought to establish this Dignity, Thienxunam, as much as to say, obedient to
Heaven. By which he endeavored to persuade the Soldiers and people, that it
was by the disposition of the Heavens that he should reign. He besieged Peking
the Metropolis of all China, and with his victorious Army he entered and took
it, An. 1644. and coming into the Palace, sat him down in the Imperial Throne;
though it was observed in this first act of Royalty he sat so totteringly, as
if even the Royal Chair it self would foretell the short durance of his felicity.

H^yl. Cousin. p. 546. Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p. 377.
10. Agilmond the Second, King of the Lombards, one morning went a hunting, and
as he was riding by a Fish Pond, he espied seven children sprawling for life,
which one (says Paulus Diaconus) it may be many Harlots had been delivered of,
and most barbarously thrown into the water. The King, amazed at this spectacle,
put the end of his Boar-spear or Hunting-pole amongst them, one of the
childrens hands fastened upon the Spear, and the King softly drawing back his
hand, wafted the child to the shore. This Boy he named Lamissus from Lama,
which in their language signifies a Fish Pond: he was in the Kings Court
carefully brought up, where there appeared in him such tokens of virtue and
courage, that after the death of Agilmund, he was by the Lombards chosen to
succeed him in the Kingdom.

11. Roger Wa^den was at the first a poor Scholar of Oxford, Bak. Chron. p. 240.
and the first step of his rising was to be a Chaplain in their College of St.
Mary's, from thence by degrees he got to be Dean of York, and after this a
higher step to be Treasurer of England, and yet a higher after that (upon the
banishment of Thomas Arundel) to be Archbishop of Canterbury: he dyed in the
ninth year of King Henry the Fourth.

12. Francisco Pizarro, H^yl. Cosm. p. 1071.
who subdued the most potent and flourishing Kingdom of Peru (and made it a
member of the Spanish Empire) was born at Trusiglio, a Village in Navarre, and
by the poor Whore his Mother laid in the Church porch, and so left to Gods
Providence, by whose direction (there being none found that would give him the
breast) he was nourished for certain days, by sucking a Sow. At last one
Gonsalles a Soldier acknowledged him for his Son, put him to nurse, and when
he was somewhat grown, set him to keep his Swine; some of which being strayed,
the Boy durst not for fear return home, but betook himself to his heels, ran
unto Sevil, and there shipped himself for America, where he attended Alphonso
de Oreda in the discovery of the Countries beyond the Gulf of Vraba, Balboa in
his Voyage to the South Sea, and Pedro de Avila in the Conquest of Panama.
Grown rich by these adventures, he associated himself with Diego de Almagro and
Fernando Luquez a rich Priest, who betwixt them raised 220 Soldiers, and in
the year 1525. went to seek their fortunes on those Southern Seas, which Balboa
had before discovered. After diverse repulses at his landing, and some hardships
which he had endured, Pizarro at the length took some of the Inhabitants of
Peru, of whom he learned the wealth of the Country; and returning thereupon to
Spain, obtained the Kings Commission for the conquest of it, excluding his
Companions out of the Patent, but taking in Almagro of his own accord. Thus
furnished, he landed in Peru again, at such time as the Wars grew hot betwixt
the two Brethren for the Kingdom; and taking part with the Faction of Guascar,
marched against Atabaliba, whom he met with in the Plains of Caxamalca, but
rather prepared for a Parley than to sight a Battle. Pizarro taking the
advantage, picked a quarrel with him, and suddenly charged upon him with his
Horse and Ordnance, slaying his Guard without resistance, and coming near the
Kings person (who was then carried on men's shoulders) pulled him down by the
clothes, and took him Prisoner, with him he took as much gold as amounted to
80000 Castellans, and as much silver as amounted to 7000 Marks (every Mark
weighing eight ounces) of his Household Plate, and in the spoil of Caxamalca
almost infinite riches. This with the Kings Ransom came to so great a sum, that
besides the fifth part which Pizarro sent to the King of Spain, and that which
he and his Brethren kept to themselves, every Footman had 7200 Ducats, and
every Horse man twice as much for their part of the spoil, besides what they
had got in Plunder. Pizarro, in regard of so great service, was made the first
Viceroy of Peru, and created Marquess of Anatilla.

Martin. in belle Tartaric. p. 286.
13. There was one Chinchilungus a Chinese, born in the Province of Fokien, he
first served the Portugals in Macao, then he served the Hollander in the Island
Formosa, where he was known to all strangers by the name of Iquon. After this
he became a Pirate, and being of a quick and nimble wit, he grew from this
small and slender Fortune to such a height and power, as he was held, if not
superior, yet equal to the Emperor of China. For he had the Trade of India in
his hand, and he dealt with the Portugals in Macao, with the Spaniards in the
Philippines, with the Hollanders in the Island Formosa and New Holland, with
the Iaponians, and with all the Kings and Princes of the Eastern parts in all
manner of rich Commodities. He permitted none to transport the Wares of China,
but himself or his, to whom he brought back the Riches and the Silver of Europe
and the I^dies. For after he once rather extorted than obtained a pardon of the
King of China for his Piracies, he became so formidable and potent, that he had
no less than three thousand Ships, o^ all which he was Lord and Master. Not
content with this Fortune, he aspired privately to the Empire; but knowing he
should never be accepted with the Prefects and people, so long as any of the
Imperial Family of the Taminges were alive, he hoped by the Tartars means to
extinguish them wholly: that done, he resolved to display his Banners and
Ensigns, to the driving out of the Tartars, which he knew would cause him to be
well followed of the people. The Tartars made him King Pingnan, that is,
Pacifier of the South, and many other Dignities and Offices of Trust they
heaped upon him; but all to illude him: for they suspecting his power, soon
found means to make him a Prisoner in Peking, though his Fleet was seized upon
by his Brothers and Kindred.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 46, 47. Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p. 371, 372.
14. Agathocles was the Son of a Potter, his childhood he spent in the filth of
the clay, his youth in intemperance and unchastity, infamous in every respect;
and through the hatred of the Citizens and his own poverty, he was forced to
become a Robber upon the Highway, soon after a Soldier, and then a General:
but that too with infamy* as one that married the Widow of Damascon (the former
General) with whom before he had lived in Whoredom. But having gained great
riches by this Match, twice he endeavored to seize upon the Sovereignty of
Syracuse, and twice was repelled, and at last forced into Exile. He then joined
with the Sicilians, the Enemies of Syracuse, and with them besieged it; but
through the Succors sent in by the Carthaginians, it was stoutly defended
against him: at last he agreed with Hamilcar, that he should depart and leave
Syracuse to him. It was done accordingly, he entered Syracuse, slew many of the
Princes and people, and so obtained the Kingdom: which done, he turned his Arms
against the Carthaginians themselves, and warred with them in Africa, with such
success, as he became very formidable to that Republic.

Lips. moni^. l. ^. c. 5. p. 48.
15. C. Marius came of Parents that were of the lowest and meanest of the
people; so that at first he was a private Soldier on ^oot, afterward a
Centurion, and then a Tribune; and when he assayed to get up to some Honor and
Office in the City, he was frequently rejected with scorn; at last he rather
broke into the Senate than came in. And yet this low and loathed Marins was the
man that subdued Africa, led King Iugurth (that dreadful Enemy of the Romans)
in Triumph; and (as if this was little) when the City and all Italy trembled at
the Invasion of the Cimbrians, this was the man that defended both, overthrew
the Enemy, was Consul (that is, supreme Magistrate in Rome) seven times, and
dyed in the seventh.

16. Iphicrates that noble General of the Athenians, Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p.
369.
who overcame the Spartans in Battle, and repressed the fierce courage of the
great Captain Epaminondas, was arrived to that height of reputation, that when
Artaxerxes the King of Persia had a purpose to war upon Egypt, he sought to him
to be General in that Expedition; and yet this man who was thus highly courted
by one of the greatest Monarchs of the World, is well known to be the Son of no
other than a poor Cobbler.

17. Aurelius Dioclesianus was chosen Emperor both by the Senate of Rome,
Fulgos. E^. l. 3. c. 4. p. 374.
and also by the joint Suffrage of the whole Army; he swayed the Scepter of the
Roman Empire long, a Prince of great Spirit, and exceeding fortunate; yet was
he of so low and abj^ct a Parentage, that some have said he was the Son of a
Notary or Serivener, and others of a freed man.

18. Bonosus the Emperor was not only no Citizen of Rome, Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c.
4. p. 379.
but a very stranger, born in Britain, his Father was poor, and kept a small
School to keep him alive; yet the Son of this man of so low a degree was
advanced to a Dignity comparable with that of the greatest Princes of the World.

19. Pope John the twenty second of that name ascended to the Papacy by a just
estimate of his Learning and Virtue; Fulgos. Ex. l. 3. c. 4. p. 384.
he broke the fierce courage and pride of the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus: and
after he had performed many notable Exploits, dying, he left the Church much
increased in its riches, and equally improved in its reputation; and yet it is
well known, that this man, a French man by Nation, had no other than a Currier
for his Father, and who in so mean a way provided a livelihood for himself and
family.

CHAP. VIII. Of wonderful and sudden Changes in the Fortunes and Conditions of
many illustrious Persons.
THE Emperors of Constantinople had in their Palace a secret Chamber, Cause.
holy Court, tom. 1. l. ^. p. 5^.
which they called the Purple, in which the Empresses, for a ceremonious
Formality, were brought to bed and delivered, thinking by this means to abolish
the acerbities, which are as it were affixed to our condition But these pretty
Prophyrogenitae (so these Children of the Emperors were called) were
notwithstanding born with a Cross, saluted life with tears and g^oans as well
as others: and many of them were so overwhelmed with disasters both in their
own persons and families, that he who was of the meanest birth in all their
Empire, would have been very loath to have exchanged conditions with them. Upon
the top of the Mountain Potosi in India there always hangs a Cloud (it rises in
form of a Pyramid, and is three leagues high) there is a Cloud over pyramidical
Fortunes too, with which they are oftentimes fatally over^cast. When
Constantine had showed all the Glory and Splendor of Rome to a certain Persian
King, M^ra quidem haec (said he) sed ut video sicut in Persia sic Romae homines
moriuntur: These are brave things, but yet I see men dye at Rome as well as in
Persia. The mightiest possessions cannot secure their owners from the most
unexpected revolutions.

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
All humane things on slender threads depend,
And sudden chance brings greatness to its end.
Ca^s. holy Court, Tom. 1. l. 2. p. 58.
1. A Favorite of Ptolomy King of Egypt, was mounted to so high a degree of
Honor, that he had but two discontentments in this life; the one that he could
grow no more, so great he was already become; the other, that the King with all
his Revenues seemed to him too poor to add any increase of riches. Few days
after this miserable Creature was surprised by King Ptolomy courting a Mistress
of his, for which contempt in that instant the Lady was enforced to drink
poison, and the unfortunate Courtier was hanged before his own Lodging.

Pezel. mellific. hist. par. 3. page 208, 209. Caryl Exposit. on Job 12, 28. p.
282. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 210. Job. Laeti compend. hist. univ.
period. Ger. c. 9.. 1. p. 252.
2. Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany having been often worsted in Battle,
was at last reduced to such exigents, that he had not wherewith to buy him
bread, but was forced to come to the great Church at Spires (which he himself
had built) and there beg to be a Chorister, that so he might get a small
stipend to keep him from starving, but could not obtain it; which repulse
caused him to speak to the standers by in the words of lamenting Job, Chap.
19.21. Have pity upon me, O my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
The weight of these miseries brought him shortly after to his grave, but he
found none so humane as to put him in; for he lay five years unburied, no man
daring to do it, because the Pope had forbidden it to be done. This wonderful
change in the state of so great a person fell out about Anno 1106.

Howel. hist. of Lewis XIII. page 3, 4.
3. The great King Henry the Fourth of France was as remarkable an example of
the lubricity and instableness of mundane affairs, and of the ^andy foundation
whereon the highest pomp and purposes of men are grounded, as almost any Age
can parallel. For this illustrious Prince having a most potent and irresistible
Army composed of 40000 Combatants, all choice men, led by veterane Commanders,
and the most expert Europe could afford, in a perfect equipage, having also a
Mount of Gold as high as a Lance, estimated at sixteen millions to maintain
this Army, having assured his Confederates abroad, settled all things at home,
caused his Queen to be crowned in the highest magnificence that could be, and
appointed her Regent in his absence: behold this mighty King, amongst these
Triumphs of his Queens, being to go next day to his Army, when his spirits were
at the highest elevation, and his he^rt swelling with assurances rather than
hopes of success and glory, going one afternoon to his Arsenal, he was stopped
in a small street, by so contemptible a thing as a Colliers Cart, and there
from amongst the arms of his own Nobles, he was thrust out of the World by the
meanest of his own Vassals, Ravilliac, who with a prodigious hardiness, putting
his foot upon the Coach-wheel, reached him over the shoulders of one of his
greatest Lords, and stabbed him to the very heart, and with a monstrous
undauntedness of resolution, making good his first stab with a second,
dispatched him suddenly from off the earth, as if a Mouse had strangled an
Elephant.

-- Sic parvis pereunt ingentia rebus.
And thus the smallest things
Can stop the breath of Kings.
4. While the Emperor Charles the Fifth, Raleighs pres. to hist. of the World.
after the resignation of his Estates, staid at Vlushing for wind to carry him
to his last journey into Spain, he conferred on a time with Seldius his Brother
Ferdinand's Ambassador till the deep of the night, and when Seldius should
depart, the Emperor calling for some of his Servants, and no body answering
him (for those that attended upon him were some gone to their Lodgings, and all
the rest asleep) the Emperor took up the candle himself and went before
Seldius to light him down stairs, notwithstanding all the resistance he could
make; and when he was come to the stairs foot, he said thus unto him, Seldius,
remember this of Charles the Emperor when he shall be dead and gone, that him
whom thou have known in thy time environed with so many mighty Armies and
Guards of Soldiers, thou have also seen alone, abandoned and forsaken, yea
even of his own domestical Servants, etc. I acknowledge this change of Fortune
to proceed from the mighty hand of God, which I will by no means go about to
withstand.

5. Darius entitled himself King of Kings and Kinsman to the Gods, Raleighs
hist. World, l. 4. c. 2.. 13. page 162. Pezel. melli^. tom. 1. page 343, 344.
Justin. hist. l. 11. page 231.
having knowledge of Alexanders landing on Asia side, so much scorned him and
his Macedonians, that he gave order to his Lieutenants of the lesser Asia, that
they should take Alexander alive, whip him with rods, and then convey him to
his presence; that they should sink his Ships, and send the Macedonians (taken
Prisoners) beyond the Red Sea. In this sort spoke the glorious King, in a vain
confidence of the multitudes over whom he commanded. But observe here a
wonderful revolution, his vast Armies were successively routed by the
Macedonians, his riches (that were even beyond estimation) seized, his Mother,
Wife, and Daughters made Prisoners, and himself by the Treachery of Bessus his
Vassal, taken from the ground, where he lay bewailing his misfortune, and bound
in a Cart covered with Hides of Beasts; and to add derision to his adversity,
he was thereunto fastened with a Chain of Gold, and thus drawn on amongst the
ordinary Carriages. But the Traitor Bessus being hastily pursued by Alexander,
he brought a Horse to the Cart where Darius lay bound, persuading him to mount
thereon. But the unfortunate King refusing to follow those that had betrayed
him, they cast Darts at him, wounded him to death, wounded the Beasts that drew
him, slew his two Servants that attended him: which done, they all fled.
Polystratus, a Macedonian, being by pursuit pressed with thirst, while he was
refreshing himself with water, espied a Cart with wounded beasts breathing for
life, and not able to move, he searched the same, and there found the miserable
Darius bathing in his own blood; impatient death pressing out his few remaining
spirits, he desired water, with which Polystratus presented him; after which he
lived but to tell him, that of all the best things which the World had which
were lately in his power, he had nothing remaining but his last breath,
wherewith to desire the Gods to reward his compassion.

Philip de Co^in. l. 8. c. 18. page 345.
6. Charles the Eighth, King of France, had conquered Naples, and caused himself
to be crowned King thereof; but the 8. of April, 1498. upon Palm Sunday even
the King being in this Glory as touching this World, departed out of the
Chamber of Queen Anne, Duchess of Britain his Wife, leading her with him to
see the Tennis-Players in the Trenches of the Castle, whither he had never led
her before, and they two entered into a Gallery called Haquelebacks Gallery. It
was the filthiest uncleanne^t place in or about the Castle; for every man made
water there, and the entry into it was broken down: moreover the King as he
entered knocked his brow against the door, though he was of very small stature.
Afterward he beheld the Tennis-playing a great while, talking very familiarly
with all men. The last words he spoke, being in health, were, that he hoped
never after to commit deadly sin, nor venial, if he could: in the uttering of
which words he fell backwards, and lost his speech about two of the clock in
the afternoon, and abode in this Gallery till eleven of the clock at night.
Every man that listed entered into the Gallery, where he lay upon an old
Mattress of straw, from which he never arose till he gave up the ghost, which
was nine hours from his first lying upon it. Thus departed out of this World
(says mine Author) this mighty puissant Prince in this miserable place, not
being able to recover one poor Chamber to dye in, notwithstanding he had so
many goodly houses of his own, and had built one so very sumptuous immediately
before.

Knowls Turk. Hist. p. 200.
7. In a bloody Fight betwixt Amurath, third King of the Turks, and Lazarus
Despot of Servia, many thousands fell on both sides; but in conclusion the
Turks had the honor of the day, and the Despot was slain. Amurath after that
great Victory, with some few others of his chiefest Captains, went to take a
view of the dead bodies, which without number lay on heaps in the field, piled
one upon another, as little mountains. While this happy Victor was beholding
with delight this bloody Trophy of his Soldiers valor, a Christian Soldier
sore wounded and all gore blood, seeing him, in a staggering manner arose as if
it had been from death, out of an heap of the slain, and making toward him
(for want of strength) fell down many times by the way as he came (as if he had
been a drunken man.) At length drawing near to him (when they that guarded the
Kings person would have staid him) he was by Amurath himself commanded to come
nearer (supposing that he would have craved his life of him) but this resolute
half-dead Christian pressing nearer to him, as he would for honors sake have
kissed his feet, suddenly stabbed him in the bottom of his belly with a short
Dagger, which he had under his Coat; of which wound that great King and
Conqueror suddenly dyed, when the Victory was his, in the place where he had
newly gained it, while his heart swelled with glory, when a thousand Swords and
Lances and Darts had missed him, when he might now seem secure as to death,
then fell he as a great Sacrifice to the Ghosts of those thousands he had in
that Battle sent to their graves. The Soldier, by whose hand this glorious
action was performed, was called Miles Cobelitz, and the Battle it self was
fought Anno --

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 345. Plut. in vit. Aemyl. p.
8. Alexander the Son of Perseus King of Mac^don, being carried away Captive,
together with his Father, to the City of Rome, was reduced to that poverty and
miserable want, that Prince as he was, he was forced to learn the Art of a
Turner and Joiner, whereby he got his living.

9. My Father has told me from the mouth of Sir Robert Cotton, ^^ll. Chapter Hist.
p. 170. in the Roll of Battle Abb^.
how that worthy Knight met in a morning a true and undoubted Plantagenet
holding the Plough in the Country. Thus gentile blood fetches a circuit in the
body of a Nation, running from Yeomanry through Gentry to Nobility, and so
retrograde, returning through Gentry to Yeomanry again.

10. ^ Philip King of Macedon after many famous Exploits by him performed,
Diod. Sicul. l. 16. page 126. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 346.
and being chosen by all Greece as their General in the Asian Expedition (an
honor he had long thirsted after) con^ulted the Oracle of Apollo, and from
thence received, as he did interpret it, a very favorable Answer touching his
success against the Persian. He therefore ordains great and solemn Sacrifices
to the Gods, marries his Daughter Cleopatra to Alexander King of Epirus, and
that he might appear amongst the Greeks in his greatest glory and magnificence,
he invites throughout all Greece diverse great persons to this nuptial Feast,
and desires them to bring with them as many as they pleased, whom he would also
entertain as his Guests. There was therefore a mavelous confluence of people
from all parts to these Royal Nuptials, and the musical contests which he had
also ordained. At Aegis, a City in Macedonia, was this great Solemnity, where
he then received diverse Crowns of Gold from several illustrious persons; as
also others that were sent to him in his honor from the most famous Cities in
Greece, even from Athens it self. Now was the Feast over, and the musical
concertation deferred to the next day, a multitude of people were assembled in
the Theater, while it was yet night, and at the first appearance of day, then
began the Pomp to set forth, in which, besides other glorious preparations,
there were twelve Statues of the Gods carried upon huge and triumphant Arches,
and together with these a thirteenth, which was the Statue of Philip himself
adorned with divine Habit, by which he would it should be understood, that he
was in Dignity equal with the Gods themselves. The Theater being now crowded,
Philip himself appears all clothed in white, having ordered his Guards to keep
at a distance from him, that the Greeks might know he thought himself
sufficiently guarded with their love. At this his glorious appearance, he was
openly extolled, and looked upon as the happiest person amongst all other
mortals. But this his dazelling brightness was soon over-cast with a black
cloud, and all the Pageant of his Glory wrapped up in the ^ables of death. For
while his Guards kept at their commanded distance, there ran up to him one
Pausanias, one of those that had the nearest charge of his body, and with a
short Gallick Sword he had hid about him for that purpose, ^mote him into the
side, and laid him dead at his foot in the sight of thousands of his Soldiers
and Friends.

11. Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos was so fortunate, Herod. l. 3. page 178,
179. Camer. oper. subcisiv. l. 1. c. 12. p. 38. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 55.
that not so much as a light touch of adversity had for a long time befallen
him; he was allied with Amasis King of Egypt, who hearing of the great
prosperity of his friend, feared (like a wi^e Prince) that it would not
continue long; wherefore he wrote unto him to this effect: I am glad to
understand that my friend fares so well, nevertheless I have this great
felicity in suspicion, knowing how envious Fortune is. For my part I had rather
that my affairs, and the affairs of my friends went in ^uch sort, as that some
adversity might cross them in this life, than that they should go always to our
liking. If herein thou will believe me, carry thy self in thy prosperity as
follows; Look what thou have about thee that thou hold most dear, and
would be most sorry to lose, cast that away so far and in such sort, as none
may ever see it. If thy prosperity change not for all that, apply thereunto
from time to time, for thy eas^, some such remedy as this is which I have
propounded to thee. Polycrates liked this counsel, and having a gold Ring set
with an Emerauld engraven, which he used for his Seal, he cast it into the Sea;
but within a while after this Ring was found in a fishes belly, and brought
again to Polycrates. Of which when Amasis heard, he renounced by an express
message the right of friendship and hospitality which he had contracted with
Polycrates, alleging, for his reason, that he feared he should be forced to
sorrow and lamentation because of his friend overwhelmed with misery. It
happened that after certain days Oraetes Lieutenant of Cyrus in the City of
Sardis drew unto him by crafty means this Minion of Fortune Polycrates, whom he
caused to be hanged upon a Gibbet, and his body there left to the heats of the
day, and the dews of the night.

Bak. Chron. p. 305.
12. Henry Holland Duke of Exeter and Earl of Huntingdon, who married the Sister
of Edward the Fourth, was driven to such want, that passing into Flanders,
Philip de Comines says that he saw him run on foot, bare-leg'd after the Duke
of Burgundy's Train, begging his bread for Gods sake, whom the Duke of Burgundy
at that time not knowing (though they had married two Sisters) but hearing
afterward who it was allotted him a small pension to maintain him, till not
long after he was found dead upon the shore of Dover, and stripped all naked;
but how he came to his death, could never by any inquiry be brought to light.
This was about the thirteenth year of the Reign of Edward the Fourth.

Court of K. James, page 37. by A. W. Clarks Mir. c. 131. page 676.
13. In the Reign of King James the Lord Cobham was condemned for high Treason,
but yet reprieved by the King, though notwithstanding he came to a miserable
end. For before his death he was extremely lousie for want of apparel and
linen, and had perished for hunger, had not a Trencher-scraper at Court
(sometimes his Servant) relieved him with such scraps as he could spare. In
this man's house he dyed, being so poor a place, that he was forced to creep up
a Ladder through a little hole into his Chamber: which was a strange change, he
having been a man of 7000 l. per annum, and of a personal Estate of 30000 l.
his Lady also being rich, who yet in this his extremity of misery would not
give him of the crumbs that fell from her table.

Fulgos. l. 3. c. 2. p. 1171. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 12. p. 77.
14. Hugolin Giradesca of Pisa was the Chief of the Faction of the Guelphs that
stuck to the Pope, having foiled a part of the Gibbellines, who affected the
Emperor, and stricken a fear into the rest, became so great amongst those of
his party, that he commanded with a white Wand, was both in name and in deed
Lord of his City, a rich and noble Personage, learned, magnificent, married to
a great Lady, had goodly Children and Grandchildren, abounding in all manner of
wealth, more than he could wish, living happy in all pleasure, both in the
judgment of himself and all his Citizens. He made a solemn Feast upon his
Birthday, and having invited all his friends, sets himself to the displaying
of all his prosperity, which himself magnifieth, admireth, and extolleth above
the clouds: and at last comes to this; he asks one of his inward friends, if
there wanted any thing to make up his felicity complete? who considering what
little stay there is in worldly matters, and how they roll and fly away in a
moment (or rather inspired from above) made this answer: Certainly the wrath of
God cannot be long from this thy so great prosperity. Well, the Forces of the
Guelphs beginning to decay, the Gibbellines run to Arms, beset the house of
this prosperous Hugolin, break down the Gates, kill one of his Sons, and a
Grandchild that opposed their entrance, lay hold on Hugolin himself, imprison
him with two other of his Sons and three Granchildren in a Tower, shut all the
Gates upon them, and throw the keys into the River of Arne that ran hard by.
Here Hugolin saw those goodly Youths of his dying between his arms, himself
also at deaths door. He cried and besought his enemies to be content, that he
might endure some humane punishment, and to grant that he might be confessed,
and communicate e're he dyed. But their hearts were all flint, and all he
requested with tears they denied with derision: so he dyed pitifully, together
with his Sons and Grandchildren that were enclosed with him. So sudden and
oftentimes so tragical are the revolutions of that life, which seems most to
promise a continuance of prosperity.

15. Amongst all those that have been advanced by the favor of mighty Princes,
Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 2. c. 78. p. 308. Knowls Turk. Hist. p. 654.
there was never so great a Minion, nor a more happy man in his life, until his
death, than was Ibraim Bassa chief Vizier to Solomon the Great Turk. This Bassa
finding himself thus highly caressed by his Lord and Master, he besought him on
a day (as he talked with him with great familiarity) that he would forbear to
make so much of him, lest being elevated too high, and flourishing beyond
measure, it should occasion his Lord to look a scance upon him, and plucking
him from the top of Fortunes wheel, to hurl him into the lowest of misery.
Solomon then swore unto him, that while he lived he would never take a way his
life. But afterward moved against him, by the ill success of the Persian War,
by him persuaded, and some suspicion of Treachery, yet feeling himself tied by
his oath, he forbore to put him to death, till being persuaded and informed by
a Talisman or Turkish Priest, that a man asleep cannot be counted amongst the
living, in regard the whole life of man is a perpetual watch, Solomon sent one
night an Eunuch, who with a sharp razor cut his throat, as he was quietly
s^eeping upon a Pallet in the Court. And thus this great Favorite had not so
much as the favor to be acquainted with his Masters displeasure, but was sent
out of the world at unawares: his dead body was reviled and cursed by Solomon,
after which a weight was tied to it, and it cast into the Sea.

16. George Villiers was the third Son of Sir George Villiers Knight; Reliq.
W^ttonian. page 78, 93, 114, etc.
was first sworn Servant to King James, then his Cup^bearer at large; the
Summer following admitted in ordinary, the next St. Georges day he was
Knighted, and made Gentleman of the Kings Bed^chamber, and the same day had an
annual pension of a thousand pound given him out of the Court of Wards. At
New Years tide following the King chose him Master of the Horse. After this he
was installed of the most noble Order of the Garter. In the next August he
created him Baron of Whaddon, and Viscount Villiers. In January of the same
year, he was advanced Earl of Buckingham, and sworn of his Majesty's Privy
Council. The March ensuing he attended the King into Scotland, and was likewise
^worn a Councellor in that Kingdom. At New Years Tide after he was created
Marquess of Buckingham, and made Lord Admiral of England, Chief Justice in
Air, of all the Parks and Forests on the South Side of Trent, Master of the
Kings Bench Office, head Steward of Westminster, and Constable of Windsor
Castle, chosen by the King the chief Concomitant of the Heir apparent in his
Journey into Spain, then made Duke of Buckingham, and his Patent sent him
thither. After his return from whence, he was made Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and Steward of the Manor of Hampton Court. But in the midst of
all these Honors of the Duke, upon Saturday the 23. of August, at Portsmouth,
when after breakfast he came out of the room (into a kind of Lobby somewhat
darker, and which led to another Chamber where diverse waited) with Sir Thomas
Friar close at his ear, in the moment as the said Knight withdrew himself from
the Duke, one John Felton (a younger Brother of mean fortunes in Suffolk) gave
him with a back blow a deep wound into his left side, leaving the knife in his
body, which the Duke himself pulling out, on a sudden effusion of spirits, he
sunk down under the table in the next room, and immediately expired. One thing
in this enormous accident is (I must confess) to me beyond all wonder, as I
received it from a Gentleman of judicious and diligent observation (and one
whom the Duke well favored) that within the space of not many minutes after
the fall of the body, and removal thereof into the first room, there was not a
living creature in either of the Chambers with the body, no more than if it had
lain in the Sands of Ethiopia: whereas commonly in such cases, you shall note
every where a great and sudden con^lux of people unto the place to hearken and
see; but it seems the horror of the Fact stupisied all curiosity. Thus dyed
this great Peer in the thirty sixth year of his age complete, and three days
over, in a time of great recourse unto him, and dependence upon him. The House
and Town full of Servants and Suitors, his Duchess in an upper room, scarce
yet out of her bed, and the Court at this time not above six or nine miles from
him, which had been the Stage of his Greatness.

M. de Serves, Hist. France, p. 72, 73.
17. Charles the Gross, the twenty ninth King of France, and Emperor of the
West, began to reign in the year 885. the eyes of the French were fixed upon
him, as the man that should restore their Estate after many disorders and
confusions. He went into Italy and expelled the Saracens that threatened Rome;
being returned, he found the Normans dispersed in diverse Coasts of his Realm;
Charles marches with his Army against them, but at the first encounter was
overthrown: this check, though the loss was small, struck a great terror, and
at last caused an apparent impossibility to succor Neustria, and recover it
from so great Forces. He was therefore advised to treat with them to make them
of enemies friends, and to leave them that which he could not take from them.
He yielded Neustria to them by his own Authority, without privity of the
Estates; so these Normans called it Normandy. By this and some other things he
fell into a deep hatred with the French; upon which Charles fell sick, and that
sickness was accompanied with a distemper of the mind, through jealousy
conceived against his Queen Richarda. After this the French and Germans
dispossess him of the Empire, and give it to Arnoul; and the French reject him
from the Regency of that Realm, substituting in his room Eudes or Odo, Duke of
Angiers. This poor Prince, deposed from all his Dignities, abandoned by every
man, in his prosperity had so ill provided from himself, that he had not a
house wherein to shroud him; banished the Court, he was driven to a poor
Village in Suevia, where he lived some days in extreme want, without any means
of his own or relief from any man. In the end he dyed, neither pitied nor
lamented of any man, in a corner unknown, save for this, to have been the
Theater of so extraordinary a Tragedy. And surely for one of the greatest
Monarchs of the World thus to dye without house, without bread, without honor,
without mourning, and without memory, is a signal instance of the Worlds vanity
and inconstancy.

18. Valerianus the Roman Emperor, Lips. monit^ l. 1. c. 5. p. 56. Herb. Trav.
l. 2. p. 211.
after he had reigned fifteen years, commenced a War against Sapores King of
Persia, of which such was the unfortunate success; That the Emperor was not
only overthrown, but also was brought alive into the hands of his Enemy:
Sapores carried him about with him in chains as a common Slave, and joining
derision to his adversity, he made him his Footstool; for as often as he mounted
his Horse, he caused the miserable Emperor to bow down, that he might tread
upon his back, for his more commodious ascent into the Saddle, and after to be
flead alive.

19. Bajazet King of the Turks, Knowls Turk. Hist. p. 220, 221. Lips. monit, l.
1. c. 5. p. 57, 58.
for his fierceness was surnamed Gilderun, that is, Lightning; a Prince of
great Spirit, and who for ten years space had been exceeding fortunate in his
great Enterprises. This great Monarch was invaded by Tamerlane the great Chan
of Tartary, overthrown in the Battle, his Son Mustapha slain, and he himself
made Prisoner. At the first the Victor gave him a civil reception, and sitting
together, he thus said to him: O Chan, we are each of us exceedingly indebted
to the Divine bounty, I that thus lame have received thence an Empire extending
from the Borders of India to Sebaste, and thou who from the same hand have
another reaching from the same Sebaste to the Confines of Hungary, so that we
almost part the World it self betwixt us: we owe therefore our praises to
Heaven which I both have, and will always be ready to render accordingly; thou
possibly have been less mindful and of a more ungrateful disposition, and
therefore thou art brought into this calamity. But let that pass; and now, my
Chan, tell me freely and truly what thou would have done with me, in case I
had fallen under thy power? Bajazet, who was of a ^ierce and ^aughty Spirit, is
said thus to reply: Had the Gods given unto me the Victory, I would have
enclosed thee in an ^ron Cage, and carried thee about with me, as a spectacle
of derision to all men. Tamerlane hearing this, passed the same Sentence upon
him; three years almost the miserable Creature lived enclosed in this manner:
at last hearing he must be carried into Tartary, despairing then to obtain his
freedom, he struck his head with that violence against the bars of his Cage,
that he beat his brains out.

20. Iugurtha was a great and powerful King of Numidia, Plut. in Mario, p. 412.
Muret var. lect. l. 2. c. 10. p. 3^^
had long withstood all the power of the Roman Arms; but at last was taken by
C. Marius, and led in Triumph, wherewith he was so affected, that he began to
dote and turn foolish. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 345.
After the Triumph was ended, he was thrust into prison; and when some had tore
off his clothes and shirt, others snatched at the rich Ear-ring he had, with
that insolence and violence, that they tore off, together with it, the tip of
his ear that it hung by. At last thus naked, he was thrust into a Dungeon, all
stupid, discovering his teeth, as one betwixt grinning and laughing: Jupiter,
said he, how cold is your Bath? There he lived six days till he was starved to
death in a miserable manner.

A. Bish. Spotsw. hist. Chapter of Scotl. p. 314. Clarks Mir. cap. 131. page 679.
21. Never was there a more notable example of the vanity and inconstancy of all
earthly things, than in the Earl of Morton, An. 1581. who was Regent of
Scotland in the Minority of our King James, and was reverenced of all men,
feared as a King, abounding in wealth, honor, and multitude of friends and
followers: whereas not long after he was forsaken of all, and made the very
scorn of all men; and being by the malice of his adversaries accused,
condemned, and executed at Edinburgh, had his Corpse left on the Scaffold, from
the hour of Execution to Sunsetting, covered with a beggarly Cloak, every man
fearing to show any kindness, or so much as to express a sign of sorrow. His
Corpse was afterward carried by some base Fellows to the common place of
Burial, and his Head fixed on the Toll-booth.

F^lgos. Ex. l. 5. c. 3. p. 612. Clarks Mir. cap. 131. page 677.
22. Belisarius, a noble and famous General under the Emperor Justinian, having
with great success fought many Battles against the Persians, Goths, and
Vandals, in his old age, by the malice and cruelty of the Empress, had his eyes
put out, and fell into such extreme want, that he was forced to beg by the
Higy-way side; Date obolum Belisario, Give a halfpenny to poor Belisarius,
whom virtue raised, and envy has thus made blind.

Speeds Chr. p. 449. Stows Annals, page 134.
23. King William the Second on the morrow after Lammas-day hunting in the New
Forest of Hampshire, in a place called Chorengham, was unhappily slain in the
midst of his sport. For Sir Walter Tyrel shooting at a Deer, his Arrow glanced
upon a tree, and hit the King full in the breast, who hastily taking hold of so
much of the Arrow as stuck out of his body, brake it off, and with one only
groan fell down and dyed. Whereupon the Knight and most of the Kings Followers
hasted away, and those few that remained laid his body in a Colliers Cart,
which being drawn by one silly lean beast, in a foul and filthy way the Cart
broke, where lay the spectacle of worldly glory, both pitifully goared and
filthily bemired, till thus drawn into the City of Winchester on the morrow
after his death, he was buried under a plain Marble stone.

Stows Annals, page 225, 226. Bak. Chron. page 163, 164, 165.
24. King Edward II. surnamed Carnarvan, being deprived of his Royal Crown and
Dignity, remained with Henry Earl of Leicester his Kinsman: but the Queen
suspecting his escape, wrought so with her Son King Edward the Third, that by
his commandment the King was delivered thence into the hands of Thomas of
Gurney and John Maltravers Knights, who brought him from Kenelworth to the
Castle of Corffe, from thence to Bristol, and thence to Barkely. Many cruelties
they exercised upon this poor Prince: they permitted him not to ride but by
night, neither to see any man, nor to be seen by any man; when he rode, they
forced him to be bare-headed: when he desired to sleep, they would not suffer
him; neither when he was hungry would they give him such meat as he desired,
but such only as he loathed: every word that he spoke was contraried by them,
and they gave out that he was mad. All this was done, that either by cold,
watching, unwholesom food, melancholy or some other infirmity, he might
langu^sh and dye; but in vain was their expectation, yea even the poisons they
gave him were dispatched away by the benefit of Nature. In their journey to
Barkely from Bristol, the wicked Gurney making a Crown of Hay, put it on his
head, and the Soldiers that were present scoffed and mocked him beyond
measure, saying, Tprut, avaunt Sir King, making a kind of noise with their
mouths, as if they farted. Fearing to be known as they traveled, they devised
to disfigure him, by shaving of his head and beard: wherefore by a little water
that ran into a ditch, they commanded him to light from his Horse to be shaven,
to whom (being set on a Molehill) a Barber came with a Basin of cold water
taken out of a ditch, saying to the King, that water should serve for that
time. To whom Edward answered, That in spite of them he would have warm water
for his beard; and thereupon began to weep and shed tears plentifully. At
length they came to Barkely Castle, where Edward was shut up close as an
Anchorite in a room where dead carcasses were laid on purpose in the Cellar
under it, that the stench might suffocate him: but this being perceived not
sufficient, one night being the 22. of September. they came rushing in upon him
suddenly, as he lay in his bed, and with great and heavy Feather-beds, being in
weight as much as fifteen strong men could bear, they oppressed and strangled
him. Also they thrust a Plummers Sodring-Iron (being made red-hot) into his
bowels, through a certain Instrument like to the end of a Trumpet or Clystering
Pipe, put in at the Fundament: burning thereby his inward parts, lest any
outward wound should be found. His cries were heard within and without the
Castle, and known to be the cries of one that suffered violent death. And this
was the sorrowful and tragic end of Edward of Carnarvan.

25. Dionysius the younger had his Kingdom in good constitution and
sufficiently fortified, Aelian. var. hist. l. 6. c. 12. p. 194.
as thus: He had no less than 400 Ships of five and six Oars in a seat, he had
one hundred thousand Foot, and nine thousand Horse; his City of Syracuse had
strong Gates, and was compassed with high Walls; he had in readiness all manner
of warlike provisions to furnish out 500 more Ships: he had Granaries wherein
were laid up 100 Myriads of that measure which contains six bushels of
bread-corn; he had a Magazine repleat with all sorts of Arms offensive and
defensive; he was also well fortified with Confederates and Allies, so that he
himself thought, that the Government was fastened to him with chains of Adamant.
But being invaded by Dion (in his absence) his people revolted, and behold what
a fatal revolution fell out in his Family; himself had before slain his
Brother, and in this Insurrection against him, his Sons were cruelly put to
death, his Daughters were first ravished, then stripped naked, and in that manner
slain, and in short none of his Progeny obtained so much as a decent Burial:
for some were burnt, others cut in pieces, and some cast into the Sea, and he
himself dyed old in extreme poverty. Theopompus says, that by the immoderate
use of Wine he was become purblind; that his manner was to sit in Barbers
Shops, and as a Jester to move men unto laughter, living in the midst of Greece
in a mean and low fashion, he wore out the miserable remainders of a wretched
life.

Bak. Chron. p. 192. Stows Annals, page 269.
26. King Edward the Third, that glorious Conqueror, after he had reigned fifty
years and four months, being in the fifty sixth year of his Age, An. Dom. 1377.
fell into his last sickness at his Manor of Richmond, where when he was
observed to be drawing on toward his end, his Concubine Alice Pierce came to
his bedside, and took the Rings from his fingers, which for the Royalty of his
Majesty he was wonted to wear, and having left him gasping for breath, fled
away. The Knights and Esquires and Officers of his Court, each of them fell to
rifle and make prey of all they could meet with, and also hasted away, leaving
the King alone in this sorrowful state and condition. Only it fortuned, that a
Priest lamenting the Kings misery, that amongst all his Counselors and
Servants, there was none to assist him in his last moments, entered his Chamber,
exhorting the King to lift up his eyes and heart unto God, to repent him of his
sins, and to implore the mercy of Heaven, and its forgiveness. The King had
before quite lost his speech; but at these words (taking strength) uttered his
mind (though imperfectly) in those matters, and made signs of contrition,
wherein his voice and speech failed him, and scarce pronouncing this word Jesus,
he yielded up the ghost.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 344.
27. Gilimer was King of the Vandals in Africa, long had he lived happy,
increasing his riches and Dominions by his Victories; when his felicity began
to alter, Belisarius sent by the Emperor Justinian against him, overthrew him;
he sled out of the Battle unto Pappus, a high Mountain in Numidia, whither he
was pursued and besieged: he had endured the Siege a while, when he sent word
that he would yield up himself, only desired there might be sent him a piece of
Bread, a Sponge, and a Harp; the Bread to relieve his hunger, the Sponge to dry
his eyes, and the Harp to ease his afflicted mind: they were sent him, and he
yielded. Being brought into the presence of Belisarius, he did nothing but
laugh; being led in Triumph to Constantinople, and presented to Iustinianus and
Theodora his Empress, he cried out, Vanity of vanities, all his vanity. He
afterward dyed private in a corner of Gaul.

Herod. l. 3. p. 11, 12, 36. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 342.
28. Croesus, that rich King of Lydia, showed Solon all his Riches and
Treasures: And what think thou, said he, is there any man thou know more
happy than my self? There is, said he, and named one Tellus, a man of mean
fortune, but content with it: and then he named two others, who having lived
well were now dead. Croesus laughs, and, said he, What state take you me to be
in? I cannot tell, said Solon, nor can we reasonably account that man happy,
who is tossed in the waves of this life, till he is arrived at the Haven,
seeing a tempest may come that may overturn all. Croesus made little of this at
that time; but being overcome by Cyrus, bound, and laid upon a Pile to be burnt
alive, Croesus cried out, O Solon, Solon: Cyrus admiring, caused him to be
asked, what God or man it was whom he invoked in this his extremity: he
replied, That Solon came into his mind, who had wisely admonished him not to
trust to his present fortune, nor to think himself happy before he came to his
end. I laughed, said he, at that time, but now I approve and admire that saying:
so did Cyrus also, presently commanding Croesus to be freed, and made him one
of his friends.

CHAP. IX. Of such as have left places of highest Honor and Employment for a
private and retired Condition.
GReat Travelers, who have fed their eyes with variety of prospects, and
pleased themselves with the conversation of persons of different Countries, are
oftentimes observed upon their return to retire themselves, and more to delight
in solitude than other men. The like sometimes befalls men of great Honors and
Employments, they retreat unto a private life, as men that are full and have
taken a kind of surfeit of the World; and when they have done so, have enjoyed
more of contentment and satisfaction of mind, than all their former noiseful
and busied splendor could afford them.

1. Doris the Athenian having governed the Commonwealth six and thirty years
with much sincerity and Justice, T^easury of ancient and modern times, l. 8. c.
2. page 736.
became weary of public Negotiations: he therefore dislodged from Athens, and
went to a Country House or Farm, which he had in a Village not far distant, and
there reading Books of Husbandry in the night time, and practicing those rules
in the day time, he wore out the space of fifteen years. Upon the Frontispiece
of his House these words were engraven, Fortune and Hope adieu to you both,
seeing I have found the true entrance to rest and contentment.

2. The Emperor Charles the Fifth, Curia Polit. by M. Scudery, p. 1, 2, etc.
Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 14. p. 340.
after he had reigned as King forty years, and had thirty six of those years
been possessed of the Empire of Germany: that Charles, who (from the sixteenth
year of his age, wherein he first bore a Scepter, to the fifth sixth year of
his age, wherein he surrendered all) had been a great and most constant
Favorite of Fortune; after he had made 300 Sieges, and gained the Victory in
more than twenty set Battles; he whose whole life and adventures were nothing
else but a concatenation of Victories and Triumphs, and a glorious continuation
of most renowned successes, after he had made nine Voyages into Germany, six
into Spain, seven into Italy, four into France, ten into the Low Countries, two
into England, two into Africa, and eleven times traversed the main Ocean, who
yet in all these his various and great Enterprises met with no check nor frown
of Fortune, except in the Siege of Marcelleis and the business of Algiers: I
say this illustrious Prince in the pitch and height of all his glory did freely
and of his own accord descend from his Thrones, resigned his Kingdom of Spain
to his Son Philip, his Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, withdrew from a Royal
Palace, and retired first to a private house at Bruxels, and thence descended
to an humble Hermitage, in the Monastery of St. Iustus, seven miles from
Placentia, attended only with twelve Servants; forbidding that any should call
him other than Charles, disclaiming together with the Affairs the pompous Names
of Caesar and Augustus.

3. Diocletianus, Fulgos. Ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 438. Heyl. Cosm. p. 553. Lips. de
constant. l. 2. c. 2. p. 11^.
the Emperor of Rome, being filled and laden with worldly Honors, which he
had acquired to himself both in Peace and War, even to the making himself to be
worshipped for a God. This great Person seeing no constancy in humane affairs,
and feeling how full his Imperial charge was of travels, cares, and perils,
left off the Managing and Government of the Empire; C^mer. op^r. subcisiv. l.
1. c. 45. page 209.
and choosing a private life, retired himself to Salona, where he spent his time
in Gardening and Husbandry: and although after he had continued there some
years, he was earnestly importuned by Maximianus and Galerius his Successors,
to resume the Empire; yet could he never be persuaded to quit his solitude,
till he parted with that and his life together.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. l. 1. c. 45. page 209.
4. S^atocopius, King of Bohemia and Moravia, having received an overthrow in a
Battle by the Emperor Arnolphus, withdrew himself secretly out of the Fight,
and unknown as he was, saved himself by the swiftness of his Horse. Being come
alone to a Mountain called Sicambri, he left there his Arms and Horse, and
began to walk on foot: when entering into a vast Wilderness, he framed himself
like a poor Pilgrim to feed upon Apples and Roots, until he had met with three
other Hermits, to whom he joined himself, abiding with them unknown till his
last. When his time drew near that he should dye, he calls the three Eremites:
You know not yet, said he, who I am; the truth is, I am King of Bohemia and
Moravia, who being overthrown in a Battle, have sought my refuge here with you.
I dye, having tried both what a Royal and a private life is. There is not any
Greatness of a King to be preferred before the tranquillity of this
solitariness. The safe sleeps which we enjoy here make the roots savoury, and
the water sweet unto us; on the contrary, the care and dangers of a Kingdom
make all meat and drink taste bitter to us. That part of my life which
remained, I have passed happily with you; that which I led upon my Regal
Throne, deserves more the title of death than of life. As Soon as my Soul has
parted from my body, ye shall bury me here in this place, and then going into
Moravia, ye shall declare these things to my Son, if he yet lives: and having
thus said, he departed this life.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 436. Ca^^^. oper. subcisiv. l. 1. c. 45. page 211.
5. The Captain Similis was Prefect of the Palace to Hadrian the Emperor, and
after he had procured leave at last to quit himself of his employment, and to
retire into the Country, he lived there in rest with privacy and content for
the space of seven years; and when he found himself near unto death, he
ordained by his last Will this Epitaph to be inscribed upon his Tomb.

Similis hic jacet cujus atas quidem multorum annorum f^it, septem tamen dunt
axat annis vixit. That is, Here lies Similis who was indeed of a great age,
yet lived only seven years.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 435.
6. Lucius Sylla, having with great labors, and infinite perils, arrived unto
the Dictatorship in Rome, than which there is no power more absolute, and
having therein governed with such severity, as to put to death two thousand six
hundred Roman Knights, slain ten Consuls, forced thousands from their Country
into Exile, and prohibited unto diverse all Funeral Honors; yet without fear of
accounting for any of his past actions, and not being in the least enforced
thereunto by any necessity of his affairs, he voluntarily deposed himself from
that high Seat of Magistracy, and retired to a life of privacy in Rome: and
whereas one day as he passed along in the Marketplace, he was reproached and
insolently treated by a young man, he contented himself to say with a low voice
to some that stood near him, This young man will be the occasion that no man
hereafter will resign a Dictatorship.

7. When Sir Henry Wotton returned from his last Embassy into England, Reliq.
Wotton lan. page 54.
at all those houses where he rested or lodged, he left his Coat of Arms with
this Inscription under them.

Henricus Wottonius Anglo-cantianus Thomae optimi viri filius natu minimus, a
Serenissimo Iacobo Primo Mag. Brit. Rege, in Equestrem titulum adscitus,
ejusdemque ter ad Rempub^icam Venetam Legatus Ordinarius, semel ad
Confoederatorum Provinciarum Ordines in Iuliacensi Negotio, bis ad Carolum
Emanuel Subaudiae Ducem, semel ad Vnitos Superiorie Germaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbrunensi, postremo ad Archiducem Leopoldum, Ducem Wittembergensem,
Civitates Imperiales, Argentinam Vlmamque and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem
Ferdinandum Secundum Legatus Extraordinarius, tandem hoc didicit:

Animas fieri sapientiores quiescendo.

8. Ramirus lived a Monk in a Monastery, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 3. cap.
92. p. 3^6.
from whence, upon the death of his Brother, he was called by the Nobles and
people of Arragon to succeed his Brother in the Kingdom: the Pope also
dispensed with his Vow, and he had his allowance to accept of the Kingdom.
Ramirus therefore left the Monastery, married a Wife, of whom he had Daughter
called Vrraca; after which, neither conjugal affection, nor the desire of a
Kingdom (two of the strongest bonds amongst men) were able to retain him, but
that he would return unto that Ecclesiastical humility which he had experienced
in the Convent where he formerly had lived.

9. The Parthians by civil discords had ejected Artabanus their King, Fulgos.
Ex. l. 6. c. 5. page 768, 769. Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 2. p. 516.
who endeavored his Restoration to his Kingdom by the Arms of Iazates King of
the Adiabeni. The Parthians not only upon the account of an imminent War, but
moved also with other reasons, repented that they had expelled Artabanus. They
sent therefore Ambassadors both to him and to Iazates, giving them to
understand, that they would most willingly do what they did require them: but
that upon the expulsion of Artabanus, they had set up Cynamus in his stead; and
having sworn Allegiance unto him as their King, they durst not recede from
their Oath. Which when Cynamus understood, he wrote to Artabanus and Iazates,
that they should come; for he would resign up the Kingdom, of Parthia to
Artabanus. When they were come, Cynamus went forth to meet them, adorned in
Royal Robes, and the Diadem upon his head: as soon as he drew near to Artabanus,
dismounting from his Horse, he thus spoke: When the Parthians had driven thee,
Artabanus, from the Kingdom, and were resolved to confer it on another, at
their entreaty I received it; but so soon as I knew it was their desire to
restore it to thee their true and lawful King, and that the only hindrance of
it was, that they should do it without my consent, I not only forbear to oppose
them; but as thou see, of mine own accord, and without any other respect I
restore it to thee. And having so said, he took the Diadem from his own head,
with his own hands he fitted it to that of Artabanus, and freely returned to
his former privacy.

10. Albertus was a Dominick Friar, Syms. Chapter Hist. l. 2. cent. 13. p. 376.
and for his great Learning surnamed Magnus; he was made Bishop of Ratisbone by
Pope Alexander the Fourth; but he freely left his Bishopric, and returned home
again to Colen, that he might retire himself, and enjoy the greater quiet for
reading and writing.

M. S. penes M. Humfr. Burt.
11. In the year of our Lord 1179. and the Reign of King Henry the Second,
Richard de Lucy, Lord Chief Justice of England, resigned his Office, and became
a Canon in the Abbey of Westwood. And in the Reign of King Henry III. upon the
29. of June, Id. ibid.
An. 1276. Walter Maleclarke, Bishop of Carlisle, renounced the Pomp of the
World, and took upon him the Habit of a preaching Friar.

Praefat. ad Monastic. Angl. p. 7.
12. In a preliminary Discourse before the Monasticon Anglicanum, we have an
account of diverse Kings in this our Island, who for devotions sake left their
Crowns, and took upon them the Habit and Profession of Monks. Such were
Pertocus King of Cambria, Constantinus King of Cornwall, Sebby King of the East
Saxons, Offa King of the East Saxons, Sigebert King of the East Angles,
Etheldredus King of the Mercians, Kynred King of the Mercians, Ceolwulphus King
of the North Humbers, and Edbricthus King of the North Humbers. Whereupon one
has wrote these metrical Verses.

Nomina Sanctorum rutilant cum laud piorum
Stemmate regali cum vestitu Monachali,
Qui Reges facti spreverunt culmina regni
Electi Monachi, sunt coeli munere digni.
Vaugh. Flor. sol. in Epist. to the Reader.
13. Prince Lewis, the eldest Son of Charles King of Naples, at the age of
twenty one years, and just when he should have been married to the youthful
Princess of Majorica, did suddenly at Barcellona put on the rough and severe
Habit of the Franciscans: The Queens and Princesses there met to solemnize the
Marriage of his Sister Blanch with James King of Arragon, employed their
Rhetoric to dissuade him from it, but to no purpose: he loved his Sackcloth
more than their Silks, and as Monsieur Mathieu (alluding to the young Princess)
speaks of him, l^^t Roses to make a Conserve of Thorns.

Ios. Antiq. l. 19. c. 6. p. 508.
14. King Agrippa took the High Priesthood from Simon Canthara, and gave it
again to Jonathan the Son of Anani, whom he esteemed more worthy than the
other. But Jonathan declared that he was not worthy of this Dignity, and
refused it, saying, O King, I most willingly acknowledge the honor you are
pleased to bestow upon me, and know you offer me this Dignity of your f^ee
will, notwithstanding which, God judges me unworthy. It suffices that I have
once been invested with the sacred Habit; for at that time I wore it with more
holiness, than I can now receive it at this present: yet notwithstanding, if it
please you to know one that is more worthy of this honor than my self, I ^ave
a Brother, who toward God and you is pure and innocent, whom I dare recommend
to you for a most fit man for that Dignity. The King took great pleasure in
these words, and leaving Jonathan, he bestowed the Priesthood on Mathias his
Brother, as Jonathan had desired and advised.

Spotsw. hist. p. 310. Clarks mir. cap. 113. page 557.
15. Constantine the Third, King of Scotland, being wearied with the troubles of
a public life, renounced his temporal Dignities and Kingdom, and betook
himself to a private life amongst the Culdees in St. Andrews, with whom he
spent his five last years, and there dyed about the year 904.

Pride. instit. hist. Interv. 7.. 9. p. 130. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l. 13. c. 12.
p. 548.
16. Celestine the Fifth, an Italian, and fo^merly an Anchorite, was chosen
Pope, was a man of pious simplicity, though unskilful in the manag^m^n^ of
Affairs; this man was easily persuaded by his Cardinals, that the employment he
had was too great for his capacity; so that he had thoughts of resigning, and
was furthered therein by the crafty device of Boniface who succeeded him. For
this man feigning himself to be an Angel, spoke through a Trunk in a Wall,
where the Pope lodged, saying, Celestine, Celestine, give over thy Chair, for
it is above thy ability. The poor man was deluded this way, and though the
French King persuaded him to keep his Seat, yet he decreed that a Pope might
quit his place to turn Hermit again, as he did; though his voluntary
resignation proved no security to him from the jealousy of his Successor, but
that he was by him taken, imprisoned, and there made to dye.

CHAP. X. Of persons advanced to Honor through their own subtilty, some
accident, or for some slight occasion.
AMongst the Romans the Temple of Honor was so contrived, that there was no
way of passage into it, but through that other of Virtue. By which they
intended to declare, that the entrance and ascent unto Honor ought to be only
by virtuous actions. But things are oftentimes far otherwise than they ought to
be; Virtue is as familiary persecuted as rewa^^^d: nor have Persons of Worth
been always barely beholden to their Merit for their preferment, but perhaps to
some petty accident, or some inconsiderable circumstance that served to set the
wheels of their advancement a going.

1. Some Kings, Full. holy State, l. 4. c. 1. p. 231. Camb. Remains, page 271.
to make a jest, have advanced a man in earnest. When amongst many Articles
exhibited to King Henry the Seventh by the Irish against the Earl of Kildare,
the last was, Finally all Ireland cannot rule this Earl: Then, quoth the King,
shall this Earl rule all Ireland, and made him Deputy thereof.

2. Cambyses King of Persia dying without issue, Herod. l. 5. p. 198. Just.
hist. l. 1. p. 26. Raleighs hist. World, l. 3. c. 4. 4. p. 38. Zonar. Annal.
tom. 1. fol. 29.
the Princes agreed amongst themselves, that at an hour appointed they would
meet in a certain place no Horseback, and that he whose Horse should neigh
first after they were upon the place, should be chosen King. Oebarus the Groom
of Darius his Horse, having understood thus much from Darius, told him he would
give him the Kingdom. Where upon overnight he led the Horse of Darius to that
place, and suffered him there to cover a Mare; and the next morning when they
were all met, Darius his Horse knowing the place, and missing the Mare,
neighed: and so Darius was presently saluted King.

3. Guymond Chaplain to King Henry the First, Bak. Chron. p. 60. Speeds hist.
p. 448.
observing that (for the most part) unworthy men were advanced to the best
dignities of the Church, as he celebrated Divine Service before the King, and
was to read these words out of St. James: It rained not upon the earth three
years and six months; he read it thus, It rained upon the earth one, one, one
years and five one months. The King observed his reading, and afterward blamed
him for it. But Guymond answered, That he did it on purpose: for such Readers
were soonest preferred by his Majesty. The King smiled, and in short time after
preferred him to the Government of St. Frideswids in Oxford.

4. I find it related in the Commentaries of the Greeks, Muret. var. lect. l.
6. c. 17. p. 146.
that Semirami^ was the Concubine of one of the Kings Slaves. As Soon as Ninus
had taken notice of her, Aelian. var. hist. l. 7. c. 1. p. 199. Pet. Gregor. de
Repub. l. 7. c. 18. p. 296.
he was so taken with her beauty and wit, that he seized her for himself: by
degrees she had gained such an empire over him, that he could deny her nothing;
nor was there any thing but she durst ask. When once she had let fall in
discourse, that there was one thing which she did earnestly desire, and he had
bid her freely and openly speak it whatsoever it was, I have desired (said she)
to sit for one day in your Throne, and do justice, and that for that whole day
all should obey me in the same manner as they do you. The King smiled, granted
her request, and forthwith sent out his Edict, that on such a day all men
whatsoever should obey the commands of Semiramis, for such was the Kings
pleasure. When the day came, the Lady ascends the Throne in her Royal Apparel,
a mighty concourse there was: she at the first (as matter of trial of their
obedience) commands something to be done of no great moment. When she perceived
that she was exactly obeyed in all her precepts, she commands the Guards of the
Kings body that they seize the King himself: he is brought; that they bind him,
he is bound; that they strike off his head, it was done: and by this means from
a day she prolonged the date of her Empire many years, which she ruled with
great wisdom, success, and glory.

Full. Worth. p. 262.
5. Sir Walter Raleigh, born at Budely in Devonshire, his introduction to the
Court was upon this occasion. This Captain Raleigh coming out of Ireland into
the English Court in good habit (his Clothes being then a considerable part of
his Estate) found the Queen walking, till meeting with a plashy place, she
seemed to scruple going thereon, presently Raleigh cast and spread his new
Plush Cloak on the ground, whereon the Queen trod gently, rewarding him
afterward with many Suits for his so free and seasonable tender of so fair a
foot-cloth. An advantageous admittance into the first notice of a Prince, is
more than half a degree to preferment. When Sir Walter found some hopes of the
Queens favor reflecting on him, he wrote in a Glass-window obvious to the
Queens eye, Fain would I climb, but that I fear to fall.
Her Majesty either espying, or else being showed it, did under-write, If thy
heart fail thee, do not climb at all.
How great a person in that Court this Knight did afterward prove to be, is
scarcely unknown to any.

Raleighs hist. World, l. 5. c. 3.. 9. p. 390, 391.
6. There was in the City of Capua an ambitious Noble man called Pacuvius
Calavius, his credit grew and was upheld by furthering all popular desires.
There was at this time a plebeian Faction in the Town, and that so prevalent,
as that all was governed by the pleasure of the multitude; which also wholly
followed the direction of this Pacuvius. The people had promised to yield up
the Town to Anibal, and to meet him on the way to them with so many of their
Nobility; but they were unable to maintain any such Negotiation, without the
advice of the Senate, and the Senate mainly oppugned it. The people therefore
were incensed against the Senate, as having occasioned them to fail their new
Friend; and withal since by their promise they had discovered themselves, they
feared lest their own Senate, together with the Romans, should hold them in
straiter subjection than before. This fear being ready to break into some
outrage, Pacuvius made use of to serve his own ambition thus. He discoursed
unto the Senate as they sat in Council about these motions troubling their
City, and said, That he himself had both married a Roman Lady, and given his
Daughter in Marriage to a Roman. But that the danger of forsaking the Roman
Party was not now the greatest: for that the people were violently bent to
murder all the Senate, and after to join themselves with Anibal, who should
countenance the Fact, and save them harmless. This he spoke as a man well known
to be beloved by the people, and privy unto their designs. Having thoroughly
terrified the Senate by laying open the danger hanging over them, he promised
them nevertheless to deliver them all, and to set things in quiet, if they
would freely put themselves into his hands, offering his oath (or any other
assurance they should demand) for his faithful meaning. They all agreed. Then
shutting up the Court, and placing a Guard of his own Followers about it, that
none might enter or issue forth without his leave, he called the people to
assembly, and speaking as much evil of the Senate as he knew they would be glad
to hear, he told them, that these wicked Governors were surprised by his
policy, and all fast, ready to abide what sentence they would lay upon them.
Only thus much he advised them (as a thing which necessity required) that they
should choose a new Senate before they satisfied their anger upon the old. So
rehearsing to them the names of two or three Senators, he asked what their
judgment was of those? All cried out, that they were worthy of death. Choose
then (said he) first of all some new ones into their places. Hereat the
multitude unprovided for such an election was silent, until at last some one or
other adventured to name whom he thought fit. The men so nominated were utterly
disliked by the whole Assembly^ either for some fault, baseness, and
insufficiency, or else even because they were unknown, and therefore held
unworthy. The difficulty of the new election appearing more and more, whilst
more were to be chosen (the fittest men to be substituted, having been named
amongst the first, and not thought fit enough) Pacuvius entreated and easily
prevailed with the people, that the present Senate might for this time be
spared, in hopes of amendment hereafter (which doubtless would be) having thus
obtained pardon for all offenses past. Henceforth not only the people (as in
former times) honored Pacuvius, and esteemed him their Patron: but the
Senators also were wholly governed by him, as a person to whom they
acknowledged themselves indebted for the safety of their lives.

7. John Russel, Full. Worthies, page 281.
his Father an Esquire, was bred beyond Sea, arrived at great accomplishments,
and returned home about the time when Philip King of Castile (Father to Charles
the Fifth Emperor) was forced by foul weather into the Haven of Weymouth. But
it is an ill wind that blows no body profit: this accident proved the
foundation of Mr. Russels preferment. For when Sir Thomas Trenchard bountifully
received this Royal Guest, Mr. Russel was sent for to complete the
entertainment. King Philip taking such delight in his company, that at his
departure he recommended him to King Henry the Seventh, as a man fit to stand
before Kings, and not before mean men. Indeed he was a man of spirit, carrying
a Badge of Valor, no blemish but a beauty in his face, the loss of an eye at
the Siege of Montrule. King Henry the Eighth much favored him, making him
Controller of the Household, and Privy Counselor: and 1538. he created him Lord
Russel, and made him Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share of the golden
shower of Abbey-lands fell into his lap, two mitred ones, Tavistock and
Thorney: King Edward the Sixth made him Earl of Bedford: he dyed 1554.

Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 6. p. 371.
8. Tiberius the Emperor advanced a vulgar and mean person to the Dignity of
the Questorship, and preferred him before all the Noble persons that were
Candidates for the Office, and that only for taking off an Amphora of Wine at a
Feast which he had made, at one draught.

Herod. l. 1. p. 43, 44. Plut. de Herod. malign. p. 632.
9. There was amongst the Medes a wise man named Dejoces, the Son of Phraortes,
who aspiring to a Sovereignty over them, dealt in this manner. When the Medes
dwelt up and down in Villages, Dejoces observing great license amongst them,
managed all things that came before him with studious and affected equity. Upon
which the Medes that dwelt in the same Village, made him the Judge of all their
Controversies, which he compounded with great justice, and grew popular amongst
such as lived near him. This unde^stood by others that lived in other Villages,
they also assembled to Dejoces upon all occasions, as being the person alone
that judged without corruption: and in conclusion would suffer none to
determine their Causes in the whole Province but only Dejoces. He now finding
all to attend upon him, refuses any longer to sit in Judicature, saying, he
could not attend upon Causes all day long as he had done, without apparent
negl^ct of his own affairs. Upon this there followed much more rapine and
villainy than before: so tha^ the Medes enter into Council about their affairs,
where (by agreement) the friends of Dejoces advise to the choice of a King,
saying, else they could not long abide in their Country, by reason of the
unbridled liberty of the people. It was resolved upon, then the question was,
who should be the man they should elect? Dejoces is extolled by all, and by
general suffrage elected^ Being brought amongst them and approved, he commands
that a palace be built him worthy of a Prince, that Guards be allotted him for
the security of his person; this was performed: which done, he compels them to
build one City, and this to be well fortified and adorned; it was so, and
called Ecbatana. And Dejoces having thus firmly fortified himself and his
Palace, he caused the rest of the Medes to dwell up and down as before. Then
made he a Law, that none should enter in to the King, but should transmit his
business by such as were appointed on purpose, and no other should see the
King: That no man should laugh or spit in his presence. When he had thus
confirmed and established himself, he was fevere in his Justice; for they
sending in their Causes, they were sent back to them decided. Thus Dejoces got
the Kingdom of Media, in which were these Nations, the Busae, Paretaceni,
Struchates, Arizanti, Budii, the Magi: and having reigned fifty three years,
left Phraortes his Son his Successor.

Polyd. Virg. l. 10. Bak. Chron. p. 49. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. page 732.
10. In the Reign of King William the Second, an Abbey being vacant, two Monks
of the Covent became Suitors to him for the place, offering great sums of
money, and each of them out-bidding the other. Whereupon the King looking
about, and espying another Monk standing not far off, asked him what he would
give for the place? Who answered, That he neither had any thing to give, nor
would give any thing if he had it; but came only to wait upon him back whom it
should please the King to appoint the Abbot: Well, said the King, thou have
spoken honestly; thou art fitter to be Abbot than either of these: and so
bestowed the place upon him gratis.

11. Novellius Torquatus, Su^ton. l. 3. c. 42. p. 145. Plin. not. hist. l. 14.
p. 427.
a Millanois, was highly honored amongst the Romans, and especially by
Tiberius; for by him he was advanced to the Proconsulship of Syria, a
Government of great honor and large command in the Empire: and will you know
by what means he ascended to this high Dignity? The cause of his advancement
was; for that he could drink three Gallons of Wine at a draught, without taking
his breath; for that he fairly drank off his liquor, and left no snuff behind
him: and after he had drank so very much, he neither stammered in his speech,
nor unburdened his stomach by vomiting; and how late soever he sat up at the
Wine overnight, he would be sure to relieve the Morning-watch and Sentinels.
For these rare qualities he was dubbed Knight by the surname of Tricongius,
that is, the three Gallon Knight.

12. For the like quality C. Piso did first rise, Plin. not. hist. l. 14. p.
427.
and afterward was advanced to the Provostship of the City of Rome by the same
Tiberius; namely, for that in his Court (being now Emperor) he sat two days
and two nights drinking continually, and never stirred foot from the table.

13. In the time of William Rufus, Bak. Chron. p. 71.
King of England, there was one Roger, a poor Priest, serving a Cure in a
Village near Caen in Normandy. It chanced that Henry the Kings youngest
Brother, passing that way, made some stay in the Village, and being desirous to
hear Mass, this Roger (then Curate) was the man to say it: which he dispatched
with such celerity, that the Soldiers (who commonly love not long Masses)
commended him for it, telling their Lord, that there could not be found a
fitter Priest for Men of War than he. Whereupon Henry appointed him to follow
him: and when he came to be King, preferred him to many great places, and at
last to be Chancellor of England, and Bishop of Salisbury. When King Stephen
came to the Crown, he held this man in as great account as his Predecessor King
Henry had done, and perhaps in greater. He arrived to such wealth, that he
builded the Castles of Salisbury, the Vies, Sherburn, Malmsbury, and Newark, to
which there were no Structures comparable in the Kingdom. He had also 40000
Marks in money: which, together with his Castles, the King seized into his own
hands upon displeasure.

14. Claudius, Sueton. l. 5. c. 10. page 207. Lips. monit l. 2. c. 3. p. 164.
Ios. Antiq. l. 19. c. 2. p. 302.
upon the rumor of C. Caligula's being slain, was so extremely terrified, and
so doubtful and solicitous of his own safety, that he slily crept forth of a
Parlour at the Court wherein he then was, and conveyed himself up into a Garret
near thereabouts, and there hid himself betwixt the Hangings that hung before
the door. Whiles he lurked close there, a private Soldier chancing to run to
and fro that way, looking for plunder, espied his feet, and by earnest inquiry,
and asking who he was, happened to take knowledge of him. He drew him forth out
of the place, and (when he for fear fell down humbly at his feet, and took hold
of his knees to move his compassion) saluted him Emperor. From thence he
immediately brought him to his Fellow Soldiers, who as yet stood wavering; by
them was he bestowed in a Litter, and for that his own Servants were fled, they
by turns supported the Litter upon their shoulders, and so he was brought into
the Pretorian Camp, all sad and amazed for fear: pitied also by the multitude
that met him upon the way, as if some innocent had been haled to execution.
Being received within the Entrenchments, he lodged in the Camp all night, and
in the morning the Soldiers swore Allegiance to him. Thus was he unexpectedly
made Emperor in the fiftieth year of his age.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 3. p. 167. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 722. Pezel.
mellific. hist. tom. 2. p. 233.
15. Regillianus was General in Illyricum, and the Soldiers (being ill-affected
to Galienus the Emperor) were busying themselves upon new designs. It fortuned
that many of them supped together, and Valerianus a Tribune (in his wine and
mirth) was asking, Whence may we believe the name of Regillianus did first
come? A regno (from reigning) replied one; then said all the Soldiers there
present, He may then be a King: and thus upon the sole occasion of this one
word spoken at all adventures, he was fetched out of his Tent, and saluted
Emperor, and behaved himself with great Gallantry against the Sarmatians.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 3. p. 166.
16. Tacitus the Emperor was dead, and Florianus his Brother aspired to the
Empire; but while the Election was depending, the Oriental Armies were resolved
to have an Emperor of their own choice. They were assembled together on
purpose to pitch upon some one: when the Tribunes (as it was fit in that case)
advised them to choose fortem, clementem, probum Imperatorem; they catched at
the word, and suddenly cried out, Probus Augustus, the Gods preserve thee; so
they clad Probus in Purple and other the Imperial Ornaments, and proclaimed him
Emperor.

Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 186.
17. Pisistratus came this way to the chief Rule and sole Power in the City of
Athens. He showed himself very affable and courteous to the Citizens, and
liberal where occasion required it: so that he was looked upon as the sure
refuge and Sanctuary of such as were oppressed with injury or poverty. The
Nobility held this course of his suspected, and he was well aware thereof; and
therefore he bethought himself which way he might cajole the Nobility, and
procure a Guard about his own person: to this purpose he gives himself several
wounds, and then all wounded and bloody comes into the Marketplace, tells the
Citizens, that these were the rewards of his goodness to them and theirs, which
he had now newly received at the hands of the men of power in the City: as also
that his life was in perpetual hazard, unless they would take ^ome course to
secure it, unto whom alone he had devoted himself and life. The people were
moved with indignation, they decreed him a Guard about his person, by means of
which he suppressed the Nobility, made himself the Tyrant of that City, and
oppressed the people.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 3. c. 8. p. 95.
18. Phrynichus was chosen General of their Forces by the Athenians, not because
of any grace or favor he was in with them, not for any Nobility in his
descent, nor that he had the reputation of a rich man, for which reasons they
had often preferred others; but in a certain Tragedy having framed his Poem and
Music so much unto military motion, that for this reason alone the whole
Theater cried out, that they would have him for their General, supposing that
he could not be without military skill, who had composed a Poem that had in it
a spirit not unfitted to the condition of men of War.

Monasticon Anglic. tom. 1. p. 256.
19. Alfredus, King of the West Saxons, went out one day a hunting, and passing
by a certain Wood, he heard (as he supposed) the cry of an infant from the top
of a tree, he diligently inquired of the Huntsmen what that was, commanding one
of them to climb the tree, where in the top of it was found an Eagles Nest, and
therein a pretty sweet-fac'd Infant, wrapped up in a Purple Mantle, and upon each
arm a Bracelet of Gold, a sign of the Nobility of his Parents. This Child the
King carried with him, caused him to be baptized, and from the Nest wherein he
was found, he gave him the name of Nesting: after he had given him noble
Education, he advanced him to the Dignity of an Earl.

CHAP. XI. Of sundry Customs that were in use and force with different Nations
and People.
AMongst the many millions of faces which are to be seen in the World, there
are not any two of them that are exactly and in all points alike: and though
there may be some similitude in voices, yet there is something in every one
that is peculiar, and that serves to difference and distinguish it from that of
another man: thus there is no less variety in the wits, minds, dispositions and
inclinations of men; and hereupon it is, that the Customs and Manners of
Nations and particular persons do accordingly differ and alter from one another.

1. The Egyptians at their Feasts use to carry about the dried Anatomy of a man
in a Coffer, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 150. Camer. oper. subcis. cent. 1.
c. 12. p. 75.
not so much in memory of Osyris slain by Typho, and in a Chest cast into the
Sea; but that being inflamed with Wine, they might mutually exhort one another
to the use and enjoyment of these present good things, because e're long all of
them would be as that Skeleton.

2. The Spartans when they brought home with them any Friend or Guest, Plut. in
Sympos. Erasm. Adag.
showing them the doors, they used to say, Not a word that is spoken passes out
here. Plutarch also tells, that by the institution of Lycurgus, when they
invited any to feast with them, he who was the elder stood at the door of the
Dining Room, and pointing to it, said to all that entered, Nothing that is
spoken passes these doors to be told abroad; expressing thereby that all the
Guests had a full freedom and liberty to speak without any constraint upon them.

3. The same Spartans in those Feasts of theirs that are called Phiditia, Plut.
adv. Stoicos, p. 552. Et in Lac^nicis.
have their Prefects or Stewards who bring in two or three of the Helotes (that
is, their Slaves) drunk and intoxicate with Wine, and expose them publicly in
that posture to their Youth, that they may see what it is to be drunk, and that
by their unseemly and uncomely behavior they might be brought into a
detestation of that vice, and to a love of temperance and sobriety.

4. The Massilienses have standing before the Gates of their City two Coffins,
Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 46.
one wherein the bodies of Freemen, the other wherein those of Servants are
carried in a Cart to burial, which they do without weeping; their mourning is
finished upon the Funeral day, with a Feast among their friends. There is also
a public poison kept in that City, which is delivered to that person, who has
made it appear to the Magistrates of six hundred (that is, their Senate) that
he has sufficient causes to desire to dye. Also they suffer no man to enter
into the Town with any Weapon; but there is appointed at the Gate one to
receive them at their entrance, and to deliver them back at their departure.
Thus as their entertainments to others are humane, so to themselves they are
safe.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 45.
5. There is a memorable Custom of the Athenians, that a freed-man convicted of
ingratitude toward his Patron, shall forfeit the Privilege of his Freedom. As
who should say, we refuse to have thee a Citizen, who art so base a valuer of
so great a gift: nor can we ever be brought to beli^ve, that he can be
advantageous to the City, whom we perceive to be villainous at home. Go thy way
then, and be still a Servant, seeing thou know not how to esteem of thy
freedom.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 157.
6. The same Athenians (by an ancient usage amongst them) as soon as their
children came to some maturity, they designed them to their several Trades, on
this manner. They laid before them Instruments and Tools of all kinds, and look
unto whatsoever the Youth applied himself, or se^em^d to be delighted with, to
that kind of Handicraft they disposed him, as if Nature it self had thereby
hinted out so much to them.

Alex ab Alex. in di^b. Genial. l. 3. c. 5. p.
7. The Romans, when in debate about the punishment of any crime, if it sell
out, that in the suffrages the Votes were evenly divided, the Judgment passed
to the advantage of the Delinquent. Which was also often done by the Athenians;
for when they collected Votes about the extinguishment of the Mytilenians, and
found them equal on each side, the opinion of Diodorus was followed, because it
was the more merciful.

Plut. in quest. Roman.
8. The Triumphers at Rome of old used to invite the Consuls and Senate to the
Triumphal Feast; but afterward they publicly besought the Consuls, that they
would not come, and sent Messengers to them to desire their absence. For the
most honorable Seat was the place of the triumphant person, and he was to be
attended on home from the Feast: which it was not lawful to do to any man (the
Consuls present) but only to themselves.

Athen. D^ipnos. l. 8. c.
9. Theognis tells, it was a Custom amongst the Rhodians, in their public
Prayers, to invite the Swallow about the Springtime (which they called (...))
and their acclamations were in these words: Come Swallow, come, that bring
along with thee a pleasant season, and delightful years.

Zuing. Th^atr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 179.
10. The Athenians at the first entrance of a new Servant into their houses, had
this Custom, the Master or Mistress threw Figs, and Dates, and Nuts, and other
Junkets upon him, which were scrambled for by the rest of the Servants. After
the same manner they used to do to Ambassadors, to such as were newly entered
upon the Priestly Office, to men that were newly married, and to all others to
whom they wished well, because it was a sign of prosperity and abundance.

Herodot. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 182.
11. The Scythians had this Custom amongst them, that if any man had received an
injury from another, which he thought he had not sufficient power to revenge
upon his Adversary, he sacrificed an Ox, he cut the flesh in pieces and boiled
them. Then spreading the Hide of him upon the ground, he sat upon him with his
hands upon his back, than which there is not a greater way of supplication
amongst the Scythians. He that would might take part of the flesh of the
Sacrifice, and standing with his right foot upon the Hide, swore to give him
his assi^tance, and this Oath was held as inviolable.

12. Amongst the Romans he who was in question for his life, Alex. ab. Alex.
dier. Genesis l. 3. c. 5. p.
when he was brought forth at the day of trial before the people, both himself,
his friends, relations, and nearest neighbors were to stand in squalid and
sordid clothes, all filthy, weeping, with the hair of their heads and beards
grown, deprecating the punishment: That by this deformed and uncomely habit,
they might move the people to compassion and mercy before such time as the
Tribes were put upon the Vote.

13. In Meroe amongst the Egyptians, Alex. dier. Genesis l. 3. c. 5. p.
if the King has committed ought that is evil, they do not punish him at all:
but all men turning from him, and shunning any converse with him, he is
suffered to dye with grief and consumption.

14. The Custom of the Ethiopians is not to punish any Subject with death,
Herod. l. 2. Diod. Sicul. rer. Antiq. l. 3. c. 1. p. 71.
though he is condemned; but one of the Lictors is sent to the Malefactor with
the sign of death carried before him: which received, the Criminal goes home,
and puts himself to death. To change death into banishment is held unlawful;
and it is said, that when one had received the sign of death, and had
intentio^s to fly out of Ethiopia, his Mother being apprehensive of it,
fastened her girdle about his neck, and he not offering to resist her with his
hands, lest he should thereby fasten a reproach upon his Family, was strangled
by her.

15. In the greater India in the Kingdom of Var (in which St. Thomas is said to
be slain and buried) he amongst them who is to undergo a capital punishment,
Paul. Venet. Orient. rerum, l. 3. c. 24. p.
begs of the King, that he may rather dye in honor of some God, than an
inglorious death by the hands of the Hangman. If the King in mercy grant him
it, by his kindred with great joy he is led through the City with mighty pomp,
he is placed in a chair with sharp knives all hung about his neck. When he
comes to the place of Execution, with a loud voice he affirms he will dye in
honor of this or that God: then taking one of the knives, he wounds himself
where he pleases, then a second, then a third, till his strength fail, and so
he is honorably burnt by his friends.

16. The Mosynaeci that live beyond the River Carambis, Alex. dier. Genial. l.
3. c. 11. p.
if their King whom they have chosen, have done any thing amiss, they punish
him in this sort; they suffer him not to eat any thing for one day entire.

17. The Scots have a Custom (which is also at Millain) they call it an
Indictment: Bodin. Daemonol. l. 4. c. 1. p. Zuing. v. 1. l. 2. p. 1205.
there is a Chest in the Church, into which any man may cast a paper having
(suppose) the name of the Wizard, the thing done by him, the place and time,
and also the Witnesses set down. This Chest in the presence of the Judge is
opened, the Kings Proctor being by, and this is done every fifteenth day, that
there may be a private inquiry made of all such persons, whose names are there
found, and they accordingly to be brought before them.

18. The ancient Romans appointed, Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 220.
that about the Axes which were carried before the Magistrates, bundles of Rods
should be bound, that while those bundles were unloosing, a convenient space of
time should be given to the Magistrate, ^est in a heat of passion he should
command such things to be done, whereof afterward he should but in vain repent
himself.

19. The Egyptians yearly compelled all persons to give in their names and
profession to the Magistrate, Camer. open. subcisiv. cent, 1. cap. 15. p. 89.
Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 2^0.
and such as they found to lie, or live upon unlawful gains, they adjudged to
death. Also about the neck of their principal Justice, there is hung the Image
of a Deity of Gold and Gems, which Deity they called Truth, by which they
showed, that truth ought always to be in the heart and mouth of a Judge: and
when they beheld that, they should prefer it before all other things.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 224.
20. The Romans used to take away the horses from such men as were of a fat and
corpulent body, as a mark of infamy upon them. For when through luxury they had
unfitted themselves for the service of their Country, they would they should be
without public honor in it. Also they caused such as were convicted of
cowardice to be let blood in the arm, that they might dishonourably lose that
blood which they feared to shed for the honor and safety of their Country.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 224.
21. That was also a praiseworthy Custom of the Romans, whereby it was
forbidden, that those spoils which they had taken from their enemies, and
consumed through length of time, should ever be renewed. By which they seemed
to take care that that hatred which might appear to be retained while the
spoils were standing, should in some time be obliterated, and cease with the
spoils themselves.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 226.
22. The Corinthians were wont, without much examination, to hang up such as
were suspected of theft, and upon the third day after the matter was strictly
examined by the Judge, then if it was found, that they had really committed the
theft, whereof they had been accused, they left them hanging upon the Gallows;
but if they were adjudged to be innocent, they were taken thence, and buried
with a preface of honor at the public charge.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 47.
23. The Thracians did celebrate the birth of any with mournful complaints, and
their Funerals with all the signs of mirth and expressions of joy: this they
did without any directions therein from the learned, but only moved thereunto
with apprehensions of the miserable condition of humane life.

Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 47.
24. The Lycians, when any matter of mourning does befall them, use to put upon
themselves the clothes and habit of a Woman, that so being moved with the
deformity of their array, they might be willing the sooner to lay aside their
foolish grief.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 228.
25. The old Gauls had a Custom, that when they were about to make War, they
called forth their armed Youth unto Council, and he whosoever he was that came
last upon that summons, was put to death by diverse torments.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 3. p. 697.
26. The Romans, whether they went into the Country, or traveled further, at
their return used to send a Messenger before them to their Wives, to let them
know, that they are at hand; and upon this reason they did it, because women in
the absence of their husbands are supposed to be detained with many cares, and
much employment, possibly they have brawls and discontents in the family: that
therefore all these might be laid aside, and that they might have time to
receive their husbands in peace, and with cheerfulness, they send before them
the news of their arrival.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 3. p. 698.
27. Plutarch says, that the King of Persia has one of his Bedchamber, who
has this given him in charge, that in the morning when he first enters the
Kings Chamber, he should awake him with these words, Arise O King, and take
care of those affairs which M^soromasdes has commanded thee to take care of.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 1. p. 229.
28. The Jews, before they entered Battle, by public Edict commanded them to
depart from the Army, who were newly married, and had not brought home their
wives: also all those that had planted a Vineyard, and had not yet eaten of the
fruit of it: and those who had begun to build a house, and had not yet finished
it, together with these all such as were cowardly and fearful; lest the desire
of those things which the one had begun, or the saint-heartedness of the other
should occasion them to fight feebly; and also by their fears possess the
hearts of such as were bold and valiant.

29. The manner of making War amongst the Romans, A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 16.
c. 4. p. Plut. in Numa, p. Livii hist. Zuing. v. 1. l. 2. p. 192.
and the recovery of such things as were injuriously detained was this: They
sent forth Feciales or Heralds, whom they also called Orators, crowned with
Vervain, that they might make the Gods witnesses, who are the Revengers of
broken Leagues. He that was crowned with Vervain carried a Turff with the grass
upon it out of the Tower: and the Ambassador, when he came to their borders,
who were the offerers of the injury, covering his face with a woollen veil:
Hear, O Jupiter, says he, hear ye Borders (and then naming the people whose
Borders they were) hear ye that which is right. I am the public Messenger of
the people of Rome, and justly and piously come as their Ambassador. Then he
speaks all their demands, and calls Jupiter to witness: If I unjustly or
impiously demand those men or those things to be yielded back to the people of
Rome, do thou then never suffer me to return in safety to my own Country: this
he does, when he is entered upon their Borders, when he meets any man, when he
enters the Gates of the City, when he comes into the Forum; then if that which
he demands is not restored, at the end of thirty three days he thus declares
War, who is the Father of the Fatherhood, the chief Herald, and who is crowned
with Vervain. Hear Jupiter and Juno Quirinus, celestial, terrestrial, and
infernal Gods, I call you to witness, that this people (and names it) is
unjust, and will not do right. But of these matters the elder of us will
consult in our own Country how to regain our Right. Then he being returned to
Rome, they enter upon the debate; and if it is decreed as right, then the
Herald returns with a Spear in his hand pointed with Iron. Upon their Borders
(before three children at least) he pronounces that such a people have offered
force to and injured the people of Rome; that the people of Rome has commanded
that War be made with them: for which cause I and the people of Rome declare
and make War with such a people; and when he has said this, he throws the
Javelin or Spear upon their Borders.

30. The Persians desired not to see their children before such time as they
had completed their seventh year; Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 48.
and for this reason, that they might the better be able to bear their death,
in case they should dye when they were little ones.

31. The Danes used, Heyl. Cosm. p. 318.
when the English drank, to stab them, or cut their throats; to avoid which
villainy, the party then drinking requested some of the next unto him to be his
surety or pledge, whilst he paid Nature her due: and hence have we our usual
custom of pledging one another.

32. At Negapatan, Herb. Trav. l. 3. p. 309.
a Town upon the River Negay, and in the Coasts of Chormandel, they have this
odd custom in the celebration of their Marriages: A Bramyn (or Priest) a Cow
and the two Lovers go together to the waterside, where the Bramyn mutters a
Prayer of small matter and to as little purpose: which finished in order, they
link hands, and have the Cows tail commixed, as a holy testimony; on all
together the Bramyn pours his hallowed Oil, and forces the beast into the
River, whereinto she goes so far, till they be to the middle in water: the Cow
returns not, nor do they disunite, till she is frighted with the water; then
being on the shore they untie their hands, and hold that conjunction sacred and
powerful ever after.

Herb. Trav. l. 3. p. 340.
33. When any Chinese dies, they wash him every where, perfume him next, and
then apparel him, they put his best clothes on, and hate to let his head be
naked: that done, they seat him in his chair, and make him sit as if he were
not dead, but living. At a set time his Wise enters the room, she first does
him respect, kisses him, and takes her farewell, by expressing so much love and
sorrow as is possible. At her departure she takes her lodging, and her children
next enter, where they kneel and kiss his hands; yea strive to outvie each
other in their ejaculations, and such outward notions of ^orrow and piety, as
is imaginable, beating their breasts, and pouring out tears in abundance. Next
to them his kindred do their parts, and then his friends and other
acquaintance. The third day they cos^in him in most precious wood, cover it
with a costly cloth, and over it place his Image; for fifteen days the Corpse
rest so, each day having a Table spread with dainty meats, but nightly the
Priests eat it, and burn Incense, and offer an expiatory Sacrifice. When they
carry it to the Grave (which is neither within any Town or City) they have
Women that do accompany it, purposely hired to howl, to tear their hair, and to
move others to compassion. Sometimes upon his Coffin they place diverse pictures
of dead men, whom they entreat to show him the best way to Paradise. That done,
his Wife and Children for some days seclude themselves from the sight of men;
and when they go abroad, go dolorously habited. They put course Sackcloth next
their skin, have their clothes made long and plain, and for three years scarce
laugh, or seem to joy in any thing: but contrariwise endeavor to the utmost of
their power to aggrandise their duty by a continued lamentation, abstinence
from public Feasts and Pastimes: yea in all their Letters instead of their
Names subscribe themselves such a ones disobedient and unworthy Child, etc.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 66. page 296.
34. It was a Custom in Alexandria, that upon certain stated and appointed days,
some particular persons were carried about in a Chariot, to whom it was given
in charge, that they should pass throughout the whole City, and making a stand
at whose door they pleased, they should there sing aloud the faults that the
persons in that house were guilty of; they might not causelessly reproach any,
but publish the very truth; to which purpose they were studiously beforehand
to inquire into the manner of the life of each Citizen. The end of this custom
was, that men might be moved to return by the consideration of that shame which
was publicly provided for a dishonest life.

Tacit. Annal. l. 12. page Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 6. p. 57. Athen.
Deipnosoph. l. 2. c. 2.
35. The Custom of establishing a mutual and lasting friendship betwixt two, and
also of Princes when they entered into inviolable Leagues or Alliances, was
this: They joined their right hands, and then both their Thumbs were hard bound
about with a string; as soon as the blood came into the extremities of them,
they were lightly pricked that the blood came, and th^n ^ach licked up some of
the others blood. Patric. Senens. de Regno, l. 8. tit. 20. p. 560.
The Friendship or League contracted by this ceremony was held most sacred, as
being signed with their own blood. In this manner the Inhabitants of the Island
Palmaria, the Scythians, Georgians, and diverse other Nations begin their
friendships, and as we read in Athenaeus, the Germans themselves.

36. It was a common use amongst the Romans, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c.
91. p. 425.
and diverse other Nations, as well amongst Princes as private persons, that if
there happened any difference of an extraordinary character amongst them, they
used to send a public Officer, or private Massenger, to let them know (whom
they conceived they had injury by) that they did solemnly renounce all
friendship with them, and that they did forbid them their houses, and all
expectation of any rites of hospitality. And they thought it unreasonable to
hurt him by word or deed, who had been their friend, till they had sent him
this declaration, that he might stand upon his guard. Thus Badius the
Campanian, betwixt both Armies renounced friendship with Q. Crispinus, a Roman,
that so he might have the freedom to assault him as an Enemy; and thus dealt
King Amasis with Polycrates, not that he had disobliged him, but that he feared
his misfortune.

37. Amongst the Persians they had this Custom; M^ret. var^ lect. l. 8. c. 25.
p. 218. Chelwind. Hist. collect. cent. 1. p. ^.
That when any was accused in the Court for a breach of the Laws, though it did
plainly appear, that he was guilty, yet should he not be immediately condemned,
but first there should be an exact inquiry made into the whole course of his
life, and a strict account should be taken, whether his evil and unhandsom
actions, or his gallant and commendable ones were the most: then if the number
of his base and unworthy doings were found to be the greatest, he was
condemned; if otherwise, he was absolved. For they thought it was beyond humane
power perpetually to keep to that which was right, and that they were to be
accounted good, not who never did amiss, but who for the most part did that
which was honest.

38. When the great Chan is dead, Dinoth. memorab. l. 2. p. 72. Kornman. de
mirac. mortuor. part. 5. c. 30. p. 14.
and his Funerals prepared, his Body is carried to the Mountain Alcan, which is
the place appointed for the sepulture of their Kings: and then those that
attend upon the Corpse thither, are commanded to kill all persons indifferently
whom they meet with upon the way, and to charge them, that they perform
diligent service to their dead King in the other World: when the dead body of
the great Chan Mongo, who was the fifth in order, was conducted to that place,
there were no less than twenty thousand slain by this means upon the way; at
another time 300000 were so killed upon the like occasion, says Kornmannus.

39. The Commonwealth of the Lycians heretofore ordained, Cause. holy Court,
tom. 1. l. 2. p. 32.
that all those who would propose any novelty in matter of Law, should deliver
it in public with a Halter about their necks, to the end, that if their
propositions were not found to be good and profitable to the Republic, the
Authors thereof should immediately be strangled upon the place.

40. The Funerals of the Indian Perses are in this manner: Herb. Trav. l. 1. p.
54.
They put the dead body into a Winding Sheet, all the way his Kindred beat
themselves, but in great silence, till they come within fifty or an hundred
paces of the burial place, where the Herbood or Priest meets them (observing
ten foot distance) attired in a yellow Scarff and a thin Turbant. The
Necesselars (or Bearers) carry the Corpse upon an Iron Biere (wood is forbidden,
in that it is sacred to the fire which they worship) to a little Shed or
Furnace, where (so soon as some mystic Anticks are acted) they hoise it up to
the top of a round stone Building, twelve foot high, and eighty in circuit: the
entrance is only at the N. E. side, where through a small grate or hole they
convey the carcass into a common Monument: the good men into one, and the bad
men into another. It is flat above, wholly open, plaster'd with smooth white
Loam, hard and smooth like that of Paris. In the midst thereof is a hole
descending to the bottom, made to let in the putrefaction issuing from the
melted bodies, which are thereupon laid naked, in two rows, exposed to the Suns
flaming rage, and merciless appetite of ravening Vultures, who commonly are fed
by these carcasses, tearing the raw flesh asunder, and deforming it in an ugly
sort: so that the abominable stink of those unburied bodies (in some places
300) is so loathsome and strong, that they would prove worse seen than spoken
of. The desire to see strange sights allures a Traveller, but the Persees
delight not that a stranger should go up to view them.

Godw. Romans Antiq. l. 2.. 3. c. 6. p. 87, 88, 89. Patric. de Instit. Reipub. l.
4. tit. 3. page 159.
41. In the Roman Marriages, which commenced with Contracts mutually sealed and
signed with the Signets of diverse Witnesses there present, there were sundry
customs observed by them. The man in token of good will gave to the woman a
Ring, which she was to wear upon the next finger to the little one of the left
hand, because unto that finger alone a certain artery proceeds from the
heart. The word Nuptiae which signifies Marriage, had its derivation a nubo,
which in old time signified to cover; the custom being, that the woman should
be brought to her husband with a covering or veil cast over her face. Also
because of the good success that Romulus and his followers had in the violent
taking away of the Sabine women; they continued a custom, that the man should
come and take away his wife by a seeming violence from the lap or bosom of her
mother or her next kin. She being thus taken away, her husband did dissever and
divide the hair of her head with the top of a Spear, wherewith some Fencer had
been formerly killed; which Ceremony did betoken, that nothing should disjoin
them, but such a Sp^ar or such like violence. Toward night the woman was
brought home to her husbands house with five Torches, signifying thereby the
need which married persons have of five Goddesses and Gods, Jupiter, Juno,
Venus, Suadela, and Diana, who is also called Lucina. When the woman was thus
brought to the door, then did she anoint the posts of the door with Oil: from
which Ceremony the wife was called Vxor, quasi unxor. This ended the Bride-men
did lift her over the Threshold, and so carried her in by a seeming violence,
because in modesty she would not seem to go without force into that place where
she must cease to be a Maid. At her carrying in, all the company did cry out
with a loud voice, Talassio, Talassio: for which custom Plutarch alleges this
reason for one: At the rapture of the Sabine Virgins, there were some of the
poorer sort spied carrying away one of the fairest women, some of the chief
Citizens would have taken her from them, but they began to cry out, That they
carried her to Talassius, a great man, and well beloved among the Romans: At
the naming of Talassius they suffered her to be carried away, themselves
accompanying her, and often crying, Talassio, Talassio, from whence it has
been continued as a custom amongst the Romans ever after at their Marriages to
sing Talassio, Talassio.

42. The black people, I. Huighen Linschotens Voyages, l. 1. c. 41. p. 76.
Parch. pilgr. tom. 1. l. 7. c. 7.. 4. p. 861.
or Caffares in the Land of Mosambique, have a custom amongst them, that when
they go to War against their Enemies, he that takes or kills most men, is
accounted the best and bravest man, and much respected. As a proof of his
gallantry unto his King, of as many as he has slain or taken Prisoners, he
cuts off the privy members, drys them well, because they should not rot; with
these thus dried he comes before his King with great reverence, in the presence
of the principal men of the Village, where taking these members one by one into
his mouth, he spits them on the ground at the Kings feet, which the King with
great thanks accepts, and the more to reward and recompense their valor, he
causes them all to be taken up, and given him again for a sign and token of
Honor. Whereby from that time forwards they are accounted as Knights, and they
take all those members, wherewith the King has thus honored them, and tie
them all upon a string like a Bracelet or Chain, and when they marry or go to
any Wedding or Feasts, the Bride or Wife of such Knights do wear the foresaid
Chain about their necks, which amongst them is as great an honor, as it is
with us to wear the golden Fleece, or the Garter in England; and the Brides of
such Knights are therewith as proud, as if they were the mightiest Queens in
all the World.

43. When any of the Indian Noblemen or Bramenes (that is, I. Huighen
Linschotens Voyages, l. 1. c. 36. p. 70.
Priests) dye, their friends assemble together and make a hole in the ground,
wherein they throw much wood, sweet Sanders, and other Spices, with Rice, Corn,
and much Oil, because the fire should burn the stronger. Which done, they lay
the dead Bramene in it, then comes his Wife with Music, and many of her
n^arest friends, all singing certain praises in commendation of her Husbands
life, encouraging her to follow her Husband and to go with him unto another
World. Then she takes all her Jewels and parts them amongst her friends, and
so with a cheerful countenance she leapeth into the fire, and is presently
covered with wood and oil; so she is quickly dead, and with her Husbands body
is burnt to ashes.

CHAP. XII. Of the several things that several persons and Nations have set
apart and worshipped as their Gods.
AMongst all the Nations under the whole Canopy of Heaven, there are none so
barbarous and cruel, none that are so utterly lost to all the sentiments of
Humanity and Civility, but that they have embraced and continued amongst them
the notion of a Deity, or some Being that ought to be adored by them. This is a
Principle so deeply engraven in the very Nature of Man, that no time nor
change, nor chance has ever been able to obliterate it: so that rather than
men would have nothing to worship, they were contented to be obliged to their
Gardens for their Gods; and indeed herein their ignorance and folly is chiefly
to be lamented, that they still made choice of any thing rather than the true
God, to pay their constant homage and venerations unto.

S^^^lli^. E^. l. 4. c. 1. p. 179. Dinoth. l. 2. p. 80.
1. The E^yptians, amongst the many Animals which they esteemed as Gods, did
especially worship an Ox they called Apis; he was black, remarkable for some
spots of white, and in his tongue and tail different from all others. The day
in which he was calved, was held a as Festival throughout the whole Nation. At
Arsinoe they worship the Crocodile; at the City of Hercules the Ichucumon, a
Creature that is enemy to the Crocodile: Others of them adore a Cat; some a
Falcon; others the Ibis, and with that religious observation, that it is capital
to kill any of these; and if by accident or disease any of them dye, they
honorably interre them, and lament over them with all solemnity.

I^vii Elog. l. 4. p. 192.
2. The Inhabitants of Hispaniola worship Goblins, which though they see not,
yet they believe to wander in the night time about their houses. The wooden
Images of these they religiously adore, calling them Zemini, the Disposers of
good and bad Fortune.

Dinoth. l. 2. p. 84.
3. In the Province of the Acladans, amongst the Tartars, every Family does
worship its Progenitor.

Dinoth. l. 2. p. 84. Linschot. Voyages, l. 1. c. 33. p. 64. Dinoth. l. 2. p.
84. Herb. Trav. l. 3. p. 302.
4. In the Island of Iava they worship whatsoever it is that they first meet and
chance to see in the morning, and pray unto it all the day after, although it
be a Hog, or worse thing.

5. They of Calecut worship the Statue of the Devil; the Chapel in which he is
adored, is not above three paces from the ground; in the midst of it is a
Throne, and a brazen Statue that is framed sitting in it, with a Diadem about
his head, like the Pontifical Mitre amongst the Romans. He has four prominent
Horns upon his head, his mouth stretched out to an unreasonable wideness, a
crooked nose, threatening eyes, cruel countenance, crooked hands, and feet like
to those of a Cock, which put together, render the Devil wickedly deformed.

L^ps. monit. l. 1. c. 3. p. 38. Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 10. page 1071.
Hak. Apol. l. 4. c. 10.. 3. p. 432. Val. Max. l. 2. c. 5. p. 43, 44.
6. Those of the Province of Manta worship an Emerauld, a great and beautiful
Gem, and this they esteem of as the true Deity; the sick came in Pilgrimage to
visit it, and there offered their gifts, which the Cacique and Priests turned
to their own profit.

7. The Romans made a Goddess of their very City, whose Temple was situate upon
the top of the Mount Palatine, as appears by that of Claudian, bringing in the
Provinces as Suppliants to visit the Goddess Rome. Claudian. l. 2.
Convenient ad tecta Deae, quae candida lucent
Monte Palatino --
They meet at the Goddess Temple, which does shine
So white and glorious on Mount Palatine.
And Lucan (as a Goddess) solemnly directs his Prayer to her. Lucan. l. 1.
-- Summique O Numinis instar
Roma fave coeptis --
And thou as greatest pow're divine,
Aelian. var. hist. l. 12. c. 11. p. 307. Sabellic. Ex. l. 4. c. 1. p. 178.
Favor, O Rome, this enterprise of mine.
A number of Deities the Romans worshipped, that they might do them some good:
but they worshipped the Fever or Ague, that it might do them the less hurt and
harm.

H^b. Trav. l. 3. p. 310.
8. The Inhabitants of Negapatan have a massy Copper gilded Pagod (or Idol)
mounted upon a triumphant Chariot (moved by eight mighty Wheels) over-laid with
pure Gold: the ascent is easy, Huigher. Linschot. Voyages, l. 1. c. 44. p. 82.
spacious, and by many steps, on which are place^ on a solemn day the Priests
and many young Maidens, who to enrich the Devil, pro^^itute their bodies to the
libidinous flames of wicked men. The procession is not unlike the Thensa; used
by the superstitious Romans, happy is that man, rich and poor, great and base,
that can fasten a hand to draw the Chariot; yea they account them happiest, who
out of a frantic zeal temerariously throw their naked bodies in the way, that
by the ponderousness of the Pagod and his Chariot, their wretched bodies may be
crushed in pieces, being for this thought Martyrs: and such is the stupid folly
of these men, that they persuade their Daughters to become Strumpets to please
their Pagods: insomuch that it is a great wonder to see so many Girls at such
immaturity so impudently delighted with the impure conversation of filthy men.

9. In the City of Meacco the Metropolis of Iapan, Herb. Trav^ l. 3. p. 335^
besides seventy Temples wherein they number 3333 Manada's or little Idols;
there is one more notable than the rest, like the Rhodian Coloss, huge and
wonderful. It was built by Tycozamma, and without much pain and cost was not
finished: It is framed of gilded Copper, its posture is sitting in a chair, of
seventy ^oot high, and eighty broad; his head is capable to support fifteen
men, who may stand together upon it without pressing: his Thumb is ^orty inches
about; and his other limbs proportionable.

10. At Dabys is another Manada or Idol, Herb. Trav. l. 3. p. 335.
no less infamous and resorted to: this Devil or Moloch is of concave Copper,
vast thick, and double gilded; its height is twenty four foot, and would be
more, but that they have formed it kneeling; his buttocks resting upon his
legs, after the usual mode of the Eastern Pagans; his arms are stretched to the
uttermost, and at solemn times is in^lamed within, and sacrificed unto by
offering him a Child, which in his embraces is fried to death in an infernal
torture.

11. But more of note is another at Tenehedy Eastward thence, Herb. Trav. l. 3.
p. 336^
where Satan visibly plays the Impostor. The Fotique or Temple there is of rare
structure, and daily served by a multitude of hellish Bonzees or Priests, not
admitted to attend there, except they be young, well shaped, and potent
Disciples of Venus. Every new Moon they solemnly betroth unto the Devil a
Damosel, whose Parents account the Ceremony happy and honorable; if any be
more fair or singular than another, she is selected, by the lustful Priests
devoted and brought into the Temple, and placed right against the Manada or
Idol. The room is first made glorious with Lamps of burnished Gold, and a
preparation by the burning of Lignum vitae, Gums, and Perfumes, such as are
most curious and costly: by and by the Lamps extinguish by a kind of miracle,
and in a gross darkness the Prince of darkness approaches and abuses her (so
she imagines) and it is the rather credited, in that the Devil leaves behind
him certain scales (like those of fishes) an argument of no Phantasm: but by
this hellish conjunction they swell not, unless the Bonzee second it. Satan is
no sooner gone, but she is saluted by the Bonzees, who ravish her with Songs
and pleasant Music: which ended, she acquaints them with her fortune, and
resolves them in such questions, as she by their instruction propounded to the
Devil, and he had satisfied her in. She comes out from thence with applause,
and ever after is reputed holy and honorable.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 76. p. 350. Justin. hist. l. 43. p.
12. The Alani have amongst them no Temple nor Shrine, nor so much as a Cottage
with a covered roof is there any where to be seen, but with barbarous
Ceremonies they fix a naked Sword in the ground; and this they religiously
worship as the Mars or God of those Regions, that they travel about in, and
where they make their abode.

Seld. Syntagm. c. 6. page 169, 170, 171. Godw. Heb. Antiq. l. 4. c. 2. p. 177.
Diod. Sicul. bibl. l. 20. p. 663.
13. Moloch (so called quasi Melech, which in most of the Oriental Languages
signifies a King) was the God of the Ammonites, to whom they offered their Sons
and their Daughters; not that this was his ordinary Sacrifice, but only in
extraordinary cases and distresses, and being looked upon as a work more
meritorious. Generally they caused their children to pass through the fire to
him, that is, betwixt two fires, as a kind of februation; for his Priests had
persuaded them, that their Sons or Daughters would die speedily that were not
thus as it were hallowed. The Carthaginians worshipped this Idol under the name
of Saturn, and indeed Baal, and Saturn, and Moloch are reputed to be all one.
The Image of this Idol was of Brass, wonderful for its greatness, having the
face of a Bullock, and hands spread abroad like a man that opens his hands to
receive somewhat from some other. This Image was hollow, having seven Closets
or Apartments therein: one for Wheatflour of the finest, a second for Turtles,
a third for a Sheep, a fourth for a Ram, a fifth for a Calf, a sixth for an Ox,
and to him that would offer his Son or his Daughter, the ^eventh Conclave or
Chamber was opened; and then while the Boy was burning in the Idol with the
fire that was made under him, the Parents, and such as were present, were to
dance, and to play upon Timbrels, and beat upon Drums, that they might not hear
the sorrowful cries of their child, while thus sacrificing. Anameleck and
Adrameleck the Gods of Sepharvaim, mentioned 2 Kings 17. are supposed to be the
same with this Idol, whose Priests were called Chemarim from their blackness;
the place of this Idol amongst the Israelites was Tophet, the Valley of the
Sons of Hinnom, that is, of lamentation or roaring, from the cries of them that
were offered. The Carthaginians being greatly distressed by Agathocles, at one
time offered or burnt unto this Moloch (their Saturn) no less than two hundred
choice Youths of their Nobility. This idolatrous custom continued to the days
of Tiberius.

I. Huighen Linschotens Voyages, l. 1. c. 14. p. 81.
14. In the Island of Ceylon there is a high Hill called Pico d' Adam, or Adams
Hill, upon the top whereof stands a great house, as big as a Cloister. In
this place, in times pas^, shrined in gold and precious stones was kept the
Tooth of an Ape, which was esteemed the holiest thing in all India, and had the
greatest resort unto it from all the Countries round about it; so that it
passed St. James in Galisia, and St. Michaels Mount in France, by reason of the
great Indulgences and Pardons that were there daily to be had. For which cause
it was sought unto with great devotion by all the Indians within four or five
hundred miles round about in great multitudes. But it happened An. 1554. when
the Portugals made a road out of India, and entered the Island of Ceylon, they
went up upon the Hill, where they thought to find great Treasure, because of
the same that was spread abroad of the great resort and offerings in that
place. They diligently searched the Cloister, and turned up every stone
thereof, and found nothing but a little Coffer made fast, with many precious
stones, wherein lay the Apes Tooth. This Relic they took with them unto Goa,
which when the Kings of Pegu, Sian, Bengala, Bisnagar, and others heard of,
they were much grieved, that so costly a Jewel was in that manner taken from
them. Whereupon by common consent they sent their Ambassadors unto the Viceroy
of India, desiring him of all friendship to send them their Apes Tooth again,
offering him for a Ransom, besides other Presents, which as then they sent unto
him, 700000 Ducats in Gold, which the Viceroy for covetousness of the money was
minded to do. But the Archbishop of Goa, Don Gaspar dissuaded him from it,
saying, That they being Christians, ought not to give it them again, being a
thing wherein Idolatry might be furthered, and the Devil worshipped; but rather
were bound by their profession to root out and abolish all Idolatry and
Superstition. By this means the Viceroy was persuaded to change his mind, and
flatly denied the Ambassadors request, having in their presence first burnt the
Apes Tooth, the ashes whereof he caused to be thrown into the Sea. The
Ambassadors departed, astonished that he refused so great a sum of money for a
thing which he so little esteemed. Not long after there was a Beniane that had
gotten another Apes Tooth, and gave out, that he had miraculously found the
same Apes Tooth that the Viceroy had; and that it was revealed unto him by a
Pagod (that is, one of their Gods) in a Vision, that assured him it was the
same, which he said the Portugals thought they had burned; but that he had been
there invisible, and taken it away, laying another in the place. This the
Heathens presently believed, so that it came unto the King of Bisnagars ears,
who thereupon desired the Beniane to send it him; with great joy he received
it, giving the Beniane a great sum of Gold for it. Whereupon this Tooth was
holden and kept in the same honor and estimation, as the other that was burnt
had been.

15. Adad and Atergatis, Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 14.. 77.
that is, the Sun and the Earth, were the chief Gods of the Assyrians; and,
says Macrobius, they ascribe all power to these two. The Image of Adad shined
with rays or beams downwards, designing the Suns force, that of Atergatis with
beams upwards, as noting thereby the Earth, ascribing to the heavenly influence
all her plenty. Lucian also says, That the Assyrians did sacrifice to a Dove,
the only touching of which Fowl required much Ceremony for Expiation.

16. The Philistinis and all that Seacoast are reckoned to the Phoenicians,
Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 17. page 92, 93.
and they worshipped Dagon: what Dagon was, says Martyr, is not well known,
but by the derivation of his Name, which signifies a Fish, it seems he was a
Sea-God. Above his belly he was of humane shape, beneath like a fish. When
Cicero says, the Syrians worshipped a Fish, it may be construed of this Dagon,
happily, says Martyr, they intended Neptune, or I know not what Devil;
Tremellius thinks Triton. Derceto's or Dagons Image, Lucian says, he saw in
Phoenicia, not unlike to that of the Mermaid, the upper half like a Woman, the
other like a fish, in reverence of whom the Phoenicians were said to abstain
from fish. They offered unto her Fishes of Gold and Silver, and the Priests all
day long set before her true fishes roast and sodden, which afterward
themselves did eat.

17. At Ekron was worshipped Baalzebub, Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 17. p. 93.
that is, the Lord of Flies: ^o called, either from the multitude of Flies that
attended the multitude of his Sacrifices, wherefrom the Sacrifices of the
Temple of Jerusalem (as some say) were wholly free: or for that he was their
Larder God to drive away flies; or for that form of a fly in which he was
worshipped, as Nazianzen against Julian reports: yet Scaliger says, the name
of Baalzebub was in disgrace and contempt, and that the Tyrians and Sydonians
did not so call him, Baal or Belus being the common surname to their Gods,
which they distinguished by some addition, as Baalsamen Lord of Heaven; but the
Hebrews, and not the Phoenicians, called him Baalzebub or Fly-Lord.

P^rch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 10. page 1071.
18. Those of Peru worshipped the dead bodies of their Inguas (that is,
Emperors) preserving them with a kind of Rosin, so that they seemed alive. The
body of Yupangui, the Grandfather of Atabalipa, was thus found, having eyes
made of a fine Cloth of Gold, so artificially made and set, as they seemed
natural, having lost no more hair, than if he had died the same day, and yet he
had been dead threescore and eighteen years.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 13. c. 22. p. 373. Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 4.. 1.
p. 728.
19. Ptolomeus Philopater erected a Temple to Homer the Poet, in which his Image
was placed comely sitting, environed with those Cities which challenged him for
theirs: and Strabo mentions a Temple and Image of Homer at Smyrna, with a Coin
called Homerium. As for the Egyptians, they worshipped not only Crocodiles, and
Goats, and Hawks, but even Frogs, and Beetles, and Onions; and which is
strangest of all, as Jerome derides them, they made a Deity of a stinking Fart:
Crepitus ventris inflati (says he) quae Pelusiaca religio est, which they
worshipped at Pelusium.

Speeds Maps p. 135.
20. The old Irish at every change of the Moon worshipped her, bowed their
knees, and made their supplications, and with a loud voice thus spoke unto the
Planet, We pray thee leave us in as good estate as thou find us.

Ferd. Mend. Pinto, c. 28. p. ^12.
21. Some leagues from the Town of Iunquileu, in China, we arrived at a place
encompassed with great Iron Grates, in the midst whereof stood two mighty
Statues of Brass upright, sustained by Pillars of cast Metal, of the bigness of
a Bushel, and seven fathom high, the one of a man, and the other of a woman,
both of them seventy four spans in height, having their hands in their mouths,
their cheeks horribly blown out, and their eyes so staring, that they
affrighted all that looked upon them. That which represented a man was called
Quiay Xingatalor, and the other in the form of a Woman, was named Apancapatur.
Having demanded of the Chinese the explication of these Figures, they told us,
that the male was he, which with those mighty swollen cheeks blew the fire of
Hell, to torment all those miserable Wretches that would not liberally bestow
alms in this life; and for the other Monster, that she was the Portress of
Hell-gate, where she would take notice of those that did her good in this
World; and letting them fly away into a River of very cold water called
Ochilenday, would keep them hid there from being tormented by the Devils, as
other damned were. At such time as we arrived here, we found twelve Bonzoes or
Priests upon the place, who with silver Censers full of Perfumes of Aloes and
Benzoin, censed those two devilish Monsters, and chanted out aloud, Help us,
even as we serve thee: whereunto diverse other Priests answered in the name of
the Idol, with a great noise, So I promise to do like a good Lord. In this sort
they went as it were in Procession round about the place, singing with an
ill-tuned voice to the sound of a great many Bells that were in Steeples
thereabouts. In the mean time there were others, that with Drums and Basins
made such a din, as I may truly say (put them all together) was most horrible
to hear.

22. We arrived at the great Temple of Singuafatur in Tartary, Ferd. Mend.
Pinto his Voyages, c. 41. page 162, 163.
where we saw an Enclosure of above a league in circuit, in which were builded
an hundred threescore and four houses, very long and broad (after the fashion
of Arsenals) all full up to the very Tiles of dead men's skulls, whereof there
was so great a number, that I am afraid to speak it, for that it will hardly be
credited. Without each of these houses were also great piles of the bones
belonging to these heads, which were three fadom higher than the ridges of
them, so that the houses seemed to be buried, no other part of them appearing,
but the Frontispiece where the Gate stood. Not far from thence upon the
South Side of them, was a kind of Platform, whereunto the ascent was by certain
stairs of Iron winding about, and through four several doors. Upon this
Platform was one of the tallest, the most deformed, and dreadful Monster that
possibly can be imagined, standing upon his feet, and leaning against a mighty
Tower of hewed stone; he was made of cast Iron, and of so great and prodigious
a stature, that by guess he seemed to be above thirty fathom high, and more
than six broad. This Monster held in both his hands a Globe of the same Iron,
being six and thirty spans in the compass of it. We demanded of the Tartar
Ambassador the explication of so monstrous a thing: You must know, said he,
that this great Saint which you see there, is the Treasurer of the bones of all
those that are born into the World, to the end, that at the last day he may
give to every one the same bones which he had upon Earth: so that he who in
this life shall be so ill advised as not to honor him, nor present him with
something, will be but in an ill case: for he will give him some of the
rottenest bones he can meet withal, and one or two less than he should have, by
means whereof he will become deformed, lame, and crooked. The Globe he holds
is to fling at the head of the gluttonous Serpent, that lives in the profound
Abysme of the house of smoke, when he shall come thither to steal away any of
those bones. He told us moreover, that the name of this Idol was Pachinavan du
occulem Prinaufaque, and that it was threescore and fourteen thousand years
since he was begotten on a Tortoise called Migoma, by a Seahorse that was an
hundred and thirty fathom long, named Tybrem Vucam, who had been King of the
Giants of Fanius. He also assured us, that the gifts which were presented to
this Idol amounted to above 200000 Tacies per annum, without comprising therein
what came from Chapels and foundations of Obits from the principal Lords of
the Country, the yearly Revenue whereof amounted to a far greater sum than the
gifts. He added, that this Idol had ordinarily twelve thousand Priests
attending on his service, maintained with all necessaries only to pray for the
dead unto whom those bones belonged, who also had allowed them, without the
Temple, six hundred Servants, who took care for the providing all things
necessary for them. As for the Priests themselves, they never went without the
limits of the Temple, but by the permission of their Superiors. There was also
a Seragli^ there wherein many Women, appointed for that purpose, where shut up,
whom their Governesses permitted to have too near an acquaintance with the
Priests of this beastly and diaboli^^^ Sect.

CHAP. XIII. Of the manner of Food which has been, or is yet in use amongst
diverse Nations and People, or persons addicted to some idolatrous Sect.
ALL the stores of Nature, and the greatest plenty and variety that is
imaginable, is scarcely sufficient to satisfy the boundless and excessive
luxury of some men. When they have surveyed all the delicacies that the
Mountains and Seas afford, yet even then they are at a loss, and can
difficultly resolve with themselves what they should eat. Others as carelessly
pass by all the choicer provisions their Countries can furnish them with; and
devote themselves to such a manner of feeding, as reason would condemn as
inconvenient and abominable, were it not superseded by a pertinacious adherence
to some custom formerly received amongst them.

Bruyer in. de re cibar. l. 2. c. 5. p. 92.
1. There were several Nations amongst the Scythians, who used to feed upon
humane flesh; such also were the Cannibals in the New Indies: and it seems that
in Sicily it self, where there is all sorts of fruits, there were heretofore
such a sort of people as they called Cyclops and Lestrigones, who fed
themselves in such manner, as Polyphemus is described to do in Virgil.
Visceribus miserorum and sanguine vescitur atro.
The entrails of slain Wretches are his food,
And then he quaffes their black and lukewarm blood.
There were also amongst the Greeks such as did curiously search into the
bowels of men, and what kind of taste they had. Galen says, he was informed by
such as had made trial thereof, that the flesh of man is in taste much like
unto that of Beef.

Bruyer in. de re cibar. l. 2. c. 5. p. 93.
2. The Nation of the Ethiopians, whose Country reaches as far as from Meroe to
the River Hydaspis, feeds upon Scorpions and Aspes: and Quintinus Hed^us
writes, that he saw one in the Isle of Malta, who eat up a Scorpion without
hurt: for there the Scorpions are without venom or poison. So the Candaei by
the Greeks called Ophiophagi, fed upon Serpents.

Bruyer in. de re cibar. l. 2. c. 5. p. 93.
3. The people that are called Medunni live upon the Milk of certain Creatures
that are called Cynocephali, they are a sort of Apes: of these they have whole
herds, of which they kill all the males, but such as are requisite for
generation, and keep the females in great numbers for the sake of their milk.

Diod. Sicul. ^er. Antiq. l. 3. c. 3. p. 78.
4. In Ethiopia there is a people who are called the Acridophagi, they border
upon the Desert, they are somewhat lower than the common stature, lean, and
exceeding black: these live after this manner. In the Spring time the West and
South-West winds bring an infinite number of Locusts from the Wilderness
amongst them: these Locusts are very great, but of a filthy and ugly color in
the wings of them. The Ethiopians that are accustomed to their coming, carry
abundance of combustibl^ matter into a Plain, that is many furlongs in the
length and breadth of it. When the Locusts are brought with the wind, as a
thick Cloud over that place^ they set fire upon the grass and other stuff they
have brought thither for that purpose, by which and the smoke it makes, the
Locusts that fly above are killed, and fall down a little beyond this Valley,
in such number and plenty, that they are more than sufficient for the food of
the whole Nation: these they salt up, and keep long by them, as a food which
they delight to feed upon.

5. The Phrygians and they of Pontus have a certain white and thick worm
amongst them with a blackish head, Coel. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 28. c. 2. p.
1289. Plin. not. hist. l. c. p.
which is bred in rotten and putrified stuff; these worms they look upon as
delicates, and feed deliciously upon them. Also those great worms that are
found upon Oaks, which they call Maggots or green Worms, were received amongst
the Romans for a delicate kind of repast: and to this purpose they preserved
them in Brans, till they came to their due color and fatness.

6. The Tartars when they ride far, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 6. p. 432.
and are vexed with hunger or thirst, they open a vein of the Horse they ride
upon, and with a draught of that blood they qualify their hunger and thirst.
Also they are exceedingly delighted with Mares milk, supposing that they are
made both strong and fat by it. The Bisaltae in Scythia mix the blood of Horses
and milk of Mares, and so feed upon it.

7. The Budini, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 6. p. 432.
a people in Scythia, familiarly feed upon Lice, and the Vermin that is bred
upon the bodies of men.

8. The Zygantes, Zuing. Theatr. v. 2. l. 6. p. 432.
a people of Africa, paint themselves with red Lead, and feed upon the flesh of
Apes, which are plentifully bred for them upon the Mountains.

9. In that Ethiopia which is beyond Egypt, Diod. Sicul. rer. Antiq. l. 3. c.
3. p. 76.
near unto the River Astapa, there is a Nation who are called Rhizophagi; these
live upon the roots of Reeds, which they dig up out of the places near them:
they wash these roots with great care, and then bruise them with stones, till
they become so soft as to cleave together, of which they make a kind of Cakes
of the bigness of a Brick, as much as they can well hold in their hand; and
having baked them a while in the Sun, they feed upon them.

10. The Hylophagi are a people who live near unto these, Diod. Sicul. rer.
Antiq. l. 3. c. 3. p. 77.
the manner of whom is with their wives and children to march into the
Wood-land or fielden Country, where they climb up into the trees, and crop off
the most tender branches of the boughs, and young sprouts of them, with which
they fill their bellies, and feed lustily upon. By continual custom they have
acquired such a dexterity in climbing, that (which may seem incredible) they
will leap from tree to tree like Squirrels; and their bodies being lean and
light, they climb upon the smaller branches without danger: if their feet slip,
they catch hold on the boughs with their hands, and save themselves from
falling; or if they chance to fall, they are so light, that they receive little
damage thereby.

11. The Inhabitants of the Island of Corsica feed not only upon little Dogs
that are tame, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 6. p 431.
but upon those also that are wild; and therefore Cardan says of them, that
they are cruel, unfaithful, bold, prompt, nimble, strong, according to the
nature of the Dog; the Thracians also fed upon Dogs.

12. In a corner of Caramania dwell the Chelonophagi, Diod. Sicul. rer. Antiq.
l. 3. c. 3. p. 76.
who feed upon flesh of Tortoises, and cover their houses with the shells of
them: they are rough and hairy all over the body, and are covered with the
skins of fishes. In the shells of the larger Tortoises which are hollow, they
sit and row about as in a Boat: they use them also as a Cistern to preserve
water in; so that this one fish is the food and furniture, the house and ship
of this people.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 431.
13. The Ancients fed upon Acorns, especially the Arcadians made them their
continual and daily food.

I. Huighen Linschotens Voy^ges, l. 2. p. 239.
14. The Inhabitants of Cumana, both men, women, and children from their youth
upwards learn to shoot in Bows. Their meat is Horsleeches, Bats, Grasshoppers,
Crevises, Spiders, Bees, and raw, sodden, and roasted Lice. They spare no
living Creature whatsoever but they eat it, which is to be wondered at,
considering their Country is so well replenished with good Bread, Wine, Fruit,
Fish, and all kind of flesh in great abundance. Hence it is observed, that
these people have always spots in their eyes, or else are dim of sight, though
some impute this to the property of the water in the River of Cumana.

Ferdinand Mendez Pinto his Voyages, c. 56. page 222.
15. In our Travel with the Ambassador of the King of Bramaa to the Calaminham,
we saw in a Grot men of a Sect of one of their Saints, or rather of a Devil,
named Angemacur; these lived in deep holes made in the midst of the Rock,
according to the rule of their wretched order, eating nothing but Flies, Ants,
Scorpions, and Spiders with the juice of a certain herb growing in abundance
thereabouts, much like to Sorrel. These spent their time in meditating day and
night, with their eyes lifted up to heaven, and their hands closed one within
another, for a testimony that they desired nothing of this World, and in that
manner died like beasts: but accounted the greatest Saints, and as such, after
they are dead they burn them in the fires, whereinto they cast great quantities
of most precious Perfumes, the funeral Pomp being celebrated with great state
and very rich offerings; they have sumptuous Temples erected to them, thereby
to draw the living to do as they had done, to obtain this vainglory, which is
all the recompense the World gives them for this excessive penance.

Ferd. Mend. Pinto his Voyages, c. 56. page 222.
16. We likewise saw others of a Sect altogether diabolical, invented by a
certain Gilen Mitray: these have sundry orders of penance, and that their
abstinence may be the more agreeable to their Idol, some of them eat nothing
but filthy spittle and thick snot, with Grasshoppers and Hens dung; others clods
of blood drawn from the veins of other men, with bitter fruits and herbs
brought them from the Woods, by reason whereof they live but a short time, and
have so bad a look and color, that they fright those that behold them.

Ferd. Mend. Pinto his Voyages, c. 49. page 243.
17. In the Empire of Calaminham there is a sort of people called Oquens and
Magores, who feed on wild beasts which they catch in hunting, and which they
eat raw; they also feed on all kind of venomous Creatures, as Lizards,
Serpents, and Adders, and the like.

Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.
18. Anchimolus and Moschus the Sophists, throughout their whole life drank
nothing but water, and satisfied their hunger with Figs alone. These were their
only food; yet were they no weaker than others that used better diet, only such
an unacceptable and filthy smell came from them when they sweat, that no man
could endure to be with them in the Bath, but industriously avoided their
company.

CHAP. XIV. Of some persons that have abstained from all manner of Food for
many years together.
THE Ocean continually flows into the Mediterranean Sea by the Straights of
Gibraltar, and the Euxine always flows into the same Sea by the Propontick:
yet is there no appearance that the Mediterranean is more filled, though no
passage whereby it sends forth its waters is discovered, nor seems the Euxine
Sea any thing lessened, though there appears no supply of waters to it, but by
some small Rivers. Thus there are many abstruse things in Nature almost every
where to be met with; which when we cannot solve for the most part, we resolve
not to credit, though never so well attested, as in the following Chapter.

1. Paulus Lentulus a Doctor of Physic in the Province of Bearn, Schenck.
observe. l. 3. p. 306. Greg. Horst. addit. ad Donatum, l. 7. c. 1. p. 653. Hak.
Apol. in advert. 3. p. 5, 6.
a Canton in Swisserland, has published a Book entitled, A wonderful History
of the fasting of Apollonia Schreira, a Virgin in Bearn: he dedicated it to
King James of England, at his first coming to the Crown, where he tells us,
that himself was with the Maid three several times, and that she was by the
command of the Magistrates of Bearn brought thither, and having a strict Guard
set upon her, and all kinds of trials put in practice for the discovery of any
collusion or fraud in the business, in conclusion they found none, but
dismissed her fairly. In the first year of her fasting she slept very little,
in the second not at all, and so continued for a long time after.

2. Margaret, Schenck. observe. l. 3. p. 306. Horstius in Donat. l. 7. c. 1. p.
646. Hak. Apol. adv. 3. p. 6. Treas. of times, l. 6. c. 9. p. 555.
a Girl of about ten years of age, born in a Village named Roed, about two
miles from Spires, began to abstain from all kind of sustenance, An. Dom. 1539.
and so continued for three years, walking in the mean season, and talking, and
laughing, and sporting as other children of that age use to do; yet was she by
special order of the Bishop of Spires delivered into the hands of the Pastor of
the Parish, and by him narrowly observed, and afterward by the command of
Maximilian, King of the Romans, committed to the keeping of Gerhardus
Bacoldianus his Physician, with whom he joined a Gentleman of his Bedchamber,
and at the end of twelve days finding by their relation, that there could be no
juggling in the business, he gave her leave to return to her friends, not
without great admiration and princely gifts.

3. The like Narration we have of Katherine Binder, Schenck. observe. l. 3. p.
306. Hak. Apol. adv. 3. p. 6. Cites. opusc. medic. p. 78, 79. Zacch. Qu. med.
legal. l. 4. tit. 1. p. 217.
born in the Palatinate, whom John Casimir, An. Dom. 1585. committed to the
search of a Divine, Statesman and two Doctors of Physic. She is said to have
fed only upon Air for the space of nine years and more, the discourse whereof
the above named Lentulus received from Fabritius, and therewith the account of
another Maid, born in the Dukedom of Iuliers, who being about the age of
fourteen years, was brought to Cullen, and is certainly reported to have taken
no kind of meat or drink by the space of at least three years.

4. But, Hak. Apol. adv. 3. p. 6. Horstius ad Donat. l. 7. c. 1. p. 654.
says Dr. Hakewel, the strangest that I have met with in this kind, is the
History of Eve Fleigen, out of Dutch translated into English, and printed at
London, An. 1611. who being born at Meurs, is said to have taken no kind of
sustenance by the space of fourteen years together, Fabrit. obs. thirurg. cent.
5. obs. 33. p. 414.
that is, from the year of her age twenty two to thirty six, and from the year
of our Lord 1597. to 1611. and this we have confirmed by the testimony of the
Magistrates of the Town of Meurs; as also by the Minister, who made trial of
her in his house thirteen days together, by all the means he could devise, but
could detect no imposture. Over the Picture of this Maid, set in the Front of
the Dutch Copy, stand these Latin Verses.

Meursae haec quam cernis decies ter, sexque peregit
Annos, bis septem prorsus non vescitur annis,
Nec potat, sic sola sedit, sic pallida vitam
'Ducit, and exigui se oblectat floribus horti.
Thus rendered in the English Copy.

This Maid of Meurs thirty and six years spent,
Fourteen of which she took no nourishment;
Thus pale and wan she sits sad and alone,
A Garden's all she oves to look upon.
Vide Fabritium in cent. 5. obs. 34. p. 422. Melancth. in vita Lutheri.
5. Philip Melancthon wondered at Luther, who being of a large bulk of body, and
so strong withal, that yet he could live with so very little food. For, says
he, I have seen him in the state of good health continue four days together
without eating or drinking any thing at all, and many days together to content
himself with a little bread and one single Herring.

Schenck. observe. l. 3. p. 306.
6. I knew (says Poggius) a man who lived for two years together without any
food, and he wrote this in the sixth year of the Popedom of Nicholas the Fifth:
he professes also to have read of a Girl who lived in the same manner for the
space of twelve years in the Reign of the Emperor Lotharius, An. Dom. 1322.

Spotsw. hist. C^. of Scotl. l. 2. p. 69. Zacch. Qu. med. leg. l. 4. tit. 1. p.
217. Clarks mir. cap. 104. p. 505.
7. An. Dom. 1539. there lived in Scotland one John Scot, no way commended for
his learning, for he had none, nor for his good qualities, which were as few.
This man being overthrown in a Suit of Law, and knowing himself unable to pay
that wherein he was adjudged, took Sanctuary in the Abbey of Halyrood house,
where out of discontent he abstained from all meat and drink, by the space of
30 or 40 days together. Fame having spread this abroad, the King would have it
put to trial, and to that effect shut him up in a private room within the
Castle of Edinburgh, whereunto no man had access. He caused a little water and
bread to be set by him, which he was found not to have diminished in the end of
thirty days and two. Upon this he was dismissed, and after a short time he went
to Rome, where he gave the like proof of his fasting to Pope Clement the
Seventh, from whence he went to Venice, carrying with him a testimony of his
long fasting under the Popes Seal, and there also he gave the like proof
thereof. After long time returning into England, he went up into the Pulpit in
Paul's Churchyard, where he gave forth many speeches against the Divorce of
King Henry the Eighth from his Queen Katherine, inveighing bitterly against him
for his defection from the Sea of Rome; whereupon he was thrust into prison,
where he continued fasting for the space of fifty days: what his end was I read
not.

Schenck. observe. l. 3. p. 306.
8. Hermolaus Barbarus says, there was a man at Rome that lived forty years
only by sucking in of the Air; he was a Priest, and was all that time in
health, says Iohnstons not. hist. cl. 10. c. 2. p. 316.

Schenck. observe. l. 3. p. 306.
9. Rondeletius says, he saw a Girl that to the tenth year of her age lived
only upon Air, and that she was afterward married, and had children. Vid.
Iohnst. not. hist. clas. 10. c. 2. p. 316.

10. Franciscus Citesius, Francis. cites. opusc. medic. page 64, 65, 66.
H^rstii ad Donat. l. 7. c. 1. p. 648. Treas. of times, l. 6. c. 8. p. 550.
Physician to the King of France, and the Cardinal Richelieu, in his Opuscula
has a particular Treatise concerning Ione Balaam; she was the Daughter of John
Balaam, a Smith, her Mothers name was Laurentia Chambela; she was born in the
City of Conflance, lying upon the Borders of Limosin, near the River Vien, of a
just stature according to her age, somewhat rude of behavior. About the
eleventh year of her age, which was the thirteenth of the Calends of March, An.
1599. she was seized with a continual Fever, accompanied with very bad
Symptoms, amongst the rest a continual Vomiting for twenty days together; her
Fever somewhat remitting, she grew speechless, and so continued for the space
of twenty four days. After which her speech returned, but full of raving and
impertinence, all motion and sense of the parts below the head began to grow
dull and languish: so that the Oesophagus it self, the passage for meat and
drink was resolved, nor from thenceforth could the Girl be persuaded to take
any food. Yet almost six months after she recovered the use of her limbs, only
one Hip, of which she is somewhat lame to this day; only the inability to
swallow remains; whence she has an extreme hatred to all sorts of meats and
drink: the parts of the belly are all contracted, and clung together, other
parts of the body remaining in good plight; her breasts large, her paps
indifferently swelling, her arms and thighs fleshly, her face somewhat round,
but swarthy, her lips reddish, her tongue somewhat contracted, but her speech
ready, her hair long, for her hair, and nails, and whole body grows. No
excrement proceeds from any part of her body, and saving a small spittle, and a
few tears, she has no purgation at her ears, nostrils, or by sweat; the skin of
her whole body to the touch is cold and dry; nor is she made hot by any work,
except in the armpits, and some places adjoining to the heart, though she is
wholly employed in running to buy provisions, sweeping of the house, spinning,
and such like. This Maid continued thus fasting for the space of almost three
years entire, and afterward by degrees returned to her food, and to a laudable
habit of body.

11. Gulielmus Fabritius tells of a Marsiacensian Maid, Fab. observe. cent. 4.
obs. 29. p. 310.
that she lived above fifteen years without either meat or drink, and that she
was then living when he wrote his Book, which was An. 1612. and promised a
large account of it at further leisure to Paulus Lentulus.

12. Licetus tells of a young Maid of Piedmont, Zacch. Qu. med. legal. l. 4.
tit. 1. p. 218.
that An. 1601. (being then a great Girl) was by the command of the excellent
Prince Auria, brought to Genoa, and there kept almost two months under strict
guards: nothing came into her mouth, but water or diluted wine, and confirmed
by undoubted experiment that fame that had gone of her fasting for diverse years
together.

13. I my self, Wier. oper. lib. de commentit. jejun.. 12. p. 754. Melch. Adam.
in vitis Germ. med. p. 188.
says Wierus (I speak it without boasting) have lived four days entire without
food or drink, and could have continued longer, were it not that I apprehended
something worse from continual watchings. My Brother has persisted to the
eighth day fasting without hurt, taking only a morsel of Quince.

14. An. 1470. Franciscus Nicholaus Petra Vnderus, Fulgos. Exempl. l. 1. c. 6.
p. 270, 271.
an Helvetian, after he had had five children by his Wife, betook himself to a
solitary life far from any Town, where he dyed after he had lived full fifteen
years without any manner of food or drink: Zacch. Qu. med. legal. l. 4. tit. 1.
p. 218. Iohnst. not. bist. class. 10. cap. ^. page 316.
he predicted several things that came to pass, and by his austere life made
the belief of his fasting unquestionable. Certain it is, that the Bishop of
Constantia, in whose Diocese he lived, went to him on purpose to see him, and
after diligent observation confirmed the truth of the report by his Letters;
and withal for the greater certainty, he compelled him upon his obedience to
taste some food, though very little, which caused him to have extreme pain in
his stomach for three days after, the which Nicholas told him beforehand was
his fear: nor had only the Bishop this trial of him, but diverse Princes of
France and Germany went to him, to make experiment of the reality of his
fasting, and found it accordingly; he himself spoke but sparingly of it, and
attributed it rather to his nature, than to any thing that was miraculous. Thus
far Fulgosus; and, says Zacchias, I chanced to see the Picture of this
Helvetian not long since, as it was drawn to the life: he was of a squalid
aspect, and extenuated in a wonderful manner; so that his Image would strike a
kind of horror into those that looked upon it. He lived seventy years, and
died upon the day of St. Benedict, An. 1470. after he had fasted, says he,
twenty years.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. p. 207.
15. In the Popedom of Eugenius the Fourth, there was one Iacobus, a French man,
who was an Amannensis in the Court of Rome: this man falling sick of a disease,
vowed a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, in case he should recover: he performed it
accordingly, and returned to Rome when Nicholas the Fifth was Pope. It was the
admiration of all men, that he was observed neither to eat nor to drink any
thing; and he solemnly swore, that he had not done either for two years
together last past.

Cites. opusc. med. p. 113. Horstius ad Don^t. l. 7. ^. ^. p. 651. Fulgos. Ex.
l. 1. c. 6. p. 206.
16. In the Reign of the Emperor Lotharius, say the Writers of the French
Chronicles, there was a Girl in Agro Tullensi of about twelve years of age, who
lived three whole years without any kind of meat or drink, viz. from the year
822. to 825. when about the beginning of November she began again to take to
her meat and drink, as is usual with others to do. Fulgosus says this was An.
1320. and that her fasting came upon her after she had been at Church, and
received the Sacrament. Gault. Tab. Chron. p. 595.

Fabrit. obs. chirurg. cent 2. obs. 40. p. 116.
17. An. Dom. 1595. a Maid of about thirteen years of age was brought out of the
Dukedom of Iuliers unto Collen, and there in a broad street at the Sign of the
White Horse, exposed to the sight of as many as desired it. The Parents of this
Maid affirmed, that she had lived without any kind of food or drink for the
space of three years: and this they confirmed by the testimony of diverse
persons such as are worthy of credit. I viewed her with great observation: she
was of a sad and melancholy countenance, her whole body was sufficiently
fleshy, except only her belly, which was compressed, so as that it seemed to
cleave to her backbone. Her liver and the rest of her bowels might be perceived
to be scirrhous, by laying the hand upon her belly. As for excrements, she
voided none; and did so far abhor all kind of food, that when one that came to
see her, privately conveyed a little Sugar into her mouth, she immediately
swounded. But that which is most wonderful, is that this Maid walks up and
down, plays with other Girls, dances, and does all other things that are done
by Girls of her age; neither has she any difficulty of breath, speaking or
crying out. The original of this was thus related by her Parents, being
recovered of a disease about seven years past, she fell into a loathing of
food; so that sometimes for three or four days she would eat nothing, then she
took a little new milk, afterward for six or seven days would neither eat nor
drink: and when she had lived in this condition for four years, she altogether
abstained from and loathed all manner of food; and so has continued to do for
the last three years, in which she has neither eaten nor drunk.

18. In St. Augustines days one lived forty days without eating any thing.
Iohnst. nai. hist. class. 10. c. 2. p. 315, 316.
Another in the time of Olympiodorus the Platonist, who for so long as he
lived, neither fed nor slept, but only stood in the Sun to refresh himself. The
Daughter of the Emperor Clotarius fasted eleven years, and Petrus Aponus saw
one that had fasted full eighteen years.

19. From Essere in Ethiopia we made toward Bigan, Vincent le Blanc's Travels,
tom. 2. c. 17. p. 259.
having taken in provision, because we had four days journey thither; the way
is something dangerous, by reason of certain Cafies Assassines, who murder the
Passengers. These can subsist three or four days together without eating any
more than a little Butter and two Dates a day. They are of a large size, by a
good span taller than the ordinary, but very meagre and lean, and they never
lie down.

20. Charles the Seventh, Trenchfield. hist. improved, p. 61.
King of France, having a jealousy, that those about him (by the instigation
of his Son) did intend to poison him, abstained from all food so long, that
when he would have eaten, he could not, his passages being shrunk up with too
much abstinence, and so he died miserably of famine.

21. Amongst the Mahometans there is a superstitious Sect called Dervises,
Clarks. mir* c. 128. page 654.
whose sharp and strict Penances far exceed those of the Papists. Some of them
live upon the tops of Hills remote from any company, there passing their time
in contemplation, and will rather famish than remove from their retired Cells,
where they would undoubtedly be pined to death, but that the people who dwell
nearest to them (out of devotion) send some relief to them. Some of these do
voluntarily impose upon themselves such long times of fasting, that they will
not give it over till Nature is not only decayed, but almost spent.

CHAP. XV. Of such as refused all drink, or to taste of any liquid thing, or
else found no need thereof.
LYsimachus, King of Thrace, was shut up in a straight by King Dromichetes, in
such manner, that for very extreme thirst he was driven to yield himself and
all his Army to the mercy of his Enemy. After he had drunk, being now a
Prisoner, Gods! said he, for how little a pleasure am I become a Slave, who but
a while since was a King? Had his constitution been like unto that of some of
these which follow, he had saved his Kingdom and Army: so might he also, if he
had rested contentedly at home with the enjoyment of his own; but his ambitions
thirst after Sovereignty made him set upon a Prince, who had given him no
provocation: so his own thirst was appare^^^^ punished in that of another kind.
But let us turn to such as had little or no acquaintance with thirst.

Marcel. Donat. bist. med. mirab. l. 6. c. 3. p. 305.
1. Pontanus writes, that in his time there was a Woman, who in all her life
time did never drink either wine or water; and that being once enforced to
drink wine by the command of Ladislaus, King of Naples, she received much hurt
thereby.

Pli^. not. hist. l. 7. c. 18. p. 166.
2. Julius Viator, a Gentleman of Rome, descended from the Race of the
Voconians, our Allies, being fallen into a kind of Dropsy between the skin and
flesh, during his minority and nonage, and forbidden by the Physicians to
drink, so accustomed himself to observe their direction, that naturally he
could abide it; insomuch that all his old age, even to his dying day, he
forbore to drink.

Coel. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 13. c. 24. p. 602. Schenk. obs. l. 3. p. 309.
3. There was in the City of Naples one of the Family of Tomacelli* who never
drank, says Coelius.

4. Aristotle in his Book of Drunkenness writes of some that familiarly eat of
salt meats, and yet were never troubled with thirst in such manner as to have
need to drink, as Archon the Argive.

Athen. Deipnosoph. l. 2. c. 6. p. 44.
5. Mago the Carthaginian did three times travel over the vast and sandy Deserts
of Africa, where no water is to be met with, and yet all that time fed upon dry
Brans, without taking any thing that was liquid.

Athen. Deipnosoph. l. 2. c. 6. p. 44, 45.
6. Lasyrtas Lasionius did not stand in need of any drink, as the rest of
mankind do, nevertheless he voided urine frequently as other men: many there
were who would not believe this, till they had made trial thereof by curious
observation; they staid with him thirty days in the heat of Summer; they saw he
abstained from no kind of salt meats, and yet drank not. It is true that this
man drank at some times, but he never had any need to do it.

Fabrit. obs. chirurg. c^nt. 4. obs. 41. p. 319.
7. A Nobleman of Piedmont being sick of that kind of Dropsy which is called
Ascites, sent for Dr. Albertus Roscius, who finding the Dropsy confirmed, and
the Patient averse from all kind of remedies, he said thus to him: Noble Sir,
if you will be cured, and perfectly freed of this mighty swelling, that is, if
you desire to live, there is an absolute necessity that you determine with your
self to dye of that thirst wherewith you are so tormented: if you will do this,
I hope to cure you in a short time. The Nobleman, at the hearing of this, did
so far command himself, that for a month he refrained not only all kind of
drink, but not so much as tasted of any thing that was liquid: by which means
he was restored to his former health.

Dr^xel. oper. tom. 1. p. 796.
8. Abraames Bishop of Carras, says Theodoret, lived with that rigorous
abstinence, that bread and water, bed and fire seemed superfluous to him. It is
said of this great man, that he drank not, nor made use of water wherein to
boil his herbs, or any other thing; but his manner was to feed upon Endive and
Lettice, and Fruits, and such other things as were to him both meat and drink:
and from these also he used to abstain till the evening. Yet was he a person of
great liberality to such as were his Guests, these he entertained with the best
bread, the most generous wines, the better sort of fishes, and all such other
things as a generous mind and a real love could produce, and himself would take
upon him to be the Carver, and to distribute to every man his portion.

Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.
9. That is also wonderful which Theophrastus thought fit to insert into his
Writings, that there was one Philinus, who throughout the whole course of his
life never made use of any manner of drink, no nor of food neither, excepting
only milk.

CHAP. XVI. Of such men as have used to walk and perform other strange things
in their Sleep.
THey tell of a Tree in Iapan that flourishes and is fruitful, if kept in a
dry earth, but with moisture (which causes other Trees to flourish) withers.
Whereas sleep binds up the senses, and obstructs the motion of the rest of
mortal men, there are some who have been found not only to walk, but to perform
diverse other kind of actions in their sleep, with as much dexterity and
exactness, as others could have done when awake, and which all their own
courage would not perhaps have permitted themselves to attempt with their eyes
open.

1. A young man of a choleric constitution lying asleep upon his bed, Zacut.
Lusitan. prax. admirand. l. 1. obs. 43. p. 33, 34.
rose up thence on the sudden, took a Sword, opened the doors, and muttering
much to himself went into the street, where he quarrelled alone, and fancying
that he was in fight with his enemies, he made diverse passes, till at length he
fell down, and through an unhappy slip of his Sword, he gave himself such a
wound upon the breast, that little wanted but he had thence received his death.
Hereupon being awaked and affrighted, and dreading lest such his night-walkings
might at some time or other create him as great dangers, he sent for me to be
his Physician, and was accordingly cured.

2. John Poultney born in little Sheepy in Leicestershire, Burt. disc: of
Leicestirshire, page 254. Full. Worth. in Leicest. p. 137.
was herein remarkable, that in his sleep he did usually rise out of his bed,
dress him, open the doors, walk round about the fields, and return to his bed
not wakened; sometimes he would rise in his sleep, take a staff, fork, or any
other weapon that was next his hand, and therewith lay about him, now striking,
now defending himself, as if he were then encountered or charged with an
adversary, not knowing, being awaked, what had passed. He afterward went to
Sea with that famous but unfortunate Sir Hugh Willoughby Knight, and was,
together with all the Fleet, frozen to death in the North-East passage about
Nova Zembla.

3* I knew a man, Henric. ab Here. observe. medic. l. 1. obs. 2. page 32, 33.
says Henricus ab Heeres, who when he was young professed Poetry in a famous
University; when in the day time he used to bend his mind, how he might yet
better turn such Verses as he had often before corrected, not able to perform
it awake, rising in the night he has opened his Desk, he has writ, and
oftentimes aloud read over what he had written: which done, he has applauded
himself with laughter, has called to his Chamber-fellow to applaud him also,
then putting off his shoes and clothes, shutting his Desk, and laying up his
Papers, as he had done in the evening before, he has returned to his bed and
slept, till he was called up, utterly ignorant of all he had done in the night.
In the morning after a short Prayer, returning to his studies, not having yet
seen his Papers, laboring with his former days cares how to fill up the gap in
his Verses, taking his Papers, when he found them supplied as he would desire,
and that with his own hand, as one that was Planet-struck, he was seriously
solicitous, whether it was done by a man or some evil Genius; he besought his
Companions, and that with tears, when they laughed at him, that if possible they
would free him of this perplexity. They telling him what had been done, for
they waking had seen him, and yet gaining no credit with him, the night after,
after his walking they led him to another bed, and lay his head on a Pillow,
which they had fitted to the place of the feet, and in his Gown, which by
chance he kept on, they commit him to his rest. When he waked, which was not
till fair day, they stood by him, and when he denied all, especially that he
had risen, and had read and written such things, they convince him by so many
circumstances. The wonder is, that he having a happy memory, should yet
remember nothing at all of his so long study and writing in his sleep. For I
have observed him at it, sometimes for three or four hours; but this is yet
more wonderful, that his walking in the night, his reading, writing, and
pronounciation little differed, nay not in the least, from the same by him in
the day; whereas in others, for the most part, all these are imperfectly as in
men that are drunk, or children that are learning to walk and speak. But that
is most of all strange, and beyond my understanding, that having long after
left the Schools, and married a Wife, a very virtuous person, yet concealing
some things from her, as it is usual in Marriage, as often as he rising, and
taking his child out of the Cradle, walked about the house, his Wife following
him, being asked by her, he would discover the secrets of his heart, answering
to all the demands of his Wife with exact truth, and without all equivocation:
so that what she could no way gain from him awake by all her blandishments, and
such things as then she was ashamed to ask him, he would discover in his sleep,
and without any reserve upon her single question. Himself often wondering, how
that which he thought was committed to his breast alone, should enter the
heart, and get upon the tongue of his Wife. When he was about to rise, his Wife
would embrace, and endeavor to retain him, but all in vain; when she held him,
or spoke to him, he would either draw her after him, or gently call her:
otherwise she asleep, he would walk alone. About the fortieth year of his age
he left off this custom, unless he had drunk freely over night. They that had
seen him walking, and reading, and writing, his Companions, his Wife, and whole
Family being desired to observe it, affirm, that his eyes were wide open, yet
he seriously and sincerely affirmed, that he saw not in the least.

Plater. obs. l. 1. p. 12.
4. Johannes Oporinus (an excellent Printer) night growing on, was shut out of
the City, together with my Father Thomas Platerus; and that they might pass the
night the better, as being in a place where they wanted accommodations, they
set upon the correction of a Greek Copy. Oporinus read the Text, and though
falling asleep, yet he ceased not to read. Being a^terwards awaked, he
remembered not any thing he had read, although it was no less than an entire
page.

Schenk. obs. l. 1. p. 65.
5. Horstius writes of one, who in his sleep would dream he was to ride a
Journey, whereupon once he rose up, put on his Clothes, Boots, and Spurs, got
up into the window, where he sat stradling smiting the walls with his Spurs
till he was awaked.

6. There was a man at Helmestadht, Schenk. obs. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 65.
who ros^ in his sleep, went down the stairs into a Court, from thence toward
the Kitchen, near which was a deep Well, into this he went down, holding fast
to the stones by his hands and feet; but when he touched the water, with the
cold thereof he was awaked, and finding in what danger he was, made a pitiful
outcry, which awaked those in the house, who having found him, got him out,
and brought him into his bed, where he lay many days speechless and immovable,
being extremely weakened with fear, cold, and crying.

7. We read of an Englishman in Paris, Schot. phys. carios. l. 3. c. 22. page
514.
who rose in his sleep, unlocked the door, took his Sword, and went down
toward the River Seen, where having met with a Boy, he killed him, and so
returned still asleep to his bed.

8. Strange is that History of a young Gentleman, Schenk. obs. l. 1. obs. 1. p.
65.
who in his sleep arose naked, carrying his shirt in his hand, and by the help
of a rope clambered up to a high Turret in the Castle where he was at that
time; here he found a Nest of Magpies, which he robbed and put the young ones
into his shirt, and so by the same rope descended, and returned to his bed. The
next morning being awaked, he told his Brother how he dreamed that he had
robbed a Pies Nest, and withal wondering what was become of his shirt, rose, and
found it at his beds feet, with the young ones wrapped up in it.

9. When I was a sleepy I used to go to bed, Plat^r ob^. l. 1. p. 12.
yet as I lay there, I still read something or other; and though I fell asleep
in reading, yet I continued to read: and being awaked, could remember I had
read, but what, by reason of my sleep, I could not recover. So using after
supper to play upon the Lute, and falling asleep, I have yet persisted to play
for some time, which both the bystanders have affirmed to me, and my self
could observe, especially since sometimes, being asleep, my Lute h^th ^^llen
out of my hands.

(...) Delrio has a relation of what fell out at (...) Spain, Dilrio. disq.
magit. l. 1. c. 3. qu. 3. p. 22, 23. Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c. 22. page
514, 515*
in a Convent of Religious persons (...) twenty years before he wrote his Book,
(...) ^aith, he knew the persons to whom it happened: A Layman (says he) used
in the day time to teach the children their Cathechise, and the same thoughts
did recur to him in his sleep; so that he would sing and teach, exhort and
chide the Boys with as much noise and fervency in his sleep, as he used when
awake. By this means he much disturbed such as were of the neighborhood;
whereupon another Layman that lodged the nearest to him, often told him of it,
and once above the rest threatened him (in jest only) that if he persisted to
make this noise, he would rise in the night, come to his bed, and with a Whip
of small cords drive away that kind of intemperance of his. What did
Gundisalvus in this case? (for so was he called that was thus threatened) he
rose in the middle of the night in his sleep, went forth in his shirt, entered
the Chamber of his Colleague with a pair of Tongs in his hand, and came
directly to the bedside of him that had menaced him with whipping. It fell
out, that the Moon shone; the night was uncloudy and clear, and the man lay
awake in his bed, who observing him as he came, armed in such manner, leapt
from his bed to the other side of the Chamber. Gundisalvus thrust three or four
times at the Bolster with his Tongs, and having thus done, returned as he came.
In the morning being asked about it, he said, he remembered nothing of it, that
he never had the least purpose in his mind to do it, only he had thought with
himself, that in case the other should come to him (as he said) with his Whip,
he would catch up the Tongs, and with them affright and drive him away.

Fabrit. obs. chirurg. cent. 2. obs. 84. p. 159.
11. Gregorius Horstius in one of his Epistles to Fabritius, sets down this
History. The last year upon the 20. of April a Kinsman of mine, that dwelt in
the same house with me in Wittenberg, came home in the evening somewhat in
drink; to bed he went, and slept well till about twelve a clock at night: then
it was that he got up in his sleep, walked to and fro for a while, and then
hastily went to the window, and got out. The unusual stir waked me, who lay in
the same Chamber, and recollecting with my self betwixt sleep and wake, that
this young man was one of those whom they call Somnambuloes or Sleep walkers, I
called my Servant, and asked him, if the young man was in bed with him, who
replying, No, up I got, and came to the window, hoping to have found him
sticking there, and to have pulled him back. But alas! just as I came he fell
from the third story of the house (fourteen Else high) into the paved street
below, where he lay for some time speechless and immovable. I expected he had
been broken to pieces, but I found it otherwise: and though much hurt, after
some time he was recovered.

Fabrit. obs. chirurg. cent. 2. obs. 85. p. 162.
12. Peter Galantier, an honest and strong man, in the fortieth year of his age,
and Anno 1605. went to Neopolis, by the Neodunensian Lake, to visit his
Friends, and to be present at a Wedding that was then there. Toward night
being urged to drink more liberally than he had a mind to do, he on purpose to
avoid it, withdrew himself into a Chamber in the second story of the house. He
was fallen into a very heavy and deep sleep, and about the midst of the night
dreaming (that to avoid drinking) he was going into the garden, he rose from
the bed, got out at the window, and fell thence to the ground. Waked thus from
his sleep, with his cries and groans he awaked the Servants of the house, who
brought him into the Kitchen half dead, but in a few days he recovered, is now
well, and has never since been this way disturbed.

CHAP. XVII. Of the long Sleeps of some, and of others that have been able to
subsist for months and years without it, or were difficultly brought to it.
WE read it of the Persian Kings, that they had always about them some one
familiar friend, whose office it was to come betimes in the morning to their
bed-sides, and to raise them up from their sleep with such an admonition as
this, Consurge Rex, and obi negotia quae te obire voluit Mesoromasdes, Rise O
King, and go about that business whereunto thou art appointed by Mesoromasdes.
Sharper Monitors than these would not have been sufficient to have awaked some
of those Dormice hereafter mentioned.

Foelix Plat. in obs. l. 1. p. 6.
1. I have known one, says Platerus, that slept three days and three nights
together upon foregoing weariness, without the occasion of any precedent
drunkenness, or the taking of any soporiferous medicine.

2. William Foxley, Bak. Chron. p. 428. Stows Chr. p. 591. Faithful Annalist,
p. 76, 77.
Pot-maker for the Mint in the Tower of London, fell asleep on Tuesday in
Easter-week, and could not be waked with pinching or burning, till the first
day of the next Term, which was full fourteen days; and when he was then
awaked, he was found in all points as if he had slept but one night. He lived
forty years after: this matter fell out in the thirty seventh year of King
Henry the Eighth his Reign.

3. Plutarch tells out of Aristotle, Plut. symp. l. 8. quaest. 9. p. 780.
how the Nurse of one Timon used yearly after the manner of some wild beasts,
to lie hid for two months together, without any other evidence of life all that
while, save only that she breathed.

4. It is not fit to pass by a thing of admirable novelty. Crantz. Vandal. l.
8. c. 39. Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c. 19. page 500. Donat. hist. mirab. med.
l. 4. c. 12. p. 214. Zacch. Qu. med. leg. l. 4. tit. 1. qu. 11. page 242.
There was, says Crantzins, a young Scholar at Lubeck in the time of Pope
Gregory the Eleventh, who (that he might sleep without disturbance) betook
himself to a private place, where none knew where he was. He was sought for,
and being not found, it was thought he was returned into his own Country. There
passed seven years from the time wherein he had laid himself down. It then fell
out, that one finding a Chest behind a Wall in the Chamber, determined to see
what was in it, where he found this young man asleep, whom he shook with such
violence, that he awaked him. His face being without change and undisfigured
from what it had used to be, he was easily known to all his former
acquaintance, who were amazed at what had passed. He for his part, supposing
that he had slept but one night and some part of a day.

5. Marcus Damascenus writes, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415. Mersen. Qu.
in Genesis cap. 37. p. 625.
that in his time there was a Rustic in Germany, who being very weary, laid
himself down under a Rick of Hay, where he continued to sleep throughout the
whole Autumn and Winter following, till such time as the Hay being fetched
away, he was there found and awaked; but when he arose, he was as a man half
dead, and utterly distracted.

6. Pliny tells of Epimenides the Gnossian or Cretan, Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c.
52. p. 184. Donat. hist. med. mirab. l. 4. c. 12. p. 214. Laert. l. 1. c. 11.
p. 29. Sabel. l. 2. c. 6. p. 90.
that when he was a Boy, being wearied with heat and travel, he laid him down
in a certain Cave, and there slept fifty seven years; being awaked, he returned
home, wondering at the changes he found in the World, and was at last
difficultly known by his younger Brother then alive, and growing old. It is
said, that in so many days he slept years, he grew old, nevertheless he lived
in all 175 years: and from him it was that the sleep of Epimenides became a
Proverb.

7. In the Reign of the Emperor Decius, Niceph. Eccles. hict. l. 14. c. 45.
Lonicer. Theatr. page 230. Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c. 19. page 501. Zacch.
Qu. med. legal. l. 4. tit. 1. qu. 11. page 243.
Maximianus, Malchus, Martinianus, Dionysius, Ioannes, Serapion, and
Constantinus, the seven Sleepers, as they ar^ commonly called, were Companions
at Ephesus, and the Persecution being hot under this Monarch, they fled to the
neighboring Mountain called Coelius, where they hid themselves in a Cave; and
though diligently sought after, could not be found: at last animating
themselves to undergo Martyrdom, after they had taken meat, by the Providence
of God they fell asleep, and slept to the thirtieth year of Theodosius the
younger, which was for the continued space of 196 years from their entrance
into the Cave. Then, which was upon the day of the Resurrection, being awaked,
they went as they were wont to the City, as if they had slept only for one day,
where the whole matter was discovered by the different habit and speech of the
men, and the moneys they had about them of a different stamp, etc.

Olaus Mag. l. 1. c. 3. p. 15. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415. Korn man.
de mirac. mort. l. 2. c. 43. p. 29.
8. In the utmost Bounds of Circium, the Northern parts of Germany, in the very
shore of the Ocean, under a steep Rock there is a Cave to be seen, where (as
Methodius and Paulus Diaconus in the beginning of his History of Lombardy do
testify) there are five men (uncertain from what time who rest seized with a
long sleep, so indemnified as to their bodies or garments, that upon this very
account they are worshipped by the Barbarians. These for as much as appears by
their habit are discovered to be Romans, and they say, that when one out of a
covetous desire would needs strip one of them, both his arms dried up, the
punishment of whom so terrified the rest, that no man from thenceforth has
been so bold as to touch them.

Mirs. Qu. and Com. in Genesis Quaest. 30. p. 1222. Ioh. Licet. l. 1. c. 6. p. 28.
Hen. Kornman. de mirac. mort. par. 2. c. 41. p. 29. Delrio disquis. magic.
Zacch. qu. med. leg. l. 4. tit. 1. quest. 11. p. 241. Treas. of times, l. 6. c.
10. page 565. Schot. phys. curios. l. 1. c. 36. p. 176.
9. That is beyond all exception, which was witnessed to Henry the Third when he
was in Poland, by several Princes most worthy of credit: there were present at
the same time diverse Nobles of France, many Physicians of the Court, amongst
whom was D. Johannes Piduxius, famous not only for his skill in Physic, but
his knowledge in all kind of natural History. The story is also related by
Alexander Guagninus of Verona, Colonel of Foot in the Castle of Vitebska in the
Frontiers of Moscovy: he in his Description of Moscovy writes thus. There is a
certain people that inhabit Lucomoria, a Country of the further Sarmatia, who
yearly upon the 27. day of the month November, after the manner of Swallows and
Frogs, by reason of the intenseness of the Winters cold, seem to dye.
Afterward at the return of the Spring, upon the 24. day of April, they again
awake and arise. These are said to have commerce with the Grustentzians and the
Sperpono^ntzians, people that border upon them, in this manner: When they find
their approaching death or sleep ready to seize upon them, they then stow up
their Commodities in certain places, which the Grustentzians and
Sperponountzians fetch away, leaving an equal value of their own behind them in
their stead. The Lucomorians, upon their return to life, if they are pleased
with the change, they keep them; if otherwise, they redemand their own of their
neighbors. By this means much strife and war does arise amongst them. Thus
Guagninus, and the very same History has Sigismundus Liber, a Baron in
Heiberstein, which is also set down by Citesius.

Schenk. obs. med. l. 1. p. 64.
10. Fernelius speaks of one, who lived without sleep fourteen months; but this
man was possessed with madness, and his brain, it should seem, being heated with
melancholy, did beget animal spirits without much wasting of them.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415.
11. Arsenius, the Tutor to Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors, being made a
Monk, did satisfy Nature with so s^ort a sleep, that he was used to say, that
for a Monk it was enough, if he slept but one hour in a night.

Sueton. in vit. August. c. 78. page 103.
12. Augustus Caesar after supper betook himself to his Closet, where he used to
remain till the night was far spent, and then went to bed; when he slept most,
it was not above seven hours, and those also not so continued, but in that
space he usually waked three or four times, and to provoke sleep, had water
poured long and constantly by his Beds head into a Cistern.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415.
13. George Castriot commonly called Scanderbeg, the same who forsook Amurath,
King of the Turks, and seized upon the Kingdom of Epirus, as his own by right
of Inheritance. This Prince was a person contented with so little sleep, that
it is reported of him, that from the time that he entered into Epirus, to the
day of his death, he never slept above two hours in one night, yet he died in
his climacterical year of 63.

14. A Woman at Padua lived fifteen days without sleep, Schenk. obs. med. l. 1.
obs. 1. p. 64.
nor could by any means be brought to it through the weakness of the Ventricle,
and penury of vapors; for she eat no supper, only contented her self with a
dinner: at last using to eat a Toast steeped in Malmesey toward night, she
returned to her wonted sleep.

15. Seneca reports of Mccaenas, Seneca di provident.
that great Favorite of Augustus, that he lived three years entire without any
sleep, and was at last cured of his distemper with sweet and soft Music.

16. It is reported of Nizolius, Schenk. obs. l. 1. p. 64.
that painful Treasurer of Cicero's Words and Phrases, that he lived ten years
without sleep.

17. We read of a noble Lady, Schenk. obs. l. 1. p. 64.
that for thirty and five years lived without harm, and in good health, as both
her Husband and whole Family could and did witness, without sleep.

18. Some young men in Athens having made themselves drunk in the Apatarian
Feasts, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415.
are said to have out-slept four days of that Solemnity, as Simplicius recites
out of Eudemus.

19. Smyndyrides the Sybarite was used to say, Athen. in Deipnosoph.
That for more than twenty years he had never seen the Sun either rising or
setting; which also Histieus Ponticus was used to report of himself, says
Athenaeus.

20. Publius Scipio is said to be overmuch devoted to sleep; Zuing. Theatr.
vol. 2. l. 5. p. 415.
so that the people of Rome were used to upbraid him with his somnolency, as
Plutarch says in his Politics.

21. C. Caligula was exceedingly troubled with want of sleep; Sueton. l. 4. c.
50. page 194, 195.
for he slept not above three hours in a night, and in those he seldom took any
quiet repose, but was scared with fearful and strange illusions and fantastical
imaginations: as who once dreamed that he saw the form and resemblance of the
Sea talking with him. Hereupon for the greatest part of the night, what with
tedious watching and weariness of lying, one while sitting up in his Bed,
another while roaming and wandering to and fro in his Galleries (which were of
an exceeding length) he was wont to call upon and wish for the morning light.

22. Perseus, Plut. in vit. Aemyl. p. Clerks Mirr. c. 37. p. 130.
King of Macedon, being taken Prisoner by Aemylius, and led Captive to Rome,
was guarded by some Soldiers who kept him from sleep, watching him narrowly
when he was overtaken therewith, not suffering him so much as to shut his
eyelids, or to take the least rest, till such time as Nature being exhausted
by this strange cruelty, he gave up the ghost.

CHAP. XVIII. Of such as have fallen into Trances and Ecstasies, and their
manner of behavior therein.
SInce the Soul is the instrument and means by which we come to the knowledge
of all those things wherein we have any understanding, it can never be
su^ficiently wondered at, that it should be so very little that we are able to
comprehend (with any certainty) concerning the Soul it self. The most learned
amongst men: are at a loss, as often as they would speak distinctly touching
its nature, manner of working, the way of its conjunction with the body, and
principal place of its residence; and so are they also for the manner of its
retreat, and the place of its retirement in such cases as are propounded in
this Chapter.

Full. Worth. p. 113. Suf^^x. Bak. Chron. p. 578. Hollinsh. p. 1315.
1. William Withers, born at Walsham in Sussex, being a child of eleven years of
age, did An. 1581. lie in a trance ten days without any sustenance; and at last
coming to himself, uttered to the standers by many strange speeches against
pride and covetousness, coldness of charity, and other outrageous sins.

Sabellic. Exempl. l. 2. c. 6. p. 89. S^^ott. phys. curios. l. 3. c. 33. p. 578.
2. Hermotimus the Clazomenian seemed frequently to have his body deserted of
the soul, and as if it had wandered about in the World, at the return of it he
would relate such things at a distance performed, that none could tell of but
such as were present; by which means he was long the admiration of such as he
dwelt amongst. At last being in one of these trances, his enemies seized upon
his body and burnt it; by which means the returning soul was disappointed of
its usual place of residence and retreat. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 52. page 184.

Sabellie Exempl. l. 6. c. 4. p. 383.
3. Johannes Scotus, the same who has treated with such subtilty concerning
divine matters, is also said to have been in frequent raptures, in such manner,
that he has been observed to sit sometimes for the space of a whole day and
more immovable, with his mind and senses bound up, or at least wandering far
off from the body. In which condition at length he was taken up by some such as
were unacquainted with him, and so buried alive.

August. de Civit. D^i, l. 14. c. 23. page Iohnst. not. hist. cl. 10. c. 8. p.
351. Coel. Antiq. let. l. 20. c. 16. page 942.
4. Restitutus, a Presbyter, could at his pleasure deprive himself of all sense,
and would do it as often as he was asked; which many did, as desirous to be the
eyewitnesses of so admirable a thing. At the imitation of some notes and the
tone of lamenting persons, he would lie as one that was dead, altogether
senseless of his being pulled or pricked; nay once being burnt with fire, he had
no apprehension or feeling at all of it for the present, only the wound was
painful to him at his return to himself. In these his trances he did not
breathe at all, only he would say, that the voices of men only, if they spoke
louder than ordinary, were heard by him, as if they were at some great distance
from him.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 223.
5. Thomas Aquinas, by his daily and constant contemplations, had so accustomed
himself, that frequently falling into an Ecstasie of the mind, he seemed to all
that were present to be dead: yet in the mean time he gained the knowledge of
the abstruser Mysteries in Divinity; and being returned to himself, he imparted
to others the fruits of this his philosophic death both in his Writings and
Converse.

Cardan. de variet. r^r. l. 8. c. 43. p. 103.
6. Hieronymus Cardanus, of Millain, writes of himself, that he could pass as
often as he would into such an Ecstasie, as only to have a soft hearing of the
words of such as discoursed by him, but not any understanding of them at all;
he felt not any pullings or pinches of him, nor was at such times in the least
manner sensible of the pains of the Gout, or any other thing, but only such
things as were without him. The beginnings of this were first in the head,
especially from the brain, diffusing it self thence all along to the back bone.
At first he could perceive a kind of separation from the heart, as if the soul
were departing, and this was communicated to the whole body, as if a door did
open. He adds, that he saw all that he desired with his eyes, not by any force
of the mind; and that those images of things did perpetually move, as Woods,
Mountains, living Creatures, and what else he pleased. He imputes all this to
the vigor of his fancy and the subtilty of his sight.

7. The Father of Prestantius, August. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. cap. Bodin.
Daemonol. l. 2. c. 5. p. 67.
says St. Augustine, was often in such an Ecstasie, that upon the return of
his spirit he would affirm, that he had been transformed into a Horse, and that
he, with other Horses, had carried relief and forage into the Camp, whereas
his body lay then at his own house in the manner of a dead Corpse.

8. The English Histories relate, Iohnst. not. hist. cl. 10. c. 8. p. 391^
that Elizabeth Burton, a Maid of Canterbury, had contracted a custom of
entrancing her self, and taking away her senses; which first came upon her, by
reason of a disease which she had upon her.

CHAP. XIX. Of extraordinary things in the Bodies, Fortunes, Death, etc. of
diverse persons.
Travelers that have determined to pass through diverse Countries, lightly
touch those common occurrences that present themselves to every man's eye; but
if they meet with any thing extraordinary, these they set a special and
particular remark upon, as matter wherewith men's knowledge may be improved, and
their curiosity gratified. If I have staid the longer upon this Chapter, it is
possibly for some such reason as this, that the Reader may have something, if
not so profitable as he could wish, yet not altogether unpleasant in the
perusal.

1. Antonius Cianfius, Barthol. de luce animal. l. 1. c. 17. page 148.
a Bookseller at Pisa some few years since, putting off a shirt which was made
straiter to his body than usual, flames were seen to issue from his back and
arms, and that also with a crackling noise, to the affrightment of the whole
family. The truth of this is attested as well as the History related by
Fortunius Licetus, that great Philosopher of this Age, in the second Book and
28. Chapter of his Commentary of the Causes of Monsters.

2. That is strange which is recorded of M. Furius Camillus, Plut. in Camill^,
page 129. Zuing. ^heatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 733.
that though he had gained many important Victories, was often General in the
head of an Army, was Censor, was five times created Dictator, and at four
several times had triumphed, and was also called the second Founder of Rome,
yet was he never chosen Consul.

3. Nicholas Wotton was termed a Center of Remarkables, Full. Worth. p. 77.
Ke^^.
so many met in his person; he was Dean of the two Metropolitan Churches of
Canterbury and York; he was the first Dean of those Cathedrals; he was Privy
Counselor to four successive Sovereigns King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the
Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth; he was employed thirteen several times in
Embassies to foreign Princes, and which is not the least remarkable, in the
first of Queen Elizabeth he was offered the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and
refused it: he died 1566.

4. John Story, Fox. Acts and Monuments, page 215^.
Doctor of Law, a cruel Persecutor in the days of Queen Mary, fled afterward
into Brabant, Full. Worth. l. 9. cent. 16. p. 84.
being trained into the Ship of Mr. Parker, an English man, the Master hoised
Sail, and over was this Tyrant and Traitor brought into England, where refusing
to take the Oath of Supremacy, and professing himself a Subject to the King of
Spain, he was executed at Tyburn, where being cut down half dead, after his
privy members were cut off, he rushed on the Executioner, and gave him a blow
on the ear, to the wonder of the bystanders.

Plin. not. ^ist l. 7. c. 19. page 166. Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. p. 187. Solinus
c. 4. p. 181.
5. It is said of Crassus (Grandfather to that Crassus, who was slain in the
Parthian War) that he was never known to laugh all his life time, and thereupon
was called Agelastus, or the man that never laughed.

6. Plin. l. 7. c. 19. p. 166. Solin. c. 4. p. 181.
Antonia, the Wife of Drusus, as it is well known never spit; and Pomponius the
Poet, one that had sometimes been Consul, never belched.

7. Bak. Chr. p. 8.
It is memorable which is recorded of a King named Wazmund, and was the Founder
of Warwick Town, that he had a Son named Offa, tall of stature, and of a good
constitution of body, but blind till he was seven years old, and then saw, and
dumb till he was thirty years old, and then spoke.

Bak. Chron. p. 577.
8. In the first year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth died Sir Thomas Cheney,
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, of whom it is reported for a certain, that his
pulse did beat more than three quarters of an hour after he was dead, as
strongly as if he had been still alive.

Full. Worth. p. 273. in Durham.
9. George Nevil, fourth Son of Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, was consecrated
Bishop of Exeter when he was not as yet twenty years of age, at twenty five he
was made Lord Chancellor of England, and discharged it to his great
commendation, his ability supplying the luck of age in him.

Bartholin. Hist. Anatomic. cent. 3. hist. 70. p. 139, 140. Barthol. de ^uce
anim. l. 1. c. 19. p. 162.
10. When I was in Italy, that Paradise of the World, the outward skin of a Lady
of Verona, though lightly touched, did manifestly sparkle with fire: This
spectacle so worthy of the research of the inquisitive and curious, is
faithfully exposed to the World by the public Script of Petrus a Castro, the
learned Physician of Verona, in his Book de Igne lambente, whom I shall follow
in the relation of this story. The illustrious Lady Catherina Buri, the Wife of
the noble Io. Franciscus Rambaldus, a Patritian of Verona, of a middle age,
indifferent habit of body, her universal temper hot and moist, her liver hot
and dry, and so abounding with bilious and black blood, with its innate fervor
and an age fit for adustion, increased by vehement grief. This noble Lady the
Creator endued with so stupendous a Dignity and Prerogative of Nature, that as
often as her body was but lightly touched with linen, sparks flew out plentifully
from her limbs apparent to her domestic Servants, as if they had been struck
out of a flint, accompanied also with a noise, that was to be heard by all.
Oftentimes when she rubbed her hands upon the sleeve of her smock that
contained the sparkles within it, she observed a flame with a tailed ray
running about, as fired exhalations are wont to do: insomuch that her Maids
were oftentimes deluded, supposing they had left fire in the bed after warming
of it in Winter, in which time also fire is most discernible. This fire was not
to be seen but in the dark, or in the night: nor did it burn without it self,
though combustible matter was applied to it: nor lastly, as other fire did it
cease within a certain time, but with the same manner of appearance of light it
showed it self after my departure out of Italy.

Ross. Arcan. Microcos. l. 3. c. 6.. 10. p. 8^.
11. I have read (says Ross^) of one who had a horn grew upon his heel, a foot
long; which being cut off, grew again, and would doubtless have still renewed,
if the tough and viscous matter had not been diverted and evacuated by Issues,
Purges, and Phlebotomy.

12. Fernelius says, Fernel. de abdit. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 9.
he saw a Girl that lived in near neighborhood to him, the ligaments of whose
joints were so very loose, that you might bend and turn any of them this or
that way at your pleasure; and that it was so with her from the time of her
birth.

13. Sir John Mason born at Abington, Donat. hist. m^d. l. 6. c. 2. p. 301.
bred at All souls in Oxford, died 1566. and lies buried in the Quire of St.
Paul's. I remember this Distick of his long Epitaph. Tempore quinque suo
regnantes ordine vidit, Full. Worth^ page 137, 138.

Horum a Consiliis quatuor ille fuit.
He saw five Princes which the Scepter bore,
Of them was Privy Counselor to four.
That is, to Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth.

14. Thomas Bourchier successively Bishop of Worcester, Full. Worth. p. 324.
Essex.
Ely, and Archbishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal by the Title of St. Cyriacus
in the Baths, being consecrated Bishop of Worcester, An. 1435. the fourteenth
of Henry the Sixth, he died Archbishop of Canterbury 1486. the second of King
Henry the Seventh; whereby it appears, that he wore a Miter full fifty one
years, a term not to be paralleled in any other person: he saw the Civil Wars
of York begun and ended, having the honor to marry King Henry the Seventh to
the Daughter of King Edward the Fourth. Nor is it the least of wonders, that he
lost not himself in the La^yrinth of such intricate times.

15. Sir Thomas Frowick was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Full.
Worth. page 183. Middlesex.
in the eighteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, four years he
sat in his place accounted the Oracle of the Law in his Age, though one of the
youngest men that ever enjoyed that Office. He (...) reported to have died
florida juventute, before full forty years old; so that he was Chief Justice at
thirty five: he died 1506. October. 17.

16. That was great and excellent in Socrates, Solin. c. 4. p. 181.
that whatever fell out of joy, or otherwise, he returned with the same
countenance he went forth with, and was never seen to be more merry or
melancholy than at other times in any alteration of times or affairs.

17. In the Reign of King James, Bak. Chron. p. 615.
in the year 1613. on the 26. of June, in the Parish of Christ-Church in
Hampshire, one John Hitchel, a Carpenter, lying in bed with a young child by
him, was himself and the child burnt to death with a sudden Lightning, no fire
appearing outwardly upon him, and yet lay burning for the space of almost three
days, till he was quite consumed to ashes.

18. Lucius Fulvius being Consul of the Tusculani, Plin. l. 7. c. 43. Zuing.
Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 727.
who at that time rebelled, he deserted them, and was thereupon made Consul at
Rome; and so it fell out, that in one and the same year in which he was an
Enemy to Rome, he triumphed at Rome, and a Consul over those to whom he had
been Consul.

19. It is said of Charles Earl of Valois, M. de S^rres, p. 163.
that he was the Son of a King, Brother to a King, Uncle to a King, and Father
to a King, and yet no King himself.

20. There was amongst the Magnesians one Protophanes, Pausan. in Atticu.
who in one and the same day won the Prize in the Olympic Games, both at
Wrestling, and other Games: Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 295.
when he was dead certain Thieves opened his Sepulcher, and went into it,
hoping to have found something to prey upon; after which many others also went
in to behold the remains of his body; and this is certain, that his ribs were
found to be not distinct, as those of other men, but from the shoulder to those
that are called the short ribs, there was only one continued and entire bone
instead of the greater ribs.

Solin. c. 4. p. 182.
21. Some are born with bones concrete and solid, and th^se, they say, neither
sweat nor thirst; such a one was Lygdamus the Syracusan, who in the 33.
Olympiad had the first Crown of Wrestling: his bones were found to be of a
solid substance throughout, without any marrow in them, or place for it.

Hen. Hiers obs. meddle. l. 1. obs. 29. p. 250.
22. A certain Gentleman has lived many years without any ejection of
excrements by stool more than at his eyes; a little before noon he sits down at
his table, commonly inviting diverse Noble persons, about one a clock he rises
from table, after he has eat and drunk after the manner of other persons, then
he vomits up the dinner he had eaten the day before, exactly retaining all that
he has newly eaten, being to return that by vomiting the day following, as he
did that he had eaten the day before, he ejects it putrid and filthy, not
differing from other excrements. In his vomits he raises it with ease, without
delay, at once casting up a great quantity from his stomach, then washing his
mouth with sweet waters, he returns to the table, and there eats as much as
will suffice till the n^xt day at noon; he eats no break-fasts nor suppers,
contented with a dinner only. He has thus continued about twenty years. It
often comes into my mind, that this Gentleman may have two ventricles, as those
Creatures have that chew the cud, the one of which being newly filled, provokes
the other to empty it self by vomit; but the truth of this conjecture will be
cleared only by Anatomy, if it will be permitted.

He^. Hiers obs. meddle. l. 1. obs. 29. page 251, 252.
23. A noble Matron in our City for this six years space, about ten of the clock
in the morning every day ^ills a Basin (containing two of our pints) by vomit,
sometimes clear, at others black with an acour that stupifies the teeth,
sometimes yellow with an extremity of bitterness; sometimes intensely green
with a loathsome smell; at other times white and frothy; yet does she never
vomit up any thing of what she eat at supper overnight: in other respects she
is of good health, and in that six years has been delivered of five children:
she is now almost thirty years of age.

(...) de ^^tilitat. Zuing. Th^atr. vol. 2. l. 2. p. 295. I^^^st. not. hi^^.
cl. 10. c. 5. p. 328.
24. I saw at Genoa (says Cardanus) one Antonius Benzus, of the Town of Port
Maurice, he was thirty four years of age, his complexion was pale, his beard
grew thin, as to the habit of his body he was fat, out of the paps of this man
^lowed so much of milk, as was almost sufficient to have suckled a child, and
not only did it run out, but he would spirt it out with a great force. Such as
have seen the new World affirm, that most of the men have abundance of milk.

(...) p. 7^.
25. Neubrigensis and also Huntingdon report of one Raynerus, a wicked Minister
of a more wicked Abbot, that crossing the Seas with his Wife, he with his
iniquity so over-weighed the Ship, that in the midst of the stream it was not
able to stir, at which the Mariners astonished, cast lots, and the lot fell
upon Raynerus; and lest this should be thought to happen by chance, they cast
the lots again and again, and still the lot fell upon the same Raynerus:
whereupon they put him out of the Ship, and presently the Ship, as eased of her
burden, sailed away: certainly a great Judgment of God, and a great Miracle,
but yet recorded by one that is no fabulous Author, says Sir Richard Baker.

26. In the time of King Stephen there appeared two children, Bak. Chron. p. 73.
a Boy and a Girl, clad in green in a stuff unknown, of a strange language, and
of a strange diet, whereof the Boy being baptized died shortly after, but the
Girl lived to be very old; and being asked from whence they were, she answered
they were of the Land of St. Martyn, where there are Christian Churches
erected, but that no Sun did ever rise unto them: but where that Land is, or
how she came hither she her self knew not. This I the rather write (says mine
Author) that we may know there are other parts of this World than those which
to us are known: and this story I should not have believed, if it were not
testified by so many and so credible Witnesses as it is.

27. Hugo, Cause. holy Court, part 2.. 2. page 168.
a child of five years old, was constituted Archbishop of Rhemes, to possess
the Seat of the great Remigius, which was to parallel the ^oot of Hercules with
the leg of a Fly.

28. At Hammel, Wier. de praestig. Demon. l. 1. c. 16. p. 47. Schot. phys.
curios. l. 3. c. 24. p. 519. Howels Ep. vol. 1.. 6. epist. 59. p. 241.
a Town in the Duchy of Brunswick, in the year of Christ 1284. upon the 26.
day of June, the Town being grievously troubled with Rats and Mice, there came
to them a Piper, who promised upon a certain rate to free them from them all;
it was agreed, he went from street to street, and playing upon his Pipe, drew
after him out of the Town all that kind of Vermin, and then demanding his
wages was denied it. Whereupon he began another tune, and there followed him
one hundred and thirty Boys to a Hill called Koppen, situate on the North by
the Road, where they perished, and were never seen after. This Piper was called
the pyed Piper, because his clothes were of several colors. This story is writ
and religiously kept by them in their Annals at Hammel, read in their Books,
and painted in their Windows, and in their Churches, of which I am a witness by
my own sight. Their elder Magistrates, for the confirmation of the truth of
this, are wont to write in conjunction in their public Books, such a year of
Christ, and such a year of the Transmigration of the children, etc. It Is also
observed in the memory of it, that in the street he passed out of, no Piper be
admitted to this day. The street is called Burgelosestrasse; if a Bride be in
that street, till she is gone out of it there is no dancing to be suffered.

29. Ptolomaeus, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 8. p. 83.
the Son of Lagus, intending to erect a Library at Alexandria, and to furnish
it with all such good Books as were extant, requested of the Jews inhabiting
Jerusalem, that they would send him their Books translated into the Greek
Tongue; they (forasmuch as they were yet subject unto the Macedonians) sent
unto Ptolomaeus seventy Elders from amongst them, very skilful in their Books
and both the Tongues. Ptolomaeus fearing, if they conferred together, they
would conceal the truth revealed in their Books, commanded them severally every
man by himself to write his Translation, and this in every Book throughout the
Old Testament. When as they all came together in presence of Ptolomaeus, and
compared their Translations one with another from the very beginning to the
ending they had expressed the same thing with the same words, and in the same
sentences: so that the Gentiles then present, pronounced those Scriptures to
have been translated by the inspiration of the holy Spirit of God.

Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 28. page 110. History of Cardinals, part 3. l. 1.
p. 216.
30. When Anterus had sat Bishop of Rome for one month only, he died; after
whose death it was that Fabianus came from the Country, together with certain
others to dwell at Rome, when such a thing as never was seen before at the
Election of a Bishop happened then by the divine and celestial Grace of God.
For when all the Brethren had gathered themselves together for to make choice
of a Bishop, and many thought upon diverse notable and famous men, Fabianus
being there present with others, when as every one thought least, nay nothing
at all of him, suddenly from above there came a Dove, and rested upon his head,
after the example of the Holy Ghost, which in likeness of a Dove descended upon
our Savior; and so the whole multitude being moved thereat, with one and the
same Spirit of God cried out cheerfully with one accord, that he was worthy of
the Bishopric, and immediately he was taken and installed Bishop.

Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 2. p. 214.
31. Constantine the Emperor going against the Tyrant Maxentius had a certain
Vision. It was about noon, the day somewhat declining, when he saw in the Sky a
lightsom Pillar in form of a Cross, wherein these words were engraven, In hoc
vince, i.e. In this overcome. This so amazed the Emperor, that he mistrusting
his own sight, demanded of them that were present, whether they perceived the
Vision; which when all with one consent had affirmed, the wavering mind of the
Emperor (understand it of Religion, whether he should become a Christian or
not) was settled with that divine and wonderful sight. The night following he
dreamed that Christ came unto him and said, Frame to thy self the form of a
Cross, after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the
same against the enemies, as a fit Banner or token of Victory: which he
accordingly did, and was victorious.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 8. c. 10. p. 1129.
32. That was a rare instance of propitious Fortune which befell Thomas Serranus,
who in one and the same year was consecrated Bishop, elected Cardinal, and also
attained to the Popedom by the name of Nicholas the Fifth.

Fabrit. obs. chirurg. cent. 2. obs. 25. p. 104.
33. Franciscus Trovillon was a man of a middle stature, a full body, bald,
except in the hinder part of the head, which had a few hairs upon it; his
temper was morose, and his demeanor altogether rustic: he was born in a
little Village called Mezieres, and bred up in the Woods amongst the Charcoal
men. About the seventh year of his age he began to have a swelling in his
forehead; so that about the seventeenth year of his age he had a horn there as
big as a man's finger end, which afterward did admit of that growth and
increase, that when he came to be thirty five years old, this horn had both the
bigness and resemblance of a Rams horn. It grew upon the midst of his forehead,
and then bended backward as far as the coronal ^uture, where the other end of
it did sometimes so stick in the skin, that to avoid much pain he was
constrained to cut off some part of the end of it: whether this horn had its
roots in the skin or forehead, I know not; but probably being of that weight
and bigness, it grew from the skull it self; nor am I certain, whether this man
had any of those teeth which we call Grinders. For two months together the man
was exposed to show in Paris, where (says Vrstitius) in the year 1598. I in
company with Dr. Iacobus Faeschius, the public Professor at Basil, and Mr.
Johannes Eckenstenius, did see and handle this horn. From Paris he was carried
to Orleance, where (as I am informed) he died soon after he came.

34. In the time of a grievous Persecution Felix Presbyter of the City of Nola,
Heidfield in Sphing. c. 9. p. 250.
by a divine instinct hid himself in the corner of a ruined Wall, and before
the Persecutors had pursued him thither, a Spider had drawn her web at the
mouth of the hole whereinto the Presbyter had put himself. His enemies told
them, that Felix was crept in at that very place; but they beholding the
Spiders web, could not be persuaded, that any man could enter and lurk there
where the Spiders lived and labored so securely; and thereupon by their
departure Felix escaped. Paulinus once Bishop of that City has these Verses
upon this occasion, which I will also try to English.

Eccubi Christus adest, tenuissima aranea muro est,
At ubi Christus abest, and murus aranea fiet.
Where God is present, Spiders spin a wall,
He gone, our Bulwarks like to cobwebs fall.
35. In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth there was one Mr. Gresham, Sand.
Trav. l. 4. p. 248, 249. Clarks mir. c. 33. page 115.
a Merchant of London, who was sailing homewards from Pa^ermo, a City in
Sicily, wherein was dwelling at that time one Antonio surnamed the Rich, who
had at one time two Kingdoms mortgaged to him by the King of Spain. Mr. Gresham
crossed by contrary winds, was constrained to anchor under the Lee of the
Island of Strombulo, where was a burning Mountain. Now about the midday, when
for a certain space the Mountain used to forbear sending forth flames, he with
eight of the Sailors ascended the Mountain, approaching as near the vent as
they durst, where amongst other noises, they heard a voice cry aloud, Dispatch,
dispatch, the Rich Antonio is a coming. Terrified herewith, they hasted their
return, and the Mountain presently vomited out fire; but from so dismal a place
they made all the haste they could, and desiring to know more of this matter
(since the winds still thwarted their course) they returned to Palermo, and
forthwith inquiring for Antonio, they found that he was dead about the instant,
so near as they could compute, when that voice was heard by them. Mr. Gresham,
at his return into England, reported this to the King, and the Marin^^s being
called before him, confirmed the same by their Oaths. Upon Gresham this wrought
so deep an impression, that he gave over all merchandising, distributed his
Estate, partly to his Kindred, and partly to good uses, retaining only a
competency for himself, and so spent the rest of his days in a solitary
devotion.

36. That is much to be admired at, Patrit. de Regno, l. 2. tit. 3. p. 89.
as being little less than a Miracle, which is related of Xenophilus, a
Musician, who lived to the age of an hundred and five years without any manner
of disease or indisposition of body throughout his whole life.

37. The Governor of Mountmarine besieged by Augustus, Iohnst. not. hist cl.
10. c. 3. art. 6, p. 322.
the base Son of the Prince of Salucia, was called forth as it were to parley,
and then held Prisoner; he was threatened with death, if he yielded not up the
place, and was so frighted with the apprehensions of this undeserved death,
that he sweat blood over all his body.

CHAP. XX. Of matters of importance and high Designs either promoted, or made
to miscarry by small matters, or strange accidents.
PLutarch tells us of a certain Painter, who was very intent upon drawing of
the foam that should come from the mouth of a Horse, which he had before him in
his Tablet; but with all his Art and care he could not compass the expressing
of it in such manner as the nature of the thing required: whereupon in a great
rage he threw his Pencil at the Table, which light so fortunately, as it
happily performed all that which had so long defeated his utmost skill. Thus
mere casualty and chance brings to light, and other ways performs that in
matters of greater importance, which has seemed out of the power of prudence
it self to effect or prevent.

H^wels Ep. ^ol. 1.. 6. epist. 57. p. 251.
1. There is a people in Spain called Los Pattuecos, who some threescore and odd
years since were discovered by the flight of a Hawk of the Duke of Alvas. This
people were then all savage, though they dwelt in the center of Spain, not far
from Toledo, and are yet held part of the Aborigines that Tubalcain brought in:
being hemmed in and imprisoned as it were by a multitude of huge and craggy
mountains, they thought that behind those mountains there was no more earth,
and so lived, unknown to all Spain, till discovered by this odd accident so
lately.

Li^s. ^onit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 60.
2. When Dion went to free Syracuse from the grievous and infamous Tyranny of
Dionysius, it fell out, that Dionysius himself was then in Italy about other
business, which fell out fortunately for Dion. For whereas he was arrived at
Sicily with small forces and greater courage than prudence, Timocrates (the
chiefest of the Tyrants friends) and whom he had left his Substitute in the
Kingdom, did forthwith send him a Messenger with Letters to signify the coming
of Dion, the instability of the minds of his Subjects, that he should return
with all speed, unless he would be totally deserted. The Messenger had happily
passed the Seas, and was landed on the shore, intending to foot it to Caulonia,
where Dionysius then was. Being upon the way, he met with one of his
acquaintance, who had newly offered a Sacrifice, and did friendly give him a
part of it, he put it into the bag by his side, where was also Timocrates his
Letter; he went on his journey, and being overtaken with the night, and weary,
cast himself upon the ground to take some short repose. He was not far from a
Wood from whence came a Wols, who smelling the flesh, came and took the bag
from where it lay by his side. Soon after the man waking, and finding his bag
with his Letter gone, in fear of being severely punished, he durst not go on to
Dionysius, but turned off another way. By this means Dionysius had later
information of his Affairs than the necessity required; and so having lost his
Kingdom, was fain to betake himself to the Ferula, and turn Schoolmaster in
Corinth.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. c^nt. 1. ca^. 80. p. 366.
3. The Duke of Burbon led a Royal Army against Rome, with intention to surprise
it upon the sudden; but whereas he was utterly unprovided of great Guns to take
it by assault, a strange and unthought of accident administered to him an
opportunity for the taking of the City. For an Ensign, who had the charge of a
ruined part of the Wall (perceiving Burbon, with some others, break into a
Vineyard, that from thence he might take view of the City, in what place it was
most expugnable) was so possessed with fear, that whereas he thought to run
into the City, he descended the ruined place, with his Ensign advanced, and
marched directly toward the Enemy. Burbon that saw the man tend toward him,
and supposing that others followed to make a Sally upon him, stood still, with
intention to sustain the assault with those about him, till the rest of his
Army were come up to him. The Ensign was got almost three hundred paces without
the City, when by hearing the Alarm and cry of Burbon's Army, he returned to
himself, and as one newly awaked from sleep, having recollected himself, he
retires, and reenters the ruined place by which he had descended. Burbon
admiring this action of the man, caused scaling Ladders to be advanced to that
part of the Wall; and having there slain the Ensign, his Soldiers broke into
the City, and took it.

4. A small matter gave also the occasion of the taking of Belgrade by the
Turks, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 80. p. 367.
a place equally fortified both by Art and Nature. The Governor went to Buda
to the Court, to procure some Pay for his Soldiers; leaving the Town without
any Commander in chief, when he came he was delayed and frustrated in his
expectation by the Treasurer; whereupon not daring to return to the Garrison
without a supply, and the Turks in the mean time facing the place with a
moderate Army, the hearts of the Soldiery and Inhabitants so failed them, that
not expecting any relief, they yielded up the place. Thus Belgrade came into
the power of the Turks, which all agree might have been preserved by the
seasonable sending of a small sum of money.

5. Vrspergensis and other Historians write of the Hunnes, Camer. oper.
subcisiv. l. 1. c. 80. page 368.
that they lived on this side the Lake and Fens of Maeotis, only addicting
themselves to hunting, without being solicitous whether there were any other
Countries or not: for they thought there was no Land nor Inhabitants on the
other side of Maeotis. But one time by accident certain Hunters beheld a Stag
passing over the Fens, and standing still sometimes, as if making trial if the
place was passable or not, till at last he was got safe on the other side. They
looked upon this as an unwonted and mavelous thing; so that following the
Stag at a distance, they also at last got upon the Continent, where finding it
inhabited by the Scythians, they returned, and gave their Countrymen an
account of their discovery; who having collected a great Army, passed the Fens,
and surprising the Scythians, who dreamed of nothing less than so sudden an
assault, they oppressed them. Whence afterward they marched with such fortune
and felicity, that they rendered themselves terrible to the whole World.

6. The Gauls had besieged the Capitol at Rome, Live. hist. l. 5. p. 202. Camer.
cent. 1. cap. 80. p. 368.
and having by accident found out a way where it might be climbed up, they in
the midst of night sent one unarmed before as their Guide, and then with mutual
assistances, and drawing up one another, as the nature of the place did
require, they had in such silence arrived to the top of it in one place, that
not only the men within were not aware in the least, but the Dogs, otherwise
watchful Creatures, gave no notice of their approaches. But within there were
certain Geese that were consecrated to Juno, which rendered at that time more
vigilant through the want of provision in the place, gave the first Alarm by
their cackling and clapping of their wings. M. Manlius, who three years past
had been Consul, was raised up by this unusual noise; a warlike person he was,
and discerning the danger, took Arms, raised the rest, overthrew the foremost
that were now mounted the Wall, and by this unusual means the Capitol was
saved, all the Gauls being forced to hasten off, or to leave their dead bodies
at the foot of that Hill they had newly climbed.

Fazel. de reb. Sic. postr. decad. l. 9. c. 6. p. 602. Camer. oper. subcisiv.
cent. 1. cap. 80. p. 369.
7. The Arragonians had a design upon C^sibilis in Claremont, a well fortified
place, and in the night the Watch being asleep, having applied their scaling
Ladders, had mounted a Rock, taken one Tower of the Castle, erected the Ensign
of their King upon it, and were now marching to a second, which they had also
carried with little ado, but that there was a Hawk there perched, which being
awaked, made such noise and cry, that the Governor was thereby raised, and the
Watch awaked, finding that the Enemy had gained entrance, they lighted up three
Torches, a sign agreed upon to hasten their friends to their relief; who coming
with speedy and seasonable succors, occasioned the Arragonians to relinquish
their enterprise.

Harod. l. 3. p. 142. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. ^0. p. 369.
8. Niger had fortified the Mountain Taurus against the Army of Severus in such
manner, that it was now made inaccessible; so that the Party of Severus had no
hope of doing any good upon them; when a great snow fell, with showers of rain,
the passage of which from the Mountain being intercepted by the Fortifications,
it at last grew so strong, that it bore away all before it; which the Soldiers
that stood there to guard the passages, perceiving, they immediately fled, and
left all free to the Army of Severus, who then easily passing Taurus, fell into
Cilicia, believing that the Gods themselves fought for them.

Salust. Bell. Iugurth. p. 169. Camer. cent. 1. cap. 80. p. 370.
9. C. Marius had besieged a Castle in Numidia, which by Nature and
Fortifications seemed to be impregnable; he was now in great anxiety about it,
and tortured with hope and fear; he could not resolve whether he should desist,
or continue in the expectation of some good Fortune that had used to be
favorable to him in such occasions. While he remained in these thoughts, a
private Ligurian Soldier that went out of the Camp to get water, being got on
the other side of the Castle, perceived some Cockles creeping amongst the
stones; these he followed, and got diverse of them, till at last his eagerness
in gathering of them had brought him to the top of the Mountain: where having
taken full view of all such things as might be useful, he returns and acquaints
the General with such observations as he had made. Marius made such use of the
occasion, that assaulting the Enemy behind as well as before, he became Master
of that strong place: and, says Salust, the temerity of Marius, corrected by
this accident, turned to his glory.

CHAP. XXI. Of such as have framed themselves to an imitation of their
Superiors or others, with the force of Example in diverse things.
UPon the Coast of Norway the Air is so subtly piercing, that it does
insensibly benum the members, chills the blood, and b^ings upon the man a
certain death, if not with speed prevented. Our over-fondness in the imitations
of the Examples of our Superiors, when they are evil, or too costly for us,
will prove as pernicious to us.

1. Gallus Vibius was a man first of great eloquence, Coel. Rhod. Antiq. lib.
11. c. 13. p. 500. Full. holy state, l. 3. c. 12. page 169.
and then of great madness, which s^ised not on him so much by accident as his
own affectation, so long mimically imitating mad men, that he became one: And
Tully confessed, that whiles he laughed at one Hircus, a very ridiculous man,
Dum illum video, says he, pene factus ^um ille, While I laugh at him I am
almost become the same kind of person.

2. One of the Queens of China had misshapen feet; Alvariz. Seemed. hist. China
part 1. c. 5. p. 30, 31. Linschot. Voyages, l. 1. c. 23. p. 40.
she, to mend that natural defect, used to swathe them to bring them to a
better form: that which she did out of a kind of necessity, the rest do at this
day out of gallantry: for from their very infancy they swathe their childrens
feet straitning them so as to hinder their growth. Certainly the generality of
them have so little, that one might reasonably doubt, whether so small feet
could belong to a humame body grown up to its full stature. Now this practice
had its original from that use of the Queens.

3. Sir Philip Calthrope, Full. Worth. page 270. Northfolk.
who lived in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, had sent as much Cloth of
fine French Tawny, as would make him a Gown, to a Tailor in Norwich. It
happened one John Drakes, a Shoemaker, coming into the Shop, liked it so well,
that he went and bought of the same as much for himself, enjoining the Tailor
to make it of the same fashion. The Knight being informed hereof, commanded the
Tailor to cut his Gown as full of holes as his shears could make, which so
purged John Drakes of his proud humor, that he would never be of the Gentleman's
fashion again.

4. Lancelot Andrews, Full. Worth. page 206. London.
Bishop of Winchester, was an unimitable Preacher in his way, and such
Plagiaries who have often stolen his Sermons, could never steal his preaching,
but could make nothing of that whereof he made all things as he desired. Pious
and pleasant Bishop Felton, his Contemporary and Colleague, endeavoring in
vain in his Sermons to assimulate his style, and therefore said merrily of
himself, I had almost marred my own natural Trot by endeavoring to imitate his
arti^icial Amble. This peerless Prelate died 1626.

5. It was of old a custom of the Ethiopians, Diod. Sicul. rer. Antiq. l. 3. c.
1. p. 71. Din^th. memorab. l. 1. p. 69.
that if the King by any accident or cause was maimed in any of his limbs, his
Domestics and Familiars would voluntarily weaken themselves in those parts;
for they thought it uncomely for them to walk upright, and their King to halt,
or that seeing him but with one eye, themselves should have two. Also when the
King died, his particular friends used to kill themselves, supposing that such
an end of life was honorable, and also a testimony of unseigned friendship.

Sab^l. Ex. l. 6. ^. 9. p. ^86.
6. Salmoneus and Alladius, the one whereof lived at Alba in Italy, and the
other at Elis in Arcadia, would needs imitate the Thunder and Lightning of
Jupiter; but both with a just reward of their presumptuous impiety, were struck
with fire from Heaven.

Clarks mi^. c. 75. page 338.
7. When Charles the Fifth went out of Italy to be crowned Emperor, being much
troubled with the headache, he cut his hair short, the great Courtiers presently
followed his fashion and example; so that wearing long hair, esteemed so much
for many Ages before, grew quite out of fashion in his time.

Clarks mir. c. 75. page 338.
8. When Don John of Austria, base Son to Charles the Fifth, went Governor into
the Low Countries, because the hair on the left side of his temples grew
upright, he used with his hand to put back all the hair from his forehead; and
because that baring of the forehead seemed to look handsomely in him, thence
came the fashion of combing and keeping the hair up with wearing of soretops.

Mobile mutatur sempter cum Principe vulgus, says Claudian.
The people vary too
Just as their Princes do.
And Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
The whole World use to take
The pattern Princes make.


Coel. Rhod. l. 3. c. 10. p. 101.
9. Tatianus the Orator was surnamed the Ape, because he was able to express any
thing by a most ingenious imitation.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 8. p. 235.
10. Alexander the Great carried his neck somewhat awry, and thereupon all the
Courtiers and Great men took up the same as a fashion, and framed themselves to
his manner, though in so mall a matter.

Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 8. p 236.
11. The luxury of the Romans was exceeding great in their Feasts, Clothes,
Household Stuff, and whole Families unto the time of Vespasian: and it was so
confirmed amongst them, that it could not be restrained by the force of those
many Laws that were made against it. But when he came to be Emperor, of it
self it straight became out of fashion: for while he himself observed the
ancient manner both in his diet and attire, the love and fear of the Prince
swayed more with the people than the Law it self.

Su^t. l. 11. c. 3. p. 319.
12. It is said of the Emperor Titus Vespasian, That he could write in Ciphers
and Characters most swiftly, striving by way of sport and mirth with his own
Secretaries and Clerks, whether he or they could write fastest: also he could
imitate and express exactly any handwriting whatsoever he had once seen; so
that he would often profess he could have made a notable Forger and
Counterfeiter of Writings.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 3. cap. 96. p. 358.
13. When King Henry the Eighth of England, about the year 1521. did cut his
hair short, immediately all the English were so moved with his example, that
they were all shorn, whereas before they used to wear long hair.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 66. p. 298.
14. Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, used to say he would have his Son
Charles understand nothing of the Latin Language further than this: Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit reguare, He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how
to reign. This advice of King Lewis was so evil interpreted by the Nobles of
France, that thereupon they began to despise all kind of learning. On the
contrary, when Francis the First showed himself a mighty Favourer of learning
and learned men, most men in imitation of his example did the like.

15. Ernestus, Luther. Colloq. mensal. p. 459.
Prince of Lunenburg, complaining to Luther of the immeasurable drinking that
was at Courts, Luther replied, That Princes ought to look thereunto: Ah! Sir,
said he, we that are Princes do so our selves, otherwise it would long since
have gone down: Manent exempla regentum In vulgus. When the Abbot throws the
Dice, the whole Covent will play.

16. Queen Anne, Trenchfield hist. improved, p. 84.
the Wife of King James, had a Wen in her neck; to hide which she used to wear
a Ruff: and this they say was the original and first occasion of that fashion,
which soon after spread it self over the most part of England.

17. A certain Duke of Bavaria, Clarks mir. cap. 107. p. 539.
before he went to his Diet or Council, used to call his Servant to bring him
water in a Basin, in the bottom whereof was stamped in Gold the Image of Cato
Major, that so he might fix the impression of his Image in his mind, the
imitation of whose virtues he had prudently proposed for his practice.

18. The Emperor Charles the Fifth having resigned his Kingdom, Clarks mir.
cap. 128. p. 652.
and betaken himself to a Monastery, labored to wash out the stains of his
defiled Conscience by Confession to a Priest, and with a Discipline of platted
Cords he put himself to a constant and sharp Penance for his former wicked
life. This Discipline his Son King Philip ever had in great veneration, and a
little before his death commanded it to be brought unto him, as it was stained
in the blood of Charles his Father. Afterward he sent it to his Son Philip the
Third, to be kept by him as a Relic and a sacred Monument.

19. Antoninus Caracalla being come to Troy, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 21. l. 3. page
3810.
visited the Tomb of Achilles, adorning it with a Crown, and dressing it with
flowers, and framing himself to the imitation of Achilles, he called Festus his
best beloved Freed-man by the name of Patroclus. While he was there Festus
died, made away on purpose, as it was supposed by him, that so he might bury
him with the same Solemnities as Achilles did his Friend: Indeed he buried him
honorably, using all the same Rites as Achilles had done in the Funerals of
Patroclus. In this performance, when he sought for hair to cast upon the
funeral Pile, and that he had but thin hair, he was laughed at by all men; yet
he caused that little he had to be cast into the fire, being clipped off for
that purpose. He also was a studious Imitator of Alexander the Great; he went
in the Macedonian Habit; chose out a Band of young men whom he called the
Macedonian Phalanx, causing them to use such Arms as were used when Alexander
was alive, and commanded the Leaders of the Roman Legions to take upon
themselves the names of such Captains as served Alexander in his Wars.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Authority of some persons amongst their Soldiers and
Countrymen, and Seditions appeased by them diverse ways.
NEar Assos there are stones, which in few days not only consume the flesh of
dead bodies, but the very bones too; and there is in Palestine an Earth of the
same operation and quality. Thus there are some men, who by their singular
prudence and authority, are able not only to cease the present tumult and
disorder of a people, but to take such effectual course, that the very seeds
and causes of their fermentation and distemper should be utterly consumed and
removed. Of what force the presence of some, and the eloquence of others has
been in this matter, see in the Chapter following.

Sabel. Ex. l. 6. c. 8. p. 354. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 9. p. 974.
1. Caius Caesar the Dictator intending to transfer the War into Africa, his
Legionaries at Rome rose up in a general mutiny, desiring to be disbanded and
discharged from the War: Caesar, though otherwise persuaded by all his friends,
went out to them, and showed himself amongst the enraged multitude. He called
them Quirites, that is, Commoners of Rome, by which one word he so shamed and
subdued them, that they made answer, they were Soldiers, and not Commoners;
and being then by him publicly discharged, they did not without difficulty
obtain of him to be restored to their Commissions and places.

Diod. Sicul. biblioth. ^. 20. p. 671.
2. Arcagathus the Son of Agathocles had slain Lycifcus (a great Captain) for
some intemperate words; whereupon the friends of the dead put the Army into
such a commotion, that they demanded Arcagathus to death, and threatened the
same punishment to Agathocles himself, unless he did yield up his Son. Besides
this, diverse Captains with their Companies spoke of passing over to the Enemy.
Agathocles fearing to be delivered into the hands of the Enemy, and so to be
put to some ignominious death, thought in case he must suffer, he had better
die by the hands of his own Soldiers: so laying aside the Royal Purple, and
putting on a vile garment, he came forth to them; silence was made, and all ran
together to behold the novelty of the thing; when he made a Speech to them
agreeable to the present state of things, he told them of the great Exploits he
had formerly done; that he was ready to die, if his Soldiers should think it
expedient, for he was never yet so possessed with fear, as out of an
over-desire of life to be drawn to do any thing unworthy of himself: And when
he had told them, that themselves should be witnesses hereof, he drew his
Sword, as one that was about to kill himself; and being now ready to inflict
the wound, the whole Army cried out he should not do it, and that they had
forgiven him. So he was persuaded by the Army to reassume his Royal Habit, and
was fully restored with their great applause.

Civ. hist. l. 2. p. 32. Zonar. Annal. tom. 2. fol. 58. Lonic. Th^atr. p. 376.
3. A great Sedition was in Rome, and the common people so incensed against the
rich men and the Senate, that all things were now tending to ruin and
destruction, when the Senate sent unto the people one to persuade them: this
was Menenius Agrippa, an eloquent man, who being admitted amongst them, Plut.
in Co^riolano, p. 216.
is said thus to have spoken: Upon a time there arose a great sedition amongst
the other members of the body against the belly, the eyes, ears, hands, feet,
and tongue said, they each of them performed their several offices to the body;
but the belly doing nothing at all, as a King, enjoyed their labors, and
consumed upon it self all those things that were purchased with the sweat of
the rest. The belly confessed, that these things were true, and that if it
pleased them from henceforth they should allow it nothing: the members decreed
it amongst themselves, that nothing should be given to the belly; when this had
been observed for some little time, the hands and feet lost their strength, and
all the other members became slothful, sick, or immovable; then at last they
perceived, that the food which was allowed to the belly, was of equal advantage
to all the rest of the members as to it self, and so returned to their former
obedience. When the people had heard this Fable, they understood thereby, that
the Wealth which was in the hands of Great men, was also advantageous to
themselves: and so upon some promises of the Senate, to discharge some of their
debts, they were reconciled to the Fathers.

4. Sextus Pompeius being overcome, Zonar. Annal. tom. 2. fol. 89.
and Lepidus having yielded himself, the Soldiers of Octavianus Caesar began
to grow seditious; they came together in a tumultuary way, and every man
demanded whatsoever he thought good. When they saw they were neglected by
Caesar (as if now there being no Enemy, there was no further use for them) and
that they prevailed nothing with the threatenings they gave out, at last with
great indignation and clamor they cried out, that they would be dismissed,
hoping by that means to obtain what they desired. Caesar knowing that it became
not a Prince to seem to be compelled by any necessity to give way unto his
Subjects, told them, that they desired no more than what was fit, and that
therefore in the first place he did dismiss those that had warred with him
against Antonius; and when others also desired their dismission, he also
dismissed them that had been in the War ten years, and told them, that he would
not make use of one of them, though they should never so earnestly desire it.
At the hearing of which, they said no more, but returned to their obedience.

5. Severus the Emperor being ill of the Gout, Pezel. mellific. hist. tom. 2.
page 206.
while he was warring in Britain, his Soldiers apprehensive of some evil
consequence from his indisposition, took his Son Bassianus (whom he before had
made his Associate in the Empire) and saluted him by the name of Augustus,
determining to secure him in the Title and Power they had given him. Severus
understanding this dangerous sedition in the Army, caused himself to be carried
to his Tribunal, there he commanded his Son, together with all the Tribunes,
Centurions, and Cohorts that were concerned as Authors of the Sedition, to
appear before him, in such manner as guilty persons are wont. The Army was
terrified with this his manner of proceeding, and therefore falling prostrate
before him upon the ground, they universally implored his pardon. He striking
his hands together: You now perceive, said he, that it is not the feet, but the
head that rules all; and so dismissed them in quiet.

6. Pupienus, Pezel. mellific. hist. tom. 2. page 220.
Balbinus, and Gordianus the Third were made Emperors by the Senate: of these
the first was sent against Maximinus, the other two staid in Rome. When a great
Sedition arose betwixt the Pretorian Soldiers and the people of Rome, Balbinus
found that his Authority availed not to appease this commotion; whereupon he
caused the Child Gordianus arrayed in Purple to be brought forth, and set upon
the shoulders of a very tall man, to be showed to the Soldiery and people. No
sooner was the Princely Boy beheld by them, but that the love and consideration
they had of him, brought both the Soldiery and people to a mutual concord.

Q. Cart. hist. l. 10. page 307. Diodor. Sicul. Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. page
381, 382.
7. Alexander the Great had 30000 young men of the same age, that he caused to
be instructed in the military Discipline of the Grecians, and armed as the
Macedonians: these came to his Army, and he called them Epigoni or his
posterity. The Macedonians resented their coming ill, especially when the King
in an Oration of his to the Army told them, that he would dismiss them that
were become unserviceable through age or wounds, and send them home with
honor. The Macedonians were highly incensed with this his Oration,
interpreting his words as if he despised them, and looked upon them all as
unserviceable: whereupon, without regard to their Commanders, or presence of
the King, with a tumultuous noise and military violence, they cried out, that
they would all be dismissed, adding, that he and his Father should war
together, scoffingly intending Jupiter Hammon. When Alexander heard this,
grinding his teeth for anger, he leapt with his Captains from his Tribunal,
rushed into the midst of them, and having noted thirteen of those that had
spoken most boldly, he laid hands on them, and delivered them as Prisoners to
his guard, no man opposing him. The Army before so fierce, were seized with a
sudden fear at this his procedure; and when they saw their fellows led to
Execution, they remained as men stupisied, and expecting what the King would
determine of them all. The next day they were prohibited the fight of the King,
he only admitting the Asian Soldiers to his presence; whereupon they set up a
mournful cry, and said, they would all die, if the King would persist in his
anger against them. He continued resolute, called the strangers to an Assembly,
ordering the Macedonians to stay in their Camp, made the Persians his Guard and
his Apparitors, and by these punished the Mutineers. This the Macedonians took
patiently; but when they knew that the Persians had Leaders appointed them,
were formed into Troops, and Macedonian names given them, and themselves
ignominiously rejected; they were no longer able to restrain their grief, but
came to the Palace, laid down their Arms at the Gates, and retaining only their
under-garments, they stood at the door, with great humility and tears
beseeching to be admitted, and desiring the King to satisfy himself rather
with the punishment than reproach of them. When Alexander was informed of this,
he came forth, and beholding their afflicted estate, he wept with them; and
having modestly reproved them, and then commending their modesty that gave him
occasion to pardon them, he received them again to his favor, and dismissed,
as he before intended, the unserviceable with rich Presents, and Letters to
Antipater in their favor.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 9. page 974.
8. Petrus Lauretanus was the Venetian Admiral, he had overthrown the Navy of
the Turks at Callipolis. At Rapalus he had taken Franciscus Spinola of Genoa,
with eight Captains of Galleys, and three Counselors; whereupon he was created
a Procurator of St. Mark, and his authority was so great amongst the people,
that (when a mighty sedition arose of the Mariners and Seamen, who in great
numbers were come out of Istria and Dalmatia to furnish out the Fleet against
Philip Duke of Millain) this man by his presence alone (though sick) did
appease them, and that too, when the command of the Duke himself was not
regarded, the authority of the December viri contemned, and the power of all the
Guards drawn out against them availed not. In this state of things such was the
Majesty of this one private person, that as men affrighted, the seditious fled
all away at the sight of him.

CHAP. XXIII. Of such Princes and persons as have been fortunate in the finding
of hid Treasures, and others that were deluded in the like expectations.
SOme men have as wilfully cast away their Riches, as Crates the Philosopher is
said to have done his, and upon much the like pretenses, as looking upon them
to be the fuel of all sorts of vices, and fearing to be undone by them: whereas
if Riches prove hurtful to any man, it is no fault of theirs, but his only that
makes an evil use of them, and to a wise man they are the Handmaids and
Assistants to his Virtues. It is happy therefore for some men, that the Earth
should for ever conceal her Treasures from them, seeing their greatness would
be an obstruction to their goodness; but whenever she shall disclose her
Riches, may they ever be put into such hands as will make others better, and
themselves no worse by them.

1. Tiberius the second Emperor of Greece, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 1. p. 592.
was exceedingly fortunate in this kind; he seeing many (as they passed by a
certain Cross) that they would ever go on the upper side thereof as led
thereunto with a kind of devotion: he commanded that this Cross should be taken
away, and set in some other place. They that were employed in the digging of it
up, found underneath, beyond all hope or expectation, very rich Treasure. He
found besides, the huge Wealth of Narses, which he had hid in his house a
little before he died, having killed all those that knew any thing thereof,
save a young child whom he made to give his promise, with many oaths and
execrations, that he should never speak word of it to any body. But when this
child was grown old, and long after the decease of Narses, he revealed the
matter to Tiberius, who found in the place an incredible Mass of Gold and
Silver.

2. Gontran King of Burgundy dreamed that he found Treasure hid in a Cave
within a certain Mountain; Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 63. p. 287.
when he awaked, he sent away some on purpose to dig in the same place, who
there found it accordingly.

3. About the year 1060. Robert Guiscard being at that time Prince of Calabria,
Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 63. p. 287.
Apulia, and the adjacent Isles, there was found in Apulia a Statue of Marble,
having about the head a Circle of Brass with this Inscription: Calendis Maii,
orient Sole, aureum caput habebo, that is, The first day of May, at Sun
rising, I shall have a golden head. There was not any that could solve this
Riddle that could any where be found. At last a Saracen then Prisoner, offered
himself to expound the Inscription, upon promise that when he had done it, he
should be set at free and full liberty. The Prince gave him assurance thereof,
and the first day of May being come, at the rising of the Sun, the Saracen
observed the shadow of the Circle that was about the head of this Image, and in
the same place where the shadow was, caused them to dig: which they did, and
when they were come very deep, they found a mighty Treasure, which came in good
season for the Prince, for it served to defray the charge of the War he made at
that time. The Saracen, besides the grant of his liberty (which he preferred
before all other things) was bountifully rewarded, and sent away with many rich
and princely gifts.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 63. p. 285.
4. Decebalus the King of Dacia, by the hands and labor of Captives only,
turned the course of the River Sargetia, that ran near unto his Palace, and in
the midst of the Chanel caused a deep Vault to be dug, wherein he bestowed a
mighty Mass of Silver and Gold, and all such things as were with him* of
greatest estimation, even such precious Liquors as would keep: and this done,
he restored the River to its wonted course. All that he had employed in this
work, or that he supposed to have any knowledge hereof he caused to be slain,
to prevent all discovery. But one Biculis a Captain (who though he knew
thereof) had accidentally made his escape, revealed the matter to the Emperor
Trajanus, who causing diligent search to be made, found it. Upon this account
diverse ancient Inscriptions in Marble are found to this purpose.

Iovi Inventori, Diti Patri, Terrae Matri, detectis Daciae Thesauris, Caesar
Nerva Trajanus, Aug. Sac. p. Morris of com. Right, p. 94.
5. Caecilius Bassus with much confidence and exultation comes to Nero, and told
him, that it was revealed to him in a dream, that within his ground in Africa
was hid a stupendous mass of Treasure not stamped, but in Bullion, reposited
there of old by Q. Dido coming from Tyrus. This was over-lightly credited, the
Orators and Poets made it the subject of their declamations and recital to the
people; the Galleys were sent to fetch it, but returned empty of any thing but
shame and obloquy; and as Tacitus observes, the expectation of Riches was
amongst the causes of the public poverty.

Textor. officin. lib. 2. c. 23. p. 98.
6. Aminocles the Magnesian, while he was busying himself in digging and turning
up the earth, found diverse Cups and Vessels of Silver and Gold, and much
Treasure, which in times past had been there hidden by the Persians.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Election and Inauguration of Princes in several Places and
Nations.
THE safety and prosperity of the people is highly concerned in the ability and
integrity of that person in whose hands they shall entrust the Government; and
therefore in places where the supreme Ruler is elective, they manage their
choice of him with such wisdom, that if possible they may not be imposed upon,
and then instal him with that Ceremony and Solemnity, as they conceive may best
conduce to establish his Authority, and beget a due reverence to his person,
without which he can do them little service.

1. Contarenus describes the Election of the Duke of Venice on this manner:
Howels Repub. of Venice, p. 34. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 720. Sabellic.
l. 9. decad. 1. Heyl. Cosm. p. 127.
Presently upon the Vacancy all the Gentry, above thirty years of age, do
assemble, so many as meet cast their names into a Pot, and in another are just
so many Balls, whereof thirty only are gilt, then a child draws for each,
till the thirty gilt ones be drawn, for which thirty the child draws again a
second time out of another Pot that has only nine gilt Balls. The nine so
drawn nominate forty, out of which forty twelve are again selected by the same
kind of Lot; these twelve nominate twenty five, out of whom nine are again by
Lot set apart; these nine nominate forty five, who are by Lot reduced again to
eleven; these eleven choose forty one of the Senate, of the best and principal
rank. These forty one after every one has tied himself by solemn Oath, to
choose whom they shall think most worthy, the scrolls are mingled together, and
then drawn; the fitness of the persons thus drawn is discussed, and he who has
most Voices above twenty five, is the man whom they pronounce to be elected,
and adjudge him to be created Duke with all solemnities.

2. It is a strange custom which the Archdukes of Austria use, Fulgos. Ex. l.
2. c. 1. p. 226. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 719. Petr. Greg. de Repub. l.
7. c. 15.. 16. page 289.
when they first enter upon the possession of the Dukedom of Carinthia; for not
far from the Town of St. Vitus (in a Valley where there are yet seen the ruins
of a great City, the name of which is now lost to the memory of man) there is a
great stone: upon the day that the Duke comes to take possession of that
Duchy, a Countryman chosen by Lot mounts the stone, and stands betwixt a lean
Cow and a Mare, surrounded with a multitude of Rusticks. The Duke of Austria
descends into the Valley, clothed in Country-habit, whom very many of the
Princes of that Country resort unto armed, and with Ensigns, amongst whom the
Earl of Goritia has the chief place. The Countryman perceiving at a great
distance the coming of the Prince, as one that was seized with wonder (in the
Liburnian Tongue which they use) demands of the Rusticks about him, who that
is, that with so proud a port, walk, and equipage is coming toward him? They
tell him, that it is the Prince of the Country. The Countryman demands again,
if he be a just Judge, if he have a care of the common safety of the Country;
if he be a Servant or Freeman, if worthy of that honor, and if he be a true
Christian? Which when they that are about him have affirmed, he again asks by
what right he will drive him from that stone? Then the Earl of Goritia, being
now come near, replies, He will drive thee away by the gift of sixty Crowns,
and of those Cattle that are by thee: he will free thee and thy family from all
public burdens; and besides thou shall have those Princely Robes, which he
has laid by. The Countryman at the hearing of this, giving the Prince a
gentle blow upon the cheek, admonishes him that he be just, and taking the
Cattle that were by him, returns home. The Prince leaps upon the stone, and
brandishes his drawn Sword, and promises that he will administer Justice to all
that desire it; and so descending, he goes to the Temple, and takes upon him
his Princely Robes and Office. After he has feasted, he ascends a Tribunal
that is placed for him in the fields, and there hears all the complaints of the
people.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 112, 113.
3. The Election of the Pope is made most commonly in this manner: In the Popes
Palace on the Hill Vatican are, amongst other Buildings, five Halls, two
Chapels, and a Gallery seventy foot long: the Gallery is appointed for
Conference, one Chapel for the Mass and for the Election, the other with the
Halls are for the Cardinals Lodgings: every Hall has two rows of Chambers,
which are purposely for the time, made of green or Violet Cloth. To each
Cardinal is allowed four Servants to lie in his Chamber. They that are once
within are compelled, unless they be sick, still to continue there; and such as
are once out, are no more permitted to go in, lest by that means the Cardinals
should maintain Intelligence with any foreign Princes. To this Conclave (for by
this name the place of the Election is called) is but one door, to which
belongs four Locks and as many Keys: one Key is in the keeping of the
Cardinals, one of the City-Bishops, one of the Roman Nobility, and one of the
Master of the Ceremonies. There is in this door a Wicket or Hatch, which is
opened only at dinners and suppers, whereof the Master of the Ceremonies
keeps the key. At this hole the Cardinals Servants receive their meat, every
dish being first diligently searched, lest any Letters should be conveyed in
them. As for the Lodgings, they have neither holes nor windows to give light,
so that there they make day of Wax-candles. And lest the Pope should be made by
force, both the City and Conclave are strongly guarded. When the Cardinals are
going to Election, the Privileges of the Cardinals are recited, which every
one swears to observe, in case he be chosen Pope. Then the Master of the
Ceremonies ringing a Bell, calls them to Mass: which ended, there is brought
to every Cardinal a Chair, and therein a scroll of all the Cardinals names.
Before the Altar it self is set a Table covered with a purple Cloth, whereupon
is set a Chalice and a silver Bell, and about it six stools, on which sit two
Cardinal-Bishops, two Cardinal-Priests, and two Cardinal-Deacons. Every
Cardinal writes his voice in a piece of paper, goes to the Altar, prays God
to guide him in the Election, puts his voice into the Chalice, and departs
to his seat. The first Bishop takes out all the papers, and delivers them to
the first Deacon, who unfoldeth each of them, reads (without mentioning the
name of the Elector) the name of the Elected; and every Cardinal in his
particular scroll notes how many voices every one has. The account being
made, the first Priest having the like scroll, pronounces who has most
voices: which done, the Priest ringeth a silver Bell, at which call the Master
of the Ceremonies brings in a Pan of coals, and burns all the little
papers, wherein the names of the elected were written. He that has the most
voices (so that his voices exceed the proportion of two parts of three) is
acknowledged Pope, and adored by the rest of the Cardinals: but if they exceed
not this number, they must begin all anew. If in the space of thirty days the
Election be not fully ended, then must the Cardinals be kept from fire, light,
and victuals till they are fully agreed. The Wicket which woe before mentioned,
is called the golden Gate, at which stand an infinite number of poor people, on
whom the new Pope having opened that Gate, bestows his fatherly benediction,
and remitteth to them all their sins. Then strikes he continually on the same
door with a golden Mallet, which whilst he is doing, workmen without break it
open. The chips, stones, dust and dirt, which fall from the Gate, while it is
opening, are gathered and preserved as choicest Relics, and the golden Mallet
is usually given to that Cardinal who is in most grace with the new Pope.

4. The Tartarians when they choose and elect their Prince, Lithgow'^ Travels,
part 9. p. 422.
they meet together in a large field, and then they set him in a stately Throne
richly gilded, placed in the view of all that are then present; and falling
down before him, they all proclaim after this sort, and with one consent: We
beseech, we will and command that thou bear rule over us. Then their new King
which is chosen answers: If you will have this done of me, it is necessary
that you be ready to do all that I shall command you; when I call, to come, and
wheresoever I send, to go, and to commit and put the whole Rule into our hands.
When they have answered, We be ready; he says again, Therefore my Word shall
be my Sword; then all the people clap their hands with great rejoicing. Then
the Noblemen take him from the Regal Seat, and make him to sit softly upon a
Cushion or Carpet upon the ground, saying thus: Look up and acknowledge God,
and look downward to the Cushion whereon thou fittest. If thou do govern and
rule well, thou shall have all things according to thy desire; but if thou do
ill, thou shall be brought so low and so bare, that this small Cushion whereon
thou sit shall not be left thee. At which saying they adjoin unto him his
dearest and best beloved Wife, and lifting them both up with the Cushion, they
salute them as their Emperor and Head.

5. When the King of the Cumbae and Capi (a people in Guinea) dies, Purch.
pllg. tom. 1. l. 6. c. 14.. 1. p. 809.
his Son, Brother, or his next Kinsman succeeds; but before he is admitted to
the exercise of full Regality, they bind him at his house, and lead him bound
to the Palace, there they whip him; after which he is loosed: then they attire
and lead him to the Judgmentseat, where the eldest Counselor makes an Oration
concerning his Right and Duty: which ended, he puts a Hatchet into his hand,
which they use in Executions, and after this all acknowledge their subjection
to him.

6. The S^minaries (or Alberges) of Malta are seven, Heyl. Cosm. p. 964.
France in general, Auvergne, Provence, Castile, Arragon, Italy, and Germany,
over every one of which they have a grand Prior. An eighth Seminary they had in
England till the suppression of it by King Henry the Eighth: yet they have one
to whom they give the Title. They have sixteen amongst them of great Authority
called the great Crosses. The Election of their Master is performed on this
manner: The several Seminaries nominate two Knights, and two also are nominated
for the English. These sixteen from amongst themselves choose eight, these eight
choose a Knight, a Priest, and a Fryer-servant, and they out of the sixteen
great Crosses elect the great Master. The great Master being thus chosen, is
styled the most Illustrious and most Reverend Prince the Lord Friar N. N. great
Master of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, Prince of Malta, Gauls, and
Gosa.

7. The Electors of the Emperor of Germany are six, Heyl. Cosm. p. 481.
the Archbishops of Mentz, Colen, and Triers, the Count Palatine of the Rhine,
the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brand^nburg: upon equality of Voices
the King of Bohemia comes in for a seventh. The Election is usually celebrated
at Frankford on the Main, where the Electors meet on the day appointed by the
Archbishop of Mentz, as Chancellor of the Empire. Being met, they go into St.
Bartholomews Church, where after high Mass is said, the three spiritual
Electors laying their hands upon their breasts, and the temporal Princes on the
Book make Oath to choose a fit temporal Head for the people of Christendom. If
in thirty days they are not agreed, then must they have no other allowance but
of bread and water; nor may they go out of the City till necessity compel them
to agree. Being at last resolved on and declared, the Prince so elected is
presently saluted by the Title of King of the Romans, not usually that of
Emperor till he have received the Crown at the hands of the Pope.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Games and Plays of sundry Nations, by whom they were
instituted, and when.
THE troubles and cares of humane life are so many and so great, that the
spirit would fail under the weight and burden of them, should there not be
something of mirthful and pleasant found out, wherewith to counterbalance and
take off the Taedium of them. All Nations therefore have thought it meet to
make necessary provision of certain periodical Solemnities of Joy, on purpose
to recreate and renew the decayed and almost exhausted vigor of the mind, and
to sweeten the acerbities of the painful pilgrimage of their present life.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 585. Benedict. de Pindar. Nemeor. titulo, p. 487.
1. The Nemaean Games were so called from Nemea, where Hercules killed the
dreadful Lion which annoyed the whole Country. In honor of which noble act
were instituted in time following the Games aforesaid, which continued of great
fame in Greece for many Ages. The Exercises were Running with swift horses,
Whorlbats, Running on foot, Quoiting, Wrestling, Darting, and Shooting,
celebrated first in honor of Opheltes, afterward by Hercules in honor of
Jupiter: the Crown at first was a Branch of Olive, afterward a Garland of Ivy.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 579. Plin. not. hist. l. 34. c. 4. p. 489. Benedict. in Pindar.
Proem. Diod. Sicul. rer. Antiq. l. 4. c. 4. p. 121.
2. The Olympic Games were instituted by Hercules in honor of Jupiter, and
celebrated on the Plains of the City Olympia, in the Country of Elis, A. M.
2757. The Exercises in them were for the most part bodily, as running in
Chariots, running on Foot, Wrestling, fighting with Whorlebats, and the like.
But so, that there repaired thither also Orators, Poets, and Musicians, and all
that thought themselves excellent in any quality, to make trial of their
several abiliti^^. The rewards given the Victor were only Garlands of Palm, or
such slight remembrances; and yet the Greeks no less esteemed that small sign
of Conquest, than the Romans did their most magnificent Triumphs: Those who
were Conquerors herein, being met by the principal men of the City, in which or
under which they lived, and a passage broken in the main Walls thereof for
their reception. Crotona, a City of the higher Calabria, was once so famous for
this, that one year all the Victors in these Games were of that City. They were
celebrated once in five years; he who had been Victor the third time, had his
Statue erected agreeable to his own features and proportion, which the Greeks
call Icones.

3. In the Isthmus, Heyl. Cosm. p. 586. Benedict. de Pindar. Isthm. tit. p.
655. Plin. l. 4. c. 5. p. 74. Pind. Nem. 6. epist. 2. p. 564.
near the City of Corinth, were celebrated yearly the Isthmian Games, ordained
by Theseus in the honor of Neptune, in imitation of the Olympic devised by
Hercules in honor of Jupiter. The Exercises were much the same, and the reward
no other than a Garland of Oaken boughs; yet drawing yearly a mighty confluence
of people to them. These Games were first celebrated by Sisyphus in honor of
Melicerta, and the Masteries were performed in the night: but being intermitted
through the robberies of Scyron and Sinnis, for fear of whom all strangers
feared to come, they were renewed and restored by Theseus, who had overcome the
Robbers, by him they were ordered to be in the day. They were celebrated every
fifth year, say Pliny and Solinus; but Pindar himself says, they were kept
every third year.

4. The Pythian Games were instituted in honor of Apollo, Benedict. de Pind.
Isth. tit. p. 245.
and celebrated not only at Delphos, but also amongst the Magnetes, Sicyonians,
and others. They were of great reputation amongst the Greeks, more ancient than
the Isthmian, and not so old as the Olympic. The death of the Serpent Python
is supposed to administer the first occasion of them. The Assembly to them was
in the beginning of the Spring, at first every ninth year, and afterward every
fifth. The same Exercises were here as in the Olympic, the reward various, at
first a Laurel; Theseus made it a Garland of Palm, Eurylochus appointed it
should be of Money.

5. The Scenick Plays at Rome, Val. Max. l. 2. c. 4. p. 40. Godw. Romans Antiq.
l. 2.. 3. c. 2. p. 69.
so called from Scena. The first institution of them was occasioned by reason
of a great pestilence, which by no medicinal help could be removed. The Romans
then superstitiously conceiting, that some new Games or Sports being found out,
the wrath of the Gods would thereby be averted: They thereupon, about the 400.
year from the building of Rome, sent for certain Stage Players out of Hetruria,
which they call Histriones, from the Hetrurian word Hister, which signifies
such a Player.

6. The Ludi Compitales in Rome were such as usually were solemnized in
Compitis, Godw. Romans Antiq. l. 2. c. 2. p. 68. Plin. not. hist. l. 36. c. 27.
page 599.
that is, in the cro^s-ways and streets. Servius Tullus who succeeded Tarquin
in the Kingdom, was the first that instituted these solemn Games in honor of
the Houshold-Gods or familiar Spirits; he himself being thought to be begotten
by one of these Genii or Goblins.

7. The old Romans at the expulsion of their Kings annually solemnized the
Fugalia, Heyl. Cosm. p. 318.
according to which pattern the joyful English having cleared their Country of
the Danes, instituted the annual Sports of Hock-Tide; the word in their old
Tongue (the Saxon) importing the time of scorning or triumphing. This Solemnity
consisted of the merry Meetings of the Neighbors in those days, during which
the Festival lasted, and were celebrated by the younger sort of both sexes with
all manner of Exercises and Pastimes in the streets, even as Shrove-Tide yet
is. But now time has so corrupted it, that the name excepted, there remains
no sign of the first institution.

8. Lactantius speaking of the Plays called Floralia, Lactant. institut. l. 1.
c. 20. p. 65.
They are made, says he, with all dissoluteness, and fitly correspond with the
memory of the infamous Harlot that erected them. For besides the lasciviousness
of words in which all villainy overfloweth, at the request of the people the
common Harlots are stripped stark naked, and brought upon the Stage, where in
open view they exercise all the wanton gestures and motions of their Trade,
till the beholders have glutted their lustful eyes with such shows.

Aelian. v^r. hist. l. 2. c. 28. p. 68.
9. The Athenians having overcome the Persians under the Conduct of
Themistocles, did ordain by a particular Law, that from thenceforth annually
upon a certain day there should be a fighting of Cocks exhibited in the public
Theater; the occasion of which was this: When Themistocles had drawn out the
City-forces to fight against the Barbarians, he saw two Cocks fighting, which
he beheld with earn^stness, and having showed them to his whole Army; Yet
these, said he, do not undergo this danger, either for their Houshold-Gods, or
for the Monuments of their Ancestors: they ^ight neither for glory, nor for
liberty, nor the safety of their children; but only because the one will not be
inferior or give place to the other. By this means he mightily confirmed the
minds of the Athenians; and thereupon what had once been to them so strong an
incitement to virtue, they would preserve the memorial of against the like
occasions.

Plut. moral. in libro de Musi^a, page 1256.
10. The Argives had certain solemn Games in their City called Sthenia, where
there was Wrestling, and their Music was that of Hautboys. These Games were
(by report) instituted at first in honor and m^mory of their King Danaus, and
were afterward consecrated to the honor of Jupiter surnamed Sthenius.

Sueton. l. 5. c. 21. page 215. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 10. l. 3. page 2445.
11. The Ludi Seculares were so called, because they were to be exhibited but
once in an Age; at the proclaiming of which the Crier used to invite Spectators
in such terms as these: Come to those Plays which no man now living has yet
seen, or shall see again. Claudius Caesar pretending that Octavianus Augustus
had anticipated the time, and had celebrated them before the just return of
them, resolved to exhibit them himself. He therefore placed in the great Cirque
for the Racers Pillars of Marble, from whence they were to set out, and the
Goals, or ending places of their Races were gilt over. He appointed proper
places for all the Senators, where they might behold what was done; whereas
before they sat intermixed with the Commons. Besides the contentions of
Charioteers, he exhibited the Games of Troy. There were also appointed
Thessalian Horsemen, who hunted wild Bulls all along the Cirque, who leaped
upon their backs when they were weary, and by their horns drew them down to the
earth. Besides these there was a Troop of Pretorian Horsemen, who had Tribunes
for their Leaders, and these hunted, and killed a number of Panthers and
Leopards. This sort of Play was also celebrated by Philip the Emperor at his
return from the Persian Expedition, 1000 years after the building of Rome,
there was then a notable Hunting performed, and there were given to be killed
thirty two Elephants, twenty Tigers, sixty tame Lions, an hundred Hyenae, one
Rhinocerote, ten Archoleontes, ten Camelopards, forty wild Horses, thirty tame
Leopards: and besides all this, the^e were appointed a thousand pair of Fencers
or Sword-players at sharps, to delight the c^uel eyes of the people with their
blood and wounds.

12. The Quinquennalia, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 10. l. 3. page 2445.
Decennalia, Vicennalia, and Tricennalia were solemn Games, Plays, and
Spectacles exhibited by the Roman Emperors in honor of their arrival to the
fifth, tenth, twentieth, and thirtieth year of their Reign. All these were
performed with great magnificence^ and vast expenses, and that successively by
the Emperor Constantine the Great.

CHAP. XXVI. Of such persons as have made their Appeals to God in case of
injury and injustice from men, and what has followed thereupon.
IT was the Saying of the Emperor Maximilian, Fiat justitia, and ruat coelum,
Let Justice be done, and it matters not what shall come after. The Tribunals of
men may sometimes fail in the distribution of Justice, through such intricacy
of the Cause, want of discerning in the Judge, or other circumstances, as may
lay no great imputation upon such as have not the gift of infallibility. But
when men that sit in the place of God, shall through corruption or malice
wilfully prevaricate, and knowingly and presumptuously oppress the innocent, in
such cases the supreme Judge oftentimes reserves the decision of the Cause to
be made at his own Bar; and thereupon has inspired the injured persons to give
their oppressors a summons of appearance, which though at prefixed days they
have not been able to avoid.

1. In the Reign of Frederick Aenobarbus the Emperor, Lips. monit. l. 2. c.
11. p. 282. Dinoth. l. 8. p. 579. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 6. p. 123.
Delrio disq. magic. l. 4. c. 4. qu. 4. p. 677. Chetw. hist. collect. cent. 1.
p. 21.
and the year 1154. Henry was Archbishop of Mentz, a pious and peaceable man,
but not able to endure the dissolute manners of the Clergy under him, he
determined to subject them to some sharp censure; but while he thought of this,
he himself was by them beforehand accused to Pope Eugenius the Fourth. The
Bishop sent Arnoldus his Chamberlain to Rome to make proof of his innocence;
but the Traitor deserted his Lord, and instead of defending him, traduced him
there himself. The Pope sent two Cardinals as his Legates to Mentz to determine
the cause, who being bribed by the Canons and Arnoldus, deprived Henry of his
Seat with great ignominy, and substituted Arnoldus in his stead. Henry bore all
patiently, without appealing to the Pope, which he knew would be to no purpose;
but openly declared, that from their unjust judgment he made his Appeal to
Christ the just Judge, there I will put in my Answer, and thither I cite you:
the Cardinals jestingly replied, When thou art gone before we will follow thee.
About a year and half after the Bishop Henry died; upon the hearing of his
death, both the Cardinals said, Lo he is gone before, and we shall follow
after: their jest proved in earnest; for both of them died in one and the same
day, one in a house of office, and the other gnawing off his own fingers in his
madness. Arnoldus was assaulted in a Monastery, butchered, and his carcass cast
into the Town-ditch.

2. Ferdinand the Fourth, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 11. page 284, 285.
King of Spain, was a great man both in peace and war, but something rash and
rigid in pronouncing Judgment; so that he seemed to incline to cruelty. About
the year 1312. he commanded two Brothers, Dinoth. l. 8. p. 580. Fulgos. l. 1.
c. 6. p. 168. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 1. p. 120. Delrio disq. magic.
l. 4. c. 4. qu. 4. p. 677.
Peter and John, of the noble Family of the Carvialii, to be thrown headlong
from an high Tower, as suspected guilty of the death of Benavidius, a Noble
person of the first rank: they with great constancy denied they were guilty of
any such crime, but to small purpose. When therefore they perceived that the
Kings ears were shut against them, they cried out they died innocent; and since
they found the King had no regard to their pleadings, they did appeal to the
divine Tribunal, and turning themselves to the King, bid him remember to make
his appearance there within the space of thirty days at the furthest. Ferdinand
at that time made no reckoning of their words; but upon the thirtieth day, his
Servants supposing he was asleep, found him dead in his bed in the flower of
his age; for he was but twenty four years and nine months old.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 168. Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 11. p. 284. Dinoth. l. 8. p.
580. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 2. p. 120. Delrio disq. magic. l. 4. c.
4. qu. 4. p. 678.
3. When by the counsel and persuasion of Philip the fair, King of France, Pope
Clement the Fifth had condemned the whole Order of the Knights Templars, and in
diverse places had put many of them to death; at last there was a Neapolitan
Knight brought to suffer in like manner, who espying the Pope and the King
looking out at a window, with a loud voice he spoke unto them as follows:
Clement, thou cruel Tyrant, seeing there is now none left amongst mortals unto
whom I may make my appeal, as to that grievous death whereunto thou have most
unjustly condemned me; I do therefore appeal unto the just Judge Christ our
Redeemer, unto whose Tribunal I cite thee, together with King Philip, that you
both make your appearance there within a year and a day, where I will open my
Cause. Pope Clement died within the time, and soon after him King Philip: this
was An. 1214.

Dinoth. l. 8. p. 582. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 3. p. 121.
4. Rodolphus Duke of Austria being grievously offended with a certain Knight,
caused him to be apprehended, and being bound hand and foot, and thrust into a
Sack to be thrown into the River; the Knight being in the Sack, and it not as
yet sown up, espying the Duke looking out of a window (where he stood to behold
that spectacle) cried out to him with a loud voice: Duke Rodolph, I summon thee
to appear at the dreadful Tribunal of Almighty God within the compass of one
year, there to show cause wherefore thou have undeservedly put me to this
bitter and unworthy death. The Duke received this summons with laughter, and
unappalled made answer, Well, go thou before, and I will then present my self.
The year being almost spent, the Duke fell into a light Fever, and remembering
the appeal, said to the standers by, The time of my death does now approach,
and I must go to Judgment; and so it fell out, for he died sooner after.

Dinoth. l. 8. p. 582. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 3. p. 120. Delrio
disq. magic. l. 4. c. 4. qu. 4. p. 678.
5. Francis Duke of the Armorick Britain cast into prison his Brother Aegidius,
one of his Council, who was falsely accused to him of Treason; where when
Aegidius was almost famished, perceiving that his fatal hour approached, he
spyed a Franciscan Monk out of the window of the prison, and calling him to
confer with him, he took his promise, that he would tell his Brother, that
within the fourteenth day he should stand before the Judgment Seat of God. The
Franciscan having found out the Duke in the Confines of Normandy, where he then
was, told him of his Brothers death, and of his appeal to the high Tribunal of
God. The Duke terrified with that message, immediately grew ill, and his
distemper daily increasing, he expired upon the very day appointed.

6. Severianus by the command of the Emperor Adrianus was to die; Dinoth. l.
8. p. 580.
but before he was slain he called for fire, and casting Incense upon it, I
call you to witness, O ye Gods, said he, that I have attempted nothing against
the Emperor; and since he thus causelessly pursues me to death, I beseech you
this only, that when he shall have a desire to die, he may not be able. This
his appeal and imprecation did not miss of the event; for the Emperor being
afflicted with terrible tortures, often broke out into these words: How
miserable is it to desire to die, and not to have the power?

7. Lambertus Schasnaburgensis, Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 11. p. 283. Drexel. oper.
tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 6. p. 123. Delrio disq. magic. l. 4. c. 4. qu. 4. p. 677.
an excellent Writer as most in those times, tells, That Burchardus Bishop of
Halberstadht, in the year 1059. had an unjust controversy with the Abbot of
Helverdense about the Tiths of Saxony; these the Bishop would take from the
Monks, and by strong hand (rather than by any course of Law) sought to make
them his own. It was to small purpose to make any resistance against so
powerful an Adversary; but the injured Abbot some few days before his death,
sent to Frederick the Count Palatine, and entreated him to bear these his last
words to the Prelate, That being too weak to contend (though the Law was on his
side) he gave place, and was also departing this life; but that God would be
the Judge, unto whom he made his appeal; that therefore both of them should
prepare to order their Cause before his Tribunal, where favor and power set
aside, only Justice should prevail. Not long after the Abbot died of a Fever,
and soon after him the Bishop also; for one time as he was mounting his Horse,
he fell down as one stricken with a Thunderbolt, and his last words were, That
he was hurried away to the Judgment Seat of God, there to be judged.

8. The Genoways sent out their Galleys against the Pirates, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1.
c. 6. p. 169. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 2. p. 120. Delrio disq. magic.
l. 4. c. 4. qu. 4. p. 678.
and in the way took a small Ship of Sicily, together with the Master of it,
whom in contempt of the Sicilians they hanged up: The poor man said, he
suffered unjustly, since he had never done any thing of injury to them: but
perceiving all his plaints to be in vain, he appealed unto God for Justice, and
cited the Admiral of the Genoways to make his appearance at his Bar within six
months, within which time he that was thus cited died.

9. Amphilothius, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 6. p. 170.
a Tribune, was accused to have conspired against the life of Constantius the
Emperor; but seeing the thing could not be made out by sufficient proof,
Constantius bad his accusers to create him no further trouble, but to remit the
Tribune to the tortures of his own conscience; for if he was really guilty,
they should behold (even in his presence) the evident tokens thereof. The next
day therefore, while they beheld the Plays, the Seat where the Tribune sat
over against the Emperor, fell down to the ground: those that sat therein
were but lightly hurt, only the Tribune himself was taken up dead.

10. Patrick Hamilton studied at Marpurge, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 499*
and afterward returning into his Country, was informed against by A^ex.
Cambel, with whom he had conferred about matters of Religion; oppressed by the
Priests, he was burnt by the Church of St. Andrew, An. 1527. in the twenty
fourth year of his age. As he was leading toward his death, he thus spoke unto
Cambel: Thou wicked Wretch, who now condemnest those things which thou know
to be true, as thou have confessed unto me but a few days since, I do summon
thee to appear before the Tribunal of the living God. Cambel was troubled at
these words, and from that very day was never in his right mind, but soon after
died mad.

Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 1. p. 120.
11. There was one Agrestius who reproached and calumniated Columbanus when he
was dead; Eustachius the Abbot (who had been Scholar to Columbanus) a man
famous for patience and great knowledge, boldly sets upon this slanderer in
this manner: Thou Agrestius, said he, I am the Disciple and Successor of him,
whose doctrine and discipline thou thus rashly condemnest, and before these
Priests I do invite thee to the divine Judgment, and within this year see that
thou there make thine appearance; thou shall then know from the most just Judge
whose virtue thou have slandered. Agrestius looked upon these as vain and
ridiculous threats, and also refused the place of the Penitents often proffered
to him; but the words of Eustachius had a mighty weight, for upon the thirtieth
day, before the year was at an end, Agrestius, by a Servant of his whom he had
bought for a Slave, was stricken with an Ax, that he died.

Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 2. p. 120. Delrio disq. magic. l. 4. c. 4.
qu 4. p. 678.
12. In Sweden Johannes Turso gave sentence upon a certain man, that he should
lose his head; who when all other defense was denied him, fell down upon his
knees: Behold, said he, I die unjustly, and I cite thee, unjust Judge, to Gods
Tribunal, there to answer for my head within this hour. These were looked upon
as frivolous words; but scarce was the man beheaded by the Executioner, when
the Judge himself fell down dead from his Horse.

Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 4. p. 122. Delrio disq. magic. l. 4. c. 4.
qu. 4. p. 677.
13. An. 1013. Menwercus, Bishop of the Paderbonensian Church, determined to
restore the decayed Discipline in the Monastery of Corbeia; he began this his
reformation first in point of Manners; but Walo the Abbot stoutly opposed him,
as one that would not admit of any greater strictness. The Cause was brought
before the Emperor, and at last it came to this, that the Abbot was put out of
his place. Whereupon the Bishop constant to his purpose, again sets upon the
reformation he first intended, and designed to begin the work with the
celebration of Divine Service in that Church. But one Boso, a Monk of that
Monastery and Sacrist of the place, denied him the holy Garments, and threw
those off from the Altar, which the Prelate had brought thither. He was
admonished again and again, and still he persisted in his contumacy. The Bishop
moved with so great an injury, cited the Monk to the divine Judgment, who thus
contemned all humane Laws, in these words: Thou shall render, said he, an
account of this deed to the most High. The Monk slighted this menace, and
derided the Bishop; but the success was, that in the very same hour wherein the
Bishop departed this life, the Monk Boso being at that time under the Barbers
hand to be shaved, suddenly fell down and died.

Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 5. p. 122.
14. Benno was Bishop of Misnia, and forty years together had he sat in that
See, presiding there with vigilance and sanctity, that he was famous for many
miraculous works; amongst which the following was one Otho, the Marquess of
Misnia, a covetous man, against all Justice seized upon the Goods of that
Church. The vigilant Pastor Benno, supposing so great an injury was not to be
dissembled, admonished the Marquess with all mildness, and told him he should
do well of his own accord to restore the Church of Misnia her rights; if not,
there was a most just Judge to be appealed to in the case, who not only did
take notice of all injuries, but in a convenient season would exactly revenge
them: And, said he, to this Tribunal (in case all other help fail) this present
controversy is to be referred. The Marquess being a furious man, and not able
to bear this liberty of speaking, though delivered with sincerity and humanity,
gave Benno the Bishop a box on the ear, who inspired from above, told him, That
God should revenge this injury also at the same time in the following year. The
Marquess scoffed at this prophecy: And who Bishop, said he, made thee the chief
Secretary of Heaven? Art thou then of Jove's Privy Council? so the thing seemed
to have passed away in a jest. Not long after Benno fell sick, and died An.
1106. The Marquess, when the time of the year and the day designed by Benno was
come: Behold, said he, this is the day that Bishop Benno foretold should be so
fatal to me. He is gone, and his prediction with him, and there is nothing that
we should need to fear. Scarce had he spoke the words, when a sudden
consternation fell upon him, he called for help; but death executing his
command, in the midst of struglings and sighs, bore him away to that Judgment
of which Benno had foretold him.

15. A Master of the Teutonick Order (whose name I spare to mention) proposed a
Match betwixt a young Merchant and a Woman of a doubtful fame in respect of her
chastity. Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 6. p. 123.
The young man refused the overture, the rather because he that persuaded the
Marriage, was supposed to be no hater of the woman. The Master resented this
refusal so ill, that he determined that the life of the refuser should pay for
it; he therefore contrived that he should be accused of theft, and being
condemned, he commanded he should be hanged; prayers and tears were of no
avail, and therefore the innocent had recourse to the safest Sanctuary of
Innocence; and therefore as he was led to Execution, he said with a loud voice,
I suffer unjustly, and therefore appeal to the supreme Lord of life and death,
to him shall he render an account after the thirteenth day from hence, who has
unjustly condemned me. The Master scoffed at this; but upon the same thirteenth
day he was taken with a sudden sickness, and said, Miserable that I am, behold
I die, and must this day appear before the all-seeing Judge, and so died.

16. Otho the First, Drexel. oper. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.. 7. p. 124.
Emperor of Rome, being freely reprehended for his Marriage with Adelaida, by
his Son William then Bishop of Mentz, sent his Son to prison. The Bishop cited
his Father Otho to the Tribunal of Christ: And (said he) upon Whitsunday both
of us shall appear before the Lord Christ, where by divine Judgment it shall
appear who has transgressed the limits of his duty. Upon the Nones of May, and
the day of Pentecost, Otho died suddenly in Saxony, when his Son the Bishop had
deceased some time before him.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Apparition of Demons and Specter, and with what courage
some have endured the sight of them.
THere are some who deny the very Being of Spirits, these I look upon as men
possessed with such an incurable madness, as no Hellebore is sufficient to quit
them of. Others who believe they are, yet think them so confined to their own
Apartments, that they may not intermeddle with humane affairs, at least not
show themselves to men; there is no doubt variety of impostures in the stories
of them, but to reject all such appearances as fabulous, is too severe a
reflection upon the credit of the best Historians.

Plut. in vit. Bruti, page 1000. Lips. monit. l. 1. c. 5. p. 75. Fulgos. Ex. l.
1. c. 4. p. 88. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. cap. 14. p. 56 Wier. lib. de
praest. Daem. c. 15. p. 42. Lavater. de spectr. part. 1. c. 12. page 53. Sabel.
Ex. l. 10. c. 3. p. 551. Schot. phys. curios. l. 2. c. 2. p. 205. Vsser. Ann.
page 705. An. Mund. 3963.
1. When Cassius and Brutus were about to pass out of Asia into Europe, and to
transport their Army into the opposite Continent, an horrible spectacle is said
to be showed to Brutus; for in the dead of the night, when the Moon shined not
very bright, and all the Army was in silence, a black image of a huge and
horrid body standing by him silently, is said to offer it self to Brutus: his
candle being almost out, and he musing in his Tent about the issue of the War,
Brutus with an equal constancy both of mind and visage, inquired of him what
either Man or God he was? The Spirit answered, O Brutus I am thine evil Genius,
and thou shall see me again at Philippi. Brutus courageously replied, I will
see thee there then. The Spirit disappeared; but, as he had said, appeared to
him again in those fields of Philippi the night before the last fight. The next
morning he told Cassius what he had seen, and he expounded to him out of the
doctrine of the Epicureans, what was to be thought concerning such Specter.

2. Lavater. de spectr. part. 1. cap. 15. p. 66. Wier. oper. c. 17. p. 53.
Schot. phys. curios. l. 2. c. 3. p. 213.
The learned and pious Melancthon tells, that he had an Aunt, who sitting sad
by the fire side one night after the death of her Husband, there entered two
persons into the house, one of whi^^ who bore the resemblance of him, told her,
that he was her dead Husband; the other was in the habit of a Franciscan. The
Husband came to the fire side, saluted his Wife, and bad her to fear nothing,
for that he only came to give order for some things: whereupon having wished
the Monk to withdraw, he wished her to hire certain Priests to say Masses for
his Souls health, and then desired her to give him her hand. The frighted woman
durst not; but he promising she should have no hurt, she then complied with his
desire; but though she had no hurt upon her hand, yet by that touch it seemed
so burnt, that it was black to the day of her death. When he had taken her by
the hand he called the Franciscan, and both of them departed.

Plin. Epist. l. 7. epist. 27. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 6. p. 144. Wier. oper. c. 15.
p. 40, 41. Schot. phys. curios. l. 2* c. 2. p. 203. Lavater. de spectr. part.
1. c. 12. page 54.
3. There was a house in Athens, wherein in the dead of the night a tall and
meagre Ghost used to walk, and with the dreadful rattling of his chains, had not
only frighted away the inhabitants, but was also a great terror to the
neighborhood. The house was a very fair one; but for as much as there was no
man found that durst dwell in it, it had stood long vacant, though there was
writ upon the door, that it was to be let for a very inconsiderable Rent. It
fortuned, that Athenodorus the Philosopher came to Athens, and allured with the
cheapness of the Rent, Sabel. Ex. l. 10. c. 3. p. 552. Camer. oper. subcisiv.
cent. 1. cap. 49. p. 221.
more than affrighted with the relation of the Phantasme that disturbed it, he
hired it forthwith. And sitting up purposely somewhat late at his studies, the
chained Ghost appears to him, and beckned to him to follow, which he boldly did
from room to room, till at last in a certain place he observed it to vanish;
which having diligently noted, he caused to be dug, and there found the
carcass of a man in chains, and in all points resembling the appearance he had
seen. He caused the Corpse to be removed, and elsewhere committed to the ground:
which done, the house from thenceforth continued to be quiet.

4. Take a Narration of that which happened to Alexander of Alexandria, A^ex.
ab Alex. dier. Genial. l. 2. c. 9. Schot. phys. curios. l. 2. c. 3. p. 212.
Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1 cap. 70. p. 312.
a Witness worthy of credit, as himself has set it down thus: Being, says he,
once sick at Rome, as I lay in my bed broad waking, there appeared unto me a
very fair Woman; looking upon her with mine eyes wide open, I lay still a long
time much troubled, without speaking a word, casting and discoursing with my
self, whether I waked or was in a dream, and whether it was a fantasy of mine
or a true sight which I saw. Feeling all my senses whole and perfect, and
seeing the shape to continue in the same posture, I began to ask her who she
was; she smiling and repeating the same words that I had spoken, as if she had
mocked me, after she had looked upon me a long while vanished away.

5. Dion the Syracusan after, Sabel. Ex. l. 10. c. 3. p. 551. Lips. monil. l.
1. c. 5. p. 75. Fulgos. l. 1. c. 4. p. 89. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. cap.
14. p. 57. Wier. oper. c. 15. p. 41. Schol. phys. curios. l. 2. c. 2. p. 205
Lavater. par. 1. c. 12. p. 52.
with great glory to himself, he had freed his Country from Tyranny, sitting in
his house at midday, a Woman in the habit of a Fury, of huge stature, and
horrid ugliness, offered her self to his eyes, without speaking a word, and
beginning to sweep the house with a Besome: Dion affrighted, called for some of
his friends, upon which the Spectre disappeared, but so did not the evil which
she presignified; for his eldest Son, it is uncertain, whether out of some
sudden transport of passion, or through distraction, threw himself headlong
from the top of the house, and so killed himself. Soon after some Conspirators
that lay in wait for an opportunity, slew Dion himself in his own house,
committing his wife and daughter to prison: and thus was the house swept clean
indeed.

6. Curtius Ruffus was at Adrumetum, Fulgos. Ex. l. 1. c. 4. p. 89.
a City in Africa, in the Family of the Questor, and at that time not
remarkable for any Dignity: walking one time in the midday in the Portico, he
saw the apparition of a Woman of a more august presence, and greater than
humane form, who spoke to him in these words: Thou art Ruffus who shall come
Proconsul into this Province. By this prodigy he was advanced in his thoughts
unto some hopes, not long after he obtained of Tiberius the Proconsulship of
Africa, which fulfilled what was promised by the Vision.

7. Crescentius the Popes Legate at the Council of Trent 1552. March 25. was
busy writing of Letters to the Pope till it was far in the night, Lonicer.
Theatr. page 129.
whence rising to refresh himself, he saw a black Dog of a vast bigness,
flaming eyes, ears that hung down almost to the ground enter the room, which
came directly toward him, and laid himself down under the table. Frighted at
the sight, he called his Servants in the Antichamber, commanded them to look
for the Dog, but they could find none. The Cardinal fell melancholy, thence
sick, and died at Verona: on his deathbed he ^ryed out to drive away the Dog
that leaped upon his bed.

Val. Max. l. 1. c. 5. p. Wier. c. 15. p. 41. Camer. cent. 2. c. 14. page 56.
8. Cassius Severus of Parma, none of the meanest Poets, took part with Brutus
and Cassius, having a Command of a Tribune of the Soldiers; after they were
overcome, he betook himself to Athens, where one night when he lay solicitously
perplexed in his thoughts, he saw a man of a vast bigness come to him, he was
black, his beard squalid, his hair dangling; and being by him asked who he was,
he told him, a Cacodemon or evil Spirit. Frighted with so horrible a sight, and
so dreadful a name, he called up his Servants, inquired if they saw any to
enter or depart his Chamber in such habit as he described? They answered that
none came. He therefore again composed himself to sleep and rest, when the same
Image did again represent it self to his mind and sight: so that not able to
sleep, he called for lights, and commanded his Servants to stay with him. Now
Quintilius Varus was sent by Augustus to kill him, and betwixt this night
wherein he had this Vision, and the death he suffered by the orders of Caesar,
there was but a very little distance.

Fulgos. l. 1. c. 4. p. 90. Camer. cent. 2. c. 14. page 58. Lavater. c. 12. p.
58. Schot. l. 2. c. 2. p. 209.
9. Iulianus the Emperor, that night which preceded the day, wherein he was
slain in Persia, while he was reading in his Tent, saw a Ghost that presented
it self before him full of horror; so that for very fear he arose from his
seat. As Soon as he saw it go ^orth of his Tent, he supposed that it was his
Genius, which now deserted him as one that was near unto his death. Ammianus
Marcellinus writes, that Julian saw the same Spirit the night before the day
that he was declared Augustus, that it was then veiled, and with a Cornucopia
in its hand, as the public Genii are described; that it reproved him, saying,
I have long Julian watched at thy door, delighting in the increase of thine
honor, and sometimes have returned with a refusal.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. cap. 16. p. 60, 61.
10. There is, says Aventinus, a Town in Austria called Greinon, near unto
which there are huge and high Rocks, through these Danubius passes foaming
along, and with a mighty noise. Henry the Third was sailing this way, and Bruno
the Bishop of Wirtzburg, his Kinsman accompanied him in another Ship. As they
passed by a high Rock, there stood the form of a Negro, which called Bruno,
saying, Ho, ho, Bishop, I am an evil Genius, thou art mine, and wheresoever
thou shall betake thy self, thou shall be mine. I have at present nothing
against thee, but in short space thou shall see me again. All that heard this
were astonished, the Bishop signed himself with the sign of the Cross, and
adjuring the Spirit, it vanished away. Not far thence, I think about ten miles,
the Emperor and his Nobles were entertained at Bosenburg by Richilda, the
Widow of Adelbert, a Nobleman lately dead, where the Widow besought the
Emperor, that Bosenburg and the Farms about it, held by her late Husband
gratis, might be so held by Welpho her Brothers Son. There were then in the
presence with the Emperor Bruno, Alemannus President of Ebersperg, and
Richilda; while the Emperor was reaching out his hand, as a sign of his Grant,
the floor of the Chamber fell down under them, the Emperor fell into a bathing
Vessel without hurt, Bruno, Alemannus and Richilda were thrown upon the sides
of that Vessel, in such manner, that they were sore bruised, and in a few days
after dyed of that fall.

Templ^'s Irish Rebel. p. 134, 135.
11. December. 20. 1641. the Irish Rebels did drown an hundred and eighty
Protestants, men, women, and children in the River at the Bridge of
Portnedoune, and Elizabeth the Wife of Captain Rice Price, of Armagh, deposes,
and says, That she and other women whose husbands were murdered (hearing of
diverse Apparitions and Visions which were seen near Portnedoune-Bridge since
the drowning of their children, and the rest of the Protestants there) went
unto the Bridge aforesaid about twilight in the evening. Then and there upon
the sudden there appeared unto them a Vision or Spirit, assuming the shape of a
Woman, waste high, upright in the water, naked, with elevated and closed hands,
her hair hanging down, very white, her eyes seemed to twinkle, and her skin as
white as snow, which Spirit seemed to stand straight up in the water, crying,
Revenge, revenge, whereat this Deponent and the rest being put into a strange
amazement and affright, walked from the place. This was sworn to, January 29.
1642.

12. Damon (for many murders he had committed) was enforced to quit Cheronaea,
Lavater. de spectr. part. 1. c. 12. p. 52. Plut. in Cimone, p.
the Citizens not long after with fair words, enticed him back thither again,
and one day as he was in the Bath, set upon him and slew him: from that time
there were many Specter seen in that place, and groans heard; so that at last
they were compelled to stop up the doors of the Bath.

13. Dio Cassius writes of Drusus, Lavater. de spectr. part. 1. c. 12. page 54.
that being busied in Germany, destroying all as far as the River Albis, he
endeavored also to pass that, but in vain; and therefore having erected
Trophies on the hither bank of it, he retired upon this occasion: He was met by
a Woman greater than human form, who said to him, Drusus, whither go thou,
assigning no measure to thy covetous ambition? thou art not allowed by the
Fates to pass further, and therefore depart, for now the end of thy
Achievements and life draws near. Upon the hearing of which, Drusus bent his
course backward, and in his Journey, before such time as he came to the Rhine,
he fell sick, and dyed.

14. Cornelius Sylla, Sabel. Ex. l. 10. c. 3. p. 552.
while as yet in some health, saw an Image that presented it self before him,
and heard himself called by it, by which he concluded that his fatal hour was
nigh; he therefore (...) his Will, and the next night was seized by a Fever,
of which he dyed.

15. Johannes Manli^s, Lavater. de spectr. part. 1. c. 12. page 57.
in his Collection of common places, writes from the relation of Melancthon,
that Theodorus Gaza by the Gift of Pope Nicholas had a Farm in Campania. In
this Farm, when a Labourer had dug out an Urn wherein were some bones, there
appeared to him a Spirit, who commanded him to re-interre that Urn; and that if
he refused so to do, his son should dye. When the Labourer neglected to do as
he bid, soon after he found his son dead in the night. Some days over-passed,
the Spirit appeared to him again, threatening that he would kill his other son,
unless he should bury those bones where he found them. The Labourer admonished
by what had befallen him, and perceiving that his other son was sick, told all
the matter to Theodorus Gaza, he went with him to the Farm, and in the same
place where they were found, he committed again to the earth both the Urn and
the bones taken up with it: which done, the son of the Labourer was presently
restored to his health.

16. Antonius Laverinus came to free one that was possessed by the Devil; Heyw.
Hierarch. l. 9. p. 609.
but after the use of his devotions to that purpose, the obstinate Devil began
to menace him, and told him, that he would bewitch him that night to his great
terror and affrightment; and therefore wished him to prepare himself against
his expected coming: to whom he again as confidently answered, That if he
failed of his word, he would hold him for one of the basest and most abject
Devils that fell with their Arch-Captain Lucifer. That night Antonius heard him
knock three several times at his Chamber door, and suspecting him to be the
Devil, betook himself to his devotions and prayers, commending his safety to
the protection of God and his good Angels, and made no other answer. The Devil
went then to the top of the house, and began to untile the roof, as if he
purposed there to make his entrance. But he continuing his godly meditations,
was no further troubled, but slept quietly the remainder of the night. The next
day coming again to visit his Patient, whom the Devil had possessed, after he
had prayed with her awhile, he began to upbraid the Devil with breach of
promise, and told him, that he had neither visited nor terrified him, no not so
much as entered his Chamber, which he bragged and boasted he would do. To whom
he replied, That he was at the door and knocked; and moreover, that he had
untiled a great part of the house, but had no power to enter, it was so
fortified and defended by his holy supplications, nay more, that if all the
Legions of Hell should have attempted it, it had been in vain, since there is
no invasion or irruption to be made by them into a place that is so sanctified.

Delrio disq. magic. l. 3. part 1. q. 7.. 2. p. 477. Heyw. Hierarch. l. 9. p.
600. Schot. phys. curios. l. 1. c. 17. p. 65.
17. In Silesia, a Nobleman, having invited many Guests to Dinner, and prepared
a costly and liberal Feast for them, it fell out, that instead of his friends,
he only received their excuses for not coming. At which the Nobleman in great
rage broke out into these words: Since all these men have thus failed me, I
wish so many Devils of Hell would feast with me to day, and eat up the
provision made for them; and so in fury left the house, and went to Church,
where that day was a Sermon: he had not been long gone, before a great Troop of
Horsemen arrived at his house; they were black, of extraordinary aspect and
stature, who alighting in the Court, called a Groom to take their Horses, and
bad another of the Servants to run presently to his Master, and tell him his
Guests were come. The Servant amazed, runs to Church, and with short breath,
and the little sense he had left, delivered to his Master what had happened.
The Nobleman calls to the Preacher, desiring him to break off his Sermon, and
to advise him with his ghostly counsel. He persuades that all his Servants,
with what speed they could, should depart the house. In the mean time they,
with the whole Congregation, came within the view of the mansion, of which all
the Servants had with great affright cleared themselves; but for haste had
forgot and left behind a young child, the Noblemans son sleeping in the Cradle.
By this the Devils were revelling in the Dining Room, making a great noise, as
if they had saluted and welcomed one another. They looked through the
Casements, one with the head of a Bear, another a Wolf, a Cat, a Tiger, etc.
and taking bowls and quaffing, as if they had drank to the Master of the house.
By this time the Nobleman seeing his Servants safe, remembered his son, and
asked what was become of the child? Those words were scarce spoke, when one of
the Devils had him in his arms, and showed him out of the window. The father at
this sight, being almost without life, spying an old faithful Servant of his,
fetched a deep sign, and said, Ah me! what shall become of the infant? The
Servant seeing his Master in that ecstasie, replied: Sir, by Gods help, I will
enter the house, and fetch the child out of the power of you Devil, or perish
with him. To whom his Lord said, God prosper thy attempt, and strengthen thee
in thy purpose. When having taken a blessing from the Priest, he enters the
house, and coming into the next room where the Devils were then rioting, he
fell upon his knees, and commended himself to the protection of Heaven. Then
pressing in amongst them, he beheld them in their horrible shapes, some
sitting, some walking, some standing, then they all came about him at once, and
asked him what business he had there? He in a great sweat and agony, yet
resolved in his purpose, came to the Spirit which held the infant, and said, In
the Name of God deliver this child to me, who answered, No; but let thy Master
come and fetch him, who has most interest in him. The Servant replied, I am
now come to do that office and service to which God has called me, by virtue
of which and by his power lo I seize upon the innocent; and so snatching him
from the Devil, took him in his arms, and carried him out of the room; at which
they clamoured, and called aloud after, Ho thou Knave, ho Knave, leave the
child to us, or we will tear thee in pieces; but he unterrified with their
diabolical menaces, brought away the infant, and delivered it safe to the
father. After some few days the Spirits left the house, and the Nobleman
returned unto his ancient possession.

18. In the Age of our Fathers Ludovicus was King of Hungary, Lips. monit. l.
1. c. 5. p. 76.
betwixt whom and Solomon Emperor of the Turks, there were preparations for
War. An. 1526. dining in the Castle of Buda, with the doors shut, as the manner
of Princes is, there stood at the Gate a person of humane form, but lame,
crooked, and as to the rest of his habit and array, very ^ordid; he cried out
with a sharp and shrieking voice, desiring to confer with the King. He was
neglected at first, as being thought to be some mendicant person. But when he
persisted with greater earnestness, that he must speak with the King himself,
and no other, it was ^old the King, who sent one of his most splendid
Courtiers, with command to take upon him his person and name, and to understand
what the matter was. He came and asked the lame Fellow what secret he had to
impart? The other looked upon him, and told him he was not the King, adding,
For as much as the King despises to hear me himself, go your way, and tell him,
that in a short time he shall assuredly perish; which when he had said, he
straight vanished from the sight of the Attendants. His threat proved but too
true, the King, near to the City Mohatz, was overthrown in a Battle, and
flying, fell into a Bog, whence while he strove to free himself, his Horse fell
upon him, and he was there suffocated in the twenty first year of his age.

19. Melancthon relates, Wier. de praestig. Demon. c. 17. p. 54.
that there came a Monk to Luthers house, and with great violence knocked at
the door, the Servant opened it, and inquired what he would, he asked if Luther
was at home? Luther informed, bad he should come in, for he had not seen a Monk
of a long time. He told him, that he had some Papistical Errors, about which
he desired some Conference with him, and propounded some Syllogisms; which
Luther having ^olved with ease, he offered others that were not so easily
answered. Luther somewhat angry, broke into these words: You give me a great
deal of trouble, for I have other business in hand that I should dispatch; and
withal rising from his seat, he showed the explication of that place, which was
urged by the Monk; and in this Conference perceiving that the Monks hands were
like the claws of a bird: Art thou he then, said he? listen to that sentence
which is pronounced against thee, and straight shows him that place in Genesis,
The seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent, and then added, Nor
shall thou devour them all. The Devil overcome with this saying, angry and
murmuring to himself, departed, letting a huge fart, the stink of which nasty
smell continued in the room for some days after.

Speeds hist. p. 628.
20. At Danbury Church in Essex the Devil appeared in the habit of a Minorite,
to the incredible astonishment of the Parishioners; and at that time there was
such a terrible Tempest with Lightnings and Thunder and Fireballs, that the
Vault of the Church was broken, and half the Chancel was carried away.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Imprecations of some men upon themselves or others, and
how they have accordingly come upon them.
THough Justice and Judgment is called the strange work of God, and that his
Mercy as more connatural to him, is said to rejoice against Judgment; yet these
his Attributes have their alternate courses; for the presumptuous boldness of
man grows often to that excessive height, as to extort a vengeance from his
unwilling hands, which yet would not be, but that by this his wholesome
severity, he might caution the rest from secure sinning, upon the foolish
confidence of Heavens either inadvertence or impotency.

K^owls Turk. hist. p. 1310.
1. On the 26. of April 1611. a Turk having lent a good sum of money to a
Christian to be paid at a certain day, he came before the appointed day with
another Turk, and willed the Christian to pay the money to that other Turk when
the day came, which the Christian promised to do, and performed it accordingly.
But the Turk denied the receipt thereof, whereupon he to whom the money was
properly due, came and demanded it, to whom the Christian answered, that he had
paid it to that party, to whom he had assigned it; whereunto the Turk replied,
that if it were so, he was satisfied; but yet the other Turk denied it.
Whereupon the matter was brought before the Judge, and the Turk who had
received the money, taking an Oath to the contrary, the Christian, according to
the Turkish Justice, was enforced to pay the money again: the which he did; but
withal he prayed God to show some public sign, which of them had done the
wrong: and thereupon the Turk going forth to repair unto his house, fell down
dead in the street.

Eusebius. l. 6. c. 8. p. 100, 101. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 86. p. 397.
2. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, though a man famous for his virtues and
faithfulness in the reproof and correction of vice, was yet maliciously and
falsely accused of incontinency. There were three of these wicked and suborned
Varlets, who bound their accusations with oaths and fearful imprecations upon
themselves. The first of these at the close of his testimony, added, If I say
not the truth, I pray God I may perish by fire. The second said, If I speak any
thing of falsehood, I pray God I may be consumed by some filthy and cruel
disease. And said the third, If I accuse him falsely, I pray God I may lose my
sight, and become blind. This wicked charge, although it was not believed by
such as knew the great integrity of the Bishop, yet the good man, partly for
grief to lie under such a scandal, and partly to retire himself from worldly
affairs, left his Bishopric and lived privately. But his forsworn accusers
escaped not the all-seeing Justice of Heaven. For the first, according to his
imprecation, had his house set on fire (it is unknown how) and was therein
himself, together with his family, burnt to ashes. The second languished away
under a foul and loathsome disease. The third seeing the woeful ends of his
Companions, confessed all the complotted villainy, and lamenting his case and
crime, he continued weeping so long, till he utterly lost his sight. And thus
God said Amen to all that they had wickedly and presumptuously wished upon
themselves.

Godwin, Bak. Chron. p. 26. Polyd. Virg. l. 8. p. 138. Laeti compend. hist.
univers. period. Germ. c. 8.. 1. p. 248. Camer. oper. subcisiv. c^nt. 1. cap.
86. p. 397.
Earl of Kent, in the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, as he sat at table
with the King on Easter-Monday; was speaking as to the justification of himself
from the death of Prince Alfred, and said he, If I be any way guilty of it, I
pray God I may never swallow down one morsel of bread; and thereupon was
choked by the first morsel he offered to take.

4. The Emperor Frederick the First being in St. Peter's Cloister in the City
of Erford, had occasion to go to the Privy, whither he was followed by some of
the Nobles, when suddenly the floor that was under them began to sink; the
Emperor immediately took hold of the Iron Grates of a window, whereat he hung
by the hands, till some came and succored him. Some Gentlemen fell to the
bottom, where they perished. And it is most observable, that amongst them that
dyed was Henry Earl of Schwartzenburg, who carried the presage of his death in
a common imprecation of his, which was this: If I do it not, I wish I might
sink in a Privy. This happened Anno 1184.

5. Mr. Perkins in his Book of the right government of the Tongue, Caryl com.
in Job 16. 18. p. 376.
tells of certain English Soldiers, in the time of King Edward the Sixth, who
were cast upon the French shore by a storm, in which distress they went to
prayer, that they might be delivered. But one Soldier instead of praying cried
out, Gallows claim thy due; and when he came home he was hanged indeed.

6. Mr. Fox in his Book of Acts and Monuments, Id. ut supr. p. 377.
tells of John Peter's, Keeper of Newgate, who was wont at every ordinary thing
he spoke (whether true or false, it made with him no great matter) to aver it
with this imprecation: If it be not so, I pray God I may rot before I dye, and
so it came to pass.

7. I shall add one more which is fresh in the memory of many yet living, Id.
ut supr. p. 377.
of Sir Gervaise Elways, who suffered at the Tower Hill, about the business of
Sir Thomas Overbury, who then confessed it was just with God that he should
undergo that ignominious death: For, said he, in gaming I have often used this
wish, I pray God I be hanged, if it be not so. While I was preaching this, a
woman who came accidentally into the Congregation, did afterward by writing
certify me, that she being convinced in conscience of her sin in wishing evil
upon her self, thereby to cover a sin which she had committed, but denied, did
feel the sad effects of it, according to her wish, and therefore begged earnest
prayers, that it might be forgiven her, and that God would be entreated to take
off his hand. Let them hear and fear that fear not to wish the Devil take them,
and God damn them, lest God should take them at their word.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 86. p. 399.
8. I shall here set down that which was related to me by my Brother Ioachim:
Being, says he, of late in the Court of Prince William the Lantgrave of Hesse,
I saw there a Boy that was both dumb and deaf, but yet withal so ingenious,
that I could never enough admire the dexterity wherewith he apprehended and
performed all things. The Lantgrave observing my wonder, That deaf and dumb
Boy, said he, does presently understand any thing that is done in the Court and
City, and by notable signs uses to make discovery of it. But withal hear an
eminent instance of divine Justice; the Mother of this Lad being accused of
theft, and having no other way to clear her self, had recourse to imprecations;
and whereas she was at that time big with child, to add greater weight to what
she said, she wished (if she was guilty of that she was accused) that the child
she went with might be dumb while he lived, and never be able to utter one
word. Which, said the Lantgrave, is come to pass, as you see.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 86. p. 396.
9. Charles Burbon desired of the Citizens of Millain, that they would furnish
him with 30000 Crowns a month, for the payment of his Soldiers; but they
affirming, that they were already exhausted by War and frequent Exactions, he
desired them but this one time to comply with his request; adding, that if they
should receive any further injury from him or his, he prayed God, that the
first Bullet that was shot might take off his head. They sent him the money
according to his desire; but then he forgetting his promise, dealt never the
more civilly with them, suffered his Soldiers and Collectors to exact upon
them, while they in vain implored that faith he had given them. This done, he
led his Army to Florence, and from thence to Rome, where he was killed by the
first Cannot-bullet from the Walls.

Camer. ut supra, page 400.
10. At Friburg, a Town in Misnia, are yet the footsteps to be seen of a
stubborn Son, who could not be removed from the place where he stood all his
life long, till he dyed of the plague, with whose disobedience his father being
one time exceedingly provoked, had prayed God he might never stir from the
place he was then inwhile he lived.

11. Alphonso Henriques, Son of Henry Duke of Lorrain, Camer. cent. 1. cap. 86.
p. 400.
put his Mother Theresia, the Daughter of Alphonsus the Sixth King of Spain,
into prison, for that she had married his Father-in-law. She being in bonds
thus bitterly cursed her Son: Seeing, says she, thou have put my legs into
chains, and have taken from me that honor which was left me by thy Father, I
pray God thou may become a Prisoner to thy Enemies as I am, and that whereas
my legs are tied, thou may live to behold thine own broke. All this was
fulfilled e're long: for Alphonsus warring with Ferdinand King of Leon, as he
went out at the Gate of the City, his foot caught at the bar of the Gate, and
his Horse passing on broke his leg; after which marching out, he was overthrown
by King Ferdinand, and made Prisoner.

Camer. cent. 1. cap. 86. p. 400.
12. In the Court of a neighbor King one was accused of having spoken injurious
words, who to justify himself, said, If he spoke them he desired God to send
an immediate token of his wrath upon his body, and in case he should defer to
do it, he wished the Devil might. Immediately he fell down in an Epileptick
fit, which he never had before, and with horrible howling frighted them that
stood by, and to this day remains in this ill state of body.

13. King Henry the First of England sought to Edgar King of Scotland for his
Sister Mathilda in Marriage, Polyd. Virg. l. 11. page 177, 189.
who had devoted her Virginity to God. Edgar fearing to displease him, married
her to him by force, who then prayed to God, that none of those children that
should be born of her might prosper, and it fell out accordingly; for Duke
William and Mary his Sister, with their whole Retinue of an hundred and fifty
persons, were all miserably cast away at Sea by a storm.

14. In our memory such an accident as this fell out at Newburg: Lonic. Theatr.
p. 296.
A certain mother being in a great rage with her son, broke into these words:
Go thy ways, God grant thou may never return alive again to me; the same day
the young man going to wash himself, was drowned.

15. L. Furius Camillus was accused, but falsely, by L. Apuleius, Zuing.
Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 178.
that he had converted the Hetruscan spoils to his own use, and was thereupon
condemned without having his cause heard; and being impatient of this
indignity, he went without the City-gates, lift up his hands to Heaven, and
prayed: If, said he, I am innocent, and thus injured only through the envy of
the people, then let this action speedily repent the people of Rome, and let it
be known to all the World, that they stand in need of Camillus; which
accordingly fell out not long after in the invasion of the Gauls.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Error and Mistakes of some men, and what has fallen out
thereupon.
HVmanum est errare, Error and mistake is a kind of inseparable property to
humanity, the wisest of men has not always all his prudence about him;
sometimes our passions precipitate and transport us, and at others unexpected
and intervenient accidents help to mislead us. And although time may so tarry
for some men, as to give them the leisure to repair their over-sights; yet so
much has depended upon these little turns, and the weightiest affairs have
been so perplexed and disordered by them, that time it self has not been able
to remedy.

1. At the Siege of Perugia in Italy, Heyl. Cosm. p. 99.
when the City was as good as won, only a chain which was laid a thwart the
Gate, wanted cutting asunder to make a fuller entrance for the whole Army. Upon
a mere mistake of a Soldier crying out, Give back, meaning to get a fuller
blow at the chain, all behind taking it for a word of command, and apprehensive
of some new discovered danger before them, faced about, and ran directly away,
and so the City was saved.

2. In that great Battle at Philippi, Plut. in Bruto^ page 104, 105. Val. Max.
l. 9. c. 9. p. 26^.
betwixt Brutus and Cassius on the one part, and Octavianus and Antonius on the
other, Brutus had routed and put to flight Octavianus in the right wing, and
Antonius had caused Cassius to retire in the left wing; Lips. monit. l. 1. c.
5. p. 61.
yet Cassius only retreated to a Hill not far off, where he could easily have
rallied his men again; but by reason of the dust not knowing of Brutus his
Victory, he sent Lucius Titinnius, his intimate Friend, to see what was become
of Brutus. Titinnius meets with Brutus his Soldiers triumphing for the
Victory, and inquiring after Cassius; he having informed them where he was,
along they march to acquaint him with the good news. Cassius seeing them
coming, and by a-fatal mistake judging them to be enemies, and Brutus to be
overthrown, caused his freed-man to cut his throat. Titinnius finding him dead,
through his default, cuts his own throat also. Brutus hearing of these sad
accidents, loses both his courage and newgained Victory.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6. p. 115.
3. Iulia, the Wife of Pompey the Great, seeing certain clothes of her Husbands
brought home all besmeared with blood by the killing of some beasts, at a
Sacrifice whereat he was present, she fearfully apprehended that some danger
had befallen him, and thereupon did suddenly fall into a swound, and so dyed.

Diod. Sicul. lib. 20. page 684, 685.
4. While the Carthaginians lay encamped against Agathocles, their Tents being
made of reeds and straw, accidentally caught fire, and the winds so improved
it, that the Soldiers labored but in vain to quench it; and therefore diverse
of them ^led out of the Camp with a great deal of tumult and clamor. There
were 5000 Africans in the Army of Agathocles, that revolting from him, had
resolved this night to join themselves with the Carthaginians their
Countrymen. The Scouts and Forlorn^hope of these Troops were discovered by
those that fled out of the Camp, making directly to the Camp of the
Carthaginians: they therefore hastily sent them word, that the whole Forces of
the Grecians were coming upon them. Then was the Army put into a greater
disorder, some running, others mistaking their friends for enemies, rush upon
them with their drawn Swords, others with very fear ran head^long from steep
places. During this rule of ignorance 5000, and so the rest, being still in a
consternation, were glad to retreat into Carthage. The same mishap befell the
Army of Agathocles that very same night; for the revolted Africans seeing all
their friends in flames and tumult, durst go no further, but return whence they
came. Some of the Greeks perceiving their March, not knowing who they were,
brought word to Agathocles, that the whole Carthaginian Army was coming against
him. He perceiving the Camp on fire, and hearing the tumult amongst them, could
conceive no less. Hereupon a sudden and panick fear seized upon his Army also,
and the Africans in this fright set on all they met as their enemies; so that
4000 of Agathocles his Army perished through this mistake.

Schen^k. obs. med. l. 2. p. 237.
5. Iohanna Queen of Navarre, a Princess by birth, being received by the Queen
her Mother at a Feast, the first of June 1572. upon the seventh day following
she fell into a pleurisy; some were therefore called to open the Basilick
vein, which in that kind of disease is judged to be a most present remedy: but
by a fatal mistake they opened the contrary, which brings death, by which upon
the 9 of June she ended her life.

Fallers Chapter History. l. 7. cent. 16. p. 408.
6. Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset, and Protector, in the Minority of King
Edward the Sixth, being absent from the Council Table, it was by the Lords
there met, contrived how all things should be ordered in relation to his
Arraignment. R. Rich Lord Chancellor (then living in great St. Bartholomews)
though outwardly concurring with the rest, Lloyds State Worthies, page 206.
began now secretly to favor the Duke of Somerset, and sent him a Letter,
therein acquainting him with all passages at the Councilboard, superscribing
the same (either out of haste or familiarity) with no other direction, save to
the Duke, enjoining his Servant, a raw Attendant (as newly entered into his
Family) safely to deliver it. The man made more haste than good speed, and his
Lord wondering at his quick return, demanded of him, Where the Duke was when he
delivered him the Letter? In Charter House, said his Servant, by the same token
that he read it at the window, and smiled thereat. But the Lord Rich smiled not
at his relation, as sadly sensible of the mistake and delivery of the Letter to
the Duke of Norfolk, no great Friend of his, and an utter Enemy to the Duke of
Somerset. This error cost him his Chancellorship, which the next morning early
he besought the King he might resign, and thereby saved himself from being
stripped by others, for revealing the secrets of the Councilboard.

7. The Funerals of Julius Caesar being performed, Xiphil. in Iulio, p. 20.
Sueton. l. 1. c. 85. page 51. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 9. p. 262. Plut. in Bruto,
page 993.
the enraged people trooped directly to the houses of Brutus and Cassius (his
Murderers) with lighted Torches on purpose to set them on fire, and were
difficulty restrained. In their return they chanced to meet with Helvius Cinna,
whom they unhappily (erring in the name) mistook for Cornelius Cinna, who the
day before had publicly declamed against Caesar. Him they sought for, but
lighting on this other (without giving space to clear up any error) they
struck off his head, and fixing it upon the top of a Lance, they carried it
about with them.

8. In that memorable Battle at Cannas betwixt Hanibal and the Romans, Plut. in
Fabio, p. 183. Fulgos. l. 9. cap. 9. page 1269.
there was a strange and fatal mistake: For L. Aemyliu; Paulus the Consul being
wounded, was thrown by his Horse, when diverse of that Cohort cast themselves
from their Horses, with a purpose to assist the Consul on foot, and to remount
him as soon as might be. The rest of the Horse perceived it, and as if they had
received such a command, they all leaped from their Horses to fight with the
Enemy on foot. When Hanibal saw this, with a military scoff, I had rather, said
he, that the Consul should do thus, than deliver them all bound into my hands.
Indeed it proved little less; for by this means at this Battle Hanibal obtained
the greatest and entirest Victory that ever he got of the Romans: and had he
made use of it accordingly, he had made himself Master of Rome it self.

9. Lartes Tolumnius, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 29.
King of the Veientines, playing at Dice, and having a prosperous Cast, said
jestingly to his Companion, Occide, meaning no more than kill or beat me now,
if you can. It fortuned, that the Roman Ambassadors came in at the instant, and
his Guard mistaking the intention of the word, slew the Ambassadors, taking
that for a word of command to them, which was only spoken in sport to him that
was played with.

10. Cleonce, Plut. ^n Cimone, page 482. Ha^iger. propug. cast. l. 1. p. 79.
Lavater. de spectr. part. 2. c. 9. page 136.
a Virgin of Byzantium, had promised in the night to come to the bed of
Paufanias the Lacedemonian General; she came somewhat later than the agreement
was, and had received a candle of the Guard to direct her to his Chamber; but
stumbling by chance at the door of the Chamber, she fell, and the light was put
out. Pausanias was asleep, but awaking with the noise, leaped out of bed, and
doubting some treachery, directed himself as well as he could in the dark to
the Chamber door, Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 9. p. 1268.
and ran his Sword through the body of her, who did not look for so bloody an
entertainment.

Sueton. in Tiberio, l. 3. c. 62. p. 157. Fulgos. l. 9. cap. 9. page 1271.
12. Tiberius Caesar being busted in the examination of some men by torments to
find out the Authors of his Son Dr^sus his death, it was told him, that a
Rhodian was come, who apprehending it of one that could tell something of the
matter, commanded that they should presently put him to the Rack: soon after it
appeared, that this Rhodian was his Friend, and one whom Tiberius himself had
invited to him from Rhodes by his own Letters. The mistake being cleared,
Tiberius commanded to strangle the man, that so the villainy might be concealed.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 32.
12. Baptista Zenus, a Cardinal in the time of Pope Paul the Second, having
called often for the Groom of his Chamber, and he at that time obeying the
necessities of Nature, and so returning no answer, the furious Cardinal hid
himself behind the Chamber door, that he might punish him to purpose as he came
in. In the mean time came the Secretary of another Cardinal, and finding the
door open, entered the Chamber; Baptista caught him by the hair, and laid on him
with his fists, the passion he was in not suffering him (for some time) to
discern his mistake.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 9. p. 1273, 1274. Fitzh^ of Relig. and Pol. part 1. c.
14. p. 135. Osorius l. 7. c. 36. p. 201.
13. Gildo rebelling in Africa against the Emperor Honorius, Mastelzeres the
Brother of Gildo was sent against him. Gildo's Army was far the more numerous;
and when Mastelzeres drew near the forefront of the Enemy, he began to speak
mildly to the Soldiers: The Standard Bearer of Gildo replying roughly upon
him, he with his Sword smote off the arm he bore the Ensign with, that both it
and the Ensign fell together to the ground. The hinder-part of the Army having
seen Mastelzeres in Treaty, and perceiving the Ensign inclined (a sign of
submission amongst them) and thinking that the Front which consisted of Roman
Legions, had submitted themselves to Mastelzeres, as Honorius his General, and
so they were deserted of the greatest part of the Army; these Africans wheeled
off, and did what they imagined the rest had done. Gildo beholding the whole
Army at the point of yielding, and fearing his life, fled hastily away, and
left an unbloody Victory to his Brother by virtue of this odd mistake.

Fulgos. Ex. l. 9. c. 9. page 1276, 1277.
14. Mullus Cropellus was sent by Ma^heus Vicecomes, who then bore the chief
Rule in Millain, to seize upon Cremona, who approaching the City in the night,
had dug through the Wall unperceived. Pontionus, an Exile of Cremona, had
entered the breach, followed only with an hundred men, and supposing that Mullus
followed him, forthwith seized upon the Palace. A great tumult and cry being
raised, Gregorius Summus, a Citizen of Cremona, took Arms, flew to the Walls,
and soon stopped up the entrance against them that were without. Mullus
therefore thinking that Pontionus was oppressed in the City, drew off in great
fear; and Gregorius Summus being informed that the Palace was lost, supposing
that a far greater number of Enemies had entered the City than indeed there had,
though he was in the head of a great Party of valiant men, with which he might
easily have cut off Pontionus and all his, yet he fled out of Cremona. Thus the
darkness of the night had led both Parties into error in the same place, and
so as that those which were most in number did still slye from, and were afraid
of those that were not so many.

15. Caicoscroes, Nicet. Choniat. l. 2. fol. 56.
the Sultan of Iconium, having received some injury from Alexius Angelus the
Greek Emperor, intending to be revenged, made a sudden incursion, and had
taken Antioch, had it not been for an accidental chance and a mistake of his
own thereupon. It fell out, that the same night he hastened toward Antioch to
take it, that there was a Noble person in the City that celebrated the Nuptials
of his Daughter, and as it is usual in such solemnities, there was a great noise
of the Feasters, a sound of Cymbals and Timbrels, of Dancing, and Women singing
up and down: these made a great stir in the City all night. As Soon as
Caicoscroes drew near the City, hearing the noise of Instruments and a
concourse of men, not apprehending the thing as indeed it was, but conceiving
it a military notice one to another, that his coming was discerned, he forsook
his design, and drew off to Lamp.

16. Johannes Gorraeus a Physician in Paris, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94.
the same person who wrote the excellent Physical Lexicon, being sent for to
the house of a Bishop, who at that time was sick; to prevent all danger that
might happen to him upon the account of his Religion (for at that time all
France was on fire with it) he determined to make his return home in the
Bishops Litter: he was upon his way about twilight when certain Parisians (to
whom the Bishop was indebted, and that had long in vain waited for
satisfaction) assaulted the Litter, in hope to find some of the Bishops goods
conveyed in it that way. This struck such a fear into Gorraus, that supposing
he was taken upon the account of his Religion, he fell i^to a distemper of
mind, and was not restored to his perfect health till a long time after.

17. Ferdinand King of Arragon and Naples setting forward with his Army toward
Canusium, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 94.
the Scouts he sent out beholding a great Herd of Deer feeding in the night,
wherewith that Country does very much abound, by a signal mistake they returned
to the King, and reported that Nicholaus Picininus, with John Duke of Anjo^,
who affected the Kingdom, had joined themselves with the Prince of Tarentum;
and that they had found them all in Arms in such a place. Ferdinand fearing
that he should no way be able to match with so great Enemies, fairly retreated
with his Army to Barolum, upon no other occasion than this gross mistake, which
the cowardice of his Scouts had put upon first themselves, and then him.

18. Rome being besieged by Totilas King of the Goths, Zuing. v. 1. l. 3. p.
257.
Vigilius the then Pope, being upon his return from Constantinople, diverted
unto Sicilia, and though he had been very injuriously dealt with by the
Citizens, yet he sent thence a mighty quantity of Corn by shipping to Rome. The
Goths were aware of this relief, and therefore getting into the Haven before
the arrival of these Ships, and keeping themselves close, lay in ambush behind
the Towers and Buildings thereabouts. The Soldiers of the Garri^on from the
Wall and their Guards, with up-lifted hands, and garments upon the points of
Lances, and great cries, gave notice to the Mariners, that the Enemy lay in the
Port, that therefore they should take heed and not fail into it. But the
Mariners not understanding the signs, and supposing the Romans on the Walls had
made them and their loud acclamations only for the joy they conceived at their
coming, they put into the Haven with all speed, where they were all as speedily
taken, and the great provision of Corn which they brought was all unladen by
the Goths.

Lonic. Theatr. p. 479.
19. A certain Cardinal had an unlawful familiarity with a Citizens Wife, her
Husband not only conniving, but being also subservient thereunto. The Husbands
Brother vehemently discontented at this turpitude and dishonor to the Family,
was resolved to be the death of the Cardinal. He understood the Cardinal had
given order for a sumptuous Supper at the house of the Adulteress, as indeed he
had; but being detained by some unexpected affairs, did not come: so that at
the last, the Husband weary of waiting, went to bed with his Wife, in that bed
which was prepared for her and the Cardinal. In the mean time the Brother had
hid himself in a far room of the house, and supposing that the Cardinal was in
bed with his Brothers Wife, at midnight he rushes into the Chamber, and
imprudently kills his Brother, together with his adulterous Sister. In the
morning understanding his error, before he went into a voluntary banishment,
he took care that the Cardinal should be poisoned by a Priest.

Zuing. vol. 2. l. 7. page 464.
20. Iulianus surnamed Hospitator, returning home one morning betimes, found his
Father and Mother in that bed wherein he and his Wife had used to lie; and
supposing that his Wife had played false, and that it was she and her Adulterer
who were there laid asleep, he slew them both by a lamentable mistake.

Nicephor. Gregor. l. 8. fol. 31.
21. Andronicus Junior (the Son of Michael) the Emperor, went one night to make
merry with a noble Strumpet in the City, and having understood that there was a
very handsome young man that was extremely in love with her, he placed certain
Gladiators in ambush to await his coming, and with charge to fall upon him and
kill him. It fell out, that Manuel the Despot going to seek for his Brother the
Emperor, chanced to pass that way; the Swordmen supposing this was the
Emperors Rival, assaulted him with Darts and Swords, in such manner, that the
young Prince having received a mortal wound, fell from his Horse, at last he
was known by some of the Soldiers, and by them carried unto the Palace, where
he dyed in a few hours after.

Sabel. l. 3. E^. 7. 101.
22. Antonius, the General of Vespasians Forces, having taken Cremona from the
Soldiers of Vitellius, went into a Bath to get off the blood he was soiled
with, and to refresh himself after his weariness. While he was there, they
excused to him that the Bath was not so warm as it should be: Well, said he, it
will be hot by and by. This word of his was catched up by some of the
Soldiers; and as if thereby he had given them a command to set fire on the
City, 40000 of them broke in at once upon the City, slew all the Citizens
indifferently, seized upon their Goods, and set fire upon their houses; so that
in four days time the City was utterly consumed.

Zuing. T^^atr. l. 5. vol. 2. page 382.
23. Theodorus Bibliander, Professor of Divinity amongst the Tigurines, was a
man of singular parts, and one who by his over-constancy in his studies, was
fallen into that infirmity of the eyes which is commonly called San-blind;
rising one morning betimes, and coming into the Kitchen, the Cat sat upon the
Table, sporting as she used to do, he supposing it had been the Maid: Good
morrow Elsa, said he, and the Cat, after her manner, returned the salute of her
Master.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 9. p. 382.
24. Valentinus Bolzius, a Preacher, was weak-eyed from his birth, and San-blind
when he was grown up, rising one morning to his wonted studies, and intending
to light a candle, he came in with his match to the ^ire side, and thrust it
into the Cats eye that sat there, the shining of it in the dark having
occasioned him to think it a coal that had fire in it. The Cat gave a sudden
leap, with such a cry as they use when they are injured, and the poor Minister,
as if he had seen a Ghost, was put into so terrible a fright, that he was glad
to retreat into his Chamber, till at last understanding his error, his fears
were turned into laughter.

25. In the Battle of Cirignola in the Kingdom of Naples betwixt the Spaniards
and the French men, Fizth. of Relig. and Polic. part. 1. c. 14. p. 133.
a word of the Count de Nemours, who was General of the French, being
misconstrued by his Soldiers, was a great cause of their overthrow. For the
Battle being already begun, and the Count finding that he could not pass a
certain Ditch (over which he had thought to have led some part of his Army to
charge the Spaniards on the other side) cried to the Soldiers that followed
him, Back, back, meaning to lead them another way. But they not knowing the
cause, understood that he had bid them fly, which they began to do, and others
seeing them, followed their example. The Count was slain at the same time, and
thereupon the whole French Army fled outright, and left the field and Victory
to the Spaniards.

26. When Arnulphus the Emperor besieged Rome, Fizth. of Relig. and Polic.
part. 1. c. 14. p. 132.
it chanced that a Hare being started by some of the Camp, ran toward the
City, and that a great number of the Soldiers pursued her with great noise and
cries; which the Romans seeing from the Town, and conceiving that the Enemies
meant to give them a furious assault, they were hereupon surprised with so
sudden and vehement a fear, that they abandoned the Walls and Rampires; which
the Enemies observing, made use of the opportunity, s^aled the Walls, and took
the City.

27. The Army of Agathocles was in a vehement sedition, Diod. Sicul. l. 20. p.
671.
which the Carthaginians sought by all means to improve, soliciting the
Soldiers to a defection by promise of increase of stipend, and other gifts,
diverse Captains had promised to come to them with their Companies, in the mean
time Agathocles, by his Oration and Policy, had appeased the mutiny; whereupon
determining not to lose so fair an occasion, he immediately led forth his Army
against the Carthaginians: they who saw them upon their March, supposed them to
be the Revolters that came over to their side, not at all dreaming of what had
fallen out in the Army. But so soon as Agathocles drew near them, he soon put
them out of their mistake; he caused his Trumpets to sound a Charge, and fell
in fiercely upon his unprepared Enemies that expected nothing less, so that he
made a great slaughter of them.

28. Sempronius, Lord Rem^ his civil considerat. c. 62. p. 158.
the Consul, warring with the Aequi, the Battle between them continued until
night with variable fortune on either side. The night being come, and both
Camps in disorder, neither of the Armies returned into their own Camp; but each
Party retired into the next Mountains, where they thought to be most assured.
And the Roman Army divided it self into two parts, whereof the one went with
the Consul, and the other with Tempanius a Centurion. The morning being come,
the Consul (without knowing any thing of the affairs of the Enemy) went to
Rome, thinking that he had lost the Battle, and the Aequi did the like, both
having left their Camps to him that would, and thought himself victorious. It
happend that Tempanius in retiring with the rest of the Army, understood (by
chance) from certain wounded Soldiers of the Aequi, how their Captains
abandoning their Camp, were fled and gone: wherefore he returning, saved the
Roman Camp, sacked the Camp of the Enemy, and came victorious to Rome.

Fox Book of Martyrs vol. 2. l. 7. page 1382, 1383, 1384.
29. There was one Mr. Mallary Master of Arts of Cambridge, Scholar of Christ's
College, who for opinions held contrary to the determination of holy Mother
Church of Rome, was convented before the Bishops, and in the end sent to
Oxford, there openly to recant and to bear his Faggot, to the terror of the
Students of that University. It was appointed, that he should be brought
solemnly into St. Mary's Church upon a Sunday, where a great number of the
Head-Doctors, and Divines, and others of the University were assembled, besides
a great number of Citizens which came to behold the sight. Dr. Smith then
Reader of the Divinity Lecture, was appointed to make the Sermon at this
Recantation. All things thus prepared, comes forth poor Mallary with his
Faggot upon his shoulder, the Doctor was also in the Pulpit to make his Sermon;
he had scarce proceeded into the midst thereof, when suddenly was heard into
the Church the voice of one crying in the street, Fire, fire. The occasion of
which was, one Heuster coming from Alhallows Parish, saw a Chimney on fire, and
so passing in the street by St. Mary's Church cried, Fire, fire, meaning no
hurt. This sound of fire being heard in the Church, went from one to another,
till at length it came to the ears of the Doctors, and at last to the Preacher
himself. These amazed with sudden fear, began to look up to the top of the
Church, and to behold the walls; the rest seeing them look up, looked up also.
Then began in the midst of the Audience some to cry out, Fire, fire: Where,
says one? Where, said another? In the Church, says one. The Church was scarce
pronounced, when in a moment there was a common cry, the Church is on fire, the
Church is on fire by Heretics. Then was there such fear, concourse, and tumult
of people through the whole Church, that it cannot be declared in words, as it
was in deed. After this, through the stir of the people running to and fro, the
dust was so raised, that it showed as if it had been smoke. This and the
outcry of the people made all men so afraid, that leaving the Sermon, they
began all together to run away; but such was the press of the multitude,
running in heaps together, that the more they labored, the less they could get
out; they thrust one another in such sort, that they stuck fast in the door,
that there was no moving forward or backward. They then ran to another little
Wicket on the Northside, but there was the like or greater throng. There was
yet another door toward the West, which though shut and seldom opened; yet now
they ran to it with such sway, that the great Bar of Iron (which is incredible
to be spoken) being pulled out, and broken by force of men's hands, the door
notwithstanding could not be opened for the press or multitude of people. At
last when they were there also past hope to get out, they were all exceedingly
amazed, and ran up and down, crying out, That the Heretics had conspired their
death; one said he plainly heard the fire, another affirmed that he saw it, and
a third swore he felt the molten Lead dropping down upon his head and
shoulders. None cried out more earnestly, than the Doctor that preached, who in
a manner first of all cried out in the Pulpit, These are the subtilties and
trains of the Heretics against me, Lord have mercy upon me, Lord have mercy
upon me. In all this great amaze and garboil, nothing was more feared than the
melting of the Lead, which many affirmed they felt dropping upon their bodies.
The Doctors seeing no remedy, that no force nor authority would prevail, fell
to entreaty, and offered rewards; one offering 20 l. another^ his Scarlet Gown,
so that any man would pull him out, though it were by the ears. A President of
a College pulling a board out from the Pews, covered his head and shoulders
therewith against the scalding Lead, which they feared much more than the
falling of the Church: one thought to get out at a window, and he had broken
the glass, and got his head and one shoulder out, but then stuck fast betwixt
the Iron Bars, that he could move neither way: others stuck as fast in the
doors, over the heads of which some got out. A Boy was got up to the top of the
Church door, and seeing a Monk of the College of Gloucester (who had got upon
the heads of men) coming toward him, with a great wide Cowl hanging at his
back, the Boy thought it a good occasion for him to escape by, and handsomely
conveyed himself into the Monks Cowl. The Monk got out with the Boy in his
Cowl, and for a while felt no weight or burden; at last feeling his Cowl
heavier than accustomed, and hearing a voice behind him, he was more afraid
than while in the throng, believing that the evil Spirit that had set the
Church on fire, was flyen into his Cowl, then began he to play the Exorcist: In
the Name of God, said he, and all Saints, I command thee to declare what thou
art that art behind at my back: I am Bertrames Boy, said the other; but I said
the Monk adjure thee in the Name of the inseparable Trinity, that thou wicked
Spirit, do tell me who thou art, and from whence thou come, and that thou go
hence: I am Bertrames Boy, said he, good Master let me go. When the Monk
perceived the matter, he took the Boy out, who ran away as fast as he could. In
the mean time those that were in the streets, perceiving all things to be
without fear, made signs to them in the Church to keep themselves quiet, crying
to them there was no danger; but for as much as no word could be heard, by
reason of the noise in the Church, those signs made them much more afraid than
before, supposing all on fire without the Church, and that they were bid to
tarry within, and not to venture out for the dropping of the Lead, and the fall
of other things: this trouble lasted for many hours. The next day and week
following there was an incredible number of Bills set upon the Church doors to
inquire for things lost, as Shoes, Gowns, Caps, Purses, Girdles, Swords, and
Money; and in this garboil few but through negligence or oblivion left
something behind him. The Heretic, who through this hurly-burly had not done
his sufficient Penance, was the day following reclaimed to the Church of St.
Frideswide, where he supplied the rest of his plenary Penance. This ridiculous
accident happened An. 1541. in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

CHAP. XXX. Of Retaliation, and of such as have suffered by their own devices.
QVod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris, or Do as you would be done by, is
a Rule that Nature it self dictates unto all Mankind; yet there is no Lesson
that is sooner forgot than this: where power is, it is ordinary to be
oppressive according to the measure of it; but then many times the Providence
of God steps in, and measures out the greatest Insolents the measure they have
meted, causing them to fall into the very pits they have dug for others.

Dugd. Antiq. Warwickshire, p. 101.
1. In the 7. of King Stephen, the times being then turbulent, Robert Marmyon
(whose Seat was the Castle of Tamworth) being a man potent in Arms, and a great
Adversary to the Earl of Chester, possessed himself of the Monastery of
Coventry, turned out the Monks, and fortified the Church with the Buildings
belonging thereunto, making deep Trenches in the fields adjacent, which he so
covered, that they could not be seen, to the end that they might be an
impediment to an Enemy whenever any approach should be made; but it so
happened, that as he fallied out with some forces upon the Earl of Chester's
drawing near, and not remembering whereabouts those places had bin dug, he
fell with his Horse into one of them himself, and by that means being surprised
by a common Soldier, had his head presently cut off.

Knowls T^rk. Hist. p. 1418.
2. Daout Bassa, grand Vizier, had taken along with him Executioners, and
strangled Sultan Osman his great Master: not long after by the contrivance of
the great Vizier Georg^, the Spahies were stirred up to demand his life in
satisfaction of the death of their late Emperor. Daout bribed the Ianizaries
with 40000 Chequins of Gold, and they received him into their protection; but
the Spahies persisting in their former resolution, the Ianizaries put him
secretly into the same Coach, wherein he had sent Sultan Osman to Execution;
twice in the way being dry with sorrow, he drank at the same Fountains where
his late Master begged drink, and so was conveyed into the same Chamber, where
he had murdered him. The Executioners beginning to tie him, himself showed the
very corner where he had committed that foul fact, and desired that he might,
if possible, expiate it there: and so he was accordingly strangled.

Drummonds Hist. Scotl. p. 15.
3. Mack Donald born in Rosse, was a Thief fleshed in all Murders, mischievous,
without mercy; amongst other his cruelties, he nailed Horseshoes to the soles
of a Widows feet, because in her grief she had sworn to report his wickedness
to the King. Not long after he was brought to Perth by men of his own
qualities, with twelve of his Associates; the King, James the first of
Scotland, caused them all in like manner to be shod, as they had served the
woman; and when they had been three days hurried along the Town, as a spectacle
to the people, his Companions were gibbeted, and himself beheaded.

Philip de Comines, l. 6. c. 12. p. 216. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 9.
p. 67.
4. In the Reign of Lewis the Eleventh King of France, there were by his order
cruel Prisons made as Cages, being eight foot square, and one ^oot more than a
man's height; some of iron, and some of wood, plated with iron both within and
without with horrible Iron-works. He that first devised them was the Bishop of
Verdun, Cardinal Balue, who incontinent was put himself into the first that was
made, where he remained fourteen days. And it is remarkable, how the King
himself did imprison himself not long before his death; for in a jealous fear
of his Son and Nobles, that they would deprive him of his Government, he
enclosed himself within a Castle framed with Towers of Iron and iron Grates
round about it.

5. Perillus the Athenian having cast a brazen Bull for Phalaris the Tyrant of
Sicilia, Sabel. Ex. l. 10. c. 4. p. 557. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 9.
p. 68.
with such cunning, that offenders put into it, feeling the heat of the fire
under it, seemed not to cry with humane voice, but to roar like a Bull; when he
came to demand the recompense of his pains, was himself by order of the Tyrant
put into it, to show the proof of his own invention. Whence Ovid, Et Phalaris
tauro violenti membra Perilli
Torruit, infoelix imbuit author opus.
Perillus roasted in the Bull he made,
Gave the first proof of his own cruel trade.


6. Scarce any of the Murderers of Julius Caesar outlived him three years but
dyed a violent death, Sueton. in Iulio, c. 89. p. 52.
being all of them condemned, they all perished by one accident or other; some
by shipwreck, others in Battle, and some of them slew themselves with the same
Poignards wherewith they had before stabbed Caesar.

7. When Sultan Bajazet the First was taken by Tamerlane, Knowls Turk. Hist. p.
220.
he being demanded of the Victor what he would have done, in case the Victory
had been his: Had I gotten thee in my power, said he, I would have enclosed
thee in an iron Cage, and carried thee about therein for a show wheresoever I
went. Tamerlane having heard this surly and unseasonable answer, caused an iron
Cage to be made, wherein he enclosed the insolent Sultan, who not able to
endure the indignities that were there daily done to him, gave his head so many
knocks against the Grates of his Cage, that at last death heard, and put an end
to all his miseries.

8. Pope Alexander the Sixth went to supper in a Vineyard near the Vatican,
Iovii Elog. l. 4. p. 203. De Serres hist. France p. 499. Bak. Chron. p. 358.
Knowls Turk. Hist. p. 453. Fitzh. Rel. and Policy, c. 13. page 120.
where his Son Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valence, meaning to poison Adrian
Cardinal Cornetti sent thither certain Bottles of Wine, infected with poison,
and delivered them to a Servant of his, who knew nothing of the matter,
commanding him, that none should touch them but by his appointment. It happened
the Pope coming in something before supper, and being very thirsty through the
immoderate heat of the season, called for drink, his own provision being not
yet come. The Servant that had the empoysoned Wine in keeping, thinking it to
be committed to him as a special and precious sort of Wine, brought of it to
the Pope, and while he was drinking, his Son Borgia came in and drank also of
the same, whereby they were both poisoned; but the Pope only (overcome with the
poison) dyed: his Son by the strength of youth and Nature, and use of potent
remedies bore it out, though with long languishing.

9. Hermotimus being taken Prisoner in War, Herod. l. 8. page 496, 497.
was sold to Panionius of Chios, who made him an Eunuch. This base Merchant
made a traffic of such dishonest gain; for all the fair Boys he could lay his
hands on at Fayrs, or in the Ports for his money, he handled in this sort, and
afterward carried them to Sardis, or to the City of Ephesus, where he sold
them for almost their weight in Gold. Hermotimus was presented amongst other
Gifts to King Xerxes, with whom in process of time he grew into greater credit
than all the other Eunuchs. The King departing from Sardis to make War upon the
Grecian^, Hermotimus went about some affairs into a quarter of the Country,
which was husbanded by those of the Isle of Chios, where finding Panionius, he
took acquaintance of him, and in a large conference recounted to him the large
benefits he enjoyed by means of his adventure, promising him to promote him to
great wealth and honor, if he would remove himself and his family to Sardis.
Panionius gladly accepted of this offer, and a while after went with his wife
and children. Hermotimus as soon as he had him and his in his power, used these
words to him: O thou most wicked man, of all the wickedest that ever were in
the world, that usest the most vile and detestable traffic that can possibly
be devised, what hurt or displeasure did thou or any of thine receive of me,
or any that belong to me, that thou should bring me into that case wherein I
am, and of a man that I was, make me neither man nor woman? Did thou think
that the Gods were ignorant of thy practices? Do thou not see how they doing
right and justice have delivered thee (wicked Wretch) into my hands, that thou
may not find fault with the punishment I shall inflict upon thee? After these
and such like reproaches he caused Panionius his four Sons to be brought into
his pre^ence, and compelled the miserable Father to gueld them all one after
another with his own hands, and after that was done, the children were also
forced to gueld their own father.

Lonic. Theatr. p. 344. Sabel. Ex. l. 10. c. 4. p. 555. Heyl. Cosm. p. 150.
10. Alboinus, King of the Lombards, having in a great Battle overcome and slain
Cunimundus King of the Gepidae, married Rosamund Daughter of the dead King. On
a time at a Feast he drank to her out of the Skull of her dead Father, which he
had caused to be made into a Cup; the offended Lady resolved to be revenged,
and knowing that Helmichild, a Knight of Lombardy, was in love with a Lady in
her attendance, she caused him to be brought into a dark Chamber, in pretense
of there enjoying his Mistress; her self lay in the bed to receive him, and
afterward that he might know what he had done, she caused the window to be set
upon, and then told him, that unless he would kill Alboinus her Husband, she
would discover all he had acted with her. H^lmichild overcome with her threats
and his own fears, in the night slew Alboinus as he lay in his bed. The Murder
committed, both of them fled to Ravenna, where she also intended to destroy
Helmichild by a present poison. He had drank off a part of it, and finding that
the deadly operation of it began to insinuate and creep along his veins, he
drew his Sword, and enforced Rosamund to drink off the rest of the potion she
had prepared for him, and so by that means they both of them dyed together.

Lonic. Theatr. p. 639.
11. Eutropius the Eunuch was the Minion and Darling of the Court in the Reign
of Arcadius the Emperor; he sold places of Honor, Justice, and the Laws, gave
and took away Provinces as he pleased; at last was made Consul: then was he
accused of a Conspiracy against the Emperor, the Emperor gave order for his
death, but he was fled into a Temple or Sanctuary; and it is remarkable, that
he was the first who had made a Law, that any guilty person might be taken out
of a Sanctuary per force, by virtue of which Law himself was dragged out and
slain.

12. Clisthenes was the first amongst the Athenians, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l.
6. p. 794.
who made a Law for the banishment of persons, and it was not long before he
himself suffered the same penalty by his own Law.

13. Gryphus, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 9. p. 68.
King of Egypt, had scarce recovered the Kingdom of his Father, and newly
overcome the dangers abroad, before he saw himself ready to be ensnared at home
by his own Mother. One day as he came from hunting, she presented him with a
poisoned Cup; but he forewarned of the ambush (counterfeiting the mannerly Son)
prayed his Mother to begin, which she refusing, he pressed her to it, and
withal plainly told her what he had heard of the poison, reproving her sharply,
and swearing that to clear her self of such an accusation, there was no way for
her but to swallow down the drink. The miserable Queen overwhelmed with the
conscience of her own offense, drank the poison, whereof she presently dyed.

14. In the year 1477. there was cast in the City of Tour^ a very great piece
of Ordnance, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 9. p. 69.
which was carried to Paris, where being mounted and placed without the Walls
by St. Anthonies Port, it was often discharged. At last as they were loading it
with an iron Bullet of fifty pounds weight, by some accident the powder in the
Piece took fire, which beginning to vomit forth the furious Ball, the chief
Founder of the Piece, Johannes Manguaus, and fourteen other men that stood near
him, were so rent and scattered abroad, that scarce could there be found any
little pieces of their bodies. The Bullet after all grasing a great way off,
killed a poor Fowler, as he was laying his Nets for Birds, six other men being
only stricken with the wind of the Gun, and the stench of the powder, fell
extremely sick.

15. Marius one of the thirty Tyrants in the Reign of Galienus, Camer. oper.
subcisiv. cent. 1. c. 9. p. 69.
was chosen Emperor by the Soldiers on the one day, reigned as Emperor the
second, and was slain by a Soldier on the third, who striking him, said, This
is with a Sword which was made by thy self: for this Marius had before time been
a Cutler.

16. The Emperor Henry the Fourth used to go often to Prayers in St. Mary's
Church in the Mount Aventin^; Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 98. p. 461.
Pope Gregory the Seventh, who carried a watchful eye over all the actions of
this Prince, commanded one to take notice of the place where he was wont to
pray, and got a certain Fellow, with promise of great recompense, to get up
upon the top of the Church, and there upon the Beams to place certain huge
stones, which should be so fitly laid, that with the least touch they should
fall down directly upon the Emperors head, and brain him at the first blow.
This mercenary Villain, as he would have played his part, went so hastily to
work, that as he thought to have rolled down a great stone from the Roof, the
stone with its weight drew him on so, that first the man and then the stone
fell upon the Church-floor, where he was killed with the stone that fell upon
him. The Romans hearing of this Treason, ran into the Church, tied a rope about
the feet of this wretched Traitor, and dragged his carcass three days together
throughout all the streets of Rome; but the Emperor using his wonted clemency,
commanded he should be buried.

17. As the Emperor Charles the Fourth was sitting in his Court of Audience,
Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 99. p. 463.
there came before him a Priest complaining, that Zachora, a Gentleman and his
Patron, had put out his eyes, because he had reproved him of Heresy, and
therefore he desired of the Emperor that he might have satisfaction. Zachora
appearing, confessed the fact, excusing it by a transport of rage, and offering
to submit to any mulct of money the Judges should think fit, to repair the
Complainant with. The Emperor considering that the blind man's eyes could not
be restored, by the Law of Retaliation caused the eyes of Zachora to be put out
for those of the Priest.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 210.
18. Brennus, Captain of the Gauls, while the Romans were weighing out Gold for
their Ransom, hung a Sword and Belt upon the beam of the Scales, and when he
was asked by Sulpitius the Consul what that meant: What, said he, should it
mean but woe to the conquered. Now when L. Camillus the Dictator had suddenly
set upon the Gauls, as they were weighing, and had slain many of them, Brennus
complained, that this act of Hostility was contrary to the agreement made with
him, the Dictator only retorted his own words, Woe to the conquered.

Knowls Turk. Hist. p. 486.
19. Selymus the First, Emperor of the Turks, lay at Constantinople sick of an
Ulcer in the Reins, and afterward was seized upon by a malignant Fever; so
that wearied with his disease, and being a burden to himself, he dyed September.
1520. in the same Village of Chiurle, where he had formerly fought with his
Father; which certainly came to pass, not without a manifest token of divine
Justice, that he should suffer in that very place where he had sinned.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 560.
20. Aba, a Tyrant of Hungary; was put to flight by the Emperor Henry the
Third, in the behalf of Peter the lawful King; being forced to fly, he passed
the Danubius, and got to a Village called Scaebe, near the River Tibiscus: at
this place he had slain many of the Nobility, and at the same place himself was
murdered by the Swords of his own mutinous Soldiers.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 466.
21. Theudius, King of the Visigoths, was slain in his Palace, An. 587. by one
that counterfeited madness; while he lay breathing out his last, he commanded
that his Murderer should not be slain: For, said he, I have no more than I
deserved, having my self slain my Prince while I was a private man.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 6. c. 10. p. 192.
22. Pericles, an Athenian Commander, and one of great power in that State,
ordained by a Law, that no man should be admitted to any Government in the
Commonwealth, unless born of both such Parents as were Citizens. This Law of
his came afterward to touch upon himself, for those two Sons he had, Paralus
and Xanthippus, both dyed of the pestilence; he had others illegitimately born,
who were supervivors of their Father, but by virtue of this Law of his, might
not be admitted to any place of Government in the Republic.

Spotsw. hist. of the Chapter of Scotland l. 2. p. 110, 111.
23. Adam, Bishop of Cathnes in the year 1222. was barbarously used by some
wicked people suborned by the Earl of Cathnesse; he was assaulted at his own
house, his Chamber-boy, with a Monk of Melrosse that did ordinarily attend him,
were killed; the Bishop was drawn by force into his Kitchen, and when they had
scourged him with rods, they set the Kitchen on fire, and burnt him therein.
King Alexander the Second was at that time upon his Journey toward England,
and upon notice of this cruel fact, turned back and went in haste to Cathnesse,
where he put the offenders and their partakers to trial, four hundred by
public sentence were executed, and all their male children guelded, that no
succession should spring from so wicked a seed. The place where their stones
were cast in a heap together, is to this day known by the name of the stony
Hill. The Earl for withholding his help, and because he did not rescue the
Bishop, had his Estate forfeited, and howbeit after some little time he found
means to be restored, yet did he not escape the judgment of God; being murdered
by some of his own Servants, who conspired to kill him, and to conceal the
fact, set the house on fire, and burnt his body therein: So was he paid home in
the same measure he had used to the Bishop.

CHAP. XXXI. Of such persons as have been extremely beloved by several
Creatures, as Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, etc.
THE fittest object of man's love is certainly something that is above, or at
least something that may pretend to a kind of equality with him; but yet this
noble passion has admitted of most unworthy descents. Xerxes doted upon a
Plane-tree; and we read of others that have been enamored of Statues: thus
when the Master has humbled himself to his Servant, it is the less wonder, if
his slaves rise, and tender him an affection that he may be ashamed of.

1. There are several relations in Books of the Loves of wild Creatures to men,
Busbeq. ep. 3. p. 52. Burt. Melancholy, part. 3.. 2. p. 404.
to which yet I could never give any credit, till such time as I saw a Lynx,
which I had from Assyria, so affected toward one of my servants (known to him
but a while) that it could no longer be doubted but that he was fallen in love
with him. As often as the man was present, there were many and notable flatteries
and embraces, and little less than kisses; when he was about to go away, he
would gently lay hold on his garments with his claws, and endeavor to detain
him: when he departed he followed him with his eyes, and seldom took them off
from that way he went. In the mean time he was sad till he saw him returning,
and then he entertained him with a wonderful alacrity and congratulation. At
last the man crossed the Sea with me to go into the Turkish Camp, and then the
Lynx witnessed the violent desires he had of him by continual sickness, and
after he had forsaken his meat for some days, he languished away till he dyed:
which I was the more displeased with, because I had determined to send him as a
Present to Caesar, together with an Indian Rat which I had very tame.

2. King Porus in a sharp fight with Alexander the Great, being sore wounded
with many Javelins thrown at him, fell from the back of his Elephant, upon
which he was mounted. Lonic. Theatr. p. 328. Plut. Moral. p. 963.
The Soldiers supposing him dead, came upon him, with a purpose to spoil him
of his arms and ornaments. Here it was that the Elephant made use of all his
fury in the defense of his Master; and having cleared the place of the most
forward of the Assailants, he took up the body of his Lord with his Trunk,
placed him again upon his back, by which means the King was saved, but the
Elephant dyed of his wounds.

3. This which follows happened in our time, Plin. hist. l. 8. c. 40. p. 219.
and stands upon record in the public Registers, namely in the year that
Appius Iunius and P. Silus were Consuls. Xiphil. in Tiber. p. 87. Lonic.
Theatr. p. 328.
Titus Sabinus and his servants were executed for an outrage committed upon the
person of Nero, the Son of Germanicus. One of them that dyed had a Dog which
could not be kept from the prison door, and when his Master was thrown down the
stairs (called Scalae Gemoniae) would not depart from his dead Corpse, but kept
a most pitious howling and lamentation about it in the sight of a great
multitude of Romans that stood round about to see the execution. And when one
of the company threw the Dog a piece of meat, he straightways carried it to the
mouth of his Master lying dead. Moreover when the carcass was thrown into the
River Tyber, the same Dog swam after, and made all the means he could to bear
it up a float, that it should not sink; and to the sight of this spectacle and
fidelity of the poor Dog to his Master, a number of people ran forth by heaps
out of the City to the waterside.

Plin. l. 8. c. 17. p. 204. Lonic. Theatr. p. 327. Aelian. de Anim. hist. l. 6.
c. 63. p. 393.
4. In Patras, a City of Achaia, a Boy called Thoas, had bought a young Dragon,
which he kept and nourished with great care, and a notable familiarity there
was grown betwixt these two. But when the Dragon was grown to a considerable
bigness, the Citizens caused it to be carried into the Wilderness, and left
there. It fortuned that this Thoas being grown up to a young man, was returning
with some of his Companions from certain sights they had been to see, and in
their journey were set upon by Robbers. Thoas cried out, his voice was straight
known to the Dragon, who was lurking not far from the place, who immediately
came forth to his rescue, frighted some, and slew others, and so preserved the
life of his Benefactor.

Plin. l. 8. c. 42. p. 221. Ionic. Theatr. p. 328.
5. Centaretrius the Galatian having slain Antiochus in the War, got upon the
back of the dead Kings Horse; but he had no sooner done so, but that the Horse
seemed sensible that it was his Masters enemy that bestrid him: so that taking
the Bit in his teeth, he ran with all the speed that might be to the top of a
Rock, from when he threw both himself and his Rider headlong, in such manner,
that neither could be taken up alive again.

Plin. hist. l. 9. c. 8. page 239. Sandys on Ovid. Metamorph. l. 6. p. 115.
6. In the Reign of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, there was a Dolphin entered the
Lucrine Lake, which loved a certain Boy, a poor man's Son, in a strange manner.
The Boy using to go every day from Baia to Puteoli to School, about noon used
to stay at the waterside, and to call unto the Dolphin Simo, Simo, many times
would give him the fragments of bread which he daily brought him to that
purpose, and by this means allured the Dolphin to come at his call. I should be
ashamed to insert this relation into my History, but that Mecaenas Fabianus,
Flavius Alfius, and many others have set it down for truth in their Chronicles.
Well, in process of time, at what hour soever of the day the Boy lured for him,
and called Simo, the Dolphin, though never so close hidden, would come abroad
and scud amain to this Lad, and taking bread and other victuals at his hand,
would gently offer him his back to mount upon, letting fall the sharp prickles
of his Fins, for fear of hurting the Boy; when he had him on his back, he would
carry him over the broad arm of the Sea as far as Puteoli to School, and in
like manner convey him back again home: and thus continued for many years
together so long as the Lad lived: But when the Boy was fallen sick and dead,
the Dolphin usually came to the place, seemed to be heavy and mourn for the
absence of his beloved; and at last, it is presumed for very grief and sorrow,
himself was found dead upon the shore.

Plin. hist. l. 9. c. 8. p. 239. Plut. Morals, p. 979.
7. Egesidemus writes, that in the City of Iasso^ there was a Boy called
Hermias, who having used likewise to ride upon the back of a Dolphin over the
Sea, chanced at last, in a sudden storm, to be overwhelmed with waves, as he
sat upon his back, and so dyed; he was brought back by the Dolphin dead as he
was, who (as it were) confessing that he was the cause of his death, would
never return again into the Sea, but lanched himself upon the sands, and there
dyed upon the shore.

8. In the great Cirque at Rome, Lonic. Theatr. p. 327. A. Gell. noct. Attic.
l. 5. c. 14. p. 157, 158.
at a solemn Spectacle, there were many persons condemned to be torn in pieces
by wild beasts let loose upon them from Dens and Caves made for the purpose.
Amongst these miserable persons was one Androdus, who had been Servant to a
Consular person. There was a Lion let forth upon him, the most terrible of all
others to look upon both for strength and extraordinary fierceness, who at the
first stood still, as one in admiration, and then softly and mildly approaching
the man, moved his tail, after the flattering manner of a Dog, and then gently
licked the legs and hands of the poor Slave that was almost dead with fear, and
defended him against all the wild beasts in the Cirque. All the people saw this
wonder not without great applause. Androdus was therefore sent for by Caesar,
who inquired of him the reason, why that terrible beast had spared him alone,
and had fawned upon him in that manner. The Slave told him, That being Servant
unto the Proconsul of Africa, by over-hard usage he had been constrained to run
away into the sands and solitudes, where while he hid and rested himself in a
Cave, there came to him this huge Lion lame of one foot, and bloody, who seemed
mildly and gently to crave his assistance; that he took up his foot, and having
pulled out a long and sharp thorn gave him ease; that from that day to three
years end he lived with the Lion in that Cave, who ever brought him a part of
his prey, which he roasted in the Sun and eat. After which, weary of that
bestial life, (in the Lions absence) he went his way, and having gone three
days journey, he was seized upon by the Soldiers, and brought out of Africa to
Rome to his Lord, and by him was condemned to be thus exposed to the wild
beasts to be devoured; but that it seems this Lion being afterward taken, had
again taken knowledge of him, as he had seen. Upon this the people universally
interposed for the pardon of Androdus, and that he might have the Lion bestowed
upon him; it was granted, and the Slave led the Lion in a small thong through
the whole City: the people willingly gave him money, with great acclamations,
crying out, This is the Lion that was the man's Host, and this is the man that
was the Lions Physician. Gellius calls the Slave Androclus.

9. Busbequius tells how a Spaniard was so beloved by a Crane of Majorca, Burt.
Melancholy, part 3.. 2. p. 404.
that the poor bird would walk any way with him, in his absence seek about for
him, make a noise that he might hear her, and knock at his door, and when he
took his last farewell, Desiderium suum testatus, post inediam aliquot dierum
interiit, Not able to over-master her passionate desire, she abstained from all
food till she dyed.

10. There happened a mavelous Example about the City of Sest^s of an Eagle,
Plin. not. hist. l. 10. c. 5. p. 273.
upon which account that bird is had in great honor in those parts. A young
Maid had brought up an Eagle by hand from a young one, the Eagle again to
requite her kindness, would first when she was but little, fly abroad a
birding, and ever bring part of that she had gotten to her Nurse. In process of
time being grown bigger and stronger, she would set upon wild beasts also in
the Forest, and furnish her young Mistress continually with store of Venison:
at length it fortuned that the Damosel died, and when her funeral fire was set
a burning, the Eagle flew into the midst of it, and there was consumed to
ashes, with the Corpse of the said Virgin. In memorial whereof the inhabitants
of Sestos erected in that very place a stately Monument, such as they call
Heroum, dedicated to Jupiter and the Virgin; for that the Eagle is a bird
consecrated to that God.

Text. offi. l. 5. c. 66. p. 678. Sax. Grammat. hist. Danic. l. 10. p. 410.
11. Saxo Grammaticus relates, that in part of Sweden, while some Virgins were
playing in the fields, there came forth a great he Bear that seized upon one of
the most beautiful amongst them, carried her into a secret part of the Wood in
his paws to the place where his Den was, where he fell so in love with her,
that he not only abstained from preying upon her, but usually brought some part
of his prey, and used her with such bestial caresses, that being impregnate by
him, she had a son, who, say some, gave beginning to the Family of the Vrsines.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the extraordinary Honors done to some great Persons in their
life time, or at their death.
THE usual manner of the World is to frown upon present virtue, and to pursue
it with envy and detraction; but when once it is removed from our eyes, then,
as if we repented of our former injustice, we can be contented those should
have their due honor, who are now no longer in a capacity to enjoy it. It is
true the same World has dealt more sincerely with some in this kind than with
others; to some few it has made present payment, but reserving the just debt
to others, till they have been withdrawn into their graves.

Olear. Trav. l. 6. p. 354, 355.
1. The Turkish Emperor, desirous to recover Bagdat, sent Cha^il Bassa with an
Army of 500000 men to reduce it. Schach Abas the Persian King commanded
Cartzschugai Chan to march to the relief of the City with a small Brigade, but
consisting of choice men, and he followed him in person with the whole Army; he
himself got into the City, and sent Cartzschugai Chan to meet the Turk, whom he
wearied out with perpetual Skirmishes for six months together. At last he gave
him Battle, disordered and defeated him, forcing him to fly as far as Netzed.
Upon the first news of the Victory Schach Abas left the City to go and meet
Cartzschugai Chan, and being come near him alighted, and said to him, My
dearest Aga, I have by thy means and conduct obtained so noble a Victory, that
I would not have desired a greater of God; come, get up on thy Horse, it is fit
I should be thy Lacquey. Cartzschugai was so surprised at this discourse, that
he cast himself at his feet, entreated his Majesty to look on him as his Slave,
and not to expose him to the derision of all the world, by doing him an honor
so extraordinary, as that it was impossible he could any way deserve it. But
notwithstanding all his entreaties, he was forced to get up, the King and the
Chans following on foot only seven paces.

2. Timoleon the Corinthian was the person who subverted the Kingdom and
Tyranny of Dionysius in Sicily, Sabel. Ex. l. 3. c. 2. p. 182. Fulgos. Ex. l.
5. c. 2. p. 584. Plut. in Timol. page 254.
and restored the City of Syracuse to her pristine liberty; for which act of
his, the grateful City understanding his death, decreed him perpetual honors,
and that he should be buried, and his Tomb erected in the Forum or Market place.

3. The day that Germanicus the Son of Drusus dyed, Sutton. in C. Caligul. c.
5. p. 167. Vssers Annals, p. 813. An. Mund. 4023.
the Temples were battered with a tempest of stones, Altars overturned, the
Houshold-Gods by some thrown into the streets, children laid out to perish, the
Barbarians also did consent to a Truce; being in Civil War amongst themselves,
or waging it with the Romans, as in a domestic or common mourning, some
Princes and Governors amongst them cut off their beards, and shaved the heads
of their wives, in sign of the greatest and most afflicting grief. The King of
Kings also, that is, the King of Parthia, forbore his hunting and feasting of
the Nobles, which is a kind of vacation amongst the Parthians.

4. Aratus had delivered the Sycionians from under tyranny to liberty; Fulgos.
Ex. l. 5. c. 2. p. 585.
when therefore he was dead, though he dyed without the Borders of the
Sycionians, yet so great was the love of the people to him, that they
accompanied his Corpse crowned, and with great funeral Pomp conveyed it to their
City, singing all along the praises of the deceased: they built him a Sepulcher
of mavelous work and great cost, which in honor of him they called by his
name, and at this place they yearly celebrated the Birthday of Aratus with
Sacrifices and Sports. Moreover, in case it happened that any of Aratus his
Family chanced to be there present at that annual Solemnity, they compelled him
to take amongst them the first and most honorable place.

5. Titus Livius the Historian had attained to that same and mighty reputation
amongst men for his Learning and public Writings, Fr. Modid epist. dedic. ante
Livii hist. Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 5. p. 281.
that although he lived in the Age of Augustus, wherein a learned man was no
rarity; yet it is said concerning this man, that diverse persons of great
Nobility came to Rome from the farthest parts of Spain and Gades, on purpose to
see him; and when once they had so done they departed, lest they should seem to
have given that visit to the Magnificence and Majesty of Rome, at that time the
Head-City of the World.

6. When Plato in his return from Sicily came to Olympias, Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c.
5. p. 275.
all the people (who were then convened for the celebration of the Plays there)
as soon as they understood of his coming left the Plays, and ran forth to
receive him, looking upon him with admiration and reverence, as a divine person
and a man sent down from Heaven. Now if any man shall well consider the vanity
of the Greeks, and how devoted to these sports, and withal the mean birth and
descent of Plato, he will better understand the greatness of the honor done
him, which was never given to any King before or after.

7. Phi^opoemen had also a singular honor from the Greeks in the Nemaean
Plays; Fulgos. Ex. l. 2. c. 5. p. 275.
for after he had obtained that famous Victory at Mantinea, and mustered his
Army where the Plays were celebrated, there were diverse Harpers and Singers,
and when one sung this Verse, O Pylades, through the gallantry of this Captain
all the Grecian Cities were restored to liberty, all the people fixed their
eyes upon Philopoemen, and with a loud and joyful shout testified they believed
these Verses to agree with his virtue.

Fulgos. exempl. l. 2. c. 5. p. 277.
8. The integrity and honesty of Zeno Yziaeus, a Cyprian Philosopher, was in
such high estimation with the Athenians, that they decreed him a golden Statue,
with a Crown upon it; and also deposited the Keys of their City in his hands,
believing them more safe therein than in any of their own Temples.

Fulgos. exempl. l. 2. c. 5. p. 276.
9. The innocence and justice of Phocion procured him as much of reputation and
honor as learning or military virtue use to bestow on others; for as often as he
was chosen and sent out by the Athenians as their General by Land, or Admiral
by Sea, he was freely and cheerfully received with the whole number of his
Soldiers by the confederate Cities and Allies; they set open their City-gates
not as to an Athenian, but as to a Citizen of their own City: whereas when any
other besides himself was sent out in that employment, the Gates were shut and
chained, and the Watches kept upon the Walls, as if some Enemy was near hand
ready to surprise and betray them.

Fulgos. exempl. l. 2. c. 5. p. 280.
10. In what honor Pompey the Great was amongst the Romans, appears by that one
action of theirs; for when he was to be created Praetor in the Mithridatick War,
and that Roscius opposed him, advising the people to choose another to add
Pompey as his Companion, marking out with his finger whom he designed for that
choice; the people of Rome knowing the honor of Pompey was impeached, if he
should be made another Associate, were universally moved with indignation, and
set up a shout with that earnestness, that the Crows that flew over their
heads, fell down astonished in the midst of them: nor would they depart the
Assembly, till they had obtained the Pretorship for Pompey alone, and all other
things, which he thought necessary for his Expedition.

Aelian. var. hist. l. 10. c. 1. p. 262.
11. Pherenice brought her Son to the Olympic Games to contend for a Crown
there, and when the Hellanodicae or Judges did prohibit her from beholding the
Plays, she insisted upon her right, saying, She had a Father and three Brothers
all Victors in the Olympicks, and had also brought thither her Son as a
Champion: with these reasons she overcame both the people and the Law it self,
which forbad a woman to be present, and she alone was admitted to sit there.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 45. Su^ton. in August. l. 2. c. 58. p. 90.
12. Augustus Caesar had the surname of Pater Patriae, the Father of his
Country, given him by the sudden and full consent of the Romans. The better
sort of the people were sent to him with this Title unto Antium, and after,
because he would not accept it, when he returned to Rome, the whole body of the
people met him with Wreaths of Laurel upon their heads. The Senate decreed to
Antonius Musa, his Physician, a Statue of Brass to be placed next to that of
Aesculapius, because by his means he was recovered of a dangerous disease. Some
Masters of Families left it in their Wills, that their Heirs should cause them
to be carried to the Capitol with a Sacrifice before them, which should be
there offered in testimony of their thanks, that Augustus had survived them.
Some Cities of Italy made that day wherein he first came to them to be the
beginning of their year. Most of the Provinces, besides Temples and Altars,
appointed Plays every five years, and that almost in every Town. The Kings his
Friends and Confederates, each of them in their Kingdoms, built Cities after
his name called Caesaria's. And with joint consent and at their common charge,
they resolved to finish the Temple of Olympic Jupiter, begun in Athens of old,
and to dedicate it to his Genius. They left their Kingdoms oftentimes, and both
at Rome, and when he passed through the Provinces, did him daily services,
gowned, without Royal Ensigns, after the manner ^f Clients. The Knights of Rome
did constantly celebrate his Birthday two days together. All degrees of
persons did yearly cast a stipend into the Gulf of Curtius, as a vow for his
health; and in the Calends of January they gave him a New Years gift, although
he were absent, which amounted to huge sums, though he would not admit that any
single person should pay him above one single penny. When he returned out of
the Provinces, they followed him not only with hearty wishes of prosperity, but
with Songs and Verses fitted to their Music; and it was precisely observed,
that upon the day of his entrance into Rome, no kind of punishment should be
inflicted upon any Malefactor.

13. When M. Tullius Cicero was forced into Exile by the means of Clodius,
Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 3. p. 256.
besides the whole body of the Senate, there was above twenty thousane men that
put on mourning Apparel and funeral Habit, that thereby they might declare what
sense they had of his calamity, and that they were as much grieved, as if it
had fallen upon their own families; and on the other side, when by the means of
Pompey and others, he had liberty to return, almost all Italy ran out of their
Towns and Cities to behold and welcome him.

14. The Emperor Constantine the Great being dead in Nicomedia, Zuing. Theatr.
vol. 1. l. 1. p. 97.
the Soldiers that were of his Lifeguard rent their garments, threw
themselves upon the ground, and knocking their heads against the walls, spared
for no complaints that a mighty grief was able to prompt them to in such a
case. The Prefects, Captains, and rest of the Soldiers followed them therein
in mournful tones, crying out they had lost a Protector, a Guardian, a Father.
The Citizens like so many mad and distracted persons, ran about the City
howling by reason of the greatness of their grief, which they were not able to
contain: others went up and down with silence, hanging down their heads as men
astonished; all complaining they were now deprived of all the comforts of
humane life. At Rome the Senate and people had no measure in their grief and
sadness; for they shut up the Baths, they came not either to the Markets or
Plays, but intermitted all those things which are wont to be observed in times
of joy and prosperity. And having lamented the loss of so great an Emperor,
and pronounced him a happy person, that had closed up his life in so great a
glory: they added this also to the rest of his honors, that he should be
painted above the heavenly Orbs, sitting amongst the celestial company of
blessed Souls; and withal decreed, that an Embassy should be sent unto
Constantius his Son, that he would send unto them the Corpse of his Father, and
that he would honor the City of Rome with the Remainders and Funerals of a
most noble and illustrious Prince.

15. The death of Titus Vespasian the Emperor being made known in the evening,
Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 9^.
the Senate rushed into the Curia, as to bewail the loss o^ the Worlds
perpetual Guardian; they then heaped upon him such honors, as they had never
voted him either present or alive, and so decreed he should be numbered amongst
the Gods.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the strange and different ways whereby some persons have been
saved from death.
HE that thinks himself at the remotest distance from death, is many times the
nearest to it; all of us indeed so neighbor upon it, that the Poet has most
truly said, The Gods so favor none, that they can say,
We will live this, and then another day.
Yet as some men who have received the sentence of condemnation in themselves,
have met with an unlooked for pardon: so others have miraculously escaped, when
to all humane reason they might be numbered amongst the dead.

Ma^del. Trav. l. 3. p. 202.
1. Four Christian Slaves being in the Ship of an Algier Pirate, resolved to
make their escape in a Boat, which one of them who was a Carpenter undertook to
build; the Carpenter set himself on work, making wooden Pins and other pieces
necessary for the fastening of the boards whereof the Boat was to consist.
Having appointed a time for the execution of their design, they took off five
board ^ from the room where the provision was kept, whereof they used two for
the bottom, two others for the sides, and the third for the Prow and Poop, and
so made up somewhat that was more like a Trough than a Boat, their Quilt served
them for Tow, and having pitched the Boat well, they set it into the water; but
when they would have got into it, they found that two men loaded it so, that
being in danger of sinking, two of the four desisted from that enterprise, so
that only two, an English and a Dutch man adventured in it, all the Tackling
they had was two Oars and a little Sail, all their provision a little bread and
fresh water, and so they put to Sea without either Compass or Astrolabe. The
first day a tempest at every wave filled their Boat, they were forced to go as
the wind drove, they were continually employed in casting out the water, the
Sea had spoiled their bread, and they were almost quite spent when they were
cast upon the Coasts of Barbary. There they found a little wood wherewith they
somewhat enlarged their Boat, but narrowly escaping death by the Moors, they
got to Sea again. Thirst troubled them most, in which some shift they made with
the blood of some Tortoises they took: at last, after ten days floating up and
down, they arrived upon the Coast of Spain, at the Cape of St. Martin between
Alicante and Valencia. Those of the Country seeing them at a distance sent a
Boat to meet them, carried them bread and wine, treated them very civilly, and
found them passage for England: this was An. Dom. 1640.

Addit. ad Donat. per Horst. l. 7. c. 9. p. 707. Fabrit. obs. chirurg. obs. 95.
p. 173. Kornman. de mirac. mort. par. 2. c. 10. p. 15.
2. An. Dom. 1357. there was a great plague at Co^en, amongst many others who
were infected with it was a noble Lady, her name was Reichmut Adolch, she lived
in the new Market, where her house is yet to be seen, she being supposed to dye
of it was accordingly buried. The Sextons knew that she was buried with a Ring
upon her finger, and therefore the night following they came privily to the
Grave, and dug up the Coffin, and opened it; upon which the buried Lady
raised up her self, the Sextons ran away in a terrible fright, and left their
Lanthorn behind them, which she took up, and made haste to the house of her
Husband, she was known by him and received in; afterward being attended with
all care and diligence, she perfectly recovered, and lived to have three Sons
by her Husband, all which she devoted to the ministerial Function. The truth of
all this is confirmed by a public monumental Inscription, erected in memory of
so strange a thing, and is yet to be seen in the entrance of the Church of the
holy Apostles.

3. I cannot but ponder that prodigy so loudly proclaimed in the Greek
Anthology: Causins holy Court tom. 1. max. 4. p. 358.
There was a Father and a Son in a certain Ship, which as it fortuned, was
split upon the Rocks. The Fathers age not able to grapple with the waves was
soon overwhelmed and drowned. The Son laboring to save his life, saw a carcass
floating upon the water, and mistrusting his own strength, mounted himself upon
it, and by this help reached the shore in safety: he was no sooner free of his
danger, but he knew the Corpse to be that of his dead Father, who gave him life
by his death, as he had afforded him birth by his life.

4. I read in the Relations of Muscovia, Lonic. Theatr. p. 687, 688. Causins
holy Court tom. 3. max. 4. p. 358.
set out by the Ambassador Demetrius, of the memorable Fortune of a Country
Boor; the man seeking for honey, leapt down into a hollow tree, where he light
into such plenty of it, that it sucked him in up to the breast; he had lived
two days upon honey only, and finding that his voice was not heard in that
solitary Wood, he despaired of freeing himself from his licorish captivity; but
he was saved by a strange chance. A huge Bear came to the same tree to eat of
the honey, whereof these beasts are very greedy, he descended into the tree, as
a man would do, with his hinder parts forward; which observed, the poor forlorn
Creature catched hold of his loins, the Bear in a lamentable fright labored
with all his power to get out, and thereby drew out the Peasant from his sweet
prison, which otherwise had proved his tomb.

5. Aristomenes, Polyen. l. 2. Pausan. in Messenic. Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. p.
171. Raleighs hist. World, l. 2. c. 27.. 4. p. 530. Heyl. Cosm. p. 580.
General of the Messenians, had with too much courage adventured to set upon
both the Kings of Sparta, and being in that fight wounded and fallen to the
ground, was taken up senseless, and carried away Prisoner with fifty of his
Companions. There was a deep natural Cave, into which the Spartans used to cast
headlong such as were condemned to dye for the greatest offenses; to this
punishment were Aristomenes and his Companions adjudged. All the rest of these
poor men dyed with their falls, Aristomenes (howsoever it came to pass) took no
harm, yet it was harm enough to be imprisoned in a deep Dungeon among dead
carcasses, where he was likely to perish with hunger and stench. But a while
after he perceived by some small glimmering of light (which perhaps came in at
the top) a Fox that was gnawing upon a dead body, hereupon he bethought himself
that this beast must needs know some way to enter the place and get out; for
which cause he made shift to lay hold upon it, and catching it by the tail with
one hand, saved himself from biting with the other hand by thrusting his Coat
into the mouth of it; so letting it creep whither it would he followed, holding
it as his guide, until the way was too straight for him, and then dismissed it.
The Fox being loose ran through an hole, at which came a little light, and
there did Aristomenes delve so long with his nails, that at last he clawed out
his passage, and so got home in safety, as both the Corinthians and Spartans
after found to their cost.

Stradae. Clarks Mirroir.
6. An. Dom. 1568. upon the Eve of All Saints, by the swelling of the Sea, there
was so great a deluge, as covered certain Islands of Zealand, a great part of
the Sea coast of Holland, and almost all Frizland. In Frizland alone there were
2000 persons drowned, many men who had climbed to the tops of Hills and Trees,
were ready to give up the ghost for hunger, but were in time saved by Boats.
Amongst the rest, upon an Hill by Sneace they found an Infant (carried thither
by the water) in its Cradle with a Cart lying by it; the poor Babe was soundly
sleeping, without any fear, and then happily saved.

Stradae. Clarks mir. c. 104. page 504.
7. William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, as he lay in Camp near to the Duke de
Alva's Army, some Spaniards in the night broke into his Camp, and some of them
ran as far as the Prince of Orange his Tent, where he lay fast asleep. He had a
Dog lying by him on the bed, that never left barking and scratching him by the
face, till he had waked him; and by this means he escaped the danger.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 3. p. 314.
8. In that horrible Earthquake at Antioch it is said by Dion, that the Emperor
Trajan was saved by miracle; for by one of greater than humane stature, in the
ruin of the houses, he was snatched out at the window. After which (for fear)
he abode some days in the open Air, and in the public Tents of the Hippodrome.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 16. p. 61.
9. An. Dom. 1045. the Emperor Henry the Third traveling toward Hungary upon
the River Danubius, Richilda the Widow of Albert Earl of Ebersberg, entertained
and lodged him very sumptuously; and as she was making her supplication to the
Emperor, that Bosenburg and some other Lands in the Earls possession, might be
given to her Nephew Welpho; while the Emperor (in token of his Grant) reached
her his hand, the Chamber-floor suddenly broke under them. The Emperor fell
into a bathing Vessel that was in the Stove underneath the same room, and had
no harm; but Bruno the Bishop of Wirtzburg, Cousin to the Emperor, Alemanus
the Bishop of Ebersberg and Richilda lighting upon the brinks of the Vessel,
were so sore hurt and bruised, that they died some few days after. A little
before (says Aventine) there appeared to Bruno, as he was aboard the Barque
with the Emperor, a certain Ghost like an Ethiop, who stood upon an high Rock,
and having called Bruno, vanished.

Causins holy Court, tom. 3. max. 4. p. 358.
10. In the Earthquake of Apulia that happened in the year 1627. on the last day
of July, one writes, That in the City of St. Severine alone ten thousand souls
were taken out of the world; that in the horror of such infinite ruins and
sepulcher of so many mortals, a great Bell (thrown out of a Steeple by the
Earthquake) fell so fitly over a child, that it enclosed him, and doing no
harm, made a Bulwark for him against any other danger. Who balanced the motion
of this metal, but the same fingers that distended the Heavens?

Full. Worth. page 175. Lincolnshire.
11. In Edgehill Fight Sir Gervase Scroop fighting valiantly for his King,
received twenty six wounds, and was left on the ground amongst the dead; next
day his Son Adrian obtained leave of the King to find and fetch off his Fathers
Corpse, and his hopes pretended no higher than a decent Interrement thereof:
such a search was thought in vain amongst many naked bodies with wounds
disguised from themselves, and where pale death had confounded all complexions
together. However ever he having some general hint of the place where his
Father fell, did light upon his body, which had some heat left therein, the
heat was with rubbing within a few minutes improved to motion, that motion
within some hours into sense, that sense within a day into speech, that speech
within certain weeks into a perfect recovery, living more than ten years after,
a monument of Gods mercy and his Sons affection. The effect of this story I
received from his own mouth in Lincoln College.

12. Pomponius was one of the number of those who were proscribed by the
Triumvirate at Rome; Lips. monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 333.
but he escaped death by a notable shift. He takes to him the Ensigns of the
Pretorship, he in his Robe, his Servants as so many Lictors with their Fasces,
kept close about their Master, lest he should be known by such as they met; in
this order they passed undiscovered through the midst of the City. At the Gate,
as Praetor, he took and got up into a public Chariot, and so passed through all
Italy, pretending to be an Ambassador from the Triumvirate to Sextus Pompeius,
and was thereupon also furnished with a public Barge, with which he passed
over into Sicily, at that time the securest Sanctuary for the distrossed. No
small wonder it is, that amongst so many men, in so many places, upon diverse
occasions, he should not meet with any person that did betray him to those who
sought after his life.

13. Strange was that escape of Caesar in Egypt, S^^t. p. 39. in Iulio. Heyl.
Cosm. p. 924.
having hither pursued Pompey, and discontented Ptolomy the King, by demanding
pay for his Soldiers; he had his Navy (which lay near the Pharos at Anchor)
assaulted by Achillas, one of young Ptolomy's Courtiers. Caesar himself was
then at Alexandria, and hearing of the Skirmish, he hastened to the Pharos,
meaning to succor his Navy in person. But the Egyptians making toward him on
all sides, he was compelled to leap into the Sea, and swim for his life: and
though to avoid their Darts, he sometimes dived under water, yet held he still
his left hand above, and in it diverse Books; he drew after him his Generals
Coat (called Paludamentum) with his teeth, that his Enemies might not enjoy it
as a Spoil; and having swam thus 200 paces, he got safe to his Ships, where
animating his Soldiers he also gained the Victory.

14. Sir Richard Edgecomb Knight being zealous in the Cause of Henry Earl of
Richmond (afterward King Henry the Seventh) was in the time of King Richard
the Third so hotly pursued and narrowly searched for, Carews Sarv. o^ Cornwall,
p. 114. Full. Worth. page 274. Devonshire.
that he was forced to hide himself in his thick Woods at his house at Cuttail
in Cornwall. Here extremity taught him a sudden policy to put a stone in his
Cap, and tumble the same into the water, while these Rangers were fast at his
heels, who looking down after the noise, and seeing his Cap swimming thereon,
supposed that he had desperately drowned himself, and (deluded by this honest
fraud) gave over their farther pursuit, leaving him at liberty to shift over
into Brittaigne.

15. John Thornborough preferred by Queen Elizabeth Dean of York, Full. ^^^th.
page 151. Wiltshire*
and Bishop of Lymbrick in Ireland, where he received a most remarkable
deliverance in manner following: Lodging in an old Castle in Ireland in a large
room partitioned but with Sheets or Curtains, his Wife, Children, and Servants,
in effect a whole Family, these all lying upon the ground on Mats, or such
like, in the dead time of the night the floor over head being earth and plaster
(as in many places is used) and overcharged with weight, fell wholly down
together, and crushing all to pieces that was above two foot high, as
Cupboards, Table-forms, Stools, rested at last on certain Chests (as God would
have it) and hurt no living creature. In the first of King James 1603. he was
consecrated Bishop of Bristol, and from thence was translated to Worcester.

Cl^rks mir. c. 83. ^. 365.
16. In the Massacre of Paris one Merlin, a Minister, fled and hid himself in a
Hay-mow, where he was strangely nourished and preserved; for all the time he
lay there (which was a fort-night together) a Hen came constant^y, and every
day laid an Egg by him, by which he was sustained.

Dinoth. memorab. l. 4. p. 310. Purch. pilg. tom. 1. l. 4. c. 11.. 2. p. 455.
17. Chingius Chan, first Emperor of the Tartarians, slying from a Battle where
he had unprosperously fought, hid himself amongst briars and shrubs to escape
the pursuit of the Enemy. An Owl sat upon the bush whereinto he had crept to
preserve himself. The Enemy passing that way, and seeing an Owl to sit upon the
bush, declined the search of that place, as supposing no man was there where a
bird had pearched so securely; and by this means Chingius escaped. From that
time forth an Owl was in great honor amongst the Tartars, they looking upon it
as a bird of fortunate presage, and carrying the feathers of them in their Caps
with great devotion.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 2. l. 3. p. 315. ^idren. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. p. 153.
18. Leo, Son to the Emperor Basilius Macedo, was accused by Theodorus
Sandabarenus, a Monk, as having designed upon the life of his Father, and was
thereupon cast into prison, and was freed thence by these strange means. The
Emperor on a time feasted diverse of the greatest Lords in his Court: they were
all sat, when a Parrot that was hung up in a Cage in the Hall (in a mournful
tone) cried, Alas, alas, poor Prince Leo: it is like he had frequently heard
Courtiers passing to and fro, bewailing the Princes hard fortune in those
terms; and when he had often spoke these words, the Lords at the Table were
seized with such a sudden sadness, that all of them neglected their meat: the
Emperor observed it, and called to them to eat, inquiring the reason why they
did not? When one of them with tears in his eyes replied: How should we eat,
Sir, being thus reproached by this bird of our want of duty to your Family? the
brute Creature is mindful of his Lord, and we that have reason, have neglected
to supplicate your Majesty in the behalf of the Prince whom we all believe to
be innocent, and to suffer under calumny. The Emperor moved with these words,
commanded to fetch Leo out of prison, admitted him to his presence, and
restored him first to his favor, and then to his former Dignity of Caesar.

^^k. Chron. p. 29, 30.
19. Guy Earl of Burgoigne, Grandchild to Richard the Second, Duke of Normandy,
grew sensible of his Right to the Dukedom of Normandy, and joining with
Viscount Neele and the Earl Bessin (two powerful Normans) conspired the death
of Duke William (who afterward conquered England) and they had effected it, if
a certain Fool about him had not stolen away in the night to the place where the
Duke was, and never left knocking and crying at the Gate, till he was admitted
to his presence, willing him to fly for his life instantly, or he would be
murdered. The Duke considering, that being related by a Fool, it was like to be
the more probable, and that there might be danger in staying, none in going,
rode instantly away all alone toward Falais his principal Castle. But missing
his way, he happened to pass where a Gentleman was standing at his door, of
whom he asked the way, and was by him as knowing him directed. Which he had no
sooner done, but the Conspirators came presently inquiring, if such a one had
not passed that way, which the Gentleman affirmed, and undertook to be their
Guide to overtake him; but leading them on purpose a contrary way, the Duke by
this means came safely to Falais. From thence he journies to the King of
France, complains of his injuries, who so aided him, that he made him greater
than he was before.

20. Mr. Lermouth, Clarks mir. c. 4. p. 18.
alias Williamson, Chaplain to the Lady Anne of Cleve, a Scotch man, being cast
into prison for the Truths sake; as he was on a time meditating, he heard a
voice (probably of an Angel) saying to him, Arise, and go thy ways: whereunto
when he gave no great heed at the first, he heard the same voice a second time.
Upon this he fell to prayer, and about half an hour after he heard a voice the
third time speaking the same words; whereupon rising up, immediately part of
the prison-wall fell down, and as the Officers came in at the outward gate of
the prison, he went out at the breach, leaped over the prisonditch, and in his
way meeting a Beggar, he changed his Coat with him, and coming to the
Seashore, he found a Vessel ready to set sail, into which he entered, and
escaped.

21. The people of Sicily being oppressed by diverse Tyrants, Plut. paral. p. in
Timoleonte. Fitzh. of Policy and Relig. part 1. p. 117.
craved assistance of the Corinthians, who sent them for their succor a
Captain of theirs called Timoleon, a man famous for military Discipline and for
moral Virtues. Timoleon in a short time had such success, that the Tyrants
despairing either to overcome him, or to defend themselves by force, one of
them, called Icetes, suborned a couple of desperate Villains to assassinate
him, who persuading themselves they might best perform it, as he should be
sacrificing to his Gods, and wholly attentive to his devotions, watched an
opportunity for that purpose. They found him one day in the Temple ready to
sacrifice, and drew near him to execute their design; but as they were ready to
strike him, one of the standers by, who suspected nothing of their intention,
upon a sudden gave one of the Conspirators such a mortal wound, that he fell
dead in the place. The other seeing his Fellow killed, and thinking the
Conspiracy was discovered, fled to the Altar, took hold thereof, craved pardon
of the Gods and of Timoleon, and promised, that if he would save his life, he
would discover all the practice. In the mean time he tha^ killed the other
Conspirator, being ^led was taken, and brought back, calling God and man to
witness, that he had done nothing but a most just and lawful act in killing him
that had killed his Father; which being known to some that were present, and
testified by them to be true, filled all the assistants with admiration of the
divine Providence, which by such an accident had not only overthrown the
pernicious plot and design of the wicked Tyrant, and preserved Timoleon, but
had also at the same time executed its Justice upon a Murderer.

22. An. Dom. 1552. about the Nones of February, Schenek. obs. medic. l. 3.
obs. 3. page 307.
Franciscus Pelusius, one of sixty years of age, while in the Manor of Lewis
Dheiraeus, and in the Hill of St. Sebastian, he was digging a Well forty foot
deep, the earth above fell in upon him to thirty five foot depth. He was
somewhat sensible before of what was coming, and opposed a plank (which by
chance he had by him against the ruins, himself lying under it. By this means
he was protected from the huge weight of the earth, and retained some air and
breath to himself, by which he lived seven days and nights without food or
sleep, supporting his stomach only with his own urine, without any pain or
sorrow, being full of hope in God, in whom alone he had placed it. Ever and
anon he called for help (as being yet safe) but was heard by none, though he
could hear the motion, noise, and words of those that were above him, and could
count the hours as the Clock went. After the seventh day (he being all the
while given for dead) they brought a Bier for his Corpse, and when a good part
of the Well was dug up, on a sudden they heard the voice of one crying from
the bottom. At first they were afraid, as if it had been the voice of a
subterranean Spirit, the voice continuing they had some hope of his life, and
hastened to dig to him, till at last (after he had drunk a cup of wine) they
drew him up living and well, his strength so entire, that to lift him out, he
would not suffer himself to be bound, nor would use any help of another; of so
sound sense, that jesting he drew out his purse, gave them money, saying, he
had been with such good Hosts, that for seven days it had not cost him a
farthing. Soon after he returned to his work again, and was then alive when I
wrote this, says Bartholomaeus Anulus.

Schenck. obs. medlc. l. 7. p. 887.
23. A certain Woman (says Iordanus) had given her Husband poison, and it seems
impatient of all delay, gave him afterward a quantity of Quicksilver to
hasten his death the sooner; but that slippery substance carried along with it
the poison that lay in the Ventricle (and had not yet spread it self to the
heart) through the bowels away from him by stool, by which means he escaped.
Ausonius has the story in an Epigram of his, the conclusion of which is to
this purpose.

The Gods send health by a most cruel wife,
And when Fates will two poisons save a life.
Marsil. Cagnat. de sanit. tuend. l. 7. c. 7. p. 26.
24. At Tibur, An. Dom. 1583. two years before I wrote this Book, there was one,
who diging in a subterranean Aquaduct, by a sudden fall of the earth (which
store of ruin had caused) he was overwhelmed and buried alive; yet such was
the vigor of his spirit, that night and day (though he could not distinguish
either) working with hands, feet, head, and back, he hollowed the earth that
lay about him, and dug as it were a Coneyhole: so that working as a Mole into
the part of the Aquaduct that was beyond the place where the earth fell, he at
last reached it, and from thence upon the seventh day he had scratched himself
out, and was safe and sound, though all the time without meat and drink, only
his fingers ends bruised and wore away.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of such persons as have taken poison and quantities of other
dangerous things without damage thereby.
PVrchas tells of the herb Addad, that it is bitter, and the root of it so
exceedingly venomous, that a single drop of the juice of it will kill a man in
the space of one hour. This nimble Messenger of death makes its approaches to
the Fortress of life so speedy, and withal so sure, that it is not easy for
the virtue of any Antidote to make haste enough to overtake it, or to overpower
and counterwork it; yet of the like dangerous drugs taken without sensible
harm, see the following Histories.

1. Mithridates that warlike King of Pontus and Bithynia, Schenck. obs. medic.
l. 7. p. 885. Polychron. fol. 136.
when in the War with the Romans he was overcome in Battle by Pompey,
determined to finish his life by poison; and therefore drank a draught of it
himself, and gave others to his Daughters, who would needs accompany their
Father in death. They overcome by the force of the poison, fell down dead at
his foot; but the King himself having formerly accustomed his body to the use
of Antidotes, found that the poison he had taken was of no use to him in this
his last extremity; and therefore gave his throat to be cut by his Friend
Bystocus, who with his Sword gave him that death, which he in vain expected
from the poisonous draught he had swallowed.

2. Conradus Bishop of Constance, Zuing. v. 2. l. 3. p. 327.
at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, drank off a Spider that had fallen into
the cup of wine, while he was busied in the Consecration of the Elements; yet
did he not receive the least hurt or damage thereby.

3. While I was a Boy, Schenck. obs. medic. l. 7. p. 886.
says Fallopius, and was sick of the Colic, I took a scruple of Scammony, and
yet had not one stool by it: And I saw a German Scholar at Ferrara, who took at
once a whole ounce of Scammony (I say of Scammony, not Diagridium) and yet was
no way stirred by it.

4. Theophrastus tells of Thrasyas, Schenck. obs. l. 7. p. 886.
who was most excellently skilled in all sorts of Herbs, that yet he would
often eat whole handfuls of the roots of Hellebore without harm: and he also
tells of one Eudemus a Chian, that in one day he took two and twenty Potions of
Hellebore, and yet was not purged thereby; and that supping the same night, as
he used, he did not return any thing he had taken by Vomit.

5. Schenckius relates the History of a Woman from an eyewitness of the truth
of it, Schenck. obs. l. 7. p. 887.
that she intending to procure abortion to her self, swallowed down half a
pound weight of Quicksilver in substance; and though she had done this more
than once or twice, yet it always passed through her as soon almost as she had
taken it, and that without hurt.

6. A certain man condemned for a capital crime, Schenck. obs. l. 7. p. 888.
was set free by Pope Leo the Tenth of that name; for that without taking any
previous Antidote, he had swallowed down almost an ounce of Arsenick, and
received no hurt thereby.

7. The weight of thirty grains of Antimonial glass prepared has been taken
without any harm, Schenck. obs. l. 7. p. 888.
as Schenckius reports from Albertus Wimpinaeus.

8. I knew a man, Gars. ab Hort. Aromat. Ind. l. 1. c. 4. page 91.
says Garsias ab Horto, who was Councellor to Nizamoxa, he would daily eat
three shivers of Opium, which weighed ten drams and more; and though he seemed
always to be stupid, and as one ready to sleep, yet would he very aptly and
learnedly discourse of any thing propounded to him; so much is custom able to
perform.

9. Albertus Magnus says, Coel. Rhod. lect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.
he has seen a Maid at Collen, who at three years of age would search about
the walls of the house, hunting for Spiders, which she would not only eat, but
delighted in that feeding, and yet continued in good habit of body thereby.

Schenck. l. 7. p. 885.
10. The Ethiopians that dwell near unto the River Hydaspis, do familiarly feed
upon Serpents and Scorpions without any harm by such food, which certainly
proceeds from no other thing than a secret and wonderful constitution of the
body, says Mercuriali^.

Schenck. l. 7. p. 886.
11. Rondeletius, an excellent Physician, and Regius Professor at the University
of Montpe^er, says he saw a Spaniard in a very hot season, who swallowed down
half an ounce of Opium without discernible alteration in him.

Sc^lig. de subtle. exercit. 175. p. 568. T^^nchfields hist. improved, p. 15,
16.
12. Scaliger tells of the King of Cambaia's son, that he was fed with poison
from his infancy, and that although himself continued in health, yet at last
his flesh became so venomous, that the flies and such insects as sucked any of
his blood, swelled and dyed: his very breath was dangerous to those that spoke
with him; and those women whom he used for his lust, were never the subjects of
a second dalliance, but passed from his bed to their burial.

Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.
13. Aristotle relates it of a Girl, who began by little and little to be
nourished by poisons, and that at last custom passed into nature; for she was
as well fed and nourished by those poisonous things as by any other kind of
common food. He adds further, that the heart of this Girl had but little heat
in it, and the passages very small; so that by the strength of the digestive
faculty the poison was exceedingly changed and altered before it could reach to
the heart. The Girl her self through this her education became so poisonous,
that with her spittle, or any other moisture which came from her, she would
kill such as came near her, as also they who had to do with her dyed
immediately.

Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.
14. Avicenna writes, that in his time there lived a man, whom all poisonous
things would fly from; if any of them had accidentally bitten him, they all
dyed forthwith, while he himself received no hurt by them. At last there set
upon him a larger sort of Serpent, which having bitten him, the man was cast
into a Fever for two days; but the Serpent dyed presently upon it.

Zuing. Th^at^. vol. 2. l. 3. p. 327.
15. Sabinus was Bishop of Canusium, he was far gone in years, and blind, but
famous for the gift of Prophecy, which he was known to have. His Archdeacon
thinking he lived too long, and hoping for the Bishopric after his decease,
had a wicked design upon his life, and to that purpose had dealt with his
Butler to mix some poison with the Bishops drink, and to give it him when he
called for it. The Butler had consented, and brought the cup accordingly; when
the Old man refused to receive it at his hand, saying withal, Do you drink off
that which you now offer to me to drink of. The Butler, in fear of that just
punishment which he had merited by his treachery, was about to drink off the
poisonous cup, when Sabinus hindered him, and withal: Go, said he, to the Author
of this Treason, and tell him from me, that I will drink up this poisonous
draught; but for all that he shall never enjoy the Bishopric. Sabinus drank it
all off, and received no hurt thereby; but the Archdeacon dyed the same hour,
though he had tasted of no poison.

CHAP. XXXV. Of such as have been happily cured of diverse very dangerous
diseases and wounds, etc.
PHysicians amongst the Indians were of that honor, that excepting only their
Brachmanni, they had no sort of men whom they received with equal veneration
and reverence. They deservedly accounted that a noble study that was conversant
about the preservation of the body of man in its due soundness of constitution
and health. The frailty of it they knew was assaultable by a thousand
accidents, to meet with which no acquirable wisdom and experience can be
thought too much in them who have taken upon them so worthy a profession; and
thereupon they suited the honor to the difficulty of the employment, wherein
some have happily succeeded, though to some Patients chance has proved the
best Physician.

1. Sebastianus, Zacut. Lusit. prax. adm. l. 3. obs. 99. p. 402.
King of Portugal, passing from Conimbrica to Lisbon, was received in his way
at a Sea-Port-Town with all possible expressions of joy; the streets were clean
swept, and strowed with sweet flowers; every house breathed out sweet odours
from the precious Spices and Gums burnt therein; a numerous multitude filled
the streets to behold the King as he passed, attended with Troops of Lords and
Ladies; amongst the rest that came to gaze, was a poor Fisherman, who had
grown old upon the Sea, who was no sooner in the street, but he grew giddy, and
as one that was Planet-struck, fell down, and as the King passed, was carried
in a swound to a house near at hand: two Physicians were sent to attend him,
who supposed he was taken with an Apoplexy, but finding no success left him for
dead. Three days after the King returned, inquired of his condition, and being
informed, sent Thomas a Veiga to him, a most excellent Physician: he first
inquires of the life and profession of the man, and being instructed therein,
he persuaded himself, that the sweet Perfumes whereunto he had been
unaccustomed, had given the occasion of his distemper: he caused him to be
carried to the Seaside, and to be covered with Sedge, Sea-weeds, and Mud; here
the man taking in the scent and air he had been used to, after four hours
opened his eyes, began to know them that were about him, and after a days time
was perfectly well as before. Such is the extraordinary force of custom.

2. An. 1602. I saw at Prague a Bohemian Rustic named Matthew, Croll. Basil.
chymic. in praef. admonit. p. 125, 126, 127.
he was aged about thirty six; this man for two years together, with a strange
and unheard of dexterity in his throat, used often in the company of such as
sat drinking, to take an iron Knife of the usual bigness, with a haft of horn,
and this (after the manner of a Jugler) he would put down his throat, and drink
a good draught of Ale after it, the price of his bold attempt. But he could
recover it at his pleasure, and with a singular Art take it by the point, and
draw it out. But by I know not what misfortune, the day after Easter of the
same year he swallowed the same Knife so far, that it descended into his very
stomach, and by no artifice of his could be drawn back any more. He was half
dead through the apprehension of death that would undoubtedly follow; but after
he had retained the Knife, in manner aforesaid, for the space of seven weeks
and two days entire, by the use and means of attractive Plasters, made up with
Loadstone and other things, the Knifepoint by a natural impulse, began to make
its way out near to the orifice of the stomach; which perceived, the Patient
(though many dissuaded him because of the eminent hazard of his life) was very
earnest that incision might be made, and so the Knife drawn out, which at
length he obtained by many entreaties; and upon Thursday after Whitsuntide
about seven a clock in the morning, all was happily performed by Florianus
Matthis of Brandenburg, the chief Surgeon both of the City and Kingdom. The
Knife is laid up amongst the Emperors choicest rarities, and showed as an
incredible miracle to the Courtiers and others in the City; the length of this
Knife is nine inches, and the color of it was so changed in the stomach, as if
it had all that time lain in the fire. The Rustic in the space of some few
weeks, by the care of his expert Surgeon, without further sickness or
trouble (as himself has sometimes told me) and contrary to the determinate
assertions of Physicians in their Aphorisms, recovered his former health in so
perfect a manner, that soon after he married.

Schenck. obs. medic. l. 1. p. 88.
3. Johannes Sobiratius for many years together had such a Convulsion, that his
knees and legs were ^o pulled together, that he was not able to go. But being
one day taken with a sudden and vehement anger against a servant of his, he did
thereby so stir and heat his body, that forthwith the nerves of his legs were
dis^ended, so that he was able to stand upright, and to walk without any sense
of pain.

Georg. Bortis^ut. f^r. Academ. p. 264, 265.
4. A certain Cardinal was sick of an Impostume, and now the collected matter
was got in such manner into his throat, that it caused great difficulty of
breathing, and threatened to strangle him immediately. The Physicians had
deserted him, as a man whose case was utterly desperate, when his servants
eager after spoil, enter his Chamber, seize upon all the ornaments of it. They
took down the Hangings, Pictures, Statues, carry out the Carpets, Cushions, and
the very Clothes of their Master, yea his Cardinals Gown, while he yet breathed
and looked upon them. The Cardinal kept an Ape, and he having observed how his
fellow servants had been busied, comes also himself into the Chamber, looks
round about him to see what there was left for him, he finds nothing but only
the Cardinals Cap which lay neglected upon the ground; this he merrily takes
up, and puts upon his own head. This spectacle moved the almost dying Cardinal
to a most extreme laughter, the laughter broke the Impostume, and after he had
well vomited he was restored to his health, and to the recovery of his
embezelled goods.

Schenck. obs. medic. l. 5. p. 663.
5. Sextus Pomponius the Governor of the hither Spain, and Father to one that
had been Praetor, while he was present in his Barns at the winnowing of his
Corn, was seized with the terrible pain of the Gout, he thrust therefore his
legs above the knees into a heap of Wheat, and by this way of drying his feet,
received ease in a wonderful manner, and afterward upon the same occasion made
use of the same remedy.

Mr. Boyls Exp. Phil. Essay 1. p. 3.
6. Mr. Stepkins the famous Oculist (as both himself and an illustrious person
that was present at the cure informed me) had a Maid brought to him of about
eighteen years of age, having a couple of Cataracts that she had brought with
her into the world, by reason of which she had lived absolutely blind from the
first moment of her birth. This Maid being brought to the free use of her eyes,
was so ravished at the surprising spectacle of so many and various objects as
pres^nted themselves to her unacquainted sight, that almost every thing she saw
transported her with such admiration and delight, that she was in danger of
losing the eyes of her mind by those of her body, and to expound that mystical
Arabian Proverb, which advises to shut the windows, that the house may be light.

7. Paleologus the Second, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 3. c. 59. p. 214.
Scho^. phys. curio^. l. 3. c. 28. p. 537.
Emperor of Constantinople, was dangerously sick, and when Nature nor the Art
of his Physicians could at all p^ofit him, and that he had kept his bed for a
year about, to the great prejudice of the State, the Empress was informed by an
old Woman, that it was impossible her Husband should recover, unless he was
continually vexed and provoked by harsh dealing and ill usage, for by that
means the humors that were the occasion of his sickness, would be dissipated
and discharged. This advice was approved, and by this way of contrary cure (as
one would think) the Empress proceeded, she began continually to vex and
torment him to an exceeding height, scarce observing him in any one thing that
he commanded. With these frequent and incessant vexations, the malignant
humors were discussed by the augmentation of heat, and the Emperor did so
perfectly recover, that throughout those twenty years which he survived this
malady, even to the sixtieth year of his age he remained found and well.

8. A certain man (says Solenander) lay sick upon his bed, Schenck. obs.
medic. l. 5. p. 692.
and in all appearance entering upon the last moments of his life, at which time
came an enemy of his, and inquires of his servant where his Master was: He is
(said he) in his bed in such condition, as he is not likely to live out this
day. But he (as the manner of the Italians is) resolving he should die by his
hands, enters his Chamber, and giving the sick person a desperate stab,
departs; but by the flux of blood that issued from that wound, and the diligent
attendance of his cure the man recovered, receiving as it were a new life from
him who came for no other purpose than to assure himself of his death.

9. Nicholaus, Schenck. obs. medic. l. ^. p. 646.
an Architect, fell headlong from an high Tower, and yet was so far from being
hurt by so dreadful a fall, that he received an advantage thereby; for whereas
before he halted on one foot, he ever afterward went upright.

10. Vdalricus Baron of Hoenstone, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 3. cap. 59. p.
214.
a valiant person, but disfigured by a most protuberant Wen, which had been
long growing upon him: this man was Colonel of the Swissers under the Emperor
Maximilian the First. In the War of Millain it fortuned that the Colonel was
run through the neck with the point of a Lance, and received thereby so
fortunate a blow, that the wound from his enemy was the perfect cure of his
Wen, as himself used afterward to boast.

11. Alphonsus King of Arragon lay sick at Capua, Schot. phys. curios. l. 3. c.
28. p. 539. Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 51. p. 228.
and receiving no help by the administration of his Physicians, betook himself
to the reading of Q. Curtius his History of the Acts of Alexander the Great,
wherein he took such delight, that he was thereby recovered to his former
health, as is related by Antonius Panormita and Aeneas Sylvius. So also
Ferdinand King of Spain and Sicily recovered his health that was despaired on
by his Physicians, by reading the History of Titus Livius; so did Laurentius
Medices by the relation of a story, which story you may find s^t down in my
third Book, the eighth Chapter and the third Example. At the taking of Royan by
the Duke of Espernon, Hist. of the life of the D. of Espernon, part. 2. l. 8.
p. 402.
so strange wounds were observed, as that their cures defeating all the Rules
of Art, passed for miraculous. One of the Soldiers of the Dukes Guards, called
Faure, received a Cannon shot in his belly, which passed quite through, leaving
an orifice bigger than a Hat-crown, so that the Chirurgions could not imagine,
though it were possible the bowels should remain unoffended, that Nature could
have supplied so wide a breach, which notwithstanding she did, and to that
perfection^* that the party found himself as well as before. Another of the
same condition, called Ramee, and of the same place (they being both Natives of
St. Iean de Angely) received a Musketshot, which entering at his mouth, came out
of the nape of his neck, who was also perfectly cured. Which two extravagant
wounds being reported to the King, his Majesty took them both into his own
particular dependence, saying, Those were men that could not die, though they
afterward both ended their days in his service.

Fab. ^ild. ob^. chirurg. cent. 1. obs. 79. p. 58.
12. I was familiarly acquainted with a man of no mean condition, who about
sixteen years ago, being accused of high matters, was brought to Berne, where
he was several times put and tortured upon the Rack with great rigor:
notwithstanding he constantly affirmed (in the midst of all his pain) that he
was innocent; so that at last he was freed and restored to his dignity. This
person for many years past, had been miserably tormented with the Gout; but
from the time of his tortur^s beforementioned, and his use of the Valesian
Baths, his health was so far confirmed, that being alive at this day, he never
was sensible of the least pain of his Gout; but although he is now old, he is
able to stand and walk in a much better manner than before he could.

Stows Annals, p. 98.
13. A young Woman married, but without chi^dren, had a disease about her Jaws;
and under her Che^k, like unto Kernels, and the disease so corrupted her face
with stench, that she could sca^c^, without great shame, speak unto any man.
T^is Woman was admonished in ^er sleep to go to King Edward, and get him to
wash her face with water, and she should be whole. To the Court she came, and
the King hearing of the matter, disdained not to undertake it, but having a
Basin of water brought unto him, he dipped his hand therein, and washed the
Woman's face, and touched the diseased part oftentimes, sometimes also signing
it with the sign of the Cross. When he had thus washed it, the hard crust or
skin was softened, the tumors dissolved, and drawing his hand by diverse of the
holes, out thence came diverse little Worms, whereof, and of corrupt matter and
blood they were full. The King still pressed it with his hand to bring forth
the corruption, and endured the stench of it, until by such pressing he had
brought forth all the corruption. This done, he commanded her a sufficient
allowance every day for all things necessary, until she had received perfect
health, which was within a week after, and whereas she was ever before barren,
within one year she had a child by her Husband. This disease has since been
called the Kings Evil, and is frequently cured by the touch of the Kings of
England.

Lloyds State Wor^hies. p. 194
14. Sir John Cheek was once one of the Tutors to King Edward the Sixth,
afterward Secretary of State; much did the Kingdom value him, but more the
King; for being once desperately sick, the King carefully inquiring of him
every day, at last his Physician told him there was no hope of his life, being
given over by him for a dead man: No, said the King, he will not die at this
time, for this morning I begged his life from God in my prayers, and obtained
it: which accordingly came to pass, and he soon after, contrary to all
expectation, wonderfully recovered. This, says Dr. Fuller, was att^sted by the
old Earl of Huntington, bred up in his childhood with King Edward, to Sir
Thomas Cheek, who was alive Anno 1654. and eighty years of age.

15. Duffe, Sandys on Ovid. Metam. l. 8. p. 158.
the threescore and eighteenth King of Scotland, labored with a new and
unheard of disease, no cause apparent, all remedies bootless, his body
languishing in a continual sweat, and his strength apparently decaying,
insomuch as he was suspected to be bewitched, which was increased by a rumor,
that certain Witches of Forest in Murry practiced his destruction, arising from
a word which a Girl let fall, that the King should die shortly, who being
examined by Donald, Captain of the Castle, and Tortures showed her, confessed
the truth, and how her mother was one of the Assembly. When certain Soldiers
being sent in search, surprised them roasting the waxen Image of the King
before a soft fire, to the end that as the Wax melted by degrees, so should the
King dissolve by little and little, and his life consume with the consumption
of the other: the Image broken, and the Witches executed, the King recovered
his wo^ted health in a moment.

16. When Albertus Basa, Melch. Adam. in vita Germ. med. p. 33.
Physician to the King of Poland, returned out of Italy, he diverted to
Paracelfus, who then lived at the City of St. Vitus, with him he went to visit
a sick person, of whom all who were there present said, That he could not
possibly live above an hour or two, and by reason of an indisposition in his
breast, a defect in his pulse, and failing of his spirits, they pronounced of
him, that he would not live out a few hours: Paracelsus said, it would be so
indeed in despite of all that skill in Physic which the Humourists have, but
that he might easily be restored by that true Art which God had shut up in
Nature; and thereupon he invited the sick man to dine with him the next day,
then he produced a certain distillation, three drops of which he gave to the
Patient in Wine, which immediately ^o restored the man, that he was well that
night, and the next day came to Paracelsus his Inn, and dined with him in sound
and perfect health to the admiration of all men.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Stratagems in War for the amusing and defeating of the Enemy,
and taking of Cities, etc.
MArcellus was called the Roman Sword, and Fabius their Shield or Buckler; for
as the one was a resolute and sharp A^saulter of the Enemy, so the other was as
cautious and circumspect a Preserver of his Army. These two Qualities
whenever they are happily met together in one man, they make an able
Commander; but to render a General complete, there ought to be a certain
fineness of wit and invention, and a quickness of apprehension and discerning,
by the one to entrap the Enemy, and by the other to avoid the snares which the
Enemy has laid for him: in these no man was perhaps a greater Master than he
who is next mentioned.

Sabel. exempl. l. 6. c. 6. p. 343.
1. When the strength and power of the Carthaginians was broken, Anibal betook
himself to Antiochus, the great King of Asia, him he stirred up against the
Romans, and made him victo^ious in a naval fight by this subtle device of his:
He had caused a great number of Serpents to be gathered and enclosed in earthen
pots, these he ordered to be thrown into the Roman Vessels in the heat of the
fight in great plenty; the Romans amused and terrified with these unlooked for
enemies, began first to abate their vigor in fighting, and their fears
increasing upon them, soon after betook themselves to plain flight.

Sabel. exempl. l. 6. c. 6. p. 344.
2. Mithridates, King of Pontus, was overcome by Lucullus in a great Battle, and
enforced to quit the field to save himself by a hasty flight; the pursuers
followed close after him, when he caused great quantities of gold to be
scattered, whereby the edge of the pursuit was taken off; and though the Romans
thereby had a great prey, yet they suffered a more noble one to escape their
hands by the only fault of their inconsiderate covetousness.

Raleighs hist. World, l. 1. c. 2.. 18. Hak. Apol. l. 3. c. 8.. 4. p. 258, 259.
3. The Island of Sark joining to Garnesey, and of that Government was surprised
by the French, and could never have been recovered again by strong hand, having
Corn and Cattle enough upon the place to feed so many as would serve to defend
it, and being every way so inaccessible, as it might be held against the great
Turk; yet in Q. Mary's time, by the industry of a Gentleman of the Netherlands,
it was in this sort regained: He anchored in the Road with one Ship of small
burden, and pretending the death of his Merchant, besought the French, being
some thirty in number, that they might bury their Merchant in hallowed ground,
and in the Chapel of that Isle, offering a present to the French of such
Commodities as they had aboard; whereunto the French yielded upon condition
they should not come ashore with any weapon, no not so much as a knife. Then
did the Flemmings put a Coffin into their Boat, not filled with a dead carcass,
but with Swords, Targets, and Harquebusses. The French receiving them at the
landing, and searching every of them so narrowly, as they could not hide a
Penknife, gave them leave to draw their Coffin up the Rocks with great
difficulty; some part of the French took the Flemish Boat, and rowed aboard the
Ship to fetch the Commodities promised, and what else they pleased; but being
entered, they were taken and bound. The Flemmings on Land, when they had carried
their Coffin into the Chapel, shut the door to them, and taking their weapons
out of the Coffin, set upon the French, they run to the cliff, and cry to their
company aboard the Flemming to come to succor; but finding the Boat changed
with Flemmings, yielded themselves and the place.

Raleighs hist. World, part 1. l. 5. c. 4.. 7. p. 527.
4. The Stratagem by which Philip the Father of Perseus King of Macedon won
Prinassus, is worthy of noting, says Sir Walter Raleigh. He attempted it by a
Mine, and finding the earth so stony, that it resisted his work, he
nevertheless commanded the Pioneers to make a noise under ground, and secretly
in the night time he raised great mounts about the entrance of the Mine, to
breed an opinion in the besieged, that the work went marvellously forward. At
length he sent word to the Townsmen, that by his undermining two Acres of their
Wall stood upon wooden Props, to which if he gave fire, and entered by a breach,
they should expect no mercy. The Prinassians little thought that he had fetched
all his earth and rubbish by night a great way off to raise up those heaps
which they saw, but rather that all had been extracted out of the Mines;
wherefore they suffered themselves to be outfac'd, and gave up the Town as
lost, which the Enemy had no hope to win by force.

5. When Kiangus had declared himself a Subject to the Empire of China, Martin.
Martin. Bell. Tartaric. p. 293, 294.
the Tartars sent a great Army against him. Kiangus feigned to ^ly, but in the
rear he placed very many Carts and Wagons, which were all covered carefully,
as if they had carried the richest Treasures they possessed, but in real truth
they carried nothing but many great and lesser pieces of Artillery, with their
mouths turned upon their enemies. The Tartars intending to rifle their
Carriages, hastily pursue, fight without order, and fall upon the prey with all
the greediness imaginable; but those that accompanied the Wagons, firing the
Artillery, took off a great part of the Army, and withal Kiangus wheeling
about, came upon them, and made a strange carnage amongst them.

6. Xerxes his Navy was come to Phalericum, Plut. in Themist. p. 118, 119, 120.
and lay upon the neighboring shores of the Athenian Territories, he had also
drawn his Land-army to the Seacoasts, that so he might be in the sight of the
Grecians with all his Forces at once, then did the Peloponnesians resolve of
retiring to the Isthmus, and would hear no propositions to the contrary. They
intended therefore to set sail in the night, and all the Captains of the Ships
had orders to be accordingly prepared. Themistocles perceiving the Greeks would
by this means lose the Commodities of the Streights, and the convenience of
their present station, dispersing themselves into their particular Towns,
bethought himself of this Stratagem: He had with him one Sicinus, a Persian
Captive, of whose fidelity he did not d^^bt, as being the Instructor of his
children, him he sends privately to Xerxes with this message: That
Themistocles, the General of the Athenians, was of his party, and that in the
first place he gave him to understand, that the Grecians were preparing for
flight, that he advised him not to suffer their escape, but that forthwith he
would set upon them, while in disorder, and before their Land-army was with
them, that by this means he should be sure to overthrow all their naval Forces
at once. Xerxes received this advice with great thanks as from a friend, and
immediately gave order to the Admirals of his Navy, that they should silently
prepare all the Ships for sight, and send two hundred of them to shut up all
passages, and surround the Islands, that there might be no way of escape for
the Enemy. It was done, and thus the Greeks were forced to fight where they
would not, though the most convenient place for themselves; and by this pruden^
management of Themistocles they obtained a naval Victory, such as had not been
before amongst the Greeks on Barbarians. After which Xerxes still intending to
press upon them with his Landforces, and such others as he had yet unbroken at
Sea, Themistocles found amongst the Captives Arnaces one of Xerxes his Eunuchs,
him he ^ends to the King, to le^ him know, that the Greeks being now Masters at
Sea, had decreed to sail with their Navy to the Hellespont to cut down the
Bridge he had there built, to hinder his return home; that he being solicitous
for his safety, would advise him with all speed to retire thitherward, and to
pass over his Army, while in the mean time he would contrive delays to hinder
the Greeks from the pursuit of him. The Barbarian terrified with this message,
hastily retired, and by this slight the Greeks eased themselves of a heavy
burden.

Plut. in Themist. p. 121.
7. The Persian War with Greece being over, Themistocles determined to rebuild
Athens, and to surround it with Walls with all the speed that might be. The
Spartans found themselves aggrieved at it, and therefore sent one of Aegina to
Athens to complain of that doing of theirs. Themistocles goes himself to Sparta
as an Ambassador from the Athenians, where they complaining, that the Athenians
were walling their City, Themistocles denies it, and desires them to send
Ambassadors, who might satisfy themselves with their own view; by this means
he gained time. The Ambassadors went, the Walls went on apace, and he had wrote
to the Athenians to keep the Spartan Ambassadors as pledges for his own return.
They did so, and so the Spartans, though thus deluded, were yet forced to send
him back with safety.

M. Hurault. polit. disc. l. 2. c. 20. p. 487.
8. Spartacus having but few men with him when he rebelled against the Romans,
took to a Mountain strong and unapproachable, where he was besieged by 3000
Romans who guarded well the passage, that he might not escape; for there was but
one passage up or down, all the rest was a steep Rock. Spartacus finding that
there grew wild Vines aloft upon the Rock, did cut off all the twigs, and with
them made Ladders of Cords so stiff and long, that being fastened above, they
reached down to the bottom of the Plain: upon these they all secretly went
down, except one, who tarried to cast down their Armor after them; and when he
had so done, he also saved himself by the same means. The Romans mistrusted it
not, by reason whereof they that were besieged, coasting round about the Hill,
came and assailed the^ behind, putting them in such fear with their sudden
coming upon them, that they all fled away, and Spartacus had the Spoil of the
forsaken Camp.

Plut. in Fabio, p. 178. Sab^l. exempl. l. 6. c. 6. p. 341. Polyb. hist. l. 3.
p. 244.
9. Anibal intending to remove his Forces to Cassinas, his Guides by a mistake
of the Punick Tongue, led his Army to Cassilinum in Campania. The place is
otherwise mountainous, save a long Valley that stretches out it self unto the
Sea. Fabius had shut up the way by which he should pass out with 4000
Soldiers, and the rest of his Army he had securely placed upon the Mountains,
or with a part of them troubled the rear of his Enemy. Here Anibal found
himself in a Trap, and his Army was dejected with fear, apprehending an
impossibility of freeing themselves out of these streights. Anibal therefore
causes 2000 Oxen (of his prey that he drove along with him) to be caught, and
fastens to each of their horns Torches and Faggots of dry sticks^ These being
lighted, he caused the Oxen ^o ^e driven up to the top of the Mountains; and in
the mean time with the main of his Army silently and in the dark marches to the
outlet of the Valley. The Oxen marched in order till the fire about their
horns got to the quick, then they ran up and down as mad, their fronts and
tails blazing, and firing the bushes as they went. The Romans amazed with this
unwonted and terrible spectacle, supposing that they were on all sides shut in
by the Enemy, quit their Post, and thereby gave liberty of free exit to Anibal.
Fabius not knowing whereto this subtilty of the Enemy tended, kept himself
within his Camp in good order; but by the first light in the morning it was
easily discerned, that by this Stratagem Anibal had made his escape.

10. Hermocrates being advertised of the intent of Nicias (the Athenian
General) to break up his siege before Syracuse, M. Hurault. polit. disc. l. 2.
c. 21. p. 489.
and march away, and knowing that day to be a Festival and of Sacrifice to the
Gods, from which he should not be able to draw out his men to seize upon the
passages by which he was to retire; he sent therefore a familiar friend of his
to Nicias with instructions, that he came from such as gave him secret
advertisement from within the City to warm him that he should not march away
that night, unless he would fall into such ambushes as the Syracusans had
purposely laid for him. Nicias being bleared with these words, tarried all that
night, so as the next morning the Syracusans took all the passages, by means
whereof the Athenians were unfortunately overthrown.

11. When all the World was alarmed with the terrible power and successes of
that great Warrior Tamerlane the Scythian, he fearing that the terror of his
Arms would cause all men to hide their precious Stones, Jewels, Gold and
Silver, and such precious Movables as might easiliest be conveyed away,
therefore dispatched away a number of his Soldiers in the habit of Merchants
to go to the remotest and richest Cities, with Camels laden with rich Booty,
that could not so fitly be hidden, commanding them to fell at low rates, that
cheapness might allure the Asians to buy, and so either part with their Coin
before it was hid, ^or draw it out again when they saw a gainful purchase
before them. Which done, he came upon those Cities with such celerity, that
they could have no leisure to hide that which they had bought: by which secret
slight, without much ad^, he p^fer'd and plundered the Asians of all that they
had.

12. Hernand Teillo Porta Carrero Governor of Dourlans for the Spaniard, D.
Serres Genesis hist. Fran^^, page 888. D'Avila civil Wars, l. 15. page 1444.
An. 1596. being advertised, that the Citizens of Amiens (a proud people and
little practiced in Arms) would not receive the Garrison that the King offered
them for the preservation of the Town, hastens the effect of those
Intelligences he had there; and on Monday the 10. of March he attires forty or
fifty Soldiers like Peasants laden with many burdens, and armed underneath
with Daggers and short Pieces, and marches with about 700 Horse and 5000. Foot*
he lays his ambushes near the Town, and the next day sends his disg^ised
Soldiers to the Gate of Montrescut, following a Ca^t, which being under the
Portoullis, one of the pretended Peasants cuts the Horse-trace, and by the
great disorder of the Horse hinders the liberty of the Ga^e* the other
prese^^ly discover their Arms, seize upon the Corpse (...) Guard, and give a
sign to the ambush, the ambush comes horse and foot, and enter into the Town,
and go directly to the Market place^ take the Fo^t, and seize upon the Arsenal
and Munition, which King Henry the Fourth of France had lately sent, and in the
end forced the Townsmen to a composition for the redemption of their goods.

13. Trivulti^ perceiving the Garrison of Millaine, M. Hurault. polit. disc. l.
2. c. 21. p. 494.
and especially the Millainers themselves to be astonished at the coming of
Maximilian and the Swizzers into Lombardy, bethought himself of this policy: He
wrote Letters with his own hand, sealed with his own seal to the chief
Commanders of the Swissers, and sent them by a Servant of his own that spoke
well the Swissers Tongue. In these Letters he willed them to perform within two
days the thing that he and they were agreed upon, for he should then have all
things ready according to their Platform. The Messenger offered himself on
purpose to be taken by the Emperors Scouts, and being examined prayed pardon,
and thereupon confessed, that he brought Letters to the Leaders of the
Swissers: his pardon was granted, and he plucking off his hose, took out the
Letters that were sewed in the sole of it, the which were carried to the
Emperor immediately. When he had read them, although he was in great
perplexity, yet was he not of opinion they should be showed to the Cardinal of
S^n, because he would not accuse a Captain of so great authority amongst the
Swissers, much less would he cause them to be seized upon, for fear of putting
his affairs into danger; but in his heart distrusting the loyalty of the
Swissers, he repassed the Mountains without making further speech of it, and
returned back into Germany, freeing thereby the Millanois of that fear they had
conceived at his coming.

Knowles Turk. his^. p. 140, 141.
14. The Captain of Bilezuga was minded to compass the death of Othoman: being
therefore to marry the Daughter of the Captain of Iarchizer, he invited Othoman
to the Wedding, as a time convenient to accomplish his design; but he having
imparted the matter to Michael Cossi, this person grieving to see so brave a
man treacherously brought to his end, acquainted Othoman with it, which he
received with due thanks: And now, says he, as to the Captain of Bi^ezuga,
request him from me to protect for me one year longer, as he has used to do,
such goods as I shall send to his Castle, and because of the Wars betixt me and
the Prince German Ogli, I will presently send such things as I make most
reckoning of, and will also bring with me to the Marriage my Mother-in-law with
her Daughter my Wife. The Captain was glad of this message, looking upon the
whole as his own. When the Marriage-day drew nigh, Othoman instead of precious
Household stuff, sent his Packs in Carriages filled with armed men, and had
caused some of his best Soldiers to be attired in women's apparel, as being his
Mother-in-law and her Retinue: these he ordered to meet together at the Castle
about twilight; being admitted, the Soldiers leap out of their Packs, and the
other in women's habit betake themselves to their weapons, slew the Warders of
the Castle, and without more ado possessed the same, Othoman having before
slain the Captain of it in just ^ight.

Knowles Turk. hist. p. 181.
15. The great City of Nice held out only upon the hope of a thousand Horsemen,
which the Emperor Andronicus had promised to send them, of which aid so
promised, Orchanes King of the Turks understanding, furnished 800 of his
Horsemen, after the manner of the Christians, and fetching a great compass
about, came at length into the highway that leads from Constantinople to
Nice, and so trooped directly toward the City, as if they had come from
Constantinople. At the same time he sent 300 of his other Horsemen in the
habit of Turks to forage and spoil the Country as much as they could within
the sight of the City; which whil^t they were a doing, the other 800 Horsemen
in the attire of Christians, following upon them, as if it had been by chance,
charged them, and in the sight of the Citizens put them to flight: which done,
these counterfeit Horsemen returned directly again toward Nice. The Citizens
which with great pleasure had in the mean time from the Walls seen the most
part of the Skirmish, and how they had put the Turks to flight, supposing them
to be the promised aid whom they daily expected, with great joy opened the
Gates of the City to receive them as friends. But they being entered the Gates,
presently set upon the Christians, fearing no such matter, and being seconded
with the other 300, which in dissembling manner had fled before, who speedily
returned with other Companies of Turks that lay in ambush not far off, they won
the great and famous City of Nice, which they have ever since to this day
possessed.

16. The Turkish King Amurath had concluded a Peace with the Christians of
Thracia, Knowles Turk. hist. p. 190.
during which the Governor of Didymoticum intending to fortify his City with
new and stronger Fortifications, entertained all the Masons, Carpenters, and
other Workmen he could by any means get; which Amurath understanding, secretly
caused two hundred lusty Workmen and Laborers to come out of Asia to offer
their service unto the Governor, who gladly entertained them. The wiser sort
of Citizens wished the Governor beware of those Asian Workmen, as by them
suspected; but he presuming upon the Peace made with Amurath, and considering
they were but base Workmen, and no Soldiers, had the less care of them; yet
using their work all the day, he commanded them to lodge without the Walls of
the City every night. Amurath understanding these Workmen were thus
entertained, sent for the valiant Captain Chasis Ilbeg, and requested him with
thirty other good Soldiers to seek there for wo^k also, and to espy if any
advantage might be taken for the surprisal of the City. These also were
entertained by the Governor and Chasis, that awaited with a vigilant eye,
having found that one of the Gates of the City might be s^^^enly taken, found
means to acquaint Amurath therewith, who caused a sufficient number of Turks to
lie in ambush near the City to further the design. Chasis broke the matter to
the Asian Workmen, and gave full instruction what was to be done. According to
appointment, the Christians being at dinner, the Turkish Workmen and Laborers
fell at words amongst themselves, and from words to feigned blows; in which
counterfeit brawl and tumult, they suddenly ran to one of the Gates of the
City, and there laying hands upon the Warders weapons, as if to defend
themselves against their Fellows, suddenly set upon those Warders, being in
number but few, and then at dinner also, and so presently slew them: which
done, they opened the Gate of the City, let in the ambushed Turks, took the
place, and put the chiefest of the Citizens to the Sword.

17. Count Philip of Nassau had by Prince Maurice his advice conferred with a
certain Gentleman of Cambray, The Triump^ of Nassau, p. 11^. Belg. Commonw.
page 292.
called Charles Heranguieres, Captain of a Foot-company, about an enterprise
upon the Castle and Town of Breda, telling him, that diverse Mariners Vassels to
the House of Nassau had offered their service herein, they being accustomed to
carry turff and wood into the Castle, and under that color fit to make some
attempt. Herauguieres having well considered all dangers, resolved with a
certain Fellow called Adrian of Berghen (that was wont to carry Turffs into the
Castle) to undertake the matter, giving order to the Shipper to make ready his
Boat, which was deep and flat, and lay in a Dorpe called Leure, a mile from
Breda, that he might convey seventy men into her. Round about, and on the upper
part of the Boat rows of Turff like Bricks were orderly placed of a good
height. Being thus prepared, they resolved to execute their enterprise on the
25. of February, but the Frost hindered them certain days, not without great
danger of being discovered; for having entered the Boat on Monday the 26. of
February, they remained in it till Thursday morning, not able to go forward or
backward, by reason of the Frost, contrary wind, and want of victuals, which
enforced them in the night to quit the Boat, and to retire to Nordam, On
Thursday the first of March 1590. they at night returned to the Boat, staying
within a quarter of a mile of Breda, and in this manner continued from Friday
till Saturday morning at ten a clock before the Herons Wood near the Castle,
where the Boat went on ground, so as they were enforced to tarry till an high
water. During their abode there, the Boat sprung a leak, through which the
water entered in such abundance, as the Soldiers stood up to the knees in it;
being come into the enclosure of the Castle (which so soon as the Boat entered
was shut after them) the leak miraculously stopped of it self. Whiles they lay
there, a Corporal came to search the Boat, where finding nothing, he went his
way, and strange it was, the Soldiers coughed not, and yet many of them were
so hoarse, it was hard to refrain from it. Among others Matthew Helt
Lieutenant, was so torment^d with the cough, as fearing lest the enterprise
should be discovered thereby, he drew forth his Poignard, intending to have
slain himself. The third of March afternoon at high water the Castles ^^uce was
opened, so as the Boat entered. About evening the Sergeant Major commanded that
Turffs should be distributed to the Courts of Guard; which was done in such
quantity, that the Deck b^^^^ to lie bare, which greatly afflicted them in ^^e
Boat. But the Shipper being a crafty Fellow, perceiving all the Corpse du Guard
were furnished, pretending weariness, gave money to his Mate to go and drink
with the Porters, not meaning to unlade any more till the next day. Night being
come, the Watch set, and all things quiet, about eleven a clock at night,
Herauguieres exhorted his Soldiers to begin their enterprise; the Shipper
plying the Pump to drown the noise his men made in shipping, he marched before
them by the Storehouse toward the Gate which opens into the Town, the
Sentinel asked, Qui va la? but Hera^guieres making no answer, struck him
through the body with an half Pike; whereupon the Alarm was given to those of
the Guard who made resistance. An Ensign hurt Herauguieres in the arm, and was
by him beaten down to the ground, the Enemy was beaten into the middle part of
the Castle, whence they sallied out upon us, but lost thirty six of their men,
and were enforced to retire. The place made good, Herauguieres marched with his
Soldiers to another Corpse du Guard, where sixteen Soldiers made resistance,
and were all slain. This done, and a signal given, Count Hoenlo came to the
Castle with the Princes Vanguard, soon after Prince Maurice himself with Horse
and Foot, so that the Town was yielded, the Soldiers only to depart with their
lives; the Burgomasters redeemed themselves from spoil with 97074 Florins. Thus
the Town and Castle of Breda was taken with the loss only of one man, who fell
into the water, and was drowned: it was taken March 4. 1590.

18. Cimon understanding that the Persian Navy lay about Cyprus, Diod. Sicul.
Biblioth. l. 11. page 256.
he set s^il toward them, and with 250 Ships he boldly gave Battle to 340, the
Victory inclined to the Athenians, 100 Ships were taken, some sunk, and the
rest got into Cyprus, the Soldiers fled all out of them, and leaving them
without Guards, those also fell into the hands of the Athenians. Cimon not
content with this glorious Victory, set forth with his whole Navy against the
Land-army of the Persians also, which lay upon the Banks of the River Eurybas;
he caused all the Persian Ships he had taken to sail foremost, and those to be
all stuffed with the valiantest of his Soldiery, with Persian Tyaras, and
other the like habits upon them. The Persians on Land, deceived with the figure
of their Ships, and the habit of their friends, and not knowing of any
Landforces of the Greeks near them, took them for their own Fleet but lately
parted from them, and now returned. When night came Cimon unshipped his men,
breaks in upon the Camp of the Persians, filling all places with tumult and
slaughter; the Persians in this confusion fled to the Ships, and were there cut
off, not being able to discern against whom they fought. When a great carnage
was made, and that the gross of the Army was scattered here and there, Cimon
thought of his retreat to his Ships, which he had beforehand taken care of; for
he had ordered his Soldiers to repair forthwith to that place, where they
should behold a burning Torch advanced in the air: he gave the sign, and the
Soldiers ceased their plunder, and returned safe into their Ships; so that
Cimon obtained two noble Victories in one day by Sea and Land.

19. Amilcar was sent by the Carthaginians against the Greeks that lived in
Sicily with 300000 Foot, Diod. Sicul. Biblioth. l. 11. page 236.
2000 long Ships, besides those that were for burden, and such as were
appointed for the carriage of Tributes, the number of which was 3000. Thus
appointed, Amilcur laid siege to Himera, to the relief of which came Gelo the
Syracusan with 50000 Foot and 5000 Horse. Being come, he bethought himself how
to destroy all the Forces of the Enemy without endangering himself, which his
design, an accidental thing did much further; for whereas he had determined to
fire all Amilcars Ships, it was also told him, That such a day Amilcar did
solemnly sacrifice to Neptune; also a Prisoner was taken, who told him, That
Amilcar had given order to them of Selynuntis to send him a number of Horsemen
well appointed to be with him upon the same day. Gelo therefore sent out his
Horsemen that way, and having ordered they should all night cross the Country,
in the mornings first light they should, as if Selynuntians, come to the Camp,
where as soon as received, they should kill Amilcar as he sacrificed, and then
carry fire from the Altars amongst all the Ships: he had also ordered a
Watchman to give himself notice of all this that had passed: his Horsemen had
performed all as he required it; and having also received the sign agreed upon,
he with his whole Army fell in upon the Carthaginian Army at Land, who came out
of their Camp to encounter him; but while they were eagerly fighting, the
flames showed themselves on high from their Vessels, and it was cried in their
Army, that Amilcar was killed, and all their Ships on fire. Dispirited with
this bad news, they were slain on heaps, Gelo would give no quarter, so 150000
of them were slain upon the place, the rest fled to a Fortress, but ready to
dye for thirst, soon yielded themselves.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the secre^ ways of dispatch, and the delivery of Messages by
Letters, Ciphers, and other ways.
SEcrecy and celerity are of special importance for the right conduct and
management of all sorts of affairs; but in military matters they are of that
absolute necessity, that scarce any thing of moment can be effected without
them. Various ways have the Ancients and others invented, whereby they might
convey their intelligences and advice with both these; a taste whereof we have
in the following Examples.

Lithgows Travipar. 5. page 202, 203. Huigen van Linschotens discourse of
Voyages, l. 1. c. 6. p. 16.
1. Aleppo is so called of Alep, which signifies Milk, of which there is great
abundance thereabouts; there are here, also Pigeons brought up after an
incredible manner, who will fly between Babylon and Aleppo (being thirty days
journey distant) in forty eight hours space, carrying Letters and News (which
are fastened about their necks) to Merchants of both Towns, and from one to
another. These are only employed in the time of hasty and needful intendments:
their education to this tractable expedition is admirable, the flights and
arrivals of which I have often seen in the time of my wintering in Aleppo,
which was the second winter after my departure from Christendom.

Sabel. Ex. l. 6. c. 6. p. 340.
2. The City of Ptolemais in Syria was besieged by the French and Venetians, and
it was ready to fall into their hands, when the Soldiers beheld a Pigeon
flying over them, with Letters to the City, who thereupon set up so sudden and
great a shout, that down fell the poor airy Post with her Letter; being read,
it was found that the Sultan had therein sent them word, that he would be with
them with an Army sufficient to raise the Siege, and that they should expect
his arrival in three days. The Christians having learnt this, sent away the
Pigeon with others instead of the former, which were to this purpose: That they
should see to their own safety, for that the Sultan had such other affairs, as
rendered it impossible for him to come in to their succor. These Letters being
received, the City was immediately surrendered, the Sultan performed his promise
upon the third day; but perceiving how matters went, returned to his other
employments.

Herod. l. 5. p. 301. Sabel. exempl. l. 10. c. 6. p. 569. A. Gell. noct. Attic.
l. 17. c. 9. p. 458.
3. Histaeus the Milesian being kept by Darius at Susa, under an honorable
pretense, and despairing of his return home, unless he could find out some way
that he might be sent to Sea; he purposed to send to Aristagoras, who was his
Substitute at Miletum to persuade his Revolt from Darius; but knowing that all
passages were stopped and studiously watched, he took this course: He got a
trusty Servant of his, the hair of whose head he caused to be shaved off, and
then upon his bald pate he wrote his mind to Aristagoras, kept him privately
about him till his hair was somewhat grown, and then bad him haste to
Aristagoras, and bid him cause him to be shaved again, and then upon his head
he should find what his Lord had wrote unto him.

4. Harpagus was a great Friend to Cyrus, Herod. l. 4. p. 203. Justin. hist. l.
1. p. 18. Sabel. exempl. l. 10. c. 6. p. 569.
and had in Media prepared all things in as good forwardness as he could; being
therefore to send his Letters to Cyrus to hasten his Invasion upon that
Country, he thought it the safest way to thrust it into the belly of a Hare, so
by this unsuspected means his Letters went safe to Cyrus in Persia, who came
with an Army, and made himself Master of the Empire of the Medes.

5. The ancient Lacedaemonians when they had a purpose to dissemble and conceal
their Letters, A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 17. c. 9. p. 458. Erasm. Adag. p. 442.
Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 4. p. 156. Plut. in Lysandr. p. 144. Pet. Gregor. de
Repub. l. 16. c. 4. p. 667.
which they sent to their Generals abroad, that the contents of them might not
be understood, though they should be intercepted by the Enemy, they took this
course: They chose two round sticks of the same thickness and length, wrought
and plained after the same manner. One of these was given to their General when
he was about to march; the other was kept at home by the Magistrates. When
occasion of secrecy was, they wond about this stick a long scroll and narrow
only once about, and in such manner as that the sides of each round should lie
close together, then wrote they their Letters upon the transverse junctures of
the scroll from the top to the bottom. This scroll they took off from the
stick, and sent it to the General, who knew well how to fit it to that stick he
kept by him; the unrolling of it did disjoin the Letters, confound and intermix
them in such manner, that although the scroll was taken by the Enemy, they knew
not what to make of it; if it passed safe, their own General could read it at
pleasure. This kind of Letter the Lacedaemonians called Scytale.

6. I have read in the Punick History, A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 17. c. 9. p.
458. Pezel. mellific. tom. 1. p. 59.
that an illustrious person amongst them (whether it was Asdrubal or some
other, I do not now remember) who on this manner used to conceal such Letters
as he sent about matters of secrecy. He took new Tables, which were not yet
covered with wax, and cut out his Letter upon the wood, then (as the manner
was) he drew them over with wax, these Tables, as if nothing was writ upon
them, he sent to such as beforehand he had acquainted with the use of them,
who upon the receipt of them took off the wax, and read the Letter as it was
engraven upon the wood. Demaratus used this way of writing.

7. The way by Pigeons to give intelligence afar off with wonderful celerity,
Sandys on Ovid. Metam. l. 12. p. 229.
is this: They take them when they sit on their nests, transporting them in
open cages, and return them with Letters bound about their legs like Jesses,
who will never give rest to their wings, until they come to their young ones.
So Taurosthenes by a Pigeon, stained with Purple, gave notice of his Victory at
the Olympic Games the self same day to his Father in Aegina.

8. There are Books of Epistles from C. Caesar to C. Oppius and B. Cornelius,
A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 17. c. 9. p. 457. Sueton. l. 1. c. 56. p. 36. Pet.
Gregor. de Repub. l. 16. c. 4. p. 667.
who had the care of his affairs in his absence. In these Epistles of his in
certain places there are found single Letters without being made up into
syllables, which a man would think were placed there to no purpose; for no
words can be framed out of these Letters. But there had been a secret agreement
betwixt them of changing the situation of the Letters, and that in writing they
should appear one thing, but in reading they should signify another. Probus
the Grammarian has composed a Book with curiosity enough, concerning the
occult signification of the Letters in the Epistles of Casar. Suetonius says
of Caesar, That any thing of privacy he wrote by notes or characters, that is,
by so transposing the order of the Letters, that no word could be made out of
them. But if any man would understand and imitate this practice of his, he must
know, that he changed the fourth Letter of the Alphabet, that is, he set down
D. for A. and so throughout all the rest of the Letters.

Pezel. me^^fic. tom. 1. p. 73.
9. Artabasus, an illustrious person amongst the Persians, after the departure
of Xerxes, was left with Mardonius in Europe, he had taken Olynthus, and was
now set down before Potidaeu, here there was intelligence betwixt him and
Timoxenus, an eminent person in the Town, and the device they had to convey
Letters to each other was this: They wrapped their Letters round about the
upper part of an Arrow, and then glued on the feathers of the Arrow upon it,
and so their Arrows were to be shot to such a place, as they had mutually
agreed upon. They had done this for some time, till they were casually
betrayed; for Artabasus directing his Arrow to the wonted place, it chanced to
light upon the shoulder of a Potidaean that was accidentally there; diverse, as
the manner is, ran to the wounded man, and plucking out the Arrow, perceived
the Letters that were fastened to it, and carried them to the Magistrates of the
City, whereby it came to pass, that Timoxenus the Traitor was discovered.

Pezel. mellifi^. tom. 1. p. 409.
10. Antigonus who had wintered in Mesopotamia, came to Babylon, and having
there joined with Seleucus and Python, he determined to march out against
Eumenes, who had fortified the River Tygris from its Fountain to the Sea, and
indeed all the Country bordering upon him, in which manner he waited the
approach of the Enemy; but for as much as the Guard of a place of so great a
length required a multitude of Soldiers, Eumenes had obtained of Peucestes,
that he should send for some thousands of Archers for him out of Persia; which
was done in such manner, that most of the Persians, though distant thirty days
journey, did yet hear of the Edict of Peucestes upon that very day it was given
out, and that through the artificial placing of their Watches: for whereas
Persia is interrupted with Valleys, and full both of many and high Rocks, the
strongest voices that were to be found amongst the Inhabitants, were placed
upon the tops of these; so that the command being heard in diverse places at
once, they transmitted it immediately from one to the other, till such time as
it was gotten to the utmost end of Peucestes his Satrapy.

Sueton. l. 2. c. 88. p. 109. Pet. Gregor. de Repub. l. 16. c. 4. p. 667.
11. Octavianus Caesar when he wrote to his friends any thing of secrecy or
matter of importance, his manner was to take the next Letter in the Alphabet to
that which should have been made use of, says Dio Cassius; and Suetonius
says, that as often as he wrote by notes or characters, he used B. for A. and C.
for B. and in the same order all the rest as they follow, only instead of X. he
used a double AA.

Pet. Gregor. de Repub. l. 16. c. 4. p. 666.
12. The Roman Spies that were sent into Persia, at their return brought a long
piece of Parchment that had Letters wrote upon it within, which was given them
by Procopius; but for the better concealment of it, it was put into sheath or
scabbard of a Sword, and so carried safe without suspicion.

Pet. Gregor. de Repub. l. 16. c. 4. p. 666.
13. Diognetus the Milesian was in love with Polycrita of Naxos, and for love of
her he betrayed his Countrymen and their Counsels; for when they had besieged
Naxos, he sent a young Girl with a Letter to Polycles Brother of Polycrita, and
Governor of the City, wherein he showed the way how he might entrap and slay
the Milesians. This Letter was writ upon a Plate of Lead rouled up, and baked
in a Loaf of Bread, and so conveyed to the Governor.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the sad condition and deplorable distresses of some men by
Sea and Land.
THE Mountain Vesuvius near Naples is reported to be so fertile, Cause. Treat.
of pass. p. 38.
that it yields to those who manure it a million of gold in revenue; but when
it comes to cast forth its all-inflamed entrails, it oftentimes makes as much
havoc in one day alone, as it brings profit in many years: Montaign. Essays l.
1. c. 18. p. 29.
And it seems (says Montaigne) that Fortune does sometimes so narrowly watch
the last days of our life, as in one moment to overthrow what for many years
she has been erecting, repaying our past and light pleasures with weighty
miseries, and forcing us to cry out with Laberius, Nimirum hac die una plus
vixi, I have certainly lived too long, at least by this one unhappy day.

1. Horrible was that Tragedy which the Western Indies beheld in the persons of
seven English men, Nich. Tulpii observe. med. l. 1. c. 43. p. 81.
the relation of it take as follows: The forementioned seven being in St.
Christophers Island, had prepared themselves for a Voyage of one night, and had
taken with them provisions for no longer a time, but a tempest intercepted
their return, and carried them so far off into the Sea, that they could not
return home in less than seventeen days: in which time they were so sparing of
their one nights provision, that they made it serve them to the fifth day; that
past, they must wrestle with mere famine, which was so much the more grievous
to them, in regard the Sun was extreme hot, that dried up their parched
throats, exhaling the saltness from the troubled Sea. They had now little hope
of retriving themselves from their intricate error, and were therefore forced
(O cruel necessity!) to cast lots amongst themselves to see whose flesh and
blood should satisfy the hunger and thirst of the rest. The lot fell upon him
who first gave the counsel, who was not only unaffrighted at his hard fortune,
but encouraged the rest who had a kind of horror as to what they went about;
he told them, that Fortune was a favourer of the bold, that there was no
possibility of escape, unless they immediately staid their flying life by
humane flesh; that for his part he was well content, and that he thought
himself happy he could serve his friends when he was dead. With such words as
these he so persuaded them, that one (drawn out by lot also) cut his throat, of
whose carcass (I tremble to relate it) each of them was so desirous of a piece,
that it could scarce be divided so quickly. They fell to the flesh with eager
teeth, and sucked out the blood into their thirty stomachs. One only was found
amongst them, who being nearly related to the dead person, resolved to endure
all things rather than to pollute himself with the blood of his friend: but the
next day his famine drove him into such a madness, that he threw himself
overboard into the Sea. His Associates would not suffer so delicate a repast
(as his carcass) to be so unseasonably snatched from them. But his madness had
already so vitiated his blood and the flesh all about the veins, that in the
whole body there was scarce any thing found fit to eat, save only his bowels.
At last it pleased God to show them mercy in this their wandering and distress,
and brought their small Ship to the Isle of St. Martin, in which they were
kindly received by the Dutch Garrison, and sent back to the rest of their
friends, where scarce had they set foot on the shore, but they were accused of
Murder; but inevitable necessity pleading in their behalf, they were set free
by the Magistrate.

Mandelslo's Travels, l. 3. p. 280, 281.
2. In the year 1616. one Pickman, a Fleming, coming from Dronthem in Norway
with a Vessel laden with Boards, was overtaken with a calm, during which the
current of the Sea carried him upon a Rock or little Island toward the
extremities of Scotland; to avoid a wrack he commanded some of his men to go
into the Shallop, and to tow off the Ship: coming near the Island they saw
something which was more like a Ghost than a living person, a body stark naked,
black and hairy, a meagre and deformed countenance, and hollow and distorted
eyes, he fell on his knees, and joining his hands together, begged relief from
them, which raised such compassion in them, that they took him into the Boat:
there was in all the Island nor grass, nor tree, nor ought whence a man could
derive either subsistence or shelter besides the ruins of a Boat, wherewith he
had made a kind of Hut to lie down under. The man gave this relation of
himself, That he was an English man, and that a year ago, or near it, being to
pass in the ordinary passage Boat from England to Dublin; they were taken by a
French Pirate, who being forced by a tempest that immediately rose to let go
the passage Boat, left us to the mercy of the waves, which carried us into the
main Sea, and at last split the Boat upon the Rock where you took me in. I
escaped with one more into the Island, where we endured the greatest
extremities. Of some of the boards of our Boat we made the Hut you saw, we took
some Sea-mews which dried in the wind and Sun we eat raw. In the crevices of
the Rocks on the Seaside we found some eggs, and thus we had as much as we
served to keep us from starving. But our thirst was most insupportable; for
having no fresh water but what fell from the sky, and was left in certain pits
which time had worn in the Rocks, we could not have it at all seasons, for the
Rock lying low, was washed over with the waves of the Sea. We lived in this
condition six weeks, comforting one another in our common misfortune, till
being left alone, it began to grow insupportable to me. For one day awaking in
the morning, and missing my Comrade, I fell into such despair, that I had
thoughts of casting my self headlong into the Sea. I know not what became of
him, whether despair forced him to that extremity, or that looking for eggs on
the steepy side of the Rock, he might fall into the Sea. I lost with my Comrade
the knife wherewith we killed Sea-dogs, and the Mews upon which we lived: so
that not able to kill any more, I was reduced to this extremity to get out of
one of the boards of my Hut a great nail, which I made shift so to sharpen upon
the Rock, that it served me for a knife. The same necessity put me upon another
invention, which kept me last winter, during which I endured the greatest
misery imaginable. For finding the Rock and my Hut so covered with snow, that
it was impossible for me to get any thing abroad, I put out a little stick at
the crevice of my Hut, and baiting it with a little Sea-dogs fat, I by that
means got some Sea-mews, which I took with my hand from under the snow, and so
I made a shift to keep my self from starving; I lived in this condition and
solitude above eleven months, and was resolved to end my days in it when God
sent you hither to deliver me out of the greatest misery that ever man was in.
The Seaman having ended his discourse, the Master of the Ship treated him so
well, that within a few days he was quite another creature, he set him ashore
at Derry in Ireland, and saw him afterward at Dublin, where such as had heard
what had happened to him, gave him wherewithal to return into England.

3. Richard Clark of Weymouth in Dorsetshire was a knowing Pilot, Hackluits
English Voyages, vol. 3. page 163. Full. Worth. p. 282. in Devonshire.
and Master of the Ship called the Delight, which An. 1583. went with Sir
Humphrey Gilbert for the discovery of Norembege. It happened, that without any
neglect or default of his, the Ship struck on ground, and was cast away on
Thursday, August 29. in the same year. Of them that escaped shipwreck, sixteen
got into a small Boat of a Tun and half, which had but one Oar to work withal;
they were seventy leagues from land, and the weather so foul, that it was not
possible for a Ship to brook half a course of sail. The Boat being
over-burdened, one of them, Mr. Hedley, made a motion to cast lots, that those
four which drew the shortest should be cast over board, provided if one lot
fell on the Master, he notwithstanding should be preserved, in whom all their
safety was concerned. The Master disavowed the acceptance of any such
privilege, replying, they would live or dye together. On the fifth day Mr.
Hedley (who first motioned lot-drawing) and another dyed, whereby their Boat
was somewhat alighted. Five days and nights together they saw the Sun and Stars
but once, so that they only kept up their Boat with their single Oar, as the
Sea did drive it. They continued four days without sustenance, save what the
weeds (which swam in the Sea) and salt water did afford. On the seventh day
about eleven of clock they had sight of, and about three they came on the South
part of Newfound land. All the time of their being at Sea the wind kept
continually South; if it had shifted to any other point, they had never come to
land, but it turned to the North within half an hour of their arrival. Being
all come to shore, they kneeled down, and gave God praise for their miraculous
deliverance. There they remained three days and nights, having there plentiful
repast upon Berries and wild Pease. After five days rowing along the shore,
they happened on a Spanish Ship of St. John de Luz, which courteously brought
them home to Biscay. Here the Visitors of the inquisition came aboard the Ship,
put them on examination, but by the Masters favor and some general answers
they escaped for the present. But fearing a second search, they shifted for
themselves, and going twelve miles by night got into France, and so safely
arrived in England. Thus as the Psalmist speaks, They which go down into the
Sea, and occupy in great waters, these men see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep.

4. It is a story altogether lamentable, Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2. c. 3^.
p. 343.
and a calamity full of astonishment, which happened about the Cape de bona
Speranza to Manuel de Sousa, Cause. holy Court, tom. 2. max. 14. p. 411, 412.
surnamed Sepulveda, Governor of the Citadel of Diu for the King of Portugal,
and it is this: Having long enjoyed great happiness and honor in the
East-Indie, he came to Cochin, not far from Calecut, where he embarked himself
in January 1553. in a great Ship laden with riches, and about six hundred
persons with him, amongst which was his wife, his children, servants, slaves,
and a great retinue, to come into Portugal; but the Ship being cast away upon
the Coasts of Aethiopia, and the Sea having swallowed up well near all that was
within it, except the persons who saved themselves ashore half naked, destitute
of all hope to recover their loss again; having relied upon the words of the
crafty and cruel Barbarians, they fell at last (so many of them as remained yet
alive, for the most part were now dead, what with fear and famine, and other
miseries) into the hands of a petty King of Aethiop, who caused them to be
disarmed, stripped, and left stark naked upon the sand, deprived of all succor
and all necessary things. They that were left alive, half dead with hunger and
thirst, overwhelmed with fear and shame, casting their eyes to the ground, as
persons transformed into so many Images. Elionor the wife of Manuel, Daughter
to Garcias Sala, Viceroy of Portugal in the Indies, an honorable Lady, seeing
the Barbarians busied about stripping and snatching away the clothes from her
Husband, her self, her children, and the rest, forgetting her dignity and her
sex, fell upon these Filchers with her fists, provoking them to kill her, but
in vain. They left her stark naked upon the shore: the chaste Lady seeing her
self in such a case, and the daylight ministering to her more sorrow and
horror than death it self, she covered her self with sand, casting abroad her
hair confusedly upon her shoulders and over her breasts that were naked and
bare: which done, she commanded the men that survived of her miserable company,
to be gone and shift for themselves as they could, her self remaining in that
case without stirring or speaking a word. If at some times she beheld her dear
children, the tears would flow from her eyes like rivers, and she sent out deep
sighs and sobs. As for Manuel the Father and Husband, such an extreme sadness
and grief had closed up his heart and his mouth, that he held his eyes a long
time fixed upon the earth, as one struck with a Thunderbolt; yet at last the
care of his little ones upon the sudden awakened him, he goes to a Forest there
hard by to seek for some food, at his return he finds the youngest of his
children departed, and his Wife who had been three days without eating any
thing, overborn with sorrow and tears. His child he buries with his own hand;
the next day he returns to seek again, and coming back, he finds his Wife and
his other Son dead, and some Women-servants lamenting with great cries over
their poor bodies. Having put by the Servants, he lays himself down upon the
ground, and stretching out the right hand of his deceased Wife, he leaned a
while with his head upon the same, and then with the help of the said Servants,
he hides his wife and child within the sand, without uttering a word. That
done, he returns into the Forest, where it is conjectured he was devoured by
wild beasts, for there was never any news heard of him afterward. About
sixscore of these miserable Travelers having escaped diverse incredible
difficulties, did at last recover a Port of the Sea, where they found commodity
to pass into Portugal, who there declared the particulars of their history as
it is here set down.

5. An. Dom. 1630. May the first, Clarks mir. c. 105. page 512, 513, etc. Stows
Annals, page 1017.
the Muscovy Merchants of London sent a Ship called the Salutation for
Greenland, which arrived there in safety June 11. following, together with two
other Ships, all which were commanded by Captain William Goodler. The Captains
Ship stayed at Bellsound, that of the Salutation at the Foreland; the Captain
having killed store of Whales, sent away for the Salutation, which in the way
meeting with cross winds, the Master set eight of his men ashore to kill some
Venison. These men taking with them a brace of Dogs, a Fire-lock, two Lances,
and a Tinder-box, went on shore, killed fourteen: night coming on, and they
weary, they went to rest, intending next day to end their hunting, and so
return to their Ship. But the next day proved foggy, and much Ice being betwixt
the shore and the Ship, the Ship was fain to stand so far off into the Sea,
that they lost sight of her; they hunted on to Green-harbour, and there they
found that the Ship was departed, they made all speed possible with their
Shallop to Bellsound to their Captain, and for fear of delay heaved their
Venison overboard; but having no Compass, they wandered up and down so long
till the Ships were departed. This filled them with fear and astonishment,
knowing that neither Christian nor Heathen had ever inhabited those desolate
Climates; that none could be hired for what reward soever by the Merchants to
winter there; and that nine able men left behind formerly, as they now were,
dyed all miserably upon the place, becoming the prey of Bears and Foxes. All
which made them like men amazed to stand looking one upon another: that which
increased their horror, was their want of all necessary provision, no clothes
for shift or warmth, no food, no house for shelter. After a space, knowing the
danger of delay in extremity, they advised upon the most likely course for
their preservation; they resolved to go to Green-harbour to hunt for Venison,
where in their going, stay, and return they killed nineteen Deers and four
Bears, with which they laded their Shallop, and finding another old Shallop
left there, they laded it with the graves or fritters of Whales that had been
boiled there that year, and took their way to Bellsound to their Tent, where
they intended to winter; in the way of their passage they had like to have lost
all their provision, but saved it by a desperate remedy, running into the
high-wrought Sea, and by force drawing their Shallops to the shore. This done,
they arrived at Bellsound, where they took out their provision, considered
their Tent, and with part of the materials of a lesser Tent thereby, pieces of
old Casks, and old Shallops left there (as it is usual) they made up their House
and Cabbins where they lodged two and two, and with mavelous industry
provided themselves with firewood and shelter against the extremity of the
cold, their beds were the Deer skins dried. Having thus fitted every thing in
the best manner they could, on the 12. Sept. looking out into the sound, they
espied two Sea-horses lying asleep on a piece of Ice; whereupon hasting to them
with an old Harping-iron, they slew first the old one, and then the young,
flead, roasted, and eat them: not long after they killed another; but nights
and cold increasing upon them, and they viewing their provision, found it too
small by half: whereupon they agreed to one reasonable meal a day, and to fast
Wednesdays and Fridays, except from the Greaves of the Whale, a loathsome meat;
at which diet they continued three months. To repair their clothes and shoes
they made thread of rope-yarn, and needles of Whale-bone. October. 10. the nights
being grown very long, all the Sea was frozen over, and then grief and fear
began to work upon them; but they prayed to God for strength and patience in
their miseries, and by his assistance cheared up themselves to use the best
means for their preservation: then for the preservation of their Venison, and
lengthning of their firing, they thought best to roast every day half a Deer,
and to stow it in Hogsheads, which accordingly they did, leaving so much raw as
would serve to roast every Sabbath day a quarter. Here another trial of their
patience befell them: Their Whale-fritters that had been drenched with
Seawater, and lay close together, was grown moldy and spoiled; and again
surveying their Bear and Venison, they found it would not afford them five
meals a week, so they were fain to cut off one meal more, and for three months
after they fed four days upon the mouldly Whale-fritters each week, and the
other three on Bear and Venison. Besides the want of meat they began to want
light, no Sun appearing from the 14. of October to the 3. of February, but the
Moon shined as here in England; against this having found a sheet of Lead in
the Coopers Tent, with rope-yarn and oil they made a Lamp, which they kept
continually burning to their great comfort. In the beginning of January, as the
days began to lengthen, the cold began to strengthen to that extremity, that it
raised blisters on their flesh; and if at any time they touched iron, it would
stick to their fingers like bird-lime; if they went out to fetch water, it
would so pinch them, that they were sore, as if they had been beaten: for
drink, from the 10. of January to the 20. of May they had none but Snow-water,
which they melted with hot Irons. The last of January they found their food
would last but six weeks longer; but they had recourse to God for a supply: and
looking out one bright day, they saw a great she-Bear with her Cub coming
toward the Tent, her they slew with their Lances, the Cub escaping, they drew
her into the Tent, and this Bear served them twenty days. In March the days so
lengthned, that the Fowl and Foxes came abroad, of which Foxes by Traps they
catched fifty, and sixty Fowl as big as Pigeons, and they had killed seven more
Bears; so that with two or three meals a day their strength was much increased.
In May the first the weather grew warm, so that they went out to seek
provision. In this month there came two Ships of Hull into the Sound, who
knowing some men had been left there the year before, and being desirous to
know whether they were dead or alive, the Master manned a Shallop to go as near
the shore as they could, and so over the Ice to the Tent. When these men came
near the Tent, they haled them with the usual word of the Sea, crying Hey, to
which one of them in the Tent answered again Ho: which sudden answer almost
amazed them all; but perceiving them to be the very men left there, with joyful
hearts they embraced one another. The men left their Tent, and went with them
to their Ship, where they stayed till the London Fleet came, which was three
days after. They went aboard the Admiral where Captain William Goodler was, who
made them very welcome, gave them apparel to the value of twenty pounds, and
after fourteen days refreshment they grew all perfectly well. Thus they
continued in the Fleet till the 20. of August when they set sail, and at last
came safe into the River of Thames, and the Muscovy Merchants dealt very well
by them. The names of these eight men were William Fakely Gunner, Edward Pelham
Gunners Mate that wrote this story, John Wise and Robert Goodfellow Seamen,
Thomas Airs Whale-cutter, Henry Bett Cooper, John Dawes and Richard Kellet
Land-men.

6. The Admiral St. Iago set out of Portugal An. 1585. with a good speedy wind;
I. Huighen Linschotens Voyages, l. 1. c. 92. p. 146, 147.
she came sailing betwixt the Island of St. Laurence and the firm Land that
runs by the Coast to Mosambique, in which passage there are certain shallows
called the India, which are of Coral very sharp, black, white, and green, and
very dangerous. The Pilot took the height of the Sun, and made his account they
were past the shallows; and though many of the Sailors, and others in the Ship
were against him, yet he commanded the Master to make all the sail he could to
Mosambique without any let or stay. They sailed in that sort till midnight when
they fell upon the shallows, being of clear white Coral, and so sharp, that
with the force of wind and water that drove the Ship upon them, the Ship was
cut in two pieces, as if it had been sawn asunder; so that the Keel and two
Oarlops lay still upon the ground, and the upper part being driven somewhat
further, at the last stuck fast, the Mast being also broken; whereupon there
was a mighty and lamentable cry, for there were no less than five hundred
persons in the Ship. The Admiral Fernando de Mendoza, the Master, the Pilot,
and ten or twelve more presently entered into the small Boat, defending it with
their drawn Swords, that no more should enter, saying, they would go see if
there were any dry place in the shallows whereon they might work to make a Boat
of the pieces of the broken Ship, therein to sail unto the shore, and so to
save their lives, which put them that were behind in some small comfort. But
when they had rowed about and found no dry place, they durst not return again
to the Ship, lest their Boat should have been over-laden: wherefore they rowed
toward Land, having about twelve Boxes of Marmalade, with a Pipe of Wine, and
some Biskets, which in haste they had thrown into the Boat; after they had been
seventeen days upon the Sea, they fell with great hunger, thirst, and labor on
the Land where they saved themselves. The rest that stayed in the Ship, seeing
the Boat came not again, it may well be thought in what case they were. At last
one side of the upper part of the Ship, between both the upper Oarlops where
the great Boat lay; burst out, and the Boat being half burst, began to come
forth; but because there was small hope, no man laid hand thereon, but every
man sat looking one upon another. At last an Italian called Cyprian Grimoaldo
rose up, and taking courage unto him, said, Why are we thus abashed? let us
seek to help our selves, and see (if there be any remedy) to save our lives.
Wherewith presently he leapt into the Boat with an Instrument in his hand, and
began to make it clean, whereat others took courage, so that there leapt at the
least fourscore and ten persons into it, and many hung by the hands upon the
Boat swimming after it; but because they should not sink the Boat, they were
forced to cut off the fingers, hands, arms of such as held thereon, and let
them fall into the Sea, and many they threw overboard. Which done, they set
forward, committing themselves to God, with the greatest and pitifullest noise
that ever was heard by those left behind in the Ship. In this manner having
rowed certain days, and having but small store of victuals, for that there were
so many in the Boat, that it was ready to sink, and because it was very leaky,
and not likely to hold out, they agreed to choose a Captain whom they would
obey, and do as he commanded. They chose a Gentleman, a Mesticho of India, who
presently commanded to throw some of them overboard, as the lot directed;
amongst these was a Carpenter, who not long before had helped to dress the Boat,
who desired them to give him a piece of Marmalade and a cup of Wine; and when
they had done, he willingly suffered himself to be thrown overboard into the
Sea, and so was drowned. In this misery and distress they were twenty days at
Sea, and in the end got to Land, where they found the Admiral, and those that
were in the other Boat. But having escaped this danger, those (in both Boats)
fell into another; for they had no sooner set foot on shore, but they were by
the Moors, called Caffares, spoiled of all their clothes, so that they left not
so much as a single rag upon any of their bodies. In the end having endured
great hunger, and misery, and other mischiefs, they came unto a place where
they found a Factor of the Captains of Sofala and Mosambique, who holp them as
he might, and made means to send them unto Mosambique, and from thence they
went into India, where I knew many of them; some of them dyed before they got
to Mosambique. Of those that stayed in the Ship some took Boards, Deals, and
other pieces of Wood, and bound them together (which the Portugals call
Iangada's) every man what he could catch, all hoping to save their lives; but
of all those there came but two men safe on shore: so that of all the five
hundred, there were about sixty persons that saved themselves, all the rest*
amongst whom were thirty Women, some Jesuits and Friars, were all drowned in
the Ship; and all this through the wilfulness and pride of a Pilot.

Okely his Ebenezer. 8. p. 43, 44, etc. ad finem.
7. Great were the dangers and wonderful the deliverances of William Okeley and
his Company, the relation of which from his own Book I have thus contracted:
An. Dom. 1639. we took ship at Gravesend in the Mary of London, Mr. Boarder
Master, bound for the Isle of Providence in the West Indies; five weeks we lay
in the Downs waiting for a wind, and then we set sail, and came to Anchor near
the Isle of Wight; but by this time all our Beer in the Ship stunk, and we were
forced to throw it overboard, and to take in Vinegar to mix with Water for our
Voyage. The next Lords day we set sail again, and coming between the Island and
the main Land, we stuck fast in the sands, but the Tide coming in, heaved us
off. The sixth day after our setting sail from the Isle of Wight, we discovered
three Turks Men of War, who chased us, and at break of day boarded and took us;
having kept us close Prisoners at Sea, at the end of five or six weeks they
brought us to Algiers, where I was sold for a Slave the first Market day to a
Patron who told me, I must allow him two Dollars a month, and live ashore where
I would, and get it where I could, though I knew not where to levy the least
Mite of it. Wandering up and down, I light of an English man in his little shop
that traded with T^baco and a few other things, his Partner I became with a
little money I had reserved, and a small modicum my Patron had allowed me for
my stock: here I got money, and hired a Cellar where I laid up some other of my
Goods; when weary of my slavery, I formed a design for my liberty, and
communicated it to John Anthony Carpenter, William Adams Bricklayer, John Iephs
Seaman, John a Carpenter, and two others, men of able bodies, and useful in
the intended project, which was to contrive the model of a Boat, which being
formed in parcels, and afterward put together, might be the means of our
escape. They approved the proposal, and in my Cellar we began our work, we
provided first a piece of Timber of twelve foot long to make the Ke^l; but
because it was impossible to convey a piece of Timber of that length out of the
City, but it must be seen and suspected, we therefore cut it in two pieces, and
fitted it for jointing just in the middle, then we provided ribs; after which
to make the Boat water-tite, because boards would require much hammering, and
that noise was like to betray us, we bought as much strong Canvas as would
cover our Boat twice over: upon the unequal of the Carine we provided also as
much Pitch, Tar, and Tallow as would serve to make it a kind of Tarpawling
Cere-cloth to swaddle the naked body of our Infant-boat; of two Pipestaves
sawed across from corner to corner we made two things to serve for Oars; and
for our provision we had a little bread and two Leatherbottles full of fresh
water; we also remembered to buy as much Canvas as would serve for a Sail. We
carried out all these in parts and parcels, fitted them together in the Valley,
about half a mile from the Sea, whither four of our company carried the Boat on
their shoulders, and the rest followed them. At the Seaside we stripped, put our
clothes into the Boat, and carried it and them as far into the Sea as we could
wade, and then all seven got into the Sea; but finding she was over-laden, two
of the seven were content to stay on shore; having bid them farewell, we lanched
out, June* 30. 1644. the Bill of Lading was John Anthony, William Adams, John
Iephs, John -- Carpenter and William Okeley; four of us wrought continually at
the Oars, the fifth was to free the Boat of that water, which by degrees leaked
through our Canvas: our bread was soon spoiled with soaking in the salt water,
our fresh water stunk of the tanned skins and Owze, yet we complained not.
Three days with good husbandry our bread lasted us, but then pale famine stared
us in the face, water indeed we might have, but it must be salt out of the Sea,
or that which had been strained through our own bodies, and that we chose of
the two; but we must not have that after a while, unless we would accept of the
other first: and the misery was, these did not assuage our thirst, but increase
it. The Wind too for some time was full against us; but God rebuked it, and
made it our friend: a second inconvenience was, that our labor was without
intermission; and a third, the extremity of the heat by day, the season raging
hot the beginning of July, and we wanted fresh water to cool the heat, our
labor made it insupportable to our bodies, and our little hope made it as
grievous to our souls: one help we had, a poor one, he that emptied the Boat
threw the water on the bodies of the rest to cool them; but our bodies thus
scorched and cooled rose up in blisters all over. Great pain we felt, great
dangers we were in, great miseries we endured, great wants we were under, and
had nothing little but hope, food, and strength. If any ask by what directions
we steered our course to Mayork, whither we designed, for the day a Pocket-dial
supplied the place of the Compass, by night the Stars when they appeared, and
when not, we guessed our way by the motions of the Clouds. Four days and nights
were we in this woeful plight, on the fifth all hope that we should be saved was
perished; so that we left off our labor, because we had no strength left, only
emptied the Boat of water, when God sent us some relief; as we lay hulling up
and down, we discovered a Tortoise not far from us asleep in the Sea; had Drake
discovered the Spanish Fleet, he could not have more rejoiced: we took up our
Oars, silently rowed to our prey, took it into the Boat with great triumph; we
cut off her head, and let her bleed into a pot, we drank the blood, eat the
liver, and sucked the flesh. It wonderfully refreshed our spirits, and we
picked up some crumbs of hope. About noon we thought we discovered Land, it is
impossible to express the joy of our raised souls at this apprehension: we
wrought hard, and after further labor were fully satisfied that it was Land,
and it was Mayork, we kept within sight of it all day. The sixth of July, and
about ten a clock at night we came under the Island, and crept as near the
shore as we could and durst, till we found a convenient place where we might
thrust in our Weather-beaten Boat. When we were come to Land, we were not
insensible of our deliverance; but though we had escaped the Sea, we might die
at Land, we had no food since we eat the liver, and drank the blood of the
Tortoise; therefore John Anthony and my self were sent out to scout abroad for
fresh water, because we spoke some Spanish; we came to a Watchtower of the
Spaniards, spoke to him on the Watch, told him our condition, earnestly begged
some fresh water and some bread; he threw us down an old moldy Cake; but so
long as it was a Cake, hunger did not consider its mouldiness; then he directed
us to fresh water which was hard by. We stood not telling stories, we remembered
our brethren left with our Boat, and observing the Sentinels directions, came
to a Well where there was a Pot with strings to draw with, we drank a little
water, and eat a bit of our Cake; but the passage was so disused, that we had
much ado to force our throats to relieve our clamorous stomachs. We return to
our Boat, acquaint them with the good success of our Embassy, and all prepare
to make to the Well: so tying our Boat as fast as we could to the shore, we
left her to mercy. Now we are at the Well it has water, and we have something
to draw, but God must give us a throat to swallow; for William Adams attempting
to drink, after many essays was not able to swallow it, but still the water
returned; so that he sunk down to the ground, faintly saying, I am a dead man;
but after much striving he took a little, so refreshed with our Cake and water,
we lay down by the Well-side till the morning: when it was clear day, we again
went to the Watchman, entreating him to direct us the ready way to the next
House or Town where we might find relief, he civilly pointed us to one about
two miles off, and long it was e're our blistered feet could overcome the
tediousness of that little way. When we came the honest Farmer, moved with our
relation, sent us out bread and water, and Olives, and seeing us thankful
Beggars enlarged his civility to us, called us into his house, and gave us good
warm Bean-pottage, which seemed to me the most pleasant food that I ever eat in
my life. Thence we advanced to the City of Mayork, about ten miles from that
place, that night we lay by a Well-side, and in the morning we entered the
Suburbs; the Viceroy was informed of us, and we were commanded to appear before
him: who after he had examined us, and heard our story, ordered we should be
maintained at his own cost, till we could have passage to our own Country; but
our English Ships seldom trading thither, we petitioned the Viceroy for passage
in the King of Spains Galleys, which were in the Road bound for Alicant, which
he graciously granted us. After some other troubles we met with contrary winds,
and it was five weeks e're we could reach the Downs, where we arrived in Sept.
1644. The Commander of the Ship was Captain Smith of Redriff. Mr. Thomas
Sanders my Wife's Brother being in Mayork not long after we came thence, saw
our Boat hung up for a Monument upon the side of the great Church there. Mr.
Robert Hales was there 1671. and assures me, that he saw the naked ribs and
skeleton of it then hanging in the same place.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Conscience, the force and effects of it in some men.
LVcretius boasts of his Master Epicurus, that when the minds of men were sunk
under the burden of Religion, this was he who first did dare to assert the
freedom and liberty of Mankind, and that so successfully, that Religion began
to be despised, and man was made equal with Heaven it self: but if we believe
Cotta in Tully, he tells us, That Epicurus was so far from finding his beloved
ease and pleasure in his sentiments, that never was Schoolboy more afraid of a
Rod, than he was of the thought of a God and Death: Nec quenquam vidi (says
he) qui magis ed timeret, quae timenda esse negaret, No man more feared the
things which he taught should be despised than himself. For whatever there is
in the Air, there is certainly an Elastical power in the Conscience, that will
bear it self up, notwithstanding all the weight that is laid upon it. Men may
silence for a while the voice of their own Conscience, but it will find a time
to speak so loud, as to be heard in despite of its owner.

1. There were two Senators in great reputation at Rome, Wierus de Praestig.
Daem. c. 15. p. 43. Lavat. de spectr. pars 1. c. 3. p. 14. Cael. Rhod. Antiq.
lect. l. 27. c. 22. page Burtons Melanch. ^ar 3.. 4. p. 627.
Symmachus, and Boethius, who had married the Daughter of the former.
Theodoricus, King of the Goths, sent for them to him, then at Ticinum, where he
long kept them in prison, because they had opposed something which he was
desirous should be decreed in the Senate (possibly the allowance of Churches to
the Arrians) Having thus deprived them of liberty, he exposed their Goods to
open sale, and at last caused them both to be slain. Not long after their
death, there was set before him on the Table at supper the head of a great
fish, there did he think he saw the head of Symmachus with a horrible yawning,
and threatening him with flaming eyes. Immediately therefore he was sore
affrighted, and trembling, caused himself to be carried to his bed. Elpidius
the Physician was sent for, but could not help him: he told his friends about
him of that terrible resemblance of Symmachus which he had seen, and deploring
his wicked cruelty, he soon after gave up the ghost.

Clarks mir. c. 29. page 103.
2. A certain Jesuit in Lancashire, as he was walking by the way lost his Glove,
and one that came after him finding it, followed him apace, with an intention
to restore it; but he fearing the worst, and being pursued with a guilty
conscience ran away, and hastily leaping over an hedge, fell into a Marl-pit on
the other side, in which he was drowned.

Senecae. Erasm. Apotheg. l. 9. Felth. Resolv. cent. 1. c. 25. p. 44.
3. A Pythagorean Philosopher had bought a pair of Shoes of a Cobbler; but having
no m^ney at present, desired him to stay for it till the morrow, and then he
would return and pay him. He came with his money according to agreement, and
then heard that the Cobbler was newly dead; he therefore, without mention of the
money, departed with a secret joy for the unexpected gain he had made that day;
but finding that his conscience would not suffer him to be quiet, he takes the
money, goes to the Cobblers shop, and casting in the money there: Go thy ways,
said he; for though he is dead to all the World besides, yet he is alive to me.

F^ll. Worth. page 223. London.
4. Thomas Curson Armourer dwelt without Bishopsgate London: it happened that a
Stage Player borrowed a rusty Musket of him, that had long lain leiger in his
shop; now though his part was comical, he therewith acted an unexpected
Tragedy, killing one of the standers by, the Gun casually going off on the
Stage, which he suspected not to be charged. Oh the difference in tenderness of
conscience! This poor Armourer was highly afflicted therewith, though done
against his will, yea without his knowledge, in his absence, by another, out of
mere chance. Hereupon he resolved to give all his Estate to pious uses: no
sooner had he gotten a round sum, but presently he posted with it in his Apron
to the Court of Aldermen, and was in pain till by their direction he had settled
it for the relief of the poor in his own and other Parishes, and he disposed of
some hundred pounds accordingly, as I was credibly informed by the then
Churchwardens of the said Parish.

Fitzh. of Relig. and Policy, part 1. c. 34. p. 403. Stows Annals, p. 460.
5. The wretched estate of King Richard the Third, after he had murdered his
Nephews, is thus described by Sir Thomas Moor: I have heard, says he, by
credible report of such as were secret with his Chamberers, that after this his
abominable deed done, he never had quiet in his mind, he never thought himself
sure. When he went abroad his eyes whirled about, his body was privily fenced,
his hand ever on his Dagger, his countenance and manner like one that was ever
ready to strike; he took no rest a nights, lay long waking and musing, sore
wearied with care and watching, rather slumbred than slept, troubled with
fearful dreams, suddenly sometimes started up, leapt out of his bed, ran about
the Chamber, so was his restless heart tossed and tumbled with the tedious
impression and stormy remembrance of his horrid and abominable deeds.

Dinoth. m^morab. c. 8. p. 583, 584.
6. Attalus King of Pergamus had slain his Mother and also Beronice his Wife,
for which he was so pursued with divine vengeance, that he never after had a
joyful day: laying aside his Royal Ornaments, he put upon him a poor and sordid
garment; he suffered the hair of his head and beard to grow, he came not to
show himself in public to the people; there was nothing of mirth or feasting
at his Court, nor did he discover any signs of a found man. To conclude, he was
so terrified with his conscience, that yielding up the government of his
Kingdom, he betook himself to the employment of a Gardener, digging up the
earth, and sowing seeds therein; from this he passed to the Art of graving in
Brass, and therein he spent his time. At last he purposed to make a Sepulcher
for his Mother, and being intent upon the work, through the vehement heat of
the Sun, he contracted a Fever, and upon the seventh day following he dyed.

7. After the Emperor Nero had slain his Mother Agrippina by the ministry of
Anicetus, Sueton l. 6. c. 34. page 254. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 133.
although he was confirmed by the gratulations of the Soldiers and loud
applauses of the Senate; yet neither presently, nor ever after was he able to
bear the conscience of so great a guilt. He often confessed, that he was vexed
with the Apparition of his Mother, with the scourges of Furies and burning
Torches: insomuch that by certain horrid Sacrifices by the Magicians he
attempted to call up, and to appease her Ghost. Being once present at the
Eleusinian Solemnities and Ceremonies, wherein the Crier, as the manner was,
proclaimed, That all impious and wicked persons should depart, he had not the
confidence and assurance to remain. In the day time he was terrified with the
noise of Trumpets that sounded an Alarm, and certain tumultuous noises that
were heard in the place where the bones of his Mother rested. For this reason
he quitted that quarter; and when notwithstanding he was pursued with the same
noises, he passed from one place to another, never thinking himself secure from
the contrivances of his enemies.

8. Kenneth the Third, Bp. Spotsw. Hist. Chapter os Scotl. l. 2. p. 27.
King of Scotland, was a wise and valiant Prince, and might have been reckoned
amongst the best, if he had not stained his Fame with the Murder of Prince
Malcolme his Nephew, whom he made away by poison (the ambitious desire he had
to settle the Succession in his own Posterity put him upon this villainy) which
he carried in so covert a manner, as no man did so much as suspect him thereof
(the opinion of his integrity being universally great) but as wicked facts can
never be assured, though possibly they may be concealed; his mind was never
after that time quiet, the conscience of the crime vexing him day and night
with continual fears. In the end (whether it was so in effect, or that his
perplexed mind did form to it self such an imagination) whilst he lay a^leep,
he heard a voice speaking to him on this sort: Do thou think that the death
of Malcolme, that innocent Prince, treacherously murdered by thee, is hidden
from me, or that thou shall pass any longer unpunished? No, there is a Plot
laid for thy life, which thou shall not escape; and whereas thou did think to
transmit the Crown firm and stable to thy Posterity, thou shall leave the
Kingdom broken, distracted, and full of trouble. The King awaked with the
voice, was stricken with great terror, and calling Moveanus his Confessor,
laid open to him the grief of his mind, who advised him to bestow alms on the
poor, visit the Graves of holy men, have the Clergy in greater regard than he
accustomed, and perform such other external satisfactions as were used in those
times. The King did thus: and as he was visiting the Grave of Palladius, he was
invited to lodge in the Castle of Fettercarne, where he was treacherously
murdered.

9. Constans the Emperor being offended with his Brother-in-law, Zuing.
Theatr. vol. l. 2. p. 133. Cedren.
by the persuasion of Paulus the Patriarch of Constantinople made him a Deacon,
and afterward caused him to be slain, although he had received the sacred
Mysteries at his hands. After which oftentimes in his sleep he seemed to see
his dead Brother in the habit of a Deacon, reaching out to him a cup filled
with blood, and saying to him, Drink, Brother. The unhappy Emperor was so
afflicted and terrified with the apprehensions of this, and the stings of his
own conscience, that he determined to retire into Sicily, where also he dyed.

Zuing Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 136.
10. Hermannus, Bishop of Prague, when he lay a dying (with a heavy sigh)
complained, that he had spent a far greater part of his life in the Courts of
Princes, than in the House of the Lord; that he might have given check unto
sundry vices, but that with his Courtier-like life he had rather administered a
further license to sin, while after the manner of others, he endeavored to
seem to Princes rather pleasant than severe: and this fault (above others) he
earnestly desired that God Almighty of his mercy would forgive him.

Burtons Melanch. part 3.. 4. page 630.
11. Memorable is the Example of Francis Spira, an Advocate of Padua, An. 1543.
who having sinned in despite of conscience, fell into that trouble and despair,
that by no endeavors of learned men he could be comforted: he felt, as he
said, the pains of Hell in his Soul. Frismelica, Bullovat, and other excellent
Physicians could neither make him eat, drink, nor sleep, no persuasions could
ease him. Never pleaded any man so well for, as this man did against himself;
and so he desperately died.

Ios. Jewish Wars, l. 7. c. 31. p. 763.
12. Catullus, Governor of Libya, had fraudulenty and unjustly put to death
3000 Jews, and confiscated their Goods: now though neither Vespasian or Titus
said any thing to him, yet not long after he fell into a grievous disease, and
was cruelly tormented not only in body, but also in mind: For he was greatly
terrified, and still imagined to see the Ghosts of them whom he had so unjustly
slain, ready to kill him, so that he cried out, and not able to contain
himself, leapt out of his bed, as though he had been tortured with torments and
fire. And this disease daily increasing, his guts and bowels rotting and
issuing out of him, at last he died.

CHAP. XL. Of Banishment, and the sorts and manner of it amongst the Ancients,
etc.
THE Nature of man is to rush headily and at all adventures upon that which is
forbidden him, and to account himself as a sufferer wherein he is any way
infringed of his liberty, although it be really to his advantage to be so
restrained. This was perhaps the reason why

Sueton. l. 5. c. 23. p. 217.
1. The Emperor Claudius banished some persons after a new kind of fashion; for
he commanded that they should not stir beyond the compass of three miles from
the City of Rome wherein they lived.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 6. p. 795.
2. Damon, the Master of Pericles, was banished by the Athenians, by a Decree of
ten years Exile, for this only reason: That he was thought to have a wisdom and
prudence beyond what was common to others.

Cael. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 25. p. 184.
3. The Ephesians banished Hermodorus the Philosopher for this only cause, That
he had the reputation of an honest man, and lived in great modesty and
frugality* the Tenor of their Decree was, That no man should amongst them be a
good husband, or excel others, in case he did, he should be forced to depart.

4. Ostracisme was a form of Banishment for ten years; Heyl. Cosm. p. 588. Pet.
Gregor. de Repub. l. 13. c. 12. p. 550.
so called, because the name of the party banished was writ on an Oyster-shell:
it was used toward such, who either began to grow too popular or potent
amongst the men of service. This device allowable in a Democracy, where the
overmuch powerfulness of one might hazard the liberty of all, was exercised in
spite oftener than desert. It was frequent amongst the Athenians, and by virtue
hereof Aristides, Alcibiades, Nicias, and diverse others were commanded to leave
their Country for ten years.

5. Petalism was a form of Banishment for five years, Heyl. Cosm. p. 85. Pet
Gregor. de Repub. l. 13. c. 12. p. 550.
from the Greek word (...), which signifies a leaf: it was practiced chiefly in
the City of Syracuse upon such of their Citizens as grew too popular and
potent: the manner was to write his name in an Olive-leaf, and that once put
into his hand, without more ado he was thereby expelled the City and its
Territories for five years; yet could not this device so well secure them in
the possession of their so much desired freedom, but that this City fell oftener
into the power of Tyrants, than any one City in the World.

6. The Carthaginians banished Hanno, Mariana, p. 46. Ch^tw. hist. collect.
cent. 5. p. 128.
a most worthy person, who had done them great services, not for any fault, but
that he was of greater wisdom and industry than the State of a free City might
well bear, and because he was the first man that tamed a Lion; for they judged
it not meet to commit the liberty of the City to him who had tamed the
fierceness of savage beasts.

7. John Chrysostom, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 13. l. 3. page 2863.
Bishop of Constantinople, was twice banished by the procurement of Eudoxia the
Wife of Arcadius the Emperor; and the chief, if not the only ground of this
her severity against him, was because she was not able to bear the free
reprehensions and reproofs of that holy man.

8. In the Island of Seriphus, Alex. l. 3. c. 1. p. 119.
as also amongst some of those Nations that live about the Mountain Caucasus,
no man is put to death, how great soever the crime is that he has committed;
but the severest of all punishments with them is, to interdict a man any longer
abode in his Country, and to dispose of him into banishment, where he is to
continue all the rest of his life.

9. Rutilius was so little concerned with his banishment, Petrarch. In dialog.
dialog. 67. page 209.
that when he was recalled by one whose order it was death to disobey, yet he
despised his return, and chose rather to continue in his Exile: perhaps it was
for this reason, That he would not seem in any kind to oppose the Senate, or
even the unjust Laws of his Country; or whether it was that he would be no more
in such condition, wherein it should be in the power of others to banish him
his Country as often as they pleased.

CHAP. XLI. Of the wise Speeches, Sayings, and Replys of several persons.
A Wise man has ever been a scarce commodity in all places and times, whole
Greece it self could boast no more of this sort than only seven; and a Cato and
a Laelius was almost the total sum of the Roman Inventory in this kind. Being
so few, they must needs be the harder to be found; and seeing that the wisest
men are commonly the least speakers, hereupon it is that there is almost as
great a penury of their Sayings, as of their persons, and yet of these too
every man will determine according to his own pleasure: a liberty which the
Reader shall not be refused to make use of in these few that follow.

Lord R^my his civil Considerat. c. 68. p. 176.
1. Cardinal Pompeius Colomne being employed, used such means (that Cardinal
Franciotto Vrsin being put by) Clement mounted to the Sea Apostolic. After
Clement was Pope, Pompeius obtained of him many graces and honors; but
assuring himself that nothing could be denied him, he was one time importunate
in some such matter, which the Pope judged to be unjust and inconsistent with
his Holiness honor to grant; so that Pompey failing of his expectation herein,
began to reproach the Pope, and to tell him, that it was by his means that he
was Pope. His Holiness answered him, that it was true, and prayed him to suffer
him to be Pope, and that he would not be it himself; for in proceeding in this
manner, he took that from him which he had given him.

Cambd. Remains, page 2^8.
2. Robert Winchelsea, Archbishop of Canterbury, was banished by King Edward the
First; but afterward restored again by him, and all the Rents that had been
sequestered during his absence repaid him, whereby he became the richest
Archbishop that had been in that Seat before. Wherefore often recording his
troubles, he would say: Adversity never hurts, where no iniquity overruleth.

Cambd. R^mains, page 212.
3. The Emperor Frederick the Third, when he heard of the death of a great
Noble man of Austria, who lived ninety three years most wickedly in fleshly
pleasures, and yet never once in all that time afflicted with grief or
sickness, he said This proves that which Divines teach, That after death there
is some place where we receive reward or punishment, when we see often in this
World neither the just rewarded, nor the wicked punished.

F^lgos. (...) l. 7. c. 2. p. 897.
4. When Theopompus was King of Sparta, one was saying in his presence, That it
now went well with their City, because their Kings had learned how to govern.
The King prudently replied, That it rather came to pass, because their people
had learned to obey; showing thereby, that popular Cities are most injurious to
themselves by their factious disobedience; which while they are addicted to,
they are not easily well governed by the best of Magistrates.

^ulgos. exempl. l. 7. c. 2. p. 898.
5. Dionysius the Elder reproving his Son, for that he had forcibly violated the
chastity of the Wife of one of the Citizens of Syracuse, asked him amongst
other things, If he had ever heard, that any such thing had been done by him?
No, said the Son, but that was because you had not a King to your Father:
Neither, said Dionysius, will you ever have a King to your Son, unless you give
over such pranks as these. The event proved that he then said the truth: For
when this young man succeeded his Father, he was expelled the Kingdom of
Syracuse for his evil behavior and manner of life.

6. Aristippus having lost all his Goods by shipwreck, Fulgos. exempl. l. 7. c.
2. p. 899.
was cast naked upon the shore of Rhodes, where yet by reason of his Learning,
he found such estimation, that neither he nor his Companions were suffered to
want any thing that was convenient for them. When therefore some of his company
were about to return home, they asked him, if he would command them any thing:
Yes, said he, tell my relations from me, that I advise them to procure such
riches for their children, as a tempest at Sea has no power over; showing
thereby how precious Learning is, which no storms of adverse Fortune can take
away from us.

7. Cineas was in great honor with Pyrrhus King of Epirus, Fulgos. exempl. l.
7. c. 2. p. 902. Plut. in Pyrrho, page 398.
and he made use of him in all his weighty affairs, professing to have won more
Cities by his Eloquence than by his own Arms. He perceiving Pyrrhus earnestly
bent upon his Expedition into Italy, one time when he was at leisure and alone,
Cineas spoke thus to him: The Romans, O Pyrrhus, have the reputation of a
warlike people, and command diverse Nations that are so, and if God shall grant
us to overcome them, what fruit shall we have of the Victory? That Is a plain
thing, said Pyrrhus; for then, says he, no City will presume to oppose us, and
we shall speedily be Masters of all Italy, the greatness, virtue, and riches of
which is well known to you. Cineas was silent a while, and then having, said
he, made Italy our own, what shall we then do? Sicily, said he, is near,
reaching out its hand to us, a rich and populous Island, and easy to be taken.
It is probable, said Cineas; but having subdued Sicily, will that put an end to
the War? If God, said Pyrrhus, give us this success, these will be but the
Praeludia to greater matters; for who can refrain from Africa and Carthage,
which will soon be at our beck? And these overcome, you will easily grant, that
none of those that now provoke us, will be able to resist us. That Is true, said
Cineas; for it is easy to believe, that with such Forces we may recover
Macedon, and give the Law to all Greece. But being thus become Lords of all,
what then? Pyrrhus smiling, Then, said he, good man, we will live at our ease,
and enjoy our selves in compotations and mutual discourses. When Cineas had
brought him thus far: And what hinders, said he, but that we may now do all
these, seeing they are in our power, without the expense of so much sweat and
blood, and such infinite calamities as we go about to bring upon our selves and
others?

8. He was a wise man that said: Lloyd. State Worthi^s, p. 207.
Delay has undone many for the other World; Haste has undone more for this.
Time well managed saves all in both.

9. A Christian Matron being imprisoned by the Persecutors, Camer. oper.
subcisiv. cent. 3. c. 31. p. 108.
fell in labor there, the extremity of her pains enforced her to cry out
extremely; whereupon the Keeper of the Prison reproached her, and said he, If
you are not able to bear the pains of childbirth to day, what will you do to
morrow when you come to burn in the flames? Today, said she, I suffer as a
miserable Woman under those sorrows that are laid upon my sex for sin; but to
morrow I shall suffer as a Christian for the Faith of Christ.

Fair warnings to the World, page 23, 24.
10. Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary of State in Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
toward the latter end of his life wrote to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, to
this purpose: We have lived enough to our Country, to our Fortunes, and to our
Sovereign, it is high time we begin to live to our selves and to our God. In
the multitude of affairs that passed through our hands, there must be some
miscarriages for which a whole Kingdom cannot make our peace. And being
observed to be more melancholy than usual, some Court-humorists were sent to
divert him: Ah! said Sir Francis, while we laugh, all things are serious about
us; God is serious when he preserves us, and has patience toward us, Christ
is serious when he dies for us, the Holy Ghost is serious when he striveth
with us, the holy Scripture is serious when it is read before us, Sacraments
are serious when they are administered to us, the whole Creation is serious in
serving God and us; they are serious in Hell and Heaven, and shall a man that
has one foot in the grave jest and laugh?

Clarks mir. c. 92. p. 441.
11. When the Donatists upbraided St. Augustine with the impiety and impurity of
his former life: Look, said he, how much they blame my fault, so much I praise
and commend my Physician.

Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2. page 191, 192.
12. When Solon beheld one of his friends almost overcome with grief, he led him
up into an high Tower, and bad him thence look down upon all the houses before
and round about him; which when he saw he did: Now, said he, think with your
self what various causes of grief have heretofore been under these roofs, are
now, and will hereafter be, and thereupon desist to lament those things as
proper to your self, which are in common to all mankind. He used also to say,
That if every man was to bring his evils and calamities to be cast with those
of others upon one heap, it would fall out, that every man would rather carry
home his own troubles again, than be contented to take up his part out of the
whole heap.

Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2. page 194.
13. The Samnites had shut up the Roman Legions at the Furcae Caudinae in such
manner, as they had them all at their disposal; whereupon they sent their
General to Her^nnius Pontius, a man in great reputation for wisdom, to know of
him what they should do with them, who advised to send them all away without
the least injury. The next day they sent again, who then advised to cut all
their throats; they neglected both, by both using them ill, and suffering them
to depart, whereby it came to pass, that the Romans were incensed to ruin
them, as after they did.

Ibid.
14. Mago was sent from Anibal to the Carthaginian Senate, to relate the
greatness of the Victory at Cannae; and as an instance thereof, he showed three
bushels of gold Rings that were taken from the fingers of the dead Roman
Gentlemen. Hanno a wise Senator demanded, If upon this success any of the Roman
Allies were revolted to Anibal? Mago said, No. Then, said he to the Senate, my
advice is, That you send forthwith Ambassadors to treat of Peace. Had this
prudent saying of his been followed, Carthage had not been overcome in the
second Punick War, nor utterly overthrown in the third, as it was.

CHAP. XLII. Of such persons as were the first Leaders in diverse things.
AS there is a time for every thing that is under the Sun, so there is no Art,
or Practice, no Custom, or Calling, but had its first Introducer, and some one
or other from whom it did commence. Now although many of these things are so
mean, and the Authors of them so obscure, that one would think they scarcely
could merit a Memorial; yet I find that Historians of all sorts have taken
pleasure to touch upon them as they passed: some of which I have thus collected.

1. Sp. Carvilius was the first in Rome that sent his Wife a bill of
divorcement by reason of her barrenness; Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1. page* 34. Alex.
ab Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 8. p. 196.
who though he seemed to be moved thereunto for a tolerable reason, yet went
not without reprehension; for it was believed, that even the desire of children
should give place to matrimonial fidelity. Before this time there was no
Divorce betwixt man and wife to the five hundred and twentieth year from the
first building of the City.

2. Pope Gregory the First was the first, Sabel. ex empl. l. 6. c. 2. p. 314.
who in his Pontifical Writings entitled himself thus, Servus servorum Dei,
The Servant of the Lords servants, which has since been followed by most of the
rest, though they mean nothing less.

3. Paulus born at Thebes in Egypt was the first, Sabel. exempl. l. 6. c. 2. p.
314.
who betaking himself to the solitudes of the Desert, was called an Eremite,
wherein he has since been imitated (...) and Paphnuphius, and multitudes of
(...) have found out the like places of retirement from the cares and troubles
of humane life.

4. Valerius Poplicola was the first in Rome, Sabel. ibid. l. 6. c. 2. page 316.
who made a funeral Oration in praise of the deceased, who thus in public
celebrated the memory of Quiritius Iunius his Colleague in the Consulship: and
Pericles was the first in Athens, who thus also publicly extolled those who
were slain in the Peloponnesian War in defense of their Country.

5. Cleon the Athenian Orator, Id. Ibid. p. 317.
was a vehement person in his time. It was he who first used vociferation in
his Pleadings, striking his hands upon his thighs, and passing from one side of
the Pulpit to another; which after him obtained much amongst the Romans and
others.

6. Scipio Africanus was the first Senator in Rome, Id. Ibid. p. 317.
who continually went with his beard shaven, whereas the whole City before used
to nourish their beards. This custom of his was the most studiously followed by
Caesar Augustus, the best of all the Roman Princes.

7. Lucius Papyrius was the first that set up a Sun-dial in Rome, Id. ibid. p.
317. Plin. not. hist. l. 7. c. 10. p. 191.
which being only of use when the Sun shined, an hourly measure of time was
found out by Scipio Nasica; whereas before that time the Romans knew no
distinction in the time of the day.

8. Hanno, Id. ibid. p. 318. Plin. hist. l. 8. c. 16. p. 203.
a noble Carthaginian, was the first of all men, who showed a Lion subdued unto
tameness by himself, for which he was publicly sentenced, most men believing
that the public liberty was ill entrusted in such hands, and to so dexterous a
Wit, to which so great fierceness had given place.

Sabel. l. 6. c. 3. p. 325.
9. Marcus Tullius Cicero was the first amongst the Romans, who by Decree of the
Senate had the Title of Pater Patriae given him, that is to say, Father of his
Country. Augustus Caesar received it afterward as his most honorable Title;
and the successive Emperors sought it with more ambition, than they had merit
to obtain it.

Plin. hist. l. 8. c. 26. p. 210.
10. M. Scaurus was the first, who in his Plays and Sights set forth by him in
his Edileship, made show of an Hippotamus or Seahorse, and Crocodiles swimming
in a Pool or Lake made only for the time of that Solemnity.

Plin. hist. l. 8. c. 16. p. 202.
11. Q. Scaevola, the Son of Publius, was the first in Rome, who in his curule
Edileship exhibited a fight and combat of many Lions together for to show the
people pastime and pleasure.

Plin. l. 8. c. 16. p. 203.
12. The first that yoked Lions, and made them draw in a Chariot, was Marcus
Antonius; it was in the time of the Civil War, after the Battle in the plains
of Pharsalia; in this manner rode he with Cytheris the Curtesan, a common
Actress in Inderludes upon the Stage.

Pit. Gregor. de Repub. l. 3. c. 3.. 8. p. 48.
13. Minyas the King of that People who take their name from him, was the
richest of all his Predecessors, the first that imposed a Tribute upon Goods,
and the first that erected a Treasury wherein to repose the Revenues of his
Crown.

Full. Worth. p. 137, 138.
14. John Matthew Mercer, born at Sherington in Buckinghamshire, was Lord Major
of London, An. 1490. he was the first Bachelor that ever was chosen in that
Office, yea it was above an hundred and twenty years before he was seconded by
a single person succeeding him in that place, viz. Sir John Leman Lord Major
1616.

Plin. not. hist. l. 10. c. 50. p. 297.
15. The first that devised an Aviary was M. Lenius Strabo, a Gentleman of Rome,
who made such a one at Brindis, wherein he had enclosed birds of all kinds, and
by his example we began to keep birds and fowl within narrow (...) and Cages as
prisoners, to which Nature had allowed the wide Air to fly in at Liberty.

Plin. l. 9. c. 17. p. 246.
16. The Scarus was a fish that bore the price and praise of all others in Rome,
the first that brought these out of the Carpathian Sea, and stored our Seas
betwixt Ostia and Campania with them, was Optatus, first the Slave, and then
the Freedman, lastly the Admiral of a Fleet under Claudius the Emperor.

Plin. l. 9. c. 55. p. 267.
17. Caius Hirtius was the man by himself that before all others devised a Pond
to keep Lampreys in; he it was that in the Triumph of Julius Caesar lent him
six hundred Lampreys to furnish out his Feasts, which he kept at that time, but
on this condition to have the same weight and tale repaid him.

Cael. Antiq. sect. l. 6. c. 6. p. 235.
18. The best way of making Oils, and also of making Honey, was first found out
and practiced by one Aristaeus.

Patric. de Regno, l. 1. tit. 9. p. 42.
19. The first that built a house in Athens is said to be Doxius the Son of
Caelius, who taking his pattern from the Nests of the Swallows, began the way
of making houses with clay, whereas before men dwelt in Caves and Caverns of
the Earth, and I know not what kind of miserable Huts.

Patric. de Regno, l. 1. tit. 7. page 104. Cael. Rhod. l. 13. c. 29. p. 613.
20. Semiramis was the first that caused the castration of young Males, and
howsoever by this her unworthy act, she has possibly lost as much reputation as
she has praise for the building of Babylon; yet she is followed in this
corrupted example of hers by most of the Eastern Monarchs, who delight to be
attended by Eunuchs.

P^in. not. hist. l. 36. c. ^. p. 574.
21. About Syrene in the Province of Thebais, there is a Marble (thereupon
called Syrenites) which was also called Pyrrhopoecilos: of this stone in times
past the Kings of Egypt made certain Radii or Obelisks, and consecrated them to
the Sun, whom they honored as a God. They were inchased or had engraven upon
them certain Characters and Figures, which were the Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
and therein a great part of their best Learning was contained. These Obelisks
were stones cut out of the solid Rock, framed of one entire stone, and of that
mighty bigness, that some of them have been on every side four cubits square,
and in length an hundred foot, as was that of Ramises once King of Egypt. The
first that ever began to erect these Obelisks, was Mitres King of Egypt, who
held his Court in the Royal City of Heliopolis, the City of the Sun, and it is
said he was admonished in a Vision or Dream so to do.

22. Edward the Third our most renowned King to his eternal memory, Burtons
Melanch. in epist. to Reader, p. 54.
brought clothing first into this Island, transporting some Families of
Artificers from Gaunt hither.

23. Cneius Manlius (as Livy relates) Anno ab Vrb. condit. 567. was the first
brought out of Asia to Rome singing Wenches, Live. l. 9. c. 1. p. Burtons
Melanch. part 2.. 2. page 278.
Players, Jesters, Mimicks, and all kind of Music to their Feasts.

24. Cael. Rhod. l. 14. c. 4. p. 634.
Solon (as writes Philemon) was the first who brought up Whores for the young
men of Athens, that the fervor of their lust being exonerated that way, they
might desist from the enterprise and thoughts of any thing that is worse.

25. Antigonus King of Iudaea was beheaded by the command of M. Antonius the
Triumvir, Plut. in Antonio, page 932.
and this was the first King that ever was put to death in this manner.

26. A Cardinal named Os Porci or Swine-snout in the days of Ludovicus Pius the
Emperor, Imperial. hist. p. 538.
was chosen Pope; and because it was a very unseemly name for so high a
Dignity, by a general consent it was changed, and he was called Sergius the
Second. This was the first, and from thence arose the custom of the Popes
altering their names after their Election to the Popedom.

27. Honorius the Fifth Archbishop of Canterbury was the first that divided his
Province into Parishes, Bp. Godwin p. 52.
that so he might appoint particular Ministers to particular Congregations: he
dyed Anno Dom. 653.

28. Cuthbert the Eleventh Archbishop of Canterbury was the first that got
liberty from the Pope of making Cemeteries or Burial places within Towns and
Cities, Bp. Godwin p. 57.
for before within the Walls none were buried.

29. Ralph Lane was the first that brought Tabaco into England in the twenty
eight of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Bak. Chron. p. 529.
and in the year of our Lord 1585.

30. Servius Tullius King of the Romans caused Brass money to be coined, Plin.
not. hist. l. 33. c. 3. p. 462.
and was the first that stamped it; for before his days they used it at Rome
rude, in the mass or lump. The mark he imprinted on his Coin was a Sheep, which
in Latin they call Pecus, and from thence came the word Pecunia, which
signifies money.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the witty Speeches or Replys suddenly made by some persons.
THE vein of wit does not always answer a man's desire, but at some times while
we are writing or speaking, something does casually offer it self unto our
thoughts, which perhaps has more of worth in it, than we are able to compass
with the utmost vehemence of our meditation and study. Facetious men have many
such fortunate hits lighting on the sudden upon that which is more graceful and
pleasant to the hearer, than their more el^borate endeavors would be.

B^rtons Melanch. part 1.. 2. page 111.
1. Poggius the Florentine tells a merry story, condemning the folly and
impertinent business of such, especially mean persons, as spend their time in
hunting and hawking, etc. A Physician of Millain, says he, that cured mad men,
had a pit of water in his house, in which he kept his Patients, some up to the
knees, some to the girdle, some to the chin pro modo insaniae, as they were
more or less affected. One of them by chance that was well recovered stood in
the door, and seeing a Gallant ride by with a Hawk on his fist, well mounted,
with his Spaniels after him, would needs know to what use all this preparation
served? he made answer, To kill certain Fowl; the Patient demanded again, What
his Fowl might be worth, which he killed in a year? he replied five or ten
Crowns; and when he urged him further, what his Dogs, Horse, and Hawks stood
him in? he told him four hundred Crowns: with that the Patient bade him be
gone, as he loved his life and welfare: For (said he) if our Master come and
find thee here, he will put thee into the pit amongst madmen up to the very
chin.

Ch^tw. hist. collect. cent. 1. p. 23.
2. Mr. Bradford said of Popish Prelates magnifying the Church, and contemning
Christ, That they could not mean honestly, that make so much of the Wife, and
so little of the Husband.

Heyw. Hierarch. l. 4. p. 232.
3. One asked a noble Sea-Captain, Why having means sufficient to live upon the
Land, he would yet endanger his person upon the Ocean? He told him, That he had
a natural inclination to it, and therefore nothing could divert him: I pray,
said the other, where dyed your Father? At Sea, said the Captain. And where
your Grandfather? At Sea also, said he. And said the other, Are you not for
that cause afraid to go to Sea? Before I answer you, said the Captain, I pray
tell me, Where dyed your Father? In bed, said he; and where your Grandfather?
In his bed, said he also; and, said the Captain, Are you not afraid for that
cause to go to bed?

Plut. in Them. page 121.
4. A certain Captain that thought he had performed much for his Country in the
Fight with Xerxes, in an insulting manner was comparing his deeds with those of
Themistocles, who thus returned: There was, said he, a contention betwixt a
Holy Day and the day after, the day after boasted of the labors and sweat
which it was spent in, and that what was gained thereby, was expended by those
that kept Holy Day: True, said the Holy Day, but unless I had been, thou had
not been, and so, said he, Had I not been, where had you all been?

Heyl. Cousin. p. 179.
5. The Spaniards sided with the Duke of Mayenne, and the rest of those Rebels
in France which called themselves the holy League; and a French Gentleman being
asked the causes of their Civil Broils, with an excellent allusion he replied,
They were Spania and Mania, seeming by this answer to signify (...) Penury,
and (...) Fury, which are indeed the causes of all intestine tumults; but
covertly therein implying the King of Spain and the Duke of Mayenne.

6. Sir Robert Cateline Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Cambd. Remains,
page 147.
in the first of Queen Elizabeth, had a prejudice against those who wrote their
names with an alias, and took exceptions at one in this respect, saying, That
no honest man had a double name, or came in with an alias. The party asked him,
What exception his Lordship could take at Jesus Christ, alias Jesus of Nazareth?

7. The Goldsmiths of London had a custom once a year to weigh Gold in the
Star Chamber in the presence of the Privy Council and the Kings Attorney. Full.
Worth. p. 201.
This solemn weighing by a word of Art they call the Pixe, and make use of so
exact Scales therein, that the Master of the Company affirmed, that they would
turn with the two hundredth part of a grain: I should be loath, said Attorney
Noy (standing by) that all my actions should be weighed in those Scales.

8. Dr. Andrew Perne Dean of Ely, Full. Worth. p. 257.
was excellent at blunt sharp Jests, and sometimes too tart in true ones: he
chanced to call a Clergyman Fool (who indeed was little better) he replied,
That he would complain thereof to the Bishop of Ely: Do, says the Dean, when
you please, and my Lord Bishop will confirm you.

9. John Iegon D. D. Master of Bennet College in Cambridge, Full. Worth. p.
326.
after made Bishop of Norwich by King James, a most serious man, and grave
Governor, yet withal of a most facetious disposition. Take this instance:
While Master of the College he chanced to punish all the Undergraduates
therein for some general offense, and the penalty was put upon their heads in
the Buttery; and because he disdained to convert the money to any private use,
it was expended in new whiting the Hall of the College; whereupon a Scholar
hung up these Verses on the Screen. Dr. Jegon Bennet College Master
Brake the Scholars head, and gave the walls a plaster.
But the Doctor had not the readiness of his parts any whit impaired by his
age; for perusing the Paper, e^^tempore he subscribed, Knew I but the Wag that
writ these Verses in a bravery,
I would commend him for his wit, but whip him for his knavery.


10. When the Wars in Queen Elizabeth's time were hot betwixt England and Spain,
Heyl. Cosm. p. 765.
there were Commissioners on both sides appointed to treat of Peace. They met
at a Town of the French Kings. And first it was debated in what Tongue the
Negotiation should be handled. A Spaniard thinking to give the English
Commissioners a shrewd guird, proposed the French Tongue as most fit, it being
a Language the Spaniards were well skilled in; and for these Gentlemen of
England, I suppose, says he, that they cannot be ignorant of the Language of
their Fellow Subjects, their Queen is Queen of France as well as of England.
Nay in faith, my Masters, replied Dr. Dale (a civil Lawyer, and one of the
Masters of Requests) the French Tongue is too vulgar for a business of this
secrecy and importance, especially in a French Town, we will therefore rather
treat in Hebrew, the Language of Jerusalem, whereof your Master is King, and I
suppose you are therein as well skilled as we in the French.

H^yw. Hierarch. l. 7. p. 458.
11. The Inhabitants of Tarracon, as a glad presage of prosperous success,
brought tidings to Augustus, how that upon his Altar a young Palmtree was
suddenly sprung up, to whom he made this answer: By this it appears, how often
you burn Incense in our honor.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 39. p. 181.
12. Thomas Aquinas came to Pope Innocent the Third, in whose presence they were
at that time telling a great sum of money: Thou see Thomas, said the Pope,
that the Church need not say, as she did at her beginning, Silver and gold have
I none. Thomas without study replied: You say true, holy Father, nor can the
Church say now, as the ancient Church said to the same Cripple, Arise, walk,
and be whole.

Full. Worth. p. 1^3.
13. There was in the Kings Wardrobe a rich piece of Arras presenting the
Sea Fight in 88. and having the lively Portraictures of the chiefest Commanders
wrought on the borders thereof, on the same token, that a Captain who highly
prized his own service, missing his Picture therein, complained of the injury
to his friend, professing of himself, that he merited a place there as well as
some therein, seeing he was engaged in the middle of the Fight: Be content,
quoth his friend, thou have been an old Pirate, and art reserved for another
Hanging.

Full. worth. p. 67.
14. A great Lord in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, that carried a white Staff in
his hand, as the Badge of his Office, was spoken to by her Majesty to see that
such a man had such a place conferred upon him: Madam, said that Lord, the
disposal of that place was given to me by your Majesty at such time as I
received this Staff. The Queen replied, That she had not so bestowed any thing,
but that she still reserved her self of the Quorum: Of the Quarum, Madam, said
the Earl. At which the Queen somewhat moved, snatched his Staff out of his
hand: And, Sir, said she, before you have this again, you shall understand,
that I am of the Quorum Quarum Quorum; and so kept his Staff for two or three
days, till upon his submission it was restored to him.

Full. Worth. p. 25.
15. Alexander Nequam (or Bad in English) was born at St. Albans, an excellent
Philosopher, Rhetorician, Poet, and a deep Divine, insomuch that he was called
Ingenii Miraculum. His name gave occasion to the Wits of the Age to be merry
with. Nequam had a mind to become a Monk in St. Albans, the Town of his
Nativity, and thus Laconically wrote to the Abbot thereof for leave. Si vis
veniam, sin autem, tu autem.
To whom the Abbot returned, Si bonus sis venias, si Nequam nequaquam.
Another pass of Wit there was (as it is reported) betwixt him and Philip
Repington, Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop sent this Challenge. Et niger and
nequam, cum sis cognomine Nequam,
Nigrior esse potes, nequior esse nequis.
Both black and bad, whilst Bad the name to thee,
Blacker thou may, but worse thou can not be.
To whom Nequam rejoyned, Phi nota foetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus and lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus.
Stinks are branded with a phi, lippus Latin for blear eye,
Phi and lippus bad as either, then Philippus worse together.
Nequam to discompose such conceits for the future, altered the Orthography of
his Name into Neckham. He dyed in the Reign of Henry the Third, An. 1227.

16. The Pope having brought under his power the Marquisate of Ancona, Camer.
oper. subcisiv. cent. 1. cap. 61. p. 978.
sent his Legate to the Venetians, to know of them by what right they
attributed to their Seigniory alone the Customs and other Jurisdictions in the
Adriatic Sea, seeing they could show no Grants or Charters for the same? They
answered him cunningly, That they wondered why any man would require them to
show their Privileges, seeing the Popes had the Original thereof, and kept
them in their Chests as most precious Relics. That it was an easy matter to
find them, if they would look well upon the Donation of Constantine, on the
backside whereof their Privileges were written in great Letters. This answer
is fathered upon Jerome Donatu^, Ambassador of Venice; when Pope Alexander the
Sixth asked him merrily, Of whom the Venetians held those Rights and Customs of
the Sea? he answered him presently, Let your Holiness show me the Charter of
St. Peter's Patrimony, and you shall find on the back thereof a Grant made to
the Venetians of the Adriatic Sea.

17. It was the saying of a merry-conceited Fellow, Heyl. Cosm. p. 137.
That in Christendom there were neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews
enough: and when answer was made, That of all these, there was rather too great a
plenty than any scarcity, he replied, That if there were Scholars enough, so many
would not be double or treble beneficed; if Gentlemen enough, so many Peasants
would not be ranked amongst the Gentry; and if Jews enough, so many Christians
would not profess usury.

18. A certain Roman Knight came to Hadrianus the Emperor to request a favor
of him, Spart. p. 89.
but received a denial. The Knight was old, and had a very gray beard; but a
few days after (having colored his beard and hair black, and put himself into
a more youthful garb) he presented himself again unto the Emperor about the
same business. The Emperor perceiving the fraud: It is, said he, but a few
days since, that I denied it to your Father, and it will not be fair for me now
to grant it to the Son.

19. King Antigonus came to visit Antagoras a learned man, Plut. quaest.
conviv. lib. 4. p. 78. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 160.
whom he found in his Tent busied in the cooking of Congers: Do you think, said
Antigonus, that Homer at such time as he wrote the glorious Actions of
Agamemnon, was boiling of Congers? And do you think, said the other, that
Agamemnon, when he did those Actions, was wont to concern himself, whether any
man in his Camp boiled Congers or not?

20. Raphael Vrbinas, Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 206.
an excellent Painter, was reprehended by two Cardinals, for that he had
represented the faces of St. Peter and St. Paul with an unbecoming and unwonted
redness upon them. He replied, That he had not expressed them in such a
paleness and leanness in their faces as they had contracted (while living) with
their fastings and troubles; but that he had imitated that adventitious redness
which came upon them (now they were amongst the blessed) while they even
blushed at the manners and life of their Successors.

Zuing. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 2. p. 207.
21. Licinius Crassus is said to have loved a Lamprey he kept in a Pond, in such
manner, that when it dyed he wept, and put on Mourning-apparel; whereupon his
Colleague Domitius (being one day in altercation with him) spitefully asked
him, Are not you he who shed so many tears for the death of a Lamprey? The
other as bitterly replied, And are not you he, who have buried three Wives
without shedding so much as one tear?

Full. Worth. p. 6. Wales.
22. I well knew that wealthy man, who being a great improver of ground, was
wont to say, That he would never come into that place which might not be made
better; to which one tartly returned, That it should seem then, that he would
never go to Heaven, for that place was at the best.

Full. Worth. p. 155.
23. I remember when I was at Cambridge, says the same Dr. Fuller, some thirty
years since, there was a flying, though false report, That Pope Urban the
Eighth was coopt up by his Cardinals in the Castle of St. Angelo; whereupon a
waggish Scholar said: Iam verissimum est, Papa non potest errare.

Heyw. Hierarch. l. 7. p. 460.
24. After the Battle of Pharsalia and the flight of Pompey, one Nonnius, a
great Captain, thinking to encourage the Soldiers, bade them be of good
comfort, for there were yet seven Eagles left: That were something, said Cicero
(then present) if we were to fight against Jays.

Full. Worth. p. 223.
25. King James came in progress to the house of Sir -- Pope Knight, when his
Lady was lately delivered of a Daughter, which Babe was presented to King James
with a Paper of Verses in her hand; which because they pleased the King, I hope
they will not displease the Reader.

See, this little Mistress here
Did never sit in Peter's Chair,
Or a triple Crown did wear,
And yet she is a Pope.
No Benefice she ever sold,
Nor did dispense with sins for gold,
She hardly is a sevenight old,
And yet she is a Pope.
No King her feet did ever kiss,
Or had from her worse look than this;
Nor did she ever hope
To saint one with a rope,
And yet she is a Pope.
A female Pope you will say, a second Jone,
No sure, she is Pope Innocent, or none.
CHAP. XLIV. Of Recreations some men have delighted in, or addicted themselves
unto at leisure hours, or that they have been immoderate in the use of.
THE Bow that is always kept bent, will suffer a great abatement in the
strength of it: and so the mind of man would be too much subdued, and humbled,
and wearied, should it be always intent upon the cares and business of life,
without the allowance of something whereby it may divert and recreate it self.
But then as no man uses to make a meal of Sweetmeats; so we must take care,
that we be not excessive and immoderate in the pursuit of those pleasures we
have made choice of: a thing that has been incident to some who were otherwise
Great men.

1. Leo the Tenth, Burtons M^elanch. par 1.. 2. page 111.
that hunting Pope, is much discommended by Iovius in his Life, for his
immoderate desire of hawking and hunting; insomuch that, as he says, he would
sometimes live about Ostia weeks and months together, leave Suitors
unrespected, Bulls and Pardons unsigned, to his own prejudice, and many private
men's loss; and if he had been by chance crossed in his sport, or his Game not
so good, he was so impatient, that he would revile and miscal many times men of
great Worth with most bitter taunts, look so sour, be so angry and waspish, so
grieved and molested, that it is incredible to relate it. But if on the other
side he had had good sport, with unspeakable bounty and munificence he would
reward his fellow Huntsmen, and deny nothing to any Suitors, when he was in
that mood.

2. It is reported of Philip Bonus, Burtons Melanch. part 2.. 2. page 258, 259.
that good Duke of Burgundy, that at the Marriage of Elionora, Sister to the
King of Portugal at Bruges in Flanders, which was solemnized in the deep of
Winter; when as by reason of unseasonable weather he could neither hawk nor
hunt, and was tired with Cards and Dice, the Ladies dancing, and such other
domestic sports, he would in the evening walk disguised all about the Town. It
so fortuned, as he was walking late one night, he found a Country-fellow dead
drunk, snorting on a bulk, he caused his Followers to bring him to his Palace,
and there stripping him of his old Clothes, and attiring him after the
Court-fashion, when he awaked, he and they were all ready to attend upon his
Excellency, and persuading him he was some great Duke, the poor Fellow admiring
how he came there, was served in state all the day long; after supper he saw
them dance, heard Music, and the rest of those Court-pleasures; but late at
night when he was well tippled, and again fast asleep, they put on his old
Robes, and so conveyed him to the place where they first found him. Now the
Fellow had not made them so good sport the day before, as he did when he
returned to himself: all the jest was to see how he looked upon it. In
conclusion, after some little admiration, the poor man told his Friends he had
seen a Vision, constantly believed it, and would not otherwise be persuaded:
and so the Jest ended.

3. Hartabus King of Hircania caught Moles, Plut. in Demet. p. 897. Sabel. Ex.
l. 2. c. 9. p. 110. Causins holy Court, tom. 1. l. 2. p. 44.
Bias King of the Lydians stabbed Frogs, Aeropus King of the Macedonians made
little Tables, Lanthorns or Lamps; and the Kings of Parthia used to sharpen the
points of Arrows and Javelins, and with that dexterity, as not only to delight
themselves, but also to gain the applause of others.

4. That Mahomet, Sabel. exempl. l. 2. c. 9. p. 110.
who subverted the Empire of Greece, used to carve and cut out wooden Spoons,
and even in that time wherein he gave Audience to Ambassadors, he was either
employed that way, or else drew out something with a Pencil upon some little
Tablet that was before him for that purpose.

5. Socrates at leisure hours used to play upon the Harp, Laert. l. 2. p. 41.
and sing to it, saying, It is not absurd to learn that whereof a man is
ignorant: besides he spent some time daily in dancing, supposing that exercise
to conduce much to the health of the body.

Plut. in Demetrio, p. 897. Alex. Genial. dier. l. 3. p. 796.
6. Attalus Philometor made it his recreation to plant venomous and poisonous
herbs, not only Henbane and Hellebore, but Monks-hood, Hemlock, Dory^nium, an
herb wherewith the poison the head of Arrows and Darts. These he sowed and
planted in the Royal Gardens, and he made it a part of his entertainment to
know the Juice, Seeds, and Fruits of these Herbs, and to gather each of them in
its due time.

Plut. in Demetrio, p. 897.
7. Demetrius, who was s^rnamed Poliorcetes, made it his recreation to invent
new Engines for War, and his vulgar exercise was to frame such things, Ships or
otherwise, that both to his Friends and Enemies they seemed to have that
magnificence and beauty, that still they were judged worthy of a Royal hand.

Patrit. de Regno, l. 3. c. 9. p. 194.
8. Alexander the Great, when at liberty from his more weighty affairs, used
often to play at Hand ball with such as he made choice of for his Associates in
that recreation; and though he was exceeding liberal by nature, he was yet more
so at these times, and rarely would he deny any thing to his fellow-Gamesters
when they asked him. Hereupon it was, that Serapion, a modest and witty young
man (when he had diverse times played with him, and yet got nothing of the King,
because he never asked) one time struck the Ball to all on the Kings side, but
never to himself: which Alexander observing, Why, said he, do you strike the
Ball to all the rest, and never to me? Because, replied he, you never ask. The
King apprehended his meaning, and smiling, commanded great gifts to be brought
him; whereat Serapion became more pleasant, and struck the Ball usually to the
King: I perceive, said Alexander, that gifts are more acceptable to them that
ask not, than to those that ask.

Patrit. de Regno, l. 3. ^it. 9. page 194.
9. Julius Caesar, as he resembled Alexander in other things, so also in this:
He played at Ball too, and at such times was so bountiful to those that played
with him, that once he gave 100000 Sesterces to each of them, save only to
Gaecilius, to whom he gave only 50000: What, said Caecilius, do I alone play
but with one hand? Caesar smiling hereat gave order, that he should receive the
same sum with the rest.

S^et. l. 12. c. 3. p. 327. Sabel. exempl. l. 2. c. 9. p. 111.
10. Domitianus the Emperor in the beginning of his Reign, did every day
reserve some hours to himself, wherein he would sit in private and alone; at
which times his whole employment and the exercise wherein he much delighted,
was to catch Flys, and to thrust them through with a sharp Bodkin or Needle: so
that when one asked, If there was any person with Caesar within? Vibius Crispus
not unaptly replied, That there was not so much as a Fly with him.

Patrit. de Regno, l. 3. tit. 10. page 197.
11. Octavius Augustus, after he had obtained that Empire, was noted for this,
That he was overmuch addicted to playing at Dice; and, says Suetonius, he
could never wipe off that report that went of him for it: So that in the
Sicilian War, when he was twice overcome, and had lost both times a good part
of his Ships, an Epigram was made of him, and in every man's mouth, part whereof
was, He plays at Dice daily, that at last he many overcome. Yea when he was
grown old he played and openly; nor only in the month of December, wherein
greater license was commonly taken, but upon other Festival days and their
Eves: and doubted not in his Letters to his Children to boast of his Victories
herein, and the money he had won. He was also delighted with meaner matters;
for he would play with Nuts in the company of little children, the prettiest
for face and most talkative whereof he caused to be found out for him for this
purpose, with which also he used to bathe himself, and to say laughing, That he
swam amongst his little fish.

12. The Game at Chess and Tables were supposed to be invented by Diomedes to
pass away the time with at the Siege of Troy. Patrit. de Regno, l. 3. tit. 12.
page 199.
Mu^ius Scavola, the great Civilian, is said to be much delighted herewith at
his spare time from his studies at Table or Board; for this Game was brought to
Rome by Pompey amongst his Asiatick Spoils, three foot broad, and four foot
long, made up of two precious stones, and all the men of several colors of
precious stones.

13. Diverse great Wits have for their recreation chosen the most barren
subjects, Gaff. curios. c. 2. p. 37. Voss. Instit. orat. l. 3. p. 933.
and delighted to show what they were able to do in matters of greatest
improbability, or where truth lay on the other side. Thus the description of a
War betwixt Frogs and Mice is written by Homer, the commendation of a Tyrant by
Polycrates, the praise of Injustice by Phavorinus, of Nero by Cardan, of an Ass
by Apuleius and Agrippa, of a Fly and of a Parasitical life by Lucian, of Folly
by Erasmus, of a Gnat by Michael Psellus, of Clay by Antonius Majoragius, of a
Goose by Julius Scaliger, of a Shadow by Iam^s Do^^a the Son, of a Louse by
Daniel Heinsius, of an Ox by Libanius, and of a Dog by Sextus Empiricus.

14. Nicholaus the Third, Pride. ^nstit. of his^. interv. 7. 9. p. 129.
a Roman, and Pope of Rome, was so extremely delighted with hunting, that he
enclosed a Warren of Hares on purpose for his Holiness his recreation.

CHAP. XLV. Of such People and Nations as have been scourged and afflicted by
small and contemptible things, or by Beasts, Birds, Insects, and the like.
THE Sea called Sargasso, though four hundred miles from any Land, and so deep,
as no ground is to be found by sounding; (...) abounds with an herb called
Sargasso, like Sampire; so thick, that a Ship, without a strong gale, can
hardly make her way. As this great Sea is impedited by this contemptible weed;
so there is nothing so small and inconsiderable in our eyes, but may be able to
afflict us, even then when we are in the fullness of our sufficiency.

1. Sapores the King of Persia besieged the City of Nisibis; Gault. ^ab. chron.
page 279. Luth. Colloq. mensal. page 245.
but S. James the holy Bishop thereof, by his prayers to God obtained, that
such an infinite number of Gnats came into his Army, as put it into the
greatest disorder: these small creatures flew upon the eyes of their Horses,
and tormented them in such manner, that growing furious, they shook off their
Riders, and the whole Army was hereby so scattered, and brought into con^usion,
that they were enforced to break up their Siege, and to depart.

2. About the year of our Lord 872. came into France such an innumerable
company of Locusts, Gault. tab. chron. page 599.
that the number of them darkened the very light of the Sun: Zuing. Theatr. vol.
3. l. 2. p. 634.
they were of an extraordinary bigness, had a sixfold order of wings, six feet,
and two teeth, the hardness whereof surpassed that of a stone. These eat up
every green thing in all the fields of France. At last by the force of the
winds they were carried into the Sea, and there drowned; after which, by the
agitation of the waves, the dead bodies of them were cast upon the shores, and
from the stench of them (together with the Famine they had made with their
former devouring) there arose so great a Plague, that it is verily thought
every third person in France dyed of it.

Plin. not. hist. l. 8. c. 29. p. 218.
3. Marcus Varro writes, that there was a Town in Spain undermined with Conies,
another likewise in Thessaly by the Mouldwarps. In France the Inhabitants of
one City were driven out, and forced to leave it by Frogs. Also in Africa the
people were compelled by Locusts to void their habitations: and out of Gyaros,
an Island, one of the Cyclades, the Islanders were forced by Rats and Mice to
fly away. Moreover in Italy the City Amyclae was destroyed by Serpents. In
Ethiopia, on this side the Cynomolgi, there is a great Country lies waste and
desert, by reason that it was dispeopled sometimes by Scorpions, and a kind of
Pismires called Solpugae. And if it be true that Theophrastus reports, the
Treriens were chased away by certain Worms called Scolopendres.

Heyl. Cosm. p. 658. Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 2. p. 634.
4. Myas, a principal City in Ionia, situate on an arm of the Sea, assigned by
Artaxerxes with Lampsacus and Magnesia to Themistocles, when banished his own
Country. In aftertimes the water drawing further off the soil, brought forth
such an innumerable multitude of Fleas, that the Inhabitants were ^ain to
forsake the City, and went with their bag and baggage to retire to Miletus,
nothing hereof being left but the name and memory in the time of Pausanias.

Camer. oper. subcisiv. cent. 2^ c. 13. p. 49.
5. Annius writes, that an ancient City situate near the Volscian Lake, and
called Contenebra, was in times past overthrown by Pismires, and that the place
is thereupon vulgarly called to this day, The Camp of Ants.

Herod. l. 4. p. 258.
6. The Neuri, a people bordering upon the Scythians (one Age before the
Expedition of Darius into Scythia) were forced out of their habitations and
Country, by reason of Serpents: For whereas a multitude of Serpents are bred in
the soil it self, at that time there came upon them from the desert places
above them such an abundance of them, and so infested them, that they were
constrained to quit the place, and to dwell amongst the Budini.

Diod. Sicul. l. 3. c. 3. page 79.
7. In Media there was such an infinite number of Sparrows that eat up and
devoured the seed which was cast into the ground, that men were constrained to
depart their old habitations, and remove to other places.

Athen. Deipnos. l. 9. c. 14. p. 400.
8. The Island of Anaphe heretofore had not a Partridge in it, till such time an
Astypalaean brought thither a pair that were male and female; which couple in a
short time did increase in such wonderful manner, that oppressed with the
number of them, the Inhabitants upon the point were enforced to depart from the
Island.

9. Astypalaea of old had no Hares in it; Athen. Deipnos. l. 9. c. 14. p. 400.
but when one of the Isle of Anaphe had put a brace into it, they in a short
time so increased, that they destroyed almost all that the Inhabitants had
sowed; whereupon they sent to consult the Oracle concerning this their
calamity, which advised them to store themselves with Greyhounds, by the help
of which they killed 6000 Hares in the space of a year, and many more
afterward, whereby they were delivered from their grievance.

10. The Inhabitants of the Gymnesian Islands are reported to have sent their
Ambassadors to Rome, Plin. l. 8. c. 55. p. 232* Zuing. Theatr. vol. 3. l. 2.
p. 633.
to request some other place to be assigned them for their habitations; for
that they were oppressed by the incredible number of Conies amongst them. And
the Baleares, through an extraordinary increase of the same creatures amongst
them, did petition the Emperor Augustus, that he would send them the assistance
of a military force against these enemies of theirs, which had already
occasioned a famine amongst them.

11. In the seventeenth year of the Reign of Alexander the Third, Zuing.
Theatr. vol. 3. l. 2. p. 634.
King of the Scots, such an in credible swarm of Palmer-worms spread themselves
over both Scotland and England, that they consumed the fruits and leaves of all
Trees and Herbs, and eat up the Worts and other Plants to the very stalks and
stumps of them. As also the same year by an unusual increase and swelling of
the Sea, the Rivers overflowed their banks, and there was such an inundation,
especially of the Tweed and Forth, that diverse Villages were overturned
thereby, and a great number both of men and all sorts of Cattle perished in the
waters.

12. In the year 1581. an Army of Mice so overrun the Marches in Dengry
Hundred in Essex near unto South-Minster, Speeds Maps p. 31. Chetw. hist.
collect. cent. 6. p. 162.
that they shore the grass to the very roots, and so tainted the same with
their venomous teeth, that a great Murrain fell upon the Cattle that afterward
grazed upon it.

13. About the year 1610. the City of Constantinople and the Countries
thereabouts were so plagued with clouds of Grasshoppers, Knowles Turk. Hist. p.
13^8. Clarks mir. cap. 103. p. 481.
that they darkened the beams of the Sun, they left not a green herb or leaf in
all the Country; yea they entered into their very Bed-chambers, to the great
annoyance of the Inhabitants, being almost as big as Dormice, with red wings.

14. Cassander in his return from Apollonia met with the people called
Abderitae, Plin. l. 10. c. 65. p. 304. Justin. hist. l. 15. p. 172.
who by reason of the multitude of Frogs and Mice, were constrained to depart
from their native soil, and to seek out habitations for themselves elsewhere;
and fearing they would seize upon Macedon, he made an agreement with them,
received them as his Associates, and allotted them certain grounds in the
uttermost Borders of Macedonia, wherein they might plant and seat themselves.
The Country of Troas is exceedingly given to breed great store of Mice, so that
already they have enforced the Inhabitants to quit the place and depart.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABstinence from Drink. Page. 591 Abstinence from Food. 589 Accusers False. 410
Actors on the Stage. 502 Advancement how? 577 Advancement whence? 566 Adversity
dejects. 431 Adversity improves. 200 Adulterers punished. 457 Affability. 181
Age of some great. 47 Age memorable. 49 Age Renewed. 51 Agility and Nimbleness.
42 Ambition. 415 Anger. 110 Antipathies. 11 Apparel mean. 164 Apparel Luxury in
it. 395 Apparitions of Devils. 611 Apparitions of Souls. 88 Appeals to God. 608
Archers and Shooting. 510 Art, rare Works of it. 224 Attempts, dear and vain.
409 Atheistical Persons, 361 Authors, first in things. 647
B.
BAnishment its kinds* 645 Beards how worn. 19 Beauty. 24 Beginnings low
remembered. 233 Beloved by Beasts, etc. 622 Birthday of diverse. 8 Births very
different. 4 Births monstrous. 5 Bishops of Rome. 473 Bodies how found. 64
Bodies unburied. 62 Boldness. 210 Bounty of some men. 186 Boasting vain. 433
Brethren their Love. 152 Brethren their Discords. 374 Buildings magnificent.
561
C.
CHarity great. 189 Chastity. 193 Cheats and Thefts. 420 Children dutiful. 149
Children degenerate. 366 Children unnatural. 368 Clemency and Mercy. 174
Commiseration and Pity. 127 Confidence in themselves. 214 Conscience its force.
643 Constancy. 213 Constitutions strange. 10 Council and Counselors. 182
Covetousness. 416 Creatures taught many things. 230 Creatures their love to
men. 622 Cruelty, examples of it. 376 Cures upon some, strange. 630 Curiosity.
400 Customs of sundry Nations. 580
D.
DDeath boldly received. 241 Death self procured. 458 Death feared overmuch.
437 Death unusual ways to it. 59 Death warned, not avoided. 455 Declined from
first virtue. 363 Deformity of Body. 29 Degenerate Children. 366 Designs helped
or hindered. 200 Desires and Wishes. 117 Discontented Persons. 434 Diseases
strange. 56 Dissimulation. 128 Dispatch of Affairs. 45 Distresses by Sea and
Land. 638 Divinity affected. 370 Dreams. 545 Drinkers great. 391 Drink
abstained from. 591 Drunkenness, its evils. 393 Dwarfs and Low statur'd men. 36
E.
EAsters great. 390 Effeminate men. 451 Elections of Princes. 605 Eloquence,
famous for it. 488 Ambassadors. 484 Emperors Eastern. 469 Emperors Western.
463 Envy. 120 Error and Mistakes. 615 Escapes from death. 626 Examples their
force. 601 Expedition and Dispatch. 45 Extraordinary Accideents. 596 Eye, its
Frame and Beauty. 23
F.
FAce, its Composure. 24 Fancy, its force. 94 Fastings wonderful. 589 Fate
unavoidable. 415 Fathers of the Church. 518 Fatness and Corpulency. 46 Fear and
its effects. 108 Feasting luxurious. 387 Feeling, the Sense. 101 Fidelity to
their Trust. 157 Flattery hated, 137 Flattery prodigious. 440 Food of sundry
Nations. 588 Folly, extreme in some. 407 Fortitude and Valor. 207 Fortunate
men. 239 Frailty considered of. 238 Friendship sincere. 168 Frugality and
Thift. 164 Fruitfulness. 40
G.
GAmes and Plays. 607 Gaming at Dice. 397 Generosity. 161 Giants. 34 Glory
desired. 426 Gluttony. 39 Gods of several Nations. 584 Gratitude. 171 Grief and
Sorrow. 115
H.
HAir, how worn? 18 Hatred extreme. 107 Head and Skulls. 16 Hearing, the Sense.
100 Hearts, what found in them* 32 Heretics and Heresies. 511 Historians. 489
Honesty. 167 Honors done to some. 624 Hope. 118 Hospitaelity. 165 Humility.
181 Husbands unnatural. 372 Husbands loving. 142 Hypocrisy. 128
I.
Jealousy. 125 Idleness. 403 Ignorance of former Times. 401 Imagination, its
force. 94 Imitation. 601 Impostors. 424 Imprecations. 614 Imprudence. 398
Impudence. 124 Incest. 453 Inconstancy. 414 Industry. 229 Infants crying in the
Womb. 1 Infants long dead in the Womb. 2 Infants petrified in the Womb. 3
Ingratitude. 444 Injuries forgiven. 201 Innocence. 167 Inventions by whom? 222
Joy, the effects of it. 113 Judgments wise. 184 Justice loved by whom? 192
K.
KIngstone Provost Marshal. 376 Knowledge much improved. 401
L.
LAwgivers. ^82 Leanness of Body. 46 Learned men. 219 Learning loved, by whom?
216 Liberality and Bounty. 186 Liberty highly prized. 237 Libraries and their
Founders. 564 Life very long. 47 Life over desired. 437 Likeness of some to
others. 30 Litigious men. 436 Longaevity. 47 Loquacity. 461 Love and its
effects. 105 Love to Brethren. 152 Love to Children. 147 Love to Country. 140
Love of Servants to Masters. 154 Love to Parents. 149 Love of Wives to
Husbands. 144 Love of Husbands to Wives. 142 Luxury. 387
M.
MAgicians. 515 Majesty. 26 Marks and Moles. 9 Massacres. 384 Melancholy. 94
Memories great. 96 Memories Treacherous. 406 Mercy and Meekness. 174 Messages
how sent. 637 Mistakes. 615 Moderation of mind. 177 Modesty. 122 Monsters. 5
Murders discovered. 89 Musicians and Music. 496 Mutations and changes. 569
N.
NAtures defects supplied. 14 Noble Actions. 161 N^^tambulo's. 592
O.
OBedience to Superiors. 159 Oblivion. 406 Oppression. 382 Oracles deceitful.
558 Orators famous. 488 Oversights of great men. 398
P.
PAinters excellent. 499 Parents indulgent. 147 Parents severe. 364 Patience.
199 Peace loved by whom. 139 Perfidiousness. 447 Perjury. 412 Philosophers. 505
Physiognomists. 497 Pity and Compassion. 127 Poets Greek and Latin^ 492 Popes
of Rome. 473 Poverty. 334 Poison. 629 Predictions false. 558 Predictions true.
554 Praesages. 549 Pride and Arrogance. 429 Princes their Investiture. 605
Printers famous. 510 Prodigality. 385 Promise kept. 157 Prosperity. 431
Prudence in discoveries. 184 Punishments horrid. 54 Punishments by small
things. 652 Pigmies and Dwarfs. 36
Q.
QUeen of Sheba what she proposed. 184 Quarrels on slight occasions. 436
R.
RAshness. 433 Recreations. 651 Rejuvenescency. 51 Religion despised. 361
Religion observed. 136 Reproofs well taken. 203 Reproofs ill resented. 442
Reprovers guilty of the same. 441 Responses equivocal. 558 Resurrection a
parcel one. 64 Returns to life. 86 Retaliation. 620 Retirement loved. 575
Revenges bitter. 379 Revenges moderate. 177 R^ches contemned. 334 Robberies and
Thefts. 420
S.
SCoffing and Scorn. 119 Sea-me^ ^amous. 486 Secrecy. 232 Seditions appeased.
603 Servants love to Masters. 154 Sepulchers violated. 62 Sepulture hardly
obtained. ibid. Sex changed. 52 Shamefacedness. 122 Sight and Seeing. 99
Slothfulness. 403 Smelling, the Sense. 104 Sleepers long. 594 Sleep walked in.
592 Sobriety. 179 Solitude loved. 575 Stage Players. 502 Statuarie famous. 501
Stature and Tallness. 34 Stratogems. 6^^ Strength very great. 37 Study very
hard. ^^8 Stupidity. 404 Swiftness. 44 Swimmers and Diverse under Water. 504
T.
Taste, the Sense. 183 Teeth their Number. 20 Temperance. 179 Thefts very bold.
420 Time well spent. 229 Torments born. 205 Touch, the Sense. 101 Tongue. 21
Trances and Raptures. 595 Treachery. 447 Treasures found. 604 Tributes and
Taxes. 418 Truth loved. 137
V.
Valor and Courage. 297 Unavoidable Fate. 455 Unchastity. 452 Unfortunate men.
459 Unmerciful men. 382 Voice and Speech. 21 Voluptuous men. 451 Voracity and
Greediness. 390
W.
WAlkers in their sleep. 592 Warnings of death. 455 Wishes and desires. 1^7
Witches and Witchcraft. 5^^ (...) unnatural. 373 Wives (...) good. 144 Works of
Art. 224 Work of (...). 189 Wise sayings. 646 Witty speeches. 649 Wives well
beloved. 142
X.
XErxes his folly. 407
Y.
YOuth hopeful. 130 Youth wild, reclaimed. 132 Youth hopeful declined. 363
Youth restored. 51
Z.
ZOpyrus his fact. 155 Zoroastres how born. 4
ADVERTISEMENT.
BY reason of the Authors Absence, some Errors have passed the Press, though
few such as make any considerable Alteration of the Sense, or that may not
easily be Corrected by (...) Pen of the Reader.

FINIS.

