A Sixth LETTER, Concerning the Sacred Trinity; IN ANSWER To a Book Entitled,
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Four Letters, etc.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D. Professor of Mathematics in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, 1691.

A Sixth LETTER Concerning the Sacred Trinity.
SIR,
I Find from my Socinian Adversary, Observations (as he calls it) on my Four
Letters; (He might have said Five, if he pleased.) Which I saw not till
Yesterday, Mar. 13. Nor do I see any great need of publishing a hasty Answer.
There being so little in it that deserves an Answer, which had not been
answered before it was written. And I may perhaps ere long meet with some such
like Observations upon my Fifth; and then I may at once Answer both.

His first head he calls The Design of the Letters.

That which I undertook to maintain, was clearly stated thus, That it is not
Inconsistent with natural Reason, that there may be Three Somewhats which are
but One God; And that what in one regard are Three, may in another regard be
One. To prove this (and this only) I brought those Arguments or Instances at
which he cavils.

This he now tells me (p. 4.) The Socinians will grant me this. (That is, they
grant what I undertook to prove.) And of which, he says, no Man ever was so
foolish as to doubt. And my Arian Adversary in like manner, (in his Answer, p.
3. and his Vindication, p. 3, 5.) that none but a Madman would ever deny it.
And that he cannot say, there is any Contradiction in saying, there may be
three Persons in God. Thus far therefore we are agreed on all hands.

But he now tells me, p. 4. That this is not the Question. Yes; this is the
Question that I undertook. It Is true, there be other Questions between us and
the Socinians. But the Question I undertook was that. And he knows it was so.

Well; but what says he, is the Question? It Is this he says (p. 4.) Whether
there be Three Gods, or but One God. No: this is not the Question. For in this
we are agreed also. The Socinians (he says) affirm There is but One God. And so
do I.

The Proposition, he says, which (in favor of the Trinity) I should have
proved, (that is, the task he sets me, not what I undertook) was this, That
what are in one regard Three, may in another regard be SO One, that all of them
(together) are but One, and yet each of them (singly, and by it self) is that
One.

Now, I think, I had proved this; This corpus longum, corpus latum, and corpus
profundum, is One Cube. The corpus longum is a Cube; the corpus latum is a
Cube, and the corpus profundum is a Cube: and yet this Corpus longum, latum and
profundum, is (altogether) but One Cube.

But this is Latin: And his Challenge is, (p. 5.) Show me that Trinitarian that
dares dispute the Question in plain English. I Will endeavor that too. David the
Son of Iesse was a Man; and David King of Israel was a Man; and David the
Father of Solomon was a Man: Yet David the Son of Iesse, the King of Israel,
and Father of Solomon, was (altogether) but One Man. And this is plain English,
without the words of Abstract, Concrete, Paternity, Personality, (at which he
there cavils,) or other hard words than what his Tankard-bearer might
understand.

Well but (says he) We may indeed say, This long body is a Cube, meaning
thereby, This long body, which is also broad and high, is a Cube; and if it
were not broad and high it were not a Cube: But we cannot say so here. I Will try
if I cannot hit this too. The All-wise God, is God All-sufficient; the Almighty
God, is God All-sufficient; the Everlasting God, is God All-sufficient: meaning
by the All-wise God, the God who is also Almighty and Everlasting; and if he
were not also Almighty and Everlasting, he were not All-sufficient. Yet this
All-wise, Almighty, and Everlasting God, is (altogether) but One God
All-sufficient.

But supposing (says he) the Doctor's Instances do satisfy this difficulty, (as
I think they do;) Does he not know there are many more, (Yes, he does know it)
to which these Instances are not applicable? Very true. And therefore they were
not brought to prove all points which concern the Trinity. They were brought to
prove this point in particular, That it is not Inconsistent with Reason, that
Three Somewhats may be One God. And if they prove this, it is what they were
brought to prove. (when I undertake other points, I may use other Arguments.)
And this has been said so often, that (if he have any thing else of moment to
say) it is strange, that repeating the same Objection (without any further
strength) he should put me so often to give the same Answer.

His next head is Of Somewhats and Persons.

We are told, that Christ and the Father are one, Joh. 10. 30. And these Three
are One, 1 John 5. 7. without giving a name to these Three. Nor what shall we
call them? These three -- what? Not three Gods; for that is false: (There is but
One God.) And three Persons he will not allow me to call them, because it is
not a Scriptural Word. ( Person he grants is scriptural, Heb. 1. 3. but not
Persons.) I must not call them three Nothings. (For certainly it was never
meant to be thus understood, These three Nothings are One: And when Christ said
I and the Father are One, he did not mean We two Nothings are One.) And if they
be not Nothing, they must be Somewhat; and Three such, must be three Somewhats.
And I could not think of a more Innocent word, to design them by. And therefore
(that we might not quarrel about words) I was content to wave the name of
Persons, and (without fixing a new name on them) design them by the word
Somewhat. (Presuming that those who do not take them to be Nothing, would allow
them to be Somewhat.) But neither will this word pass with him.

Now this is a hard case. The Scripture says These Three, without giving them a
Name. And then, We must not give them a Name; because that Name will be
unscriptural. And yet if we do not give them a Name; he tells us, They be Three
Somewhats, without Name or Notion: And that no two can agree, what this is, or
what is thereby meant; but as many Writers, so many Explications. p. 8. 16.

To which I say; As to the Notion, I think the Orthodox are all, thus far,
agreed; That they are Three such Somewhats in God, as differ from each other
more than what we commonly call the Divine Attributes, but not so as to be
Three Gods. And though (within these limits) diverse men may diversely express
themselves, yet in this Notion the Orthodox I think do all agree. And this I
had before declared, (Let. iv. p. 37.) though he please totake no notice of it.
(So that we are not without a Notion of it.) And if he will allow us to give a
Name to it; that Name (whatever it be) is so to be understood as to denote this
Notion. And we think the word Person, a fit Name to denote this Notion by. But
if we may not give it a Name; we must then say, The Notion is such as was but
now explained. But they will not allow us to give it a Name. And as to our
Agreement or Disagreement, I think the Trinitarians do less disagree amongst
themselves, than do the Anti-trinitarians.

But he says, (p. 9.) I own the word Persons (when applied to God) to be but
Metaphorical; and not to signify just the same as when applied to Men, but
somewhat Analogous thereunto. True; I do so. And I have given my Reasons why I
do so, more than once. Because Two of them being represented to us in Scripture
under the Names of Father, and Son, and this Son said to be begotten of that
Father: (which words are therefore not to be quarrelled with, because Scripture
Language:) No man thinks that the one is so a Father, or the other so a Son, or
so Begotten, as these words signify concerning Men; but somewhat Analogous
thereunto. And in what sense they are Father and Son, they are (in a sense
analogous thereunto) Two Persons, and the Holy Ghost a Third. For Father and
Son in a proper sense amongst men, are such Relatives as the Latins did denote
by the word Persona in the first and proper signification of that word: And
consequently Father and Son in this Analogical sense, are (in a continuation of
the same Analogy) Persons in a like Analogical sense.

But he says further, that in the explication of the Athanasian Creed, (Let.
iii. p. 13.) I interpret (...), by truly Persons, or properly Persons. I do so:
Because I suppose it was intended to call them truly or properly such persons
as are there meant, (answering to the Greek Hypostases;) that is in such a
sense as they are there called Father and Son, and that the word Person is a
true and proper Continuation of the same Analogy.

I have before declared, more than once, (in the places by him cited, p. 9,
10.) that the true and proper sense of the Latin word Persona, is not to denote
a Man simply (for this with them was Homo, not Persona,) but such quality,
state, or condition of a man, whereby he is distinguished from, or stands
related to, other men. As a King, a Father, a Judge, and the like. And
accordingly the same Man, may sustain diverse Persons. (He may be a King, and a
Father.) And according as such Condition varies, the Person also varies. It Is
true that in English, (for want of a word that answers to Homo,) we sometimes
make use of the word Person, when we speak indifferently of Man, Woman, or
Child; as when a Man, or Woman, and an Infant are spoken of as three Persons:
But these the Latins would not have called tres Personas, but tres Homines.
(But if considered as Father, Mother, and Child, they may, as thus related, be
called tres Personae.) And the Schoolmen sometimes (and some others in
imitation of them) do in a like sense use the word Persona, for want of a Latin
word which did indifferently respect Men and Angels. But these are new senses
of the word Persona, quite different from what the word signified in the purity
of the Latin Tongue; and unknown (I suppose) to the Fathers, who first applied
the word Personae to those of the Sacred Trinity: As I had before showed at
large. Let. v. p. 15. etc.

But at this rate, he tells us, (p. 10.) The Socinians will allow, God the
Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, or God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, to be Three Persons. And I am not sorry to hear it. But then I
would not have him say (as here) that I make them to be only Three Names, nor
yet (as p. 16.) three Gods. They are more than three Names, but not Three Gods.
For even amongst men, to be a Father, is more than a Name, or Title: And, in
the Godhead, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, differ more than so many Names.
And, though I will not take upon me to determine precisely, how great the
Distinction is, (which is what at p. 8. he cites out of my Let. ii. p. 3.)
because I would not be positive where the Scripture is silent* yet certainly
it is not so great as to make them Three Gods, but greater than merely three
Names, or even that between what we commonly call the Divine Attributes.

His next Head is about my Explication of the Athanaan Creed. Which he finds
(he says) to be an Explication of the Damnatory Clauses therein. And he is not
much amiss in that observation. He was told so in the first words of that
Explication, and in the last words of the Postscript, That it was in pursuance
of a clause in a former Letter to that purpose; and that (though other things
are explained in it) it was chiefly intended for the Satisfaction of those who
do believe the Doctrine of it, (but stumbled at those Clauses,) to show that
they need not (for these Clauses) to reject that Creed.

He tells us (p. 11.) there is a difference between Necessary and Requisite. Be
it so. But the word there is (...), oportet (not (...)) which I had rendered (
p. 4. 21.) by these words, It is necessary, it is mainly necessary, it is a
principal requisite, he ought to believe it. And certainly, if he had not a
great desire to cavil he would not have quarrelled at this exposition, as not
full enough for the word (...).

I had said, this Creed was part of the Catholic Faith; the whole of which I
took to be the whole word of God: which a man is obliged to believe as to the
Substantials of it; but may be saved notwithstanding an Ignorance or Mistake as
to some Particulars of lesser moment. Now he would have it to be understood,
that this Creed is the whole, not only a Part of the Catholic Faith: that
nothing must be added to it, nothing taken from it: And that every Man and
Woman shall perish everlastingly who does not believe and profess this, without
taking ought from it, or adding ought to it. Why I think otherwise, I have
showed before, and need not repeat it. But leave it to the Reader to judge,
whether this or that be likelier to be true. And, whether he take it to be the
meaning of this writer, That all must needs be damned, who lived and died
before this Creed was written; or who possibly never saw it or heard of it,
(though they should believe all the Substantials of the Christian Faith, or
Word of God, and held nothing destructive of it;) or, who do not believe just
so much and no more. But if that be his opinion, he does interpret it more
severely against himself than I would have done; or (I think) any Man who had
not a mind to cavil.

His next head is, about the Opinions charged upon Socinus and the Socinians.
Concerning which, I do not think it needful to trouble the Reader with
repeating what I had said of those Opinions, Let. iii. p. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
and Let. iv. p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. or what he now brings in excuse of it. But shall
leave it to the Reader, to judge (upon what is said on both sides) whether I
have not thereby fully proved the charge; of the slight Opinion they have of
the Scripture (in competition with Reason) when it crosses any of their beloved
Tenets. And yet, if that be not enough, himself directs, p. 16. to Maresius and
Lubertus, where (it seems) is more to be found to the same purpose.

But his Plea for himself, p. 16. I do admit. That if Socinus have spoken
erroneously, or unadvisedly, or hyperbolically, he is not obliged to defend it
(nor do I know that he is obliged to be a Socinian.) He may renounce of
Socinus, what he pleases.

Whether he who defended the Thesis at Franeker, were a Professed Socinian, or
but covertly so, I tannot tell (because I do not know the Man:) But I do not
think it more strange, to find a Socinian at Franeker (notwithstanding the
Synod of Dort) than at London. And sometime ( p. 16.) he will hardly allow
himself a Socinian, nor any of his Party. But I hope he will not deny Socinus
to have been a Socinian. Therefore so far, at least, I was right.

But he would not have me blacken a man, long since dead, who never did me any
injury. Very well: He had before challenged me to maintain my charge against
the Socinians: And he now quarrels with me for so doing. He will now hardly
allow any to be a Socinian but Socinus himself; and yet I must not blacken
Socinus. What am I then to do? I will even leave it as it is, and let the
Reader judge. And if he doubt, whether I, or my Adversary be more fair in our
Quotations; let him consult the places and judge accordingly. And particularly
that of Epist. 5. ad Volkelium. I am at present not at home, nor have Books
about me. But sure I am, that Socinus does there (a few lines before what this
Observator repeats) directly deny, that the Soul after death does subsist;
according as I had affirmed (though I cannot now recite the whole Sentence
because I have not the Book at hand.) But this the Repeater (whether by Docking
or Decapitation) thinks fit to omit. And then I presume the Reader will then
find, that per se is not meant so by it self, or of his own nature, as not by
the gift and grace of God, (for so it might as well be said of the Soul before
death,) but, so by it self as not in conjunction with the body; and then the
sense must be, that though the Soul with the Body be praemiorum and poenarum
capax, yet the Soul of it self without the Body, is not so. But I leave this,
and the rest, wholly to the Readers Judgment, to judge (upon view) as he shall
see cause. Adding this also, that he will find it is not only as to this Point
of the Trinity, that Socinus discovers so slight an opinion of the Scriptures
in competition with Reason; but in other Points also where they do not favor
his opinions.

He had told us before, of some body at Oxford, who, maintaining a Thesis
against the Socinians, was baffled by his Opponent. Who or when this was he had
not told us; nor what that Thesis was. He now tells us, p. 16. It was a Thesis
against the Socinians, that they preferred Reason before Scripture. Perhaps,
when he recollects himself, (or consults his Informer,) he may find (if any
such thing happened as he suggests) it was on some other Thesis; and not
against the Socinians, but against the Arminians. But, be it as he says; I know
nothing of it, and shall not concern my self about it.

But in requital of this story I told him another of Sandius, who having
proposed a Challenge, upon his Problema Paradoxum (contrary to the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost) was so answered by Wittichius, that (as appears by a Printed
Letter published by his Friend and Partner in that Disputation) they were so
convinced, as to change their opinion. I now add, that it so appears, not only
by his Friend's Printed Letter: but by another of Sandius himself to
Wittichius; which I have not seen (and I think it was never printed,) but the
Contents of it may be seen in another Treatise of Wittichius, with this Title,
Causa Spiritus Sancti Victrix. Printed at London, 1682.

But this matter (he says) is both Unskillfully and Vnfairly related. Why
unskilfully? why unfairly? He says, Sandius was an Arian; (Be it so:) not a
Socinian. Very well: Nor did I say that he was; but a Friend of the Socinians.
He was an Anti-trinitarian; and did promote (against the Trinitarians) the
common cause of Arians and Socinians, (though these perhaps might quarrel
amongst themselves.) But this Observator thought (it seems) because I did not
call him an Arian, that I did not know him so to be. And this (I guess) is what
he calls unskilful. But I can give him a better reason why I should not call
him so. I did not then know I should have an Arian Adversary to deal with, (for
my Arian Adversary did not yet appear:) But my Socinian Adversary was already
upon the stage, and with him I was now dealing. Yet I could not say that
Sandius was a Socinian, but (that the Socinian might be concerned in the story)
I said, He was a Friend of theirs. And what Unskillfulness appears in this? Had
I then known (what since I do) that I was to be attacqued by an Arian also; I
should rather have called him an Anti-trinitarian, which had been common to
both: But, knowing then of none but a Socinian Adversary, I chose to call him a
Friend of theirs. Which was neither Vnfair nor Unskillful.

Perhaps he thinks if not Unskillful, 'twas at best Vnfair to say that his
Partner and He changed their opinion. But was it not so? does not his Associate
expressly tell us (in the very Title Page of his Letter of thanks for those
Animadversions) per quas (animadversiones) errores suos rejicere coactus est?
(whereby he was constrained to relinquish his Errors?) Well, but did they
change all their Opinions? did they relinquish all their Errors? I believe not:
But, that opinion which was then in dispute; his Problema Paradoxum, and the
Errors therein. And, if he consult the Book, he will find it was so: And, that
this Paradox was it which he did relinquish. And, what his Paradox was, he
might there see it as well as I. Nor had he told me, who, and when, and upon
what Question, his supposed Anti-Socinian was baffled by his Opponent? or, how
I might come to know it? (And even now, when he pretends to tell me the
Question, I doubt he is mistaken therein. But what Vnfairness was there in all
this? when I had told him where he might find as much of it as I could tell him.

But he tells us now, that Sandius was satisfied indeed (as to the Point then
in question,) but not of the Divinity of the Holy Spirit. Nor did I say that he
was. But I can tell him, That he was nearer, even to this, than our Observator
was aware, or at least nearer than he thinks fit to own to us. If he consult
Wittichius's latter Treatise, entitled Causa Spiritus Sancti Victrix, he will
there find an Extract of a Manuscript Letter of Sandius to him. In which, to
the best of my remembrance (for I have not here the Book at hand) he tells
Wittichius to this Purpose. That whereas in his Problema Paradoxum he had been
of opinion that by the Holy Spirit might be meant the whole number of good
Angels, he did not now think so well of that opinion, as before their
Disputation: but was considering of two other opinions to be substituted
instead thereof: That by the Holy Ghost might be meant, not the whole number of
good Angels, as before; but either some select number of them, as being a
superior Order; or else some One Angel as superior to all the rest. (Which
two he suggests to Wittichius's further consideration.) But, if neither of
these should succeed (as he doubted they would not;) he was then inclinable to
say, with him: That the Holy Ghost was, indeed, the same Eternal God with the
Father and the Son. If in reciting this by memory, I have failed in any
considerable Circumstance, I submit it to be rectified by the Book. But if our
Observator have seen that Treatise, and knows it thus to be, I think we have
more reason to complain of Vnfairness, in his representing it as he does: As if
he remained fixed in this Opinion, That the Holy Ghost was so a Person as the
Arians always held.

I am sorry to detain the Reader by following our Observator in his so many
long excursions which do so little concern the Business before us. For what
(almost) of what has been hitherto mentioned of his, does tend to the
confutation of what we affirm, That what we call Three Persons, are more than
Three Names, but not Three Gods.

In ( part of) his two last leaves, he would seem to come somewhat nearer to
the Business, but not much. He tells us, p. 17. that Luther and Calvin did not
like the word Trinity. It may be so. (I Will take his word for it without seeking
the places; because I do not think it worth while.) That they say it is
Barbarous and sounds odly (I suppose he knows that by a Barbarous word, is
commonly meant, a word not used by Classick Authors, or not agreeable to the
usual forms of speech in Latin and Greek Writers.) Be it so. (And what if I had
said so too?) Suppose a Hunter should say, a Trinity of Hares sounds odly, and
another say the like of a Leash, and choose rather to say (in plain English)
Three hares: the sense is still the same. And if Calvin (who loved a smooth
style, and pure-Latin words,) should say that Trinitas is a barbarous Word, (as
not extant in Classick Authors:) what great matter is there in all this?

I will not trouble my self to enquire whether Trinitas be, in that sense used
in Tully; but sure I am that (...) is a good Greek word. And words, though not
so well contrived at first, yet when once received into common use, and the
meaning thereof understood, we choose to retain, rather than to make a needless
change. This the common Phrases of, your Worship, your Honor, your Lordship,
etc. for one Worshipful, Honorable, a Lord, etc. have been noted long since to
be not Analogous to the more usual Forms of speech in Latin and Greek Writers:
Yet Custom has made them Allowable; and therefore we do not scruple to use
them. So Luther and Calvin, it seems, thought the word Tres to be a better
Latin word, in this case, than Trinitas. And I had allowed our Adversary, (
Let. iv. p. 36.) instead of Trinity in Unity, to say (if that will please him
better) Three in One. Yet Three and Trinity (to my apprehension) differ no more
than Ten and a Decade; or Twelve and a Dousain. But what is all this to the
matter in hand? Does Luther or Calvin any where say, that Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are but three Names? or, that they be three Gods? If they say
neither of these; they do not contradict what we affirm. It Is but as if a Man
should choose to say Ten Commandments, rather than a Decade, or half a score; or
to say, there are, in the Apostles Creed, Twelve Articles rather than a
Dousain. And if these be the great disagreements he there complains of, it
comes to a very small matter.

To his Argument, That only the Father is God, because of Ioh. 17. 3. to know
thee the only true God; he says, p: 17. I give three Answers. (I do so.) But,
he says, the first and third are destructive of one another. Not so: they all
agree very well. And any of them will destroy his Argument. It Is not said, Thee
only, but the only true God. He would have us think it all one to say, Thee
only, to be the true God, and Thee to be the only true God, I think otherwise.
The one gives some seeming color for his objection: The other, not the least
shadow. His Argument, The Father is the only true God, therefore not the Son or
Holy Ghost, is just in this Form, The God of Abraham is the only true God,
therefore not the God of Isaac, nor the God of Jacob. Which, I presume he will
not allow to be a good consequence.

He would have it thought I grant, that if it were as this form, the only, thee
true God, then the Socinians had undoubtedly gained the point. Not so. He has
not heard me say so yet; nor is he like to do. If I should say, He that brought
Israel out of Egypt, and he only, is the true God: my meaning would be but
this, That God who brought Israel out of Egypt, and that God only, is the true
God: And this must be understood to be said of him, not as their deliverer out
of Egypt, but as God. For he was the true God (and the only true God) long
before he brought Israel out of Egypt; and would have been so, though they had
never been; or had never been so brought out. There may be vera praedicatio,
which is not (...) (...).

And, of all men living, the Socinians are obliged to say, that this title the
true God, or only true God, belongs to him, not as Father, but as God. For if
(as they would have us think) our Lord Jesus Christ had no Being before his
being made Man of the Virgin Mary; then neither had he a Father till that time:
But he was the only true God from all Eternity; and therefore not (with this
Reduplication) as Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. For he was the only true God
(according to their Doctrine) long before the Man Christ had a Father; and
would so have been, though this Man had never been. And though Christ speak to
him as His Father, yet the title of the only true God, he ascribes to him as
God. If Solomon should have said to David, Thou Father art King of Israel; he
was not therefore King of Israel as Father of Solomon; for he was so, long
before he was Solomon's Father. Which takes away all color of our Observator's
(imaginary) contradiction here pretended: and leaves not the least umbrage for
it.

As little force is there in his other cavil, p. 18. If the Father and Son be
the only true God, then not the Holy Ghost. Yes; the Holy Ghost also. For
though it be not here Affirmed; yet neither is it here Denied.

But these Objections of his have been so often brought, and so often answered,
that it is tedious to see the same things brought so often over and over again.

The like I say of what he repeats from 1 Cor. 8. 6. which is answered
sufficiently, Let. iii. p. 52. Nor is it at all strange, or uncommon, that the
word Father should be sometime spoken of God personally considered, as Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and sometime of God indefinitely (according to his
Essence) without respect to this or that Person. Father of Spirits, Heb. 12. 9.
Doubtless thou art our Father, Thou O Lord art our Father and our Redeemer,
Isai. 63. 16. Thou shall call me My Father, Jer. 3. 4, 19. which the Socinians
must not say to be meant as to his Personality, as Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (for such, they say, he then was not,) but as to his Essence. The
everlasting Father, Isai. 9. 6. spoken of Christ, not as to his Personality
(for so, he was Son) but as to his Essence.

As to what he objects, p. 19. to that of Romans 9. 5. Christ; who is over all,
God blessed for ever, Amen. I refer to what is said, Let. iii. p. 57. (too
large to repeat here*) But how Amen (which is a word of Asseveration) should
make it Nonsense, I do not understand. And what was said of God indefinitely,
Rev. 1. 4. is said particularly of Christ, ver. 8. Who was dead and is alive,
ver. 17, 18. (which description of Christ in particular, he had begun at ver.
5. and continues beyond this place.) If he deny it, let the Reader judge.

As to that of 1 Ioh. 5. 7. I refer to what has been said already. I think
there is not much more to be said thereof on either side than had been said
long before either He or I began to write. And if after all he resolve to hold
to his opinion; he must give me leave to retain mine. And let the Reader judge
as he sees cause. And so for that of Matt. 28. 19.

As to all, in all those Leters to which he makes no Reply; it stands as it
did: And if the Reader please to read them over again, he will be able to
judge, whether it be all so contemptible as to have nothing of Weight in it.

I have said nothing to his Blustering and Contemptuous Language, his Canting
(or rather Railing) against Schools, Metaphysics, Mother Church, Alma Matter
Academia, School-terms, Gothish and Vandelick terms, Abstract, Concrete, (as if
Long and Length were all one; and all one to say David was Kingdom of Israel,
and the Kingdom of Israel was Father to Solomon, as to say this of the King of
Israel) and other the like. (To which he is wont to run out when he has little
else to say, but would seem to say somewhat to make a Noise.) Because the
Reader would know (without my telling him) that this is Raving rather than
Arguing. And when he tells us, so often, of The Brief History of the
Unitarians; why might not I as well tell him, that Doctor Sherlock had answered
it; and means (I suppose) to Vindicate that Answer, if he think there be need.

So, when he runs Division upon Imperial Edicts, Confiscations, and
Banishments, seizing and burning of Books, Capital punishments, Fire, and
Faggot; (with many other things wherein I am not concerned,) What is all this to
me? I do not know that I ever did him any hurt (unless by discovering his
Errors;) I was only Arguing as a Disputant; not making Laws.

As little need be said of a many little things, as little to the purpose: As,
whether my Third Letter were not rather a Book? Whether the things which God
has prepared for them that love him, are the Only deep things of God which we
cannot comprehend? or the Only secret things which belong to God, while things
Revealed belong to us? Whether, what I knew forty years ago, I had been
studying and considering forty years (without thinking of ought else all the
while)? which certainly I could not be, for I was then forty years old. Whether
it be better English to say, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the
Sanctifier ARE, or IS but one God? Whether Vnum (in the Neuter Gender, put
absolute without a Substantive) do not usually signify One Thing? Whether the
word Trinitas, be a pure Latin, or a Barbarous Word, (not to be found in Tully,
any more than Unitarian)? Whether Tres or Trinitas be the better Latin-word?
Whether, what in his former Letter, p. 9. were but old-fashioned Notions, be
now (in this last) New and Cautious? with other the like.

But (besides in these and many others, he cavils without a cause) what is all
this to the Business in hand? Or how does it contradict what I affirm? viz.

That, What in one Consideration are Three, may in another Consideration be but
One.

That, We may safely say (without Absurdity, Contradiction, or Inconsistence
with Reason,) there may be in God, Three Somewhats (which we commonly call
Persons) that are but One God.

That, These Three, are more than three Names, but not three Gods.

That, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, (otherwise
called God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,) are such Three.

I see nothing of what he has said, does overthrow any of These.

March 14. 1690/1. Yours, I. Wallis.


