A TOUCHSTONE FOR Physic, Directing By evident Marks and Characters to such
Medicines, AS Without Purgers, Vomiters, Bleedings, Issues, Minerals; or any
other disturbers of Nature, may be securely trusted for Cure in all
extreamities, AND Be easily distinguished from such as are hazardous or
dangerous: Exemplyfied By various Instances of Remarkable Cures performed
solely by such Medicines.

LONDON, Printed by J. W. for Benjamin Billingsley, at Gresham-Colledge-gate,
near the Church in Broad-street 1667

To the Ingenious Reader.
SInce the generous breeding of most Physicians, in reason may be presumed to
have freed them, more from envy and partiallity, then less Phylosophical
professions; though here and there some few may appear perverse: yet now there
seems no cause to doubt their ready and cheerful entertainment, of whatsoever
can be proposed for support of humane frailty, or relief of distressed
patients, and the rather because of their frequent, and free converse with the
most noble Virtuosi, those ample encouragers of all improving Studies.

The scruple being rather, how this Discourse will be disgested by those who
are furnishers of all sorts of ingredients; and also by the preparers of
Medicines: for since self denial, may not like their Semper vivum be always
green and flourishing. If it cannot be proved, that both shall be no losers; how
can it be expected they should freely yield to such an alteration, as this
Touchstone imports, though the whole Society of practisers should deem it
requisite.

For abatement therefore, of any proness to opposition, it may be needful to
give this assurance to all those, who furnish either foreign or domestic
materials, that in this sublime and more refined way of Medicine; not less but
much larger quantities, are likely to be used, in that where much can yield but
very little, much of necessity must be employed.

Then for the preparers, and conveighers of Medicines, between Physicians and
Patients: were all expressly to be regulated, according to the Marks and
Characters herein specified, no loss at all appears; for in this pure,
liquid, powerful, pleasant and durable way; not one spoonful would ever perish
or decay upon their hands: neither Time, nor Winters cold, nor Summers heat, in
the least impairing their virtue or efficacy: a recompense far surmounting all
objections, if what they yearly lose by perishable ware, be but duly weighed.

Nor is this new way less vindicative of their reputation, not only seldomer
failing of their desired success in Cure, but not the least quantity ever cast
away by their Patients, being such as is serviceable to them sundry ways,
which how many hundreds if not thousands of pounds would be saved yearly in
Patients purses, may be worth their consideration, nor is there many of their
present preparations, but what by solicitous Study, and ingenious Art, may be
converted into this clear stream of Physic.

Besides, where one now in the present way of Medicine they are in, makes use
either of the Physicians advice, or of any other preparations; and when they
do, do it but merely for necessity, as dreading the trouble, tediousness, and
danger thereof, well nigh as much as sickness it: In this pure, pleasant, and
safe effectual way, twenty at the least would be frequent and familiar
therewith, no time of the year being unseasonable, no scrupulosity in the diet,
no pains nor gripes in operation, nor tiresome confinement, to house or
chamber, (unless when extremity enforces) nay when they are proper for all
persons in all weaknesses, and distempers, from the Cradle to the oldest age:
may be also taken in Diet for improvement thereof, and in Recreation as the
most pleasant and reviving refreshment, what infinite quantities must
necessarily be employed.

So that they could not but be vast gainers every way, both in profit and
credit, by so happy an alteration, bringing also to the Physician, besides the
respects and rewards usual, if not more and greater.

The inestimable contentment of a quiet mind, resting securely and calmly
amidst all occasions and extreamities, with this sweet repository that he runs
no hazard with his Patients, and yet supplies them with the utmost helps
imaginable: so that both the Physician, the provider of Materials, and the
preparer of Medicines, are all in an assured condition, unto whom I wish one
more were added, so far am I from desiring the prejudice of any: And that is
Studiers and Inventers of Medicine, known only by their faithfulness and the
fruit of their productions: To be encouraged therein, and not to be diverted
with any other part of Physic, or Practice; for if truly such, they will never
be many, nor desire any other business, being not such by Education, but by
Birth and Nature; for some Title whereunto I appeal, to the just restoration of
the pallat, to its pristine jurisdiction, in discerning Virtues, and choice of
Materials: And to the successeful conception and appropriation of the true
humane temperature, that Clavis Medicinae, not consisting in the equality of
the Elements or Humors (as most may imagine) but in the Proximity and Coherence
of the spirit, and all parts of the Medicine, with the spirit of the true
Humane constitution; without which, those who traffic for Medicine, may be as
coasters; but no considerable new discoverers: This being to the Arts
advancement, like Columbus his card to his discovery of the Indies, who though
long seeming but as a vain boaster, yet those who first gave credit found it,
far exceeding his report; and so I doubt not it will prove here, the Medicines
herein proposed for an example, never doing harm, but good where ever they were
taken, many wishing they had known them sooner, never any repenting their use:
And if the Body be more worth then Raiment, and Health to be preferred before
Riches, it being not in Mountains of Gold, to give that exemption from the
pains, fears and miseries of sickness, which resides in a benign powerful
Medicine; your good acceptance of these overtures, will never blemish either
that Virtue or that Prudence, for which you will be ever highly honored,

By Your Most humble Servant, W. W.

The Preface To the Reader.
IT being usual for Authors in Prefaces to render an account of the occasion
which gave Birth to their writings, and (...) acquaint the Reader with the
design or scope of their Discourses, I thought it convenient to continue a
custom approved by many Illustrious examples.

Let me therefore give thee to understand, that it is not desire of applause
has engaged me in this Controversy. The care I have taken to conceal my Name
will, I suppose, free me from such suspicion; but besides, let me assure thee I
am too far from promising my self any addition to my Repute from this scrible,
That I do rather apprehend it will lessen my Esteem with many of those
excellent Persons, who are now pleased to Honor me with their Friendship: and
do expect from me Discourses very different from those I here present thee.
Which considerations surely will gain me credit, when I affirm That no Motive
besides that of public advantage could ever haveprevailed upon me, to exchange
my darling Studies of Experimental Philosophy, and Physic (most pleasing and
profitable employments) for barren Controversy, which I ever declined. And
among all, if I had consulted my own quiet or Interest, I should have avoided
this wherein I have now engaged; which may occasion me much trouble, but cannot
possibly bring me any advantage, besides that satisfaction which is always the
result of Actions well intended. Which pleasure I must confess will be much
heightened, if this endeavor of mine meets with good entertainment and work the
desired Effect; which that it may have, I will particularly address my self to
all the Persons concerned with me in this debate: Who are the People or
Patients, and Physicians.

This Discourse is chiefly intended for the First, it being they, who are most
highly injured by the unwarrantable practices of those we have therein accused;
for although many understanding Persons among the People are sufficiently
sensible of the abuses we have manifested; and that it is of absolute necessity
some reformation be made: yet all are not thus persuaded, for we may daily
observe, that many who are less discerning, being deceived by an imaginary
good, covet their own ruins; and unless they be given to understand which is
the evil and which the good, by persons in whom they have reason to confide,
they must necessarily run much hazard. I have here endeavored to undeceive
them, which I should despair of, did I only foresee inconveniences a far off
(the Vulgar being led by sense, and not by probable conjectures) but since they
do now actually labor under many, and those obvious inconveniences, how short
soever their sight be, the sense of feeling being no less acute in them, than
in others I persuade my self they will readilygive their assent to those Truths
I have here discovered. Now there are many things whereof most Apothecaries are
highly guilty, as carelessness, Unskillfulness, Unfaithfulness on the one hand,
and Intrusion into the Physicians Employment (I mean the Practice of Physic)
on the other: on all which accounts as I have fully demonstrated, they are
exceedingly injurious to the Public. In order to the prevention of such
unpardonable abuses of the People I have made this Proposal, That Physicians
prepare and dispense their own Medicines; and at large showed That the
advantages of such a Constitution will be manyand great. For it will much abate
the charge and expense of Physic, and the Medicines themselves will be more
safe and effectual than now they are, interest obliging Physicians to have
their Physic as good as they can contrive or prepare; and certainly such a
State of Physic of all other is most desirable, wherein no man having the
Interest can have the Power, nor any having the Power can have the Interest to
prepare Medicines unfaithfully: wherein bad men shall be made good, and those
that are good never be tempted to become dishonest. And in that Constitution of
Pharmacy for which we contend, suppose men be never so bad; yet nevertheless
their wickedness cannot have any ill influence on Physic, as is manifested at
(...) in this following Discourse: so if the sick have regard, either to profit
or safety, they will address themselves to those Persons who supply them with
the best Remedies, and at cheapest Rates.

And as for Physicians, they must necessarily put their affairs into some such
Method, as this we have commended; If they have any concern for their Patients,
or intend to improve Pharmacy it self. For as it has been well observed, if we
depend only upon that we read in Books, we shall never promote this Art beyond
its present limits; and if Physicians in former times had not been knowing in
Simples, examined their Virtues, and Tempers, enquired into their Effects, and
mixed them with their own hands, there had been no such Science as Physic. Now
according to the Ancient Axiom, Ex quibus Constamus, ex iisdem Nutrimur, Those
things which gave a being to this Noble faculty must help to make it complete;
toward which as nothing can contribute more than the improvement of Pharmacy:
so neither can any thing promote that, more than Physicians taking it into
their Management. But besides all this, it is fit that they who exercise
themselves in the Practice of Physic, be satisfied their Medicines are good;
whereby their Mind will be free, and without any clog: which would add more
difficulties and dangers to a thing by it self hard and dangerous.

These and other Considerations mentioned and insisted on in the following
Discourse will I assure my self, persuade all Physicians who have respect to
the good and benefit of their Patients, Honor of their inrofession, or own
Reputation, to put Pharmacy into other hands, and into better Methods, than
those wherein at present it is; Whereby they who now dishonor it (I mean the
Apothecaries) will either be reduced to a sense and performance of their Duty,
or sufficiently punished. For Notwithstanding that they do now Unanimously
resolve with associated endeavors to Oppose all Reformation; yet I am
persuaded that if Physicians take some such courses as those I have mentioned,
the event will be the samewith that of Mutinies. Where if the Commande^ be
resolute he makes some of the Mutineers exemplary, and threatens others; of
fierce, that they were in general, each one out of his particular Fear becomes
obedient: So how insolent soever the Apothecaries now are when they see their
Punishment near and certain, not trusting to one another, they will hasten all
to Obedience; especially if good encouragement be given to those who return to
their Duty, and become Reformadoes.

And now (to hasten to a Conclusion) if any fancy, we have too rudely attaqued
the Apothecaries, let them consider (and then certainly they will excuse us)
that what we have done is only in our own defense; for we had never interrupted
their quiet, could they have contained themselves within due limits and not
invaded our Profession. So that if the Case be stated rightly, it will appear
most evident, that we are on the Defensive part, They the Aggressors; and that
we cannot justly be blamed, if in our own Defense we offend them: or if being
forced, we take violent Courses, whose End yet is not (as may be pretended)
Destruction and confusion, but Order and redress.

Nothing now remains but that I Apologize for the defects of the ensuing
Discourse. It may be objected, that the Method is not exact, the expression
rude, the Style unpolished and abrupt, the parts not closly cemented by handsome
and suitable Transitions. All which I readily acknowledge: But withal Desire
the Readers to consider that this Book was begun and finished within the space
of six or eight days at the most; and even then I was not free from diversions
of many kinds: so that being penned in so short a time, the subject it self
unpleasant, and the writer variously distracted, it is scarcely possible it
should be complete in Method or Expression. Besides, this Discourse was not
calculated for Scholars, but for the Vulgar to whose capacity it is adapted;
for if I had intended to instruct the former, I would have taken more time and
pains, digested the matter better, disposed it more advantageously, and
endeavored to cloth it in more handsome expressions.

I must not here forget to acknowledge, that I have borrowed several passages
from the judicious Author of a late excellent Discourse concerning the State of
Physic, and the regulation of its Practice. I suppose it will be easily
imagined that I could have spoken the same things in other words; but my
respect for that Worthy Person disposes me to believe they will sound better
and be more effectual in his own language; although I must crave his pardon for
transposing some, and accommodating others to a proposal, he did not then think
fit to mention.

For Faults in Printing etc. the Printer must be responsible; and particularly
for that formal beginning of the 177. Page, which was never so intended by the
Author.

This is all with which I thought fit to acquaint thee, I shall therefore now
end with this request. That thou determine nothing in the behalf, or to the
prejudice of this performance, till thou have impartially examined all that is
contained therein; and then if it appear that I have spoken truth, I expect it
should be owned and promoted by thee: if I be in any thing mistaken I am
content to hear of it, and ready to retract whatsoever is not consonant to
Truth and Reason.

A TOUCHSTONE FOR PHYSIC, etc.
THough of all the Natural Sciences, that of Physic, and therein, the
Medicinal part is of most Concernment to Humane Happiness: yet is there hardly
any Art, Science or Mystery, whether for Delight, Convenience or Necessity, but
what has gotten the start thereof, by many degrees, of real Improvement;
Whilst Physic, the chief of Arts, instituted for the preservation of Man's
health, without which all his felicity in a moment is turned into gall and
bitterness; has so little to glory in, that notwithstanding infinite
endeavors of the studious, with the utmost help of Chemistry; the mok skillful
do ingenuously confess, They believe the far better part rests still
undiscovered.

A Truth too evident, and the sad causes thereof too manifest to be doubted;
yet so accompanied with unpleasing reflections, both upon the Speculative,
Inventive and Practick part, that I willingly decline all repetition of
whatsoever upon my enquiry fell into observation.

Only as to the most Important, and which rendered the whole Fabric crazed
and tottering: I must needs say, That to my Apprehension, the aims of the
Studious, Inquisitive after the Conservation or Restoration of Man, the sole
Subject of Physic, had not been taken aright, nor in due measure proportioned
to so peculiar and so refined a Being.

For, permitting my Understanding its free course throughout the Wilderness of
Physical Notions; at length my thoughts thus fixed: That the Original
constitution of Humane Nature, being at first but One, however since deviated
into various Temperatures and Complexions; and being far more sublimed, than
any other Creature on Earth, to render his Body a fit Instrument for his Divine
contemplative and discoursive Soul. The whole mass of assistants assigned by
this Art, for his supportation or recovery, appeared either so weak and
impotent; or else so course, casual, violent and dangerous; as seemed very
unsuitable so sublime a Nature.

Upon which, I conceived it undeniably requisite, that all provisions and
preparations designed for help of Mankind, ought in special manner, both in
purity, efficacy and pregnancy, to hold due and just proportion to the
peculiarity of the true Humane Temperature or Constitution: and that all
administrations of a gross, impure, or improper, unbenign nature, must needs
produce cross and perverse effects; and could not but be the main occasion of
the manifold failings and miscarriages so frequently and apparently discernable
in Physic.

With which conclusion being very much satisfied; my hopes soon led me into
persuasions of a possibility of raising new ayds both to Diet and Medicine, so
refined, and so suited to the true Humane Constitution, and so appropriate to
distinct Infirmities, Distempers, and Diseases; that, administered in any case,
and to any complexion, though never so far distant from the original: should
really intend its reduction, and without any disturbance of Nature, by
Loosners, Vomiters, Bleedings, Issues, Shaving the head, Clisters, Blisters;
and without Minerals, or any hazardous or nauseous Ingredients; might
rationally be relied on in all extremities: And this solely from their
powerful friendliness to Humane Nature, and efficacious virtue in
extinguishing the venomous causes of Diseases.

In pursuance whereof, depending very much upon my palate, long exercised in
determining of Virtues, (by which, Compounds, as well as Simples, became
equally liable to my assistance;) and pressed thereunto by an express
propensity in Nature: In process of time I proved so succesful in choice of
materials, and in heightning and uniting of Excellencies; as by degrees to
raise a large variety of so kindly and so powerful Medicines, That not only
have approved themselves serviceable to the Healthful in Diet and Refreshment;
and to the weakest women and children in manifold infirmities; but in greatest
extremities, (all other means failing) have frequently been prevalent, beyond
all hope or expectation; and this too (according to my ayms) without any
outward Violence or inward Disturbance of the body, either by Vomiters,
Loosners, Minerals, or any other Disturbers of Nature.

Insomuch that their various, weighty and remarkable performances have long
time represented their peculiar qualifications, as so many evident marks and
characters of Real Medicine, whereby to distinguish such as are (from such as
are not) to be trusted in cure, or fit for Humane Constitutions.

And to my own particular; ever since I understood them, they have served me as
a real Test or Touchstone of Medicine; using no other, for any that rely on me
in any occasion, but Medicines of their qualities; wherein having been
succesful, to my own satisfaction, and others approbation, yea even to
admiration: I have thence entertained some apprehensions, that it could not be
taken amiss, but rather as a fair progress toward the Arts Improvement, to
publish these Marks and Characters, as a competent Touchstone for probation of
Medicine in general; especially of my own; and thereby possibly come to be
somewhat better understood, as to my Physical Conceptions, than hitherto I have
been; some having been over forward to imagine, all I aimed at, or had
attained, amounted to no more, but only some pleasant preparations and
productions, serving merely for Refreshment and Recreation, without any
material effect or prevalencie upon Distempers and Diseases. Whether it be so
or not, and how far they are mistaken, who thus censure, the whole Discourse
will plainly evince: and happily may prove a safe and sure Guide to distressed
Patients, what kind of Medicines to avoid, and what to embrace, in any their
necessities.

The Marks and Characters, with their Grounds or Reasons annexed, are as
follows.

AS, First, I conceive, a benign kindly Medicine ought to be Liquid: and this,
for avoiding that difficulty and disturbance incident in the disgesture of
those of grosser substances; and likewise for the evil consequence of their
remaining earthy parts in the coats, films and crevices both of the stomach and
bowels, which generally so clog and tire the natural faculties to expel them;
as instead of that quiet and ready help requisite in Sickness, makes Nature a
new and tedious work in their avoidance; as whoever notes shall find in a sad
dejection of Spirit when they have done their best. Whereas things Liquid, if
mild, disturb no part, puts Nature to no stress in ordering them to its best
advantage, nor leaves any remains for after Inconveniences: but through their
gentle Vivacity, and insinuative Virtues, (like the Waters of Life) immediately
prosecute the prime End for which they were taken.

II. I conceive they ought not only to be Liquid, but transparently clear and
pure, exempt from all grossness of residence or taint of rankness. It being
possible to have liquid things as bright and clear as Crystal, which yet in
smell no carrion ever exceeded in noysomness; a tang whereof, any one that
notes will find, in most of what is used for Refreshment or for Relief, in
first Illness. Which should be heedfully avoided, because by things course,
rank, or tainted, the whole sourse of Blond and Spirits become insensibly to be
corrupted; all faculties debilitated; and the best and strongest constitutions,
by degrees, betrayed into the worst distempers; therefore, like Virtues
descending from above, they ought to be immaculately clear and pure.

III. Such Medicines as may be trusted in cure, I conceive, ought, as much as
is possible, to be Pleasant and to suffice in small quantity; that they may not
in the least be burdensome, but at first touch appear like true and cheerful
friends, that make the distressed heart leap for joy; no sooner tasted, but
Nature bids them welcome, and easily disposes them to their proper service.
Bonum and jucundum, as in Divine benedictions, being never to be separated in
Physic.

IV. Such Medicines with the precedent qualities, ought especially to be highly
virtuous and powerful, and which at first taste, by their lively, sp^ightly,
yet mild quickness, should evidently appear such stout, longbreath'd valiant
Champions, as are thoroughly qualified to tug grapple with, and subdue the most
violent, venomous, pestilential enemies of Man's Health and happiness: And yet
withal so mild, gentle and manageable, (like our blessed Lamb and Lion
couched together) as Children in greatest weakness may partake with safety; and
for assurance that they are such, the prescribers, if desired, are to take the
like quantity in sight of the Patient or Relations, for the more undoubted
assurance of its innocence, and that it partakes not of any hazardous
ingredient.

V. Such Medicines as may comfortably be relied on in cure and in cases of
extremity, ought to be so truly friendly to Humane Nature, that if taken by
man, woman or child, in health, shall no ways move their bodies, but shall
nourish and strengthen them: and yet if by any in Sickness, the very same
Medicines, taken in the same quantity, shall in due time either open or bind,
vomit or stop vomiting, sweat or restrain sweating, give sleep or abate
excessive sleeping; as the instant necessity of the body most requires, or
most conduces to recovery. And this, as the most distinguishing character, I
conceive, is most to be noted by the Ingenious, and to be insisted on: For how
can that possibly appear truly to deserve the Name of a Medicine, or real
helper of the sick, or be rationally deemed to work upon a distemper; which, if
given to a well person, shall either bind or loosen him, vomit, or sweat, or
lay him asleep, even as it does those who are sick? and which if given to never
so sound a person in larger quantity, shall purge him, or vomit him into his
grave, sweat out his last breath, or sleep him past ever waking to this life;
which are the known qualities of most things given in Sickness: So as with much
more likelihood they might be styled Disturbers of Nature, (for how else do
they thus work upon the healthful?) rather than Medicines and friendly
Helpers, whose good qualities are with tenderness to cherish and retain all
that is good in the body, and without the hazardous violences of Purgers,
Vomiters, Bleedings, Issues, Shaving the head, Clisters, or Blisters; and
without Minerals, or other nauseous or dangerous Ingredients, to exclude only
what is evil; and not, Bedlam-like, turn good to bad, and then madly throw out
all together; which are the properties not of Heavenly and peaceable, but of
Infernal wrathful Spirits.

VI. And lastly, Such Medicines as may be justly relied on in cure, that they
may be known to be complete, ought not to be perishable Commodities, which
argues such defects, as renders them unlikely to hold out upon a long march;
being apt to tire, grow faint, sick, weak and heartless, before, or when they
come in sight of, or near the enemy, therefore they ought not to want this sure
Mark, (Close stopped) to keep Good for Years (in all Climates) and in full
strength and vigor without any the least diminution; much after the similitude
of an endless life, which is no small assurance of their real virtue and
efficacy. Then having all the other precedent qualities conjoined in every
medicine; and a large variety of them, (variety being singularly useful) you
have medicines most Masculine and Heroic, such as may confidently be relied on
for Cure, and be easily distinguished from those which are hazardous, or
dangerous.

All which being neither difficult to remember; nor hard to be understood; and
such as cannot be denied to be both pertinent and sufficient for proof and
assurance of Medicine: Admit patients and all the Ingenious every where should
henceforth hold Practitioners strictly to these Characters; accepting or
refusing; accordingly: what a mighty Improvement would it soon occasion in
Physic: By necessarily enforcing all Students and Practitioners, to set
themselves to that which the Noble Hippocrates made the chief Character of a
Physician worthy Estimation Viz. By Study and his own Industry, to bring to
light something that was not known before, and better known than unknown, or at
least to perfect something that was imperfect before.

And then as Excellencies for real use in Physic could not but every where
abound; so would such a Test established, naturally tend to the fixation of
this too much uncertain Art; put a period to the many Contrarieties and
Contradictions of Practitioners, be an occasion of less harm and danger, of
more pertinency, certainty, and security in Cure: and abundantly more enable
them to perform with Comfort the infinite trust reposed in them, especially by
their more Ingenious and Noble Patients in their extremities.

These are the Marks and Characters conceived requisite for the test of
Medicine; and the desirable Advantages which in good probability would ensue
upon such an establishment.

Nor let any suppose, as some may be apt to do, (who are loath any thing should
prove of weight, but what they themselves discover) that these Characters or
Marks of real Medicine are but mere impracticable notions, set forth to amuse
the credulous with wonders that never were nor never will be found in medicine:
For silencing all such slight suggestions, since such medicines are best known
by their Fruits: It will be best and most proper to let them speak for
themselves in some of their many fold instances of Cures performed by them, in
various and dangerous cases: and are as follows.

The first of which, is of a man of middle age, afflicted with so extreme a
Bloody Flux as was deemed incurable, yet he perfectly recovered by two ounces
of a medicine, every way answering those Characters; being a powerful subduer
of those venoms which occasion such distempers.

Another is of one about 50: who had been long ill, but being of a strong
constitution, thought with help of ordinary means to wear it out: As the manner
of many has been, till the best comes too late; and they wear themselves into
their Graves, as it was like to have proved with him; for when my advise was
first desired, he was sore all over his body, light headed, spots upon his
breast, very feverish, and swo^n in his leg: other advise he had which
ordered him to bleed; which he not likeing, he fell under my Charge, and in
less then eight days time, by the sole help of Medicines of the same nature,
perfectly recovered.

Another is of a Gentleman about 30. long and grievously tormented with an
Ague: both hot and cold fitts; violently painful, with extreme thirst, and
soreness of throat; who after much time and money spent in vain, being plied
with some variety of these medicines, became perfectly well. In which case as
the variety proved very acceptable, so proves it Generally very successful in
all or most distempers.

Another is of a young Gentleman, who upon an extreme Cold and soreness all
over his body falling into a violent vomiting, and looseness; which increasing
under much means of Physic, I was importuned to take care of him; and in less
than a weeks time he recovered, solely by the use of diverse of these Medicines.

Another instance is of a Gentleman somewhat above fifty: surprised with a
violent surfeit, and its worst effects, excream vomiting, headache, high fever,
and soreness every where: and which notwithstanding many consultations, and
thereupon bleedings, purgings, vomitings, often repeated: with sundry the best
reputed Julips and Cordials usual in such cases: nevertheless settled into six
hours cold fits, with tortures in his knees and ancles as if upon the Rack, and
near upon ten hours hot fitts, his breast stuffed with tough and clammy
phlegm, throat swollen and blister'd, his tongue parcht, scurft, raw and so big
that he could hardly speak a word to be understood.

In this woeful plight, his Physicians, Himself and Relations quite hopeless,
hearing what had been performed by my Medicines, I was sent for: yet not
without much scruple, as one that gave chiefly Spirits and hot things: which
this Gentleman said, How to one in such a flame as he was in, Spirits and hot
things could be proper, he could not understand: I replied, he would soon find
there was a benign as well as a venomous heat, that indeed he had too much of
the one, but too little of the other; And that without supplies of the better,
his Lamp of Life could not be long maintained.

Which yet I perceived he so slowly admitted, that I was leaving of him: but
his Lady taking me aside, and asking me whether I thought there was any
possibility of his recovery: I told her I did believe there was: she asked me
by what means, there having been so much used and failed: I said by Cordial
Medicines: she said he would not endure any thing that was hot, I told her it
was impossible without it: But yet such heaters as would certainly cool him:
she asktme if I had any such, I told her I would have none else, nor valued any
other.

Which so far prevailed that he took that Night two ounces of one of my
Medicines, and so did constantly of that or some other, always before his cold
fit; and at the end of it, respecting his hot fit, both which with all their
painful threatening effects were after a while much mitigated, and in conclusion
most happily extinguished. And had been sooner but for the unfortunate
interposition of a gentle Purger; which because of Costivenes was pressed upon
him by one of his Physicians, who generally make such a do about keeping the
body solluble, as spoils all too often. This Purge though of the middle sort,
(which I must not know of at no hand) gave him upon twenty stools, and so
cheerful he was upon it, that they reckoned now all filth was purged and
carried out of his body: Insomuch as when I came amongst them, all eyes were
cloudy upon me; so I said little, and off I went: But before next morning the
Scene was altered, and I hastily sent for, his cold and hot fits being doubled
both in time and extremity; And he so weakened as they all feared his sudden
dissolution: Bu^ falling to work a fresh with the same Medicines, though this
mischievous loosener set us back at least ten Cordials, yet it was not longe're
all was perfected, wherein our pleasant varlety proved infinitely Advantageous
and Contentful.

For so clear a Convert this Gentleman became, that though at first any thing
of heat frightened him, yet so thoroughly reconciled to my heaters was he, that
not only all his Cordials were freely taken by him, but for one of them,
(which has heat enough in it to startle most practisers) he would not be
without a moment and not only sipping of it, but drinking of it continually
night and day, so much more easy is it to convince an ingenious Gentleman
(with whom Reason and Experience soon prevail) rather then Capricious Arts-men,
whose too much self-respect, or error in breeding sway them, one while to
accuse those Medicines of deficiency because of their mildness, another while
of danger because of their heat: And indeed Generally to adhere to old and
mistaken Maxims.

For so in this case when the Cure was almost finished, comes one, who finding
by all was done he had never sweat, Rashly pronounces, Then he could not Live.
And so in all have writ a large Receipt to enforce a sweat, a Mineral therein
being the main Agent depended on for producing the effect. But the Gentleman
was more wary than to take it, and so contrary to his adored Aphorism,
recovered without once Sweating in all the time of his sickness, and in reason
may somewhat restrain the too frequent interposing of Artsmen and at^endants
with their vulgar opinions: For of all who have relied upon these Medicines,
none ever miscarried but two: the one by the importunate obtrusion of a
Loosener; and the other by the unkindness of a far absent Brother which in
sickness proves mortal like a venomous Damp.

My next instance is of one naturally of a good Constitution, and Cheerful,
whose occasions inducing his too much converse with Wine, in process of time
inclining to the Dropsy, and in fine swelled his belly, took away his
appetite, sometimes he had stoppage of his Urine, and sometimes made reddish
water, under which Infirmities he remained long, though he used the best
counsel and Physic he could get; but instead of amendment, fell into other
extremes; for his flesh every way aba^ed, his strength utterly failed, his
belly sunk and clung'd to his back, no stools but by Glisters, nor could he eat
one bit of flesh-meat at any rate, nor ought else but as he forced it down. In
this sad plight he desired my assistance, and in fourteen days with medicines
of this kind only, his appetite and digesture were recovered, his strength
restored, his flesh and countenance well likeing, his belly in due state, his
urine and stools natural and he so blyth and jocund as was wonderful to all
that knew him, and so continued for above four months: But his occasions still
misleading of him; and upon a frolic overgoing his strength he fell ill again,
and then unhappily waving the means which had formerly helped him, took a
resolution to be his own Physician, by help of such Books as were then in
repute, wherewith he tampered so long till he was past recovery, his Distempers
being far above the reach of Book or common Medicine.

The next is of a Gentlewoman long under Physic for Distempers of the Breast,
as Cough, shortness of Breath, Feverish, extremely wasted in body, and sunk in
Spirits, hardly eating or drinking but what she vomited purged; and vomited and
bled, she had been with Issues, and her head shaved, and so left hopeless,
unless by Country air in the Spring. This being the beginning of Winter, many
questions and much discourse I had from her, as whether I had ever seen any one
in her distemper, or had ever cured any: Also what means I intended; seeing as
able Physicians as London yielded prevailed not: I told her 'twas not my way to
speak either of my Experience or Performance, that if the party who advised her
to send for me had not satisfied her therein: And withal, that I was not apt to
undertake, but where I had ample hopes of Cure, he was too blame. And that I
did believe and was well assured that there was both more proper and more
powerful means in being, than Physicians were usually acquainted with; and by
which with Gods blessing, I did not doubt to cure her, as hopeless as she was,
without either purging, or vomiting, or bleeding, or issues, wishing also her
Hair had been spared, as the chief comfort of so weak a Head, with this she
cheered a little.

So I fell to work with my real Medicines, and in few weeks time so far
prevailed, as that she frequently went abroad that Winter: nor kept she house
any more on this occasion,

Another Instance is of a Girl about four years old, that by a Fever and
Consumption, and much Roving Physic was in a hopeless condition, yet in a
weeks time by these Medicines only, perfectly recovered.

A young Gentleman came to me about noon with an Ague most terribly shaking
him, to whom I immediately gave half a Pint of one of my Medicines well heated,
which was the usual way by which in the great Ague Year abundance were cured:
He drank it off at two draughts, and it stayed with him, but within a quarter
of an hour it made him vomit very largely, and thereupon he became instantly so
well, as I would have had him dine with (...) but excusing himself he fell fast
a sleep for two hours, and never had the least Grudgings after it; which is the
more to be noted, because it is frequent with the same Medicine to stay
vomitings when the body any ways stands in need thereof.

A young Maiden much depressed in Spirit, and swollen in body by unkindly
Obstructions, which she could find no means to dissolve, upon the use of one
of these Medicines appropriate to those distempers, perfectly recovered.

A middle aged Woman, troubled grievously with Hystericall distempers taking a
good quantity of a Medicin thereto appropriate, recovered; as abundance more
have done, by the same and the like means: for in this, as in most other
Distempers, Variety proves of very absolute advantage.

Also a young Lad, lying more like a dead than a living child; taking a small
quantity of one of the Medicines for that purpose, in short time voyded Worms
and recovered, as many others also have done, who have been thought to have had
Worms though they voyded none.

A young man being in a tedious Fever, and finding no relief in much Physic
used to him; a friend of his sent him often small quantities of my Medicines,
which those with whom he was, scrupled to let him take; being told, they were
too hot, and altogether unfit for him in his case, which was near unto a
Pleuresie: Yet doing all they otherwise could, growing worse and worse, his
friends urged him to remove to their house; which being done, weak and ill as
he was, and he then plied a while with diverse of them, his Cure came on very
fairly. But on a sudden was almost choked with a mass of thick putrid phlegm,
which yet, sipping upon a Medicine peculiar thereunto, for some continuance; it
so ripened, raised, and freely expelled it, (as is usual with it in all cases
of phlegm) that he instantly and perfectly recovered.

Another Instance is of a Gentleman, who with his Lady being in Town upon Law
occasions in height of Summer, fell into an extreme Fever: She having had full
knowledge of the recovery of some of her friends, by the use of my Medicines,
when all other means proved fruitless; She of her self singled out one of them,
which upon occasion she had used her self also; and so possessed her Husband with
confidence therein, that he solely relied thereupon, and with the expense of
about three Pints of it, perfectly recovered: and which has drawn their
affections so toward it, that they have had often of it, and diverse others of
them, for their Family occasions.

Another is of One some Thirty miles from London, long tired with a violent
Fever, that admitted no check by the utmost endeavors of a skilful Physician;
but having formerly had good experience of my Medicines, withstood all denial,
and hasted a friend to me for a Pint of one of my Medicines, which he named,
and a small quantity of another, and what else I would send him: So, I sent him
the Pint of the first he named, and six Ounces of the next, and as much of
another, and three Ounces of a fourth sort; which being soon with him, although
many cautions were given him, in respect of their heat, he being, as was told
him, scorched and scalded from the tip of his tongue down to his Navel; yet
being sure of what he did, he no sooner set sight of the largest Glass, but he
catches it, and drinks a good sound draught of it, and so time after time, till
he had taken all of them: and very much mending thereupon, sent for another
Pint more of the first he had sent for, with this Commendum, That he hoped to
see me suddenly: and was as good as his word.

And seeing thus is their general performance; helping and recovering in the
extremities of thirst, and most violent Inflammations; notwithstanding their
manifest heat: It were but equal, all such false-accusing and unreasonable
Cautions should for ever cease, or be never more regarded, by whomsoever
uttered; and that whoever henceforth urges their familiar mildness, as a note
of their Insufficiency; (as our Mineral Practisers use to do) when thus they
have constantly manifested their power and efficacy in most dangerous cases:
may themselves be noted of perverseness in endeavoring to affright and dehort
people, from their safest and most effectual Helpers, to a dependence on what
is either insufficient or hazardous.

And truly some others, besides the last mentioned, in their extremities have
found strength enough to break through these and the like cobweb-snares and
scruples. One more especially: who, after traversing the usual course of
Physic through and through; as purging, vomiting, bleeding, with Juleps upon
Juleps, and Cordials upon Cordials of the best current: and finding no
amendment or abatement of his most violent heat and thirst; grew importunate
for some of my Medicines, even to impatience; which, though sparingly allowed
by his Physicians, and under usual cautions for their heat; yet he took of them
nevertheless freely and plentifully; and upon a sudden became so perfectly
well, as was sufficient to have converted a hundred Scruplers.

And was not wholly fruitless: For, after this Gentleman walked abroad, using
often to visit me, as one was treating with me about my Medicines for his
Friend in a high Fever; upon tasting of them, objecting their Heat, as improper
in such cases: This Gentleman noting it, says to him, Sir, let no body abuse
you with such doubts; for I my self being in as high a Fever, with extremity of
thirst and burning like the very fire, as I verily believe could not be
exceeded; yet when all other means proved vain and ineffectual, these cooled
me, quenched my thirst, and cured me. But, says the other Gentleman, You took
them then very warily, and in small quantity: With that he catches a Glass
which held about four ounces, says he, When I was at worst, I drank thus much
at a draught, and often.

But, until men of parts, art and practice enable themselves better to
distinguish of Heats, and more accurately to discern of Virtues proper to
Humane nature; but continue perversely to determine, that because this Medicine
is as hot as Sack or White Wind, conclude it therefore as improper and
dangerous to be administered in sickness; or, because this or that Cordial
Medicine is so mild, that people in health drink them as familiarly, as Burnt
Claret or brewed White Wind; therefore, alas, what power can such have in
Putrid Fevers, and Pestilential Distempers: till they blush at such
unphilosophical arguings, and search deeper into the Mystery of Heats and
Mildness, and take in daily some grains of Self-denial, they will be apt either
through partiality, to speak worse of things, than they know they do deserve,
or through error to speak evil of things they know not: and either way are
improper Guides, ever inclined to mislead the distressed in their greatest
extremities; and which renders this evident Test of Medicine of real and
infinite use in such doubtful Judgings.

But it fell out generally, if one said I am dry already, and these will make
me more thirsty; I am obstructed, and these cannot but be binding; I sweat, and
these will certainly increase it; I am subject to be disturbed in my head, and
these must needs intoxicate: It was great odds but some or other would soon
assure the contrary from their own experience. All which their benign
qualities, and exemption from evil, they really ow unto their coherence with
the true Humane Complexion: a Conception, though absolutely requisite to the
Art of Health, yet, I doubt, too great a stranger to be suddenly understood, or
be bid welcome among Artists, so generally prepossessed; yet Time and a good
Touchstone may make even the stoutest stoop to reason.

My next Instance is, of an ingenious generous Gentleman, who by violent
exercise had so overstrained his body, that he was not able to go without much
pain; after some discourse, I sent him two pints of two several Medicines, the
one being to be frequently taken, and the other by two ounces every night: and
by thus using them, he perfectly recovered.

Likewise the same Gentleman, sometime after, being sorely afflicted with the
Toothach, having taken many Medicines in vain, complaining to me of it, I told
him, I thought he might be certain of help that night, by taking a small
quantity of one of my Cordial Medicines: at which he smiled, and asked me, How
a Cordial could help the Toothach? I said, By extinguishing the venom that
caused it; and it was rather questionable, What a real Cordial Medicine could
not do. Nay then, says he, If you are so confident, pray let me have one. So I
gave him only two ounces of one I had good experience of, half to be taken
that night at resting time, a little warmed in his hand; and the other part, if
he needed it, after his first sleep. The first cured him; but for more
security, he took the rest next night, and so was thoroughly well; nor have I
ever found a more certain course in this painful distemper, though nor always
so suddenly; and then should be longer continued, with abstinence from Wine and
all gross Diet, which further all Cures.

And since this performance; It has not only done this Gentlemnan the like
service; but when at any time he has any ways been indisposed, and sometimes
he has been so feverish, that he has thought there was no way but by
bleeding; yet even then two ounces of the same Medicine, or at most four ounces
for twice taking, has not failed to discharge all to his full satisfaction;
plainly also showing, that a kindly true humaniz'd Medicine, may be proper and
effectual in several Distempers.

Another seeking my help, was a Gentlewoman: Her Servant brings an Urinal,
desired me to look on that Water; I told her it was not my way: She ask't me,
how then I would understand the Disease? I ask't her, if she knew any that
could tell whether it proceeded as it was from Man, Woman or Child: She said,
she could: I told her, in that she knew more than any Physician could be sure
of, let him pretend what skill he would; and that unless she had somewhat else
to say, I should talk no longer with her: With that she named a very worthy
person, and some of her Infirmities, that she had been long under Physic, but
yet remained in extreme weakness. Many questions I asked her, which she could
not resolve, and so desired I would give her a visit: I told her, I did not use
^o visit any; but if she pleased to send one to me that could acquaint me
expressly with her condition* I would assist her the best I could.

So next morning, her Sister came to me. But instead of farther informing me
how she was, she only importuned me to see her. I told her, I did not avoid
visits, because I was unwilling to attend any; but as not judging it needful,
my experience assuring me I could perform as much upon good information, as
upon sight. She seemed to muse at it, yet would have no denial, but I must
promise to see her without delay; which I performed: and truly she was brought
extreme low, looked like death it self, and even hopeless of recovery; giving
me withal so clouded a countenance, as much disliked me. But se^^ing me by
her, she related to me the original and progress of her Distemper, how long she
had been ill, what abundance of means she had used, by advise of such as she
knew both able and faithful; and yet naught availed, but that she was as I saw
her.

Upon which, I told her, I did believe there was yet other means and more
effectual than had been used: She said, Every one spoke well of their own, but
she found little comfort; asking me whether I ever saw any in her condition? I
told her I had never seen two persons in all respects distempered alike: She
asked me whether I had ever cured any in her case, or like it? I ask't her,
whether she would not be well pleased to be the first? She said, she did not
like to run any hazards. I told her, if she referred herself to me, she should
run none at all; for what I intended to give her, she should, if she pleased,
see me or any in our house take the like quantity of the same before her. She
said, that was fair; but then how could things so familiar, work ou^ such a
mass of rooted corruption, as she was loaded with in every part of her. I told
her, I did not doubt of it, and that she should find all her distempers
insensibly vanish; and that by such pleasing means, as she would never be
unwilling to take. With that she smiled, and wished she could believe it. I told
her, there lay all the difficulty; because as to that point, how far my words
were to be credited, I should be silent; she must be satisfied of that some
other way, and ought to have been done before I was sent for: and with that was
taking my leave. But she stayed me with a Glass of Wine, and offered me money;
which I refused, being unwilling to be so engaged. So she wished me to prepare
what I thought needful for her that night, and she would send for it, and in
the morning I should hear how she was, and would take what I sent her, and
observe my counsel solely.

Which she did most exactly, though there wanted not who would have been busy
with their gentle Purgers, as they somewhat undeservedly entitle their
Loosners; which usually cleanse but as dirty beesoms, that too often make a
worse kind of filth than they avoid, and more dangerous, even to the defilement
of the Blood and Spirits. But as hap was, I had her promise against all
intermedlings; and in little more than a weeks time made all my words so good,
(and that solely by Medicines agreeable to this Test) that she went immediately
and cheerfully into the country, taking for her Viaticum, a good quantity of a
Cordial fit for the occasion.

And the circumstances of this, and many of the other instances warily
observed; as on the one hand they manifest that generally it is far more
difficult to persuade Patients of the possibility of their cure, than to cure
them: so also, how apt they are both to give large credit, where they have
cause enough of scruple, (as in the common road of Physic) and to distrust
where there is no cause of fear at all; and this for want of some certain marks
of distinction upon Medicines whereby to guide their judgments, which possibly
this, or some other Touchstone may henceforth happily supply.

Besides, in all my Observation of her confused complicated Distempers; I could
ascribe them to nothing more, than to the variety and frequency of purgative
and vomitive Medicines, she had long time been accustomed to; as believing such
Distempers impossible to be otherwise removed: yea so bewitched are most people
therewith, that they never think or speak of Physic or Medicine, but they
intend Vomiters o^ Loosners, as if nothing else deserved the name of Physic,
but such as brought them pain or torture; frequently left them in misery, or
prepared for future mischief: as this Gentlewoman sadly found to her cost. But
it is hopeful, time and a little consideration will produce a better
understanding in matters of so great moment.

Whilst this Cure was in agitation: a Child in the country, very dear and
nearly related to them, being extremely ill, my help was desired; I sent only
three ounces of one of my Medicines, by which it recovered.

Many other particulars, worthy note, have been since performed by the like
Medicines, for this worthy Family and their alliance, diverse large quantities
being frequently fe^cht for their occasions, and to their their contentful
satisfaction: plainly showing how much may be performed, where there are store
of such real Medicines, without the nic^ties of Uri^es, pulses, and such
predictive curiosities, which too often distract both Patients and Physicians,
or but rarely assist them to any material indication.

Another Lady* some miles from London, in a most terrible Fever, and after long
proceeds in the best of usual Physic, farther to seek, and more threatened with
the saddest issue; being persuaded by a friend, sent for some of my Medicines;
by allowance of her Doctors. I sent her six ounces of one most appropriate; and
sending again, I sent as much of another* and next time, of the first the like
quantity; by help of which she perfectly recovered, with very thankful
respects to her Physicians, for their so signal freedom and self-denial in her
preservation.

About this time I received a Letter from a young Gentleman, a stranger to me,
concluding I could certainly cure him of many distempers therein related,
chiefly a violent pain in his Head and Breast, which had cost him much in
Physic without any benefit. I sent him a Pint mixed and made up of two of my
Medicines, advising him to take it in equal parts at four nights, which he did;
and immediately after came with a great deal of joy, telling me he was
perfectly well: and which occasioned many of his friends and relations, people
of quality, to apply themselves to the use of these Medicines for sundry
infirmities, speeding no worse than he had done: and some of them receiving
that satisfaction from them, which they could hardly believe within the power
of Art to have effected.

Which I thus express, to show that it is no absurdity, even for Persons of
Honor to put so much trust and confidence in some Students or Arts-men; as to
take freely and without scruple those preparations, which they judge requisite
for their recovery, though they know no part of their Ingredients, as these
worthy persons most readily did; deeming it no disparagement at all to be
governed in such cases, wholly by an implicit Faith, as some censoriously term
all trusts of this nature; whose overmuch wariness is generally punished with
false stories of what is given them, or with supplies only of vulgar
insignificant Medicines, and so by being over careful, too frequently trifle
away their lives and money: for an Arts-man subsisting by his Art, being owner
of it no longer than he keeps it to himself, nothing can be more improper or
unwelcom than to ask discovering Questions; nor would it need at all, where
such a Test as this once comes to bear rule amongst the Noble or ingenious,
because upon trial every one would and might freely trust as he had occasion.

Another young Gentleman was recommended to my care, who had wearied himself
out with seeking remedy for a long settled pain within the uppermost part of
his breast, and sharp painful Rheums in his head, with a cough, and an Hectic
Fever. The first I gave him was only four ounces of so fortunate a Medicine,
for two nights, as quite took away the pain of his breast; after which applying
himself to some others of them his Constitution became so renewed and fixed,
that I believe in maintenance of their innocence and efficacy, he would not
fear to enter the Lists with the most captious or capricious Artist; nor in the
most contageous Time or most violent Distemper, would be drawn to depend on any
other, either Preservatives or Remedies.

Another instance is of a Gentleman of worth and judgment; whose Lady, newly
delivered, and her child dying, fell into a feverish sadness. He wrote to me
her condition, with this also, that he knew nothing so fit for her, as some of
my Medicines, desiring I would send such as I thought good: so I sent only
four ounces of the most appropriate, which she took, and after that, sent for
the like quantity of the same, and once more for the like also, with which she
became perfectly well; and if this tender case do not sufficiently prove their
heat to be innocent, and their mildness to be accompanied with power, it must
be sure with those with whom reason is of no validity.

One whose children had often been recovered by my Medicines, came hastily upon
me from a friend of his, whose young Daughter of about Fourteen, was as he
said, in a very hopeless condition, earnestly desiring me to go and see her. I
asked him, how long she had been ill? He told me, a long time, and the best
advice and means used, but all in vain. I told him, I had declined the usual
way of practice, and visited none, nor was willing to meddle where others had
the care. He said, her father had lately buried two very hopeful children, and
so much feared this, that he was resolved she should take no more of them; and
so much importuned me, that I went with him; finding her quite wasted and
almost breathless, and in a very high fever; I spoke cheerfully to her, and
raised some hopes in her and her sad friends, wishing them to send to me within
two hours: So I sent her three ounces of an appropriate pleasant Medicine to
take two spoonfulls every three hours, and to send for more when it was spent.
She took it with delight, and so with the use only of this, continued for
about Eight days, she went well abroad, and kept within no more through any
infirmity.

One whose child I had formerly cured, passing by, seemed full of care, and
being gone a little, returned suddenly, and told me her child that I once
recovered, was dangerously ill, and that she had been with a Physician, an old
friend of hers, who ordered her to be bled, and ask't what I thought of it; I
told her, 'twas improper for me to meddle in another business, yet that it
would be fit before the child was bled, being not above five years old, to
advise with some others; and ask't her, if he had directed any thing else? with
that she showed a Glass with about three ounces of a very ordinary weak Julep,
which after I had tasted, I gave to a Gentlemen of skill and learning, desiring
his judgment of it in so dangerous a fever: and he saying it was very mean, she
asked me if I could give her any thing more effectual, and spare her bleeding;
I said, I thought I could; and filling a Glass of about two ounces, gave to her
and the Gentleman to taste; and he saying it was full of life, she hasted away
with it, and gave it to the child, by which she recovered perfectly without
bleeding; which may possibly excuse this irregularity.

Another instance is of a young Merchant, somewhat consumptive, exceedingly
troubled with continual pains in his head, who after long toyling under
Physic, desired my advice, but withal said, he was inclined to the use of
that a Friend of his had received much good by, and it being very proper for
him, he took with him a large quantity, and lives very comfortably in the
frequent use of it, resolving where ere he is, not to be without it, or some
other of its neighbour-Medicines.

Another young Gentleman, who had contracted a very ill habit of body, by being
so surpised with Snow in the night, that he was almost frozen to death; yet in
time somewhat growing it out, settled in London. Where he remained very
uncomfortably, full of pains and weakness, which he endeavored to remove by
all the means of Physic he possibly could imagine, but instead of prevailing,
growing worse and worse, he came to me, desiring my help whatever it should
cost. He had continual pains in his head, with want of stomach, soreness all
over his body, a most heavy dullness and indisposition to his occasions, took
joy in nothing, as was too easily discernable by the sad aspect of an ingenuous
countenance. I gave him a Pint of a very general Medicine, which he was to take
by little and little in a weeks time, holding it always a good while in his
mouth before he swallowed it; which he carefully observed, and fetched another
Pint; and so by three or four Pints became perfectly well; and occasioned
diverse of his friends to make use both of this and others: and oftentimes upon
sudden illness made use of them himself, to his constant satisfaction.

Another instance of their benign qualities, agreeing with this Test, is of one
near Fifty, who very much pleasing him self on all occasions with small Mineral
Pills, mightily cried up for all manner of virtues: upon an extreme Cold taken
falling into a Surfeit, with a violent Fever, vehement thirst, and tedious fits;
advised with the Author of those Pills, who ordered him to take a certain
number of them, which working both ways with him* and yet worse upon it; sent
again, and was ordered more; but being still worse, he sent again, and was
still ordered to take more; which he not liking to do, sent his Wife to me, his
condition then being very dangerous: who relating to me all I have expressed, I
told her, He who first had him in hand, ought to amend his error; and that it
could not seem meet for any other to meddle; none knowing so well as he, what he
had given; and that if things never so safe should be prescribed, and the event
succeeded not to his recovery, the blame might be laid nevertheless upon it;
and so advised her to return to him: She said, He would give no other but those
Pills, and she was sure her Husband would take no more of them; earnestly
desiring me to send him somewhat. I told her, I would send him nothing but what
should be as safe as breast-milk for children; but it should be she, and not I,
that should undergo the issue. So I gave her a Pint of an appropriate Medicine,
which he took by two, three and four ounces at a time: and so with the use of
two Pints more, perfectly recovered, thankfully acknowledging its wonderful
effects, especially in quenching his thirst, which he thought impossible; by a
Medicine so apparently hot: But says he I perceive now it is but an abuse to
bid beware of their Heat (some or other having been busy with their cautions)
for it coold me and quenched my thirst, and extinguish my Fever, in the most
contentfull manner imaginable.

Another Instance, Is of a Gentleman of middle age, who upon Heats and Colds,
much intention of business and neglect of usual Dy^t, fell into an irksome
frequent provocation to Stool; but with utmost striving voyded nothing,
desiring my advise I gave him over night three ounces of a General Medicine;
for which next day he gave me hearty thanks, his body then working naturally
and sufficiently: Though this Medicine, I believe was never exceeded in staying
of Loosnesses, which shows it to be of the true Humane strain and virtue.

The same Gentleman long before this upon every Cold taken falling into a
dangerous Quinsie, and still thereupon bled in the Tongue and in the Arm; with
the general course of Physic usual in such cases: and every time more and more
threatening; I at length told him this way could not but so impair his nature,
that at length it would fail him and leav him in the lurch when he stood most
in need of help, and withal that by a good and real Medicine this flattering
way of bleeding might be prevented: So next time he took my counsil, and by
four ounces of an appropriate Medicince taken for two nights; it discharged the
Quinsie and prevented bleeding and all other inconveniences, and was never
since troubled after that manner.

The same person at another time, so Heart-sick and Feverish, that he thought
it impossible to escape a dangerous fit of Sickness: by one three ounces of a
General Medicine, instantly and perfectly recovered.

Also this Gentleman's Wife having had many fits of Sicknesses, and some very
threatening and dangerous; besides her Breeding times, times of Labor and Lyings
In, depending generally upon these Medicines never failed of her desired help:
nor ever used other as upon importunity, sometime she has done, but she
repented it; as she has often sadly acknowledged: Being now fixed to their use
past all removing; her Children have often recovered also diverse dangerous
distempers and fits of Sicknesses: And her Mother although far in years and full
of infirmities, occasioned originally from unhappy advice to bleed in her
youth; and also by prescription of Mineral Vomits, yet by the constant use of
these, though in somewhat scanty quantities, has been preserved beyond all
expectation, maintaining a pregnancy and cheerfulness hardly to be found in
younger and stronger people; so exceedingly do they oppose the impresses of
Age and Sickness.

Another instance, Is of a young Gentlewoman, who after a long journey into the
Country and different Diet, upon her return to London, upon drinking Milk and
over eating Summer Fruit took a Surfit with an high Fever, accompanied with
vomiting, soreness of Throat, tedious empty coughing, which brought her so
extreme low, as was thought impossible for her to escape; yet continually
taking plentifully of diverse of these Medicines, and no other (though much
urged) she at length beyond all hope recovered.

Which plenteous taking is the more to be noted; because therein, in difficult
Cases, chiefly rests the efficacy, and without which people do but Flatrer
themselves with vain hopes of wonders from small matters and little charges; a
humor which has cost many there purses, and too many their lives, to be rid of
painful dangerous distempers contracted by their boldness with cheap Physic,
which ever and anon are obtruded upon the over easy and credulous who rather
then their lives would feign be cured by miracle, that is for nothing.

Besides I have observed some gross abuse, these real Medicines have suffered
by the crafty unfairness of some practitioners, who when after long endeavors
in their usual way of purging, vomitting bleeding, etc. And their Patients as
quite tired growing importunate for some of my Medicines, they have usually
given way for a small quantity; and then nothing the small effects of things so
much talked of, turn to their patients and relations, telling them they may see
they are but as other things, sometimes prevailing and sometimes no^; and so at
once disparaging the Medicines, and clear their readiness to allow of any thing
for their recovery: an unbeseeming subtilty I found more frequently than is
imaginable, and from some, who carry it very smoothly: of which one instance
may be needful.

Being called in all haste to speak with one, A maid attending told me her
Mistress who lay very ill desired something to stay her vomiting, for she could
not retain any thing she took, I asked where she dwelt, and perceived her to be
one, who had been well acquainted with my way, a young daughter of hers having
been cured by my Medicines: I asked what Physicians she had, and diverse were
named, I asked whether she came with their allowance, she said she did, at
which, as I wondered, so I apprehended all hope was over, and scrupled sending
any; but the maid would have no denial; so although I saw it would be to no
purpose but to undervalue my Medicines, yet out of my respects to the Family,
and their want should not be imputed to obstinacy in me, I sent two ounces of a
Medicine, that taken in due time had stayed many such distempers, advising more
should be sent for as there was occasion: But as I feared it was but a little
time after that I saw all her relations in Black.

All which I have thus particularly expressed, That henceforth it may be
seriously minded, how absolutely necessary it is, upon every occasion their aid
is deemed requisite not to defer their use too long, nor to give over too soon,
nor to scruple to take them in full quantity; and in so doing none need to
doubt a comfortable issue: nor are the ingenious to blame me if hereafter I
withstand all such insignificant tamperings, possibly to palliate the
mischievous error of a Mineral, with which the wariest are frequently too bold,
to the irrevocable detriment of bewailing patients and there relations.

My next instance of their innocence and efficacy, Is of a young Gentlewoman,
half gone of her first Child, who being a while in the Country, under far
different accommodations than what her abode in the City plentifully afforded,
with some unusual stirring in business, soon after her return, fell into a
dangerous Fever, with vomiting, bleeding at Nostril, startings and extreme
pains in her back: her husband finding the distemper violent and threatening,
advised with her Friends, and sent for such Physicians as they liked, who for
diverse weeks daily visited, and administered to her with all possible care and
tenderness even till every of them were hopeless of her recovery; her
distempers not only proving obstinate against all means they could imagine,
there being no spare of cost; but ran hourly into higher degrees of danger,
upon which her husband lamenting her condition to me, I told him I feared he
would find her distemper far above the reach and control of the usual Physic,
which he at length found too true, in that after all they could do, her
inflammation heightened into distraction and perpetual restlesness, took nothing
but vomited as soon as taken, painful and tedious fits every night, wasted to
a very Skelli^on, mere skin and bone, nay so ruff and shrivelled, as seemed
more like Fagot-sticks, and under intolerable thirst; So as nothing but
inevitable Death was hourly expected, in this her woeful plight her husband
full of grief and fear desires my assistance, I told him so long as there was
life there was some hope, and that possibly there might be yet means for help,
whereto I should be most ready were it not that she was in others hands, he
said all was at an end, and none could blame either him or me justly, however
he would bear it all, earnestly pressing me to do my utmost: whereupon I gave
him somewhat above two ounces of a general Medicine, which that very night gave
cause of hope, and so plying her both day and night with variety, and large
quantities of these real Medicines for a long time by degrees her fits abated
her thirst ceased, her rest and appetite returned, her vomiting left; and after
a while her flesh and strength was restored to a good condition: and in
conclusion most happily and perfectly recovered, her Child also born alive and
without blemish, to the abashment of diverse her Friends and Visitants; who
usually threatened she would undo her self by such hot Medicines, and bring a
raw and scalded Child into the world: but indeed how could they well do less
hearing continually as they do the wary cautions of the learned against the use
of hot things in such cases but sure there are hopes, such instances as are
here plentifully discovered will in time incline them better to distinguish of
Heats; for during the whole time of her taking them, there was not the least
ill effect to be charged upon; them though upon some accidental relapses she
took in a short space a pint and a half of one of them: every benefit of
nature also being constantly procured and enjoyed as freely and orderly as
could be wished: So that both she and her husband recived so great an assurance
of their innocence notwithstanding their hear, and of their efficacy and power,
for all their mildness and pleasantness That under God, they have both for
themselves, their children and Family, solely depended on them ever since, are
never without good quantities of them always in readiness: and have time after
time told me so many remarkable stories of their happy performances, that were
I torecite them; in likelihood they equal half my Instances which shows how
proper and beneficial this kind of Physic would prove for Families.

Nor did he deem them deer (which some having nothing else to say, are wont to
object to withhold and restrain their use) his first course of Physic under
which she was not recovered, costing him three times more than this that
restored her to her health.

But if this seems not cheap enough, what will they say to this which follows;
for one who was very sensible of this cure and the means thereof a while after
falling into a most violent Fever, and into the hands of the most eminent
Physicians; who yet doing all they could prevailed nothing: and he in his
extremities calling often for some of my Medicines, either not understood or
not heeded: at length when every one thought him past all hope, and in
Convulsive strugglings of Death; as himself after told me, those very motions;
which those who stood by him deemed no other, but the immediate preface to his
Death proceeded solely from a strong persuasion in his Dream, that he was
drinking full quantities of my Medicines for they told him that he often
cagerly lifted both his hands up to his mouth, and down again; and so up and
down til he fell fast asleep, and waked in a well composed condition, which
hourly improved to his complete recovery: and I think he owes my Studies at
least a great good turn for it: or who will not say this Cure was too too cheap
in Conscience.

My next Instance is, of a Gentlewoman, who upon many occasions of distemper
had continually found help by my Medicines; but being near to other Assistance
and much out of order; took something that brought such unusual pains and
shootings about her, that she knew not what to think of her self, indeed very
like to the occult remains of Mineral Medicines: and soon after fell into a
violent Looseness with extreme Gripings: So upon a sudden I was sent to, and I
sent her a quarter of a pint of an appropriate Medicine not used to fail in
such Cases, which being all taken a little warm, perfectly recovered her.

But the last cure ended not so; for within two days after, the Husband of
that Gentlewoman came hastily to me, sadly lamenting an elderly Friend of his
who lay in a very hopeless condition, by occasion only of a Cold at first,
turned to a Su^fit and Fever, which under his Physicians hands increased upon
him and being bound in his body, they gave him various loosning or purging
Medicines: but yet do what they could nothing prevailed, but set him into
extreme vomiting, which what with the fears of his Physicians and his own, very
much aggravated his misery: They excusing the not working of their Loosners, by
a Rupture the Patient had had for twelve years, saying, his Gutts were twisted,
and rendered it impossible to move his body downward; so strongly conf^d^nt are
they in uncertainties notwithstanding their exact curiotsiy in Anotamy, in
Circulation, Sanguification, Fermentation and ^hilification; by which they
would seem to take their aim so right as not to miss a Hairs breadth of a
Disease.

I told him, he might too easily perceive there was small hope of life; and the
rather, because he was loaded with so many Laxative Medicines, which confounded
nature and occasioned those perpetual provocations to Vomiting; but that
withal* I did not believe his Guts were twisted; or that it was impossible to
move his Body downward, if it were fairly attempted by some kindly and
powerful friend to Nature, not loosning; but such as by its benign quality
would perform what the Body most needed: He said it seemed strange the Body in
such a Case should be moved downward without a purging Medicine, being so
extremely obstructed as his was: yet what I thought fit, he knew he could
persuade him to take: I told him, that he might plainly discern the truth of
what I said (there being indeed nothing more proper) I would send him the very
same Medicine to loosen his friends body, which I had given to his Wife to stay
her loosnesse, and which he knew had cured her: So he took with him half a
pint of the same, to be given by four spoonfulls every hour, till it was spent:
after the third taking he Vomited a little; and after the fourth his body workt
downward very effectually, which put him into so much hope, that he rested well
that night: But next day altered again, more I believe through the venomous
nature of the Laxatives by which his Spirits were perplexed and wasted, than
through the distemper it self; Besides he was far in years and weakened by his
rupture: yet nezt evening he sent for half a pint more of the same: But lived
not to take any or very little of it: yet was exceeding thankful to his Friend
for performing so much as he did for him, seeming to believe the same means
taken in time, was likely to have cured him: And though it did not; yet may
well stand as a real Medicine: and agreeable to this Touchstone, in its main
and most probationary Character.

Nor did this thus end neither; For this Sick man's Sons Wife a young
Gentlewoman in the House; having been long ill with a continual Weakness and
Sickness at Stomach; observing the kindly operation of this Medicine, resolved
to take the remainder her self: and by degrees took all; but blamed her self
exceedingly soon after; because for about a weeks time, she frequently
vomitted, and feared she should be worse upon it: but her fear proved all her
harm her vomitting not only soon ceasing; but all her other pains and
sicknesses, with much joy and thanks to her friend who made her acquainted with
it: And this effect I think, if any thing were wanting compleats the Character:
and shows also, how beneficial it is to use Medicines of so general and safe
a nature, that never decay, nor so much as a spoonful over-case away.

Another Instance is, Of a Gentlewoman, who being with one that for some spice
of Scurvy and Dropsy, was taking a Vomit; she also upon small persuasion took
the same quantity; which so altered the state of her Stomach, that long time
after she was frequently molested with extreme pains and sickness; which cost
her some Doses of my Medicines by starts for case; but not followed: but one
fit at last she had above the rest, that she thought a Preface to her Death;
yet taking upon four ounces of Appropriate Medicine in less than a quarter of
an hours time perfectly cured her: which with the many other benefits she
received from my Medicines, before and since in the Sickness time; and other
occasions has wrought so effectually upon her estimation, that she persuades
all her friends and acquaintance to depend solely upon them.

A Gentleman in an high Fever, and violent tooth-ake; taking two ounces of an
appropriate Medicine, in one night it drive out a large swelling under his Ear:
which next night upon the like quantity of another, was very much assuaged, and
next night after the like quantity of a third, quite discharged and perfectly
cured him.

A middle aged man taken suddenly with pains, and giddiness like as the
entrance of the Pestilence, taking instantly four ounces of an appropriate
Medicine; immediately recovered.

Another smitten into a most violent Fever withal imaginable signs of the
Sickness: yet plied continually day and night with variety and large quantities
of these Medicines, recovered without any swelling.

Another extremely pensive with thought of the Sickness, and hasting out of
town: feeling many signs of its appro^ch, taking with him good quantities of
these Medicines and using of them plentifully, escaped the Infection.

And the same Gentleman since; upon such violent fits of distemper: as he
thought could not possibly end, but either with death, sickness and tedious
course of Physic; yet through Gods goodness has never failed of help and
recovery sometimes by one, and sometimes by variety of these Medicines: and
which he acknowledges to have done him singular service in his journies and at
the Bath; where for want of such kindly helpers, depending upon what^ improper:
Its to be feared many fail to the dishonor of those excellent Waters.

Another instance is of a Gentleman, who recovering his lost Appetite, by the
frequent use of diverse of my Medicines; having been long troubled with the
Gout, which generally afflicting him in a part of his foot, was now flown into
the upper back part of his shoulder, with such painfulness as was intolerable,
I persuaded him to take a full quantity, or dose of an appropriate Medicine,
being near upon four ounces, which suddenly sickned him extremely, and inclined
him to lie down upon a bed, where instantly he fell into a sound sleep for at
least two hours: and wak'^ heartily well and cheerful free from all touch of
pain or sickness: And this from no sleepy or stupifying quality in the
Medicine; for I as carefully shun all enforcers of rest; by Opium under any
form, or under any correction, as I do the use of Minerals; as weakners of the
Nerves and distroyers of the animal Spirits.

Another Instance is, Of one who sadly complained he was sore all over his
body, hardly able to stir, giddy headed, had no appetite, but such a nasty
taste upon his palate, and in his stomach as was extreme loathsome: It was not
a time of Pestilence, though these signs signified little less: I asked him
what he used to do when he was sick, he said his wife used to make him a
Carduus Posset, I bid him get one instantly and drink well of it: but an hour
after bethinking my self how dangerously ill he was, and that if that night
were trifled away, all help might come too late, I went to him and found him
sitting by his fire very sadly; having taken nothing nor any thing providing
for him: so I gave him about three ounces of an appropriate Medicine, with
which he rested well all that night: and next morning standing at his door I
asked him how it was with him, he said never better; but that he had now a great
swelling behind his ear; I was glad I had done as I did: he would have had
somewhat to ripen it, but I would not, and it went down of it self.

Another being extreme ill, wholly neglected all means; but at length desired
me to give him something, which I did: but being not presently well, grew
humorous and would take nothing but cold water; by which he brought himself
into a most violent Fever, with thirst, phlegm, vomitting, and restlesness, and
soon after so wild, as he was fain to be held in his bed: all which time I
caused those about him to ply him day and night, with plenty and diverse of my
Medicines, which yet prevailed so slowly: that somewhat else was prescribed him
by one who said he had all the signs of death upon him: but it was not given him,
so for one whole night he had no relief by Medicine at all: which I no sooner
heard, but I presently sent him such as were proper; as deeming it unreasonable
to desist so long as there is life, having found it always good, still to hope
the best, and to use the utmost means* by which diverse have recovered that were
thought impossible; as this almost dying man did, to the wonder of all his
friends, who during his cure, were much troubled because of his long
costivenesse; but I quicted them, by telling the danger of moving his body till
the venom of the disease was wholly subdued, and that in due time they would
see nature so enabled by these Medicines as freely and without force it would
perform that and all other needful offices; which came to pass to their full
satisfaction: but had he been attended (as too many) with such as will be
asking continually, what do ye think of him; if you think he cannot escape,
pray deal plainly, that we may not spend more money to no purpose; a course as
destructive as vile and hateful: and had it been so here, he had certainly
dyed for it; for there was no hope but in a constant perseverance.

And now I think it cannot with any color of reason be denied, but that the
Instances recited, do fully amount in their performances to what is before
proposed to be the proper effects of real Medicines, and in every respect to
answer those Characters, which I have here established for a Standard, Test or
Touchstone, to try and prove, whether Medicines are such or not, as may
rationally be relied on in cases of extremity: and may as I conceive suffice to
witness, both the substantiality of those Characters, and that there are such
Medicines really in being: Testifying also that my conceptions of Man's true
Original and of his true Complexion: unto which I have bowed all my Studies and
Productions, have in no wise misled me; but so effectually governed and steered
my endeavors as to render them far beyond the usual success of first
discoverers; and much more true, useful and certain than other Physiology.

And as to their extent in Cure, I have frequently and impartially compared the
real Virtues and properties of these real Medicines, with all the curable
Discases (the Foul excepted, with which I never meddle) mentioned in the
largest Bills of Mortallity, with Captain Grants ingenious Comment thereupon: I
have considered seriously of them in particular: and upon the whole can see no
reason to doubt; but that taken in time with due perseverance in their use,
whether for prevention or for cure; they are likely to prove far more
pertinent, safe and effectual, than any Helpers, Preservatives or Medicines;
all their marks and performances considered, than ever yet were tendered to
human assistance; and this even in the Pestilence it self, for though I staid
not in London past the increase of two Thousand a Week; but was forced away or
must be cruel where all obligations of tenderness lay upon me: yet took I care
tha^ nothing of mine should be wanting to any, who desired to make use of them;
with some liberty of freely helping the necessitous: besides I had long
declined Practice, visited none, nor had then so much as one Patient under my
Hand: and withal had so published the Virtues and Uses of all my Medicines; as
sufficed both to encourage and to instruct every one so plainly, as without
further direction or attendance, every one might be in a capacity of helping
themselves and their relations upon any occasion: for so I judged it most
proper, both for the good of Patients and Physicians; and possibly would soon
so appear to Magistrates also in such Infectious and dangerous times, were they
accustomed to note the happy union of Safety and Power conjoined in one and the
same Medicine: or would strictly hold Physicians and Practisers to such Marks
and Characters of real Medicines, as would witness them to be such as might
justly be depended on in that violent distemper: because being such all people
might without danger confidently and freely make use of them in all states and
degrees of the distemper, without any attendance or danger to Physicians; it
being true and powerful Medicines, that is solely to be regarded in all
contagious Distempers: And it was no small quantity, I provided for the
occasion, from my observation of a general taint in Nature for some
considerable time before; so there was no want of what I could furnish; at
least for a season,

But yet, though I had great assurance, both of the propriety and efficacy of
my Preservatives and Remedies, as whoever well weigh the instances precedent,
may well believe I had good cause: yet observing how from all quarters,
Medicines were loudly voiced out, as most certain in the case. -- I could not
at any hand bring my mind to any fresh publication, least I might possibly draw
people from what was more, to what was less effectual, for more could not be
expressed for prevalence, then was of every of them; how they answered it in
performance: after I had tasted and noted diverse of them, I soon saw cause to
greive and fear, seeing so weak provision against so powerful an Adversary.

Besides to publ^sh then a ^^esh, when in reason I done enough before, and was
daily to be seen; seemed so like raising a new Mart for sale, for trade, and
mon^, as became not the sadness of the Season, requiring rather a giving than a
receiving hand, and wherein very many to their eternal praise abounded.

But although the help I left proved more faithful, then skilful, disposing of
much, and taking but little account of the success; yet it amounts to thus much
that diverse under God imputed their exemption from the Infection unto them: and
diverse their cure wholly to their use without farther help or attendance: and
this too in as dangerous a state of the disease as could possibly be; the
^okens only excepted, in which I do not know they were ever proved, though I
am not wholly without persuasion, even in that dismal case, were they taken in
large quantity.

And I have somewhat wondered that one, who practiced much with them long
before; and from the beginning to the ending of that sad Mortallity, that was
visited; sometimes by fifty in a morning, and visited the sick all day after,
and most part of the night; and reckons never were any Medicines like them for
certainty, that at thrice taking of them, they never failed of cure, in so much
as they seemed almost miraculous, and upon their taste, were highly approved by
the Master of the Pesthouse; yet gives he no account of any attempt made by
him upon the Tokens, unless upon a woman, whom he says, being speechless, and
her husband urging him to procure him but a few words from her; by a quantity
forced upon her, he so far prevailed, that she did speak to him to his
satisfaction, but no more: And this being true, what timely taken, and
continued at d^^ distance in full quantity, gives much cause of hope; but I
heartily wish there may never more be such occasion.

But for their effecacy in preserving from the infection, or expelling the
vennom as soon as taken, and their prevalence in cure; I shall give for each an
instance.

And the first, please to take in the express of a Letter from London, from one
who returning thither, had furnished himself with diverse of my Medicines, as
fearing the worst; and at the place of my abode, thus saluted me. Sir, Next to
Divine goodness, I deem my self bound to return you my hearty thanks for my
present health, which had been much endangered but for your C^rdials; for what
through change of A^^^, Diet and Lodging, with some what (...) then usual
b^sselling in business, I found my self much out of tune, but could not say I
was ill until the last Tuesday night: but then after the whole days
Indisposition, I was taken with a most violent pain in my head, and with not
much less in my stomach, That I feared it could not end but with a sickness,
if not the Sickness: and the more because that Medicine of your which at other
times was ever pleasant to my taste; was now so loathsome that I could hardly
bring my self to take it: but confidering my necessity I forced down two
ounces, which hardly stayed with me, nor did I hold it full half an hour; for
then after much struggling in me it gave me a large vomit, immediately after
which not finding my self so well as I hoped, though much relieved, I called
for my Glass, and took two ounces more: soon after which I fell to rest,
sleeping quietly all the night, and waked in the morning as if I had not been
ill at all, and so remained ever since for which I bless God and freely
acknowledge my self your debtor.

Then for their prevalence in Cure, Being in the Country where I wrought and
furnished my self with requisites for any occasion: and frequently supplied
those I left in London, with what was much wanted: not thinking of any
Practice, but only for our own Family: By a Letter from a Stranger seven miles
off, I was thus treated, Sir by my good Friend Mr. -- I understand you have a
Soverain Water for the Plague: He told me a Gentlewoman gave him part of a
Glass, whose Husband refused to take of it and died: but she and her two Maids
took it and lived, wherefore I would desire you to send me a pint of it, for I
fear my Servant dyed of it on Monday last: I knew by the money he sent what he
intended, which I sent with a taste of another, his Wife and another Servant
fell ill immediately both having Risings: he sent for more, and often and had
also of other sorts, for he spared for no cost: and the issue was, that his
servant after a while recovered without breaking: but his wifes grew very large
and was long in ripening, but at length it brake very kindly, and she suddenly
thereupon perfectly recovered: he told his friend also he believed, he himself
was three times infected, but then taking larger quantities than ordinary; he
soon sensibly perceived the venom to be subdued, and deemed himself happy in
having them.

Then for quick dispatch in other dangerous case, where in the Mineralists will
still presume pre-eminence, openly professing that without Antimony and
Quicksilver, the Armory of Physic would be left despicably poor and indigent:
whilst to me they seem more the Parents of Diseases than of Cures; and those
dangerous and long lasting even from generation to generation in Families: but
whereas there are preparations of these critical ingredients said to be as safe
as the most innocent Cordials: for assurance the prescribers will not scruple
the trial of this Touchstone. But for quick despatch in cure, besides what the
former Instances afford, I think indeed more than sufficient, cured as speedily
and with far more certainty and security: yet for an overplus, take therewith
these as an overplus.

One of which is, Of a young Man in my Country neighbor hood, weekly for half
a year, after a dangerous sickness: in dead of Winter fell into a violent
loosnesse, which infeebled him exceedingly and at three weeks end, ran into the
bloody Flux with extreme griping, thirst, and utter l^sse of appetite, working
day and night and depriving him of all rest: about ten in the morning my help
was desired by his mother; so I ordered him six ounces of an appropriate
Medicine to be taken a little warm in four equal parts at each an hours
distance: and at five in the afternoon to let me know how he was, during all
which time he had no motion to stool, nor any desire to drink: yet then I
ordered him two ounces of another to be taken last that night; with which and
no other, he became so well that next day he went abroad about his occasions,
troubled neither with gripes, looseness nor thirst, nor want of appetite, but so
hungry that he refused nothing.

Another is of a Lad about thirteen, who from a fierce Ague, fell into so
violent a Fever, that he became frantic, rising in the night in a mighty in
flammation and crying out fire, fire, that the house was on fire, and sought a
place to get out at: I ordered him four ounces of of an appropriate Medicine,
the one half to be instantly given and the other four hours after, except there
were manifest signs of amendment: and if so to reserve it for next night; the
first settled him, and next night he had the rest: after which they gave me no
account, but reckoned him well; because he went abroad and complained not: but
hearing that he rested not well, nor came to his stomach as those use who
recover upon these Medicines I wondered I was not sent to; but at last his
mother perceiving he was not like to grow it out, she came and I gave her two
ounces of another of the Medicines suitable to his present state; with which he
recovered.

Two Children also, past all hope, recovered by each four ounces of an
appropriate Medicine, given by little and little.

And another of whose life the Parents despaired: by four ounces of these
Medicines recovered also.

A young youth taken with a violent Ague and Fever, and lightheaded, recovered
by six ounces of one of the Medicines.

A Gentleman about forty, somewhat out of order, was persuaded by his friend
to take such a remedy, as he used to take himself, which putting his body into
a strange confusion, with purging and vomiting, forced him to require other aid
from Physicians, who although they somewhat allayed the distemper; yet he
remained extremely depressed and sinking in his Spirits, which continued upon
him with frequent and irresistible sighings; whereupon applying himself to the
use of these reviving Medicines, in few days time, was enabled with
cheerfulness to walk abroad, and pursue his affairs.

A Child not full a year and half old, through large and cold eating, falling
ina Surfeit and Fever, with thirst, vomiting, looseness, gripings and cough; the
Parents upon good knowledge, depending solely upon these Medicines, with
variety and good quantity, perfectly recovered the Child, when it was thought
impossible, and without any inconvenience following, though she took at least
two quarts of them, in no very long time.

A Gentlewoman, who from a healthful Constitution, and good Appetite; through
Cold and Surfeit, falling into a Fever, with continual Headache, Restlesness,
loss of Appetite, obstinate Obstructions, with extreme Melancholy, and ever
upon sinking for want of breath: by constant use of diverse of these Medicines
for a season, perfectly recovered.

A young Gentlewoman big of her first Child, afflicted with so violent, and so
perpetual a Cough, that it was thought impossible but she must miscarry; taking
every time she cought of one of the Medicines appropriate to the Infirmity, to
the quantity of a pint in one night, besides what she took the day before, quit
her self clearly of her distemper, without any the least evil ensuing.

A young Gentlewoman, upon the least taking cold, or error in diet, falling
into extreme pains and feavorishness that put her in strong Convulsivemotions;
upon taking for two or three days and nights some plenty of diverse of these
Medicines, has ever most wonderfully recovered.

A Gentleman, through much sitting and writing, falling into a weakness of the
brain and lightness, that he continually inclined to fall as he went about the
streets: by constant use of an appropriate Medicine, carried always about him,
and sipping of it in small quantity: perfectly recovered, as diverse others have
likewise done by the same means.

One in her lying in, extremely troubled with after pains; by taking only two
ounces of a general Medicine, found instant and great relief.

A Gentleman subject to a Cough, upon an extreme cold and overstraining, his
body; his Cough not only increased, but a most violent pain in his side
ensued, which so tormented him every time he cought, that tore him as it were
in pieces, yet in some four days, using plenty of these Medicines, he was
restored to his usual Condtion.

A young Lad languishing under extreme weakness, and wasted almost to nothing,
by a pint of one of these Medicines proper in Consumptions recovered perfectly.

A Gentlewoman swollen most extremely with a Dropsy, using much counsel and
means for relief, found none like what she had by the use of one of these
Medicines, appropriate to this distemper; and when she was so hugely big, that
the Physicians resolved, there was no way but by drawing the water which so
swelled her, out with their usual Manual operation, she refusing and casting
her self wholly upon God, in the use of this Medicine after a short time, the
water arise and drained it self out of her mouth daily in large quantity, till
she recovered her ordinary health and due proportion.

A Gentleman who had quite lost his appetite, by the use of one of these
Medicines, last at night, and first in the morning, perfectly recovered.

His wife lying In, and in a violent restless Fever, by a pint of another of
these Medicines perfectly recovered.

And his next neighbors, being all down with sickness, and one of them dying,
fearing it to be the sickness, he acquainted them with these Medicines; and
with the use of two pints they all recovered.

A Gentleman about the age of forty, but newly recovered of a Pluretick
distemper, upon an extreme Cold fell into a violent Fever, which after some
means and time ended in an Ague, which tormented him for diverse fits both cold
and hot, every other day three or four fits, were trifled away with slight
Medicines, which unadvised importunities thrust him upon; at length, I
undertaking him, in his first cold fit gave him in three hours time, a full
pint of so high and powerful a Medicine; as would have amazed any Physician,
which yet without any prejudice, by burning or binding, or over-sweating him,
broke the heart of his Ague, and so by plying him on his well days and nights,
sometimes with the same in smaller quantity, and with others of like nature, at
the fourth fit it was quite discharged; wherein were full experiences of their
restraining violent sweats and thirst, and in giving of rest: all which are the
peculiar effects of their benign temperature, which nor only renders my
compound Medicines, but those of mere simples, whether of Mint, Cinnamon, Clove
and the like, so far different from those of the same mildness and
pleasantness, wanting the humane true temperature, that both in health and
sickness, the one shall do real service, where the other does mischief in one
kind or other.

These, though not near the whole of what might have bin collected, of cures
of this kind -- much less of those, who have cured themselves by a draught or
two in their first illness, and so escaped fits of sickness, and courses of
Physic; nor of such who have daily supplied their spirits, and fortified their
natures, by their use in diet and refreshment, unto which they are essentially
proper; yet I conceive are abundant proofs of their real virtue and effecacy:
and that those marks and characters arising from them, are not irrationally
proposed, as a test or Touchstone of real Medicine; and for distinction of such
as may be thoroughly trusted in cure; from those which are not, and that with
out, any outward violence, by Bleedings Issues, Clisters, Blisters, etc. or any
inward disturbance to the body, by Loosning, Vomiting, or other enforcements by
Minerals, may suffice in all cases and extreamities, to the comfort of all the
ingenious, both persons and families; who taking this for their guide, need not
hence forth be so much to seek for relief as formerly, in times of sickness
and necessity. Every of those Medicines pointed at, being always to be had,

At the Star in the Postern by little Moorefields, London, 1667.
FINIS.

