LETTERS AND POEMS, AMOROUS AND GALLANT.

LONDON

Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Iudge's-Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street. 1692.

PREFACE.
IT has been so usual among modern Authors to write Prefaces, that a Man is
thought rude to his Reader, who does not give him some Account before hand, of
what he is to expect in the Book. That which may make somewhat of this kind
more necessary in my Case, than others is, That a great part of this Collection
consists of familiar Letters, which sort of Writings some Learned Persons among
us have thought unfit to be published. It must be confessed, indeed, that a
great Beauty of Letters does often consist in little Passages of private
Conversation, and references to particular Matters, that can be understood by
none but those to whom they are written: But to draw a general Conclusion from
thence, That familiar Letters can please none, but those very Persons, is to
conclude against the common Experience of all the World; since besides the
great applauses have been given the Letters of Cicero and Pliny among the
Romans; we see no Book has been better received among the Spaniards, than the
Letters of Guevara; or among the French, than those of Voiture and Balsac: Not
to mention the Italians, among whom there has been hardly any considerable Man,
who has not published Letters with good Success. What may have contributed very
much to the kind Reception these things have met, is, that there is no sort of
Writing so necessary for People to understand as this. A Man may have a great
deal of Wit, without being able to write Verses or make Harangues; and may live
in very good repute, without having occasion of doing either. But a Man can
hardly live in the World, without being able to write Letters. There is no
state of Life in which a Faculty of that kind is not requisite; and there are
few Days pass, in which a Man has not occasion to make use of it.

The Style of Letters ought to be free, easy and natural; as near approaching
to familiar Conversation as possible. The two best Qualities in Conversation,
are good Humor and good Breeding; those Letters are therefore certainly the
best that show the most of those two Qualities. There are some Men so surly, so
ill natured, and so ill-bred, that though we can hardly deny 'em to have Wit; yet
we can say, at least, that we are sorry they have it. And indeed, as their Wit
is troublesome to other People, so I can hardly imagine of what great use it
can be to themselves. For if the end of Wit, be not to render one self
agreeable, I shall scarce envy 'em any other use they can make of it.

The second Part of this Collection consists of Amorous Verses. Those who are
conversant with the Writings of the Ancients, will observe a great difference
between what they, and the Moderns have published upon this Subject. The
occasions upon which the Poems of the former are written, are such as happen to
every Man almost that is in Love; and the Thoughts such, as are natural for
every Man in love to think. The Moderns on the other hand have sought out for
Occasions, that none meet with, but themselves; and fill their Verses with
thoughts that are surprising and glittering, but not tender, passionate, or
natural to a Man in Love.

To judge which of these two are in the right; we ought to consider the end
that People propose in writing Love-Verses: And that I take not to be the
getting Fame or Admiration from the World, but the obtaining the Love of their
Mistress; and the best way I conceive to make her love you, is to convince her
that you love her. Now this certainly is not to be done by forced Conceits, far
fetched Similes, and shining Points; but by a true and lively Representation of
the Pains and Thoughts attending such a Passion.

Si vis me flere, dolendum est: (laedent.
Primum ipsitibi, tunc tua me infortunia.
I would as soon believe a Widow in great grief for her Husband, because I saw
her dance a Corant about his Coffin, as believe a Man in Love with his Mistress
for his writing such Verses, as some great Modern Wits have done upon theirs.

I am satisfied that Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid, were in love
with their Mistresses, while they upbraid them, quarrel with them, threaten
them, and forswear them; but I confess I cannot believe Petrarch in Love with
his, when he writes Conceits upon her Name, her Gloves, and the place of her
Birth. I know it is natural for a Lover, in Transports of Jealousy, to treat
his Mistress with all the Violence imaginable; but I cannot think it natural
for a Man, who is much in Love, to amuse himself with such Trifles as the
other. I am pleased with Tibullus, when he says, he could live in a Desert with
his Mistress, where never any Humane Foost-steps appeared, because, I doubt not
but he really thinks what he says; but I confess I can hardly for bear laughing
when Petrarch tells us, he could live without any other sustenance than his
Mistresses Looks. I can very easily believe a Man may love a Woman so well, as
to desire no Company but hers; but I can never believe a Man can love a Woman
so well, as to have no need of Meat and Drink, if he may look upon her. The
first is a Thought so natural for a Lover, that there is no Man really in Love,
but thinks the same thing; the other is not the thought of a Man in Love, but
of a Man who would impose upon us with a pretended Love (and that indeed very
grossly too) while he had really none at all.

It would be endless to pursue this Point; and any Man who will but give
himself the trouble to compare what the Ancients and Moderns have said upon the
same Occasions, will soon perceive the advantage the former have over the
others. I have chosen to mention Petrarch only, as being by much the most
famous of all the Moderns who have written Love-Verses: And it is, indeed, the
great Reputation which he has gotten, that has given Encouragement to this
false sort of Wit in the World: for People seeing the great Credit he had, and
has, indeed, to this day, not only in Italy, but over all Europe; have
satisfied themselves with the Imitation of him, never enquiring whether the way
he took was the right or not.

There are no Modern Writers, perhaps, who have succeeded better in Love-Verses
than the English; and it is indeed just that the fairest Ladies should inspire
the best Poets. Never was there a more copious Fancy or greater reach of Wit,
than what appears in Dr. Done; nothing can be more gallant or gentile than the
Poems of Mr. Waller; nothing more gay or sprightly than those of Sir John
Suckling; and nothing fuller of Variety and Learning than Mr. Cowley's.
However, it may be observed, that among all these, that Softness, Tenderness,
and Violence of Passion, which the Ancients thought most proper for
Love-Verses, is wanting: and at the same time that we must allow Dr. Done to
have been a very great Wit; Mr. Waller a very gallant Writer; Sir John Suckling
a very gay one, and Mr. Cowley a great Genius; yet metbinks I can hardly fancy
any one of them to have been a very great Lover. And it grieves me that the
Ancients, who could never have handsomer Women than we have, should
nevertheless be so much more in Love than we are. But it is probable the great
Reason of this may be the Cruelty of our Ladies; for a Man must be imprudent
indeed to let his Passion take very deep root, when he has no reason to expect
any sort of return to it. And if it be so, there ought to be a Petition made to
the Fair, that they would be pleased sometimes to abate a little of their
Rigor, for the propagation of good Verse. I do not mean, that they should
confer their Favors upon none but Men of Wit: that would be too great a
Confinement indeed: but that they would admit them upon the same foot with
other People; and if they please now and then to make the Experiment, I fancy
they will find Entertainment enough from the very Variety of it.

There are three sorts of Poems that are proper for Love: Pastorals, Elegies,
and Lyrick Verses; under which last I comprehend all Songs, Odes, Sonnets,
Madrigals and Stanza's. Of all these, Pastoral is the lowest, and, upon that
account, perhaps most proper for Love; since it is the Nature of that Passion
to render the Soul soft and humble. These three sorts of Poems ought to differ,
not only in their Numbers, but in the Designs, and in every Thought of them.
Though we have no Difference between the Verses of Pastoral and Elegy in the
Modern Languages; yet the Numbers of the first ought to be looser and not so
sonorous as the other; the Thoughts more simple, more easy and more humble. The
Design ought to be the representing the Life of a Shepherd, not only by talking
of Sheep and Fields, but by showing us the Truth, Sincerity and Innocence that
accompanies that sort of Life. For though I know our Masters, Theocritus and
Virgil, have not always conformed in this Point of Innocence; Theocritus, in
his Daphnis, having made his Love too wanton, and Virgil, in his Alexis, placed
his Passion upon a Boy; yet (if we may be allowed to censure those whom we must
always reverence) I take both those things to be Faults in their Poems, and
should have been better pleased with the Alexis, if it had been made to a
Woman; and with the Daphnis, if he had made his Shepherds more modest. When I
give Humility and Modesty as the Character of Pastoral, it is not, however, but
that a Shepherd may be allowed to boast of his Pipe, his Songs, his Flocks, and
to show a Contempt of his Rival, as we see both Theocritus and Virgil do. But
this must be still in such a manner, as if the Occasion offered it self, and
was not sought, and proceeded rather from the Violence of the Shepherd's
Passion, than any natural Pride or Malice in him.

There ought to be the same difference observed between Pastorals and Elegies,
as between the Life of the Country and the Court. In the first, Love ought to
be represented as among Shepherds, in the other as among Gentlemen. They ought
to be smooth, clear, tender and passionate. The Thoughts may be bold, more gay,
and more elevated than in Pastoral. The Passions they represent, either more
Gallant or more Violent, and less innocent than the others. The subjects of
them, Prayers, Praises, Expostulations, Quarrels, Reconcilements, Threatenings,
Iealousies, and, in fine, all the natural Effects of Love.

Lyricks may be allowed to handle all the same subjects with Elegy; but to do
it however in a different manner. An Elegy ought to be so entirely one thing,
and every Verse ought so to depend upon the other, that they should not be able
to subsist alone: Or, to make use of the words of a My Lord Mulgrave.
great Modern Critic, there must be

-- a just Coherence made
Between each Thought, and the whole Model laid;
So right, that every step may higher rise,
Like goodly Mountains, till they reach the Skies.
Lyricks on the other hand, though they ought to make one Body as well as the
other, yet may consist of Parts that are entire of themselves. It being a Rule
in Modern Languages, that every Stanza ought to make up a complete sense,
without running into the other. Frequent Sentences which are accounted Faults
in Elegies, are Beauties here. Besides this, Malherb, and the French Poets
after him, have made it a Rule in the Stanzas of six Lines, to make a pause at
the third; and in those of ten Lines, at the third and the seventh. And it must
be confessed that this exactness renders them much more Musical and Harmonious;
though they have not always been so Religious in observing the latter Rule as the
former.

But I am engaged in a very vain, or a very foolish Design: Those who are
Critics, it would be a presumption in me to pretend I could instruct; and to
instruct those who are not, at the same time I write my self, is (if I may be
allowed to apply another Man's Simile) like selling Arms to an Enemy in time of
War. Though there ought, perhaps, to be more indulgence shown to things of Love
and Gallantry, than any others; because they are generally written when People
are young, and intended for Ladies who are not supposed to be very old; and all
young People, especially of the fair Sex, are more taken with the liveliness of
Fancy, than the correctness of Judgment. It may be also observed, that to write
of Love well, a Man must be really in Love; and to correct his Writings well,
he must be out of Love again. I am well enough satisfied, I may be in
Circumstances of writing of Love; but I am almost in despair of ever being in
Circumstances of correcting it. This I hope may be a Reason for the Fair and
the Young, to pass over some of the Faults; and as for the Grave and Wise, all
the Favor I shall beg of them is, that they would not read'em. Things of this
Nature, are calculated only for the former. If Love-Verses work upon the
Ladies, a Man will not trouble himself with what the Critics say of them; and
if they do not, all the Commendations the Critics can give him, will make but
very little amends. All I shall say for these trifles is, That I pretend not to
vye with any Man whatsoever. I doubt not but there are several now living, who
are able to write better upon all Subjects, than I am upon any one: But I will
take the boldness to say, That there is no one Man among them all, who shall be
readier to acknowledge his own Faults, or to do Justice to the Merits of other
People.

LETTERS Gallant and Amorous.
LETTER I.
To two Masks.
THough I cannot boast much of Particularity to the Person I love, yet as to
the Love it self, I may safely say, It is one of the most particular under the
Sun. Others think it enough to fall in love with a Lady after having seen her.
I am in love with two, without having ever seen either: Not that I would
willingly admit two Tyrants into my Heart; but though one of you may perhaps be
Monarch there, yet neither you nor I knowing which it is, the matter must rest
in doubt 'till another opportunity. For he who condemned Paris as too bold a
Man, in daring to judge of the three Goddesses Beauties, when he saw 'em naked,
would have thought me a bold one indeed, if I should pretend to make a Judgment
between two Ladies in Masks. Consider a little under what difficulties you
make me labor: If I should commend the Color of your Hair, and it was all the
while deep red; the smoothness and delicacy of your Skins, when they were rough
and tawney; the fineness of your Shapes, while you were stuck up within Iron
Bodice; the brightness of your Eyes, and they should prove blear'd and
squinting. Do but imagine when I had done this, what sort of an Effect it would
have upon you. Whatever Inconveniences of this nature happen, it is your own
Faults; for my part I leave this encountering with Helmets over their Faces, to
Sir Amadis and his Knights Errant; the way of Duelling is altered, People do
not only encounter barefaced, but strip when they go to it. As for this way, I
can assure you, I find it not in the least fair; and had rather be in love with
the most hard-hearted Beauty living, than continue in this uncertain state, and
neither know what I love, why I love, nor whether I love, or no. Take pity,
Ladies, upon a Lover in distress; clear the Business to me, and let me know if
I am in good earnest, when I profess my self

Your most passionate Admirer.

LETTER II.
To one of the former.
IT is by Faith alone that I fancy you the most charming, but I find by
Experience you are one of the most unreasonable Ladies under the Sun. I
concluded I had done the boldest Action in the World, to declare a Passion to
two Masks; but you, Madam, set up a Title of your own, and are not satisfied
without Particularity, and Constancy. Your Charms I confess, Madam, as far as I
saw of them, are very great: The Masque was very good Genoa Velvet; the Gloves
very good Blois Gloves, and the Hackney Coach, for ought I know, lined with
very good green Plush. Now, Madam, though so far I do steadfastly believe, yet
to fall constantly and particularly in love with Masks, Gloves, or
Hackney-Coaches, is what I do not find a Precedent for, in any of the French
Romances; and being naturally diffident of my self, I should be loath to begin a
new sort of Gallantry, without knowing how it would take. Consider, Madam, a
little better upon the reasonableness of your Request; for Particularity and
Constancy are very hardly to be answered for, at our Years. It is, I doubt not,
Madam, in your power to blow my Love up to that height whenever you please;
and to confess a truth to you, I have a very great Stock of Particularity and
Constancy lying upon my Hands at this time, and know not how to apply it. I
have all the reason in the World to imagine it is kept for you; but however,
Madam, it would be necessary to have one view of you, before I can be positive
in that point. I am satisfied in my Conscience that I have done all my Duty in
the thing; let it lie at your Door if the Humor break off; for my part I
cannot imagine how you will be able to answer it to all the World, if you
should, for want of discovering your self, lose the most constant and most
faithful Lover under the Sun.

LETTER III.
To the same.
Constancy and Fidelity are, without doubt, great Virtues, though not always
great Charms in a Mistress; but as to your Invisibility, it is a Quality that
does not please me at all. I grant you, Madam, it is a pretty aereal sort of
Beauty, and may do very well for spiritual Lovers; but for me, Madam, who am a
little embarass'd with matter, and who generally carry a Body of six foot long
about with me, it would be convenient to have some more corporeal
Accomplishments. Descend, Madam, in this case, to your Lover's Capacity, and
make use of his Senses to represent you as charming as without doubt you are,
to his Imagination. For though I must confess Fancy has been very kind to you
in this point, yet it would be convenient to call in the Help of the Eyes to
strengthen the Evidence: I expect therefore from your next Letter, an
appointment where I may meet you in a visible manner. These are the only Terms
upon which I can treat any farther with you; for though you write the most
agreeably in the World, yet you must certainly own, that after having been
monstrously in love for a whole Week together, it is very reasonable that a Man
should know at last with whom it is.

LETTER IV.
To the same.
YEs really, Madam, I think you are in the right of it; Hanging and Drowning
are such vulgar ways of Dying, that for my part I would rather live a thousand
Years, than make use of either. Then, Madam, they are the most inconvenient
Methods in the World; Drowning will spoil your Clothes, and Hanging your
Complexion; besides several other things that might be said to dissuade you
from it, but that I know a word to the Wise is enough. I am of Opinion you had
better deferr all sort of dying 'till another Opportunity; though if you are
positive in it, I would rather recommend Mr. Boyle's Air-Pump as a newer
Invention; or being poisoned in Perfumes, as somewhat that looks pleasant
enough. But to be less serious, Madam, make no doubt of your own Perfections,
and reckon that in having me, you have the most reasonable Lover, of an
unreasonable Lover, in the World. I confess were I to form a Beauty to my self,
she should be -- let me consider a little upon it; she should be -- I protest,
Madam, I know not what she should be: monstrously in love with me, that is
certain; for the rest, I should trust the Stars, I think I may say, without
Flattery, I love my self so well, that I can love any body else that does so
too; and should prefer that single Beauty, of an immoderate Passion for me in
a Mistress, to all the other Charms in the World, as Bays does the single
beating of Armies in his Hero, to all the Moral Virtues put together. If you
can answer for this Charm, Madam, take no care for any other; he must be
unreasonable indeed, who is not satisfied with that, in a Lady of Sixteen.

LETTER V.
To the fair Unbeliever.
ST. Jerome says, (St. Jerome I must confess is a very odd beginning of a
Billet doux) That a Man who can with patience suffer himself to be called
Heretic, ought not to be esteemed a good Christian: And in common Account you
see, one who is called Coward, if he does not resent the Affront, shall always
be thought such. As my Provocations are much greater than either of these, so
if my Indignation were answerable to 'em, you could not expect to be forgiven
by me, even in the Article of Death: For after all People can say of Heretics
and Cowards, they will allow 'em to be Men; but by your Reflections upon me,
you would degrade me from that Rank, without allowing me any place among the
inferior Creatures. Had you called me Brute, or Beast, I had not been so
zealous in my own Justification: Daily Experience convinces us, That Men who
have no more Understanding than Horses, or Mules, provided they have all the
other Qualifications of those Noble Animals, may be acceptable enough to some
or other of the fair Sex; but want of Virility is an Imputation that will cut a
Man off from all sort of Communication with 'em. Had the Husbands or Old Women
had this Opinion of me, I should not have been so violent in my own Defense.
Scandals, as well as Oaths, ought to be taken in the sense of those that impose
'em; I should not be angry at a Turk, or a Jew, for thinking me of their
Religion; because whatever I thought it was what made them like me the better;
but this would be no Reason to make me forgive a Christian for calling me so.
In like manner, Madam, though I could have pardoned the Husbands and Old Women
for saying such a thing of me, yet I can very hardly pardon you for it. It were
in vain to call Witnesses in this case, or turn you over to another hand for
Satisfaction in that point, which can only properly be resolved by my self; and
it were as vain to think to clear my self by Words from an Imputation that
ought to be done by Actions; I shall therefore only challenge you to meet me at
your own place and time; where I doubt not to give you full Satisfaction in
this point, and convince you that I am not the Man (or rather indeed the No
Man) that you take me to be. In the mean time I shall remain your most Humble,
(a Curse on that Humble) but I mean,

Madam, Your most affectionate and passionate Lover and Servant.

LETTER VI.
I Have been waiting these three Months to tell you a thing that may be said in
three Words; it is, I love you. I will grant you, Madam, that this is no
necessary Reason why you should love me again; but you must grant me in
recompense, That it is a very sufficient Reason why I should tell you of it. I
do not expect you should write me a Letter in return to this, and therefore
venture it without a Name: It is from your Eyes alone, I shall attend my
Answer. But, Madam, that we may not mistake one another in this point, and that
I may not take for an Encouragement of my Passion, what you intend for a
Discouragement of it; I must tell you, That if you do not look upon me after
this, I shall believe you are in love, and that makes you bashful: If you look
angrily, I shall think it is to give me occasion to come and justify my self;
and if you look negligently, I shall conclude it is management to disguise the
Amor from the World: In fine, Madam, I shall take nothing for a Refusal of my
Heart, but looking very kindly upon me. But that you may not be mistaken in the
Person who sends this, and imagine it to come from some Lord with a blue
Garter, or white Staff, that comes from a Commoner without either. I will
describe my self so, as you may know me well enough to encourage my Passion if
you like it, but not so as to make a Trophie of me, if you do not. My Stature
is somewhat above the ordinary; my Body neither very big, nor very small; my
Hair light; my Eyes dark; and Love has not as yet made me either very lean, or
very pale: My Humor is the most commodious for a Lover in the World, not so
much inclined to Hanging or Drowning, perhaps, as some others; but for Passion
and Constancy, no Man goes beyond me. If you will accept of a Heart with all
these Qualifications, I offer you mine; if not, send it me back by the
Penny-Post, if you know me by any other Title than that of

Your most humble Servant.

LETTER VII.
To the same.
I Grant you, Madam, there are others who will love you as much as I; but are
there any who will love you as little? Yes, Madam, I under stand very well what
I say, Will they love you as little? for that is the only difficulty you have
to apprehend. There is no question but a Man who is possessed of the most
charming-Creature in the Universe, will be constant to her as long as she
pleases; but it is a great Question if he will part with her as soon as she
pleases. This is the Rock upon which those Ladies split, who will admit of none
but constant Lovers; not considering that the Women are as changeable as the
Men can be for the Lives of them and consider, pray, into what pretty
Circumstances a Lady brings herself, who is plagued with an obstinate old
Lover, when she is passionately in love with a new one. I know not what those
Crimes are the Lady you tell me lays to my Charge, but I fancy an importunate
Perseverance in Love of the same Woman, is not one of the number: And whenever
you please to make the Experiment, as the least sign in the World is sufficient
after these Preliminaries, to make me a most passionate Lover; so the least
sign you give me afterward of any new Amor, shall make me lay aside that
Title, for the less-ambitious one of

Your most humble Servant.

LETTER VIII.
To a Lady who had spoken against him.
THere may have been other Men, perhaps, besides my self, who have fallen in
love with a Woman they did not know; but for a Man to do it for no other reason
than her declaring against him, is, I believe, an Honor that has been reserved
for your humble Servant. They tell me, Madam, you are so far from liking me
your self, that you will not believe any Body else can: That you find nothing
agreeable in my Person, from the Crown of my Head, to the Soal of my Foot: That
for my Wit, (for every body, Madam, carries somewhat about them which they call
Wit) it is all Affectation: That I am an Abstract of Vanity: That I am so much
in love with my self, that it is impossible for me to be so with any Body else.
These things, Madam, that might have put some People into Anger, have put me
into Love: For as those who are naturally peevish, will be angry at People, let
them endeavor never so much to please 'em; so we who are naturally amorous,
cannot avoid being in love with a Lady, let her take never so much pains to
anger us. And indeed, Madam, did People ground their Passions upon Reason, you
have given me one of the most reasonable Causes to love you in the World: For
as there is no Man of Wit but knows himself to be a Fool, so he ought to have
an Opinion of their Judgments, who find it out as well as himself. It is
reported as an Instance of the Bravery of the Amazons, That they would never
marry a Man, 'till they had fought with him first; and if he beat 'em very
much, he might expect to be loved very much by them. Now I, Madam, who profess
as great a Veneration for Wit, as the Amazons had for Courage, cannot have so
good a Reason for Love, as your having exercised your Wit upon me: Though it is
possible you may attribute my Passion to another Cause, and as you think I love
nothing beside my self, may have some kindness for you, because you are never
like to be my Rival; however, assure your self, Madam, it is no such thing, but
knowing the worst you can say of me to be true, and having a natural Affection
for Truth, Wit, and Women, (you will think a Man a very general Lover, that can
love Truth, Wit, and Women, at the same time) I must needs be infinitely in
love with you, in whom I find 'em altogether. Be not however deluded into a
better Opinion of me, by what any body can say; for as it is only your hating
me that makes me love you, as soon as that ceases, I am afraid my Love will do
so too. As you therefore value my Kindness, take heed of having any for me; and
satisfy your self, That as long as you continue to think me a silly, idle,
conceited Fop, I shall continue to be, with all the Passion imaginable,

Madam, Your, etc.

LETTER IX.
To a Masqu'd Lady.
Though I doubt not, Madam, but you have made the most considerable Conquests
under the Sun, yet give me leave to say, You never made any so extraordinary as
this before: You have subdued, without the Conqueror's common Vanity, of making
your self known, and have gained the most absolute Victory in the World,
without as much as shea^hing your Face. I, who never knew a Woman could
overcome me, am now overcome by I know not who: And can both boast of the
greatest Passion, and greatest Faith in Nature together: The seeing you, which
is the reason of other People's Love, might, for ought I know, destroy mine;
for I have raised Idea's of you, to which it is very difficult for any thing in
Nature to arrive. I imagine you the most charming Creature in the Universe, and
at the same time fancy you to be somewhat more than I imagine. I have dressed
you up in all the most different shapes of Natute. In whatever you appear, it
has been always the most amiable: And after having supposed you Maid, Wife, and
Widow by turns, I 'find I can love you infinitely, be you any one of them. Did
I know in which state you were, I would certainly make love to all of it, 'till
I arrived at you; and for want of that, I am forced to confine my self to
Womankind. I leave it to your own Conscience, Madam, whether you can leave the
most constant Lover in Nature, in this Condition; though if it feel no remorse
for the last Disappointment, I shall very hardly ever trust it more: Yet
however extravagant my Passion is, do not apprehend that I should make any
malicious Reflections on you to the World; let my other Virtues be what they
will, my Fidelity is unquestionable: And assure your self, there is no Man
breathing less apt to tell a Secret that he does not know, than,

Madam, Your, etc.

LETTER X.
To a Friend.
SIR,
FOr Friend I can hardly call you, since under that disguise, you have done me
one of the greatest injuries in the World; and it is vain for me to guard my
Territories against the malicious Designs of Enemies and Rivals; when you, whom
I never took for either, have more prejudiced me in an Amor, than they could
with all their Forces together. But that I may not condemn you without a Cause,
nor conclude you guilty 'till I hear what you can say in your own
Justification, I will give you a plain account of the Business. Meeting one of
the Ladies last Night, with whom I am in love, she began a discourse of Lovers,
wherein she showed the many inconveniences that attended the having a Man of
Wit in that Capacity. I, who do not naturally love to dispute with a fair Lady,
(especially in a Cause where I thought my self no more concerned than if she
had talked of Jews or Mahometans) agreed with her in all she said; when she
turned briskly upon me, and told me, For that Reason a Woman must have a care
of having any thing to do with me. I told her that was acting after the manner
of some late Judges; call a thing Treason without Law, and then hang a Man for
it without Proof: That I appealed to all the World for my Innocence in the
matter, and defied my greatest Enemies to bring any Evidence of my guilt. She
told me she had it from such a one, who had it from another; and that, in fine,
the original Author of this Calumny was your self. Now though I grant you that
some People might have said such a thing as this, out of Inadvertency; yet I
can hardly believe a Man of your Prudence to have done it upon that account.
You who very well know, That to commend a Man for a Wit to the Women, is like
commending him for a good Protestant to the Fathers of the Inquisition; and he
that reported me an Eunuch among 'em, could not do it upon a more malicious
account. They love a tame, easy, governable Fool, and fancy all Wits
ill-natured and proud: Have not you often told me so? and after that to put me
upon 'em for one! Well, Sir, I am a Gentleman; nor shall I pass by such a thing
as this, without satisfaction. I expect therefore you should either give it me
under your Hand, That you never said any such thing of me; or if you really
said it, That you should go immediately to the Person to whom you did it; and
assure 'em you were misinformed in the thing, and that to your knowledge
Ireland it self never bred a more tame, easy fool than I am: for here lies the
greatest danger; I have gotten a Rival of that Country, and you know how
difficult it is to succeed in a Contest with one of them, when want of Wit to
give is the preference. After all, methinks if you would be hearty in the
thing, you may bring me out of these Difficulties: I know you have Wit enough
to convince 'em that I have none; and if the worst come to the worst, it is but
carrying you to 'em, to show the difference. In that hopes, I resume the Title
of

Your, etc.

LETTER XI.
To a Lady in the Country, who was going to be married.
AFter having written you a Letter upon your first going down, I have never
dared to venture one since, lest I should be mistaken in my Address; and for
ought I know, to write to you now by the Title of Mrs --, may be as uncivil as
to treat the King with the Title of Prince of Orange. However, Madam, blame not
me for it, since we are here in perfect ignorance of the matter. We had very
positive news one while of your being married; and as positive after, that it
was not yet done; which some here took, I can assure you, for a great Act of
Mercy. Half a dozen Sparks of your Acquaintance have provided themselves either
with Love-Songs, or Epithalamiums, to send you, as occasion shall require,
without being yet able to know which would be most proper: And here are half a
dozen more, who have had Halters about their Necks, ever since the Report of
your going to be married; for they are resolved to be ready upon the first
notice, That the same Post which brings the news of your Wedding, may carry
back that of their Deaths. It Is true, Madam, I took the boldness to advise 'em
not to be overhasty in the Affair, since they might do it afterward at their
own Convenience; and Experiments of this nature were difficult enough to
correct, when they were once ill done. But all I could say was in vain; they
are positive in the matter, and half a dozen of the handsomest Trees in the
Park, are marked out for the Execution. I must confess, I endeavored to divert
'em as much as I could from choosing that place, for the Benefit of the Company
that walks there; I told 'em it was contrary to all precedent, to make use of
Elms, or Lime-Trees, since the Willow had time out of mind been reserved for
that use; and that a Lover who did not hang himself according to form, had as
good never hang himself at all. They answered me very surlily, (though very
truly too I must own) That it was not my Business: That it was a very hard case
People might not hang themselves without asking my leave; and as they would not
hinder me whenever I was going about such a thing, so they took it very ill
that I should pretend to hinder them. I must confess, Madam, I could say very
little in the case; and you may believe I had no great mind to enter upon a
Quarrel with People in their Circumstances; but I thought the acquainting you
with it, was a Duty that became

Your, etc.

LETTER XII.
To a Lady that asked him for his Heart.
Though to tell a Man that you will dispose of his Heart to one who shall use it
ill, is but a very small Encouragement for him to part with it; yet since you
say you have a particular fancy for mine, I cannot refuse you such a trifle as
that, upon whatever terms you demand it. I have enclosed it therefore in this
Letter, and trusted it to the Penny-Post, lest your Generosity should have made
you give a Messenger more for the bringing it, than the thing it self is really
worth. I wish, Madam, it were better for your sake; and can assure you, That
were it the most mo^ish one in the World, it should be at your Service. As it
is, Madam, I am afraid you will think it very old fashioned, and too much given
to those antiquated Qualities, Constancy and Fidelity. It is probable the Lady
for whom you intend it, may despise those Things, and think a Heart of that
sort as ridiculous as a Lover in a short Cloak, slash Sleeves, pinck'd Doublet,
and trunk Hose. But let her not be prejudiced against things for their first
appearances; I have seen a very awkward Beginner, come to Dance very well at
last; and it is not impossible but by good management the Heart may be brought
quite off those disagreeable Qualities. You may please to tell her, That it
having been bred up very tenderly 'till now, it would be convenient to treat it
a little kindlier than ordinary at first, lest it should be apt to run away:
She should encourage his Sighs now and then with a kind Whisper; and when she
sees the Fire grow a little faint, let her give but one or two kind Looks, and
it will blaze out afresh. Having been troubled with an extraordinary Fever,
since it was in the presence of a certain Lady, it ought not to be exposed to
the open Air, for fear of catching cold; she may conveniently enough confine it
to her Bedchamber, where it may be of great use rightly managed, and wake her
in a morning with half a dozen deep-fetch'd Sighs, better than any Larum-Clock.
You see, Madam, what Confidence I have in your Conduct, since I trust you to
dispose of a Heart for me, that I have never been able to dispose of my self.
You will think, perhaps, it is but making a Virtue of Necessity, and
surrendering up a Fort which I am not able to hold out against you. However,
Madam, the fiercest Conquerors are kind to Garrisons that yield upon the first
Summons; and as I know your Power to be greater than any of theirs; so I doubt
not but your Virtues are answerable to 'em. All the favor I shall beg for my
Heart, is, That it may be treated as a Prisoner of War, and that I may have the
liberty of keeping a Correspondence with it, during its Confinement. To show
you I intend nothing but what is fair, I am satisfied you should read all the
Letters I write; and that none should come to me, but by your Approbation. And
indeed you need not fear this making any escape; for if I can guess at all at
his Humor, he will prefer such a Captivity to all the Liberty in the World;
and will not be so proud of the Titles of Prince, or Conqueror, as that of your
Prisoner and Slave.

LETTER XIII.
To the same.
If streaming Blood my fatal Letter stain,
Imagine ere you read, the Writer slain:
One Hand the Sword, and one the Pen employs,
And in my Lap the ready Paper lies.
I Have been these six Hours in debate, Whether I should stab my self, or write
to you first? At last, Madam, I have determined on the latter: For I consider
that if you should hear a Fellow mounted upon a Cricket, singing some doleful
Ballad of my Death, you would be at a loss to know the cause of so sad an
Accident; and, in an Age so inquisitive as ours, would take it much better to
have a relation of the thing from the first hand, than be put to the trouble of
stopping to enquire of it in the Street, or trusting to the Fidelity of a
Grub-street Historian. The Business then in short, Madam, is this: Coming home
about Twelve a Clock last Night, I found a Letter, to tell me, That I should
meet you in -- at Five a Clock in the Afternoon. Now, Madam, I am really so
sensible of my guilt of disappointing you in this manner, that after having
arraigned, judged, and condemned my self for it, I am just now upon the point
of Execution. I must confess, some People have advised me to the contrary, and
tell me you cannot take it ill that I did not meet you, when you know how late
it was before I received the Letter. But I told them, That after having written
to you, I ought never to have stirred from home, but staid in expectation of an
answer. For though it was urged in my Defense, That I had some great Business
which called me out; and that I had little hopes you should have granted me the
Honor of meeting you so soon; yet this Excuse does not satisfy me in the
least: For why a Devil should a Man pretend to make Love, when he has great
Business, and little Hope? This Consideration has absolutely determined me for
a sudden Execution; and whatever you may think upon the first sight of this
Letter, yet before you can have read it out, you may assure your self I shall
be no more

Your, etc.
Postscript.
I have a thing just now come into my Head, that may possibly make me deferr my
Execution, till I hear farther from you. Different People having different
Tastes; and there being as many ways of killing Lovers, as there are of
dressing Eggs, it would anger me very much if I should stab my self for your
sake, when you would rather have me hanged or drowned.



LETTER XIV.
To the same.
IT is well, Madam, you prepared me for a Disappointment in your Letter,
otherwise, I confess, I am very impatient under those Circumstances. I hope it
was not in revenge for my missing the other Assignation; if it be, reckon we
are upon the square now. You will certainly grant, you have all the reason in
the World to make me amends for this; and it is with a great deal of impatience
I expect a more favorable Opportunity. In recompense, you shall dispose of me,
in whatever manner you please; and I am sure you must allow, That if I am not
the most passionate Lover in the World, I am at least the most convenient: For
whenever you have a mind to give Sir --, or Mr. -- opportunities of saying soft
things, you shall see that I manage the other Party to your advantage, as
naturally as can be. Then, Madam, if after this, you have any occasion to make
'em jealous again, there is no Man in the World fitter for such an Employment
than my self. You may make use of me, Madam, in any of these Capacities, (but
still make use of me) and you will not only oblige your self, but

Your, etc.

LETTER XV.
To the same.
CErtainly the Lady who accused me of Indifference last night, has the least
reason in the World to do so. Is it indifference to be always following her
up-and-down? Is it indifference to shun all Company for hers? Is it
indifference to gaze upon her with all the tenderness in Nature? These are but
the outward Signs; but, oh! could she look within, and accuse of Indifference a
Heart that burns with the most violent Passion that ever was! It is true,
Madam, the rest of the World may, with justice enough, tax me with it: For as
there is but one Person living, who can make me otherwise; so Prudence obliges
me to manage things so, as to disguise my Passion from all the World beside.
And is there no return due to this, but a Resolution to deceive me? Well,
Madam; it is some comfort to me however, That if you can but for one half hour
delude me into an Opinion that I am beloved by you, that short Cheat will be a
greater Satisfaction, than all Womankind can grant me beside.

LETTER XVI.
To the same.
I See I am destined to destruction! Why, O Heaven! did I ever see her? Or
since I did, why did any Body else? Had I never, I could never have been happy;
and by having seen you, I am the most miserable Wretch breathing. These will
appear Mysteries, perhaps, to you; and if you think me distracted when I writ
this, you will think right: Love, Rage, Jealousy, and Despair, are tearing my
Soul in pieces. If you have any Compassion for a Man whom you have rendered the
most miserable in the World, give me an Opportunity of meeting you to day,
though it be but for one half hour. I would not have you come to the Walks
after this Rain, for fear you should catch cold; and a meeting at Shops or
Indian Houses, may make People suspicious. Though I die if I see you not, yet I
would rather do so, than bring your Health or Reputation in any danger. Think,
oh think upon some way of satisfying my Request; and do not apprehend that this
Distraction which I show you, should appear to any body else, to your
prejudice. I wish every one were as careful of you as I am; yet I lie, I do not
wish it; for to be so, they must love you at the same rate; and I had rather
allow 'em all the Favors you can grant, than that. Adieu -- I am -- alas I
know not what I am, but that I am miserable, and that I am

Yours.

LETTER XVII.
To the same.
I Think I have taken all the ways imaginable to convince you that I love you
above the World; however, Madam, you shall see I will yet do more, which is,
never to see you again. It is true, Mrs. -- told me, I might come to you to
day; but she told me at the same time, That you thought it improper for me to
come so often. Had you any kindness for me, you could not have refused my
Visits upon so cold a Reason as their being improper; and if you have not, you
cannot be pleased that I make 'em at all. You shall see therefore, Madam, how
much I value your Quiet above my own, since I engage my Word to you (and I am
sure, Madam, neither you, nor any Woman in the World, can say I have ever
broken my Word with 'em) that I will never make you another Visit, or come into
any place where you are, except you give me very good assurance that my Company
will be more acceptable to you, than I have reason to believe it has been of
late.

LETTER XVIII.
To the same.
THat this parting has not been sought of my side, Heaven can be my Witness;
and how little satisfaction I take in it, every Vein in my Heart can testify.
No; I tremble, I am all confusion, and I die when I think upon it; and it is
only in complaisance to you, that I have resolved it. I see you are picking
little Occasions of quarrelling with me; I see you are uneasy when I am with
you, and I see you do not make a return that is suitable to a Passion so
violent and so sincere as mine is. Heavens! Madam, what would you have me do?
Should I come to put you out of Humor? Or would you have me appear as a
Spectacle of your Rigor to your more-favour'd Servants. No, Madam, I had too
much tenderness for you, to give you any disturbance; and give me leave to say,
I have not so mean a Spirit as to follow any Woman, when I have reason to
believe she thinks me troublesome, how difficult soever it may be to quit her.

Since you command it, I shall not fail of waiting upon you once more, before
we part for ever.

On the Author of a Dialogue concerning Women, pretended to be writ in defense
of the Sex.
NEar Coven-Garden Theater, where you know
Poets their Sense, Players their Shapes do show,
There is a Clubb of Critics of the Pit,
Who do themselves admire for Men of Wit;
And lo! an arbitrary Power assume
On Plays and Ladies both to pass their Doom;
Censure all things and Persons, Priest and Prince,
And judge them by the Standard of their Sense:
But scan these Sparks, or by their Words or Mien,
You Will find them Fop without, and Fool within.
One of these Brats dressed up in shape of Satyr,
Comes forth to be the Ladies Vindicator:
And since for Chivalry he claims no Warrant,
Instead of Knight sets up for Poet Errant.
Bless us! said I, what mighty Hero's here?
He thunders so, it is dangerous to come near.
The beauteous Sex may set their Hearts at rest;
Of all their Patrons, sure this is the best.
This great dead-doing Champion of the Quill,
Will all the Fry of lewd Lampooners kill;
Then to begin with Dryden's dreadful Name,
Should mark out something of no common Fame.
But when the boasted Matter I had read,
I found my Expectation was misled,
And that the Poet, though he does pretend
To do them Justice, is no Woman's Friend.
Misogynes is made to shoot with Ball,
Philogynes allowed no charge at all.
And howsoever he disguise the matter,
To publish the First Part, be writ the latter.
He that but strictly marks the whole Design,
May trace the Prefacer in every Line;
And though he did not own the wanton Ape,
He nursed the Cub, and licked it into shape.
And, Ladies, now without the help of Day,
You may discern who does the Weapon sway.
And brandishes his Pen against your Credit;
To Mr. Eat-finger himself that did it.
He that sits silent in his Wits defense,
Whose Mouth is filled with Fist instead of Sense;
Or else he crams his Hand into his Iaws,
Like Russian Bears that live upon their Paws.
At Coffee-House among the Men of Worth,
He goggles like a Quaker holding forth.
Like an Endymion he can court the Moon,
And bark at her bright Glories when h'as done;
Or like the Mouse in Fable he can plead,
He has deserved t'aspire to Princess Bed,
'Till for his daring Arrogance he is spurned,
And all his fop-Pretensions over-turn'd.
Then like the little Vermin squeaks and dies,
Or prints a Book of Ladies Cruelties.
This is the Fool, fair Ladies, that does haunt you,
That will from Dressing Room: o Play Gallant you.
W -- he is called; what Name so much renowned,
Through all the Realms of Nonsense can be found?
LETTER XIX.
To a Lady who sent him the foregoing Verses into the Country.
I Received a Copy of Verses from you last Post, with a Command (for the
Requests of fair Ladies are always Commands to me) that I should answer 'em. I
would serve you, Madam, you may be sure, in any thing that was in my Power, but
this I must own is quite beyond it; and after having read them over, I found my
self utterly unable to cope with so dead-doing an Author: I sent therefore
immediately to the Clerk of the Parish (a very honest Man, a good Weaver, and
no ill Critic I can assure you, as Critics go) to beg the favor of him, that
he would come and assist me in the thing. With his help, Madam, I read 'em over
again: We both agreed, That there were never Words better chosen, Verse more
delicately turned, Satyr more fine, or Raptures more poetical. As for example:

Bless us! said I, what mighty Hero's here?
He thunders so, it is dangerous to come near.
The beauteous Sex may set their Hearts at rest;
Of all their Patrons, sure this is the best.
The Clerk indeed made some Exceptions to the Lines that follow:

But when the boasted matter I had read,
I found my Expectation was misled.
He said he could not imagine that so wise a Person as the Author of those
Verses, could be misled in any thing.

And, Ladies, now
(An Apostrophe to the Ladies:)

without the help of Day,
O God, Madam, by a Rush-light as plain as can be,

You may discern who does the Weapon sway.
If it were not too great a trouble to the Author, I would desire to know of
him who it is that does sway the Weapon; for sometimes he makes us believe it
is the Prefacer, and sometimes the pretended Author:

And brandishes his Pen against your Credit,
To Mr. Eat-finger himself that did it.
This last was so very good a Conceit, and so very new, that I thought the
Clerk would have died with laughing at it. Well, said he, (when he had a little
recovered himself) that Eatfinger is so ingenious, that a Man might have made
five or six very good Verses of that one Thought. Set your Heart at rest, said
I, and see if this Author has not as much Management as he has Wit.

He that sits silent in his Wit's defense,
I warrant this Poet never sat silent in his Life,

Whose Mouth is filled with Fist instead of Sense,
Or else he crams his Hand into his Iaws:
That is to say, Either he eats his Fingers, or fills his Mouth with his Fist,
or crams his Hand into his Iaws. Never were there Fancies more sublime, or more
variety of 'em put together.

At Coffee-House among the Men of Worth,
Observe here, Madam, if you please, a new Argument for Rhyme, and that is the
Civility and Good-breeding which proceed from it. Had it not been for the
Rhyme's sake, those who were Fops and Fools in the beginning of the Poem, had
little reason to expect to be adopted Men of Worth in the latter part of it.

He goggles like a Quaker holding forth.
This we both allowed to be the very best Jest of all. It is true, indeed, the
Clerk (who is a very good natured Man, though perhaps a little too curious in his
Criticisms) said, He could not find any very great resemblance between a Man
who sat silent, and a Quaker that was holding forth. But I told him, He must
suppose it was a Quaker holding forth at a silent Meetting.

Like an Endymion he can court the Moon,
And bark at her bright Glories when he is done.
The Clerk told me, He doubted the Author was mistaken here: For as the Story
has been always written, Endymion did not make love to the Moon, but the Moon
to Endymion. And as for the Barking, he assured me he had it from an ancient
Greek Manuscript, whose Author was intimately acquainred with Endymion; and
protests, That he never saw a Man less apt to bark at People in his Life than
he was. But if all the little Currs of the Town have always barked at the Moon,
it is very hard that Endymion, who was never known to bark at any body, must be
supposed the Author of all that Noise. But pray, Madam, inform your self a
little better from the Author, of what follows: Was there ever any Mouse? or
was there any Fable wherein there was a Mouse?

-- did plead,
He had deserved to aspire to Princess Bed?
For if the thing be really true, it was the most impudent Mouse that ever I
heard of; and we must, both the Clerk and I, agree with the Author, in the just
resentment he shows for so horrible a Presumption.

But to be a little more serious, Madam: Though I can allow a Jest as far as any
body, yet I would not have People imagine I shall bear such things as these.
You may advise the Author therefore, for his own sake, to keep his Name
concealed. How great soever his Quality may be (for if I can guess at all at
him, he is a Person of considerable Quality) let him not imagine that shall
protect him from my Revenge. Had the Great Mogul written such a Copy of Verses
against me (not that I have any particular Pique to the Great Mogul) without
any respect at all to his Quality, I would have printed the Verses, and put his
Name to 'em. However, Madam, in the midst of my Fury, he shall see how much
more like a Christian I treat him, than he has done me: For though he has
maliciously insinuated, That Mr. Dryden writes for me, and that I am covetous
of M. L. D.'s Company, yet I must do him the justice to declare, I do not in
the least believe Mr. Dryden has any hand in his Works, or that he ever found
any great Satisfaction in the Conversation of M. L. D. I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
The Clerk presents his Service to the Author, and has written the Enclosed,
which he desires may be delivered to him.



LETTER XX.
To the most Noble Author of that incomparable Poem, on the Author of a
Dialogue concerning Women, etc.
Most Noble Sir;
YOu cannot imagine with what unexpressible satisfaction I read over your late
Poem. It pleases me extremely to see, that notwithstanding the Endeavors of
our Enemies, the Wits, there are still some generous Spirits who tread in the
Steps of our Predecessors, and imitate those hidden Graces that lie
undiscovered in the Works of Mr. Thomas Sternhold, and Mr. Robert Wisdom of
Blessed Memory. I have seen several modern Lampoons that have gone some steps
toward it; but I may say without flattery, I have seen no Man who has gone so
far in it as your self. And whereas most of the Pieces now in vogue are dull,
flat things, taken from the Ancients; Yours is brisk, sharp, and all your own:
Envy it self cannot say you have stolen one good thing from any body; and truly
I think it will be very difficult for any Man to steal one from you. There is a
Saying of Virgil's concerning Homer, (for I would scorn to compare such a Poet
as you to any thing less than Homer) That it was casier to take the Club from
Hercules, than a Verse from him. What was, perhaps, but a Compliment when said
of Homer's Verses, may, with a great deal of Justice, be affirmed of your
Jests. I do no less approve your Generosity in undertaking the Moon's Cause,
than your Address in the management of it: I fancy, if your Modesty would give
you leave to own it, you are deeper in her Favor than ever Endymion was: At
least all the World must own she has a very great influence upon you; and I
fancy your Fit of Poetry comes upon you, when she is at the full. No more at
present, but that with all due Respects to her and the Mouse presented, I remain

Yours, while W. S.

LETTER XXI.
To a Friend.
Written from the Country.
THe Dialogues of Plato, with your last Letter, have quite turned my Head. What
delicacy of Invention! What sublimity of Thought! I talk no more of Women, of
Gallantry; I think of nothing but Philosophy and Seraphick Love. Oh Vanity of
Pomp, of Glory, of Trifles, falsely called Pleasures! They appear beautiful to
the sight, but once tasted, they leave nothing but Shame, Sorrow, and
Repentance. Let us give others leave to play the Fool, while we enjoy the
sweetness of Philosophy. O charming Quiet! Oh dear Repose! Oh Life truly
celestial! Mounted upon the lofty tops of Philosophy, we regard at our ease the
Vanity, the Folly, the Madness of the World: The greatest Cities appear nothing
but great Herds of Madmen; so many Men, so many Follies.

Suave mari magno turbantibus aethera ventis,
Eterra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
Sed nil dulcius est been quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum templa serena;
Despicere, unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque vias palantes quaerere vitae.
The Soul of Man, according to Plato, has two Wings; the one celestial, with
which she flies up to the Empyreal Heaven; the other terrestrial, which pulls
her down to the Earth again. It is the first of these that raises you to those
lofty divine Paths, reached by none but the greatest Wits, the noblest Souls;
The other brings Men down to the things of this World; to Vanity, to Sin, to
Marriage! Poor Husbands! you have truly observed how soon Beauty flies away;
but, alas! Love flies away much sooner: Uncomplaisant Companion that he is, who
though he comes with Beauty, will not stay with it. Great Politicians without
doubt these Husbands! who suffer an eternal slavery for a thing of so little
duration. But what signifies that to us? Let us leave 'em in peace (if there be
any such thing as Peace in Marriage) and love me as I love you.

LETTER XXII.
To the same.
From London.
IT is so long since I wrote to you, that I am almost ashamed of doing it now:
But, to say the truth, I have too just an Excuse for my neglect, being relapsed
into my former malady, and notwithstanding all the Assistance of Philosophy,
fallen in love ten times more than ever. I am ashamed to tell you how long I
have been so; but I am ten times more ashamed to tell you, I do not yet find
the least decay in my Passion, though I have reason enough to believe the Lady
did not care though she saw me hanging up at her Gate. Well; we may put as good a
face upon the matter as we will; but first or last I see Constancy comes upon
us all. In the humor I am at present, I had a good mind to forswear ever being
in love again. And yet upon better thoughts, I think I had as good try it once
more: For of three Amors I have had in my Lifetime, (as for Amourettes, those
are not worth mentioning) I valued the one Mistress after I left loving her; I
loved another, after I left valuing her; I love and value the third, after
having lost all hopes of her: So that methinks according to the course of my
Passions, I ought to love and value the next, after having obtained her.
However, from this time forward, upon what Follies soever you fall, be pleased
for my sake to spare those of love; being very well satisfied, there is not one
Folly of that kind (except Marriage) which I have not already committed. I have
been, without raillery, in love with the Beauty of a Woman whom I have never
seen; with the Wit of one whom I have never heard speak, nor seen any thing
that she has written; and with the Heroic Virtues of a Woman, without knowing
any one Action of her Life, that could make me think she had any. Considering
how very common these Qualities are, I suppose you will not ask me if I have
ever been mistaken. I know not what you think in the Country; but, for my part,
I am of Opinion a Man must resolve to abandon Women or Philosophy entirely, for
they will never agree well together. After an absence of five or six Months
from Town, I find the Ladies still the same; that is to say, still various.
Those who were in love when I went from hence, are in love still; but they are
in love with other Men. They are constant to Love, but inconstant to the
Lovers: And in this point, to speak the truth among Friends, I think there is
no great difference between the two Sexes. The Men complain of the Women's
inconstancy, and the Women of the Men's; for my part being unwilling to
disoblige either, I am very apt to agree with both. But Cupid will have it so;
and what can weak Mortals do against so potent a God? Adieu; live pleasantly,
that is, philosophically; and guard your Heart from the Pains of Love.

POEMS.

POEMS.
To his Book.
GO, little Book, and to the World impart
The faithful Image of an amorous Heart:
Those who Love's dear, deluding Pains have known,
May in my fatal Stories read their own.
Those who have lived from all its Torments free,
May find the thing they never felt, by me.
Perhaps advised, avoid the gilded Bait,
And, warned by my Example, shun my Fate.
While with calm Joy, safe landed on the Coast,
I view the Waves on which I once was tossed.
Love is a medley of Endearments, Iars,
Suspicions, Quarrels, Reconcilements, Wars;
Then Peace again. Oh! would it not be best,
To chase the fatal Poison from our Breast?
But since so few can live from Passion free,
Happy the Man, and only happy he,
Who with such lucky Stars begins his love,
That his cool Judgment does his Choice approve.
Ill grounded Passions quickly wear away;
What Is built upon Esteem, can never decay.
ELEGY.
The unrewarded Lover.
LEt the dull Merchant curse his angry Fate,
And from the Winds and Waves his Fortune
(wait
Let the loud Lawyer break his Brains, and be
A Slave to wrangling Coxcombs for a Free:
Let the rough Soldier fight his Prince's Foes,
And for a Livelihood his Life expose:
I wage no War, I plead no Cause but Love's,
I fear no Storms, but what Celinda moves.
And what grave Censor can my Choice despise?
But here, fair Charmer, here the difference lies:
The Merchant after all his Hazards past,
Enjoys the fruit of his long Toils at last;
The Soldier high in his King's Favor stands,
And after having long obeyed, commands:
The Lawyer to reward his tedious Care,
Roars on the Bench, that babbled at the Bar;
While I take pains to meet a Fate more hard,
And reap no Fruit, no Favor, no Reward.
EPIGRAM.
Written in a Lady's Table Book.
WIth what strange Raptures would my Soul
(be blessed,
Were but her Book an Emblem of her Breast?
As I from that all former Marks efface,
And, uncontrolled, put new ones in their place;
So might I chase all others from her Heart,
And my own Image in the stead impart.
But, ah! how short the Bliss would prove, if he
Who seized it next, might do the same by me.
ELEGY.
The Power of Verse.
To his Mistress.
WHile those bright Eyes subdue wherever
(you will,
And, as you please, can either save, or kill;
What Youth so bold the Conquest to design?
What Wealth so great to purchase Hearts like thine?
None but the Muse that Privilege can claim,
And what you give in Love, return in Fame.
Riches and Titles with your Life must end;
Nay, cannot even in Life your Fame desend:
Verse can give Fame, can fading Beauties save,
And, after Death, redeem'em from the Grave;
Embalmed in Verse, through distant Times they
(come,
Preserved, like Bees, within an Amber Tomb.
Poets, (like Monarchs, on an Eastern Throne,
Restrained by nothing but their Will alone)
Here can cry up, and there as boldly blame,
And, as they please, give Infamy or Fame.
In vain the Dido.
Tyrian Queen resigns her Life,
For the bright Glory of a spotless Wife,
If lying Bards may false Amors rehearse,
And blast her Name with arbitrary Verse.
While Penelope.
one who all the absence of her Lord,
Had her wide Courts with pressing Lovers stored;
Yet by a Poet graced, in deathless Rhimes,
Stands a chaste Pattern to succeeding Times.
With pity then the Muses Friends survey,
Nor think your Favors there are thrown away;
Wisely like Seed on fruitful Soil they are thrown,
To bring large Crops of Glory and Renown.
For as the Sun that in the Marshes breeds
Nothing but nauseous and unwholesome Weeds;
With the same Rays on rich and pregnant Earth,
To pleasant Flowers, and useful Fruits gives birth.
So Favors cast on Fools, 'get only Shame;
On Poets shed, produce eternal Fame:
Their generous Breasts warm with a genial Fire,
And more than all the Muses can inspire.
Jealousy.
I.
WHo could more happy, who more blessed
(could live,
Than they whom kind, whom amorous Passions
(move?
What Crowns, what Empires greater Ioys could
(give,
Than the soft Chains, the slavery of Love?
Were not the Bliss too often crossed,
By that unhappy, vile Distrust;
That gnawing Doubt, that anxious Fear, that dange-
(rous Malady,
That terrible tormenting Rage, that Madness Iea-
(lousie.
II.
In vain Celinda boasts she has been true;
In vain she swears she keeps untouched her
(Charms;
Dire Jealousy does all my Pains renew,
And represents her in my Rival's Arms.
His Sighs I hear, his Looks I view,
I see her damned Advances too;
I see her smile, I see her kiss; and, oh! methinks I
(see
Her give up all those Ioys to him, she should reserve
(for me.
III.
Ungrateful fair One, can thou hear my Groans?
Can thou behold these Tears that fill my Eyes?
And yet unmoved by all my Pains, my Moans,
Into another's Arms resign my Prize?
If Merit could not gain your Love,
My Sufferings might your Pity move:
Might hinder you from adding thus, by jealous
(Frenzies, more
New Pangs, to one whom hopeless Love had
(plagued too much before.
IV.
Think not, false Nymph, my Fury to out-storm,
I scorn your Anger, and despise your Frown:
Dress up your Rage in its most hideous form,
It will not move my Heart when Love is flown;
No, though you from my Kindness fly,
My Vengeance you shall satisfy;
The Muse that would have sung your Praise, shall
(now aloud proclaim
To the malicious, spiteful World, your Infamy and
(Shame.
V.
Ye Gods! she weeps; behold that falling Shower!
See how her Eyes are quite dissolved in Tears!
Can she in vain that precious Torrent pour?
Oh, no, it bears away my Doubts and Fears.
'Twas Pity sure that made it flow;
For the same Pity stop it now:
For every charming, heavenly Drop, that from those
(Eyes does part,
Is paid with Streams of Blood, that gush from my
(o'er-flowing Heart.
VI.
Yes, I will love; I will believe you true,
And raise my Passions up as high as ever;
Nay, I Will believe you false, yet love you too,
Let the least sign of Penitence appear.
I Will frame Excuses for your Fault,
Think you surpised, or meanly caught;
Nay, in the fury, in the height of that abhorred
(Embrace,
Believe you thought; believe at least, you wished me
(in the place.
VII.
Oh let me lie whole Ages in those Arms,
And on that Bosom lull asleep my Cares:
Forgive those foolish Fears of fansy'd Harms,
That stab my Soul, while they but move thy
(Tears.
And think unless I loved thee still,
I had not treated thee so ill;
For these rude Pangs of Jealousy, are much more
(certain signs
Of Love, than all the tender Words an amorous
(Fancy coins.
VIII.
Torment me with this horrid Rage no more;
Oh, smile and grant one reconciling Kiss!
Ye Gods, she is kind, I Am ecstasie all over!
My Soul's too narrow to contain the Bliss.
Thou pleasing Torture of my Breast,
Sure thou were framed to plague my Rest,
Since both the Ill and Good you do, alike my Peace
(destroy;
That kills me with excess of Grief, This with excess
(of Joy.
Cure of Jealousy.
WHat Tortures can there be in Hell,
Compared to what fond Lovers feel,
When doting on some fair One's Charms,
They think she yields 'em to their Rivals Arms?
As Lions though they once were tame,
Yet if sharp Wounds their Rage inflame,
Lift up their stormy Voices, roar,
And tear the Keepers they obeyed before.
So fares the Lover, when his Breast
By jealous Frenzy is possessed,
Forswears the Nymph for whom he burns;
Yet strait to her whom he forswears, returns.
But when the Fair resolves his Doubt,
The Love comes in, the Fear goes out;
The Cloud of Iealousie's dispelled,
And the bright Sun of Innocence revealed.
With what strange Rapture's is he blessed!
Raptures too great to be expressed.
Though hard the Torment's to endure,
Who would not have the Sickness, for the Cure?
SONNET.
Death.
WHat has this Bugbear Death that is worth
(our Care?
After a Life in Pain and Sorrow past,
After deluding Hope and dire Despair,
Death only gives us Quiet at the last.
How strangely are our Love and Hate misplaced!
Freedom we seek, and yet from Freedom flee;
Courting those Tyrant-Sins that chain us fast,
And shunning Death, that only sets us free.
It Is not a foolish fear of future Pains,
(Why should they fear who keep their Souls from Stains?)
That makes me dread thy Terrors, Death, to see:
It Is not the Loss of Riches, or of Fame,
Or the vain Toys the Vulgar Pleasures name;
It Is nothing, Caelia, but the losing thee.
ELEGY.
To his false Mistress.
CAElia, your Tricks will now no longer pass,
And I Am no more the Fool that once I was.
I know my happier Rival does obtain
All the vast Bliss for which I sigh in vain.
Him, him you love; to me you use your Art:
I had your Looks, another had your Heart.
To me you are sick, to me of Spies afraid:
He finds your Sickness gone, your Spies betrayed.
I figh beneath your Window all the Night;
He in your Arms possesses the Delight.
I know you treat me thus, false Fair, I do;
And, oh! what plagues me worse, he knows it too:
To him my Sighs are told, my Letters shown;
And all my Pains are his Diversion grown.
Yet since you could such horrid Treasons act,
I Am pleased you chose out him to do the Fact:
His Vanity does for my Wrongs atone;
And 'cis by that I have your Falsehood known.
What shall I do! for treated at this rate,
I must not love; and yet I cannot hate.
I hate the Actions, but I love the Face;
Oh, were thy Virtue more, or Beauty less!
I Am all Confusion, and my Soul's on fire,
Torn by contending Reason and Desire:
This bids me love, that bids me Love give over;
One counsels best, the other pleases more.
I know I ought to hate you for your Fault;
But, oh! I cannot do the thing I ought.
Can thou, mean Wretch! can thou contented
(prove,
With the cold Relics of a Rival's Love?
Why did I see that Face to charm my Breast?
Or having seen, why did I know the rest?
Gods! if I have obeyed your just Commands,
If I Have deserved some Favor of your hands,
Make me that tame, that easy Fool again,
And rid me of my Knowledge, and my Pain.
And you, false Fair! for whom so often I Have grieved,
Pity a Wretch that begs to be deceived;
Forswear your self for one who dies for you,
Vow not a word of the whole Charge was true;
But Scandals all, and Forgeries, devised
By a vain Wretch, neglected and despised.
I too will help to forward the Deceit,
And, to my power, contribute to the Cheat.
And thou, bold Man, who think to rival me,
For thy Presumption I could pardon thee;
I could forgive thy lying in her Arms,
I could forgive thy rifling all her Charms;
But, oh! I never can forgive the Tongue,
That boasts her Favors, and proclaims my Wrong.
Upon the same Occasion.
WHat Fury does disturb my Rest?
What Hell is this within my Breast?
Now I abhor, and now I love;
And each an equal Torment prove.
I see Celinda's Cruelty,
I see she loves all Men but me;
I see her Falsehood, see her Pride,
I see ten thousand Faults beside;
I see she sticks at naught that is ill;
Yet, oh ye Powers! I love her still,
Others on Precipices run,
Which, blind with Love, they cannot shun.
I see my Danger, see my Ruin,
Yet seek, yet court my own undoing:
And each new Reason I explore
To hate her makes me love her more,
The Antidote.
WHen I see the bright Nymph who my
(Heart does enthral,
When I view her soft Eyes, and her languishing
(Air,
Her Merit so great, my own Merit so small,
It makes me adore, and it makes me despair.
But when I consider, that she squanders on Fools
All those Treasures of Beauty with which she is
(stored;
My Fancy it damps, my Passion it cools,
And it makes me despise what before I adored.
Thus sometimes I despair, and sometimes I despise;
I love, and I hate, but I never esteem.
The Passion grows up, when I view her bright Eyes,
Which my Rival's destroy, when I look upon
(them.
How wisely does Nature things so different unite!
In such odd Compositions our safety is found;
As the Blood of the Scorpion is a Cure for the Bite;
So her Folly makes whole, whom her Beauty does
(wound.
Upon a Favor offered.
CAElia, too late you would repent
The offering all your store;
Is now but like a Pardon sent
To one that is dead before.
While at the first you cruel proved,
And grant the Bliss too late;
You hindered me of one I loved,
To give me one I hate.
I thought you innocent, as fair,
When first my court I made;
But when your Falsehoods plain appear,
My Love no longer stayed.
Your Bounty of those Favors shown,
Whose Worth you first deface;
Is melting valued Medals down,
And giving us the Brass.
Oh, since the thing we beg's a Toy,
That Is prized by Love alone,
Why cannot Women grant the Joy,
Before our Love is gone?
The Reconcilement.
BE gone, ye Sighs! be gone, ye Tears!
Be gone, ye Iealousies and Fears.
Celinda swears she never loved,
Celinda swears none ever moved
Her Heart, but I; if this be true,
Shall I keep company with you?
What tho'a senceless Rival swore,
She said as much to him before?
What though I saw him in her Bed?
I Will trust not what I saw, but what she said.
Curse on the Prudent and the Wise,
Who never believe such pleasing Lies:
I grant she only does deceive;
I grant'tis Folly to believe;
But by this Folly I vast Pleasures gain,
While you with all your Wisdom live in Pain.
DIALOGUE
Between a Lover and his Friend.
(Irregular Verses.)
Friend.
VAlue thy self, fond Youth, no more
On Favors Mulus had before;
He had her first, her Virgin Flame;
You like a bold Intruder came
To the cold Relics of a Feast,
When he at first had seized the best.
Lover.
When he dull Sot had seized the worse,
I came in at the Second Course,
It Is Chance that first makes People love,
Judgment their riper Francies move.
Mulus you say first charmed her Eyes;
First, she loved Babies and Dirt-Pies;
But she grew wiser, and in time
Found out the folly of those Toys, and him.
Friend.
If Wisdom change in Love begets,
Women, no doubt, are wondrous Wits.
But Wisdom that now makes her change to you,
In time will make her change to others too,
Lover.
I grant you no Man can forsee his Doom;
But shall I grieve because an ill may come?
Yet I Will allow her Change, when she can see
A Man deserves her more than me,
As much as I deserve her more than he.
Friend.
Did they with our own Eyes see our Desert,
No Woman ever could from her Lover part.
But oh! they see not with their own,
All things to them are through false Optics shown.
Love at the first does all your Charms increase,
When the Tube's turned, Hate represents'em less.
Lover.
Whatever may come, I will not grieve,
For Dangers that I cannot believe.
She Will never cease loving me; or if she do,
It Is ten to one I cease to love her too.
EPIGRAM.
LYCE.
GO, said old Lyce, senceless Lover, go,
And with soft Verses court the Fair; but (know,
With all thy Verses, thou can get no more
Than Fools without one Verse have had before.
Enraged at this, upon the Bawd I flew;
And that which most enraged me was, 'twas true.
The fair Mourner.
IN what sad Pomp the mournful Charmer lies!
Does she lament the Victim of her Eyes?
Or would she Hearts with soft Compassion move,
To make 'em take the deeper stamp of Love?
What Youth so wise, so wary to escape,
When Rigor comes, dressed up in Pity's shape?
Let not in vain those precious Tears be shed,
Pity the Dying fair One, not the Dead;
While you unjustly of the Fates complain,
I grieve as much for you, as much in vain.
Each to relentless Judges make their moan,
Blame not Death's Cruelty, but cease you own.
While raging Passion both out Souls does wound,
A sovereign Balm might sure for both be found;
Would you but wipe your fruitless Tears away,
And with a just Compassion mine survey.
EPIGRAM.
To his false Mistress.
THou said that I alone thy Heart could
(move,
And that for me thou would abandon Jove.
I loved thee then, not with a love defiled,
But as a Father loves his only Child.
I know thee now, and though I fiercelier burn,
Thou art become the Object of my Scorn.
See what thy Falsehood gets; I must confess
I love thee more, but I esteem the less.
EPIGRAM.
Love and Jealousy.
HOw much are they deceived who vainly strive,
By jealous Fears, to keep our Flames alive?
Love's like a Torch, which if secured from Blasts,
Will faintlier burn; but then it longer lasts.
Exposed to storms of Jealousy and Doubt,
The Blaze grows greater, but it is sooner out.
ELEGY.
The Petition.
(In imitation of Catullus.)
IS there a pious Pleasure, that proceeds
From contemplation of our virtuous Deeds?
That all mean, sordid Actions we despise,
And scorn to gain a Throne by Cheats and Lies?
Thyrsis, thou have sure Blessings laid in store,
From thy just dealing in this cursed Amor.
What Honor can in Words or Deeds be shown,
Which to the Fair thou have not said and done?
On her false Heart they all are thrown away;
She only swears, more easily to betray.
Ye Powers! that know the many Vows she broke,
Free my just Soul from this unequal Yoke!
My Love boils up, and, like a raging Flood,
Runs through my Veins, and taints my Vital Blood.
I do not vainly beg she may grow chaste,
Or with an equal Passion burn at last;
The one she cannot practice, though she would,
And I contemn the other, though she should.
Nor ask I Vengeance on the perjured Iilt:
It Is punishment enough to have her Guilt.
I beg but Balsam for my bleeding Breast,
Cure for my Wounds, and from my Labors rest.
ELEGY.
Upon quitting his Mistress.
I Know, Celinda, I have born too long,
And, by forgiving, have increased my Wrong:
Yet if there be a Power in Verse to slack
Thy course in Vice, or bring fled Virtue back,
I Will undertake the Task; however so hard,
A generous Action is its own Reward.
Oh! were thy Virtues equal to thy Charms,
I Would fly from Crowns to live within those Arms:
But who, oh who, can ever believe thee just,
When such known Falsehoods have destroyed all
(Trust?
Farewell, salse Fair! nor shall I longer stay;
Since we must part, why should we thus delay?
Your Love alone, was what my Soul could prize;
And missing that, can all the rest despise.
Yet should I not repent my Follies past,
Could you take up, and grow reserved at last,
'Twou'd please me, parted from your fatal Charms,
To see you happy in another's Arms.
Whatever Threatenings Fury might extort,
Oh fear not I should ever do you hurt:
For though my former Passion is removed,
I would not injure one I once had loved.
Adieu! While thus I waste my time in vain,
Sure there are Maids I might entirely gain:
I Will search for such, and to the first that is true,
Resign the Heart so Lardly freed from you.
To his Mistress.
Against Marriage.
YEs, all the World must sure agree,
He who is secured of having thee,
Will be entirely blessed;
But 'twere in me too great a Wrong,
To make one who has been so long
My Queen, my Slave at last.
Nor ought those things to be confined,
That were sor Public Good designed;
Could we in foolish Pride,
Make the Sun always with us stay,
It Would burn our Corn and Grass away,
To starve the World beside.
Let not the Thoughts of parting, fright
Two Souls which Passion does unite;
For while our Love doeslast,
Neither will strive to go away;
And why the Devil should we stay,
When once that love is past?
EPIGRAM.
Chloe.
CHloe new-marry'd looks on Men no more;
Why then it is plain for what she looked before.
EPIGRAM.
Cornus.
COrnus proclaims aloud his Wife's a Whore;
Alas, good Cornus, what can we do more?
Were thou no Cuckold, we might make thee one;
But being one, we cannot make thee none.
EPIGRAM.
Thraso.
THraso picks Quarrels when he is drunk at
(Night;
When sober in the Morning, dares not fight.
Thraso, to shun those Ills that may ensue,
Drink not at Night, or drink at Morning too.
EPIGRAM.
Gripe and Shifter.
RIch Gripe does all his Thoughts and Cunning
(bend,
T'encrease that Wealth he wants the Soul to spend.
Poor Shifter does his whole Contrivance set
To spend that Wealth, he wants the Sense to get.
How happy would appear to each his Fate,
Had Gripe his Humor, or he Gripe's Estate!
Kind Fate and Fortune, blend'em if you can,
And of two Wretches, make one happy Man.
To Caelia, upon some Alterations in her Face.
AH, Caelia! where are now the Charms,
That did such wondrous Passions move?
Time, cruel Time, those Eyes disarms,
And blunts the feeble Darts of Love.
What Malice does the Tyrant bear
To Women's Interest, and to ours?
Beauties in which the Public share,
The greedy Villain first devours.
Who, without Tears, can see a Prince,
That Trains of fawning Courtiers had,
Abandoned, left without defense?
Nor is thy hapless Fate less sad.
Thou who so many Fools have known,
And all the Fools would hardly do,
Should now confine thy self to one!
And he, alas! a Husband too.
See the ungrateful Slaves how fast
They from thy setting Glories run;
And in what mighty Crowds they haste,
To worship Flavia's rising Sun!
In vain are all the practiced Wiles,
In vain those Eyes would Love impart;
Not all the Advances, all the Smiles,
Can move one unrelenting Heart.
While Flavia, charming Flavia still,
By Cruelty, her Cause maintains;
And scarce vouchsafes a careless Smile
To the poor Slaves that wear her Chains.
Well, Caelia, let them waste their Tears,
But sure they will in time repine,
That thou have not a Face like hers,
Or she has not a Heart like thine.
The Retirement.
ALl hail, ye Fields, where constant Peace at-
(tends!
All hail, ye sacred, solitary Groves!
All hail, ye Books, my true, my real Friends,
Whose Conversation pleases, and improves!
Could one who studied your sublimer Rules,
Become so mad to search for Ioys abroad?
To run to Towns, to herd with Knaves and Fools,
And undistinguished pass among the Crowd?
One to ambitious Fancy's made a Prey,
Thinks Happiness in great Preferment lies;
Nor fears for that his Country to betray,
Cursed by the Fools, and laughed at by the Wise.
Others whom avaricious Thoughts bewitch,
Consume their Time, to multiply their Gains;
And fansying Wretched all that are not rich,
Neglect the End of Life to get the Means.
Others the Name of Pleasure does invite,
All their dull Time in sensual Ioys they live;
And hope to gain that solid sirm Delight
By Vice, which Innocence alone can give.
But how perplexed, alas! is Humane Fate?
I whom nor Avarice, nor Pleasures move;
Who view with scorn the Trophies of the Great,
Yet must my self be made a Slave to Love.
If this dire Passion never will be gone,
If Beauty always must my Heart enthral;
Oh! rather let me be confined to one,
Than madly thus be made a Prey to all!
One who has early known the Pomps of State;
(For things unknown it is Ignorance to condemn)
And after having viewed the gaudy Bait,
Can boldly say, The Trifle I contemn.
In her blessed Arms contented could I live,
Contented could I die: But, oh! my Mind
I feed with Fancies, and my Thoughts deceive,
With hope of things impossible to find.
In Women how should Sense and Beauty meet?
The wisest Men their Youth in Follies spend;
The best is he that earliest finds the Cheat,
And sees his Errors while there is time to mend.
Pastoral Eclogues.
ECLOGUE I.
Daphne.
SIcilian Muse, my humble Voice inspire
To sing of Daphne's Charms and Damon's Fire.
Long had the faithful Swain suppressed his Grief,
And since he durst not hope, never asked relief.
But at the arrival of the fatal Day
That took the Namph and all his Ioys away;
With dying Looks he gazed upon the Fair,
And what his Tongue could not, his Eyes declare:
Till with deep Sighs, as if his Heart Strings broke,
Pressing her Hand, these tender Things he spoke:
Damon.
Ah lovely Nymph! behold your Lover burn,
And view that Passion which you will not return.
As no Nymphs Charms did ever equal thine;
So no Swain's Love did ever equal mine.
How happy, Fair, how happy should I be,
Might I but sacrifice my self for thee?
Could I but please thee with my dying Verse,
And make thee shed one Tear upon my Hearse?
Daphne.
Too free an Offer of that Love you make,
Which now, alas, I have not power to take:
Your Wounds I cannot, though I would, relieve:
Phaon has all the Love that I can give.
Had you among the rest at first assailed
My Heart, when free, you had perhaps prevailed.
Now if you blame, Oh blame not me, but Fate,
That never brought you till 'twas grown too late.
Damon.
Had the Fates brought me then, too charming Fair,
I could not hope, and now I must despair.
Ruled by your Friends, you quit the Lovers Flame
For Flocks, for Pastures, for an empty Name.
Yet though the blessed Possession Fate denies;
Oh let me gaze for ever on those Eyes.
So just, so true, so innocent's my Flame,
That Phaon did he see it, could not blame.
Daphne.
Such generous Ends I know you still pursue,
What I can do, be sure I will for you.
If on Esteem, or Pity you can live,
Or Hopes of more, if I had more to give;
Those you may have, but cannot have my Heart:
And since we now perhaps for ever part;
Such noble Thoughts through all your life express,
May make the Value more, the Pity less.
Damon.
Can you then go? Can you for ever part
(Ye Gods! what shivering Pains surround my Heart!)
And have one Thought to make your Pity less?
Ah Daphne, could I half my Pangs express,
You could not think, tho'hard as Rocks you were,
Your Pity ever could too great appear.
I never shall be one Moment free from pain,
Till I behold those charming Eyes again.
When gay Diversions do your Thoughts employ,
I would not come to interrupt the Joy:
But when from them you some spare Moment find,
Think then, oh think on whom you leave behind!
Think with what Heart I shall behold the green,
Where I so often those charming Eyes have seen!
Think with what Grief I walk the Groves alone,
When You, the Glory of them all, are gone!
Yet, oh! that little time you have to stay,
Let me still speak, and gaze my Soul away!
But see, my Passion that small Aid denies;
Grief stops my Tongue, and Tears overflow my Eyes.
ECLOGUE II.
Galatea.
THyrsis, the gaiest one of all the Swains,
Who fed their Flocks upon the Arcadian
(Plains;
While Love's mad Passion quite devoured his Heart,
And the coy Nymph that caused, neglects his Smart;
Strives in low Numbers, such as Shepherds use,
If not to move her Breast, his own amuse.
You, Chloris, who with scorn refuse to see
The mighty Wounds that you have made on me;
Yet cannot sure with equal Pride disdain,
To hear an humble Hind of his complain.
Now while the Flocks and Herds to Shades retire,
While the fierce Sun sets all the World on fire;
Through burning Fields, through rugged Brakes I
(rove,
And to the Hills and Woods declare my Love.
How small's the Heat? how easy is the Pain
I feel without, to that I feel within?
Yet scornful Galatea will not hear,
But from my Songs and Pipe still turns her Ear.
Not so the sage Corisca, nor the fair
Climena, nor rich AEgon's only Care:
From them my Songs a just Compassion drew,
And they shall have them, since contemned by you.
Why name I them, when even chaste Cynthia stays,
And Pan himself, to listen to my Lays?
Pan, whose sweet Pipe has been admired so long,
Has not disdained sometimes to hear my Song.
Yet Galatea Scorns whatever I say;
And Galatea's wiser sure than they.
Relentless Nymph! can nothing move your Mind?
Must you be deaf, because you are unkind?
Though you dislike the Subject of my Lays,
Yet sure the Sweetness of my Voice might please.
It is not thus that you dull Mopsus use,
His Songs divert you, though you mine refuse.
Yet I could tell you, fair One, if I would,
(And since you treat me thus, methinks I should)
What the wise Lycon said, when in yon Plain,
He saw him court in hope, and me in vain;
Forbear, fond Youth, to chase a heedless Fair,
Nor think with well-tuned Verse to please her Ear;
Seek out some other Nymph, nor ever repine,
That one who likes his Songs, should fly from thine.
Ah, Lycon! ah! your Rage false Dangers forms;
It Is not his Songs, but it is his Fortune Charms:
Yet, scornful Maid, in time you will find those Toys
Can yield no real, no substantial Ioys;
In vain his Wealth, his Titles gain esteem,
If for all that you are ashamed of Him.
Ah, Galatea, would thou turn those Eyes,
Would thou but once vouchsafe to hear my Cries:
In such soft Notes I would my Pains impart,
As could not fail to move thy rocky Heart;
With such sweet Songs I would thy Fame make
(known,
As Pan himself might not disdain to own.
Oh could thou, fair One, but contented be
To tend the Sheep, and chase the Hares with me;
To have thy Praises echoed through the Groves,
And pass thy Days with one who truly loves;
Nor let those gaudy Toys thy Heart surprise,
Which the Fools envy, and the Sage despise.
But Galatea Scorns my humble Flame,
And neither asks my Fortune, nor my Name.
Of the best Cheese my well-stor'd Dairy's full,
And my soft Sheep produce the finest Wool;
The richest Wines of Greece my Vineyard's yield,
And smiling Crops of Grain adorn my Field.
Ah, foolish Youth! in vain thou boast'st thy store,
Have what thou will, if Mopsus still has more.
See whilst thou sing'st, behold her haughty Pride,
With what disdain she turns her Head aside!
Oh, why would Nature, to our Ruin, place
A Tyger's Heart, with such an Angel's Face?
Cease, Shepherd, cease, at last thy fruitless Moan;
Nor hope to gain a Heart already gone.
While Rocks and Caves thy tuneful Notes resound,
See how thy Corn lies withered on the Ground!
The hungry Wolves devours thy fatten'd Lambs;
And bleating for the Young, makes lean the Damms.
Take, Shepherd, take thy Hook, thy Flocks pursue,
And when one Nymph proves cruel, find a new.
ECLOGUE III.
Damon. (Taken from the Eighth Eclogue of Virgil.)
ARise, O Phosphorus! and bring the Day,
While I in Sighs and Tears consume away;
Deceived with flattering Hopes of Nisa's Love;
And to the Gods my vain Petitions move:
Though they have done nothing to prevent my Death,
I Will yet invoke 'em with my dying Breath.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Arcadia's famous for its spacious Plains,
Its whistling Pine-Trees, and its shady Groves,
And often hears the Swains lament their Loves.
Great Pan upon its Mountains feeds his Goats,
Who first taught Reeds to warble Rural Notes.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Mopsus weds Nisa! Oh, well-suited Pair!
When he succeeds, what Lover can despair?
After this Match, let Mares and Griffins breed;
And Hounds with Hares in friendly consort feed.
Go, Mopsus, go; provide the Bridal Cake;
And to thy Bed the blooming Virgin take:
In her soft Arms thou shall securely rest.
Behold, the Evening comes to make thee blessed!
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Oh, Nisa, happy in a lovely Choice!
While you with scorn neglect my Pipe and Voice;
While you despise my humble Songs, my Herd,
My shaggy Eyebrows, and my rugged Beard;
While through the Plains disdainfully you move,
And think no Shepherd can deserve your Love;
Mopsus alone can the nice Virgin win,
With charming Person, and with graceful Mien.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
When first I saw you on those fatal Plains,
I reached you Fruit; your Mother too was there;
Scarce had you seen the thirteenth Spring appear:
Yet Beauty's Buds were opening in your Face;
I gazed, and Blushes did your Charms increase.
It Is Love, thought I, that is rising in her Breast;
Alas, your Passion, by my own, I guest;
Then upon trust I fed the raging Pains.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Oh, Love! I know thee now; thou ow'st thy
(Birth
To Rocks; some craggy Mountain brought thee
(forth:
Nor is it Humane Blood that fills thy Veins,
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Relentless Love to bold Medea showed,
To stain her guilty Hands in Children's Blood.
Was she more cruel, or more wicked he?
He was a wicked Counselor, a cruel Mother she.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Now let the Scriech-Owls vie with warbling
(Swans;
Upon hard Oaks let blushing Peaches grow,
And from the Brambles, liquid Amber flow.
The harmless Wolves, the ravenous Sheep shall shun;
And valiant Deer, at fearful Greyhounds run:
Let the Sea rise, and overflow the Plains.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Adieu, ye Flocks, no more shall I pursue!
Adieu, ye Groves, a long, a long Adieu!
And you, coy Nymph, who all my Vows disdain,
Take this last Present from a dying Swain.
Since you dislike whatever in Life I said,
You may be pleased, perhaps, to hear I Am dead:
This Leap shall put an end to all my Pains.
Now cease, my Muse, now cease the Arcadian Strains.
Thus Damon sung while on the Cliff he stood,
Then headlong plunged into the raging Flood.
All with united Grief the Loss bemoan,
Except the Authress of his Fate alone,
Who hears it with an unrelenting Breast.
Ah, cruel Nymph! forbear your Scorns at last.
How much soever you may the Love despise,
It Is barbarous to insult on one that dies.
FINIS.

