More News from Rome OR Magna Charta, Discoursed of between a Poor Man and his
Wife. AS ALSO, A New Font erected in the Cathedral-Church at Gloucester, in
October, 1663. and consecrated by the Reverend moderate Bishop, Dr. William
Nicolson, Angel of the said Church, according to the account of that infamously
famous Man, Dr. Lee.

AS ALSO, An Assertion of Dr. William Warmstrey, Dean of Worcester, wherein he
affirms, that It is a lesser sin for a man to kill his Father, than to
refrain coming to the Divine Service established in the Church of England.

The one was the killing of a particular Person, The other made a breach in the
Mystical Body of Christ.

The Members of the Mystical Body distinctly discoursed on, By the said Poor
Man and his Wife.

Imprinted at London for the Author, for the only benefit of his Wife and
Children, Anno 1666, when time shall come.

The Epistle Dedicatory, To my dear and beloved Wife.
DEar Wife, I think it most proper to dedicate the ensuing Discourse unto your
self, for the use and benefit of my Children: some of them by reason of their
tender age, are not as yet able to read; I hope you will see them learn to read
(if I dye) and also instruct them the best you can. The Disconrse is partly the
same which was discoursed on between our selves: I know if any should see it,
they will be apt to say, it is simple discourse; let them know, that it comes
from poor country simple folks; and yet, not more simple than that which is in
Ridiculus Mus, the Church Catechism, which teaches to tell three lies in one
breath; Wherein I was made a member, etc. They may say likewise, it wants
method: let them know, that men and their wives do not always talk by method,
but one among another. The Times you know are much inclined to Superstition,
that is but the Mother of Idolatry, and dwelling in a place where it is much
used, some of them are inclinable to run to the Worship, to hear the Organs,
the Singing-men and Boys; they account it fine pastime, to see the Bishop in
his Lawn-sleeves, the Doctors and Prebends in their Fools Caps, Superstitious
Habits and Formalities, like Stage Players, or Morris Dauncers, is pretty
sport to them, they may in good earnest be drawn to a likeing of it, and so in
time join with them in their false worship.

The Discourse I have obtained to be printed, hoping is may inform them what
Superstition is; and the example of Parents is many times prevalent with
Children for imitation, be it good or evil: I can speak it by experience; My
father and mother were both of them Church-Papists, and dwelling in a country
village, where there was only a Reading-Priest, they commonly went to the
Service, or Even-Song (as it is called) and saw nothing in it that might justly
offend them; my mother taught me Popish prayers, my father would go to his
private Devotion; he dying when I was but nine years of age, left me, among
other things in present possession, a stock of Popish Trinkets, Books with fine
red letters in them, one Latin book in folio, with thick covers of wood, the
leaves parchment, gilded down the margent, and on the top with letters and
faces in them; Images, Beads, and a Crucifix, which was the finest of my gods;
and although my father never taught me to use any of them, yet to work I went
with them; the Images had some small adoration; the Beads, I understood not the
use of them; the Crucifix, a fine face neatly gilded, I prayed unto. My
school-fellows had a game, called Tray-Trip, at which they played for such ware
as they had, I fell at it likewise, and out went the Parchmentleaves, and
quickly brought the thick wooden Covers nearer together; then to my Beads, I
went to work with them, one after another; then to my Crucifix, hoping that
might fetch all back again; I tript it so long, that at last I tript all away:
I have admired why the Devil would stand by, as commonly he does at gaming, and
see his young disciple thus cheated of his gods, but that he thought to put
them into the hands of the bigger boys, which might employ them more to his
advantage.

I could wish that all Superstition, all Romes Remnants, Relics, Rites and
Rags were at stake, between the Devil and the Pope, at sweep-stake; I could
wish the Devil the winner, on condition he would carry them to the bottomless
Pit from whence they came, and burn them. But stay a little, give the Devil his
due, they be his own already, only out of good will and courtesy, he spares
them the Church of England, for ornament and decency; neither is the Devil so
very a fool, nor so bad a husband, to burn that for trash, so long as it will
serve to help to make a hedge to keep honest godly Preachers out of the Pulpit,
which otherwise might help to dispossess him of his Kingdom.

It Is storied of a Noble Person, who invited an Emperor to dinner, where among
the rest of superflums Neednots, there were two rich Cupboards of Glasses, of
much value and high esteem with the owner; the Noble Person had a Blackmoor,
who by accident brake one of the Glasses, whose punishment for the fact must be
no less than death, and such a death, as that he must be thrown into a great
pond, to be devoured of the Lampreys which were therein; the Blackmoor gets him
into a corner or hole, and there roars and cries most hideously: The Emperor
taking his leave, and as he was going away, he heard a fearful cry, and
enquiring what the matter was, it was told him: he sends for the Blackmoor, who
relating the matter, with the circumstances, the Emperor returns to the Noble
Man's house, and with a stick he had in his hand, brake all the Glasses; the
Noble Man demanded of him wherefore he did it? he answered, It were better that
all the Glasses were broken, were they a thousand times so many, rather than
that the precious life of one man should be cast away.

It were better that all Romes Remnants, Relics, Rites, etc. now in use in
the Church of England, were sent to Hell, from whence they came, rather than
that one honest godly Preacher should have his mouth stopped, for that he cannot
endure that the Rags of the old Whores tail should be drawn through his teeth.

But I know Wife what they will say, that a man of my condition should not
meddle with these things, it is fitter for persons of higher quality than I am,
being of mean descent for parentage, and a poor man.

To which I should answer their reverend Lordships, were they present, that I
have more cause to stand for my Master Christ, than they for Antichrist, and
that with more boldness too; and for my parentage, true it is, I am meanly
descended; my Abavus (for I find no Latin word beyond it for a
great-Grand-father) Japhet, the third son of Noah, from whom came the Gentiles,
in the interval of Worlds, was a companion, as for clean, so for unclean
Beasts, for Asses, Pigs and Wolves: From his loins I received a swinish hellish
nature, swarming with diverse lusts: And an Asse-like head, stupid and dull,
without any true understanding of any divine Mysteries, or saving Knowledge;
and therefore can justly claim nothing for my Coal of Arms, but a Pigs-tail,
and an Asses head for the Crest. If any of you step further into the old world,
and speak with the old man, there you will find the fountain as purely corrupt
(if I may use that Epithet) as the stream, only you may take thence a coat of
Fig Leaves, which will be too short to hide your cloven-footed devilish
natures. If you come back into this world, to old Jacob, and think to take up a
coat there; which, as I have heard some say, who pretend to have skill in
Heraldry, that the rise of it is founded from Jacob, falsely understood to be
Coats of Arms, which he declared as Blessings that should come upon his Sons,
he would tell you (if alive) that those Prophetical Predictions which he
uttered by the instinct of a divine Spirit, were never intended as Presidents
to make proud Fools, Coats of Honor; and therefore you may return, and take up
my Coat, with the addition of a Wolfs-skin, which is as honorable as an
Archbishops Miter; and that as truly honorable as the Popes Triple-Crown.

My Reverend Lords, give me leave to pig it once more with you: I am the poor
Pig that feeds in a bare-bitten Common, a dish of Grains, Whey or Wash falls to
my share, wherewith I am contented, and my ears secure: You had some better
pasture or feeding than mine, but Pig-like, whyning and discontented therewith,
you are crept through the hedge into the Corn or Beanfields, and there you are
up to he ears, and above the cars too; you were never turned in at any gate; if
the Heyward or Field keeper should come, peradventure you may answer the
trespass with the forfeiture of your ears: And lest that you should not
understand me, we will unpig our selves, and then give me leave to take a turn
with you in your Palace Parlour, and there I shall tell you, that the station
wherein you stand, is none of Christ's institution: you enter but as Jackdaws
into Steeples; you are not entered in by Christ, who is the door, and therefore
but Thives and Robbers. Diocessan Bishops are but of humane institution.
Cambden in his Brittania tells us, that Dyonisius was the first that divided
Italy into Diocesses and Parishes: And it is not unknown to you, who first
divided England. What have you to do to lord it now over God's Heritage, and to
undertake the office of Apostles, nay of Christ himself? wherein you are
Blasphemers, in that you presume to give the Holy Ghost to your Creatures, who
are therein guilty of Blasphemy; when by your imitation, you are as
incomperable to Christ and his Apostles, as the Apes on the Alps to Alexanders
Army. These, with the rest of your usarpations, take heed you do not answer
with the loss of your souls.

And as you have been the grief of the Godly in Ages past, so you are at this
day; and as you live undesired, so you dye unlamented by the Diocese wherein
you domineer, and no more lamentation made for you, than for the most fordid
Catchpole in the Country: And when any of you die, I have not heard that ever
the Diocese went to prayer for a supply in your places.

The premises considered; I shall assume the boldness to tell you, that
forasmuch, as I hope, that there was as great a price paid for me, as for the
best of you, and that by him who is no respecter of persons, and has made all
Nations of one blood, that qua man, I am as good a man as the best of you. And
although my condition in the world be such, that in hard times, with the rest
of my poor neighbors, I have entertained Bishop Bean, Doctor Barley, and Parson
Pease at the upper end of my table, with a cup of Cow Beer, as good as the best
Gentleman's Ox in the Country drinks (and glad I could see them there) yet
would not I change my present condition with any of you for the best of your
Bishoprics, which was at first cheated from the poor Country, nor for the
future swop souls with you; in which trade of Soul-swopping some of you have
much skill.

Well Wife, this I could tell them, if they were present: but good Wife, keep
this Letter close, for if the Bishop should meet with it, as lately he met with
a Book and Letter, of which I am the supposed Author, it may be as much as my
liberty is worth: And for the Books, for fear lest any of them should be lost,
give the Children a charge to keep them safely: If any accidentally meet with
any, I desire they would send them home by the hand of those that know where I
dwell, or make a hole in the ground and bury them. If any take up a book and
read, and be offended at it, then it is, Scandalum acceptum, et non datum; an
offense taken, not given. I throw a bone to my own dog under board, other
quarrelling curs fall together by the ears about it, shake my poor cur, and
peradventure, bite me by the shins into the bargain; the fault is not in me, I
may give a bone to my own dog; nor in my dog it cannot be, nor in the bone; it
is in those quarrelling curs, that fall together by the ears about that they
have nothing to do withal. So I dedicate a book to my own Wife, for the use and
benefit of my own Children, some Mastive fellows understanding that I intend
such a thing, begin before hand to quarrel; the fault cannot be in my Wife nor
Children, nor in the poor innocent Paper, nor in me it cannot be, it is my duty
to inform my Children. There is an Act, that Tutors and Schoolmasters shall
teach no Chatechism, but the Church Chatechism, I am not restrained thereby.
What Is the matter these Mastive fellows quarrel about it, and be ready to come
out with a Bowgh wough at me.

I have seen a country man walking by a country house, which has stood some
what solitary, out comes a great 'Dog with a Bowgh, wough, wough, at him, the
country man spreads his arms, runs to meet him, as if he would catch him in his
arms, the dog seeing it, claps his tail between his legs, away he uns; the
Country man cries rut, Begone ye cowardly Cur, begone, what afraid of a naked
man;

This last year, traveling upon Bristol-Read, I had a wooden Dagger in my
hand, almost a Swords fellow, which a Gentleman commended to a young Kinsman of
his by my hand, and having it naked in my hand, meeting with a man on
horseback, my self on foot, pretended some fear I put him into, shunned the
way, and began to quarrel with me; Begone thou cowardly fellow, begone, what
afraid of an old man with a wooden Dagger, said I, for shame begone. So I say
to these Mastive fellows, Begone ye cowardly fellows, begone, what afraid of a
naked-man? What Is the matter ye are afraid of? cannot a poor man and his wife
talk lovingly by the fireside, nor in bed neither, but ye are offended at it?
it is but a wooden Dagger, come forth and fight it out with me and my wife; non
virgis, sed verbis; I assure you she is a hansome woman; and some of your Tribe
love to deal in such ware, love corporal uncleanness as well as spiritual: but
she is too honest to deal with you upon such terms. You were Champions for the
King, that you were; no marvel though the King lost the day, when his Soldiers
are afraid of a wooden Dagger; Has your Kingdom such slender props, it drends
falling by such weapons? What Is the matter that Crackfart your Blood-hound
attends my motion, and pursues me, and threatens me with Gate House and
Gallows, and Warrants granted forth for my apprehension? Have ye no weapons in
David's Armory to fight withal? sure he is not your King. But when I consider
that you are the Locusts, and that the Locusts have no King but the Angel of
the Bottomless Pit, and that Prisons, Gallows, Banishments, Fire and Fines, are
such weapons as come forth of the Antichristian Armory, and that your time is
but short, I do not blame you, poor wretches, to be afraid of a wooden Dagger.
But good Wife keep this Letter close.

Well, poor Wat, shift for thy self from Form to Misset, and leave the Wood,
and take the Corn fields and run counter; take heed they do not course thee to
the Gallows hill, and there give thee a turn, and make poor Wat cry, Squeak,
squeak.

But my Dear, I am in all straits and necessities sure to find a Friend of
you, and I expect the worst that may befall me; I am but positively high, yet
above the reach of Envy; and yet so superlatively low, that I am beneath it:
Qui cadet in terram, etc, he that falls to the ground, can fall no lower; as
comparatively rich as he that has the World, and that satisfaction at home,
which the world cannot afford abroad; and that content in you, which the world
cannot afford me without you: It Is not the old Witch the World, when we had it
by the nose, nor since it has caught us by the nose, nor my Lady Care her
Cousin, could cozen you out of your old inmates, Peace and Patience: and were
it not for you, with a great charge of young Children, I were, in mediis lacera
puppe relinquor aquis, left as a freeborn Englishman, to enjoy the privilege
of a rative birthright, which is, To heg, starve, er steal and be hanged. Yet I
fear not the Providence of God: I have had a back, but not without a coat; and
found a God when quite without a great; who fits my stomach to my meat, and my
mind to my coat, so that I can sing with Hortace,

Sit mihi mensa tripes,
er concha puri salis,
Et toga quae defenderit frigus,
quamvis crassa queat.
Give me a tripede for my table,
and for my salt a shell,
A gown, though it be course,
so it will cold expel.
My Dear, painful steps and old age, give me a summons to the grave. In my last
will I had nothing to leave my poor Children, but each Child Adam's Comb, I
meant their fingers, with a desire of God's blessing, which might prove a good
portion to your self; a little of the world, with a Great God; something for
bed, nothing for board. I would now make you, if I knew how, as large a
Jointure as any Lady has, if cordial affectionate words would do it, (to
support you when that small assistance you have from me, ends) but I hope there
is a Jointure hered it any to you, which is your Mothers; which, as she told
us, she lay under the sense of Divine Wrath for many years, without a God or
Christ, ready to fall (as she apprehended) every moment into eternal misery;
but when Houses, Lands, Husband, deceived of her Jointure, and left with small
Children, and all means gone, the Lord came in to her soul, and became all
things to her, and for her Jointure sealed her a full Assurance of Heaven. That
Jointure I hope will prove yours, which is as much happiness as I can wish you.

I am the more large in my Epistle, not having seen your face nor my Childrens
a long time, whilst head and heart has stood almost an hundred miles asunder;
not knowing when I may, I take leave; and the good will of Him that dwelt in
the Bush he with you and yours: which is the desire of your truly affectionate
Husband,

SILAWL.

A Discourse between a Poor-man and his Wife.
WIFE, I can tell you more News from Rome; There is a Book, called, Philanax
Anglicus; or a Caveat to Kings, Princes and Prelates, how they entrust a
pretended sort of Protestants of integrity to commix with them in their
Government; Showing plainly from the Principles of all their Predecessors, that
it is impossible to be at the same time Presbyterians, and not Rebels.
Faithfully published by Thomas Bellamy, Gent. Imprinted at London for Theodore
Sadler, next door to the Dolphin in the Strand, over against Exeterhouse, 1663.
So much of the Title page.

The Dedication of the Book, To the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert, Lord
Bishop of London (now of Canterbury) and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal.

Bellamy is no less than a Papist, as by his railing against Zuinlius,
Melancton, Calvin, Martin Luther, Buchanan, John Wickliff, and others, will
appear; and by his esteem of the Mattyrs in Queen Mary's days, accounting them
for Rebels. Now there is an Act of Queen Elizabeth, that none shall sell any
Papists Books, and yet here is a Papist Book licensed to be printed; and
Crack-fart, at the end of his Intelligence, in his Advertisements, lets fly the
Book, telling where it is to be had. And an honest Gentleman lately translated
a Book out of the French into the English-tongue, and it would not pass the
Press, and yet the Act of Queen Elizabeth unrepealed. See what Medly is here!
which puts me in mind of a business, it was thus: Sometimes living at Banbury
in Oxfordshire, I grew acquainted with one Mr. Sharp a Bookseller, who with a
Companion of his, an old Puritan as well as himself, got into the Church in the
night (Sharp being Churchwarden) and threw down the Images, receiving some
encouragement from a Doctor, who held a Visitation in Banbury, being a Peculiat
within the Jurisdiction of Linculn, who delivered this Observation in his
Sermon, That it is the duty of every Christian to put to his hand to the
pulling down of Idolatry. Mr. Sharp is had up into the High Commission Court,
where this Doctor was become one of his Judges, and to the Clink he must go:
When he came into Prison, certain Papists being likewise Prisoners there, one
of them demanded of Mr. Sharp for what fact he was brought Prisoner? who
answered, for throwing down Images in Banbury Church. O says the Papist, What
a hodg-podge is your Religion! we are put in for setting of them up, and you
are put in for pulling of them down. And is not thie a pretty hogpodg, that an
honest man shall not have the liberty to print against the Papists but be
discountenanced, notwithstanding the aforesaid Act is still in force against
printing and publishing Papists Books, very many of them having been burnt by
Authority?

But Wife, to see how the Papist claws the Bishop, in saying, that those that
you cannot bring into your Fold by your sweet paternal Call, may be brought in
by the power of your Pastoral Staff. Again, Your knowledge is super-excellent
in all things, there are incorporated in your sole person the virtues and
faculties of thousands of others; That your fair soul ever appears like the
precious Bird of Persia, called Ibis. The Reverend Father, that fair soul, to
gratify him again, rewards his good opinion of him with approbation of his
Book; and with a Shame-take-them both together, to see the correspondency that
is between them, the one a Papist, the other a Protestant in name, whithout any
Schism or Clashing one against another, puts me in mind of the Cat and the Rat
which was in our Cupboard not long since: You may remember you told me
seriously that there was a Rat in the Cupboard, which when I had peept into and
saw, I used the best skill I had to catch; a Blanket must be fetched, you held
one end, I the other, the Cupboard thrown open, when the Rat leapt into the
Blanket we must clap to; out comes the Rat into the Blanket, but wanted
patience to stay till we caught him. In he comes another day, Then Husband
(again) the Rat is the Cupboard; a Gentlewoman one near our own quality, a
Wantcatchers Wife, gave us a verbal Certificate likewise of her Cats super,
excellency for Mous-hunting, which when we had obtained, my self being a
discreet man, got a pair of Tongs, and, fearing lest any thing might enterpose
the fight of other, wisely got out the Cheese, much like a New Moon, and a
proportionable quantity of Bready into the Cupboard advanced is the Cat: and
enemies now in sight one of another, some speedy execution is expected, but
nothing but peace: At last I took up one end of the side-Cupboard, and jumbled
them together, up went the other end, and jumbled them again, but nothing would
do, the Antipathy in Nature was quite gone: I looked in, and saw the Prelatical
Cat and the Roman Rat sit as lovingly close together as might be, without any
Schism or Clashing We threw open the Cupboard, the Prelatical Cat went home,
but lost some credict by it; but hanged, what cares a Prelatical Cat for a
little vulgar Credit, so long as he can keep the Master of the companies good
will, and the Master of the Roman Rats also. And is it not pretty to see the
Bishop and the Papist, like two Colts nabbing one another by the Manes, or
resembling weanning Calves, licking one another? Their courteous Carriage and
loving Behavior minds me of that passage of St. Francie, who looking out at a
Window, and saw a Friar kiss a Nun, was very thankful there was so much Charity
in the world.

Now Wife, I shall acquaint you with some passages in the Book. First, He
commends Seignior Beaumanoir for a bloody Massacre, in these words, Who like a
Noble Cordial Cavalier engaged his Sword in the Kings behalf, and slew the
Serpent, and freed the Monarchy from any more of the Serpentine servitude.

It is well known that the whole estate of the Church enjoyed a settled Peace,
and all their Rights and Privileges; all Princes with great devotion were
Nursing Fathers and Protectors of it. There was a perfect Harmony for all
matters of Religion and Faith between the Church of Rome and the Princes of
Christendom: Anno 1515. Martin Luther, a man of a turbulent Spirit, was the
first that broke this long and happy Peace, puf^ up with vain glory and
ambitious conceit of himself, put himself upon higher strarns, and as a man
grown sick in his spirit, and of a fiery disease, he began to rave and defame
all Church Government, he abandoned the Cloister, cast off his Habit, and
renounced all obedience to his Superiors; for now he preaches against the
whole Clergy and Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, whose Authority in matters of
Religion till that time was held Sacred.

He further says, that The Lord Cobham, Sir John Acton, and Sir John
Oldcastle, two of Wickliff's Disciples, were deservedly put to death for
Heresy, Rebellion and Treason in Henry the Fifth's time.

He says, That this Heresy lay strangled in the Cradle until Edward the
Sixth's days, whence some ends of it were taken up again with more oftentation
than ever in that Prince's minority; and what rare effects of obedience were
produced by that Massacre in Queen Mary's days, who brought them up to the
Test, we may read in our English Chronicles, wherein it is plain that in those
poor five years of her Reign there was de facto more open Violence, Opposition,
and Here he accounts the Martyrs for Rebels.
Rebellion, made by her own Subjects, than in many years before.

Again, But my abundant care to have the good People of England disabused
clearly from that Abominable Rebellious Brood of Presbyters, that Viperous Crew
of Cockatrice Christians. Again, speaking before of killing Princes, denies it
to come from Rome, for its opinions and practices is mere Callumny. Again, That
so impious a thing as the murdering of Princes never entered into the heart,
tongne, or pen of any true Roman Catholic. [Witness the Gunpowder Treason.]

Again, Luther may very well pretend to have taken their watercourse from the
Wickliffs and Waldenses, and they again to have borrowed from the broken
Cisterns of God's Church, the ancient Sons of Disobedience and Rebellion, the
declared Enemies and Cast-awayes of Christianity in all ages.

Again, The Preshyter, the legitimate successor of the Traytox Judas, who
undoubtedly was the first Christian of this Crew Diabolical; their Pedigree can
come but from that high and mighty Lucifer; their impious Opinions and
prodigious practices do clearly demonstrate them to be but from the Devil.

Wife, This is enough to acquaint you that Bellamy is a Papist, but I have the
Book to give you further satisfaction; and by L'estrang's approbation of it, in
putting it in the Weekly Intelligence, letting it fly to further the sale of
it, shows plainly what he is.

The Bishop, Bellamy, Crack-fart their Brother,

In point of judgment each like other.

MAGNA CHARTA.

Wife. Husband, the last Winter you and I fell into some discourse by the fire,
and brake off somewhat abruptly; you promised to begin with Magna Charta, and
talk over three or four sheets more, now tell me what you did mean by Magna
Charta.


Hus. Wife I am ready to make good my word.


W. But Husband if it please you we will goto Bed, for our Coals will scarcely
make a fire in the morning, and there will be hardly any to be had at the Key.


H. Wife I am contented.


W. Husband put out the Candle, for that piece of Watch-light is all the Candle
we have in the House; and good Husband be serious an this thing without
flashes.


H. Now I will tell you what I did mean by Magna Charta, and shall be serious.

When in the days of Henry the third there was a great War between the King
and his Barrons, which began in his Fathers days, and continued in his time
for many years, and both sides began to be weary, it came to this Refult and
Conclusion, That there should be a Writing drawn up between them, which should
express the Prerogative Royal of the King, and his Subjects Privileges; which
being decreed in High Court of Parliament, was called, Magna Charta, which was
to be a standing Law to the Nation.

In which sense, I call the Sacred Scriptures Magna Charta, but more especially
the New Testament, in which are expressed Christ's Prerogatives and his
Subjects Privileges, and that by a perpetual Decree in the Court of Heaven,
unalterable, irrevocable. The Lord Cook in the second part of his Institutes,
speaking of the Magna Charta of the Nation, says, That although it be but
small in comparison of other Writings, yet it is of great use. As Alexander the
Great was but a little man, yet he was, R^^ Magnus, a Great King; and so it may
be said of this Magna Charta, although it be but small in comparison of other
Volumns, yet it is of greatest use, and proceeds from Rex Maximus, the Gaeatest
King; figured out by Solomon, Ezr. 5. 12. We are the Servants of the Great God,
and build the House, which was builded long ago, which a Great King of Israel
set up, and behold a greater than Solomon is here. Nay He is both King,
Lawgiver and Judge, Isa. 33. 22. and by this Magna Charta he will judge the
World; so says Paul, When Jesus Christ shall judge the hearts of all men,
according to my Gospel. This Magna Charta, is the only Magna Charta, and is of
greatest use; other Magna Charta's [may be smutted with the Smoke of a Chimney]
or, as Oliver Cromwell said, What tell you me of Magna Charta, Magna Farta; the
Petition of Right, the Petition of -- but this Magna Charta is undefiled, Pure
and Permanent; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or one tittle
of this Magna Charta, until all things in it be fulfilled.

And however the Author of this Magna Charta by Hereditary Right is Heir
apparent to the whole World, and has all Kingdoms at his disposal; for by him
Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, and must vail their Crowns unto Him,
and give an account how they carry themselves in these great Places of Trust
committed to them, and of their Stewardships when they may be no longer
Stewards; Yet is he an absolute Monarch: And as the Father has delivered up
the Kingdom unto him, and given all power both in Heaven and Earth into his
hand; So also has he another Kingdom, distinct from the Kingdoms of the World,
which receives Power and Authority from him to manage all the affairs of the
same, without the assistance of Civil or Ecclesiastical Power, who by a
Covenant of Grace reconciling them unto himself, by Faith in his own most
precious Blood, to whom he has made many precious Promises, which are the
Privileges he bestows on them; as first, He that overcomes shall eat of
the Tree that is in the midst of the Paradise of God: They shall have a white
Stone given them, which no man knows but he that has it; that they have free
access to the Throne of Grace; that he that touches them, touches the Apple
of his Eye; that although all the world be his, yet they are his chiefest
Treasure, they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, and such honor
have all his Saints. Many more are the Privileges he bestows upon them, which
a Volumn would scarcely contain: All which are contained in this his Magna
Charta; and of such People does his Kingdom consist, and such are the Subjects
of his Kingdom.

And the Tabernacle which the Lord has pitched, and not man, shadowed forth in
the Tabernacle which Moses instituted at God's Command; for, says he, See thou
make all things according to the Pattern showed thee in the Mount, and Moses
did every thing precisely, Secundum formam, or Secundum similitudinem, after
the form, fashion or likeness of it. And Christ was faithful to Him that
appointed him, as Moses was; Moses as a Servant, Christ as a Son; and as
Moses's Institutions were Rules for the Church of the Jews, so Christ's
Institutions in Gospeltimes, are for the Churches of Christ to walk by, which
are contained in this his Magna Charta, his last Will and Testament, teaching
them what to do: What Men or Magistrates command? No, Whatsoever I have
commanded you. And if Nadab and Abihu where smitten with death by strange fire
from Heaven, for offering strange fire, which was but a small matter as men may
think, to take fire from the Hearth, or else where, when they should have taken
it from the Altar; yet, not being according to the Institution, see what came
of it: And if the least abberration, deviation or going aside from the Law be
damnable in point of Divine Justice, Is it a less sin to go aside from the Rule
of the Gospel? If he that sinned against Mases Law, was so severely punished,
of how much sorer Punishment shall he be worthy of, etc. And if there be a
Curse denounced against those that add to his Word, is it not a sin to add to
his Worship? the Lord complains of it by Ezekiel, They set up their Posts by
my Posts, and their Thresholds by my Thresholds. And now I have told you what I
did mean by Magna Charta. And whatsoever is used in the Worship of God, being
not founded upon a Gospel-Institution, and cannot be warranted by a
Gospel-Rule, is Superstition, a Vain Religion; Who required these things at
your hands? In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the precepts of
men. And now I hope Wife, I have answered your request in being Serious, and
you cannot but assent unto the truth of it.


VV. Husband, I am satisfied concerning the truth of it; but for the
information of my Children, tell me where lies the difference between the
Church of the Jews under the Law, and the Church of the Gentiles under the
Gospel.


H. Wife, the Church of the Jews under the Law, was the Seed of Abraham after
the flesh, by virtue of the Covenant which God made with Abraham; the Church
under the Gospel is the Seed of Abraham by Faith, such as repent and believe
the Gospel: such as heard the Word gladly, were added unto the Church, which
are under the second Covenant.


W. Husband, How do you define a Church? I have heard it thus: Where the Word
of God is truly Preached, and the Sacraments duly Administered, that is a true
Church.


H. Wife, the Word of God may be truly preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered, and yet no true Church: for, first, the Administrator may have no
right unto the work, Secondly, The Persons wanting Faith, have no right to the
Administration: But it is Faith and Order which make a true Church according to
Christ's Institution. But a true Church according to that Godly Learned man,
Mr. Hen. Aynsworth, who was never controverted by any, and whose Exposition on
the five Books of Moses carry esteem with men of several Judgments, Prelatical
as well as others; That a true Church is a People, called of God by the Gospel
from the world, unto the Communion and Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, in
whom they are coupled and built together, to be an habitation of God by his
Spirit. The parts of it may be easily proved, being known Texts of Scripture
which you are acquainted with, I shall not stand upon.


W. Husband, I have heard that the Church of England is a true Church; and many
Preachers have insisted on it very much, to prove it to be so, because of the
truth of the Doctrine taught in it, and the conversion of Souls by the Doctrine
preached therein.


H. Wife, and so it may be said that Rome is a true Church, because there is
some true Doctrine preached there, and in the judgment of Charity, some
convereted there; it follows not that therefore Rome is a true Church. And it
cannot be denied, but that many honest Godly men and women, and good Preachers
have been born and lived in the Church of England, thousands of them: First,
many that never saw the Corruptions in it: Secondly, some that saw them and did
complain, and did bear them as burdens, as many may be instanced; which are no
warrantable Presidents for men in these times, wherein the Lord does manifest
more Light; for I can remember when Gospel-Institutions were not spoken of in
the Country, no, not among old Nonconformists: A third sort who saw the
Corruptions in it, and justly separated from it. And of each sort a charitable
construction is to be had.

Yet the Church of England, as a National Church, was never founded upon a
right Basis or Foundation; for the Constitution of it unto this day, and from
the first Reformation of it, there has been always much dissension, and when
it was all of one color, in darkest times, it was accounted a true Church; and
since it became medly, it retains the name.


VV. Husband, when did the Reformation begin first?


H. Wife, in King Edward the sixths days, before which there was a general
inundation of Popery over the face of the Land, which continued until the Reign
of the said King; and according to the Light which they then received, they
endeavored a Reformation, and compelled men to come to the Worship established
by King and Parliament, which is that we call Divine-Service, or Common Prayer,
which when the Papists in Devonshire and parts adjacent heard of, they began to
make some Insurrection, but when they were informed that it was taken out of
the Old-Church-Rubrick, only translated into English, they were pretty well
pacified. The course which the King and his Council took at that time, was such
as seemed best, although according to the Rule of the Gospel, neither could
that good be done as many of them desired, there being many Great Persons that
did obstruct and hinder what others would have done, especially of the Clergy.
Contrary to this King and his Council was the practice of Ethelbert King of the
East Angles, who when he was converted to the Faith, never compelled any, as
Mr. Fox reports.


VV. Husband, do you think it fit for men to be compelled to come to the
Worship of God? our Bishop (as I heard you say) in his Sermon he preached
before the Judges at the Assizes, urged them to put the Laws in execution; that
where their hand was too short, he craved the assistance of the Judges: he
preached out of Canticles, Take us the little Foxes: he said he would unkennel
them as fast as he could, and quotes Tertullian for his Another, that the
Christians did compel the Heathen to their worship; and further said, that it
was the Opinion of most of the Ancient Fathers, that those which our Savior
sent forth his Disciples to call to the Supper, which sat under the Hedges and
Highways, were Schismatics and Heretics, and approved of the course that
Mecoenas Alexanders Schoolmaster prescribed him, which was to worship his God
after a uniform way, and command all others to follow his example.


H. Wife, I could tell his Lordship when he quoted Tertullian for his Author,
he might have wiped his mouth on his Lawn Sleeves, for Tertullian says no such
thing; and if Grotius may be credited which I read, and this extracted, where,
speaking out of the 14th of Luke, from the Greek word which is rendered Coge,
Compel, he thus says,

This place does put me in mind of an Facit hic locus me memorem eximii inter
veteres Doctoris quicum antea mult is in Libris asseverasset, Neminem'ad
professionem Fidei cogendum: qua in renihil dixerat quod ante se dixerunt,
Athenagorus, Arnobius, Minutius, Tertullianus, Lactantius, and quotquot
alicujus nominis ante se vixerunt, etc.
excellent Doctor among the Ancients, who had affirmed in many Books, that no
man was to be compelled to the profession of the Faith; in which thing he had
said nothing but what Athenagorus, Arnobius, Minutius, Tertullian, Lactantius,
and as many as were of any Fame who had lived before them, etc.

This place does manifestly belong to Cum hic locus manifesto pertineat ad
Gentes adhuc Fidem non professus, etc.
the Gentiles, as yet not professing the Faith.

And after says, that this compulsion was no other than that of our Saviors,
where he compelled his Disciples to enter into Ship, it was, Nec trahendo, nec
trudendo, neither by drawing, driving, nor thursting them. And whereas he
says, That most of the Fathers were of that opinion, that will be too hard for
his Lordship to prove; and to bring the wisdom of a Heathen for a Christians
practice, shows no admired wisdom: And whereas he said, He would unkennel the
Foxes as fast as he could; if all the Wolves should be unkennl'd, [himself with
the rest of his Tribe must lie without doors] But for the Modern Writers, as
Melancton, Luther, and the rest, are against compulsion. Luther says,
Predicare anuntiare scribere volo neminem; antem adigam; I will preach, and
teach, and write, but I will compel no man.

And again Luther says, Christus non vi aut igne homines cogere vult, Christ
will not by fire and force compel men. And Tindal says, Fides sua sponte non
coacte agere vult, Faith will work of its own accord, not by constraint: And he
is a young Student in the university, that cannot tell you, Voluntas cogi non
potest, the will cannot be compelled. But what need we go to humane Authors,
when we have the practice of our Savior left for instruction and imitation: He
that has ears to hear, let him hear; and he that will not, let him choose
whether he will or no. When his Apostles moved him to command fire from Heaven
to have destroyed them that received him not, see what he says, Ye know not of
what spirit ye are; for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but
to sove them. Wife these things are so publicly known, that I might spare to
make mention of them, but not yet known to my Children; and one thing more out
of History. That which is recorded in the life of Simon and Jude the Apostles,
as both Gulielmus defancto amore, and John His relate, That when the Chief
Ruler was very angry with those that defamed the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
in great Zeal commanded a fire to be made, that such opposers might be cast
into it, the Apostles fell down before the Emperor, saying, We beseech you
(Sir) let not us be the Authors or Causers of this destraction, who are come to
publish the Doctrine of eternal Salvation; neither let us who are sent to
revive those who are dead through sin, become the killer of those who are alive.

And if there was an Act of Parliament, that all men should have faces one like
another, and propose one man for a Pattern, it would be as easily brought to
pass, as to compel all men to be of one Judgment; for he that has a hand in
forming of the face, has a hand in forming the Judgment; and the forcing of
men to forms of worship comes to as much as the man's Penance which he
performed in Powls lately at the latter end of March, it was thus; A man had
married an ancient woman by whom he had no issue; she dying, he matried the
daughter, by whom he has two children, and she great with the third; they
agree very well, and he is a loving tender husband unto her, nevertheless the
Consanguinity must produce a Divorce: He stood in a white sheet rather than he
will give a great sum of money; he must make a public Confession of his Crime,
by saying after one who had a Paper in his hand; and for this his notorious
offense, which is esteemed so by them, or at least dissembled so to be, he must
desire the Congregation to pray for him; all this while he resolves to continue
his love to her, and that she is his wife lawfully. And such is a forced
Conformity to the Forms of Worship now in fashion: but when men are once got
out of a dark dungeon, they will hardly be brought into it again: But fear of
trouble may make men do that outwardly, which inwardly they detest, and so make
Hypocrites. Mr. Fox reports of John Frith's Son who seeing his Father burnt,
some of them who had a hand in his Fathers death, demanded of the young man,
how he did believe? who answered, Even as it pleases you.


W. Husband, So it is, that Great men, and Parliaments, Convocations and
Councils have deemed such a Reformation and Conformity requisite in well
governed Kingdoms.


H. Wife, Elibu one of Job's friends says, that Great men are not always
wise, neither do the Mighty understand Judgment. Convocations and Councils may
err, as in the Council of Nice, where one Paphnutius withstood the whole
Council, consisting of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, and convinced them
all: And Parliaments may (as we have seen) be sometimes wise, and sometimes
otherwise. True spiritual Wisdom, which is from above, accords with the
Scriptures; but that which is beneath Scripture, and cannot be warranted by it,
is earthly, earnal, sensual and devilish, and enmity against God. I have
already told you in a former discourse, that Convocations and Parliaments have
nothing to do to make Laws for Christ's Kingdom, that is on his shoulders; that
were to charge him with want of wisdom, and his Laws with imperfection: For the
souls of men and women he alone is the Lawgiver, or else what Lawgiver is he?

The Magistrates power extends no further than to the outward man, to require
obedience in Civil things; neither can Great men (as we see) reform themselves;
Convocation-men nor Parliament Men, they may as well undertake to sanctify,
justify, or glorify a soul, as to reform a soul: Sanctification is the work
of the Spirit, Justification the work of God's Free Grace, by the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, Glorification the work of the Father; Christ dying for
man is his redemption, Christ living in man is his reformation. What is the
Magistrates place then? only to encourage, protect, keep peace, and punish open
and gross offenders.


W. Husband, does not this derogate from the honor of a Magistrate, if his
power extend only to temporal things?


H. Wife, if Caesar have his due he can require no more; and it would
exceedingly redound to the honor of a Magistrate, to give Christ the hononr of
his own Kingdom, to whom all honor appertains: The time will come when the
Kings of the Earth shall bring their honor and glory into it.


W. Husband, the Kings of Isrel did things of this nature, as Jehosaphat,
Josiah, etc. reformed many things in the Church in those days, why may not
Magistrates do the like now?


H. Wife, The Kings of Israel were Types of Christ in their Government,
shadowing forth him who was to have the Government of his Israel, his Church,
which is his Kingdom, according to old Jacob's Prophecy, The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until Shilo come: and
now Shilo, which is the King of Piece, is come, all other Regal power over the
Church is ceased.


VV. But Husband, there were no Christian Magistrates in Christ's time to
commit the Government unto, which may seem to altar the case, and the Apostle
bids us submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake.


H. Wife, If Christ had seen Christian Magistrates necessary for the
Government of his Kingdom, he could as easily have turned the hearts of Kings
and Emperors, as he could the owner of the Ass to send her at his demand, or
brought the Fish to the Angle with money in his mouth to pay Tribute to Caesar.
And whereas the Apostle bids, Submit etc. he means only in Civil things;
otherwise if Augustus and other Heathen Emperors under whom they lived, had
commanded them to have worshipped their Heathen gods, they must have committed
Idolatry: But Nebuchadnezzar's Act of uniformity, and Daniels resisting to
obey, cleers up the case fully.


VV. Husband, How came the Power then to be re invested in the Magistrate?


H. Wife I Will tell you, The Pope pretending himself to be Christ's Vicar
General, assumed the power of making Laws for the Church, and all matters
concerning the Church was there determined; as we may see King Henry the eighth
could not put away his Wife without License from Rome: The King cashiering the
Pope, the Power came to be invested in him, and so successively: but good Wife
talk of somewhat else.

W. Husband, I heard that the Bishop lately conseorated a Font in the Cathedral
Church, newly erected there; it seems it is made with rings to be carried about
from place to place, that when they move household, as it is hoped they will er't
be long, they may carry it with them: But in what manner was it consecrated,
and whence came this Consecration?


H. Wife, for the manner (as I was told) thus; The Bishop had the
Common Prayer Book held over the Font, [one Idol over another] and a prayer
written in a piece of paper in his hand, which he said; and the Doctors of the
Church very devoutly kneeling about it, joined with him in the performance of
the duty. The Silver Bowl, brought three miles by the hand of the
Churchwardens, by the sober advice and discretion of that learned man Doctor
Horwood the Parson of the place, was also consecrated. The Brazen Candlesticks
were consecrated by Mr. Hanslip, both Reader and Chantar, after what manner I
know not, but, if it were done with a Noddy-board, with which he is a dexterous
man, it was as well done as with the Noddy-book; But to tell you from whence it
came, as two Sabellicus. Platina.
Popish Authors affirm, from Pope Pius the first, who consecrated Fonts in the
year 145. The old Church Rubric, which I have seen, retains the form; Exorcizo
te creatura salis et aquae, per Deum vivum et sanctum, etc. I adjure thee, O
thou Creature of Salt and Water, by the holy and living God, etc. in a most
fearful manner, it would make one tremble to read it, for it is little different
from Conjuration: some say and call it Conjuration; the Font, the Conjured
Font. If we take it from Pius it must needs be Popish and Antichristian: If
from Moses's consecration of Vessels and Altars, etc. then it is a denying the
Priesthood of Christ; for Moses was a Priest as well as King and Prophet, as
appears by his making an Atonement for the People; and they may as well offer a
Ram or any other Sacrifice, as use Consecration: they endeavor by their
practice to build up the Partition Wall of the Temple broken down, and pull
from the Cross the Ordinances which Christ has nailed thereunto. What have we
to do with things under the first Covenant? and they show themselves
superstitious and prodigious Dunces.


VV. But the Bishops of Rome were good Bishops (they say) for 500 years after
Christ.


H. Wife. The bringing in of these things was no part of their goodness, they
brought in one thing after another, until Superstition brought forth Idolatry.

W. Obj. They say that the Church has power to order such things as to their
judgment shall seem fit and requisite.


H. Wife, The Church has no power to order any thing but what is already
ordained. There is a Bird called a Hickwal, I have commonly seen them, and two
of them will build in one Nest: And in this the Church of Rome and the Church
of England are sister Hickwalls, they build both in one Nest, The Church; and
then we must believe in the Church. But I Will tell you one thing, which I should
have told you before, but you prevented me by a question; there is a Village in
Gloucester-Shire called Nimphfield, there remains the ruins of a Chapel, I
have seen it, and as the present Incumbent told me, it was dedicated to St.
Anthony; we have his name in a Proverb, Like a Tantony Pigg. It Is conceived he
was a good Pigg-drencher, as famous as Bacchus and Ceres among the Heathen,
whom they deified, being excellent for planting of Vines and breeding of.
Corn. In this Chapel, at the upper end of the Chancel near the Table, was the
Picture of a great Boar upon the wall, and a Font in the Chapel, which as some
of the most sufficient in the Parish told me, they took cut of the Chapel and
placed in the Church, where it still remains: If St. Anthony did either feed
his Piggs, or lodge his Piggs, or wash his Piggs in it, it was as well
consecrated as if the Bishop had done it. At Salperton in Gloucoster-Shire as
some of the Parish have told me, the Priest's means were very small, they had
one who was both Priest, and Shepherd to keep Sheep, a very diligent man in his
place; up he would betimes on a Sunday morning (as they call it) in Summertime
when the Fly was busy, dress his Sheep, come to Church, and put his Tar-box in
the Font, and ring the Bell, I am persuaded it was as well consecrated as if
the Bishop had done it, for I take the smell of a Tar-box to be as wholesome as
the Bishops breath.


W. Fic, fie, Husband, do not say so.


H. Wife, do you think I would mis-inform you, or my Children either; for
Superstition stinks worse than either a Pigg or a Tar-box.

I did not tell you how the Reverend Wren, Bishop of Ely, Consecrated the
Chapel, at Ely-House: he perfumed it with Superstition, which as he conceived
might be an Antidote or preservative against the infection which might be left
there by honest men who had preached the Gospel; being a man of that sweet
disposition, much like the Fly, which in Summer will suck and feed upon an
excrement, and let the sweetest Flowers alone; but if such superstitious
Fly-Blows be let alone they will quickly come to be Idolatrous Maggots. He
consecrated likewise the Cathedral Church at Ely, and celebrated Pope Clements
Ordinance, Pope Melciades Sacrament, Confirmation or Bishoping, with which the
Boys were so well affected, that to the number of forty of them gathered
themselves together and Confirmed two Mastive Dogs. Likewise one Boy brought
two Wreuns to be confirmed, but the rest of the Boys denying them the benefit
of that Ordinance; cried out unanimously, Pluck off their heads, pluck off
their heads, they may come to be Bishops in time!


W. Good Husband be ruled by me; let the Bishops alone, they will have you in
Lobs-Pound one of these days, and put a Stony Dublet upon your threedbare
Coat: They are men who pretend they love the King above any.


H. Wife they love the King just as the Ivy loves the Oak. The Ivy is one of
the best friends the Oak has, it spreads its branches, embraces, clips, and
huggs the Oak, but all this while draws sap from, and is nourished by him, its
love is but for it self. We know that Ivy is good for little but to harbor a
company of dim-ey'd creatures, called Owls; as we say in a Proverb, Like an Owl
in an Ivy Tree: and so do they love the King and kindly embrace, and with
pretended affections and plausible terms express themselves, because they draw
sap from him; and are good for little but to harbor a sort of blind Priests,
as very Moles as themselves; it is but Cupboard-love, all for the belly: For man
can be but for himself in every action, until the Love of God be wrought in
him. Every good thing, the Philosopher tells us, is of a diffusive nature; fire
and water are communicable creatures: So is Love when it proceeds from a right
principle. I cannot parallel their love to the King more fitly, than in my love
to you. I saw that in you which as I conceived might make me happy, and did
much affect me; one of a good report, of a sober life, and hansome carriage,
with other endowments; I gave you good words, and cogg'd and daubed as fast as
they (it may be) and all this while I was but my self in it; Poor woman, it had
been better for you if you had never seen my face: So may the Majestical Oak
say one day, Would I had never seen the face of Dr. Ivy. I have seen a stately
Oak flourish without an Ivie-bush.


W. Husband I pray you be saber in your expressions, and be not bitter toward
them; we should love our enemies.


H. Wife, I am not a man of that frame or temper of spirit, like Sir Jocelin
Pearcie, who after the Gunpowder-Treason, brake out into great laughter, and
being demanded wherefore he laughed? answered, I cannot but laugh to think (if
the design had took) how the Bishops would have flown up in the air like so
many Magg-Pies. Seriously Wife, I love their Persons although I hate their
Pybald Worship. I wish their eternal welfare, and that they would cry down the
sins of the times, Idolatry, Superstition, Swearing, Whoring, fearful
Imprecations, Dammum and Rammuns, The Devil fry my soul in Brimstons, etc.
which are fit materials to build Fortifications against the Invasion of
Mercles, and will serve as fitly to draw the floodgates and sluices for the
incursion and bringing-in of Wrath and Vengeance; and will do more miscief than
the Walls of Northampton, Coventry, or Glancestor, if re-standing. To keep up
sin, and throw down stones, is but poor policy. When the Children of Israel
served strange gods, then there was war in the gates. And let them give over
the prosecution of the Phanaticks, for they will never give over praying until
they have prayed them down. Let them remember the Queen of Scots, in Edward the
sixh's days (as I take it) who sent an Army into England, but before sent
privily to know which side John Knox and his party took, saying, She feared
more the Prayers of him and his party, than all the Kings Army. And set our
moderate Bishop leave his conjunction with his near relation the Papist, in
saying that the Presbyterians were like Lorinus the Jesuit, who held it lawful
to take away the life of Princes, Let him mind his brother Gauden Bishop of
Wotcester, who said that the Presbyterians were like the discease called the
Strangury, which was froth on the top, and blood in the bottom, [of which
disease himself dyed] and his predecessor Dr. Goodman, who made this
Confession, dying in the Imbrit at Westminister, That he died a Roman
Catholic: But to give the Patriarch his due, I think he was one of the best of
them. But how can there be a Superlative where there is no Positive, a bast
where there is not a good?


W. Husband, we have talk though of this, will you speak of Doctor Warmstrey's
Opinion, Dean of Worcester?


H. Wife, which of his Opinions do you mean? either that which he delivered
about observation of Holy Days, from David's Example; When I see the Moon and
the Stars which thou have ordained: David (as he says) walking forth in the
night took special observation of the Stars placed in the Firmament; so should
we take special observation of the Saints, who have been as Stars in the
Firmament of the Church, and therefore a day of Solemnity in commemoration of
them we should not let pass. Or (2dly) do you mean that opinion of the
observation of Lent, from the example of Danel's eating of Pulse and drinking
of water for certain days, and from that example of his would ground the
observation of Lent? If you mean either of these; I shall say nothing but this,
If he had grounded his opinion from Fortune my foe, why do thou frown on me?
or the other, In the days of old when fair France did flourish; these places
would have held out the truth of his opinions as well as those Texts of
Scripture. Or (3dly) do you mean Local the scension, which he holds, that
Christ went down into Hell, into the place of the damned, in me hamine body? Or
(4thly) That the Doctor has power to forgive sion, not alone declaratively,
but absolutely. If these, I Will not adventure to deal with him, for I know the
Pope will take his part; and two to one is ods at Footbal; I being but one poor
man, they may be too hard for me.


W. No Husband; Neither do I mean his crying down of Gloucester for a bloody
City, and for Rebellion, that he did passing well, he could not but deliver the
Message, he was sent for that purpose.


H. Wife, you say he did it passing well; I pick something out of that word of
yours, passing well; but I Will say no more: But I wonder he staid so long before
he brought the Message. None of all the Lord's Prophets had so much time given
them; when they were sent forth, their Commissions were presently to be put in
execution. The young Prophet must neither eat bread nor drink water before he
was to deliver his Message; but the Doctor staid fifteen years before he
brought his. It Is to be suspected whether he be not guilty of the Rebellion;
much mischief might have been prevented had not he delayed time; but when all
was past and ended, then comes this Prophet with his Message, Censitium post
facta imber post tempora fiugum, as the Poet speaks, Counsel after the fact is
like a shower of rain after Harvest to fill the Corn When the Gunpowder-Treason.
Traitors were hanged, then came the Pope's Pardon. But he came not until the
Message would bring meat in the mouth of it, his Prebends place at Gloacester,
and a thousand pounds for the Crop (as his man calls it) and 2001. per annum at
Hampton, with his Message altogether chopped in his mouth, it is a wonder it had
not choked him. What Is become of all those souls which died in those
fifteenyears? the comfort on it is, if in Purgatory, he is or may be as
prevalent a man with the Pope to setch them forth as any I know.


W. Husband, name that about a man killing his own Father.


H. Wife, I understand now what you mean, thus; That it is a lesser sin for a
man to kill his Father, than for a man so refrain coming to the Divine Service
establishod in the Church, in regard of the Ceremonies) The one was he killing
of a particular person, the other made a breach in the Mystical Body of Christ.

First, Let us consider what a smole is to kill a man; The Ox that had goared a
man in the time of the Law, his flesh was not to be eaten, but to be burnt, the
Lord showing his displeasure thereby against killing. Next consider, that there
was no Atonement to be made for Murder; in short, the hornt of the Altar must
nemo protection for Joab in the case of Amasu and Abnor The killing man's own
Father, the sin by circumstance (...) an aggravation; to kill a (...) Pa^ont
that has been a means to bring him into the world and to breed him up What
(...) my Son (...) from a Son is (...) than all the rests (...) with speak of
the Mystical Body, and what he means by it.

I conceive he means the Worship that is performed in the Cathedral Churches
and Colleges, which he himself does frequent, and where the Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, Doctors, Chancellors, Canons, Demicanons, Prebends, Organists,
Singing-men and Boys, Sexton, Vergerers, Readers, as in Powls, the Altar with
the Appurtenances, and the Cherubims over the Altar, Basins a lesser and a
bigger, with the Crucifix in it; the Virgin with the Babe in her arms, Organs,
Bell, Carpetting, Candlesticks, Scarlet and Purple Hangings, Tapestry,
Vestments, Velvet Cushions, Capps, Copes, Tippets, Surplices, the Book of
Common Prayer, as the matter and form thereof; the Chancellors Court for the
Government thereof: All this approved of by the Convocation, the representative
body of the Church of England, and all the Parish Churches in England by their
Ministers subscription and subordination; this is the Mystical Body of Christ,
according to the judgment of that Reverend Patriarch, Dr. William Warmstrey
Dean of Worcester: and whosoever (in regard of the Ceremonies) shall separate
from this Church, it is a lesser sin for a man to kill his Father. Wife, what
think you of this Mystical Body? is it like the Church of Christ under the
Gospel? is this a Tabernacle of the Lord's pitching? is such a Church, for the
constitution of it, to be found in Magna Charta?


W. Husband, I am not willing to say much, but it is not as it should be.


H. Wife, you are always like your self, Modest.

But for your further satisfaction, consider, it has been said by one, that
there are two Images of God; the one is his Word, the other his Spirit. If the
spirit in man break not forth according to the outward Image of his Word,
suspect that spirit to be rather Devilish than Divine: So let me say of this
Mystical Body, if it be according to the Image of the Word, according to the
constitution thereof, it is the Church of Christ, otherwise it is the Church of
Antichrist. And so for the Worship, if it be not according to the Word, it is
Antichristian: For as I told you in our last discourse by the fire, as is his
Word so must his Worship be, sincere, quasi sine cera, without mixture or
composition of humane invention. I Will tell you of what this Church or Mystical
Body may carry a fit resemblance, that which the Physicians call Mola, a false
Conception, never begotten by any seed: Neither was this Mystical Body ever
begotten by any Immortal Seed of the Word. This Mola or false Conception, is
that which the Country Midwives call a Moon-Calf, bred in the womb by some
natural causes, and at certain seasons of the Moon increased, the manner or by
what, becomes not the modesty of my Pen to describe: So was this Mystical Body
bred in the womb of the old Whore; and as that usually is brought forth in the
night by the assistance of a Midwife, so was this at midnight in times of
darkness, dame Gillian being the Midwife. Polidorus Durandus writes that in the
year 175, Pope Damasus brought in the prescript order of Service. Durandus
says, that in the year 1073, Pope Gregory the 7th brought in the prescript
number of Psalms and Lessons; Pope Zacharius Vitalianus, Clement, Adrian, and
the rest of the Popes successively, made an addition, until they bred it unto a
very Mooncalf, Nay, Monstrum horrendum, in form ingens, cui lumen ademptum, a
mighty ill-shap'd fearful Monster, quite blind, for it has ho light but what
it receives from the Candles, and that is but greasy light: As a man not far
from us, in Holy Orders, said, carrying a pound of Candles through a Village
upon his head, This is the Light of the World.

I could willingly speak a word of some of the particulars, and what the Doctor
has said himself concerning the Altar, in a speech he made in the
Convocation-house, where he himself sat (as I take it) Anno 1639. I took it
out of the printed Paper which he himself put forth. Next unto the language of
the Apostles and the Scriptures, most pure is the language of the Primitive
times, and there I find no Altar but the Altar of Christ crucified. Again, I
love outward reverence, so that it be directed to right objects; not to Images,
nor to Altars, but to God himself.


W. Husband, he bows now to the Altar himself, and says what he said then was
in the time of his Ignorance.


H. Wife, and what he does now is since the god of this world has blinded his
eyes. Pope Sixtus instituted Altars, Anno 125. and Pope Felix consecrated
Altars, Anno 271. at which time they began to be worshipped (as it is
conceived); as our Reverend Bishops, Doctors and Dunces do at this day.

A word of their Vestments and Ornaments. I remember a saying of Tertullian
which I have read: Nihil dandum Idolo, sic nec sumendum ab Idolo, si in Idolo
recumbere alienum est a fide, quid in Idolio videri; as we may give nothing to
an Idol, so we may take nothing from an Idol. If it be against the Faith to sit
at meat at an Idols Feast, what is it to be seen in the Habit of an Idolater?
Accedunt apparatuet armamento Mystici Corpotis Antichristi, they go in the
Apparel and Harness of Antichrist, says John Hus. Dr. Ridly, who stood for
these things in King Edwards time, yet when the time of his death approached,
and he must put on the Popish Garments to be degraded, which he refused, but
Bishop Brocks caused them to be forced upon him, whereupon he did vehemently
inveigh against the Pope, calling him Antiohrist, and all that Apparel,
foolish and abominable; yea, too fond for a Vice in a Play, as he said.

To speak of the Cross, which has been made an Idol, and by many Councils
approved, and still in use to this day by the Formalists, wherein they much
differ; it were well if possible there might be an uniformity in the use of it:
Some cross with the hand, some with the finger; others use the words, but never
put to hand or finger: it were a matter of some importance for the Convocation
at their next session to determine, or else to be referred to Rome for the right
use of it, and to the Cross on the Popes triple Crown for the dimensions of it,
being the true standard. But a word seriously, thus: Whatsoever has been
employed to Idolatrous uses, ought never to be employed in the Worship and
Service of God. The brazen Serpent when once it came to be idolized, down it
must; and the Israelites when they came into Canaan must destroy all the
Monuments of Idolatry, without exception of the Grove which Abraham had
planted; and the Censors, although not employed to Idolatry, yet being polluted
by the hands of Corah and his accomplices, must never be used again as Censors,
but must be cut out into plates to make Coverings for the Altar. If things of
lawful Institution, once abused, must never be employed in the Worship of God,
can these things which are of Idolatrous and Superstitious use be less than
abominable? The Common Prayer Book being none of Christ's Institution, as it
never came from Heaven, so it never reached Heaven; neither do men ever look
for any return of this Prayer, more than the Bishop and Doctors of our
Cathedral, when the four condemned Prisoners sent to them to be prayed for;
poor souls, esteeming the prayers of such devout men to be most available to do
them good; poor Mr. Williams (a man qualified with abilities to read, but
never said Sermon in all his days, but a man in Holy Orders, and a fair
Gamster at Tables, at which exercise he spent much of his time, but commonly
all for dry Ale) he must perform this charitable work; and taking the Book,
looking out the Prayers appointed to be said at the Visitation of the Sick,
goes on to the conclusion, which he read, Lord look upon these thy sick
servants, whom thou have visited with thy hand; visit them as thou did
Peter's Wives mother, and the Centurians servant. Restore these sick persons to
their former health, if it be thy blessed Will, if not, give them grace to take
this thy visitation, etc. the men were only sick of the Halter, of which
disease they soon after dyed. The Reverend Bishop and Doctors departed, without
putting up any further request for them. Mr. Williams being demanded, wherefore
he made use of that Prayer? answered, he could not find a fitter in all the
Book. Equivalent to such praying is the praying of the Crier, he looks for no
more return of his prayer than the Bishop and Doctors, and the Bishop and
Doctors no more than the Crier. If any man can tell any tale or tidings of a
gray Nag, bay Mare, Greyhound-Bitch, Pottle-Pot, or Mastive-whelp with a cut
tail, by and by he annexeth a prayer, God save the King.

The Chancellor's Court (whilst I speak of it, turn your nose to the Pillow,
Wife, lest it offend you) for the Government of this Mystical Body is the very
same that is through the whole Roman Monarchy, and as when the Pope sent over
his Collectors into England, promising for ten shillings (and not a penny less)
a man might have pardon for his sins, and fetch souls out of Purgatory, Omne
venale Romae; and as at Rome, so here, every thing for money: a License to kill
or dress flesh; a License to marry for such a sum of money, not a penny less;
nay a Churchwarden cannot hazard his soul upon the rock of Perjury but must pay
money: for six pence, take him Devil.


H. Wife, did you hear what was the matter with the Chancellor the other day?


W. No, Husband, what did ayl him?


H. Ayl him, Wife, why enough did ayl him; take away his gods, and ask what did
ayl him! the two Booksellers in Gloucester sold the supposed Papers of Mr.
Prin, which told the Country, That they might choose whether they would answer
to a Plea in Court, unless they could show the King's Broad-Seal for their
Authority; and that no Court of Judicatory could be held but in the Kings Name.
Poor Demetrius was like to have his trade spoiled, which cost him many hundreds
of pounds as he said, and complained to the Magistrates and Bishops; How the
Booksellers came off I know not, they were questioned. Sir Thomas Roe
Ambassador in King James's days, coming into a place where St. Paul's Monument
(as they said it was) and pretending that his Spurs hurt him, put them off his
own, and put them on St. Paul's heels: being demanded wherefore he did it, he
said, It cost the King another Ambassador to fetch him home.
That he knew St. Paul's mind, he was willing to be gone, he sees so little
honesty in this place. And if he saw the equity of this Court, he would as soon
take his leave.

Sir Thomas Overbury in his Characters says, That the Hangman and the Jailer
are Twins, they tumble both in one belly, they live by the Miseries of others.
So are the Officers of this Court as near in relation. I shall end this with
the story of the Lady who sent a man to a Bishop with a Letter, desiring him to
entertain the messenger as an Aparitor, for he was a very honest man. The
Bishop told the messenger that his Lady had spoiled all by saying he was an
honest man, for (quoth the Bishop) We must have the [veriest Knave] we can get.
If the least Officer be a Knave, what must the great ones be?


H. Wife, what think you of all this Geer? P^ethee Sweetheart tell me the
story of the green Dog which your Uncles maid told us of.


W. Husband, I Will tell you, for I know the place very well, I lived within two
miles of it many years. There was a man went to a Village two miles from the
place where he lived, and there saw a Dog which he had a mind unto, and coming
near him made much of him, and brought him away with him home to his own house,
used him kindly, fed him well, and tied him up for a time, and called him by
another name; resolves to take him abroad with him to the place from whence he
had him and for fear his old Master should know him, colors him green: The new
Master now will adventure his Dog among his old acquaintance; the Neighbors
admire the Dog, thought surely it had been a spirit; at last his old Master
seeing him, began to suspect that it was his old Whitefoot: The Dog went to his
old Master and sawned upon him, and then his Master knew that it was his old
Dog new died.


H. Wife, I think you are in the right, 'twas just as you have said: I Will tell
you how, and to what I could apply it. This Trumpe^y or Worship with its
appurtenances, call it what you will, was taken up at Rome, brought over to
England, and very good allowance was given it for a long time, and made much of
it, colored it with specious Titles, [the Lyturgie of the Church of England,
etc.] and made it look very spiritual, gave it a name, called it Divine
Service, etc. Away it was gone home again to Rome from whence it was taken, by
the space of twenty years, and we thought we should never have seen it again;
And now the Bishops have brought it back again, and all this while it is but the
old Dog new died, old Whitefoot.

We will now talk of the Officers of this Mystical Body, viz. the Archbishop
of Canterbury, to his honor be it spoken, etc. In the year 1098, Pope Vrbanus
ordained Canterbury to be the chief Patriarchal Seat. In the year 1099, Vrbanus
set Anselm the second of that name, Archbishop of Canterbury, at his tight foot
in his Council at Rome, and in these words ordained him, Includamus hunc nostro
in orb tanquam alterius orbis Papam; We take in this Pope in our world, as a
distinct Pope of another world. Some conceive that the attribute of Grace was
conferred then upon Canterbury, which makes the Pope and Archbishop as nearly
related as Grace and Holiness, which are inseparable, and yet true Grace and
Holiness as far distant from, either as Canterbury from Rome or Rome from
Canterbury. As for the lesser buggbear Bishops, who are petty Popes in their
Diocesses, they are not worth the speaking of; The old Nonconformists long ago
said, in their Admonition to the Parliament, that we may by the Warrant of
God's Word as safely subscribe to allow the dominion of the Pope universally
over the Church of God, as an Archbishop over a Province, or a Lord-Bishop over
a Diocese. As for Archdeacons, Deans, Brats of the old Whore, I could commend
unto them an Epistle taken out of Sir Richard Barkelay's Summum Bonum, page
213. An Epistle of Beelzebub Prince of Devils, and Duke of Darkness, with all
his Guard, and all the Potentates of Hell, To all Archbishops, Abbats,
Prelates, and Rulers of Churches, his well-beloved friends now and for ever,
Infernal Salutation and League of inviolable Society which can never be
dissolved: We repose great confidence, my wel-beloved Friends, in your Amity:
we rejoice much in you, because you agree very well in Opinion with Us, and
that you seek and procure with diligence those things that be Ours, always
protecting and defending whatsoever appertains to Our Right: Know ye therefore
that ye are in great favor with Our Universality, whose travel and diligence
we accept with many thanks, because that infinite numbers of souls by your
example, service and negligence in doing the Work of God among the People, are
led away from the Truth and forsaken, brought day by day to Us, by means
whereof the power of Our Kingdom is greatly increased; Persevere therefore in
your Friendship, as faithful and assured to Us in the work you have begun: We
are ready in all things to recompense you with a reward worthy of you, and
agreeable to your service, in the lowest parts of Hell. Fare ye well. Our
blessing be with you for evermore.

Another sort of this Mystical Body are the Singing-men: One of them hearing
the Bell toll, being drinking of Ale, swears he must be gone. Wife, you may
remember what a Singing-man told a Gentlewoman, Yefaith, Mistress, we are a
company of wicked wretches of us, God help us! we drink Ale and Fuddle; I am
persuaded that our singing and praying does no good, for the Scripture says,
that the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. But said the
Gentlewoman, I heard that Mr. Williams was so drunk when he was at his
devotion, that he pist in his Breeches as he read Prayer. Nay, quoth the
Singing-man, I am an eyewitness of that. Another, who is both Reader and
Chantor, being very busy in an Alehouse at a Game properly called Noddy, in
which he is much an Artist; but hearing the Bell toll for Prayer, complains of
the bondage, O says he, what a slavery do we live in? if the Bell toll, away
we must be gone what business soever we be about. But sit still (quoth he to
his Gamesters) I will make haste and be with you by and by.

One comes and enquires of a Singing-mans wife, where is your husband? She
again enquires of the Boy, Sir, where is your Master? the Boy answers, he
went to drink his mornings-draught, from thence to the Colledge-Service, but
since I never saw him; Yefaith, said the goodwoman, he is in for all this day;
I would this Colledge-Service were far enough for me. I have heard some of the
Fraternity speak of the carriages which have past among them; A Pax take ye for
a Rouge, how do you sing? Zeunds -- and curse one another. Prithee Wife what
do think of such Worship and Worshippers?


W. Truly Husband I must say as the Singing-man did, its abomination I think.

Another sort of the Mystical Body.

Now for a Dung-Cart, I Will not be long in filling it with the Members of this
Mystical Body.

One Parson which I know, and have for many years known him, challenges to
Fight, Thresh and Preach with any man. Swear he shall; I have heard him swear
eight Oaths in half an hour; and eat Ale he shall as well as perform any of the
former exercises, at which exercise having filled his belly, (And when the
belly is full the bones would have rest) falls into a heavy sleep: His loving
Neighbors, to cover his infirmity, laid him under a Board until he revived,
but were going to carry him home in a Barrow. Another time, being at a Country
Alehouse, met with a Farmer, where they fell at the exercise of drinking, until
some difference arose in point of Judgment, and then to the exercise of
Fisticuffs. There standing a Vessel of scalding Wort, the Farmer struck him
down, like a Clown, backward, (not considering that he was a man in Holy
Orders) where he scalded his Arse and his Hand, and in that sweet pickle went
to a Gentleman's House to have his Daughter dress his Hand: but she bid him go
home, and come again another day.

Another, I know not where his house is, but his dwelling is much at the
Alehouse, [where Countrymen keep Conventicles many times, but such are without
the Verge of the Act; for they never go to Prayer there, nor speak any thing of
Exposition of Scripture, Cursing, Swearing, Whoring, Drinking never so
immoderately tends to any harm] where this Priest had gotten such a burden of
Ale, that he was not able to carry it home, but fell by the way with it, near
unto a Brook-side, into which if he had fallen, farewell for ever: but falling
asleep in the place, a Gentlewoman dwelling near, tendering his Reputation, sent
two men with a Hand-Barrow to carry him home. But we will pass from the
Hand-Barrow to the Wheel-Barrow.

Another Priest was so drunk, that he was by some persons in London carried
toward a Justice of Peace in that condition; but coming near the place, he
being awakened, parted with some money to be freed from that trouble. I have
one Wheel barrow full more, but because it is so eminently known, I Will be
silent.

Gulielmus Mons (you do not know what that is in English) a Hereford shire-man,
Trapanner-General he is, (a place of honor) but has been so transpand with
the POX to him, that his Neighbors excuse their refusing to hear him, by
saying that they are afraid of receiving Infection from him. I know who had him
in Cure, but could not do the work; neither could it be cured by the Bishops
breath when he was ordained, although it seems to have much virtue in it. A
sweet Member of the Mystical Body.

A Gentleman of very good Quality told a Knight and other Gentlemen at the
Table, in my hearing, of a Devon shire Priest who had formerly been ejected for
Scandal; he was a Bachelor, but restored to both his Livings, to the value of
2. or 300 1. per annum, but had parted with one to another man as good as
himself: They sat Drinking so long, that one of them fell dead under the Table
and never stirred more: The other having been drinking in a Country Alehouse,
went homeward very late, and was found dead in the morning upon a Green, Talis
vita finis ita, lived drunk and dyed drunk: But if this may add any Comfort to
their Friends, they lived and dyed Members of the Mystical Body.

Another Parson, of whom it is publicly known in the place he lived in, was so
Drunk in the Pulpit that he began the Lord's Prayer three times before he could
end it; and at another time having a Paper put up to him, wherein was expressed
the desire of a Sick Man and Woman to have the prayers of the Congregation, he
was so Drunk that instead of praying he asked the Bands of Matrimony between
them, saying, it was the first time of the publishing thereof.

Another, being led through Moor-fields between two Porters, an old woman
followed him, saying, A Pillar of the Church, a Pillar of the Church.

Three Priests of a company, being all Drunk in London, one of them stripped
himself unto his shirt, tumbles in the dirt, and cried, Murder.


H. Wife, I should keep you waking too long, if we should talk of all this Idle
Drunken Tribe, and it is believed that the Scavinger might fill his Cart once a
week in London, if he we were able to load them; but having other things to
talk of, and the Cart pretty well loaded, by that time it has a Pillar of the
Church on it will make the Axle-tree crack.

The custom at Newgate is to carry but three in a Cart, and we shall have six
(as honest men as they) in ours. But because we have ten times six which we may
carry at leisure, we will drive away and let the rest alone until another time.

On with the Pillar; A Reverend Dean, who in his Journey to, or from London,
lay at Henly upon Thames, where having good company, he began to solace and
recreate himself with the Creature, and began to drink Healths, and good
Healths too; to the King, Queen, and to other Queen too; to the Duke of York,
this Bishop and to other Bishop too; it was not in Puddle Ale, 'twas in Sack,
and good Sack too: They drank so long till it came to a Reckoning, and a good
Reckoning too; but not without respect to a Member in Office of the Mystical
Body, who was Reader, Chantor and Sermon-sayer too; they let him ply but a
noble, when it cost every man else ten shillings. Alas, what was ten shillings
a man in Sack, for six or seven men to pay? In this they showed their affection
to the King, not alone by drinking his Health, but wisely considering that the
more is spent in Sack, the more profit comes to the King by Custom: If the Dean
had drank his seven Pulpits son, he had been able to pay for it: The Emperor
of Russia has all the profit of the houses where such liquor is sold, and
there they sit and drink until they spend all for the honor of their Heffidas,
as they call their Emperor: nay, until they sell their Wives and Children --
That Is Deboistness. But these Pickadilly infirmities may be born withal in the
Members of the Mystical Body; so long as they conform to the Orders of the
Church, that makes amends for all.

Some of these that drank Healths, joined with L'Estrange to apprehend me
lately; who very uncharitably suspects me for a Witeh, thinking that. I can
transform my self into several Shapes, and therefore hunts me in the day with
his Beagles for a Hero, and himself at night for a Badger, and instead of
putting a Bag in the hole, set a man with a lighted Porch in the mouth of the
Berry.

And another thing, Wife, they can drink Healths, wherein they not only offend
God, but transgress against the Kings Proclamation of the year 1660. and yet
hunt and threaten to take away my life, although in what they hunt me for, I
have broken neither Law of God, nor known Law of the Land; and the time may
come I may tell them so.


W. Heuband I am weary of this distroiness, talk of something else.


H. Wife we will talk a little of another sort of this Mystical Body, who are
like Asses which bear burdens beyond Imagination, and they are the Pluralists,
who are of this Monstrous Mystical Body, and indeed are Monster like men, and
carry Monstrous Burdens. I have seen a Calf with several heads, and yet but one
body, I can remember the people said it was a Monster: So have these several
heads and faces, and yet of that one Monstrous Mystical Body; and may fitly be
compared to the Water bearess in London, who when they have a Tankard of Water
on their shoulders hasten to be delivered; but put one of these fellows into
the bottom of the Thames, and when they have the whole weight of the River upon
their shoulders they feel nothing: So these, when they have two or three
hundred pounds by the year, they do but carry the Water Tankard, but put them
under a Bishoptick of a thousand or two thousand pound by the year, they are
insensible, feel nothing: They are like Arched-Bridges, the more weight you lay
upon them, the more able to bear. Indeed great bodies cannot be supported with
a little. Des Churtes the Philosopher was of opinion, that however the soul was
in every joint of the body, yet the proper seat of it was in a kernal of flesh
which was in the brain: But these Learnedmen are of another opinion, that the
proper seat of it is in the Belly, that makes them provide so well for it.


H. Wife, are not these pretty follows to preach Providence to such poor folks
as we are, and tell us what an excellent thing it is to live by Faith, qui
saour est pleno laudat jejnnia ventre, as the Poet speaks, commends tasting
with a full belly: Faith will bring Bread into the Cupboard, they tell us, but
it brings none into theirs: and how that Elijah was fed by Ravens, etc. I
remember a passage concerning a Commander who brought his Soldiers into the
Field, and showed them the face of the Enemy, encouraged them to go on and
fight valiantly, and to fear nothing; although they might seem to have a sharp
Breakfast, he would promise them good cheer for their Supper; but said he, I
have some other occasion calls me away. I must be gone. Nay, said one of his
Soldiers (taking him by the shoulden) if nor Cheer shall be so good, pray you
stay and take part with us. So Wife, I wish it were these Priests lots to take
part with us, if so excellent a thing to live by Faith; but if the Means were
gone, which they have no Divine Right unto, O how pitifully would they look,
as we say in a Counvey Proves, As the Dogs were wont to look on the first
Friday in clean (...) will be long enough before they will follow the example of
Paul, who wrought with his hands; or of Musculus the Italian, who, as Melchar
addamus report, wrought in the Town-ditch of Florente for two pence no day,
and preached twice every Lord's day. These Pluralists drive a pretty Trade as
Soul-swoping (some of them) and they (...) led to it Regis (...), etc. by the
example of their Spiritual dams Fathers and Top-gallant-Members of the Mischief
Body the Bishop. The Souls of London for the Souls of Canterbury; the Souls of
Salisbury for the Souls of Londons; the Souls of Worcester for the Souls of
London for the of (...) for the Souls of Worcester: So do these Pluralists,
just as (...) (in effect;) Come, what swop between (...) and your Parsonage, my
Parish and yours, my Souls and thy Souls? The first question is, What Is your
Parsonage worth? the second question, What Fanatics? if there be any store of
them, the Place, is much invalid, worse by thirty pound by the year than a
Parish which is olden Paper, which a man may write what he will upon: (I can
prove the point) especially if it has the convenience of another Living of the
Parsons or Prebends place seituate near it, that is a fair pretense. Doctor
Hardy has swopt the Souls of Henly upon Thames with Mr. Cawl for a parcel of
Souls in Sussex; poot Cawly. I doubt has the worst on; although Henly may be
better, yet the Fanatics spoil all; and if he can find any comfort in the
place. I dare Promise it is more than they shall find by his Ministry. Dr.
Shirborne has swopt Lidney in Gouceste^shire for Fownhope in Herefordshire
(Lidney better by 40 l. per annum) Lidney has some Fanatics in it, Fownhope
clean paper. Mr. Dashfield has swopt Berkley in Gloucoftershire for
Sutton-hadminton with Mr. Wood: I Will not stand to instance any more. And as
Horsecoursers when they have parted with a Beast, never care what becomes of
him; so these can slip whole Diocesses and Parishes through their affections
with as much facility and ease as boiled Pease-shels, or the ribs of a
Tithe-Pig, well roasted, through their teeth, without any reluctance or remorse
at all.

These men, in regard of their Sufferings, may be accounted the Prelatical
Martyrs of this age; and indeed it were to be desired that some good pen would
take the pains to do as Mr. Fox, who wrote the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, to register them for the benefit of future ages. Undoubtedly the Book
would sell well. And for that purpose Mr. L'Estrange is the most fit person,
because he may let fly to all person at the end of the News-Book, who suffer
under these heavy Pressures, to send up their names, together with the heavy
pressures they lie under, if their modesty will permit it, they do not know
what honor may come to their posterity (or benefit) thereby: I could give some
encouragement. Mr. Tindal, a Gloucester-shire-man, whom Mr. Fox calls the
Apostle of England, born twelve miles from Gloucester, what with his Sufferings
and what with his Prayers for them of the Family, I have not heard the like to
hold out the profession of Religion in sincerity (as it is believed) to this
day; and having much enquired, it has been credibly reported, that ever since
the Inheritance of the two Farms at Stinchcomb and Nibley, without addition or
diminution, are still remaining to the Family. The petty difference between Mr.
Tindal and these Martyrs only thus; he maintained and defended the Priestly
Office of Christ, and sealed it with his blood; these oppose his Kingly Office
with their livings and their lives.

And forasmuch as Ichabod has made a false relation of these Martyrs in
Gloucestershire, whereas he says thus, that there are forty six (which is
false) it will be hard for him to find twenty six. I can give an account of
them all, and shall be able to nominate them upon occasion; and name but a few
now; the manner and after what form, thus: In the Primitive Persecutions under
the Neroes, some had Horses tied to their limbs, and haled to pieces with those
bruit Beasts; some had their legs tied unto two young Trees bended together,
and so were strided to death; the Persecution now not so violent as the but
born with as much patience as the former. A Preacher speaking that good old
Ja^ob had one foot in the grave another in Heaven, a Scholar sitting under the
Pulpit, spoke, saying, 'Twas well strided: so some of these are good Striders,
but never stride so wide. Dr. William Nicholson Bishop of Gloucester strides
thence to Breknock where he is Archdeacon, from thence to Landelovour in
Carmarthenshire where he is Parson, from thence to Lansanfroid, otherwise St.
Winifrieds in Montgomery-shire, where he has a Presentation sine Cura, without
Cure or Care, from thence to his Bishopric; he strides two hundred miles in
and out; the weight, as it is conceived, which lies upon him is 800l. per
annum, besides thousands for his Crop, and yet so patient in his suffering,
that he could willingly have submitted to have Cleeve. Steeple set on
Gloucester. Tower, seven hundred on the top of five: Endeavors were used by
the assistance of the right Reverend Father the Bishop of good Canterbury, but
could not be effected: The ends aimed at were, What a hansome convenient thing
Gloucester would be, and credict to the Church; and what Hospitality might then
have been afforded. But let this Martyr pass for an old man, and a good Strider.

Another of the same brood is Dr. William Warmstrey, Dean of Worcester, hel'd
about with four bruit Beasts to Gloucester 20. miles, where he is Prebond; his
poor Innocent Childless Wife, alas what hurt has she done, that she must be
haled about with him, and that under the conduct of two men and a footboy. She
uttered a speech lately which pleased me well, That now they were as safe in
their condition as the Heavens could make them; from Gloucester to Hampton and
Radborrough ten miles, where he has 200 l. per annum, besides his full Crop at
Gloucester, and part of the Crop at Worcester: From Hampton halled back again
forty miles to Bromsgrove, Kings-norton and Mosely (as his man says,) the
burdon he lies under is 1400 l. per annum: But I think he over-burdens him; yet
willing to undergo more, endeavored for Upton upon Stavern, 200 l. per annum,
but went to the wrong Patron; likewise for the Bishop(...) Worcester, but went
without it; what snop he has made with White-Church in Warwickshire I know
not, but gone it is. An eminent Member of the Mystical Body.

Dr. Brough Parson of Michaels Cornhil in London, Dean of Gloucester, Prebend
of Windsor, having thousands of pounds for his Crops, and more money he might
have had, had it not been for his charitable disposition; but on a time
enquiring what poor Widows there might be in Gloucester which wanted relief, he
had a List (as I heard) given him, which when he had obtained, said, That he
had set some money apart for that use, and when they came to him, he gave each
poor widow a new single Pe^^^y I suppose they may be twenty or thirty. Let him
pass for a Martyr, and a good Stider, for he strides in and out 200. miles. The
(...) to L'Esirange, he shall be sure of my assistance. I could willingly add
one more Singular-Martyr; Mr. Tomkins, a knocking Martyr, that Antropophagist
man-eater, whose disposition is like the Devil's name, Diabolus, for he makes
but Dia-bolus, two bits of two brothers; for he eats up that Godly Eminent
Preacher, Mr. Benjamin Baxter at Upton upon Seavern, and his brother Stephen's
Living at Harvington, an honest man and a good Preacher; besides he eats up
seven or eight hundred pounds by the year in other places, a greater Glutton
than ever Mr. Marriot was; let him pass for a Belly-Martyr. As for Dr. Poury,
Reeve, Bredioch, etc. you may expect in the next Edition by D'Estrange. Phassen
Gherechiet undt GOTTOS Barmhertsechceit weret von nua his en evechiet. [Priests
Coveteousness, and GOD's Goodness endure for ever] as the word in the Original
has it.

The Papists call Mr Foxe's Book of Martyrs, A dunghill of Martyrs: But if all
the Martyrs of this kind, were brought and laid together, they would make a
dunghill as big as that which is made of the rotten Eggs exhausted by the
Gold-finders out of the Citizens Nests, and laid between Islington and London,
and in time will smell as Odoriferously.

Another sort of the Mystical Body are such as once had cut themselves off from
this Body, and now have cunningly inoculated themselves again; who called the
Bishops first Reverend Fathers, afterward accounted them Rebel Fathers and
Antichristian, and now Reverend Fathers again.

The winter before the Act of Uniformity came forth there was a great wind
which blew down tops of Steeples and Weather-Cocks, yet before the year came
about there were more Weather-cocks than Steeples. And what a sad Persecution
was like to come, I heard diverse of the Parsons say, Bartholmew day being the
24th of August, completed fourscore years from the day which the great
Massacre began on in France, and diverse of them seemed to be possessed with
fear, but the Persecution here fell out thus, many men stabbed their own
Consciences and there is an end of the Persecution with them. Some that marched
with Sword and case of innocent Pistols, exhorting to be courageous, and upon
deliverance by small means have clartered Gideon's Rams-horns and broken
Pitchers together, and pressed the Covenant very hard, and now qui color albus
erat. etc. white then, is black now: Some that said they would live on brown
bread, yea some that said, they would live upon stones rather than conform; yet
now can preach that some things may be dispensed withal, and that some brown
bread is better than no white.

I shall not yet speak of such, but of One whose judgment was thought to differ
from his present undertakings, who hectored his Conscience, as he was told by
one, and basted it for being a little skittish and kickish, that he made an Ass
on it, and made the poor Jude carry a Bishoptick upon its back; Raynolds you
call him, but Reynard the Fox of Norwich you may call him.

One who had been a great Synodian in the time of the Long-Parliament, told me,
he went to seek God to know whether he should conform, or turn out. The Lord
(as he said) answered him by his own Reason, that it was better to conform, and
keep his living; thou to be a Fool, and leave it to a Knave. This makes the
countryman say, that there is but the breadth of the shears between the Priest
and the Taylour, the one turns a Coat to get a Living, the other turns a Coat
to save a Living.

A Falconer told a tale, I took it for no less than a lie; That he kept his
Hawk so long in the Mew, and fed him with Mice, that he was turned to be a
perfect Owl, but the ensuing passage makes me credit it the more. One Mr.
Dolphin, a man who would not conform by any means, having formerly removed from
Broadway in Worcestershire, where there was a stream of water running by his
door (being the Element that suits best with the nature of a Fish) but removed
to a place three miles further, called Hunnibourn, where there were great store
of Geese, and less water, being famous for Geese, (No Goose to the Hunnibourn
Goose) where this Dolphin dwelling among them was turned Goose, and in his
white Feathers, I mean with his Surplice on his back, goes to Bishop Morly,
then of Worcester, and kneels down before him with submission for his past
carriage, is pardoned, received as a dutiful Son of the Church, and a Member of
the Mystical Body.

Mr. Collier of Blockley, a great Presbyterian, very forward to promote the
Covenant, having a Conscience of stretching Leather, put it between his teeth,
and with the help of his Wife, tug'd it so hard and strained it, that he made
it wide enough to protect and save three hundred pounds by the year.

The Bishop of Worcester, a new Dr. Swop-soul since Morley, coming to Evesham a
Market Town in Worcestershire, saw a Blackmoor about sixteen or eighteen years
of age, and out of his good nature, rather than from any desire or desert of
the Blackmoor, would needs make a Kirsensoul of him; a day is appointed for the
purpose, Mr. Collier must preach the Sermon upon the occasion, and did, showing
the lawfulness of Infant Baptism; if he had preached the lawfulness of Infidel
Baptism, he had hit the Nail on the head.

One Mr. Brit -- who in the days of the Covenant called his Parish together on
a day solemnly to take the same, which was accordingly performed: but now the
stream turning, he will prove constant; brown bread and small drink must be his
diet, if not live upon stones, rather than conform: But now the time is come he
must appear before the Bishop, or turn out: To the Reverend Father he goes (and
as he said) with great terror upon his spirit; but when he came to the Bishop,
the Bishop kindly salutes him, with a What brother Brit! Come, come, put to
your hand, and take it in your own sense; which he did cheerfully, and home he
comes, and then preaches that some brown bread is better than no white, and
then to the Common Prayer again.


W. Husband, what would you have the man to do? he did it out of Love and Pity
to his Parish, not knowing under what Ministry they may be lefe unto; and he is
glad and rejoices that he did conform, because (as he says) he has since he
was with the Bishop converted eight souls, which he takes as a seal of his
Ministry, which is more than he had converted in many years before: and he
seeing the Purish was willing, the Bishop willing, and his Wife willing, made
him willing also, and then what hurt can be in it?


H. Wife, it is Cato's case and Ortetius; Cato has a mighty mind to Ortetius.
Wife, he makes it known first to Ortetius, and goes honestly to work and then
to his Wife expresses his affection, telling both, that upon condition he may
have her home to his house for his use for such a time, he will give them so
much money, and justly and truly it shall be paid. Ortetius is willing, his
Wife willing, and home he has he, uses her kindly when the time is expired,
he proves honest according to his word, and sends her home with so much money.
Cato is pleased, Ortetius Wife pleased, and Ortetius a well contented-Cuckold;
and what hurt is in all this, Wife? here is a Commandment broken in this, and a
Covenant in the other.


H. Wife, Eusebius reports of Origin, that living among the Heathen, they
persuaded him to sacrifice with them, but he refused; they told him that if he
would but hold up his hand, and do no more, that should be all they would
desire, and then he should preach: he hoping to preach, held up his hand; they
clapped a Censor into his hand, and cried out, Origin has sacrificed, Origin
has sacrificed! This struck a terror to Origin, and it may to Mr. Brit. and
take away his boasting, if he consider from whom now he has received his
Ministry: His Converts were Members of his Church before, but it seems
Infidels, which is something a prepostrous course, to make them members first,
and then convert them afterward; something like the the Bishop of Newgate and
Tyburu, who receives men into his fellowship, administers the Sacrament unto
them, makes them Members of the Church of England, and then brings them to the
Gallows and bids them Confess.

A contrary effect of Conformity has been found near unto us, in some men who
made profession contrary to what their practice has fallen out to be; as
first, in one whose name is Hall, who not long since, being left unto himself,
got a Wench with Child; the Child murdered by the Wench, he ran away.

A second, whose mother (whom you know) told me that since her Son had been
with the Bishop, the Devil was got into him, he was turned common Drunkard and
Swearer, and would beat his wife (R. B^^^.) A third is, Mr. Page of Ledbury,
who the first day he went to tend Common Prayer was imitten dumb and never
spoke since. If Mr. Brit. has found such a seal as he speaks of, put that in
Annus Mirabilis. These are Membes of the Mystical Body.

Another sort of this Mystical Body, are the Rats or Cu-Rats, who are set over
the Flocks, who receive orders from their Masters to Pottage them well over
whatever they do, in which they are not so diligent as in the Cathedrals, where
they heat the Pottage three times in a day, to keep it from sowring, and yet
can hardly keep it from stinking in the nostrils of many: And these will be
Preachers too. And they are so pestered in some places with Phanaticks, that
they cannot filch a Sermon, as their Masters do, but they are found out. Some
of them who are privy to my infitmities, knowing that I am many times troubled
with a pain in my right arm that I cannot heave a groat to my head, have come
to me for some one, who had played the Truant at a Free School, and loytring
about, his father displeased with it, he be thinks himself what course to take;
and finding himself more fit to teach than to be taught, mounts the Pulpit in a
Reprobate Parish, where none had any Call to speak, the means being so small,
and with a few ragged Notes which he patched together, puts off the ware: The
Parish accepts on it, and takes him for their Cu-Rat. Then to trading he and I
fell, and in a case of extremity, being so lame, not able to stir but with
crutches, and troubled with the pain in my arm, I showed him a parcel of Notes,
nine in number; he put his hand in his pocket, took me money without asking
price; we are now both in stock, he for Sermons, I for money: Not above groats
apiece I had of him; if he gave threepence a piece more than they were worth,
he had quick return, that is something worth. Then to work again, and falls to
drinking Ale very stiffly with them; pleased the Parish well, but shortly packs
up, and to another, and another, and another place, until he got to Worcester,
where he got Ordination, and a Living of threescore pounds a year in that
Diocese.

Another poor Rat came to me, being my self in a Trap, I mean a Prison, begging
some of me, which I wrote there, I gave them fre^ly; it could be but poor
matter, from a beggar to a beggar; but he got money by them.

One young Rat lately being in discourse with one, who told him that a man
unregenerate, his prayers were not acceptable but abominable: he answered, That
if they were not available for himself, yet they might by available to do
others good, if he prayed heartily.

Another in Holy-Orders asked one what a Presbyterian was, and what an
Independent, was? where the difference was between them? and thirdly, what Free
Grace was? which when he was told, replied, that it was more than ever he heard
before.

One Rat-master, having a Living of 150 l. per annum, says, that he can go to
London, and buy Sermons to serve him all the year about for five pound and hear
his charges into the bargain; which has been his course.

Another old Rat, who has lived upon other men's Bacon for many years, being
Schoolmaster in a Market Town where good Preachers have been, he serving a
Curacy now, and has set his Son up at the Trade, who began since the King came
in, and is like to do well; for he says, His Father will help him to Sermons
to serve him seven years.


W. Husband, I pray you give over this Rat-catching, I am almost weary of it.


H. Wife, I Will tell you but of two more; one who served under an Impropriator
for eight pounds per annum, removes thence to a place of ten pounds yearly, and
out of a desire to do more good by his Ministry, as others do when they remove
from a lesser to a greater I but seeing Preaching was the better trade to get
money, gets some Sermons, and to it he goes; but hearing where a vacincy in a
Parish was, thither he repairs with some of the best were he had, and up into
the little shop he clambers with it, twice in one day. The Parish accepts of
him, and in a short time the pretty knave thrive so fast, that he was able to
hang his Bed about with slitches of ^^cor instead of Curtains. If I should say
any more of him I should not know how to end; take the other Rat, and I Will
trouble you with no more.

A young man, a servant to a Merchant, went away with an hundred pounds of his
Master's money; but the business being taken up, and the young man without
employment, resolves to take up that which will help when all f^ils: A Preacher
he will be. I met with him at a Cooks shop in 63, he gets him some Canonical
habit, Circingle and all; up he gets into a Pulpit in London, with as good a
portion of Impudence as of Ignorance: some Youths of his former acquaintance
put a Bill up to him, Desiring him to remember one in his prayer who had run
away with an hundred pound of his Masters money. But Ordination is wanting, and
he by some means men with one Dr. Gatr, as they called him (but I think no
Doctor) who wanted a Rat; to trading they fall. Caust preach, said the Doctor,
twice in a day? Yeaquoth the Rat. Can preach once a day? Can preach half an
hour in a day? Yes Sir. Come along with me to the Bishop of Chi^hester. Away
they go. The Bishop refers the examination of him to the Archdeacon. Away goes
Cars to the Archdeacon, leaving the Rat in the room where I was, but return
with this answer, That the Archdeacon had been drinking so hard, he was unfit
for the work for this day; besides, that the Canonical hour will be past: Meet
me at the Spur in Southwark on Friday, there thou shall have an Horse, and into
Sussex, twelve miles from Chichester, we will go thither to the Bishop, there
thou shall have Ordination.

Others came to me for Sermons lately by their Advocates: But I refused to let
them have any, sending them to Ducklane, whereas I then understood the Parsons
Wives sold the remainder of their Husbands Studies and Sermon-Notes: I think
some of them have took my counsel, for I went to enquire lately for some, but
could not meet with any. I asked them, if they did not use to sell such
sometimes? they answered me, Yea sometimes, but now they were without: At last
I met with a parcel of very honest Sermons, but not fit for the times. A man
that drives a Trade, must provide VVare according to the Market: he that ^rucks
for Sermons, must be sure to deal for such as the times will take off, else
they may stand upon his hand, good judgment is required in it. Sermons whose
Texts are taken out of the Revelation are quite out of fashion; for you know
that the Bishop hearing that Mr. Hall preached a Sermon out of the Revelations,
forbid him to speak any more thence: For indeed, if a man had free liberty to
speak thence, he might quickly endanger the tumbling down of their Kingdom. A
man may with safety take a Text out of Tobit and his Dog, or where the smell
of a Fish affrighted the Devil into Egypt, and raise Orthodox matter thence to
please the times: Of if a man take a Text that may touch Prelacy, let him he
sure to play his Uses far enough off the point; or as old Busted of Stow would
play his Uses (in such a case) beyond Sea, and speaking as loud as he could, O
that I had the Pope here! and this makes the Popes Kitchen SMOKE; And the use
of this point serves to reprove the Pope, and the Turk, and the great Cham of
(...) then there is no danger in it. But if he be wise, let him be sure to bang
the Fannaticks soundly, as the Bishop of Winehesier did at a Visitation, and
tell them, that the Church of England had brought forth four Bastards, viz. the
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, and the Quaker; and although a Gentleman
spoke saweily, and said, That if she had brought forth four Bastards, she must
needs be a Where, he would never come at her again; yet who dare say any thing
to him so long as he is in the Pulpit, and has Authority on his side? I hope
he it as good a man as a Stage Player, they can speak freely without control,
and why may not he upon his Stage?

Or if he preach, as sometime Dr. Lewis did at Tewksbury, and show the reason
why Metchiz^dech was Priest and King; because the Priests place was a beggarly
place, like Teniksbury, It would not maintain a man, therefore he was King of
Salem. Or if he preach, as he that preached at Bartholomews Exchange, out of
the Acts, the words of the evil Spirit in the Exorcist, Jesus I know, and Paul
I know, But who are ye? and thence infer, (speaking of the Presbyterians) That
there were a generation of men in this age, that the Devil himself did not
know. Or as he that would maintain the lawfulness of Ceremonies from Paul's
saying, Greet ye one another with an holy Kiss.

Or as Mr. Fox, who preferred the Church-Catechism before the Garden of Eden: In
the Garden of Eden were Trees good and evil, in the Church-Catechism all good:
In the Garden of Eden there were Serpents and Scorpions, in the
Church-Catechism no hurtful thing. Such as these will pass. A man almost may
say any thing, provided always he pray for the Right Reverend, and observe the
Orders of the Church.


VV. Husband, you will hardly afford me time to speak. What, preach out of
Tobit and his Dog! Fie, fie! or where the smell of a Fish frighted the Devil
into Egypt; what out of the Apocrypha! I am sorry to hear you say so.


H. Wife, why may not a man preach out of the Apocrypha as well as the wise
Convocation by order of the Common Prayer Book (as it is to be seen in the
Calender) approve of forty Chapters, or near so many, to be read for Lessons
out of Tobit, Esdras, etc. disinheriting the Sacred Scriptures, bastardizing
them: neither do I think they would take in their places so many out of Daniel
or the Revelation.


VV. Husband, they are wise, they know what they have to do.


H. Wife, no doubt but they are as wise in this and other things, as that
Synod which was called about the Mouse's eating of the Consecrated Bread, that
Fanatic Creature disturbed the peace of the Church: what punishment might be
This was discoursed on between two Doctors, the one a Doctor of Dulvinity, the
other a Doctor of the Civil Law, lately at a Sack-shop
fit for the Crime could not easily be determined; Excommunication could not,
he was no Member of the Church; if a Member, little would it advantage the
Bishops Court, wanting money to pay for his Absolution. If the Cat should eat
him, then the Bread had been twice profaned: kill him they could not before
they caught him, and it is questionable whether it were not before the invention
of Mouse-traps; no doubt but it put the Synod to a great deal of trouble. In
things of like imoortance our Convocation is as able to manage as that Synod,
and that Synod able to do as much good as ours have done, or would do, were
they to sit seven years longer.


VV. Husband, what is this Convocation? is it constituted according to Magna
Charta, the Rule of the Gospel?


H. Wife, for your satisfaction I Will tell you; it is not according to the Rule
of Gospel for the constitution of it, for in the Churches of Christ in the
primitive times the Power lay not in any single person, but in the Members of
the Churches as well as in the principal Officers. This Convocation is of Romes
Constitution, and left unto us by succession, as it was in the darkest times of
Popery, and as it is at this day under the Roman Empire, in which the Laity
(as they call the common People) have no voice in the election of the Clerks,
according to the Government of the Mystical Body (as the Doctor calls it) the
Church of England, the People being denied that privilege for their precious.
Souls, which they have in some cases in temporal things for their perishing
bodies. Bear with me for some homely comparisons, and some circumstances, and I
will tell you the manner of this Convocation and constitution of it by and by.


W. Husband, I hope there is no need of such Complements between you and me,
Pray tell me.


H. Wife, not long since I was standing in Newgate-Market in London, where I
saw at a distance a strange Creature mounted on the back of a beast, but
approaching near me, I perceived it to be a Gentleman-Fackanapes on Horseback,
and the Bears led by the nose, following him to the misery of the stake, there
to baited with Dogs. This Gentleman is no English Native, but a Foreigner,
whether of some parts of Italy or America, I know not; his habit is an hairy
rough garment, yet nothing but what Nature did afford him, and with the bridle
on his arm (for so I Will call it) for imitation like himself (very Ape as we
say) There is a Gentleman John Priest, with whom you may parallel this
Gentleman Jackanape's in some passages, who is mounted upon the Magisterial
power of the Beast, and with Institution and Induction, which is as pretty a
Popish knack as any is in all the Pack, comes to the Parish, and they must take
him, for better or worse, for their Pastor, although he never tasted of one bit
of Bread which came down from Heaven, nor drop of living Water, to which he is
a stranger; Watchman or Overseer, although the Scales never fell from his eyes,
nor ever opened by that great Occulist who only is in Commission for that
purpose; and follow him they must, although quite blind; they must see with his
eyes, and be led by him into the misery of the Ditch.

This Gentleman John Priest is no true Native, qua Saeerdos, as a Priest, but
as a Roman, and his habit a Rough Garment to deceive the People, according to
the nature of the Beast; but not any garment, no nor a rag of any thing but
what Nature does afford him; For imitation apish and wanton with a strange
woman, and nothing fits his fancy better than the Fashions of the old Whore.

Well, a Convocation must be called, by whom? this Gentleman John Priest, with
the rest of the Gentlemen John Priests of the several Diocesses and Parishes
must make choice of the Clerks, who are men called to the work of Priesthood as
himself; and although the Bishops sit in Parliament by virtue of the King's
Writ, yet they are of the Corporation, and must have, not a finger only, but a
foot in it, and then as we say in a Country Proverb, The Pottage is never the
better (what they are, we talked on before) And whatsoever is brewed in the
Convocation (I may not say who grinds the Malt) being tund up into the House,
and there a cork put in the Bunn-hole, I mean confirmed by Act, is Jus Divinum:
And the People must be led by the nose of an Implicit Faith, to believe that it
is their duty to observe and practice; which Implicit Faith brings more misery
than the Bears are brought unto at the Stake, the misery of the one is Finite,
the other Infinite. If they observe not the Dictates and Commands of the same,
they are Fined, Imprisoned, Transportation threatened, etc.


W. Husband, what is become of Sions King all this while, one JESUS?


H. Wife, well remembered, shall I tell you? they have served him as Herod,
Pontius Pilate and the High Priests, sent him into another world, or else
transported him to Tangier or else where; for (Deus hic nihil fecet) he has
not been seen or heard of here.


W. Husband, that is some comfort to them that shall follow after, if their
Captain and Head be gone before; but what is to be done in this case. for
remedy?


H. Wife, nothing as I know of, but the old Weapons, Preces et Lachrime,
Prayers and Tears; wait upon God, and then you shall see, as Athanasius said in
the like case, but (Nubeculo cito transitura) a little Cloud quickly past over.

But Wife, you put me out with your talking, what I was going to say concerning
John Priest, a little more; when the House is adjourned, Acts extant, and the
Bishop come home, Country John Priest in duty gives his Lordship a visit, and
bids him welcome home, thanking him for his pains, etc. The Bishop gives John
some account of their work (good thinks John) this will help of spin out a
little time next Sunday in the Pulpit or Pue, and then John addresses his
speech unto his Neighbors.

Neighbors, I have been with my Lord Bishop, who has given me a Narrative of
the Proceedings of the House for the settling and right regulating thereof. The
Church of England it is well known has been accounted the most Glorious Church,
and has had the pre-eminence of all the Churches in the Christian world,
however it has been clouded and eclipsed by some Schismatical and Seditious
Spirits in the late unhappy times of Libertinism; and still Fanatic Spirits do
abound; yet such good and wholesome Laws are enacted and made for the
suppressing of the same, that the Church of England may be restored to its
former Beauty and Primitive Purity: For never was there a more Learned, Pious,
Wise, Grave, Juditious Assembly of Divines, of Bishops, Doctors and Clerks, who
are the Pillars of the Church, then England has at this day, and who have laid
out themselves as well in Purse as Person for the reformation of those evils
which are crept in among us. If after all this we shall remain obstinate,
disregarding and undervaluing their indefatigable pains, studies and diligence
used, and out of our Peevish Self-Conceitedness of our own abilities, New-Light
forsooth, and Light within, and such like fooleries; whereas it is impossible
that those who are but Layicks, Mechanics and other T'radsmen and Country men,
who follow the Plow tail, to have that Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding,
which they have attained unto by reason of their great reading and acquaintance
in the Originals; especially if we consider that we are not under Heathen
Emperors, but Christian Magistrates, whom in duty we are bound to obey, as the
Apostle says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake, etc. If after all this we shall remain as before, it behooves all his
Majesty's Officers to put the Laws in Execution; and therefore Churchwardens
look to your charge, take notice who are absent at the Prayers of the Church,
make your Presentment, I Will put to my hand as by duty I am bound. Well done Sir
John Priest, you have made a fair speech. Well Wife, have a little patience and
give him but halter enough, he will hang himself, or give himself such a fall
as never Jackanapes had.

Neighbors, says John, I have received orders from my Lord Bishop, who tells
me that it is his Majesty's will and pleasure that Children should be
Catechized, I pray you send your Children; the next Sunday I intend to begin at
two of the clock: The neglect whereof has been the cause of so much Heresy,
Schism, and Sedition as has been among us, the Youth having not been
instructed in the right Principles of Religion.

The time being come, says John, Where be the Youths that come to be
Catechized? Ready quoth the Holy Water dishclout, the Clerk.

Quest. What is your name? Answ. T. B.

Let me hear you say your Creed.

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. Why do you say, I believe, and not we believe?

A. Because every man must be saved by his own Faith.

Good Boy, says John, 'twas well answered. You hear what he says, That every
man must be saved by his own Faith: And this serves to reprove and condemn the
Church of Rome, who hold that a man may be saved by an Implicit Faith, and this
very Faith, say they, drove the Devil away from the Collier. The Devil asked
the Collier, how he did believe? he answered, As the Church believes. And how
does the Church believe? As I believe. At which the Devil departed. Whereas we
know that every man must be saved by his own Faith. O Woman, great is thy
Faith, be it unto thee as Thou believe: not as others believe. And Faith is a
persuasion of the heart, grounded upon the Promises of God, not upon Churches
and Councils.

The Papists tell us that such General Councils decreed such a thing, and such
Learned-men and Fathers were of such an Opinion: We know that Churches have
erred, and General Councils, as the Council of Nice, consisting of three
hundred and eighteen Bishops; witness Paphnutius. It is not humane Learning
that opens the eyes of the blind, that is the proper work of Christ. The
Learned men have been the greatest Heretics. Heresy (as one says) is a
Bastard, bego: between a Learned head, and an Unsanctified heart. Paul
accounted his Learning among his [all things] but Dung. Where is the Disputer
of this world? Apollos an eloquent man, instructed by Aquilla and Priscilla,
two poor Tent-makers. And Christ revealed himself to poor Fishermen and
Shepherds. I thank thee O Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes and sucklings.

Neither must we pin our Faith upon other man's sleeves, no not upon Kings and
Princes. Not many Mighty, not many Noble after the flesh. Great men are as
ignorant of Christ as any. The Princes of this world knew not Christ: If they
had known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Nor obey any,
further than their Commands consist with God's Commands, etc. Well done, John,
for one Article.


H. Wife, the substance of what John Priest has said, I have heard delivered
by some of them, and can name the persons; yea, the example of the Collier for
instance. Prithee speak thy mind, wife, may not this go for a fall at footbal?


W. Truly Husband, he has overthrown what he said before: But good Husband
give over talking for this time, I begin to be sleepy.


H. Hold a very little more and I will tell you this short passage, of which I
was credibly informed. In Katherine Coleman Parish in London, a Dutchman, a
Jew, and a Papist came to pay their Daes (as they call it) but I cannot say
they came together. But says John Priest, Wherefore come not you to Church? I
go to the Dutch-Church. Wherefore come not you to Church? I am a Jew. Wherefore
come not you? I am a Roman Catholic. John is very kind, receives his money,
and farewell. Then another comes, also contented to pay his money; but Sir John
suspecting him to be some sort of Phanatick, asked him, Wherefore come not you
to Church? he says but a little; Come I know what you are, you frequent
Private Meetings, you are a Fanatic, I shall take a course with you, I Will
prosecute the Law against you; but very kind to his Countryman the Roman. To
speak it between our selves, they say (wife) that there is more favor to be
found under the Turk than under some that profess to be Christians.


W. Husband, I cannot forbear sleep any longer, the Child has lugg'd me so
hard, that unless I fetch a nap I shall not have any milk for him when he
wakes.


H. Wife I Will rise betime in the morning and fetch a halfpeth of Ale, that will
recruit you again.


W. Nay Husband, take two farthings more off the Cupboards head, and bring a
pot, that will make us all drink. I must turn on my other side; pray have a
care of the Child, and so goodnight Husband.


H. Goodnight Good-wife.


FINIS.

