AN ANSWER TO Three TREATISES Published under the Title of THE JESUITS Loyalty.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Hen. Brom at the Gun at the West End of S Paul's.
1678.

The INTRODUCTION.
IT has been thought requisite by some, whose judgments deserve the esteem
which every body has of them, that the Treatises should be answered, which have
appeared under the Title of The Jesuits Loyalty. To those among whom we live,
in a common subjection to the same Government, but with different sentiments in
Religion, we owe the satisfaction of knowing what we hold in matters so much
concerning civil obedience. And it is not just that those whose Tenets differ
from those of these Authors, should pass for approvers of Opinions which they
disapprove. These Treatises being attributed to Catholics, and the doctrines
contained in them to the Church: Ignorance and obstinacy, wickedness and
damnable error being laid to the charge of those who are otherwise persuaded;
Protestants, if no Catholic disowned them, would have but too much reason to
suspect, we were all of one mind in these matters, silence in such a case
amounting to little less then Confession. And though they were disowned, yet if
no body said why, the disowners would go near to pass for the strange people
which the zeal of these Authors represents them, and Protestants, with extreme
scandal to our Religion, apprehend, that the only good subjects among us were
the worst of Catholics, if Catholics at all. It was thought necessary to
prevent an apprehension of such bad consequence, both to Religion, and our
selves, and show they swerve neither from Religion nor Reason, and are not
seduc't but convinced into their persuasions, after ^ue weight of all that is
offered to the contrary. Besides an answer seemed due to the Church, our
Neighbor, and our selves. The Church is wronged, when doctrines are put upon
her which she holds not, and much more when those doctrines are both false and
pernicious. Not to remove the scandal is little better then to concur to it.
Our Neighbor is wronged when counterfeit coin is offered him for current:
since he will find little other in these Treatises, it is the part of an
honest man to forewarn him. We are wronged by characters which we deserve not,
and are not to be blamed if we have no mind to pass for Ignorant, and
obstinate and wicked m^n; though in truth, Religion is more concerned then we,
that who are sound in Allegiance appear not unsound in Religion. In short,
since it becomes Catholics to deal sincerely, and embrace no Tenets,
especially in what concerns their duty to God and Caesar, which fear the light;
these Authors deserve praise for owning fairly what they hold, and why, and it
was thought fit to imitate their example. For these reasons I would not but
concur with the opinion of my friends, that an Answer was necessary; but yet I
could have wished the task had been imposed on some body else. I have not
ventured on it but at the solicitation of those whom I could not refuse, and
that in default of another. But while others, some more concerned, and all more
able, for several respects declined it, I thought it better to do it, as I
could scurvily, then leave it undone. I concern my self only with the what is
said, and meddle not with the who said it, as neither knowing the Authors, nor
thinking I have any thing to do to enquire. So the Gold be weight, it imports
not what hand holds the scales. Besides, as the tartness with which too many
season their writings, is to my relish wonderful unsavory, I am not sorry at
an Ignorance which preserves me from the Temptation. For though I would, I
cannot reflect on those I know not. If any thing slip less smooth from my pen,
I entreat the Reader to look upon it as a slip, which had I been aware, I had
avoided.

AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST TREATISE.
OF the three Arguments, which make up the substance of these three Treatises,
the first in some respects, seems far the best; the other two are more proper
to amuse, then convince, and look more like products of wit and fancy, such as
a fertile invention may multiply without end on any subject, then of a settled
judgment. They rather skirmish then sight, and so as still to preserve their
Reserves entire. But the first fairly engages the Triarii, and gives us the
comfort of Alexander, to meet with all the enemies force at once. In truth it
is the only proper Topic. For obedience to Princes being evidently taught by
Faith, less then Faith will hardly serve to justify disobedience in case of
Deposition. Notwithstanding in other respects I cannot but think it an ill
chosen, and worse managed Topic.

For first, it is at most but an Argument ad Hominem, such a one as may stop a
man's mouth, but contributes nothing to clear the difficulty. It is good only
against a Catholic, and He, if he be satisfied with the proof this Author
alleges, that the Church truly held, what he says she did, is put to silence,
and must allow the conclusion true in virtue of his obligation, to believe as
the Church believes. But yet sees nothing of that Truth himself, nor can tell
how to make it out, or defend his Church, if it be objected against her, that
she holds an untruth. To an Adversary it signifies nothing, unless perhaps to
confirm him in his prejudice against the Church, when she is made to require
the belief of things, which he may see inconsistent with Truth. However all is
carried in the dark, the Catholic run down as with a boisterous shock at
Blind-mans-buff, but neither satisfied himself, nor able to satisfy any body
else, the rest left without the least glimps of light. In short, it is a Topic
proper to fright a timorous conscience into a blind obedience, but leaves the
understanding altogether at a loss.

Again, it will not do at last, as he assumes, The Church has held it, and
thence infers, it must be true. Another may assume, It is not true: and thence
a Catholic infer, the Church has not held it; and an Adversary, that the
Church has erred. In either case, it must of necessity come to be examined,
whether the point be true or no, and this by Arguments independent of the
Authority of the Church. For if the Catholic by any Arguments can prove it is
not true: -- the Church never held it, is to another Catholic as undeniable,
as his consequence, the Church has held it, therefore it is true. At least
there is no avoiding it with an Adversary: For who acknowledges the Church has
held it, and cannot show it is not an error, and by other mediums then the
Churches holding it, cannot acquit the Church from having held an error.
Wherefore since of necessity it must come to this at last, it had been a great
deal better to have begun there at first, and never troubled us with a Topic,
which even if it hold, makes us not a jot the wiser, and which when we have
taken a great deal of pains to examine, leaves us exposed to as much in
examining another.

Besides, considering the circumstances in which we live, I know not what worse
office he could have done his fellow Catholics, and indeed the Church it self.
She is daily traduced with holding doctrines inconsistent with civil
government. There is no way to clear her, that I know, but by denying that she
holds those doctrines, or that those doctrines are inconsistent. This Gentleman
assists the objection with his learned Syllogisms, and fixes the doctrines on
the Church, and then leaves her to shift for her self, with the aspersion of
holding doctrines inconsistent with Government, unless he would show them
otherwise. To leave her thus with the matter of fact confessed, her Adversaries
at liberty to conclude her guilty, and her friends uninstructed how to make out
her innocence, in my opinion shows that inconsiderate love is sometimes more
prejudicial then professed hate; and I think more foresight would have become
his learning, and more concern for her honor his zeal.

To draw a little nearer, I observe, it is nothing but the old dish newly, and
not much differently, cookt, the same oversod bean still. Only whereas usually
the inconvenience urged is, that unless the doctrine in question be true; the
Church has erred, he chooses to word it, The Church has been in a damnable
error of belief, and sin of practice, a wicked and blind Church, a Synagogue
of Satan, etc. This sounds a little more big and frightful, but signifies much
what the same. For the rest, it is but what is met with every where. When the
proof comes, on which he lays the stress, there is the fact of Greg. 7. the
Councils of Lateran and Lions, with the rest of the Common-places, objected and
answered by every body, who meddle with the question, according as they are for
the affirmative or negative. These things, if they had been satisfactory, would
have been so in other men's Writings, the dispute long since ended, and the
pains of transcribing them afresh spared. But since he knows they were not,
methinks he should have bethought himself of something more, to make them
satisfactory, then barely to transcribe them.

However to make a formal business of it, this proof is divided into 6. Heads.
All which if he can show, he hopes it will be granted a sufficient proof. Sure
he has been used to deal with very froward people, such who will not be content
unless it be syllogistically proved to them, that the sun shines at noon: or
else he is as unlucky at difficulties as some at music, who praise and
dispraise still in the wrong place. Was there ever such a pleasant If? or did
any man, besides himself, ever doubt, whether those things might be shown,
which every body, who knows any thing of the question, knows were never in
dispute, but openly acknowledged on all hands? For so it is with the main of
what he brings, though in some particulars he has the ill fortune to be out. I
am fully persuaded that neither the Sorbon Doctors, nor the rest of the
Gentlemen, who it seems are out of his favor, would, to do him a pleasure,
stick to yield him freely, perhaps more then he asks, without staying to be
for^'t to a confession by the rack of his severe Quotations.

Alas the difficulty lies not in the matter of fact-which is beyond Ifs and
Ands, sufficiently agreed, but in this, whether that matter of fact
sufficiently prove what is pretended from it. When he comes to this, all he
does is to hope it over, and leave it to take its fortune. That a Scholar
should treat a question of this concern in this manner! Keep a pother about the
premises, which no body denies, and expect the conclusion, which no body
grants, should be yielded to his confidence without any, so much as offer at
proof that it follows, or is a good conclusion, which yet is the only thing in
question! He knows that all, who dissent from him, refuse to grant what he
hopes to Bellarmin and the rest, who have produced the same things, with as
much and as likely hope as he. He knows that what he tells us is no news; that
all has been examined and sifted over and over again, and that after all, there
are who remain firm against him. Can it be possible a man of learning should
think to hope these people out of their Judgments? That they should for his
sake relent, and profess that to be true which they think to be false? Change
all on a sudden, and that without any motive? For the motives he proposes, he
knows move them not. When a scholar tur^s from proving to hoping, and expects
from the good nature of the Readers what he should force from them, whether
they will or no, by the unresistable evidence of his discourse, I for my part
think he has a great deal more reason to fear then hope, at least were it my
case, I am sure I should not be altogether so confident.

However it be, the Argument in short is this: Do but grant me that what you
and every body knows has been done, proves the Church engaged for my doctrine,
and then I will prove the Church is engaged for my doctrine, and that it is
heretical* and what you will, to oppose it. This is the long and the short of
the learned Syllogisms, and elaborat^ Quotations. Which if any one will take
for a good Argument, he may for me. But I must needs profess I never saw worse
Topic worse managed; and am heartily afflicted to see a question so strangely
handled, in which, to say nothing of some temporal considerations not
altogether to be slighted, our very duty to God and Caesar is concerned.

But not to affront his pains and zeal with an answer so general, let us cast a
view on particulars. He undertakes to prove, that the opinion, against which he
writes, is Erroneous in Faith, Temerarious, and Impious. Never were ill names
worse coupled. This is as much to say, you Sir, with whom I am very angry, are
a Rascal and a Villain, and besides cannot put of your hat with a grace, or
make a handsome leg, or some such diminishing aggravation; which none, but a
very merry enemy would use. Haeretical, and Impious are sins of the first
magnitude. Temerarious, which for all its great sound is no more but plain
Rash, is a moderate blundring fault, of which many an honest man, especially in
our nation, is guilty, even he sometimes who speaks against rashness. Neither
do I mention this for any great matter there is in it, but to observe by the
way, that he was so intent upon heaping harsh names on the Tenet, against which
he disputes, that he minded not much what they signified.

There follow the learned Syllogisms concerning which I shall only say, He has
not weaved his web so fast but that it might perhaps be unravel'd at every
stitch. There is play enough for a Gamester who would take all advantages. Who
would examine what made an Error or Practice damnable? whether what is damnable
in its own nature, be so in all circumstances, and particularly in those in
which the things he alleges were practiced, whether the Church act always as a
Church, or be responsible for all that is done by her, whether Fathers, or
Children; and whether in the cases insisted on by him; with the rest of the
many points of which he gives occasion to discourse, might peradventure stop
the career before it came to the convincing Quotations, and put him to the
charge of more proofs, then those he has provided.

But since I am at liberty, I conceive it best to gratify his expectation, and
deny just where he would have me. For indeed to deny in the wrong place without
necessity, may I fear show something disobliging. It Is as if a man should
rudely call for mutton to him who had provided Capon and Pheasant. I join issue
with him therefore where he desires and expects I should, upon the first part
of his second Minor, and deny that the Church at any time has believed and
practiced, as he pretends. And this because I believe it will be found, the
Church, or rather men of the Church, were in those times, as now, divided in
their sentiments of this business. Some were for such a power, as he would have
in the Pope, some were against it, both acted according to their several
persuasions. And I conceive that what is done by one part of the Church, and
contradicted by another, proves not the Act, and much less the Faith of the
Church.

Again, although there had been no difference of sentiments and practices, I do
not understand how the Church can be engaged, unless she proceeded on those
grounds, on which alone the Church, as a Church, or Congregation of faithful
can proceed. To this I apprehend two things necessary: First, that the point
have been originally revealed by Christ: and 2dly, that this revelation have
been preserved by an uninterrupted and uniform practice of the Faithful. If
any, or all, of those who make the Church believe or act on other grounds then
these, I conceive they believe and act, not as a Church, or as faithful, but as
men, or scholars, or in some other capacity. And because, for any thing
appears in his Argument, these conditions may be wanting, I deny any engagement
of the Church in his concerns, and for the same reason, his last Consequence
too, conceiving, whatever he may hope, that though he do show all he
undertakes, it will not follow that the Church has believed, taught, and
practiced, as he contends.

And now in truth we are at an end of our Argument; at least what remains
belongs to him, not me. His consequence since it is denied, must be proved, if
he will have it pass, and till then there is no more for me to do. It is
neither needful, nor indeed much to purpose to examine farther what he says, if
what he says will not prove his intent. However since in likelihood something
may occur, which though unnecessary, may yet be grateful to the Reader, let us
hear at least what his witnesses say. Kings and Emperors and Popes carry with
them too much respect to be denied audience.

We are told then, that Gregory the 7th. threatened the French King, and his
subjects, and deposed Henry 4th. King of the Germans: Besides that he formerly
taught this doctrine to the Church, and called the contrary wicked folly and
madness, as bad as Idolatry. Farther that Paul the 5th. forbad the Oath of
Allegiance; Innocent the 10th. censured the negative subscribers; and Alexander
the 7th. the Irish Remonstrance. And all this dilated with several
circumstances, not forgetting the very year in which each thing happened, and
Vouchers brought, and exactly quoted for every particular.

I verily believe this exactness might have been spared. These things are too
well known to need more ado about them then bare naming. I wish they were not,
for the honor of Popes and reverence we allow to their sacred and supreme
dignity. And could they be concealed, I for my part would rather lose an
opportunity of showing Erudition, then publish them. But since this Gentleman
has thought fit to bring them once again upon the stage, what will he make of
them? All this is in two words, Popes have appeared for the deposing doctrine
all the ways they can. And what then? Is all that Popes think true; all that
Popes do, well done? Had he first shown the Actions good, and opinion true, he
had deserved well of Popes, by showing them to have abetted goodness and Truth:
But that remaining in question, to expose their actions to the same question,
is, I fear, no very good piece of service to them. And it is a worse to
Christianity to assume their proceedings in proof of a point of Faith. The
Authority of Popes, he knows well, stirs not the balance, unless their
Infallibility be cast into the scales. And for that point, I refer it to
himself, if it be any more then a probable opinion, and that even according to
his own value, if he hold it. For he is not to learn that every body sets not
the same rate upon it, many holding it very improbable and very false to boot.
Now if it become a scholar to suppose that point, (for he offers not any where
to prove it) a point upon which all the stress lies, and which he knows is
strongly contested; I cannot think it becomes a Catholic to make a probable
opinion a premise to infer a point of Faith. For this is plainly to make his
Faith, a probable, and uncertain, and for ought he can tell, false Faith. I
would entreat him the next time he writes, to have more concern for
Christianity, and less for his espoused opinion, and in the mean time, change
his hopes of having his Inference pass, into a desire that it may not. For I
must hope, with a confidence something better grounded, that God will have more
care of his Church; then to suffer her Faith depend on Probabilities, if they
be so much, and the Rock on which he has built her, crumble away into slippery
sand.

But now to see how he sets off his ware; how like an Artist he covers the
weakness of what he says, by the strong expressions in which he clothes it, and
strives by his big words to fright us into an apprehension there is something
in it, if we could find it! If I show, says he, That Popes have taught it as
sound doctrine; As if they, or any body in their wits, can be imagined to have
taught any, as unsound doctrine. No body yet ever cried stinking Fish. Proving
it from Scripture and Tradition: That Scripture should have been pretended is
no such wonder, or praise. No Heresy, that I know, but has attempted as much.
But for Tradition he must pardon me, if I suspend my judgment till I hear what
his witnesses say. For to me it seems a riddle, that Tradition should be so
much as pretended. And condemned the contrary, as ^rr^n^ous in Faith,
pernicious folly, and madness, and inflicted censures on them that held it: As
if people did not use to give hard names to their Adversaries, and do all they
can against them. Many an honest man has been called knave. The question is
whether those opinions, and those men, deserved those censures, and that harsh
language; if they did not, they had the worse fortune; to be wrongfully
aspersed heretofore, and for no other reason but because they were so,
concluded guilty now.

Again, we are told, that Gregory the 7th deposed Henry the 4th in a
Patriarchal Council. I am very sorry he did so, and wish with all my heart,
truth would give me leave to deny that fact. But for the Patriarchal Council, I
must again suspend till better information. For I suspect few of the Nations
belonging to the Patriarchate were represented in that Council, save the
Italians, and know a good part of the German Nation by Counter-Councils among
themselves directly opposed it. Yet though it were true, I believe it does not,
even in his own judgment come home to his purpose. That he did it ex Cathedra,
as Vicar of Christ, and successor of S. Peter, etc. I wonder in virtue of what
other Authority he could pretend to proceed; or how he could act at all without
pretending some: And for the mystery of doing it ex Cathedra, he may, if he
please dispute it out with Launoy, for I must confess I do not well understand
it. That this sentence he published to the Empire in a Breve, and his Legates in
several Nations of Christendom. Since it cannot be imagined he intended to make
a secret of it, which way should he publish it, but by Letters, and Messengers?
Lastly (for I will mention no more) that he did not only believe, but formally
teach this doctrine to the Church by Canons published in a Patriarchal Council
at Rome; for which he cites the famous Dictatus Papae. This of all the rest,
might in my opinion have best been spared, both for his own and the Popes
credit. For my part I conceive it becomes me to use a little more respect then
he has done, and not say all to which this objection tempts me. Had he imitated
the prudence of those, who though they balkt nothing which they thought
material, yet forbore to meddle with these Dictatus, I believe he had deserved
better of some body. If he have entertained a fondness for them, and will
uphold them whatever come ont, let him if he please, maintain them against
Withrington, who flatly denis they were defined by the Council. As for me I
will have no more to do with them, only I would gladly know whether he do in
earnest believe all they contain. If he do not, methinks it is not fair play to
obtrude on others, what he believes not himself: If he do, it is the less
wonder he makes the Churches Faith but probable, since he can be content with
one, to make the best on it, very improbable, and very singular. For I dare say
there is not one man in the Church besides, who believes as he does.

Now all this seems to me, but much ado about nothing* The sum total of all
these, and if there were as many more, particulars, amounts to no more then
this, Popes did it. And for this I think he needed not have brought in his
Bill; it would have past well enough in the gross. But when he urges payment,
people desire first to be satisfyd whether they are obliged to discharge* the
Popes debts. He had done something, if he had showed we stood bound for them,
obliged to justify all they have done in this particular, and to believe, and
that with divine Faith, all was well done, and may and ought be imitated. But
barely to show they have done what before he set pen to paper, every body knew
they have, and this with so much circumstance and aggravation, is to take much
pains where none needs, and none where they do. For all that, I cannot but
acknowledge he is a great man in his way: Of all the places, which Art has
invented for amplification, I think there is none wanting. There is the Who,
and the What, the How, the Where, the Why, and all the rest, not so much as the
When forgotten* which though a body would think not much material; it importing
little, whether these things happen in 1074, or 1084, yet I know not how, his
formal In Anno has its Energy. And though I believe the discourse would have
shown better spoken, then writ, because this way it looses much of the
advantage, which a solemn gravity, a pleasing and emphatical delivery would
give it, yet even this is tempting. For there are few who will not be apt to
think there must needs be some sense, where they see so much exactness, Authors
so accurately quoted for every particular, and care taken of every Minute,
circumstance, even the very Year of our Lord.

Before I pass to the next Head, it will not be amiss to stop at a quotation or
two by the way. Out of a letter of the deposed Emperor Henry the 4th. he cites
these words; M^ quoqu^ quem S. S. Patrum traditio soli Deo judicandum docuit,
n^^ pro aliquo crimine) nisi a fide, quod absit, ^^orbitaverim, (...) ^ensuit.
The words as they ly in the letter, are these: M^ q^^q^^ (licet indign^^ inter
Christian^s sum ad Regnum vocatus) Te test, quem S. S. Patrum, etc. as he
cites, save that he puts Censuit at the last for Asseruit, which is not much
material. I would English the period, if I knew how, but I cannot make out the
gramatical construction, to which there seems something wanting. However,
besides the Parenthesis, of no great import, he leaves out two words, which as
short as they are, quite alter the sense, viz. Te Test, or, according to your
own verdict. To say absolutely, the Fathers allow me not to be judged, or, if
you will, deposed, but only for Heresy, is much a different thing from saying,
even according to your self the Fathers allow me not, etc. This is what the
Emperor says; to make him say otherwise is an evident salsification: Though I
do not suspect this Gentleman guilty of it. For I believe he has not seen the
letter himself, but taken the quotation on trust from some body, who has not
dealt faithfully.

But yet there is no great force in it, though it pass in his own terms. As for
the first half of the period, the Emperor is undoubtedly in the right. For the
Fathers do indeed teach, that sovereign Princes are to be left to the Tribunal
of God. But for the exception of Heresy, which is in the second part, I would
gladly be directed to those Fathers who made it. I have neither met with it my
self, nor heard of any who has found it so much as in any one of them. Nor do I
know how to reconcile the second part of the period with the first, this
exception to the Fathers either doctrine or practice. For since they refer the
judgment of a Prince to God alone, I see not how they can allow him to be
judged by any body else, even for Heresy. Again Heretic Princes there were in
their days, but Deposition was never thought of. They have been excommunicated,
but still obeyed. The practice then of the Fathers was against this exception,
it appears not, nay, the contrary does appear in their words: what necessity is
there to believe the Emperor in this point? will he have Emperors make Articles
of Faith too? deposed, and if he credit his own quotations, Heretic, and
Arch-Heretick Emperors? For his Henricians had their name from him.

Again, he says, in a Diet of the Empire there was no plea against the Popes
Jurisdiction, no not by the Kings own Advocates. A wise observation, and much
to purpose; as if people were obliged to say all they thin^ for their ^^rn at
all times, and did not insist now on one plea, now on another, as circumstances
direct their choice. In the contest between Paul the 5th. and the Venetians, it
was debated, whether they should appeal from the Pope to a General Council, and
'twas carried they should not, because they thought it needless so to do.
Otherwise they thought it lawful enough, and told their subjects they did
therefore refuse to make use of that remedy, to which their Ancestors and other
Princes had had recourse in such cases, because the apparent injustice of the
sentence against them required it not, Such was the case in hand: The Princes
of Germany met to examine and dicide the controversy betwixt the Pope and
Emperor according to the Canons, as he himself; out of Vrspergensis observes:
And he can find fault the Popes jurisdiction was not questioned, when by
agreement they were to proceed in another method. The Emperors friends thought
him unjustly dealt withal, even according to the ordinary proceedings of Law,
and because they undertook to make this good in an assembly of the wisest men
of their Nation, does it therefore follow they had nothing else to say?

But now come his witnesses, who are to give in their evidence that the Pope
proved this Doctrine by Tradition. This I have longed for a good while, it
seeming very strange, that wise men, as Popes are, should attempt a matter so
unlikely to succeed. The evidence runs thus: Eos qui dicunt Regem non oportet
excommunicari, etc. ad S* S. Patrum dicta vel facta mitti^^^. Why but the
matter in trial is deposition; pop us not off I beseech you with
Excommunication. Speak if you please to Deposition. Consider^nt cur Zach^rias
Papar^g^m Francorum deposucrit, and omn^s ^ran^ig^^^s* a vinculo Juram^^ti,
quod sibi f^^^rant absolverit. Why but this is not Tradition; it is a single
fact, and that not true neither. For 'twas not Zachary, but an assembly of the
Estates of France, who d^^osed Chilp^ri^. The Pope concurred no farther then by
privity and consent, and perhaps dispensing with their Oath, but they d^posed.
I think it not fit to enter into th^se questions which may ^^e r^ised
concerning that dispensation, it (...) that ^^ ^^posed not* and if he had, that
one Deposition is ^o proof of Tradition. And so the proof of Deposition by
Tradition is mad^ up of two instance^, whereof one has no Deposition, the other
no Tradition, which is what I suspected before hand it would come ^^*

There is not a word more of thi^ business i^ all this Treatise* unless the
quotation following ^ little after, about Gregory the great, be referred to it,
which because he cites for another Head, I conceive he intended not. But if he
do think it worth insisting on, let him first try to make out against Launoy,
that there ever was any such thing. For he contends, that this so much canvast
privilege, is a mere forgery, and I apprehend he would not be very wise, who
should labor much in expounding a decree, which perhaps was never made. And
yet they seem to be less wise who forged it; sure they understood little either
of St. Gregory, or of the world, who make that wise and holy Pope, one who by
his words and actions owned himself a subject to his Emperor, decree
Deposition, and not content with that, Damnation. For my part I never heard of
any power left with St. Peter, or his successors to damn men, And have been
taught all is in Aedificationem. So that even admitting the matter of fact, all
that can be made of it, is at most a Commination, to fright people from
wickedness by the apprehension of the mischiefs which may attend it.

Popes have hitherto furnished matter for his discourse, now he passes to
Councils, and produces first the Council of Lateran, an undoubted general
Council, and the greatest, for number of Prelates that ever were. Who had a
mind to raise doubts, might peradventure find somewhat to say to this
confident Gentleman, and be countenanc't by the Authority even of a General
Council too. For if this Council be so undoubtedly general, how happened it that
the Council of Florence cal^d themselves but the 8th. General Council? How came
Cardinal Pool, no ignorant man in the History of the Church, to be of that
opinion? To the 8. General Councils held in the East, add the two he cites, of
Lateran and Lions, and leave out those of Basil, Constance, and Vienna, The
Council of Florence comes to be the eleventh, not the 8th. So that as undoubted
a business as he makes it, there have it seems, been those in the world who
have doubted of it, or at least not acknowledged it, which I think is as bad.

But we will not fall out about this point. I am well content the Council be as
general as he pleases. If he will think fit to be a little more wary another
time, it is as much as I desire. I cannot tell whether he foresaw what I would
have, but, as far as I see, he is resolved to gratify me, being so wary in the
rest, that he makes no play at all. For he barely relates the matter of fact,
but offers not to apply it to his conclusion, nor gives any hint whereby it may
be guest what service he would draw from it; So that I am something at a loss
what to speak to. I know indeed his journys end, but which way he means to get
to it, am quite to seek; Because he undertook to prove the not-deposing
doctrine Erroneous in Faith, etc. This Council (I suppose) was intended for a
Medium by which to make good that undertaking. Now how he will couple both ends
to the middle, and out of this that a Canon was made, in which the deposing
doctrine is supposed, infer the contrary Erroneous in Faith, is the difficulty.

For my part, I conceive, that Councils use to define those things, which they
intend we should be obliged to believe, and have been told, that when they do
not we are at liberty. I think he will not deny, that to make a Canon is one
thing, to define another. I think he will not deny, that it is at least current
doctrine, that in Definitions, there is no necessity of believing more then the
bare Definitions themselves. Antecedents and Consequents, the very Reasons
themselves alleged for the Definition, are expressly excluded. I presume too he
will acknowledge, that Canons may be made on suppositions short of the
certainty of Faith, and known to be so. And if he will deny none of this, I
cannot see how he can hope it will not be denied to him, that because this
Canon supposes his doctrine, it follows that the Council did suppose it to be a
point of Faith: and much less, if it did, that the supposition was true.

I cannot tell, as I said before, whether he would make his Argument in this
manner; but I think he should in this or the like. And then Bellarmins doctrine
followed generally by Divines, and I verily think by himself, to my
apprehension hinders it from concluding. However, as it has been observed
before me, this is a plain case, and which cannot be denied, that the Act in
question is a decree of something to be done, not a Definition of any thing to
be believed, and that we who are not to believe more then barely the Definition
should be obliged to believe what is not defined, is a morsel of too hard
digestion till he have chewed it better. It is but little short of believing it
is defined, because it is not defined. For he would have it believed, because
it has been decreed, or supposed; and Decreeing, and Supposing are plainly
not-Defining. If he will have it at least obliging as to practice, he must
first make out that obligation from our National Laws; otherwise I must tell
him, that is a pretense which would have exposed a man to punishment, even in
Catholic times.

I pass by the Replys he makes to the answers, which he objects against
himself; not that I think them satisfactory, but because I think it needless to
meddle with them. Withrington had the refusal of them long since, and has
acquainted the world why he would not take them for good payment. If I thought
it to purpose, it were as easy for me to borrow Answers, as for him to borrow
Objections.

Next, he brings in the Council of Lions, which he serves just as he did the
former; tells the matter of fact, which every body knew before, and sets it off
with his emphatical aggravations, and leaves us to guess what it makes to his
purpose. If people will be good natured, and allow his conclusion follows from
it, he is the more beholding to them; if they will stand upon their terms, and
expect to see how it is connected with hi^ premises, they may expect for him. If
they cannot find it out of themselves, it is like to remain hidden for any care
he takes. Now it had been convenient to have said something to this point;
otherwise a particular sentence, in a particular case, with particular
circumstances, seems not altogether so much as a Canon. This Emperor had made a
positive submission to the Church, which how far it authorized the proceedings
against him, I cannot tell, sure I am, it is a circumstance not always found.

What he would make of this business, he alone can tell. What I can imagine,
is, that because this. Council, or Pope in presence of the Council, did depose
the Emperor, they supposed, or took it for granted they had power so to do. And
so far it agrees with the former Council: and the same Answer will serve for
both, viz. that suppositions are no Articles of Faith. I am sure nothing can be
more evident in the world, then that either the common doctrine, of Divines,
not excepting himself, must be changed, and we obliged to believe upon the
credit of Councils, more then their Definitions: or there is no appearance of
necessitating belief where there is no Definition.

Thus much peradventure is more then needs be said in the case* but yet, not to
leave the Reader altogether so much in the dark as he does, let us consider the
matter over again. The Council of Lateran made a Decree concerning Deposition;
The Council of Lions assented to an actual Deposition; therefore they were both
persuaded, they, or the Pope, had power to depose. I, for my part, see not what
more can be made of it. If this Gentleman be quicker-sighted, he may, when he
thinks fit, press it as he pleases; for indeed it belongs not to me to make his
Argument for him. But taking it in this manner, which to my dullness gives it as
much strength as it will bear, let us see what force it has. Such a man as
Launoy peradventure might be apt to make an exception which would not fall in
every bodies way, and say, that whatever cla^m may be made from these Presidents
in behalf of General Councils, or Popes, in and with them, there is no color,
from them, for Popes without them. I know not whether it might not prove
troublesome enough to shake off the importunity of him, who should hang
scrupulously upon such a fancy. But I intend not to insist on it my self. For I
know not that Councils pretend to the power of Deposing; and though they
should, I should think them as unreasonable, as those who will obstinately fix
it on Popes.

For the difficulty, I admit that both Councils were persuaded that they had
power to do what they did; and observe that they do not decree this persuasion
of theirs to be true, bur something to be done in consequence of it. I observe
again, that people may be persuaded of the truth of things by motives of
several kinds: by Arguments drawn from Faith alone, or Reason alone, or both
together, by sense, experience, and the rest. I observe too, that from the
action of a good and sincere man, may be gathered his persuasion of the
lawfulness of that action; but not the qu^^ity of that persuasion, that is,
whether it proceed from Faith, or science, or any other way; no more then I can
tell when I see a Tenant pay his Rent, whether he have a Lease for years or
lives. I observe farther, that who is truly persuaded of the lawfulness of an
action, may, and does without scruple, act in consequence of that persuasion.

These things, which, I think, no body will question, being put together, it
remains to see what they will spell. The Antecedent is, These Councils were
persuaded there was in the Church a deposing power. The Conclusion which he
would have follow is, Therefore the deposing Doctrine is of Faith. Another
perhaps may infer, therefore the deposing doctrine is true. I conceive there
follows neither the one, nor the other.

To begin with the first, I see not what can be clearer, then that if that
persuasion of the Councils might proceed from any other ground, it cannot be
concluded to have proceeded from Faith, unless something more appear then the
bare persuasion. If I should go about to dilate the point, I fear the Reader
would think I had a very bad opinion of his capacity. For it is in short: of a
thing which may be done many ways, we cannot tell which way it was done, purely
by knowing that it was done; then which I think nothing can be more plain. I
think t^o less plain, that the persuasion of those who made up Councils, may
proceed from other motives then Faith: because men by ent^ing into Councils, do
not leave their former judgments at the door, but carry them in, and speak, and
vote according to them, till by conference, or otherwise they come to alter
them. That the judgments which they carry in with them are not all grounded on
Faith, admits no dispute. For we see it as plainly, and know it as certainly,
as that they are men, and have judgments. This being so, I see not how it can
be denied but men in Councils may act upon Judgments which they brought along
with them, and were grounded perhaps on other motives then Faith. Indeed when
they decree any thing to be believed by the rest of the world, or in the common
language define it, without all question, they take it for Faith themselves.
But this they have not done here, and therefore have neither laid any
obligation on us to believe any thing, nor left us any color of concluding,
because they proceeded according to their Judgments, that those Judgments*
proceeded from Faith, so much as in their own opinion.

I need say no more to ^is point, the bare possibility of the case being enough
for my purpose. For no man I am sure can convince it is thus, if it may be
otherwise. But yet to carry it on a little farther, I will add, that as far as
we have means to guess at the ground, on which their Judgments were built, we
have reason to think Faith was not that ground. For, as I observed formerly, to
Faith, speaking of Catholic Faith, there go two things. The point must have
been in the first place originally revealed by Christ, and then preserved by a
constant and uninterrupted acknowledgement of Christians. Of these two, the
later, to Catholics, is the proof of the former: they not doubting of any
Article, which has been universally and uninterruptedly believed to have been
revealed by Christ, but that it was in truth revealed by Christ.

Scripture indeed is an unquestioned, and unquestionable ground of Faith too.
But it may happen that the sense of Scripture may be controverted; as it falls
out in the present dispute: The Pasce oves and Dabo claves, and the rest, being
differently understood by the different parties. Catholics acknowledge no
means of determining a controverted sense of Scripture with absolute certainty,
but the uniform and perpetual consent of the Faithful understanding the
controverted places in a determinate sense, and witnessing that understanding
by practicing accordingly. So that to them the sense written in the hearts of
the Faithful, and appearing in their actions, is the security even of the sense
of Scripture. This point to Adversaries would ask more clearing; Catholics I
presume will not contest it, and I speak only to them. Wherefore, whether
Scripture be insisted on or no, Tradition still must warrant whatsoever can,
among Catholics, pretend to be a part of Catholic Faith. The whole stress
then will lie in this, whether those Councils were persuaded they had this
warrant, for their persuasions of the lawfulness of their actions* that is,
whether they thought the generality of Christians, in all times and places, did
believe Christ had taught, or given deposing power to the Pope. And I am much
mistaken, if he who will enter into the consideration of this matter, will not
find reason to conclude it neither likely, nor indeed possible.

For in the first place, if it could have been pretended, I do not see how it
could happen that it was not, at some time or other. We see what was alleged
in their behalf, and, by this Gentleman's favor, we see it was not Tradition.
The Councils indeed speak not for themselves, so that we have no light to guide
us, but what breaks from Popes. And from them we see nothing but the Authority
of St. Peter, to Bind and Loose, to feed the sheep, etc. in those expressions
of the Scripture, which by none of the Fathers before them were ever
interpreted in the sense they put upon them. Of the writing foretold by the
Prophet Jerem. 31. in the bowels and hearts of the house of Israel, I sinde no
mention. Now whatever others say, I suppose no Catholic will think Scripture
interpreted otherwise then for ten whole, and those the first, Ages, was ever
dreamt of, nay not only unattested, but contradicted by their doctrine and
practice, any argument of Faith, nay not even though that interpretation should
happen to be true, if we speak, as we do, of Catholic or to the generality
obligatory Faith.

To him indeed, who by his greater learning and greater diligence, should with
certainty discover the sense of any place, perhaps undiscovered before, that
discovery would beget true Faith, as to his own particular, and as many more as
by his or any means arrived to see as much as he. But this would concern no
more then themselves. The generality of Christians would neither be obliged to
examine whether they were mistaken or no, nor to believe them without
examination. And though the business belong properly to Faith, yet it partakes
much of the nature of Learning, obliging the assent of those who see the truth,
but none else so much as to look after it. But I begin to stray. What I insist
on is, that nothing has been produced, whereby it may be gathered, that the
Councils alleged thought the deposing doctrine attested, as a point of Faith
should be. Whence I conceive may be gathered, that no such thing could be
produced, and that they had no sufficient motive to take it for a point of
Faith, and therefore did not take it for such.

But not to rely on a negative proof, it is beyond dispute evident, that all
the Ages before Gregory the 7th. were positively against deposing doctrine.
They taught unanimously, that sovereign Princes were subject only to God: and
their crimes, if they committed any, to be judged by him alone. That the two
supreme Powers were independent, and neither to meddle with the other; with a
hundred such things absolutely incompatible with deposing. No exception of
Heresy, or any other case was ever dreamt of, or though it had, could have been
thought other then a dream; for no man awake, and in his wits could hope to
make it consistent with the then current doctrine. In their own time we are
told it was disputed and undetermined among Scholars. It was termed thrusting
their sickle into other men's harvest. It escaped not the imputation of novelty,
not to say heresy. For my life I cannot see how he, who, notwithstanding all
this, will maintain, it was possible these Councils should think Deposing had
always been believed by the Church, can avoid the rude irreverence of making
them utterly ignorant how the world went not only before, but even in their
days: unless, with a more unpardonable and more impossible injury, he make them
force upon themselves an assent to that, which they themselves, and all the
world besides, knew to be false.

Farther to look into the practice of former, and their own times, it is as
clear, as that there were any such times, that the case happened more then once,
wherein, had the doctrine been known, it had been very seasonable to have come
to Use and application. To pass by the carriage of Christians to Heathen
Emperors, for the, I think, unreasonable exception taken to it, it is known
that since the prevailing of Christianity there have been Emperors Apostates,
Heretics of several denominations, and Persecutors: Who, not content with
erring themselves, have employed all their industry and power to force those
errors upon their Subjects: who have taken away the Churches from Catholics,
and given them to the favorite sects; afflicted their persons with
imprisonment, banishment, death. And all this found nothing but patience and
obedience from them. A zealous Prelat would now and then proceed to
Excommunication, and acknowledge and obey the excommunicate Prince when he, had
done But there was the Non plus ultra. Knowledge of their own strength, and the
easy means they had to make resistance, never tempted their subjects to resist.
In their own days, They saw there were soldiers to fight for deposed Princes,
Scholars to write for them, Bishops to hold Councils, and preserve the
reputation of Religion to their party. Reconcile this who can with a persuasion
in the cited Councils, that Deposing was warranted by the perpetual practice of
Christians, who with their own eyes saw Christians practicing otherwise. Though
the example of former times be enough for our purpose. For they were
inexcusable for not putting this doctrine in practice in their circumstances,
if they knew it: and if they knew it not, it is undeniable that it could not
come to after ages by succession, the only way by which Faith can come.

Again, who can think this doctrine was formerly held of Faith, when we see it
is not so now? Of the Abbettors of it, few will stand steddily to it, that it
is down right Faith: most plainly acknowledge it is not. Because he shall say
he has met with a fair Gamester, I will put it even to this Gentleman himself,
who for all his big words I verily believe is of the same mind. Not that I do
so much as suspect him of insincerity, or that he speaks not according to his
judgment when he says, and would prove his opinion, is of Faith. But I think
this judgment of his, grounded on speculation, or perhaps prejudicate
education, is contradicted by another grounded in nature, more deeply rooted,
and a stronger principle of his actions. For truly I cannot think he would for
any good communicate, in holy things, with men, whom he takes for flat
heretics. I cannot think he makes any difficulty to communicate thus with
those of the opposite way: for example, to receive or give Absolution, or the
Holy Sacrament, etc. to, or from them. I suppose whatever he says, he acts in
this manner without distinction between the one and the other as to these
matters.

But if he should be more scrupulously nice, then I have any reason to suspect,
I must tell him he would run away by himself, and set up a practice of
Christianity different from what is publicly owned in the face of the Church.
In France there are men of both persuasions; the one side finds the doors open
at S. Louis, the other at Port Royal, and as they see fit perform the dutys of
Christianity in either place, none enquiring of them what they hold in this
point. This the Church in France, and out of France, sees and blames not. To go
about with scrupulous noveltys to alter this settled custom, would, I believe be
looked upon as little less then setting up Altar against Altar. However, while
things are carried in this manner, while Churches, Confession-seats, Altars,
and whatever belongs to the exercise of Christianity are free for this
persuasion, he that will say, this persuasion is by the Church taken for
Heresy, must say that Heresy is by the Church admitted to Communion in all the
most holy things. And who will say, that though it pass not in the Church for
Heresy, yet intruth it is so, must say, there is a point of Faith lost, and the
Church has forgotten something taught her by Christ. Both which, if this
Gentleman think not inconvenient, I for my part think impossible.

I am not ignorant that Card. Perron tells us, the Pope tolerates doctrine
contrary to his own, for the good of the Churches peace. But then he must
suppose the Pope does not take his own doctrine for Faith, otherwise he could
not have made him a worse complement. This is as much as to sail, that the Pope
tolerates the casting of the Churches pearl to swine; the prostitution of the
Sacraments, and whatever is most holy, to great, and unrepenting, and obstinate
sinners; (for such the Cardinal, I suppose, takes Heretics to be) suffers his
sheep to go astray, and, without regard to his pastoral duty, freely to feed on
the poisonous herbs of Heresy, etc. And all this for the good of the Church. As
if any thing could be more contrary to the good of the Church, then to give the
right hand of fellowship to Heretics.

It Is so far from good, that it is most plainly ruinous to the Church. For when
once Heretics enter into her communion, she ceases to be a company of
Faithful. Neither indeed can Heresy be tolerated in a Church; in a state it
may; and it is often expedient it should. But that Church unchurches it self
which gives admittance to Heresy, I mean so as to acknowledge for members those
who profess it: nor can there be a plainer contradiction in the world then that
a man should at once be an Heretic, and a Member of the Church, or an
Heretic, and a not-Heretick. But the Cardinal understood the world better then
to let these things be obtruded on the Pope, and so tells us presently after,
that, He is contented to hold his own opinion true, and the contrary erroneous,
without binding us to hold his opinion necessary as matter of Faith, and the
other Heretical. And therefore I think it but a reasonable request to this
Gentleman, to allow us the same liberty the Pope does, and be contented with
what contents the Pope. However I think I may safely conclude we have all the
reason in the world to believe, that the persuasion of the Councils, implied in
their proceedings, actually was framed on other grounds then Faith. (though, as
I said before, that be more then needs, it being sufficient to my purpose that
it might be so.) And consequently that to infer from their persuasions, that
what they were persuaded of, was Faith to them, and ought be so to us, a very
groundless, is, and very false inference.

Let us now turn to the second head, and consider whether at least it will not
follow, that it was True. To make this consequence good, They hold it,
therefore it is true, it is evidently necessary to add this universal,
Whatsoever Councils hold is true, and because Faith is set aside, Whatever they
hold, not by Faith, but Reason, by way ^^discourse. Put this proposition now to
Divines; They will tell u^ the Definitions of Councils are obligatory; the
reasons alleged, even by themselves, are not. This I think is plainly to say,
that the firmness of their Definitions is to be refounded into something
stronger then their discoursive facultys: and to acknowledge the Reasons even
of Councils, and judgments grounded on those reasons, in as much as they
depend on them, may be faulty. Put it to the sense of the Faithful, and we
find them expecting indeed from the providence of God, that Councils be exempt
from error in Faith, and manners flowing from it; but not in other things. And
this is to say, that in our case, where Faith is excluded, no infallibility is
believed. Wherefore he who will pretend we are obliged to conform our assent to
the persuasions of Councils, when those persuasions are bred purely by
discourse, pretends we are obliged to take for true, what I think all the
learned, and all the Faithful of the Church are persuaded may be otherwise. The
truth is, when Councils leave their proper work Defining, or declaring to
Posterity the Faith received from their Ancestors, and fall to discoursing, or
rather acting on discourses formerly made, which is more properly our case,
they are not in strict formality, Councils. I mean in that propriety in which
they are held to be infallible, but men assembled to be a Council, and
proceeding now not as a Council, but as so many men.

Whatever be of that matter, because in the way of discourse there is no
security against error, but science, or seeing what p^etends to be received for
true, connected with some other foreknown Truth whether natural or revealed:
and nature endures not we should be obliged to receive for true, that of which
we can have no security that it is so: this connection of the persuasion of the
Councils with some acknowledged Truth, must appear, before we can be obliged to
own that persuasion for true. Had there been any, I suppose it would have been
produced by some body, in so long time as this question has been canvased in
the world. In the mean time we have no reason, till it do appear, to believe
there is any which can appear: and to urge us, before, to take their
persuasions for true, is plainly to urge us to do, what we have no reason to do.

That actually those persuasions were not true, all those must hold, who hold
the deposing doctrine false. And they have to say for themselves, that it is a
new doctrine begun in the 11th. age, against the doctrine and practice of ten
Ages before: That it is opposite to the doctrine of Christ, who taught us that
his Kingdom was not of this world; and by his Apostle that of necessity, we are
to be subject to the temporal power, and this for conscience, and that who
resist it procure their own damnation: That it confounds the two supreme and
independent powers, and the obedience of their subjects, rendering it impossible
to know how to carry themselves, when those powers clash, and secure themselves
from falling either to God or Casar: That with an impracticable and impossible
project it ^ets up one universal Monarch both in Spirituals and Temporals; of
which inconvenience the verbal evasions which are alleged, when they come to
be fi^ted prove merely verbal: with the rest of what they urge, who appear for
that way. As I am no farther concerned then to answer the Argument in hand,
viz. Councils proceeded on contrary persuasions; therefore that doctrine is
false. I shall content my self with saying, upon the warrant of the reasons
before alleged, that it is a weak and unconclvsive Argument, and that to
stretch it farther, to engage Faith and the Church for that side, is much
weaker.

Because the question moved by the Author of the Preface to these Treatises,
concerning Transubstantiation, belongs to the Coancil of Lateran, I think it
best, before I pass farther, to gratify his desire, but briefly, and as is
proper for one who is about other business. For the difference he would see,
betwixt the coming in of Transubstantiation and Deposition: we hold the one
came in with Christianity, the other is not come in yet. And flatly deny what
he assumes, that the same approbation of the Church is, or can be produced for
both. For what he says, that they have the same Popes and Councils for them, I
understand not what it can mean more, then the Authority of the Council, and
the Pope who held it. And by what has been said I conceive he will observe
difference enough betwixt the two doctrines. The one was plainly defined, the
other barely supposed. The Definition agreed with the Law written in the hearts
of the Faithful: the supposition shockt it. And so the one was readily
embraced: the other could never get quiet possession. Besides if he think
Transubstantiation has all its firmness from this Council, I beseech him, in my
turn, to reflect, how it happens, that it is believed by those who perhaps never
heard of the Council. Or if they did, do not value it, as having left communion
with the Sea of Rome, long before the Council was held. I beseech him again to
be contented with this little: thinking it very improper to enter far into the
Merits of such a cause as Transubstantiation, which deserves and requires exact
handling, in a Treatise of another subject. To mingle such disparate matters is
but to spoil both.

The 5th. point which he will undertake to show is, That all Catholic Divines
and Casuists that have treated of it, from the first to the last (before Calvin's
time) in all the several Nations of Christendom, have asserted this power of
the Pope, without so much as one contradicting it in all that time. This
Topic, I must confess, frighted me. For what? Must a man be obliged to read
all the Divines and all the Casuists of all the Nations in Christendom before
Calvin? Has this Gentleman who so confidently undertakes for all, read half of
them? Can he answer there is a man in the world who has? If to see the truth of
this allegation be necessary to the decision of the question, the question
never will be decided. If it may be decided at all, it must be by some other
means, and the allegation is plainly impertinent.

But I must tell him it is impertinent on another score. Divines and Casuists
are Scholars, men who undertake to prove what they say; and when their proof
is good, what they say is to be accepted for the sake of that proof, not for
theirs. For they may and do often mistake, and are freely and irreprehensibly
contradicted every day. Wherefore let what he says be supposed true, which
whether it be or no, neither he or any man else can tell: and I believe before
we have done, there will appear some reason to think it not true: but yet let
it be allowed, that all Divines, and all Casuists, and all Canonists, whom he
afterward adds, have asserted this doctrine: I ask whether in this great
crowd, there be any one who has brought a convincing proof of what he says? If
there be, let that proof be produced; for that alone will do the business. No
matter who says it, or whether any besides himself ere thought of it. But if
there be none, the thing remains still unprov'd; for the sayings of ten times
as many more without proof, does not make proof.

If this Gentleman think number signifys any thing in this case, it will
concern him to teach us, how multitude gives authority to those, who pretend to
none but in virtue of their proofs, and which way many not-provers should
become provers.

And when all is done, though he could produce this proof, (which if he thought
he could, I suppose he would not send us to look for it where possibly it is not
to be found) it would not be enough for his undertaking. For he takes upon him
to prove his opinion to be Faith, and proof from Scholars, stretch it to the
uttermost, will not reach farther then to prove it true, which a thing may be,
and not be Faith neither. So that by the favor of this Gentleman's learning,
this big sounding Topic is wondrous slender in point of sense: and when he
has shown it, he will only have showed himself ^ mighty well-read man in
things, which deserve not altogether such pains.

But how will he show it too? For to my thinking, it is something a difficult
matter, to crowd such a number of Authors into the small space he has left of
his short Treatise. You may, says he, see it abundantly proved by that
admirable man Card* Perron in his Oration, etc. Truly that speech is something
longer then this writing; but yet Cardinal Perron is an admirable man indeed,
if he can make it* though it were longer then it is, hold them all. But I
observe it is with this Gentleman as with the generality of the world, among
whom performances ar^ not altogether so large as promises. He undertakes for
all Catholic Divines and Casuists, and when he comes to make good this
undertaking, these All shrink into scholastical Divines, etc. Alas! was there
no Divinity in the world; no skill in cases and the Laws of the Church, before
the School? Are the Fathers no body, or have they said nothing relating to this
matter? Does it no way concern us, That the Clemency of God and tears of
Christians are their only remedy against Persecutors? That to resist otherwise
then with tears and sighs, Priests neither ought nor can. That Princes have
none on Earth who may correct them: That Kings are free from the bonds of
delinquency. That no laws punish them who are safe by the power of their
Empire, and not accountable to men. That the spiritual Key extends not it self
to Temporals without arrogance. That the Church has no power but spiritual: and
that to quick^n not kill. That the Bishop has no power to meddle with the
Palace, and Regal dignity. That Popes, holy and wise and great Popes professed
they ought obedience to Emperors, and were subject to their commands. This was
doctrine taught in the Church before Calvin, by those who past for Divines in
their days, and if this Gentleman would but give them his good word, I think
might do so still. And this doctrine being evidently irreconcilable with a
power in the Pope, which extends to temporals, corrects Princes with temporal
penaltys, causes them to be resisted by violence and Arms, in fine* with
deposing doctrine: it is evidently undeniable, that some Catholic Divines have
not asserted that power of the Pope.

However because he says the Cardinal has proved the contrary, we will wait on
the Cardinal, if only for the curiosity of seeing an impossible thing once come
to pass. There the proof dwindles again, into those of his own Nation. Of these
he names half a dozen, who, he says, have more exalted the Popes power, and
whose words he therefore forbears to cite. And it is very likely that more then
six have exalted the Popes power above what is fitting. Those whose words he
quotes, are S. Thomas, (reckoning him among the French, because he studied and
wrote in France,) Occam, John of Paris, Almain, and Gerson: choosing them,
because they specify the case of Heresy or Apostasy, and because the four last
have written in behalf of Princes against Popes.

St. Thomas s^ys, the dominion of Infidels way be taken away by the 2. 2. q.
10. a. 10. 2. 2. q. 12. ^. 2. Comment. ^n Ep. ad Corinth.
Church, and that by Excommunication for Apostasy in Faith, subjects are
obsolv'd from subjection, and the Oath of Fidelity. And St. Thom^^ says
elsewhere, that subjection even to infidel Princes is by divine right, and that
for that reason, the faithful cannot ^e hindered from appearing before their
Tribunals. So that in this matter he is looked upon as not thoroughly settled, and
constant to himself, and may be let alone. The reason he gives of the first
assertion, is because I^fidel Princes deserve to lose their dominion. Which is
sufficiently canvast betwixt Bellarmin and the two Barclays; to whom they may
resort, whose curiosity will carry them so far. It seems odd enough, to make
Demerit in them a premise to infer Power in the Pope: nor can I imagine which
way they will be joined together. Since St. Thomas himself has not connected
them, I conceive it belongs to him to do it, who expects this authority should
work upon us. Of the 2d. I see no reason at all, save that it is insinuated*
that Apostasy may do a great deal of harm. But how that harm should make a
spiritual censure have a temporal effect, neither S. Thomas says, nor any body
I think can understand. In cases of Temptation from imminent dangers; the
Christian remedy as I conceive, is a more diligent and careful practice of
virtue, and obedience to Princes in lawful matters I always took to be one.

The next is Occam, who says the Pope cannot ordinarily depose Emperors or
Kings, if his fault be not of the number of spiritual crimes. Lib. 8. quest. q.
2. ^. 8.
And it is true, that Occam says so, but whether he thought so, is uncertain.
For he declares he will not discover what he held himself, but only so relate
what is alleged on both sides, as to conceal to which he adhears. And so gives
the words cited for an answer which some make to an objection urged in behalf
of the Pope; but tells us in the same place, that there are others who say, the
Popes who deposed the Emperors, Otho and Frederic, did amiss; usurping a power
which they had not. And elsewhere he says, there is, Dial. p. 3. Tract. 1. c.
13. 16.
among diverse others, one opinion which gives the Pope a plenitude of power,
that is of doing whatever is not contrary to the law of God and nature, and
this by Devine Right; according to which he may depose Princes, etc. not
regularly, but on occasion, Casualiter, as he calls it. But he says too, there
is another, which denis the Pope has any such power, whether by Divine or
Humane right, whether regularly or casually. So that by the Cardinals favor,
it is manifest out of this Author, whom he produces for the contrary, that
there were before Calvin's time, Divines who, without any exception of Heresy,
or the like, flatly denied the deposing power.

John of Paris is cited in this manner: If a Prince were an Heretic and
incorrigible, and a contemner of the Churches censure, the Pope might do
something in the behalf of (he should have said, In, or among, or with) the
people: whereof might ensu^, that he should be deprived of his secular dignity,
and deposed by the people. And this the Pope may do in an Ecclesiastical crime
(for so the words would be rendered) the cognizance whereof appertains to him,
viz. by excommunicating all them who should obey such an one as their Lord. And
there the Cardinal stops. It follows in the same period, And so the people
would depose him, and the Pope by accident. Then he adds, so likewise on the
other side, if a Pope should be criminal, and scandalize the Church, and be
incorrigible, The Prince might Excommunicate him indirectly, and depose him by
accident, namely, by moving, (perhaps admonishing for I suspect an error in the
press) him by himself and the Cardinals. And if the Pope would not acqui^sce,
he might do something with the people, by which the Pope should be compelled to
yield, and be deposed by the people: because the Emperor under corporal
penaltyes, and forfeit of their goods, might forbid all and every one to obey
and (...) the Pope, and th^^ they can do one to another. If I understand
English, what John of Paris says, is, that Deposition is wro^ght, not by the
Pope, but people, and that the Popes part in it is no other, then the part of
Princes in Excommunication. And because he says also (and this is the very
period whereof the Cardinal ^i^es a part) that the utmost penalty which the
Ecclesiastical ^^dge can (...) Excommunication, or some such spiritual penalty,
and that he (...) more, unless by accident, that is according to his
exp^^^ation* a^ a Prince can Excommunicate* I conceive he says (...) cannot
depose, and that here is another Divine before (...) who ^ays, what this
Gentleman would persuade ^s none ever did.

Out of Alm^in the Cardinal brings two places* The first makes Occam ^ay, that
in case a secular Prince (...) his (...) to the ruin of Christianism or Faith,
it is not to be denied (Almains words are, Occam denis not) but that the Pope
may depose him, though other Doctors deny it. And here again I think it is
plain, that there were Doctors who denied the deposing power, whatever Occam
did, who as has been observed before argues, and answers according to the
several opinions, then on ^oot relating all, and standing to none. The second
barely mentions the two places out of Occam, and John of Paris, before set
down, by way of relation, without any addition of moment.

Gerson says, The power Ecclesiastic ought not to presume, or usurp De
Ecclesias. and Politica Potest. C^^sid. 12.
over the Rights, Dignitys, Laws, and Judgments of the secular power, but when
the abusing of the secular power redounds to the impugnation of Faith, and
blasphemy of the Creator and manifest injury of the power Ecclesiastic. For
then a remembrance must be had of the last clause of this Consideration; that
in these cases the power Ecclesiastic has a certain dominion regitive,
directive, regulative, and ordinative. Truly this is not so much, as, I am
persuaded will freely be allowed. The Anti-Deposers, forasmuch as I can gather
by their writings, will not boggle at a Coercive too, provived it keep within
its proper bound, of spirituality. I think they make no doubt but if a Layman,
whether private man or Prince, do any thing contrary to the Law of God, the
Ecclesiastical power may, nay, ought direct, and regulate, and order, and
govern this man according to that Law, (which is all that Gerson says here,)
and also by seperating him from the communion of the saithful, and
participation of the benefits of the Church, compel him. But they do not think
the temporal goods, which he abuses, may therefore be taken from him by the
Ecclesiastical power. This Gerson says not. On the contrary in his 4th.
Consideration, he delivers his opinion for the opposite, in the modest way of
intitling it to others. There are says he, who say that this (viz.
Excommunication) is the last penalty which the Ecclesiasticai power of
Jurisdiction can inflict by the sole primary institution of Christ: what they
do more, as when they imprison, or punish corporally, being by the concession
of Princes.

These are all the Divines, whose words are produced by the Cardinal. Whereof
four flatly say the contrary of what he pretends, and 5th. speaks on both
sides, but with a good reason when he is against him, and none when he is for
him. And this is the abundant proof of all Divines, and all Nations which this
Gentleman promised. There are besides 2 or 3 Canonists alleged, with whom I
will have nothing to do, because I think they have not much to do with the
business. They are to tell us what the Pope has commanded. What power he has to
command I conceive we are to learn of some body else. And so much for the
abundant proof.

But there is besides, as he says, a convincing one. And that is, that neither
Withrington, nor any body else, before Calvin, has been able to produce so much
as one Catholic Author that denied this power in the Pope absolutely, or in
any case whatsoever. If this be true, they are the more beholding to Cardinal
Perron who has produced such Authors for them. But have not they produced them
too? Have they not added others, who say, that whether the Pope can depose an
Emperor (without exception of Heresy or other case) is a question debated among
scholars, and undetermined: That it is a novelty not to say heresy: That if
these depositions of Kings and Emperors, Translations of Empire and the rest,
should move the Pope to do the like, he must know, if Religion and Humility
would permit, they might all be truly and most clearly answered. Have they not
brought others who teach doctrine absolutely inconsistent with his Tenet; as
the Independency of the two powers, the confinement of the Ecclesiastical to
spiritual matters, the subjection of Princes to God alone, etc. If he will say
these determine not the question, because they speak not particularly of the
Pope, and deposing, and Heresy, he may as rationally say, that nothing was
taught contrary to Arianism before the Council of Nice, because the word
Consubstantial was then first used. In short, this is to say, there is no meat
on the board, because it is not served up as he would have it. And if this
Argument convince any thing, it is, that he has taken little heed to what has
been said on the other side.

The 6th and last head is, that all Catholic Emperors, Kings (yea even they
who were deposed) States, Magistrates, and Lawyers, and finally, all the
Catholics in the world, for the time being, have (by tacit consent at least)
approved and received this Doctrine of Popes, Divines, and Casuists, and these
Censures, Canons, and Practices of Popes and general Councils. Magnificently
said! Why what a glorious noise does this approbation of the whole world make?
How do you show this, I beseech you? for this is worth seeing. Have you
National Acts of all the Countries in Christendom to produce, wherein these
doctrines and practices are approved and received? On the contrary, are there
not some Catholics, and some Magistrates, who to your knowledge do not approve
and receive them, and whom you call wicked Catholics, and in damnable error
for their pains? I pray, Sir, let us see your proof. Truly you must excuse him
for that matter. It is too severe to expect the performance of impossibilitys.
And so he never so much as goes about to bring any proof at all of this big
undertaking. The terrible cloud, which threatens the approbation of all the
world, vanishes at last into the thin imperceptible mist of tacit consent. And
so much if you will allow him, why so. If not, you may let it alone as he does:
for he takes no more care about that neither, then barely to say it.

Now I would fain know what this tacit consent means. The world, as it must
always happen, was on those occasions divided into Concerned, and Unconcerned
People who were unconcerned did then, as they always did, and always will do,
look on, and see what is past, and mind their own business, and let others do
what they think fit in theirs. May this be what he calls tacit consent? If
their acting, or rather not acting, in this manner signify their consent,
plainly they consented to both sides, to what was done against, as well as what
was done for the Pope. Besides I have not heard silence interpreted for
consent, unless where persons are concerned to speak; and then if they hold
their tongues, they may be thought to like that, of which they show no dislike.
Otherwise silence may be an Argument of noconcern, but none of consent.

For the Concerned, though he have discovered the gift he has of confidence
more then once. yet I cannot but wonder to see it could carry him to make them,
too, of the party, and all, and always, the very deposed Princes themselves and
all. May we in earnest rely upon it? For methinks it is strange, that all
deposed Princes should submit quietly, without making any bustle; and the world
hear no more on it. Was there never any opposition, no complaints in words, no
desence of those complaints by deeds? To bid like a fair Chapman, can he name
the single Prince, for whose tacit consent he can so undertake, as to perform
when he has done? This I am sure, that the two he names, Frederick the 2d and
Henry the 4th, were not altogether so meek. The first kept his Empire, in spite
of all opposition, till his death, and in the mean time afflicted the Pope, and
his partakers, with calamities which made him weary of his Life. The other made
a woeful bustle for many years, overcame diverse of the Competitors set up
against him, and held good till his own son, as he complains, shamefully
betrayed him, and forced him to resign. And after all, was in a fair way of
recovering all again, when death put an end to his life, and the quarrel
together, the only end which the business had.

Saving his better judgment, I should think these things made some noise, and
cannot very properly be termed tacit, nor consent, nor approbation neither,
unless Enemies be said to approve one another quarrel, who are together by the
ears about it. I should think too that these two Princes could not make all
this bustle alone, and that they had some, and a great many, who took their
parts, and that strongly and constantly; and that these were Catholics, unless
it be shown of what Heresy they were guilty. For as for the Henrician Heresy,
then coined to reproach them with, it signifys no more then opposers of the
Pope. And the question being whether those opposers were Catholic, it is to
beg it, to say they were not, but Henricians: or in other words, the opposers
were not Catholics, but opposers.

Their actions therefore plainly show little consent. Let us hear their words.
He tells us. p. 11 that the Emperor Frederick never excepted to the sentence
against him, as given a non Judice. I cannot tell which failed him, his
Information, or his memory; but one was much too blame. By his often citing
Matthew Paris I should guess he had read him. And it is strange he should forget
what the Emperor writes in a letter to the Prelates and Nobility of England, set
down in the year 1646. The words are these, Considerent etiam, etc, Consider
also what Justice is to be reputed in the process issued out against us: or by
what name it must go, if it may be called a sentence which is published by an
Incompetent Judge. For although at the suggestion of our Catholic Faith,
according to our duty, we do openly confess, that a full power in spirituals is
given by God to the Bishop of the Roman See, how great a sinner soever (which
God forbid) he be, so that what he binds on Earth is bound in Heaven, and what
he loosens is loosed; yet it is no where read, that it is granted to him by
Divine or humane Law, that he may at his pleasure transfer Empires, or judge of
temporally punishing the Kings and Princes of the Earth by deposing them from
their Kingdoms.

Again, in his letter to the King the year before, Quid enim vobis, etc. For
what is not every particular King of his particular Kingdom to fear from the
face of such a Prince of the Priesthood? if we both by solemn Election of the
Princes, and approbation of the whole Church, while it flourisht with the Faith
and Religion of the Clergy, honored from Heaven with the Imperial crown, and
magnificently governing other noble Kingdoms, be attempted to be deposed by
him* whom it concerns not to exercise any severity upon us, as to damage in
Temporals, although just causes were made out. But we are neither the first nor
the last, whom the abuse of sacer dotal power does thus molest, and endeavor to
throw down from the top to the bottom.

In another letter to the French, he speaks thus: Cum per aliquot, etc. Ap. Jo.
Barcl. infinc Lib.
Because we do with good reason hold our selves, and other Kings, Princes of
the world, and Noblemen having Kingdoms, Principalities, honors of whatever
kind, and Jurisdiction, agriev'd by some preceding and the present Bishop of
the Roman See, in this, That They, contrary to God and Justice usurp to
themselves a power, Jurisdiction, and Authority to set up Emperors, Kings and
Princes, or whatsoever Potentates, and pulling down, or removing them from
their Empire, Kingdoms, Principalitys, and Honors, exercising temporal
Authority temporally over them, absolving also Vassals from the Oaths by which
they are tied to their Lords, only by promulgating the sentence of
Excommnnication against those Lords, etc. I forbear to enquire how it happened,
that he could so much mistake in what he says of this Emperor. But I think that
it is very plain he did mistake, and that this Emperor speaks too loudly and
positively to pass for a tacit Consenter.

Henry the 4th. delivers his sentiments in the letter formerly cited by this
Gentleman. Sed Tu, etc. But you took our humility for fear, And therefore have
not feared to rise up against the very Regal power granted us by God, which you
have dared to threaten to take away from us, as if we had received our Kingdom
from you: as if Kingdoms and Empires were in your, and not in Gods hand, etc.
Again, But what says the true Pope St. Peter? Fear God, Honor the King. But
you, because you do not fear God, have dishonored me his substitute. Whence
St. Paul where he spares not an Angel from Heaven if he preach otherwise, has
not excepted you teaching otherwise on Earth. For he says: If any, whether I,
or an Angel from Heaven Evangelize to you otherwise then we have Evangeliz'd,
let him be Anathema. You then condemned by this Anathema, and the judgment of
all our Bishops, descend, etc. What think you Sir? does he tacitly consent to
that Popes doctrine and proceedings, who tells him, that his attempt upon Regal
power, incurred the Anathema of the Apostle? It should seem too there were
Bishops also, more then one, who concurred with him in these sentiments, and
consented no more then He.

Suitably in his letter to Ann^ Arch Bishop of Cole^, he speaks thus. Vt enim.
For to mention a few things of many: He has usurpt to himself, without the
privity of God, both Kingdom and Priesthood. In which he has contemned the
pious ordination of God, who would have the two, that is the Kingdom and
Priesthood, consist principally in two, not in one, etc. He has studied also to
deprive me, whom God called to the Kingdom, not him to the Priesthood, of my
Kingdom, because he saw I would hold it from God, not from him, because he made
me not King, threatening to take from me both Kingdom and life, whereof he gave
neither. This too in my opinion sounds nothing like consent. It is plain he
dissented, and dissented on those grounds which move others to dissent now,
viz. the disjunction and Independency of the two supreme powers, taught by the
Fa^hers.

I will add a passage out of the nameless Author, who writes, this Emperors
life, a friend indeed to him, but no enemy to the Pope. Having said, the Pope,
surreptitioufly deluded, by the crimes saign'd against him, and the honor of
creating a King deceitfully offered him, excommunicated the King, and absolved
his subjects from the Oath which they had taken to him: He adds, which Fact
displeased many (if it be lawful to be displeased at what the Pope does) and
they affirmed that what was done, was done both inefficaciously, and
unlawfully. But I dare not set down their assertions, lest I seem with them to
condemn the Popes doings. By this again it appears, that there were
disapprovers, and many, in those days, as well as now. And it appears too why
they make no more noise. People were shy to censure the actions of Popes. And
so they are still. And I hope it will be no imputation upon Catholics, that
Inferiors are possessed with respect for their Superiors.

In the latter contests betwixt the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, and his
contemporary Popes, the world was still the same. There is extant in Goldastus
an Information, in behalf of the Emperor against the Pope, which alleges
several reasons for the nullity of the Popes proceedings. The first is, The
Pope, however Catholic and lawful he be, has not power, nor authority, or
Jurisdiction in Temporals, and chiefly over the rights of the Empire, which is
immediately from God. Again, whence also appears, that these sentences were
pron^unced by ano^-Judge since the Pope is not Judge of the Emperor in
temporals, how much less in a cause of the Empire, of which Temporals depend,
as appears, etc. I had not cited this passage for the Authors sake Ioannes de
Ianduno (for it bears his name) who I suspected might be Ioannes de Ianduno,
one who passes for an Heretic, if the preface had not informed me the true
Author was Henricus de Chal^e^, a Friar, and Chancellor of the Emperor, in
whose defense he writes. Not but that he too is branded with suspicion, at
least of Heresy, by the Pope. But neither did the Pope himself escape free. And
should we hearken to none, who are aspersed with that reproach on the one side,
or the other, perhaps there will remain no body to give us information what
past in those days.

This Emperor was contemporary with Edward the 3d. of England. What has happened,
of this nature, since that time, is pretty fresh in our memories, and needs not
be looked for in books. By what is said, I think we may safely conclude, the
world was then, as now, divided into Approvers, and Disapprovers of Deposing
doctrine: and that there was no time in which there were not Disapprovers, save
when there were no Approvers. For I think it something a harder task to show,
that Deposing doctrine has always been in the world, then that it was not
contested, when it did appear. And yet that is so hard, that this Gentleman, as
confidently as he undertakes it, has not brought one single word to prove it:
and we have seen plain enough why he could not.

There remains the Conclusion, in which assuming, in confidence of his proofs,
that his doctrine has been, (for one Age at least) the Doctrine of the Church,
he infers; If it be an Error the Church was at that time a wicked Church; if
otherwise, those are wicked men who oppose it. I have given my reasons why I
conceive his proofs will not bear him out, to fix his Doctrine on the Church.
It Is the Readers right to judge between us: and to him I leave it.

But suppose I should say, that since the Church is a Congregation of Faithful,
and Faithful are men, that word Church may signify either the Faithful, or the
men. Suppose too that all the men of the Church, should at some time, have held
his doctrine, which is a great deal more then can be proved, because indeed it
is not true; but yet suppose it. If he will infer from this supposition, the
Church held it, the word Church, to make his inference true, must be taken
materially, in the latter sense. Otherwise, according to the Catholic method,
the men of the Church bear not the denomination of a Church, but where they
hold from Christ, un-interrupted Tradition. And till he make it appear they
hold his doctrine in this manner, they may hold it as long as they will, and as
many as they will, and not hold it as Faithful, but as Scholars, or how you
will.

If he infer farther, the Church held it, therefore the Church was a wicked
Church: because Church, unless the contrary be declared, is understood in the
first sense, formally: The Argument is a plain Sophism, taking the word Church
in a different signification, materially in the Antecedent, formally in the
Conclusion.

But will it follow at least, that all the men of the Church were, in that
supposition, wicked, and in damnable error? First, I should think this is no
such ruinous inconvenience, though it were admitted. For since All, in this
case, can signify no more then those All, who concerned themselves in the
question, which the far greatest part of Catholic mankind cannot rationally
be thought to have done; though All these were damned, there would still remain
enough, in whose salvation the perpetual goodness of God, and care of his
creatures, would sufficiently appear.

Yet I cannot think that even so much would follow. They would indeed be in
error; neither has God promised any security against it, but in his doctrine,
and the voice of the Church to tell us which it is. If men will go otherways,
it is at their own peril. But I see no necessity, that this Error should damn,
or fix the name of wicked upon them. To be deceived in speculation, and act
upon a deceived, so it be a sincere judgment, I have not heard has undergon
these harsh censurs in other cases

I* but it is a damnable sin to withstand the rights of Princes; to be the
occasion of war, and Bloodshed, etc. To withstand indeed is damnable; but I do
not understand it is so to mistake them. Likewise to make an unjust war is
damnable, but if it be thought just, though falsely, yet uprightly, sure there
is hope of mercy, or more Christians are in a damnable state upon this account,
then for denying the deposing doctrine. Alas! The Rights, even of Princes are
not things fixed by the eternal law of God, in an Indivisible point, beyond
which if a man happen to tread, he stumbles irrecoverobly into Hell. They
depend on humane constitutions, and are greater here, less there, different
every where. They may be, and every day are mistaken, and Princes prosecute
these mistakes (for when they differ, they cannot both be in the right) by
Arms. Yet if their own conscience condemn them not, no body else does that I
know. Churchmen may mistake them as will as others. They having no privilege,
that I know, to secure them from error, but by sticking to the S^mper and
Vbique and ab omnibus. Which rule whether it be appliable to this case, or at
least to all circumstances of it, may possibly be a question: but I know no
other they have. And when they do mistake, I see not why they are more wicked,
or their errors more concern the Church then those of the Laity in the same
case. But this I only think by the by, to show there are more ways to the wood
then one, if there were occasion, and that I took his, more by choice than
necessity. I thought it needless to beat out a new path while there lay one
plain and easy before me. For indeed his opinion was never universal at any
time. The quarrel, for the most part, was betwixt Pope and Emperor. Italians
and Germans sided part with one, part with the other. Not Armies only, but
Councels too, were on both sides. Who thinks in the choice of partys, they were
all guided purely by conscience, I doubt has little observed the Historys of
those times: in which, besides other things, we find they frepuently changed
sides, as their Interest led them. Other Nations looked unconcernedly on, till
it came to their own doors; and then they did as much as they thought
expedient, not always all they thought lawful. And so it remains at this day,
when People act not, till occasion prompt them, and then are guided in their
Actions by expedience. In the mean time, for reverence to the Pope, private men
according to the example of their Ancestors, if ^hey think contrary to what the
Pope does, are willing to keep their thoughts to themselves. And that is the
reason, as I conceive, of that silence, from whence he takes occasion to infer
a tacit consent.

To take leave of this Gentleman and his Argument at last, and even accounts at
parting: six of his ten proofs, that is more then half of the whole, belong to
the Head of the Pope, which would have been granted without one, and when it is
so, does not do the business, I think, even in his own Judgment. Three more,
whereof one I thought needless to take notice of, belong to the Councils of
Lateran and Lions, which how he would apply, he leaves us to guess. The
remaining one sends us to Cardinal Perron, where how we speed, you have heard.
And for his 6th. Head, which sounds so big, there is no proof at all. And this
is the sum total of his performance.

The Argument is borrowed from Cardinal Perron where it shows a great deal
better, dressed up in the ornaments of Rhetoric, then stripped and exposed naked,
as his Logic presents it. It is in short; All Catholics at one time held so
and so, therefore the Church did. Whereof the Antecedent is manifestly false:
and if it were true, the Conclusion would not follow. He ends with a touch upon
the Sorbonists, Friars, and Blacloists, to whom if he have a pique, methinks
some other pretense of quarrel might have been thought of, besides their
Fidelity to their Prince and Country. For sure that is not a crime which can
justly deserve his displeasure, and couple them with Libertines, and
Politicians and Atheists. And yet, to see how the world goes, quippi^^g
language is not the worst, which some of them have suffered, upon that account.
But they are men who can speak for themselves, ^if they please, and I love not
to thrust my sickle into other folks harvest.

AN ANSWER TO THE Second Treatise.
CHAP. I. II.
WE are now come to another Author, and indeed another Question. Whether
Deposing be Catholic Doctrine, being very different from, Whether the Oath of
Allegiance may be taken. This Gentleman declines the first, saying it is as far
from his thoughts, as foreign to his P. 2.
purpose. In which I must at the very first dissent from him. For I conceive
that all else is foreign to this purpose. But it being certainly foreign to
both our Purposes, the satisfaction of the Reader, to detain him long with
useless Preambles, I think it best, without more ado, to fall to the business.

The first Chapter is spent in stating the Question, which he sollicitously I.
puts us in mind is not, Whether a Catholic may deny, etc. the Popes Power to
depose Princes, but Whether he may deny, etc. by Oath, and universally abjure
it? To deny, and to deny by Oath, are indeed different things: but yet in this
case, not to deny by Oath, I suspect will be thought to amount to, not to deny.
It is true, in ordinary conversation, we often say what we would be loath to
swear. We speak unadvertingly, on slight surmises, or idle hear-says, and are
so understood. If we say what proves false, none lays more than lightness to
our charge. For indeed Man would be a very unsociable Animal, if in Company
nothing could be uttered but Demonstration. But if we be urged to swear what we
say, and refuse it, that refusal is a plain unsaying it; nor will any man
believe what we say, or think we expect to be believed. Except Quakers, no
honest man ever refused to swear what he seriously and steadily persists to
say, in a matter of importance, and where his Oath is duly required. I mean
according as he deliberately says; that is, if he say he knows, or thinks, or
has heard, etc. He will swear he knows it, that is positively, or thinks, or
has heard it. For since an Oath is the assurance we give, that we speak
according to our conscience, who will not give that assurance, had as good say,
he speaks against his conscience. At least People will be apt to suspect so:
and not altogether without ground, if they cannnot be assured of the contrary.

Now when he makes the state of the Question consist, in denying by Oath, I
suppose he means in that manner in which the Oath requires the denial should be
made. That is, as the Oath explains it self, according to the plain and common
sense of the words. Taking which consideration along with us, I think we shall
not fall out about the state of the Question.

In the next Chapter he begins to argue, and from the authority of Trithemius,
and Experience, assumes first, that the point has been long, and still is under
debate, and may be so, for ought we know, 500. years hence. This is both
undeniably true, and withal a full answer to the former Treatise. For if this
Question has been disputed among Catholics, these 500 years, and may be 500
more, I hope none will say it belongs to Faith, but he, who has a mind to give
those who are of different Persuasions in Religion, the satisfaction of seeing
it confessed by our selves, that we have not of a long time been agreed about
matters of Faith, and in all likelihood never shall.

He proceeds in this manner: Since likewise, when a point is thus in dispute
among Catholic Princes (by the way, that Princes I take to be an error of the
Press, because he began with Scholars, and if he do not continue on with them,
the discourse is not constant to it self) no one can determinately swear to
either side of the point in dispute, as true, etc. I marry! this will do it, if
it be true. If no point in dispute can be sworn, this of the Pope's Power
undoubtedly cannot. I hope he will bring very good proof of this Universal,
both because all the stress lies upon it, and because indeed it sounds
something like a Paradox. For few things at this rate will remain, which may be
sworn in the World, where almost every thing is in dispute. Besides, it is a
clear case, that one of the Contradictories is true, and I know not why some
body may not see that truth. And 'twould be strange, if he who sees the truth,
may not swear, because, who sees it not continues to dispute. As clear as it
is, that the Question is disputed betwixt the disagreeing parties, it is no
less clear, that it is not disputed among those who are agreed. Must their
conduct depend on the good pleasure of the other? Must they ask those others
leave to say, or swear, what they think themselves? and not take the liberty
till all the World think as they do?

This seems very strange. But yet because strange things now and then come to
pass, it is not reasonable his proof should fare e're the worse for being
unexpected, provided it be good. This it is: For, says he, this were to swear a
thing as true, or to abjure it as false, which is confessedly in dispute
whether it be so or no, which is never lawful. How, Sir! never lawful? pray let
us consider a little. The proposition to be proved was this: No point in
dispute can be sworn. The proof is, It is never lawful to swear a point in
dispute. Why this is saying the same thing in different words, For, It is not
lawful to swear, and we cannot swear, signify the same. This is not a reason,
but a repetition. When I demanded proof of a proposition which seemed strange,
I desired to know, why we could not swear a disputed point, that is, why it is
not lawful so to do. The satisfaction he gives me is, that it is never lawful.
Which is to say, It is not lawful, because it is not lawful. I suspect few will
be satisfied with such a proof, and that whosoever thinks the first proposition
false, will very hardly be brought to think it a jot the truer, for being
otherwise worded; Cannot, only changed into, It Is not lawful.

Hence, he conceives, that for the deciding our Question, there needs no other
than barely to suppose it is a Question. For if it be a Question whether the
Pope has such Power, no man can safely swear that without all question he has
none. He says, Without all question; because what we swear as true, ought to be
unquestionably such, otherwise we fall under the guilt and sacrilege of
Perjury. The art of setting off things to advantage, does well in all Trades.
This chimes a little more pleasantly, but it is the same Tune still. Hence
signifies, from having said twice over one of the premises, viz. that we cannot
lawfully, or safely swear, he makes it follow, at last, that we cannot safely
swear. The rest is the beauty of a Rhetorical Figure, to make it show more
handsomely.

We cannot swear, The Pope without all question has no Power, if it be a
question, whether he have or no. True: but whoever went about, or was required
to swear, that there is no question made in the World of the Pope's Power? Does
he in earnest think those he opposes, of such lost Consciences, that they would
swear this? Or Protestants so unreasonable to exact it? They who know
altogether as well as we, for they have the same Books to inform them, that
there is a question, and who made the Oath of Allegiance for this very reason,
because they knew there was one, and desired to know what we held concerning it.

But he says without all question, because what we swear as true, ought to be
unquestionably such. I have already said that there is no question among those
who are agreed of it. What they swear is to them unquestionable. Nor do I think
any can swear, who questions or doubts the truth of what he swears. But if he
think a man, who is satisfied himself cannot swear, because another man is not,
he must prove it, if he will have it granted. This is the knot of the business;
toward the loosing of which I do not find it contributes any thing, to say It
is a point in question, more than, as he said before, that it is a point in
dispute. So that as far as I see, we are even just where we were.

For a more full evidence, He falls to discourse of the nature of Oaths, and
concludes very truly, That to speak contrary to what a man thinks in his
Conscience, is a Lie, and to swear so, Perjury. This contrariety, or
contradiction, he says, may happen two ways. Either by knowing, or being
conscious, that what we swear is not true: or by not knowing, and therefore
doubting, or having just cause to doubt whether it be true or no. And this is
also true. Only I take him to mean that this not knowing, and doubting, and
having just cause to doubt, must be in the Conscience of him who can be
perjured by them. And for Doubting, that indeed can hardly be out of it. For no
man, I think, can doubt, and not know that he does so. But we see it often
happen, that he who knows not, takes himself to know, and that he who has cause
enough to doubt, for all that, does not doubt. Let this man swear what he
thinks he knows, but does not, and what he has just cause to doubt of, but is
not aware of it: I gather from this Gentleman's Doctrine, that whether what he
swear be true or false (which alters not the case) he is not perjured, because
he does not contradict his conscience, and has no secret checks, and inward
protestations against his Action. Whether he sin or no, is another question, to
enter into which, were to go out of our way at present: in likelihood we shall
meet with it again: But according to this Gentleman, it is not the sin of
Perjury. Otherwise his two ways of Perjury, or contradicting the conscience,
would be, one by contradicting, and the other by not contradicting it. But, I
suppose, we both mean the same. What use he will make of this full evidence, we
must expect from what follows, this being all he says here.

CHAP. III.
THe next Chapter tells us, that swearing according to the best of the swearers
knowledge, will not serve turn: and that we must remember no less is required,
than to swear according to a true knowledge, etc. And this is neatly set off
with a wish, that Knowledge may signify Knowledge, that the best of his
knowledge may not prove the best of his no-knowledge, etc. As ignorant as I am
my self, I yet think so well of Knowledge, that I am glad to see somebody stand
up for her: and heartily wish as he does, that only Knowledge may pass for
Knowledge, and her name and esteem not to be abused and usurped wrongfully.

But I desire to know who it is that is thus severe, and requires no less than
true Knowledge in our case? Whether it be the nature of the thing, so that
severely true Knowledge be a necessary and indispensable condition in all
Oaths? or whether Protestants do particularly require it to the Oath os
Allegiance?

If he say the first, I doubt he, who is so careful to bid us remember, has
himself forgot what he said but just before. The formal notion and malice of
Perjury, in the last Chapter, consisted in swearing contrary to the inward
dictates of Conscience. And it is beyond dispute, that those inward dictates may
be made up of something short of rigorous Knowledge. It may be he will not
allow a man with such dictates to swear at all; but if he do, and swear
according to them, I am sure this Gentleman's Doctrine will excuse him from
Perjury.

Again, if no less than true Knowledge, or downright demonstration, be
necessary to every assertory Oath, there are very preposterous doings in the
World. Magistrates do very ill to put poor people every day to their Oaths, who
never heard of a demonstration, or if they did, know not what it means. And
yet, I doubt, affairs of the World would go on but scurvily, if none but men of
demonstration were capable to take Oaths. Mean time this custom for Magistrates
to offer, and people to take Oaths, where there neither is, nor can be
demonstration, has hitherto passt for irreprehensible: and I believe the Maxims
which would change it, will be confuted by the exigences of the World. It being
most certain, that nothing can be true, which is contrary to what is requisite
for the good of mankind.

He may possibly think the case of Tribunals different from ours; because the
Oaths required there, are generally of matters subject to Sense; whereas ours
can only be known by Discourse. But this difference does not hinder, but that
the knowledge by Sense (I speak only of the matter in hand, of the certainty
afforded by Sense in the cases wherein Oaths are required of, and taken by
particulars, not meddling with the question, Whether absolute certainty may not,
in due circumstances, be had by Sense?) is subject to error, as well as the
knowledge by Discourse: perhaps more, but it is undeniably not infallible. And
then the case is the same. For it imports nothing whether the knowledge,
according to which we swear, be derived from Sense, or Discourse, when it is
clear that both may fail, and he who thinks he has true knowledge either way,
be deceived. Wherefore evidently, either rigorously true knowledge, by which, I
suppose, he means such as excludes all possibility of deceit, is not always
necessary, or no Oath can be taken, not so much as in matters subject to Sense.

If he think otherwise, I would ask his opinion in a case not feigned at
random, but which actually happened. In a Robbery committed in some of the
adjacent Countries, one of the Thieves Horses chanced to be taken. This Horse
was rid up to London, and when he came into the Town, had his Bridle given him,
his Rider thinking he might possibly find out his own Inn. He past by several,
in several Streets, and at last went into one. The Ostler there being asked if
he knew the Horse, replied, he did, that he usually stood there, and that he
belonged to such a Gentleman. This Gentleman was taken, and the Sessions then
happening to sit, arrain'd and condemned, the Ostler swearing there all he had
said before. And yet after all, the Gentleman innocent. A Reprieve was got, by
the benefit whereof he had time to send for his own Horse, which used to stand
in that Inn, and which proved so like the other in shape, color, size, and
every way, that no eye could find any difference.

Now would I gladly know what this Author thinks of this Case? whether this
Ostler were perjured, and owed a forfeiture to the Pillory? If he think he was,
He is of a different judgment from those who understood the Law, and the World
better than he. For no punishment was inflicted on the Ostler, nor was it
thought he deserved any. If he concur in opinion with them, he must allow an
Oath, without true knowldge, may be unblamably taken. For this Ostler swore,
not only what he knew not, but what was absolutely false.

Because a little more reflection on this may peradventure unravel all the
difficulty, let us consider what 'twas excused the Ostler, and whether, if what
excused him be found in other swearers, it will not also excuse them. He had
reason to swear, urged by the love of Justice, and called by the Magistrate. He
swore according to the Dictates of his Conscience, and had such motives for
those Dictates, that although they deceived him, yet no body judged that
deceit, or him faulty. Let another man swear in due circumstances, according to
his conscience, and with such reasons for that conscience, that if he fail, the
unpassionate. World shall lay the blame upon the weakness of deceivable Nature,
not on him. This man, I think, is in the Ostler's case, unperjur'd, and
irreprehensible, even though what he swears should happen to prove false.

I gather then, that by the Truth requisite in an Oath, and Knowledge requisite
to come by that Truth, is not understood Truth in it self, or Knowledge in it
self, but Truth to the Swearer, and Knowledge to the Swearer: That is, that
what he swears be fixed in him as True, and Known, not as doubted, or thought,
or uncertain. And, I conceive, he ought to be provided of such reasons for this
fixure, that if they be supposed to fail him, no unbiast man shall think him
therefore a less honest man, or give less credit to his Oath another time. If
he doubt, or be conscious of any just cause of doubt, if he be aware that he
does not know what he thinks he does, and yet venture to swear, I conceive the
Pillory a punishment of the mildest for him, who makes so bold with the
reverence due to God.

And the reason why I am thus persuaded is, because on the one side I see all
the World agrees with his former Doctrine, that Perjury consists in the
opposition, not to Truth precisely, but, to Conscience. For it is indeed
nothing else but a Lie sworn; and every body knows I can Lie, and yet speak
truth, as likewise say what is false, and not Lie. So that it cannot be Truth
in it self, but Truth to the swearer, which is expected in Oaths. On the other
side, I see, that unless this were so, there could not possibly be any swearing
in any case. For it being impossible to divorce our selves from the infirmity
of Nature; and Sense, and Discourse, the only ways we have to get Truth into
us (I bar Faith, as unconcerning at present, and with which I will not meddle,
for fear of embroiling things unnecessary) being both subject to deceit, Truth
cannot otherwise be drawn from us by Oath, but as it is in us, accompanied with
a possibility indeed of deceit, but against which we have used all cautions of
which we are capable, and so that we remain fully satisfied, that actually we
are not deceived. And who will not take Truth in this manner, must require more
than can be had, and absolutely take swearing out of the World.

But I stray, and forget that I am only to answer. To return to my task. I
cannot imagine what this unbefriended Oath of Allegiance has don, to be treated
with harder measure than other Oaths. I am sure he is not to learn, that his
Knowledge which must signify Knowledge, is not required to swearing by every
body, and that Probability will serve the turn of those who pass for knowing
men. I think I need never quote for the matter, especially while the words of
Suarez are to be read in the Preface. For he says, not only that Probability,
with sufficient care, excuses from Perjury; but likewise that it is the common
Doctrine. However, I will add a passage or two out of Escobar, because, I
suppose, he is as good as a great many, since he pretends to write the sense of
a great many.

He tells us, that he is perjured, who swears what he takes to be false, Mor.
Theo.
though it be otherwise true. But not so, if he probably think it true, though
it be otherwise false. Again, that in Foro conscientiae, a man Trac. 1. Exam.
3. C. 3. In Prax. C. 7.
may swear what he has heard from a man of credit, though not in external
Courts, where he must give an account of what he says. Farther, putting this
Question, Whether I who know a thing to be true, may induce another to swear
it, who knows it not? He answers, No, unless this other be first persuaded of
the truth by some probable ground. For my own part, I must needs declare, I
like not this Doctrine, and should not dare to swear what I thought only
probable. But since (the worse luck for the World) it is, as Suarez says,
common, I see not why this Gentleman needed to be more nicely scrupulous than
others are, and must suspect that Kissing goes by favor in more places than
one.

In the mean time, That severe Truth in it self, and that known by severe
knowledge, such as admitting no allay of human weakness is absolutely
irreconcilable with all mistake, is not indispensably necessary to an Oath, I
take to be both clear in it self, and clearly confessed. It remains to see,
whether it be required to this particular Oath of Allegiance, by those who
framed, and offer it. And because when we know what it is they expect from this
Oath, we may judge whether this severe knowledge be necessary to that or no,
let us reflect what they do, or can aim at by it.

Is it perhaps to discover the Truth of the Question? Alas! our credit is not
so great with them, that they should think any thing the more or less true for
what we hold concerning it. They will not believe any point in difference
betwixt us a jot the sooner, if we swear it five hundred and five hundred times
over. They have ways of their own, on which they rely for the finding out of
Truth, and care not a straw what we think of it. Again, Truth in matters of
this nature, may be discovered otherwise than by Oath. Nay, an Oath is no
proper means to discover it. For unless it be supposed the swearer both knows
what he swears, and swears according to what he knows, his Oath is no security.
But there are other means which will bring those, who faithfully pursue them,
with security to her. Wherefore I see not how it can be imagined they look for
Truth it self by this Oath, while they may have that Truth without it; and if
they could not, perhaps would be better content to remain ignorant, than be
instructed by us.

Allow them but common sense, and it will move us to believe they expect from
the Oath, something which they cannot have without it. Of the Truth of this
Question, Whether the Pope can depose? they may be, and are satisfied whether
we swear or no; but what we hold concerning it, they cannot know but by our
swearing. For this lies hid in our breasts till we declare it. And though we do
declare what we hold, if we refuse to confirm our declaration by Oath, we free
them not from the suspicion they may have that we deal not sincerely. An Oath
is very proper to satisfy them in this point; and because it can satisfy them
in nothing else, I think it cannot rationally be thought, they expect any thing
else from it. Barely then to know what we hold, and what they cannot otherwise
know but by our swearing, is all they can propose to themselves by this Oath.
Whether what we hold be true or not, is no such secret, that they need Oaths,
and least of all ours, to find it out.

Neither does it concern them what degree of certainty we have for what we
hold. That belongs to our own consciences, of which we must take care, and be
provided to give account to God. But for their parts, I am sure they cannot be
imagined to require severe Demonstration in every one from whom they expect the
Oath of Allegiance, when they offer it to those who, they know, do not
understand so much as what the word means. The Law proposes it indifferently to
All, to the Illiterate, Artificers, Plow-men, Women, if I mistake not, as well
as others. To think those who framed this Law so extravagant as to require, or
think there can be found Demonstration in these, is in my opinion a greater
extravagance.

But they have taken so much care to explain themselves, in the words they have
chosen for the Oath, that if they be mistaken, I know not how it can be
otherwise than wilfully. The Wood was all in their own Power, and they might
have made their Staff of what Tree they pleased. They might as easily have
said, I swear the Pope has no power to depose, and I demonstratively know he
has not, as, I truly and sincerely acknowledge and declare in my conscience he
has not. If any words can be found which express more clearly, that what they
require is, that we should acknowledge the truth of what we swear, only as it
stands in our consciences, and without inquiring which way we came by it, or
with what degree of certainty we hold it, I should be glad to learn what those
words are.

For my part, as I love Justice even to Enemies, I cannot but think, it would a
great deal more become us to acknowledge, and thank their moderation and
tenderness in this point, than to perplex our selves and others with captious
Cavils, which they seem even to have taken care to prevent. In the mean time I
conceive that this severe knowledge, which he requires, is not required by any
body but himself: and that enough has been said to show it, and indeed more
than enough. For since he barely says so, I might have spared all this pains,
and barely denied it without more ado. For, I hope, he will not pretend he has
brought any proof.

Besides the neat amplification by variety of phrase, there are but two things
that look like proof. The first is, when he says, that this want of knowledge
will condemn him who swears, at the bar of his own heart. And this is plainly
to say, there must be something in his heart to condemn him: some consciousness
that the best of his knowledge is indeed no-knowledge. Otherwise, if that best
appear good and true knowledge to his heart, there is nothing there which can
condemn him. The next is the Case of a Witness who should offer to swear what,
being asked, he should confess he knew not; and he too is evidently conscious
that he does not know. So that this being all he says, I cannot think himself
will say, here is any proof, or any reason why he may not swear, whose heart is
not conscious of want of knowledge.

But though I conceive, the best of a man's knowledge is all that Protestants
require in this Oath, and all that is necessary to any Oath, (I mean suppositis
supponendis, that the swearer have faithfully, and to the utmost of his power
labored to satisfy himself of the truth, and satisfied himself at least by
such motives as will excuse him from blame before God and man, and that there
be no passion, no rashness, no want of sincerity, etc.) yet I do not think this
is all the matter will bear. Knowledge may signify Knowledge, provided it do
not signify Artificial Knowledge, and be had in this case, if it be necessary,
even by the unlearned. For they can tell, as well as the best Mathematician in
the World, that the nearest way from Russel Street to Covent Garden Church, is
to go by the Dyal, not through the Arches; that more Corn will go into a round
Bag, than a three cornered one of the same cloth, etc. though they never heard
of Circles, and Angles, Sides, and Diagonals, nor know what they mean. If such
kind of knowledge as this, no less certain nor less strong than the Artificial,
will serve turn, I do not see why the Oath of Allegiance should be rejected for
want of knowledge.

Whoever has knowledge enough to take a Lease, and manage a Farm, can tell
there is a difference betwixt him who holds by Lease, and him from whom he
holds it: That the Sovereign Lord holds of no body: That if the King may
forfeit to the Pope, and be ejected by him, He is not Sovereign, whom yet he
has always called, and believed his Sovereign: That the obligation to obey our
Sovereign, according to the Laws of the Land, is commanded by the Law of God:
That when People fight against them, they do not obey them: That such
disobedience is contrary to what he has been taught is the Law of God; and a
hundred such things, which those who have the Art, may weave into absolute
Demonstrations, and which afford a very absolute certainty to the rest who were
never Prentice to that Trade. Nor can all the scholastical subtilties in the
World, how much soever they may blunder them in the mean time, when they see
men up in Arms against the King, persuade them, that fighting against him is
not fighting against him; or that they treat him as their Sovereign, whom they
do fight against; or that the Doctrine which says this may be don, is not
contrary to that which says, It may not be done; which they can as well know to
be the Doctrine of God, as any other which they believe and hope to be saved by.

But this, as he calls it, qualifying gloss, and milder exposition, cannot be
transferred to the Oath of Allegiance. Why so? Because this is only an exchange
of one Perjury for another; striving to weather one Rock, and splitting on
another. Which be these two inevitable Rocks, I beseech you? Why, if you
pretend not to abjure, this is contrary to the express words, according to
which you profess to swear, and by which you do expressly swear, that the Pope
has not any Deposing Power. Very good! Express words are things, as luck is,
subject to Eyesight. Tom Tinker, if he be not blind, can judge this matter, as
well as Aristotle. Let us take then Sir Thomas More's pair of witnesses, our
two Eyes, and make them Judges of this difference.

In the beginning of the Oath, the Swearer, says he, solemnly calls God and the
World to witness the truth of what he is about to acknowledge, etc. What are
the words in which he does this? my Eyes tell me they are these: I do truly and
sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience, That
the Pope has not any Power to depose the King, etc. By your favor, Sir, this
is not to call God and the World to witness the truth of what I acknowledge,
but the truth of my acknowledgment, or that I am sincerely persuaded, that what
I acknowledge is true. I beseech you let us have fair play, and a wrong Card
not shufled into our hands. The words expressly deny the deposing Power to be
true in or to the Swearers Conscience; of the Truth in it self, my eyes discern
none which speak.

Then he glances at one of the middle Clauses, in which he says, The Deposing
Power is not only abjured, but abjured as Heretical. The Clause is this: And I
do further swear, That I from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as impious and
heretical this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever. The word Abjure in this place, I take to
signify; solemnly renounce; or else for a word of supererogation, added
according to the usual redundancy of the Law style, and signifying but the same
with the former in a synonimous expression, as Detest super-adds nothing to
Abhor, nor Position to Doctrine. Unless perhaps it be taken in the same sense,
as when People abjure the Kingdom, or any thing else, when they are required by
Law; that is, swear never to come into it more. And then it signifies, I will
never hold this Doctrine. Otherwise the words would import, I swear that I
swear, or that I forswear, which seems no very good sense, and I think it is
not allowable to interpret a Law into nonsense. If this be so, the words
express detesting, and abhorring, (and, if you will, never holding the position
mentioned) as heretical, but there are none which say expressly, that it is
heretical, or so much as false.

The last, and only Clause he cites, says we swear according to the express
words, and those express words our eyesight tells us, are not of Truth
precisely in it self, but of Truth with relation to our Conscience. And so
instead of splitting on his Rock of Perjury, we have got a Lanthorn to avoid
it. Thanks to their care who hung it there, and who for their pains deserve a
better return than scrupulous Exceptions, confutable even by eyesight.

The other Rock, and which he conceives inevitable, Is the charge of Perjury
now under his Pen. Viz. Abjuring without necessary knowledge, etc. which, while
the dispute remains undetermined by public, and undeterminable by private
Authority, he says, is not to be had, nor expected. I have already said, there
is no necessity of running upon this Rock at all. Who does, will find it but
Sand, and never endanger splitting. For, as is formerly discoursed, rigorous
knowledge is not necessary, and though it were, is very possible to be had.
Then as sure as he thinks himself, that the point is undeterminable by private
authority, I must beg his permission to believe it may be, and is determined
even by private men, not authoritatively indeed with respect to others, but
effectually as to themselves: or rather, that private men may be and are
determined concerning it, and that with sufficient and possibly absolute
certainty. For sure Privacy is no hindrance to the discovery of Truth, unless
private men be all supposed blind: and I am sure Disputing is much less. For it
is the nature of Disputes to bring Truth to light, and make us see what
otherwise perhaps we should not. Wherefore that Knowledge cannot be had while
the point remains in dispute, and that because it is not effectually determined
by public Authority, it is therefore undeterminable, seem to me, not Rocks,
but Paradoxes.

And truly, now this Gentleman, with his Rocks and his Perjuries, has given me
occasion to reflect on the Oath of Allegiance, more than ever I did before, I
must needs profess I find it no such hideous matter; and the more I reflect the
less hideous I find it, and begin to suspect it was want of reflection that
makes the Idea so terrible. Who will not trust his own eyes, may possibly meet
with a glass which may represent the object otherwise than it is. Let us take
it in pieces, and consider it a little.

The first part acknowledges, The King is rightful King of all his Dominions,
and that the Pope has no authority to depose him, discharge his Subjects from
their Allegiance, license them to bear Arms against him, and the rest. He who
does not acknowledge the King to be rightful King, or does acknowledge the Pope
has such Power, has indeed reason to forbear swearing. And this latter is the
reason alleged by those who have written against the Oath of Allegiance. But I
see not what other good reason there can be. At least this, of want of
knowledge, alleged by this Gentleman, seems not well to bear the name. For the
words are not, I know, but I acknowledge; and besides, has he not knowledge
enough to swear the first branch, That the King is rightful King? I suppose he
will not stick at that; but is his Knowledge of that, true Knowledge? If it be
not, I think he can content himself sometimes with Knowledge which does not
signify Knowledge; If it be, he may allow others to hope for Knowledge in
things not altogether so hidden and imperious, as those, which he says he
knows.

There follows the promissory part, in which, who takes the Oath, (...), that
notwithstanding any Declaration, etc. of the Pope, he will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty. And this is the very thing he would be at, and which
P. 8. he offers, as the proper matter of an Oath of Allegiance; And which I
therefore conceive neither he, nor any body else will except against.

Then comes the Clause formerly glanced at by him, and fully set down by me,
which who refuses, does by that refusal profess, he does not abhor, etc. the
Position mentioned as Heretical, etc. For you do not directly swear any thing
is heretical. The swearing falls upon the Abhor, and the Abhor upon the
Heretical. However, I perceive by him the word Heretical sticks, but I cannot
tell where. And it is one of the most uncomfortable things in the World, to be
still vexed with scruples, and not know what they are. There has been said of
this word by diverse, what might seem to purpose, unless some body would tells
us why it is not. Methinks it is but reasonable, if we must remain unsatisfi'd
at that word, we should be told, wherefore that which has been said to satisfy
us, will not do. To take no notice of any thing to the contrary, and still go
on in doubts and dissatisfaction, is, I think, the very thing we call Scruple.
However, it is not possible for me to judge whether the Exceptions which I find
this Gentleman has to that word, be rational, or no, unless I knew what they
were. All I can do, is ingenuously to declare what I think of the matter, and
leave him and every body to judge whether my thoughts be rational, or no.

I know it is an usual exception, that the Pope's deposing Power cannot be
abjured as Heretical, because the direct contrary Proposition, being neither
expressly found in Scripture, nor Councels, nor unanimously believed by
Catholics, among whom it is contested, is conceived therefore not to belong
precisely to Faith: And Heresy is opposite to Faith, False being different
from, and not enough to make Heretical. I know also that diverse things have
been alleged to show there is more of scruple than substance in this
exception, and that there is no reason to understand the word Heretical in that
rigor, when it is plain the Protestants do not understand it so, and we commonly
enough understand it otherwise.

For is it not undeniable, that Protestants know every jot as well as our
selves, that this Proposition, The Pope has not power to depose, is not
expressly, totidem verbis, to be found in Scripture, or Councils, nor believed
by all Catholics? Is it not utmost extravagance to think, that when they swear
themselves they mean to say by the word Heretical, that the Proposition
abovementioned is found there, or oblige us to think so, when they require the
Oath of us? Wherefore if Oaths be to be taken in the sense of the Givers, as I
conceive they ought; They seem to have reason enough, who deny this sense of
the word Heretical can be the sense of Protestants, and the meaning of the word
in that place.

Again, Among our selves, is it not as plain, that this word is commonly taken
in another sense? Have we not seen the Jansenists and Jesuits object Heresy to
one another? Do we not see a hundred like Instances almost every day, where
every body knows (the hot men themselves and all) that what they call Heresy,
is not in Scriptures, or Counsels, nor usually believed? Now, because we are
obliged to swear according to the plain and common sense of the words, and
there is a plain and common sense of this word, different from that to which
these severe men would restrain it, I see not why the exception, which some
make to this severity, is not, to say the least, as rational, as the severity
with which others except against the Oath.

But all this, in my Opinion, is wide of the mark. I conceive this Gentleman is
mistaken, when he thinks the Pope's deposing Power is in this clause abjured as
Heretical. That Power was renounced before. To make it renounced again here,
is, with an idle Tautology, to make the dead man be killed over again. As for
that Point, The Oath contented it self with a bare acknowledgment, only
providing it should be true and sincere. Here it requires detestation, as of an
impious and heretical Doctrine, without all doubt; what is now treated with
more rigor, cannot be altogether the same, with what was treated more mildly
before.

And this, I think, is plain by the words of the Oath, which are to be our
Guides in this matter. The words (for the Reader, I hope, will pardon a second
repetition) are these: And I do further swear, That I from my heart abhor,
detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and
Position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. All Speech
denying or affirming something of something, the way to understand it, is to
mind what it is which is denied or affirmed, which the School Language calls
the Praedicate, and that of which this Praedicate is affirmed or denied, which
they term the Subject. Of the Proposition now, which I here swear that I abhor,
what is the Subject? Is it not manifestly, Princes excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope? And the Praedicate, is it not plainly this? Deposed or murdered
by their Subjects or others, if you stick to the precise words; though if you
take the sense, the Praedicate is, deposable, or murtherable, etc. For what the
phrase of our Language expresses by may be deposed, Logical exactness would
word by, are deposable, etc.

That Princes then can be excommunicated or deprived, is not here denied or
affirmed; for they are already so of whom the Proposition speaks,
excommunication and deprivation making up a part of the Subject, of which
something else is praedicated. But what is abhorred, is, That such Princes can
be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or others; this being the thing which
is affirmed of those excommunicated and deprived Princes. The Pope is supposed
to have done his part, and to have already deprived, or deposed. There follows
the Subjects share, the supplying what the Pope falls short of, and actually
pulling out of his Throne him who will not voluntarily quit it. For if he do,
the case cannot happen. Subjects cannot depose him who has deposed himself. The
Oath speaks of a Prince already deposed by the Pope, but yet still to be
deposed by some body else. We have nothing to do with any case in which both
these are not found.

Plainly therefore it is not, as this Gentleman supposes, the deposing Power,
as it is lodged in the Pope, which is here denied, but the execution of that
Power by Subjects or others. It is not Pope-deposing, but Subject-deposing
Power which is now in question, or if you will, not the Power, but the
Practice. And the Question is, Whether this Subject-deposing Power may be
abhorred as impious and heretical? Now I, for my part, conceive it may and
ought, and think this so manifest, that I would take Bellarmin himself, or this
Gentleman for Judge, who yet say the direct contrary, if the case were not too
clear to need one.

For does not Bellarmin say, and whether he do or no, do we not all know, That
we are obliged by the Law of God to obey our King, and that to deny obedience
to our Prince is against the Law of God? He adds indeed, while he is King, and
while he is Prince. But I desire no more. It is evident by so much, that unless
a King deprived by the Pope, cease to be a King, he is to be obeyed, and that
it is contrary to the Law of God, or flat Heresy, to say the contrary, even in
the judgment of Bellarmin.

Now I entreat this Gentleman to reflect, that whoever comes to this Branch of
the Oath, has already sworn another, in which he has declared before God and
the World, that he acknowledges there is no unkinging Power in the Pope, and
therefore that notwithstanding the Pope's deprivation, the King remains still
truly King. Wherefore if he offer to disobey, or which is worse, depose such a
King, he disobeys the King while he is King. Which if he hold to be lawful, he
falls into what is by Bellarmin, and of all hands, confessed to be Heresy.
Indeed if his Conscience will not allow him to swear the former Clause, and
tell him the Pope has Power to depose, neither will it suffer him to take this.
But then let him say so, and stand to it, that the Pope indeed has such Power,
and not scruple at this Clause, which of it self is liable to no exception, but
what is drawn from the other. For Subject-deposing is manifest Heresy, unless
Pope-deposing be true.

Neither can it be shifted off by saying, that since Pope-deposing is not
Heresy, Subject-deposing (by warrant from him, for I speak of none else)
cannot be Heresy. I admit the Antecedent, because the Oath not meddling with
that Point, obliges us not to enquire after it; but there is no appearance of
the Consequent. If it be not Heresy to make Disobedience lawful after
deprivation, because that deprivation is not known to be invalid by Faith;
neither is Disobedience heretical, before deprivation, because, even before, he
is not known to be King by Faith. It Is by the Laws of the Land, and Eyesight,
not by Faith, we know such a man to be our King, and we know by Faith we are
not to resist him, whom we do not know by Faith to be our King. And so it is in
all things commanded by the Divine Law. I do not know by Faith that this Woman
is married, or the Money in that man's hands is not mine, or that Creature is a
man. But yet it is undeniable Heresy to say, I may lawfully lie with that Wife,
or take that man's Money from him, or kill that man. However, I know the King to
be King, resistance is heretical, if he be King. And that I am fully persuaded,
and resolved in Conscience, that he is King, after deprivation as much as
before, I have already sworn, and therefore can no more refuse to abhor
resistance to him as Heretical, than to abhor Adultery, or Theft, or Murder as
Heretical.

I must confess I wonder how this word Heretical comes to be such a Bugbear,
unless by mistaking, through inadvertence, one thing to be sworn instead of
another. I see people fancy, and this Gentleman is in for company, the Popes
deposing Power is there abjured as heretical, and I suppose they think it hard
to censure for Heresy, what too many Catholics, too much unreprov'd, Alas!
hold for true. And yet all this while there is no such matter. That Power is
neither affirmed, nor denied here; another thing is denied of it, viz. A
lawfulness in Subjects, or others to proceed upon it. This indeed is abhorred as
heretical, the other Point is not touched.

Yet though it be not, in truth all depends upon it. For who believes
Pope-deposing true, has reason to check at acknowledging Subject-deposing
Heretical. He who holds the former false, must think the latter Heresy, or
renounce his Faith, which evidently teaches Kings are to be obeyed. So that (to
say what is) this exception against the bare word Heretical, is in reality an
invention to maintain the Popes Power with less envy. Bluntly to say, that the
Pope can turn any King out of his Kingdom, sounds scurvily. Few men's
Consciences are so depraved, that they can hear it without check. But if people
can be frighted into an acknowledgment of such a Power in the Pope, and the
Port reached by a side wind, the business is done every jot as efficaciously,
and a great deal more speciously. Now as Heresy is on the one side an
excellent tool to work upon a timorous Conscience, and brings the commendation
of Zeal to those who appear wary of it, so on the other, it does the work
excellently in this case. To say Subjects can depose is not heretical, declines
the offensive harshness of saying the Pope can depose; But yet it says it. For
there is no reason assigned by any, nor assignable, but a Power in the Pope, to
exempt it from Heresy, or hinder it from being acknowledged so by all the
World. Manifestly then this seeming exception against the word Heretical, is in
truth an assertion of the Popes deposing Power. I think it would not be so
common, if every body were aware what they did, and minded, that while they
only think to avoid Heresy, they do in reality bring the King into subjection
to the Pope, and establish a Power in him, which is neither consistent with
civil Government, nor with their own thoughts. For there are not many, even of
those who refuse the Oath, who do in earnest believe that the Pope can depose
the King.

But I must desire not to be mistaken, as if I thought, because the Doctrine is
heretical, all those who have held, or practiced according to it, excluded from
the hopes of salvation. I believe it is not difficult to find more than one
Heresy in more than one man: and should every one who is caught tripping that
way, be hopelesly damned without more ado, the way to Heaven would be a great
deal more narrow than it is. I, for my part, think well-meaning goes far in all
cases: and that (till the contrary appear) the failings of men are rather to be
imputed to ignorance, and weakness of nature, than malice of their minds, which
I take to be the great obstacle in the way to Heaven. However, I declare, I
think this consequence, all who do ill things, are therefore ill men, very
false, and should think my self wronged, if any should go about to pin it upon
me.

The next Clause denies Absolution from this Oath whether by the Pope, or any
other. And here again the words relate, as expressly as may be, to the belief
and conscience of the swearer, nor does he swear more. So that who is persuaded
accordingly, has nothing, that I see, which can rationally check him from
swearing.

The next renounces Dispensations to the contrary. And this, I suppose, is free
from exception. For it is the very thing he offers afterward in his promissory
form, where he says, he will bear true Allegiance, notwithstanding any
Dispensation to the contrary. Which I take to be renouncing these
Dispensations, and conceive this Gentleman does so too.

He cites the following Clause at length, which only confines our meaning to
the common sense of the express words. Now I should never have thought it
possible, that this rush should afford a knot. For methinks it is all the reason
in the World, that people when they swear, should mean what they say, and I am
sure they say what the words, which they use, plainly signify. But, to see how
men's judgments differ, he has found here what, he would have us believe, makes
much to his purpose. This, he says, ratifies and binds afresh all that went
before, by a repeated and reflex Oath looking universally back upon the
premises. And because among those All, the Pope's Power is one, and the
chiefest, that Power is here forsworn again. True; but according to the express
words in which it was forsworn before. And these express words are not, he has
none, but I acknowledge he has none. I, but this is a mental reservation
excluded by this Clause. Just the contrary. To mean I acknowledge, when I swear
I acknowledge, is no reservation, but the direct sense of what I swear. But if
you, by Acknowledge, will make me mean more than Acknowledge, you make me mean
more than the words say, and drive me into a guilt, if it be one, from which
the words take care to preserve me.

What we acknowledge, and what we swear, that is, what we swear absolutely, and
what with reference to our Conscience, is contained in the branches foregoing.
This Clause meddles no farther with it, than to require what we have sworn, be
sworn as it ought, with sincerity, and without hidden meanings of our own,
different from the plain sense of the words. And because this Gentleman seems
an Enemy to secret reservations, I believe on second thoughts, he will allow,
that to give security we have none, is not a thing at which our Conscience
ought to check. At least, could we agree on the rest, I am confident we should
not break off the Treaty on this point.

The last Clause speaks of the willingness and heartiness with which we swear.
Of this every man may have true, or at least sufficient knowledge, from the
familiar converse with his own thoughts, as he a little before instructs us.
Wherefore, I suppose, he who is conscious of willingness, and heartiness, may
without scruple venture on this branch. And this being all, I must needs
declare upon the whole, I cannot perceive the Devil altogether so ugly as he is
painted, and that the representations made of this Oath, seem a great deal more
hideous than the Oath it self.

CHAP. IV. V.
I Have been larger in the last Chapter than I designed, or expected; but hope
to make the Reader amends, and be less tedious in the rest. After the main
shower is over, the after-drops use not to last long, and a slighter covering
will serve to keep us dry. The Title of his next Chapter promises to show the
manifest unlawfulness both of swearing, and forswearing the deposing Power.
When he, comes to performance, he handsomely dilates on the competition,
betwixt the two supreme Powers, in the Question of our Duty to God and Caesar,
and then inquires, what a Private Christian, and Loyal Subject shall do, to
comply with both? And all I can understand by his answer, is, That he must fit
still and do nothing. For he will not allow him to judge, at least so far as to
swear, and if he do not judge for one side, he can act for neither, or if he
do, must act without judgment. But if he may judge, it is plain he may swear his
judgment. Now doing nothing seems to me a very surprising, and no very
commendable way of performing Christian Duties, and absolutely impossible
besides. For a man must, in these cases, act one way or another in spite of his
teeth. Nay, not-acting may happen to be equivalent to the highest acting.

But to do otherwise, says he, is to assume the right of Judicature, and as bad
as to swear odd, or even, upon the sight of a handful of Guineys. Judging is
plainly an equivocal word, being sometimes meant of Authoritative Judgment,
such as is a Rule for the Actions of others; sometimes for Not-authoritative,
and which only serves to guide the actions of him who judges. In the first
sense methinks he should not take it, because it seems excluded by the very
Question, which is only of private men, and they judge only for themselves. But
if he do, as the word Judicature which he uses is but seldom taken otherwise, I
can only say, I know of no private man who pretends to that right of
Judicature, and by his judging to oblige others to judge as he does. If any do,
let him bear his own sin, and the innocent not be involved in the guilt of his
presumption.

But if he take it the second way, I cannot understand why it should appear so
strange a thing, if men make use of the gifts which God has given them. He
never made man a rational and judging creature, with design that he should not
use his judgment when he had it. On the contrary, I conceive he expects we
should judge of what we are to do, or leave undone, and act according to our
judgment, and from him who does not, I believe, will require a severe account.
Nor do I understand what Principle, besides Judgment, there is of Action, but
Passion. I cannot think he would commend us to that for a guide, but if he do,
I must entreat him to leave me to that which God has given me.

Besides, if we must not judge of this Question, why does he write of this
Question? The Arguments he alleges, what are they for, but to make us judge,
as he does. But nature is a little resty, and will have it is flings. Twenty to
one but some will judge quite contrary. If he will not allow these to be as
free from blame as the other, he had even as good say, You may exercise your
Judgments as much as you will, so it be on my side; but you must not judge
against me.

He cannot pretend for a difference, that he only judges of the Oath of
Allegiance, but not of the Question betwixt the two Powers. For he judges of
that Question too, and by judging first of that, comes to judge himself, and
persuade us to judge of the Oath. He judges that Question to be undeterminable,
and this as a private man, and by his private judgment; which hinders not
another private man from making a private judgment that it is determinable. And
if this man pursue that judgment, and determine himself, and take the Oath, I
see not, as to the right of Judicature, what greater liberty he takes than this
Gentleman allows himself. Both judge, both act according to their judgment,
(for refusal is as much an act of the soul, as embracing) plainly either both,
or neither usurp on the right of Judicature. As for his odd or even, if he make
the case equal, that as one swears only on the sight of Guineys, the other
swears only upon hearing the Question, I think as he does, there is no ground
for an Oath. But I conceive, as the Guineys may be told, the Question may be
examined, and peradventure True or False as certainly be found there, as odd or
even among the Guineys. What he has said to the contrary, we have heard before,
and if he will allow him the right of Judicature, the Reader will judge of it.
For my part, I shall not easily be persuaded, that God has left us no means to
know how we should perform those duties which himself requires and commands.

The Fifth Chapter undertakes to confirm the Premises from this Topic, That
the Point in Question is confessedly a mere opinion, and therefore cannot be
abjured, because opinion does in its notion imply suspense, and
indetermination. He has indeed so far reason on his side, that this word
Opinion, as it is opposed to Science, does signify as he says. And I, for my
part, agree with him, that it is not allowable to swear upon such an Opinion.
Yet I believe he knows there are who think otherwise, and who infer the direct
contrary to what he does. For while he says it is an Opinion, therefore you may
not swear, others in other cases say, It Is an Opinion, therefore you may swear.
If I should turn him over to them, and make them his Pay-masters, or desire to
remain in quiet, and not be pressed with his Argument, till they were agreed
about it, I know not how he could refuse me.

But I will not take all advantages. The word Opinion every body knows is as
ordinarily taken for Sentiment, or Judgment, in contradistinction, not to
Science, but Faith. In which sense many are usually called Opinions, of which
men may, and diverse have, absolute certainty. As I doubt not but St. Thomas,
for example, was very certain of diverse matters, which yet in the Schools pass
to this day but for Opinions. In this sense of the word, Opinion and Certainty
may stand very well together, nor can I believe the Sorbon, or the Author, or
Publisher of the Questions understood it in any other. I see not what reason
there is to suspect there was never more than suspense and indetermination,
even in the dullest of them. Nor can I imagine, that when the Sorbon declares
the deposing Doctrine false, erroneous, contrary to the word of God, etc. she
can be fancied to say at the same time, she was in suspense and undetermined,
whether it were so or no.

As for what he obtrudes upon her, that her Declarations in 1663. were to
regulate (not the Faith, but) Opinions of those under their charge: if it were
so, it is plain enough that Opinion in that place is opposed only to Faith, and
so admits of certainty. But I cannot find that even so much is true. I have met
with the Articles themselves in more places than one, but not with any Decree
of Sorborn concerning them, wherein those express words should be. In the
King's Declaration concerning them, the word Sentiment is used, not Opinion,
for that wherein he desires an Uniformity among his Subjects. The same word is
used by the University of Paris, in their Decree of the Year 1626, upon
occasion of the Book of Santarellus. So that I see no great reason he had to
beat the Sorbon for game, which, though he should put up, I think would make no
very good sport. For I cannot tell what all this signifies, more than dearth of
good Arguments.

CHAP. VI.
THe following Chapter would not concern me, but for the odd use he makes of
it. The business is to confute Withrington, and I should think it matters not
much what becomes of Objections against Withrington, while we have only to do
with Objections against the Oath of Allegiance. Withrington was a man who, when
he was alive, could speak for himself, and now he is dead, might have rested
quiet in his grave, if this Gentleman had pleased. For I think it no great
wonder, if from one who has writ so much as he, there escaped sometimes what will
not endure a severe Test. Whether he have been guilty of a weakness, from which
I believe few in his case exempt* I think no such important inquiry, that any
man should busy himself about it, unless he be one of much leisure, and much
curiosity, and much concern for Withrington.

But from the defeat of Withrington he draws an Argument against the Oath, as
if it were unintelligible, since Withrington understood it not, and no man, he
truly says, can swear what he understands not. To me now this seems a very odd
consequence, nor can I understand why the fate of the Oath of Allegiance should
depend on Withrington. Suppose he did mistake in something concerning this
Oath, as I think this Gentleman has more than once; is the Oath therefore
unintelligible? The truth is, Withrington makes diverse discourses, and
deductions, with which those who see not so far as he did, neither do, nor need
trouble themselves. Among those, in a Book not written precisely of the Oath,
he has found what he accepts against. Now I do not see but the Oath may be
plain enough, whether his exception be rational or no; but yet because he would
have us believe it is of consequence, and frights us with woeful snares, and
apparent dangers, we will see what it is, and do our best to avoid those snares
and dangers.

He tells us then, that Withrington, and his Friend C. I. say, That by one
Clause of the Oath is denied indeed the Popes Power to authorize, but not to
declare, or command. And pray why may they not say so, if it be so? For the
Clause does speak of authorizing, and it does not speak of declaring and
commanding. I see no such subtle obscurity, and learned intricacy in speaking
plain Truth. It seems they say too, That this Authority to declare and command,
does not exceed the limits of a Spiritual Power. Whether it do or no, is a
Question with which the Oath meddles not; and whether Withrington and his
Friend be mistaken in it or no, imports not the Oath. Neither are they mistaken
in that, however they fare in this matter; for what they say of the Oath, is
manifestly true. Truly methinks this Quarrel might be compounded. This
Gentleman may take his choice, and say declaring and commanding does, or does
not exceed the limits of a Spiritual Power, as he pleases, and no harm done
that I see. All the mischief, if he choose the contrary to Withrington, is,
that Withrington was once in his life mistaken, as another may be another time.
He may also dispute it with Withrington as long as he pleases: The Oath will
remain neuter in the War, nor will all the subtle obscurities and learned
intricacies they can raise, hinder the plainest man that is, from perceiving,
that the Oath speaks only of authorizing.

But yet he apprehends the thing so obscure, that he desires to borrow his
Readers eyes to help him out. I cannot but think his own eyes are better than
mine, and that it is not their fault, if he see not better than I. However, such
as they are, with all my heart they shall be at his service. Let us then, if we
can, between us look out the mighty inconvenience, which he would have us
believe there is, in denying the Popes Power to authorize, and not denying his
Power to command.

If Temporal Princes, says he, as is here supposed, have Power and Authority to
Invade or annoy Foreign Princes, or their Countries, nay to depose them, when
the good of Souls and necessity of the Church shall require. Whether what he
says be supposed, or no, I cannot tell. For I have not the New Years Gift which
he cites, and Withrington, in the place to which he refers, talks not of that
matter: whether he do elsewhere, cannot be known but by reading all his Books.
And, I hope, he does not expect I should take so much pains to look for no
matter what, I know not where. But this sure is no such mystery. Every body
knows that Sovereign Princes have Power and Authority to make just Wars, and
every body sees that if they prove successful so far, the conquered Prince will
be beaten out of his Kingdom. Every body knows too, that the good of Souls, and
necessity of the Church, may be a pretense of making War, either just, or which
at least may be proved so by the Ratio ultima Regum. If this be all the learned
obscurity, in which he thinks Withrington and his fellow plunged, there is no
man in the World who is not as deep in the mire as they.

Marry, whether all this amount to Authority in one Prince to depose another,
is another Question. Power I see they have, if they can prevail. Besides Power,
I see nothing but Reason, by which they judge, whether truly, or untruly, that
they may use their Power as they do. If this be that which he, or Withrington
means by Authority, He who says Princes have no Authority to depose, or do any
thing else which they can do, says they have not Reason, and are not men. But I
conceive most people mean by Authority, a certain kind of Quality, which,
whenever it appears, ought to be submitted to, in virtue of that appearance,
and he who does not submit, wrongs both him who has the Authority, and himself
too. I know of no such thing among Sovereigns. On the contrary, it seems to
destroy the very notion Sovereignty. For a Sovereign is one who has no
Authority above him. So we see that if one Prince assail, the other defends
himself; if he be beaten out of his Kingdom, he recovers it again if he can;
and every body thinks he does well all the while, which would not be, if he
were thought all the while to oppose a lawful Authority. Now because in the
Language of the World, to say one Prince has Authority to depose another, is to
say, that this other is obliged to quit his Kingdom, when the first declares he
ought so to do, as a Magistrate is obliged to turn private man, as often as his
Prince recalls his Commission. He racks the words to a violent sense, who says
there is any deposing Authority among Sovereigns.

If the Pope is to be Judge of this necessity. Questionless he may judge of it,
and so may every Metropolitan, and every Diocesan, and every ghostly Father,
and every Privy-Counsellor, and every man whose judgment a Prince will desire,
or hearken to. All these may and do judge whether that necessity be such, as to
engage the Prince to a War. And the Prince may follow their judgments, or not,
as he sees fit, or unfit. I am much mistaken if there be ever a Prince in
Christendom who thinks himself bound to enter into War upon any man's judgment
but his own. Let the Pope judge it never so necessary, till he judge it so too,
or at least expedient, there will be no work for Soldiers.

If the Pope has Power (though not to authorize, yet) to declare, and not only
to declare, but to command the doing of all this. What then? what terrible
mischief will come of all this at last? Why then, truly his Opinion is, that
this Doctrine, as it contributes little to the security of Princes, and as
little to the satisfaction of intelligent Readers, so it is not every one can
easily understand, or be able to reconcile it to Truth and it self. A wonderful
inconvenience! That every body should not understand every thing, at least not
easily, and this only in his Opinion! Surely there needed not have been so much
cackling for this Egg.

It is not reasonable I should, for Withrington's sake, enter into the merits
of a Cause, which requires more labor than I think due to his defense, and
which is unconcerning besides. Only because he would persuade us the defense of
the Oath drives men into Doctrines unintelligible to Readers, and insecure to
Princes, it will not be amiss to see whether Withrington were so hard put to
it. As for the first Point, I wonder why the difference betwixt Authorizing and
Commanding should appear so unintelligible. Does not Authorizing signify doing
something, in virtue whereof it is now lawful for him who is authorized, to do
what before it was not lawful for him to do? Does not every body see that
unlawful things are sometimes Commanded, and that they become not lawful by
being Commanded? Or if you will say, that only lawful things can validly be
commanded, and therefore who puts a Power to Command, supposes a lawfulness in
the thing commanded: There is still a palpable difference betwixt commanding
what of it self, and independently of the command, is lawful, and making lawful
what before it was made so, was not lawful. If he think Readers so little
intelligent, that they cannot perceive this difference, I wonder why, and to
whom he writes. For nothing he does, or can say is plainer.

Then for the security of Princes, methinks it is something, that Withrington
allows not the Pope can make it lawful for one to Invade another. If you urge
that he allows the Pope can command them, and therefore supposes they lawfully
may; nay farther, that they ought do so, when the Pope commands, because lawful
Commands are to be obeyed: I conceive he might reply, that he supposes no more
than all the World knows to be true. For we see Princes may, and do Invade one
another every day. And for the Obedience urged to the Pope's Commands, in that
Case, what if he should say, the Obedience of Princes is, as the Service of
Christians, rational, not blind: That being entrusted with the Temporal Sword
by God, and accountable to Him, not the Pope, for the use of it, They both may,
and ought to consider first with themselves, whether what the Pope commands be
lawful; and when they have found it lawful, whether it be expedient: and rest
in both upon their own judgment, and those in whom they confide, not the Popes.
If Withrington should answer in this manner, he might, for ought I see, easily
enough clear himself, and his Doctrine, of prejudice to Princes. For by this
account, they would never make War at the Pope's Command, but when they found
that War both lawful and expedient by their own judgments. And this as often as
they do, they will certainly make War, whether he Command it, or no, nay though
he Command them never so much to keep the Peace.

For my own part, I conceive, that though War be never so lawful, and
expedient, and necessary too, if you will, the Pope cannot command it. Because
(to abstract from what the Pope has to do with the Temporal Sword) I think
Command imports an obligation of performing the action commanded, purely in
virtue of the command, whether the obeyer see the lawfulness or expedience of
the action, or no; nay, though to his judgment it appear not-expedient. And
because Princes in such cases act in virtue of their own sight, not of the
Pope's Authority, I conceive they cannot properly be said to be commanded, or
to obey, even when they do what is said to be commanded; nor can I believe the
Pope speaks in that strain to them. Yet if Withrington would call it
Commanding, he would speak but as many do. For we ordinarily enough say, we
have obeyed our ghostly Father, for example, when we have followed his
directions in things which with our own eyes we saw convenient. But whether the
word Command shall signify so, or so, being a pure Question de nomine, I think
it not worth disputing.

Especially while Protestants are wiser than to amuse us with such unconcerning
Speculations. They saw what truly imported, that all the danger lay in
Authorizing. For could the Pope make it lawful for one Prince to Invade
another, there might be Invasions as often as the Pope pleased, and opportunity
served. Against this mischief they provided; with Commands they would neither
trouble themselves, nor us, seeing that if the thing commanded be unlawful; no
command of it can be obligatory; and if it be lawful, it will be done without,
and even against commands, whenever it is found expedient.

But to return to our matter, this Doctrine, If this Gentleman mistake not,
foully clashes both with Truth and it self. Pray how with Truth? and how with it
self? But I might have saved my Question. For all he answers to it, is to say
the matter over again, with the imputation of a seeming riddle, and then ask,
whether it be not a mere mock pretense of security to crowned Heads? To which,
as luck is, what is said before will spare me the pains of answering. But
whereas he intimates the relief of troubled Consciences depends on this nice
Distinction of Authorizing and Commanding: I should think no man's Conscience
need ever be troubled with it at all. If that will do the business, let it even
be let alone; and Withrington for starting, and this Gentleman for chacing it,
share the blame of troubling those Consciences between them. For the Oath
obliges neither of them to meddle with it.

At last he comes to something, and tells us, this Distinction is in very deed
no Distinction at all, neither in respect of the King, or swearer. Not to the
King, because it is all one to him whether he be invaded or deposed by the
Pope's Authority, or only by his Command. Very true, if he be Invaded and
Deposed. But it is not all one, whether he can be Invaded or Deposed, or not.
They who broacht the Distinction, say he cannot, neither by the Pope's
Authority nor Command purely, and in other cases than such, in which he would
have been Invaded and Deposed though there had been no Authority, or command of
the Pope interposed, nor any Pope to interpose them. And I think there is no
King but will acknowledge, this is not all one as to say, He can as often as
the Pope pleases.

In respect of the Swearer, he says, it is no Distinction, because he cannot
securely, and without self contradiction swear that the Pope has not any Power
and Authority to Depose Princes, if he have Power and Authority to command
others to Depose them: Why so pray? Because this authoritative Injunction is
enough to entitle him to the fact. Very well! Then an unauthoritative
Injunction is not enough to entitle him to the Fact, and the Pope's Injunction
to Depose, say the Distinction-men, is unauthoritative; And his very commanding
others to Depose, both makes and denominates him the Deposer. What? Whether
there be Deposing or no; or if there be, whether the Deposing follow from his
Command, or from something else? Do I burn the House which I Command to be
burnt, if it be not burnt, or if it be, is burnt on other motives than my
Command?

Now, if the Distinction-men say, that Deposition, even when it is commanded by
the Pope, and when it happens, does not follow from the Pope's Command, but
from the Expedience and Necessity seen by the Deposing Prince, and in cases
where no Commands of the Pope to the contrary could hinder it, they are far
enough from being obliged to grant his commanding Deposition in that manner,
denominates him the Deposer. And yet the Pope may be said a Deposer too, if you
please, as the Counselors who advise the Deposing Prince to the War, and the
Soldiers who fight for him, may be said Deposers. But the Pope's Command being
no cause of the effect, even when it happens, how a not-cause should
necessarily come to bear the denomination of an effect, which follows, when it
does follow, from other causes, is in my Opinion something harder to
understand, than the nice distinction he thinks so unintelligible.

Lastly, he tells us, That if it be true, what those Authors assume, that
Temporal Princes have power to Depose one another, the Pope, as a Temporal
Prince, may put in for his share among the rest. Undoubtedly, and for the whole
too, if he be strong enough. But if those Authors assume, or suppose, as he
said before, that this kind of Deposing Power has any thing to do with the
Oath, they are much out with their Assumes, and their Supposes. It is a wild
Fancy, and which cannot, without injury, be fixed on the wisdom of the English
Nation, to imagine they ever dreamed of Depositions of this nature. Alas! it is
not an Oath which can secure our, or any King from being driven out of his
Kingdom, if another, who is strong enough, will in earnest undertake it; no
more than Laws can hinder a man, who is stronger than I, from taking away my
Purse, or Life, if he will.

It was the standing Right to Depose, claimed by the Pope, and by no body else,
against which that wisdom provided this Oath for security. Against strength, or
that Right which may accidentally accrue to Temporal Princes, by breach of
Treaties, or however their Quarrels become just, they neither did, nor could
provide. For who can tie up another man, both stronger than himself, and out of
his reach? Reason, and their mutual agreements are all the ties which are, or
can be among Princes. And there is no security but Force against him who will
break them. In short, I flatly deny there is any thing in this Oath which
concerns the Power of Temporal Princes. And I denied before, that the Power, by
which they Depose, is the deposing Power meant by the Oath, or any body else.

And so I beg the Readers pardon for detaining him so long, with an
entertainment so slight. All has been, to know whether Withrington spoke
properly, or no, when it is not a straw matter whether he spoke, or no. While
the Oath speaks not of Commanding, it is little to purpose to know what others
say of it. Yet the Chapter made a pretty show, the prettiest, I think, of any
in the Treatise, and people would have thought, peradventure, there had been
something in it, if it had been skipt over. But the substance is no more than
you see.

CHAP. VII. VIII.
THe Seventh Chapter, to make way for a Parallel with the Oath of* Allegiance,
compares first two more general Propositions: There is absolutely no Authority
to depose Princes, and There is absolutely no Authority to depose Popes. The
first of which, he says, was proposed, and rejected in France: the second
cannot safely be sworn. And in this indeed he has diverse Catholics to take
his part, though I do not approve of the reason he gives, why it cannot be
sworn, ( viz. because it is disputed) of which enough is said before. Neither
can I tell whether the case be absolutely the same betwixt Popes and Princes.
Those who think Popes may be deposed, think also, that Popes, in some cases,
are subject to a superior Power in the Church, by which they may be deposed.
Now put a Prince so independently sovereign, that he is subject, in no case, to
any Power, but that of God alone, his condition will be different from that
which these men take to be the Popes. And it will not follow, that because
Popes may be deposed, such Princes can.

But this matter concerns not the Oath of Allegiance, nor indeed the Parallel
which follows. He says, if this Oath be spelt backwards, reading Pope for King,
and King for Pope, it cannot safely be taken by any Catholic. And what then?
So the Oath of Allegiance can be taken, no ma^ter whether the other can or no.
Only I deny that it ought to be refused, for the reason he gives, the public
and unreproved disputableness of the case; (For what else he says, is only to
show that it is disputed) as thinking it very unreasonable to say, let it be
disputed as much as it will, that it is unlawful for him who is in his
conscience fully persuaded of the Truth of either side, to swear that he is so.
For that must go to the Parallel, to make it exact. And whether it do or no,
the Truth may be seen with certainty, and sworn with security, notwithstanding
the Controversy.

As for the thing it self, I cannot tell, but I suspect that few, either
Catholics or Protestants, would scruple to swear, if there were occasion, that
Kings have not Power and Authority to depose Popes. Provided that King-deposing
Power be understood in the same sense, as Pope-deposing Power is understood in
the Oath. For if it be meant of Deposing by Force, undoubtedly there are Kings
strong enough to drive the Pope out of his Chair. But understanding it of an
inherent right, I conceive there is none, no not among the Enemies of the Pope,
who thinks Kings have the same Power over Popes, which Popes claim over Kings.
Neither does joining with the Church alter the case. For as the hardness and
weight of the Hammer with which I strike is lodged in the Iron, not in my Hand;
The Authority of the Church joined to the King, does not cease to be in the
Church, because the King uses it, or rather is used by it. He himself puts the
Deposition to be by Authority of the Church; what Authority Kings have besides,
is but to use their own Power as they see fit.

To meddle farther with what I conceive little material, I think not proper. It
will be time enough to consider better of it, when the case happens. Till then
it seems an unconcerning speculation, which I leave to those who think it worth
their pains.

The following Chapter indeed concerns the Oath; but, for the greatest part of
it, not me. The substance is to show, that the proper matter of an Oath of
Allegiance is outward action, not inward persuasion, and therefore would have
Will-not sworn instead of Cannot What is requisite for the public safety,
belongs to the determination of those to whom it is entrusted, and they are to
resolve on the shall, or shall not: my privacy is confined to the may, or may
not. Besides, though I see no reason in the world why any man's Conscience
should check at the Cannot; yet I have a great aversion from intrenching on the
liberty of others. I love to do as I would be done to; as I should not take it
well to have other men's Persuasions obtruded on me, so neither do I think it
allowable in me to obtrude mine on other men. I thought it a charitable service
to examine whether the Cannot need be bogled at, if it be urged; but to make it
be urged, I think neither charitable, nor rational. Let this Gentleman persuade
those whom it concerns, to be content with his Will not; I, for my part, will
throw no rub^ in his way.

On the contrary, I will do him all the service I can. I will freely avow, I
think he is in the right when he puts Action, not Judgment, for the proper
matter of Allegiance. I conceive Magistrates need not be, and are not much
concerned what people think, so they always do what is fitting. Only Judgments
which have influence on Actions under their care, cannot, I think, be excluded
from their care. I will also avow, that I verily believe there are among the
Will-nots as good Subjects, and who in all Emergencies, even against the Pope,
would approve themselves such, as Can-nots can be for their hearts. I would
freely be bound, body for body, for some of them; For I know they would be
Can-nots in their Actions, whatever they are in their Speculations. Whether
they can, as this Gentleman says, give us good security for their Allegiance,
is for them to judge, who are to look to that security. And to them I refer
him, with this assurance, that I shall be very glad if they can agree.

I see not what I have to do, till he comes to the Can-nots, and says of them,
they may change as well as the Will-nots. And I cannot deny but Man is a
Creature subject to change, nor can I see what security an Oath, or any thing
else can give, that an honest man shall never turn Knave. I do not think the
framers of the Oath, or any other, expected by it to alter Nature, and render
Man unchangeable before his time. But yet the Can-not seems to have some
advantage of the Will-not. For who is persuaded that nothing can render
disobedience lawful, is more likely to prove obedient, than he who thinks
disobedience may indeed become lawful, but yet engages never to be disobedient.
For why should he not do a lawful thing?

This Gentleman now will undertake to answer for both. I thank him for his
kindness, and shall not be behind hand with him in good Offices, when I can be
serviceable to him. He says, that both may be fixed by Oath, though with this
advantage to the Will-not, that the Will may be fixed immediately, and Opinion
only by means of the Will. I shall not contest upon the point of Precedence,
nor envy any Advantage of the Will-nots. But if he have nothing else to answer,
I wish he had only answered for himself. Whether what he say in behalf of his
way be satisfactory, I have already said, is for them to consider, whom it
concerns him to satisfy. I, for my part, shall be satisfied with any thing,
and whether I be or no, is no great matter.

But for what concerns the other, I doubt they will not think themselves fairly
dealt with, by allowing them only bare Opinion (that is in his Language, a
state of suspense and indetermination) to make them pass for men, who would
swear any thing, even while they were in suspense, and undetermined concerning
it. He may think ill of them, if they have deserved it: but sure they have not
deserved he should think so ill.

Again, What can be made of this fixing Opinions by Will? It seems to tread on
the heels of a Bull. Since his very notion of Opinion implys not fixure, I
cannot easily discern what good sense the words can bear. Does he mean, that by
willing long enough, and strong enough, I can will my Opinion into Certainty,
or not-seen Truth into seen Truth? This, I conceive, is something hard to be
done, and when it is done, it is not fixing Opinion, but unfixing Opinion, and
fixing something else in its stead. Or does he mean perhaps the just contrary,
that the Will shall have that influence on the Opinions, that they shall never
cease to be Opinions, nor the Judgment ever pass farther, and arrive at
Knowledge? This may properly enough be called fixing Opinions: but I do not
think the Gentlemen of the other way will think themselves much obliged to him,
for teaching them an Art, how to be sure never to come to Knowledge. Nor do I
think it will be much satisfactory to any body else, to know such order shall
be taken for their security, that as nothing is, so nothing ever shall be known
of the matter, in which they desire to be secured. What else remains for him to
mean I see not, but that, whatever our Opinions be, we may be fixed to Act
according as we shall swear. But this is to fix not Opinion, but Action. And
whether the Action can be securely fixed, till the Judgment, as well as the
Will, be first fixed, concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of that Action,
is the difficulty he is to clear to those, whom it concerns, and in which I
wish him successful.

For my part I conceive this beginning at the Will to be a preposterous and
unnatural Method. I apprehend the nature of Man requires he should be led by
his Understanding. I see they are called Wilful who follow the dictates of
their Will, (and Wilfulness is not reckoned among the Virtues) unless that Will
be first settled by Reason, and that to follow it otherwise is alwais dangerous,
and often blamable and vicious. It Is plainly for the blind to lead him who has
Eyes; For the Understanding is the Eye of the Soul. The right way then of
fixing both Will and Action, I take to be by beginning at the Understanding,
and fixing her first by the sight of Truth, and by her the Will. For he, I
think, will constantly act one way, who sees he ought to do so.

Thus, I apprehend, the Gentlemen of the other way may say they are fixed in the
present case. They may say, They will therefore always stand by their King and
Country, because they see that such is their Duty. They may see that God has
commanded that Duty without this Exception, Unless the Pope depose. They may
see the reasons alleged for that exception deficient and unconcluding, and the
reasons against it strong and convictive. And their sight may ^^ther produce
absolute certainty, or, what in this case is equivalant, a full persuasion that
it is so. For that is as much as the moderation of this Oath requires. Hence
they may rationally hope, that the imperfection of a changeable nature, of
which it is impossible for them, or any body else, to divest themselves, will
not bring them into the suspicion of being changeable in their Allegiance.

For there are but two ways by which they can change, either by* changing their
Judgments, or ceasing to act according to them. And for their Judgments, they
cannot change till what now appears True, come to appear False, and the
contrary True. And this, besides that to them who see the Truth with certainty
it is absolutely impossible, is otherwise in our case a wild supposition. For
when numbers of the best Wits of Christendom, for several hundreds of years
have strained themselves to the utmost, and yet failed to show them this Truth
and Falsehood, which are supposed may appear at last, to fear a change of
Judgment from new Lights, is not much better than to hope to catch Larks with a
Net made of the falling Sky. I believe Protestants will think themselves well
enough, if they be safe till that day come. If they do not, I know not how they
can be secure of one another. For they are men too, subject to the weakness of
changeable Mortality, as well as their Neighbors. And if they cannot be secure
of other men's Judgments, because of new supposed Lights, neither can they be
secure of their own.

As for changing the second way, by ceasing to act according to their
Judgments, or turning Knaves, the case is, I suppose, excluded by the very
tender of the Oath. For it is to no purpose to require Oaths of those who are
not thought honest men, and will continue so. Protestants know well enough,
that it is not Conscience, but Fear, which works upon Knaves, and could never
propose the Oath as an expedient to secure the Allegiance of other than honest
men.

CHAP. IX.
THe two last Chapters promise an Answer to the Author of the Questions, as far
as concerns ours at present: yet the first seems only to take a care of the
Jesuits, who to my apprehension might have been past by, without prejudice to
our Question. For sure to understand whether the Oath of Allegiance may be
taken or no, it is not absolutely necessary to know how either French or
English Jesuits have behaved themselves. I, for my part, have a veneration for
the Jesuits, and all Religious; though I must confess, I love all Orders better
than any one, and Truth better than all. I wish them all the reputation they
deserve, and to deserve all they desire, and shall never by my good will raise
any cloud, which may hinder it from shining in its full luster. Leaving the
Jesuits then to enjoy, without disturbance, the Fruits of this Gentleman's
Labors, the good Opinion of the Reader, I turn to what may appear more nearly
related to our business.

His first Exception against the Author is, for mistaking the matter of Fact.
And truly I think he did mistake one Censure for another, the Censure of the
Admonitio, for the Censure of Santarellus, which, as this Gentleman says, was
not past till some days after the Decree, by which the Jesuits were commanded
to subscribe. But I'do not perceive what this mistake makes or marrs, and, I
suppose, no body would mistake willingly, but for some advantage. That the
Jesuits in France actually did subscribe the Censure against Santarellus, which
is all he pretends, we still have reason to believe. The Decree mentioned,
besides subscription to the Censure against the Admonitio, requires the Jesuits
of Paris within three days to bring into the Court an Act, by which they should
disavow and detest the Book of Santarellus expressly, and procure the like Act
from the rest of the Jesuits in France within two Months. It orders farther,
That two of their body be deputed to write in the name of the rest, Doctrine
contrary to Santarellus, and bring their writing into the Court within eight
days, and this under penalty of high Treason. Whether this Order were obeyed, I
cannot tell, but the former was. The Act is extant, whereby disavowing and
detesting the bad Doctrine of Santarellus, they promise to subscribe the
Censure which should be made of that pernicious Doctrine by the S^rbo^.

I hope I shall not be challenged of mistaking too, because this Act bears date
16 March, a day before the Decree. I suppose, that whenever it was signed, it
was not brought into the Court before the Decree past, else methinks it would
not have been required, if it had been there already. And it might very well be
made before, in pursuance of a former Order, given them by word of mouth, when
they appeared some few days before personally in Parliament. However it were,
it is apparent by the Act, that the Jesuits did promise to subscribe the Sorbon
Censure against Santarellus, and actually did subscribe, or break promise. So
that while the substance of what is said in the Questions remains in its full
force, I see not how it imported this Gentleman to use so many words about a
circumstantial mistake.

His next Exception I was very sorry to see. He blames the Author for cutting
off part of the Doctrine of Santarellus, with an unreasonable, etc. which he
says, may beget a mistake in the Reader, and give a different face to the
matter. For it may be justly doubted, whether the Faculty would have pronounced
so severe a judgment against the first part of the Doctrine, (viz. The Pope can
depose for Heresy) had not the last aggravating circumstance (or rather cause)
deserved and sharpened the Censure. Those circumstances are, That the Pope may
depose, if it be expedient, if the Prince be faulty, negligent, useless, etc.
Now for the Author, I conceive, by not citing the whole, when he promised only
a short Extract, he has done no great injury to the Reader, and none at all to
Santarellus, or those of his Order, by forbearing to say all the bad he knew.
And for the thing it self, if this Gentleman have a mind to maintain, that the
first part of the Doctrine does not deserve the Sorbon Censure, we shall see
how good his Reasons are, when he lets us know them. In the mean time I can
hardly think they are of his mind in France. For sure it was not for those
aggravating circumstances alone, that Mariana, and Suarez were burnt, and
Bellarmin condemned. The Exception he takes to the Censure, for not being
separately applied to each Proposition, to my apprehension, makes against him.
For it is a sign there needed no separation, and that the whole was corrupted
into one mass of perdition. And so I leave the deposing Power to this
Gentleman's protection, if he think fit to undertake it: wondering how favor to
it should concern the Question in this Chapter, which in the first was foreign
to this purpose: and grieving, that to depose even for Heresy should be
thought a Doctrine which needs aggravating circumstances, to deserve a sharp
Censure.

There follows a pretty severe reprehension of the Author, for conjecturing the
different conduct of the French and English Jesuits, might proceed from the
difference of their Interests. To which I can only say, that we are all
Mortals, and our tongues, and much more our thoughts, will sometimes run before
our Wits. I wish he were the only man in the World, into whose thoughts a
suspicion of Interest in Religious men had ever fallen. Were it in my Power to
regulate matters, neither should the not-Religious suspect, nor the Religious
give occasion of suspicion. For if any do, I doubt they have the severer
account to make of the two. Whether they do or no, I will not so much as
conjecture; though I believe this Gentleman understands the World too well, not
to know the suspicious Author is not without Companions in his fault, if it be
one.

But leaving that matter to him to whom the Author has, and every body shall
make their accounts, He proceeds to say in behalf of the Jesuits, that if the
Cause of the French and English were the same, the English could not in
likelihood run any hazard by writing after the French Copy; but it is not the
same; there being a bare Subscription in France, and an Oath in England, and
therefore no wonder if they act differently in different circumstances. This is
in two words, The Jesuits always do well. Which every body may believe that
pleases, for any thing I mean to say to the contrary. It concerns not our
Question that I perceive: and if it did, I should undoubtedly side with
Religious men, where I could with truth.

But the difference betwixt Subscribing and Swearing, which he makes another
mistake in the Author, I take to concern our Question something, and proper to
be considered. The Author says, That certainly no sincere and generous honesty
will solemnly and deliberately attest under his hand, what he will not in due
circumstances swear to be true. What mistake or harm can there be in this?
Truly it seems so clear to me, that I wonder how they fell out about it, unless
perchance this Gentleman, who thinks the Author mistaken in his Position, be
himself mistaken in the Author. What the Author says is this: He who attests a
thing is true, may swear it is true. I hope he does not understand him to say,
that the Attestor may swear that is true, which he attests is doubtful, or
barely probable, or uncertain. If he do, he misunderstands the Author, and the
mistake is on his side. Again, by True, I conceive no more is meant than True
to the Attester, or that it be lodged or settled in his Judgment as such, and
that he be not conscious that what he attests is true, is peradventure not
true. Not but that it is possible the grounds, on which he relys, may deceive
him; but he must not be aware of any deceit, but be fully persuaded there is
none. Otherwise he cannot assert, it is true to him, his own heart witnessing,
that it is not true to him, or if he do, he is no honest man.

This being so, what fault can be found with the Author? Is it not plain, that
an honest man neither will, nor can attest that to be true of which he is not
fully persuaded that it is so? Is it not plain, that what is fully persuaded is
true, to him is true, not doubtful, or uncertain, or only probable? If it be
indeed true to him, he may swear it is true to him, and in due circumstances
ought. Who refuses to swear, plainly refuses to do what he ought, and that is
plainly to be wanting to what honesty requires.

What has this Gentleman to say against this? How! swear to be true? says he;
and yet this Gentleman (the Author) knew full well (had he reflected on it)
that the only Question here is, of swearing or abjuring Opinions. Very like he
did so; and he knew well too, that Opinions in that place signifies Tenets, or
Points controverted, whereof one side is, and must be true, and,
notwithstanding the controversy, may be seen to be so. And he understood, as
all the World understands, that when a man has attested one of the disputed
Opinions to be true, he has attested that he is not in suspense about it, but
resolved that that side of the contradiction is true, and that it is not
Opinion to him, as Opinion signifies suspense, and indetermination. Why may he
not swear this, if he can, and do atttest it?

Why this Gentleman is sure, the daily practice of the Church, in a free and
inoffensive subscribing of Opinions, abundantly confutes it. For what more
usual amongst our greatest Divines, in resolving Cases of weight and concern,
than to deliver and attest their Opinions under their hand? Very well. And, I
pray, what does Opinion signify here? A state of suspense, and
indetermination? So that when we consult these great Divines, in cases of
weight, the satisfaction and security we get from them, is, that they are in
suspense about the matter, and attest their suspense under their hands. Truly
if this be so, we plain men of the World are wonderfully abused.

We know our selves ignorant in matters which concern the conduct of our Souls,
and take you to be knowing, who profess and exercise the Trade. Yet we are not
so ignorant, but that we know there are several Opinions among you, and, if
that were all, could take one at a venture which pleased us best, and never
trouble you. But we desire to proceed securely, and come to learn of you, which
of these Opinions is true, and we ought to follow. And when you have given us
your resolution under your hand, we apprehend, that your are resolved your
selves, not in suspense and undetermined, and that the Opinion you commend to
us, is true, as far as your judgments, on which we rely, can secure us. If it
be otherwise, and your own jugments unsettled, in that wherein you undertake to
settle us, we are plainly deceived. For we take your attestation for assurance
that they are settled, and settled according as you attest.

Truly these great Divines at this rate will run the hazard of being
conjectured little honest men. And if this Gentleman have indeed a kindness for
the Jesuits, as one would guess by his writing, he will desire they should not
be of the number of great Divines at this time. An honest man, who were
ignorant of what he is asked, would say so, and send him who asks, to some body
else who were more knowing. Or if it were a Point which no body knew, he would
tell him ingenuously, and save him the pains of a fruitless enquiry. But to
take upon him to be knowing, where he is conscious that he is not knowing; to
resolve another, and in matters of weight, where he is not resolved himself; to
deceive those who rely on him with an attestation of suspense, instead of an
attestation of truth, which we desired, and thought we had gotten; are things
which among us, do not pass for fair dealing, and which when we observe among
those of our own Tribe, we think them not honest men who do them.

Wherefore I must needs believe Divines do not act in that manner, and that
they are verily persuaded that whatever they attest under their hands for true,
really is true; however the greatest of them may have their failings now and
then. And I must needs give it with the Author against this Gentleman, not
being able to see any thing which should hinder a man from swearing as much as
he attests. Nor do I think it reasonable, that any one should venture his Soul,
where he who bids him venture, refuses to venture his own. Nay, though his
attestation should signify no more than that he is in suspense, the Author
would still be in the right, who obliges only him to swear a thing is true, who
has attested that it is so, and therefore means no more than that an honest man
will solemnly attest no more than he will swear. And such an Attester I hope
may safely swear that he is in suspense; though when he has done, if he never
will attest more, he had best keep it to himself. For those who know it will be
tempted to swear too, that they will never come at him more.

And for the consequence from subscribing to swearing, I take it to be so far
from a gross offense to Reason, and Conscience, Logic, and Divinity, that
could I answer for all as much as for one, I would say positively they do all
oblige a man to subscribe no more than he can and will swear. I mean, as I
conceive the Author meant, so as he subscribes. If he subscribes for absolute,
or evidently known Truth, he will swear that it is, or that he knows it True. If
he subscribe for True to his judgment, as it is generally, and always
understood, unless the contrary be expressed, he will swear it is true to his
judgment: if for probability, that it is probable, and so however he subscribes.
For indeed subscribing is calling the World to witness, that he is indeed
persuaded as he subscribes, and who refuses to call God to witness too, in due
circumstances, gives more reason than an honest man would, to suspect, that he
deals not uprightly with the World.

The last Quarrel he has with the Author, is for saying, That the Jesuits are
the strictest of all Religious in maintaining and extending the Popes
prerogatives. This concerns the Jesuits, not me; and though it did, I should
think it were good before I meddled with it, to know of them, whether they take
it for an Aspersion. For if they do, I can tell them an infallible way to wipe
it off. It Is but doing what this Gentleman says they may without hazarding
their concerns, writing after the French Copy, subscribing a disavow, and
detestation of the Doctrine of Santarellus. If they did so, I, and every body,
who think them sincere men, should verily believe they truly did disavow and
detest it; and, because I believe them good men too, and would not disavow,
what they thought were true, that they were persuaded the Doctrine of
Santarellus is false. And then I am persuaded, whatever this Gentleman has,
they would have no scruple to swear, in fitting circumstances, that they are so
persuaded. I will drive it no farther, for fear it should reach the Oath of
Allegiance, which in my Opinion is not far distant from this case. Nor had I
said so much, but only for the Example, which the matter afforded me, to show
the consequence from subscribing to swearing, is not so far distant as this
Gentleman would persuade us.

CHAP. X.
THe last Chapter is made up of what else he has, or thinks fit to say, against
the Author, a mighty weak man, in his Opinion, and who generally mistates the
Question, even contrary to his own express Assertions, and speaks but little to
it when he has done. Truly if the Question be mistated, it had been never a
whit the worse, if he had said less: but methinks it does not hang very well
together, that the Question should be mistated by him, whose Assertions are
expressly contrary. I know not how a Question should be stated but by
expressions, and those which are contrary to mistating; I should think, state
it right. I shall only say, that there are some, peradventure as impartial
Judges, and as careful Examiners, as other men, who have something a better
Opinion of the Author, and who think not a jot the worse of him for what this
Gentleman has said against him. And there are who suspect the Authors weakness
was not the only reason, why this Gentleman would not answer the whole, since
he has showed so good will to undertake him, by answering part. For my part,
let every one judge as he pleases. Who judges amiss, the fault and harm will be
his own. I only mind what imports our business.

The first thing he here dislikes, is fetching over a Parallel from France to
England, as asking why we may not profess as much as they To this he says, It Is
one thing to profess as much as they, and another to swear as much as they
profess; whereof, though the first might, the second cannot safely be done, for
the reasons formerly inculcated. I cannot tell whether this, though the first
might, signify it may, or it may not: for it may be taken either way. But if
he be not disposed to renounce the deposing Doctrine, even as fully as the Oath
of Allegiance requires, I would wish him to have a car^ so much as of
professing what the French did; for fear of being drawn farther than he has a
mind to go, and find the consequence from professing to swearing, strain as
well as from subsoribing. For subsoribing is but one kind of professing. For
the rest, it is the old story over again. Where I have met with the reasons, he
speaks of, the Reader will see what I think of them.

As for the Question he asks, How it comes to pass that the Oath of Allegiance
having been so long translated; The French Universities have not voluntarily
delivered their free judgment, and unanimously subscribed it? With the leave of
those to whom he speaks, I must wonder he had so little acquaintance with the
World as to ask it. I think few, besides himself, ever fancied a French
University should subscribe an English Oath of Allegiance. As for delivering
their judgments, perhaps they would, if they were solicited by such as had
credit with them. Otherwise Universities do not use to assemble and make
Decrees to satisfy every private man. Private Doctors are sometimes more
forward, but then they carry less Authority, and every body knows that they are
there as in other places, some for the Deposing Power, and some against it. I
believe it were not hard to find French Doctors, who should declare the Oath
unlawful; and those who thought otherwise would be shy enough of provoking the
Pope causelessly, and incurring his ill will, to pleasure, not so much as a
friend, but, a mere stranger, and one with whom they have nothing to do.
Besides they have been told stories, of pretenses which the Pope has by human
right, as it appears by the History of the Irish Remonstrance, the Divines of
Lovain were. Till they have studied the case, which till it concern them they
never will, They have reason to hold their hands. But though there were nothing
of all this, it is not the custom of one Nation to thrust themselves, without
interest, into the concerns of another. It Is enough for the French that they
defend their own King, and it is enough for other Nations, that they defend him
by Arguments applicable to other Kings, and which if other Nations will not
apply, the fault is their own. Who expects the French should do other men's
work, and charge their own shoulders with the burden of all Princes concerns,
understands little of their humor. Every one is for himself. We interposed not
betwixt the Jansenists and Jesuits, and are like to hear as little of them in
our Quarrels. If there were nothing else, the French have more civility, than
by taking upon them to decide our differences, to asperse our Nation, as if we
had not men of conscience and learning among our selves.

The next Quarrel he has to the Author, is for saying, The Deposing Doctrine,
however it may by some be held speculatively probable, yet as to any execution,
is practically no Power at all, against one in Possession, and consequently may
be abjured as such. This he calls his next Argument, and says, It begs the
Question, taking for an uncontrovertable truth, the only Point in controversy.
For the Deposing Power has been held, not only speculatively probable, but
safely practicable. True, it was so: but sure it was held safely practicable
only in force of a barely probable Speculation. For to say it was more than
probable, is to say, it was certain. And that, I suppose, this Gentleman will
not do, both for discovering more kindness to it than concerns the Question,
and also because it were to unsay all that has been said in his Treatise, and
allow that one side of a controverted Question may be certainly seen, and
consequently sworn. Now if the Author had begged that a Power only probable,
however it have been held, yet be not safely practicable, nor any Power to turn
Kings out of their Kingdoms, and embroil Nations in confusion and misery, I
think he had been no impudent Beggar. For not so much as any private man was
ever dipossest of a long enjoyed Estate, by any Court of Justice, upon pretense
of a bare probable Title in another man to it.

I must confess I have a great curiosity to know what this Gentleman himself
thinks of the matter, whether Deposing were safely practicable, as it was held,
or not. If he think it was, truly he has reason to quarrel with the Author, and
all who maintain the Oath, because they deny it is safely practicable. But then
it were to be wished, he would own his true reason, and stand to it, that people
may know what to speak to. For if he think it was not safely practicable, I see
no rational ground of quarrel he can have to the Author, who says but what
himself thinks true, and begs no more than he is willing to give.

But after all, the Author did not go a begging. He was not so poor at this
time. This Gentleman mistakes him, and calls that his Argument which is not. He
discourses in this manner: A certain general Rule is to be observed
notwithstanding an Exception that is uncertain. The Precept of Obedience to
Kings is certain Catholic Doctrine, the Exception, unless the Pope Depose,
uncertain. Therefore the Precept obliges, notwithstanding the Exception. Hence
he infers, in the words cited by this Gentleman, that though the Exception, or
Power of the Pope be held probable, the practice cannot be allowed, as it is
manifest it cannot, if we must act according to the certain Precept. This, if
it be Begging, is as fine begging as one shall ordinarily meet with. Few dress
up their Provings more gaily.

There follows, says he, another Argument: And so there does indeed a great way
off. For the Author it seems, in the 15 Pages which this Gentleman skips, has
nothing to purpose, or else worth notice. The business is, (for I am unwilling
to transcribe many lines) whether renouncing Obedience to the Pope's Commands,
do not amount to renouncing his Power. This Gentleman makes two parts of the
Argument. The first which he tells us is quite besides the Question, and so had
great luck that it was not skipt over with its fellows, he contracts into these
words: Either deny the Pope's Authority, or obey it. To this he says, That if
those good Subjects, who will swear they will adhere to the King, though the
Pope should Depose him, will but say (though not swear) he cannot Depose him
(which is no more than with the French Divines to deny the Deposing Power) then
the Gentleman (the Author) and the first part of his Argument are satisfied Not
very well, I doubt, nor any body else, unless they mean as they say. For who
says what he does not mean, will hardly pass either for good Subject, or good
man. Their conscience must either bear them witness, that the Pope indeed
cannot Depose, or they cannot say so without lying, and few people are
satisfied with Liars. But if their conscience be in earnest persuaded so,
manifestly it is not check of conscience, which hinders them from doing all
that the Oath of Allegiance desires, swearing that it is so persuaded. So that
bare saying, if you bar lying, may prove as bad, and of as scurvy consequence,
as subscribing, and professing, and trepan a man, before he be aware, into
swearing.

For my part I am wonderfully ill satisfied with all this, and see this offer
to say, and refusal to swear, with extreme grief. It Is well that all Catholics
are not of that mind. If they were, those who think ill enough of us already,
would soon think worse, and take us for a sort of people, who cared not what we
said, or subscribed, and who perhaps would profess for true what we thought
false, and contrariwise, or never concern our selves what were true or false,
as long as we were not put to our Oaths. None but Magistrates, or who had Power
to administer Oaths, would deal with us at this rate, nor they neither after a
while. For he whose word will not be taken, will not long be believed upon his
Oath. I hope, and doubt not but, this Gentleman is provided against this
scandal. But I am sure, if any Maxims would infer it, they are not Catholic
Maxims. As I am only acquainted with common roads, and know nothing of the
nearer ways of Casuistry, I apprehend things in this manner. Words I take to be
signs, and witnesses to the hearer, of what is in the speakers mind. Who puts
into his words, what is not in his mind, wrongs his hearer and himself, and
overthrows the Basis of all human Conversation, and Traffic, Veracity. Every
honest man seems a kind of Peer in judgment. What he says on his faith, (and
this he does as often as he speaks deliberately in a matter of moment,) is as
guilty, or not guilty upon my honor.

Swearing I take to add nothing to saying, save a stronger confirmation to
those, who not relying on our honesty, require God should be engaged, with
whom, they think he must be madly wicked who dares dissemble, since none can
deceive him, nor hope to escape his severe hands. But there must be the same
grounds for both, viz. Truth, or the things being in the words, as it is in the
mind. Without this you cannot say, with it you may, in due circumstances swear.
Neither does swearing add or alter, nor saying diminish any thing of this, nor
does swearing false, more wrong our Neighbor, though it does God and our
selves, than saying false. Wherefore I cannot understand how any one can fear
perjury, by swearing what he says, but he who has said what is against his
conscience. For Perjury, as this Gentleman rightly observes, is nothing but a
Lie sworn, and so of necessity there must be a Lie before there can be Perjury.
So that I see not how he who thinks himself in danger of Perjury, by swearing
the Pope cannot Depose, can avoid the danger of lying (damnable as well as the
other, though not so grievously) by offering to say it. The conscience must be
safe in both cases, or neither, and all the several ways of checks, which this
Gentleman has found in his Second Chapter against Swearing, must as necessarily
be avoided in Saying, unless a man care not to be damned, so it be not
altogether with the deepest.

For the Second, and only pertinent part of his Argument, he puts these words
of the Author: What wise and real difference as to Government, and the
practical part of Human Life, is there betwixt these two; I Will swear never to
obey my Commander, and I Will swear he has no power to command me? The answer, he
says, is easy. The last is an assertary Oath, and swears to a disputable piece
of Doctrine as to an absolute Truth, which is down right Perjury. This is still
the old Song, to the Tune of the whole Treatise, which what harmony it makes to
my ears, I have often enough said. I shall only observe it has something a
begging countenance, as well as its neighbors, while it assumes the Doctrine
sworn is disputable. For the Author, he sees, is of opinion, that forswearing
the Practice, amounts to forswearing the Power, and puts the Question, whether
there be Power, or no, out of dispute, so that the later is not disputable to
him who can swear the former. Again, This absolute Truth is a supposition more
than needs, or will, be granted. It Is as the Oath is. If it run as the Oath of
Allegiance, Truth to the best of the swearers judgment will serve turn. And I
conceive the Author, where he speaks of true, meant no otherwise, it being so
generally understood, and certainly meaning nothing else in our case. For what
else is material, there will be occasion to speak of it in the next branch.

Which, he says, being a promissory Oath, and tending wholly to practice,
engages not for the absolute Truth of any Doctrine, but only for the swearers
Allegiance and Loyalty, and therefore requires no absolute certainty to build
on, but only a safe and practically probable Opinion. That this is a promissory
Oath I agree, that we may agree at least in something. But this promissory
Oath, to my apprehension, does engage for the Truth of some Doctrine, and if it
did not, could not engage for the Allegiance and Loyalty of the swearer. As for
absolute Truth, and absolute Certainty, which he puts in, such an Oath as the
Oath of Allegiance requires them not, so that if he had an eye to that, they
are rubs which he has found out to cast into a way, which was otherwise smooth.
Let but his words and judgment agree; let him engage for Truth enough to
satisfy his Conscience, and Certainty enough to answer for so much Truth, and
he may safely take the Oath of Allegiance, for any thing more that it engages
him to, or requires of him. Taking Truth then for such Truth as is requisite to
the Oath of Allegiance, I conceive, that he who swears he will never obey the
Pope in the case of Deposing, does as much engage for the truth of this
Doctrine, That the Pope cannot Depose, as he who swears in the Terms of the
Oath.

And I am so persuaded, because I think it as much Perjury, or, if it have
another name, as great a sin, to swear what is unlawful, as what is false. I
think also, that the lawfulness of what we swear, must be as much known, and
fixed in our conscience with as great a certainty, as the Truth: and that the
inward checks against Injustice, make a man as deeply accountable to God, as
checks against F^lsity. Wherefore, unless he who swears, that he will always
disobey the Pope, be satisfied in his conscience, that it is, and always will
be lawful to disobey him, I think he cannot swear. That promissory Oath
therefore engages for this Truth, That it is always lawful to disobey him, nor
is there any difference whether he swear in the promissory, or assertory form.
But it cannot be lawful to disobey him, who has power to command, nothing being
more evident, than that such power imports an obligation to obey. Wherefore he
who expressly, or virtually swears it is lawful to disobey the Pope, swears also
he has no power to command. Now he who takes the Oath of Allegiance does no
more, and he who swears in the promissory form, to my apprehension does no
less. So that I cannot imagine how those who refuse the one, offer the other.

But if there be a difference, as this Gentleman apprehends there is, and that
the promissory Oath do not engage for any Truth, I conceive, there can be no
security of Allegiance by the Promissory. Every body knows, that who promises
an unlawful thing, is so far from being obliged to keep his promise, that he is
obliged not to keep it. And I speak of Promise by Oath. If the Pope have power
to command, disobedience is plainly unlawful. Who promises to disobey him, and
yet allows that perhaps it is true that he has power to command, promises to do
what perhaps is unlawful, and what he acknowledges to be so. If any man's
conscience will allow him to make such a promise, every man's judgment will tell
him, that it can no more than perhaps oblige, and that perhaps who makes it,
may be obliged to break it. Who thinks this a sufficient security of
Allegiance, may do so, if he pleases: but, I doubt, he will have a hard talk to
make others think so. For the promiser may perhaps be obliged not to perform,
and 'twill not be thought reasonable the security of Princes should depend on
may-be's. For my part, I see not what can be plainer, than that, if unlawful
promises are not to be kept, those promises are only secure, where lawful
things are promised. Wherefore who cannot, or will not engage for the
lawfulness of what he promises, cannot engage that his promise shall be
performed.

I know not whether it may be said, That it is lawful to do what is not seen to
be unlawful. And therefore since, whether the Pope have power or no, I do not
see he has, it is lawful for me to disobey him, and oblige my self always to
disobey him by promise. But this will not do: because I cannot oblige my self
for ever, nor for longer than till I remain in ignorance. As soon as I see the
Pope has Power, my disobedience becomes unlawful, and I am bound to break
promise; my performance therefore evidently depends on my sight. But I do not
see what security I can give that I shall never see, what I confess perhaps is
to be seen, and which may be seen, it may be the next day, it may be the next
hour, after I have made the promise, for any thing I can answer to the
contrary. I fear in spite of whatever can be done to exclude it, there must
always be a tacit condition impli'd in these kind of promises, and that he who
professes absolutely he will always be loyal, can mean no more than that he
will be loyal, unless, or till it appear, that he ought not to be so. Which to
me seems but slender security.

Again, What appearance of security is there in a promissory Oath, which the
promiser acknowledges may be dispenst with? Though he should swear not to
accept of a Dispensation, the matter, I doubt, would not be much mended. For if
there be a power to dispense, and that power have exercised it self, and
dispensed, whether the Dispensation be accepted or no, the Oath is truly
dispensed with, and cannot oblige him who acknowledges it is so, as he must,
who acknowledges a power of validly dispensing. Wherefore if he accept not the
Dispensation, it is not in virtue of the bond, of his Oath, for that is
cancelled, even in his own judgment, but in virtue of something else: for which
if he can offer other security, well and good; but his former security is void.
There is no obligation from the nature of the thing: For Loyalty to Princes
deposed, is not to be preserved, if the Pope truly can depose. There is no
obligation from the Oath: For that may be dispenst with, and though it were
not, as soon as it is seen that the Pope has power to depose, to obey a deposed
Prince is unlawful, and the obligation of the Oath ceases.

The truth is, the case is hard. What is promised is unlawful, if the Pope can
depose. No man's conscience can be obliged to a thing unlawful, and his
conscience will not allow him to think the Pope cannot depose. But yet because
he does not absolutely see the Pope can depose, though he shrewdly suspect it,
and hopes he never shall, his conscience will suffer him to promise absolutely
that he will always be loyal; though every body sees, it may happen to be his
duty, according to his principles, not to be Loyal. And so upon the matter he
desires you to accept of his good will, for the deed, and to believe he will
never do otherwise than he promises, since his conscience is incompatible with
any obligation, that this will shall be constant. And when a man does all that
he can do, why should not people be satisfied? Now he whose conscience is
persuaded that the Pope cannot depose, when he promises to be always loyal, is
doubly obliged to performance; by his Oath, and by the nature of the thing
promised, which obliges whether he promise or no, and therefore cannot be
dispenst with.

In the last place he brings what he calls, A conjectural proof, or rather mere
affirmative presumption of the Author concerning our Ancestors. But he was a
little out, when he took it for a proof. It is the Answer to an Objection,
which the Author had framed against himself. Nor do I see any great
presumption, in thinking our Ancestors would have changed their judgments, if
they had seen reason so to do. And I think the Reasons alleged by the Author,
and this Gentleman out of him, would have gone near to have persuaded them, not
only that the opinion denying the deposing power is bare opinion, but also that
it is true. In which if I be guilty of presumption too, I hope the sin is not
unpardonable: For I must presume again, that He, and the Author were both
mistaken, if they thought our Ancestors generally refused the Oath of
Allegiance. I am much mistaken if they did not generally take it, though I
foresee there will be a fitter place, to say why I think so.

There remains only to conclude a little differently from him, That since it is
the Voice and Law of Nature, that Protection claims Allegiance, and that
perfect Subjection to Civil Powers, under which we live, is the strict
Injunction, no less than dictate of Reason (he might have said Religion too)
there can be no danger to our Souls in complying with what Nature, Reason, and
Religion require; nor danger of Perjury by giving security, that we will, as we
ought comply; and that Tenets inconsistent with such security, are inconsistent
with all three, and can have no better warrant than scruple. Wherefore I wish
and pray, That rendering to God the things that are Gods, be not made a pretense
of robbing Caesar of the things that are Caesar's, nor our Allegiance to our
King forfeited under a show of Loyalty to God.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO THE Third Treatise.
THe Third Treatise: goes another way to the wood. Declining the Question of
the Deposing Power, with the wariness of the second Author, and with more
liberality allowing every one to hold and defend the contrary, It yet finds
fault with the Oath of Allegiance, upon an extrinsical and accidental account,
viz. the Popes prohibition of it. So that had the Pope either not writ, or not
sent the Breves alleged, there had been no place for this Gentleman's
Argument. It is this: Whoever takes the Oath, denies an exterior obedience to
the Popes prohibition, in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther then
they appertain unto him. But it is unlawful to deny an exterior obedience to
the Popes prohibitions in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther than
they appertain unto him: Therefore it is unlawful to take the Oath.

From this Argument the Author of the Preface takes occasion to tempt us into
their example of throwing the Pope quite off, seeking with this pleasant
smartness to fright us into an apprehension that we shall have a hard task of
it, to justify the Popes Authority, and disobey it at the same time. I must
beg his pardon for that matter, believing that to cut off the Head is but a bad
way to cure the Headache. All sorts of Superiors, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
Supreme and Inferior, exceed sometimes, and find their Commands unperformed,
not only without blame, but with praise. None but Tyrants expect their Word
should pass for Law; All just Powers have their bounds. And I, for my part,
think him much a better Subject, and more a friend, and support of Authority,
who, preserving a due respect, refuses to comply with the failings of his
Superior's, than who with a dangerous flattery sooths his Errors, perhaps into
ruin. Besides, while he himself has showed us how to avoid the precipice, he
has made it something the more inexcusable to leap into it. Wherefore
acknowleding the Popes superiority, I must try how hard it is to answer the
Argument drawn from it.

Yet before I begin, I have something to say to the Topic, which disrelishes
with me for more reasons than one. First, I have some difficulty to understand
it, as plain English as it is. Exterior Obedience is due to the Popes
Prohibition in matters appertaining to him, and so far as they appertain to
him. What means this, so far as they appertain to him? This should signify,
because Spirituals belong to the Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and Temporals to
the Civil, that Spirituals may in some respect become Temporals, and in that
respect belong to the Civil Magistrate, the Ecclesiastical meddling with them no
farther than as they are Spirituals. But then in that respect they are no
longer Spirituals, and so appertain not to the Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and
are excluded from his cognizance by the first Branch. So that what remains for
the second Branch to exclude or signify, I cannot tell. Or may it mean,
because Magistrates are to exercise righteous judgment, that it does not
appertain to them to judge wrong, and so they are to be obeyed only so far as
they are in the right? If this be his meaning, his Argument, I doubt, will do
him but little service. The thing is not always true; for unjust Commands are
sometimes to be obeyed for the good of the community; and if they were not, he
knows it is conceived that the Command in question is not just.

But which is of more import, according to the Argument, the Unlawfulness of
taking the Oath of Allegiance consists in Disobedience to the Popes commands.
And yet he says a little after N. 7. That the Popes Breves do not make the Oath
unlawful, but only declare it to be so Which if it be true, then the
Unlawfulness does not consist in Disobedience, but in the intrinsic
Unlawfulness of the matter sworn, and the Oath had been unlawful whether the
Pope had forbid it or no. But if the Argument be true, and the Unlawfulness do
indeed consist in Disobedience, then plainly there was no Unlawfulness
antecedent to the Prohibition, which the Pope would declare, and the Breves
make the Oath unlawful and nothing else. How these two can hang together, is
very difficult to comprehend. One says the Oath is unlawful, because forbidden;
the other, forbidden, because unlawful. In the first case Prohibition is the
Cause, and Unlawfulness the Effect: in the second, Unlawfulness is the Cause,
and Prohibition the Effect. To say both, is to make the same thing a Cause of
that of which you make it an Effect, that is, both Cause and Effect of it self.
As unintelligible, and as impossible as this is, I cannot blame the Author for
desiring two strings to his bow, and the liberty to shoot now one Unlawfulness,
now another, as occasion serves: but I foresee 'twill be difficult dealing with
such a man. Show the command obliges not, and the obligation of the thing
commanded will be insisted on: show there is no obligation in the thing, and
the command will be obtruded. And who can speak to more than one thing at once?

Now for the Argument, which only presses the Command, I conceive it quite
changes the nature of the Question, turning it from the thing sworn, to the
swearing, from the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the Oath, to the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of taking it. As it is plainly one thing to ask whether Flesh be a
lawful food, and another, whether I may eat it on Fridays: so to ask whether
the Oath be a lawful Oath, is very different from asking, whether I, in such
and such circumstances, may take it. Who inquires whether the Oath be lawful or
no, desires to know whether it contain any thing contrary to the Laws of God or
Man, or no. Who answers of an External Prohibition, speaks of a thing not
contained in the Oath, and says nothing at all to the Question. If I refuse an
Oath, who have bound my self not to swear (supposing I can validly do so) or a
Quaker refuses one, whose conscience permits him not to take any, I think it is
strange Logic which can from thence conclude that Oath unlawful. And I think
it no less strange to conclude this Oath unlawful, because it happens to be
forbidden. For the Prohibition is as extrinsical to the Oath, as the Quakers,
or my Conscience; and the Unlawfulness of an Oath is understood to be an
Intrinsical Denomination.

The Justice required for one of the three conditions of an Oath, the want
whereof he says N. 1. makes an Oath intrinsically evil, must, I think, be meant
of a Justice intrinsical to the Oath. For an extrinsical injustice, sure, can
make it no more than extrinsically evil. And since, as he says, in the same
place, an unjust Oath cannot be justified in any case possible, this
unjustifiable injustice cannot be an extrinsical Injustice by prohibition.
Because if that were all, the same Oath remaining the same, now might, now
might not be justifiably taken, as it has the luck to be forbid, or not forbid;
and might be taken by some, and not by others, as some might be forbid, others
not forbid to take it. As in this case, the Breves being addressed only to the
English, there is nothing in the Argument which can hinder the Scotch, or
Irish, or any other of the Kings Subjects from taking the Oath of Allegiance.
But an Oath truly unjust cannot be taken by any body at any time.

Again, The justest Oath in the World may happen to be forbid, as well as the
most unjust; nor is it possible to frame an Oath, which may not become unjust
this way. As in this very case, I believe it were hard to contrive a
renunciation of the Deposing Power, (without which renunciation there are who
will not be satisfied of our fidelity) into terms, which should escape censure
or prohibition. We have seen the experience in the Irish Remonstrance, and in
the Three Propositions, (and I could instance farther if it were to purpose)
which as free as they are from the Exceptions commonly made against the Oath of
Allegiance, yet have not met with much better luck. So that I fear there is no
fence for their Flayl, and should we refuse to give assurance of our fidelity
(if that renunciation be indeed necessary to assurance) till we could find out
terms which should displease no body, I doubt it will be long before we pass
for faithful Subjects. However it be, this external casual injustice, I
conceive, is not that which people seek, and are obliged to avoid in Oaths. Not
that disobedience to obliging commands is not sin, and ought not be avoided:
But I conceive it is a sin of another nature than Perjury, if that be the name
of swearing injustly. For though the Command happen to be about an Oath, yet it
is but a Command, and the breach of it disobedience, not that irreverence to
God, which is committed by swearing false or unjust things.

For this reason I suspect the Topic will not prove very satisfactory to those
for whose sake he professes to write. Few are ignorant of the Breves he
mentions; but they have a scruple concerning them, and desire to know whether
what they forbid, as contrary to Faith and Salvation, be truly so or no. Who
would satisfy them, should show it is; For if it be not, in sted of quieting
their former scruples, they will be apt to entertain new ones, and desire to
know farther, what necessity there is of obeying a command, manifestly grounded
on a supposition which is not true. This Author undertakes to lay these storms
of doubts, and allow them N. 80. the same liberty with the French, to hold, and
maintain the Pope has no power to Depose Kings, which is the substance of the
Assertory part of the Oath, and N. 50. offers a promissory form, aequivalent, I
suppose, in his meaning, to what is promised in it. This is manifestly to allow
them to hold all, which they profess in the Oath to hold, and do all they
promise to do. And yet, to satisfy them, He will not allow them to take the
Oath, because it is forbidden. Now their difficulty is, How they can be forbid
to profess by Oath, when legally required, that they hold what they do, and
according to this Gentleman, lawfully may hold, and promise what, according to
him, they lawfully may, and ought do. And his satisfaction to this difficulty
is to tell them of a Prohibition, which Prohibition is the very thing in which
they are dissatisfied. It is plain the Oath was, or was not unlawful, before
the Pope forbid it. Who believes it was, needs not the Popes Breves for his
satisfaction. Who believes otherwise will be more apt to be dissatisfied with
the Breves, than the Oath, for all this Gentleman's Argument. For let the Pope
have what power he will, why should he use it to forbid things, which otherwise
might irreprehensibly be don, and this to the manifest and great prejudice of
the obeyers? Till the World be a little better disposed to blind obedience,
such Arguments, I doubt, will not be very satisfactory.

Besides, in my opinion this Topic intrenches a little too much on the
Reverence we owe the Pope. If no Unlawfulness can be shown in the Oath,
independent of his Breves, he is manifestly exposed to the aspersion of
forbidding us lawful things. And that, not upon the score of Unfitness, on
which things otherwise lawful may rationally and profitably be forbidden; but
of an Unlawfulness which this Gentleman allows us to believe there is not. I
conceive, in a Country where all he does is so apt to be mis-interpreted, it
would have become the respect due to him, to have been more chary of his
credit. If any can, it had been much more to purpose for this Author to have
let his Breves alone, and produced that which would have done the business much
better without them. Though Catholics should be satisfied with them,
Protestants, he knows, look upon what they forbid, as a duty required by the
Law of God and Nature, besides that of our Country. By this Gentleman's
Argument, the Pope and we are both left in the lurch, and unable either to
justify him from the aspersion of forbiding us to do our duty, or our selves
from owning a power which can do so.

Were there nothing else but bringing the Popes Authority into dispute, I
conceive, he had deserved much better of him, if he had chosen another Topic.
I, for my part, have a great aversion even from discoursing of Supreme Powers,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; and doubt it is making more bold with them,
than becomes private men. The Authors of the Second Treatise, and
Controversials, in my opinion, are in the right. To preserve the Majesty of
both Powers in an awful distance, is not only respectful, but necessary. And
for the Popes Authority in particular, I must declare I think it of infinite
benefit to the World, and believe it may thank the preposterous zeal of
inconsiderate friends, if fewer be of my mind than should be. For indeed to
strain Authority beyond its bounds, is the worst office which can be don to it.
In sted of getting what is not due, it often loses what is; as who would shoot
farther than his bow will carry, by drawing up his Arrow too high, breaks his
bow. I am very sorry he has, by pressing obedience, drove me to the necessity
either of obeying against my conscience, or giving a reason why I think I ought
not, against my humor. Who is at the Oar, cannot but row; yet I shall endeavor
to strike no deeper, than is just necessary to keep the Boat stedy.

To enter upon the merits of the Cause at last, The Major of his Argument is
this: Whoever takes the Oath, denis an Exterior Obedience to the Popes
Prohibition, in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther than they
appertain unto him. Pray why so? How comes the Oath of Allegiance to appertain
to the Pope? which if we may believe a King, and a King who had the principal
hand in making it, K. James his Apology for the Oath of Alleg. p. 47. and
^lsewhere often.
meddles only with the civil Obedience of Subjects to their Sovereign, in mere
temporal causes. Because, says he, N. 2. Several things are contained, or
involved in this Oath, the decision whereof appertains only to the Spiritual,
and Ecclesiastical Court. If I am not mis-inform'd by Lawyers (for I have no
skill in these matters) when there is question to which Court a Cause belongs,
the decision of that Question, by the old Catholic Laws of England, belongs to
the Temporal Court. I know he is of another Opinion, for Reasons which we shall
see when we come at them. In the mean time I think the practice of our
Ancestors, in which the Spiritual Power has acquiesced, ought to overruled his
Reasons. But this by the by; for I intend not to insist upon it. What are these
several things, which appertain only to the Spiritual Court?

He reckons up these: How far the Spiritual Power extends it self? What
Authority Christ left to the supreme Spiritual Pastor as such? What are the
effects of an Excommunication? What Propositions are Heretical? and, which he
says is the main debate, Whether this Oath be sinful or not? It is, I perceive,
of main importance by which handle we take a thing. All this, as
Ecclesiastically as it sounds, has a pure temporal meaning. For what Spiritual
Power, and Spiritual Pastor, and Spiritual Censure can do (which by the way are
but three several expressions of one thing; It Is in short Spiritual Power
exercised by the Spiritual Governor) means nothing by its extent, and
authority, and effects, but whether Subjects are to obey their Prince, when the
Pope says they are not. And certainly the Question of the Civil Obedience of
Subjects, in civil matters, is a temporal matter belonging to the Temporal
Court, and does not become Spiritual, because a Spiritual Power interposes in
it. It is what it is, whatever that be which medles with it; nor have I heard,
nor can I imagine that Spirituality has the force to assimilate things into its
own nature, like him who turned all he touched to Gold.

But the Oath says, the Pope cannot Depose, and that is to determine the extent
of his Power. I cannot tell whether it be or no. He who says the Thames does
not run over Salisbury-Plain, I think does not determine the bounds of the
Thames. But not to dispute of words, if you will have it a confinement of his
Power, it is such a confinement as belongs to the Civil Power. For he who has
it, as he is to be supposed ignorant in Spirituals, does not exercise any
authority, or pretend to any skill in them: but out of the nature of Civil
government, which belongs to him, and in which he alone is to be supposed
knowing, sees what is consistent or inconsistent with it: and out of that sight
determins what may indeed by accident concern the Spiritual, either power, or
pretenses, but which proceeds from his own skill in matters in which he alone
has it. Barely by knowing what twenty shillings is, I can certainly tell, that
if you add Gold, or take away Brass, it is not twenty shillings; and yet I
determine nothing of the value of either, nor perhaps know so much as what they
are. So it is in this case. The Civil Governor knows what Civil government is,
and by that knowledge can with certainty judge what is necessary for it. He
judges, and all the World sees he judges right, that it cannot subsist without
the obedience of those who are subject to it, in those things in which they are
subject; and certainly concludes, that what takes away that obedience, destroys
the government. Whether it be Spiritual, or Temporal Power, or any thing else,
which pretends to do this, is all one to him. For whatsoever it be, he
evidently sees it ought not be done, and that the pretense is vain. Wherefore
if you will call the denying of that pretense to the Spiritual Power, a
confinement of the Spiritual Power, it is plain he exceeds not the sphere of
his own activity, nor does more than conclude out of the Principles of his own
Art. And this manifestly belongs to him, and so to him as not to any body else;
since every body else is supposed ignorant in them. Neither does he entrench
upon the Spiritual Power, by securing the subsistence of the Temporal
Commonwealth.

Let me add, that it is as much for the interest of the Church, as of the
Commonwealth, that he do so. A Commonwealth can be without a Church, but a
Church cannot be without a Commonwealth. It Is true, the Church is the
principal and more noble, as raising man to a higher and better state, viz. a
disposition to true and lasting happiness; whereas from the Commonwealth he
can only receive these perishable conveniences which are found in a peaceful
society. But yet the Commonwealth is to the Church as the Foundation to a
House. The House is without doubt the principal part, by which those of a
Family have shelter from the weather, conveniences to repose, and converse,
and what else they aim at in buildings. Yet nothing of all this can be without
a firm Foundation; whereas the Foundation, however useless, would yet remain
though the House were gone. So it is between the Commonwealth and the Church.
The Commonwealth is the Foundation, without which there can be no such thing as
a Church. For the Church is a body of men to be raised by Christian Discipline
to the uttermost perfection of which humane nature is capable. And it is evident
there can be no Body of men to be raised, where there is no Body of men. Civil
Government preserves this Body: Take that away, and there is nothing on which
the Church can work, and no where she can be. The Commonwealth, however
useless to the perfection of nature, would remain, though there were no Church;
but Church can no more stand without Commonwealth, than the Chambers when the
Foundation fails. So that manifestly the preservation of the Church, and all
the goods we hope from her, require the Commonwealth be kept up.

Thus much I thought it not amiss to say by the by, that those, who I doubt
reflect not on it as it deserves, may see there is nothing more ruinous to the
Church, than that Zeal not according to knowledge, which seeks to exalt the
Spiritual Power to the unsetling of the Temporal. As fondness is a very
dangerous, and often ruinous, kindness, These by their over-friendship become
in truth Enemies to the Church. In the mean time, I think, I may warrantably
deny the Major of the Argument, since the wording of the Instances, which would
prove there is something in the Oath which appertains to the Pope, in spiritual
Terms, does not hinder the matter of it from being a pure temporal matter,
appertaining wholly and only to the Temporal Power, and not at all to the Pope.

I say nothing of the other two Instances, because I conceive them more for
show than substance. The Oath determins not what is, or what is not Heresy;
but barely calls that Heretical, which is already determined, and known, and
confessed by all the World to be so, as is already discoursed in answer to the
Second Treatise. It is a very strange pretense, that the Temporal Power exceeds
it bounds, because it calls things by their own names. Neither do I think this
Author, or any body else, would think the Civil Power determined of Heresy, or
past its limits, or did any thing reprehensible, if it ordered for example,
that he should be punished, who maintained this Heretical Proposition, That
Theft is lawful, or commanded it to be renounced. And this is as much as the
Oath of Allegiance does.

Then for the pretense of sinful, or not sinful, if this would draw the Oath
under the cognizance of the Spiritual Tribunal, it would draw every action, and
leave the Temporal nothing to do, absolutely idle and useless. For there is no
action which is not either sinful or not sinful. Our Bargains, our choice of
Life, of Company, of Clothes; every thing we do, by this account would all
crowd into the spiritnal Court, because, as I said, in all we do well or ill. I
think it unnecessary to dilate upon this point, though I know the pretense has
been made use of before, and by a Pope too. But I conceive it finds no very
good reception in the World, and believe every body may easily see why it does
not. Suppose there were nothing of all this, where there is no Question of
sinful or not sinful, there is no place for the cognizance of the Spiritual
Court: And whether Allegiance be lawful, and may be professed, I hope is no
Qustion which needs, or can come under Cognizance. Wherefore the Major, I am
persuaded, ought not be admitted without better proof.

Yet though it were, I do not think any thing would come of it. In rigor I
need say no more, the Argument being sufficiently answered, when one of the
Premises is denied. But yet I cannot but ingenuously declare my thoughts, and
say, that to my apprehension the Minor will not hold water neither. It Is this:
But it is unlawful to deny an exterior obedience to the Popes Prohibitions, in
matters appertaining unto him, and no farther than they appertain unto him.
This Proposition, I conceive, is not true, because I think there goes more to
obedience, than barely to consider to whom the Matter of the Command
appertains. The Manner of Commanding, or applying the Command, is to be thought
of as well as the Matter commanded; and the Use of the Power, as well as the
Power. For to begin with the later, What if the Commander abuse his Power, and
command things prejudicial, or possibly destructive? What if he command Vice,
and forbid Virtue? If you say the Pope is still to be obeyed, because Virtue
and Vice are matters properly appertaining to him; you open a gap to all the
abuses to which the frailty of humane nature is subject, and plainly put it
into the Power of one man (and who shall secure us, there shall never be found
one wicked enough, to have the Will too?) to bring all into confusion and ruin.
In short, You oblige us to what cannot be don, and which we are forewarned not
to do, no not by the Authority of an Angel from Heaven. I forbear to dilate
this Topic, and give it that frightful face which it would have, if the number
and weight of inconveniences were particularly insisted on. Appeals as from
Abuse are things so common, and so notorious, that I think this short hint is
as much as needs to my purpose.

But yet it will not be amiss to look upon it with reference to our present
case. The Pope has declared the Oath of Allegiance cannot be taken, as
containing many things contrary to Faith and Salvation, and upon that score
forbidden it. Suppose he had don quite contrary, declared the refusal of it
contrary to Faith and Salvation, and therefore allowed, or commanded it. I
would ask this Gentleman, Whether he, who upon the warrant of that supposed
declaration should take the Oath, would not do a thing contrary to Faith and
Salvation, if the Oath indeed be, according to the real declaration, contrary
to them? As likewise, whether he, who upon the warrant of the real declaration
refuses the Oath, does not act contrary to both, if the refusal truly be,
according to the supposed declaration, contrary to them? I think neither of
these can be denied, since matters evidently are what they are, whatsoever be
declared concerning them. Wherefore I see not but a case may possibly happen in
which our Salvation may be prejudiced even by Obedience; and if it may, sure
care ought to be taken that it be not. For to have so much care of Obedience,
as to have none of Salvation, is what I cannot believe God expects at our
hands. I conceive therefore it imports as much, in this power of the Keys, that
they be turned the right way, as put into the right Lock. Otherwise insted of
opening the Gates of Heaven, they may chance to double lock them.

I hope the Reader expects not I should digress into the examination of
circumstances required to justify Disobedience. That Question concerns me not
at present. For having only to do with the general Proposition, that
Disobedience is unlawful, whenever the Matter appertains to the Commander, I
conceive it is enough to show the Proposition is not true, if it may happen
that Obedience is not due; And it is plain, that Obedience is not due, if the
Power of commanding be abused to the prejudice of Salvation. Who shall be
Judge, whether it be or no? and the like matters concern me not, and require
more exact treating than can be expected in a digression. I should think the
Case must not need a Judge: Particulars certainly not being at liberty to obey
or disobey, on pretense of their private Judgments.

Again, The Manner I said was to be considered as well as the Matter. For the
Obedience due from Catholics to the Pope, is not altogether of the same nature
with that which Religious perform to their Superiors. These inquire no farther
than whether the thing commanded be truly commanded or no, and when they know
their Superiors will, which way soever they come to know it, obey without more
ado. It Is not so betwixt Catholics and the Pope. They obey him as a
Magistrate, whose Commands, unless they come to them in a legal way, they
neither do, nor are bound to take notice of. It Is not a bare knowledge of his
will, how unquestionable and how undeniable soever it may be, which obliges to
Obedience. People may, and often do, know very certainly of Decrees made by
him; and know too, that he intends, and declares by these Decrees to bind the
whole Church, and yet regard them not; and this unblamably, till they be
proposed in that manner, in which the custom of Christendom requires they
should be proposed.

This consideration of the Manner, I suspect will seem slight enough to some
who have not thought of it, and who perhaps will be apt to imagine, that,
provided the Pope have commanded any thing, and we know he has don so, it
matters not much which way we come by that knowledge. And yet all Christendom
thinks it, and really it is a matter of great importance; so great, that,
except in cases where Salvation is manifestly concerned, and which a body would
think are known enough, not to need new Commands, The Pope can hardly make a
Command, the good of obeying which can answer for the harm of obeying it, when
unduly proposed. For what counterfeiting of Bulls, and Letters, what cheats
might not be put upon us at a distance, where people would rather choose to
accept of any thing at a venture, than run to Rome for more certain information?

But not to insist on this; it is a plain case, that what is to Edification in
one place, may be to Destruction in another. Different Countries have, and
cannot but have different Exigencies. If the same Laws should oblige every
where, some must of necessity be obliged to what is harmful for them. Wherefore
we see the Providence of God has so ordered his Hierarchy, that particular
Countries have particular Ecclesiastical Governors of their own, who living upon
the place know best what is convenient for it, and are obliged to a care of
their charges by the account which they are to make to God for them. The Pope
has power over the whole; but so that he exercises it not (except where he is
both* Bishop and Prince) but by means of this subordinate Ecclesiastical
Authority. When he orders any thing, the Order is first brought to them. If
they see fit they propose it to the people under their care; if they find it
otherwise, they let it alone. Private men are guided by their determination;
and what knowledge, or certainty soever they may otherwise have of the Popes
Decrees, neither need, nor do take notice of them, till they be proposed in a
legal way by their own immediate Superiors. Thus has the Church been governed
from the beginning of Christianity, and thus it is governed at this day. Who
would go about to alter this course, would absolutely destroy the Hierarchy,
introduce an Arbitrary Power, and set up an Universal Bishop in that heretical
sense which St. Gregory, in his contests with the Patriarch of Constantinople,
so much abhorred, and so strongly opposed.

Besides, the intermediate Ecclesiastical Authority, without whose concurrence,
and much less against it, the Popes Commands have no obliging force, there is
also in Catholic Countries required the concurrence of the Civil. And this with
great reason, and for the good even of the Church. For as Ecclesiastics are
supposed ignorant in the Art of Temporal Government, and what is necessary for
the good of the Commonwealth, and besides are not exempt from humane
frailties; They may happen, on both accounts, to order something prejudicial to
Civil Government, without which nevertheless, as has been said before, the
Church cannot stand. For this reason Ecclesiastical Decrees are communicated to
the secular Magistrates, and till they get the Placet* or Exequatur, or
Verification, or in whatever phrase they use to express their allowance, from
them, no Decree of the Pope can be proposed, and bind the people. I cannot
answer my information of the state of Christendom is so exact, that there is no
place wherein it is not otherwise; but sure I am, it is so in many. Our unhappy
differences in Religion indeed make this impossible to be practiced in England;
yet these differences hinder none from owing as much subjection to the Civil
Power, as if there were none, and as much duty, and solicitude for the good of
the Kingdom. Since we are not fortunate enough to be guided in these matters by
open declarations of the pleasure of the Civil Power, as we otherwise would*
and ought to be, our Consciences, I conceive, stand charged, to admit of no
Ecclesiastical Commands which those Consciences tell us are against the good of
the Kingdom. For whereas we have not the public Judgment to direct us, there
is no remedy, that I know, but to supply the defect as well as we can by our
private one. And most evidently the Civil Government must be preserved entire*
nor can any Ecclesiastical Authority oblige a man to any thing contrary to it.

To apply what has been said to our case: The Pope has declared the Oath of
Allegiance contains things contrary to Faith and Salvation. In this we are
firmly persuaded he is mistaken. Indeed while he declares not what these things
are, we are left in the dark, and cannot tell whether the mistake be of Fact,
or Right. If he thought his Supremacy, his power of Excommunication, or any
other point of Faith is denied by the Oath, as was apprehended by the first
writers against the Oath, and those at Rome too, who in likelihood best knew
the Popes thoughts, it is a mistake of Fact: For not only no such thing is
denied by the Oath, but particular care was taken there should not. If he
thought his Deposing Power, the disbelief whereof is sworn by the Oath, a point
of Faith, the mistake is in Right: That Doctrine being so far from Faith, that
it has openly been declared erroneous, and contrary to the Word of God, by
those whom all the World, and the Pope himself acknowledges for good
Catholics. But though it appear not which way he understood it, it is clear he
was mistaken either way.

Now, when the Pope uses his Power to propagate a mistake, and a mistake of
this consequence, which would make us take for contrary to Faith that which is
not so, I think there is a plain abuse of his Power, and which ought not be
obeyed. We are taught by a Master, in whom we are sure there was no mistake,
that the Church has no power to Destruction, let the matter be what it will,
none against Truth, but for it. What the Pope has declared is against Truth,
and is to Destruction. For since Faith is the foundation of all Christian
building, there can be no greater, nor more palpable destruction, than
alteration of Faith. And to accept as contrary to Faith, what is not so, is
plainly to alter Faith. It will not serve turn to say, that so we obey, we may
believe what we will. For though in Metaphysical rigor, there be a difference
betwixt Obeying, and Believing, and that difference be in some cases material
enough; yet here, where we are therefore commanded to refuse the Oath, because
it contains things contrary to Faith, to obey that Command is, in moral
estimation, to acknowledge that in truth it does so. And this is plainly to
acknowledge, that our Faith is other than it is. Scholastical distinctions will
not carry it against common sense, which will undoubtedly judge those, who
refuse the Oath on this account, do believe the Pope has power to Depose, and
as Faith too, if not-deposing Doctrine be contrary to Faith. For as the World
is now, there lies the whole stress. The other Question of Fact, which at first
made some noise, being, since it has been better looked into, quite silenced,
and upon the matter yielded.

This being so, They would do well to consider what they do, who urge Obedience
upon these terms: Go about to bring a new Faith into the Church, and which is
more intolerable, a false one: Leave Catholics exposed to the inexcusable
shame of being blindly obliged to all commands, whether consistent, not only
with civil Government, but even with Christianity, or no: Give the Adversaries
of the Church a manifest and easy victory over her Advocates, unable to defend
either Her or Themselves. Without more ado, it is to ruin the Church, to set
open the Gates of Hell, and assist them to, what shall never be, their
prevailing against her. And these are the consequences of an undiscerning
Obedience to all the Popes commands, even in matters appertaining to him. When
people are gravely and emphatically exhorted to be humble and obedient, not to
trust to their deceitful Judgments, to sacrifice the noblest of their
faculties, their Will, to hearken to the voice of their supreme Pastor, with
the rest of those specious Topics which may easily be assembled, it works
wonderfully with pious souls. But if these fine pretenses lead us at last to
destroy Faith and the Church, God preserve me from so mistaken a piety. I think
all the World agrees there is no obedience due to Clave errante, and I am sure
the same Apostle who has taught us there is no power in the Church against
Truth, and to Destruction, has pronounced an Anathema even to an Angel from
Heaven, if he should teach otherwise.

The next thing to be considered is, How the Breves in question have ^ome to
our knowledge. And it is plain they have not been so proposed, as according to
the practice of Christendom, they should, to become binding. All has past in a
private way, by private intelligence, private discourses and letters of private
men, without the interposition of any public Authority to apply the Popes
Authority to us. Who thinks this sufficient to oblige us to obedience, should
do well to reflect on the ruinous confusion such an obligation would bring into
the Church, which I have briefly touched before. If you say this cannot be don,
because since our unhappy differences in Religion, we have no public
Ecclesiastical Authority among us, and therefore we must be content with such
knowledge as we can have. This, insted of concluding we ought to obey these
Breves, concludes rather we cannot be obliged to obey any. For which way soever
it happens that the Popes commands are not legally intimated, whether by
misfortune, or fault, or what accident you will, still it remains, no legal
intimation, no necessity of Obedience.

That those who are not of our Communion should fancy strange things of our
subjection to the Pope, and think his word passes for Law among us without more
ado, I wonder not; Few live in Catholic Countries, and fewer mind what passes
there. Their mistakes, almost in all that concerns us, are so frequent, that
there is no room for marvel. But that those who have lived perhaps a good part
of their time amongst Catholics, and cannot but take notice of what is daily
presented to their eyes, should have the like conceits, is very strange. It
seems as if they fancied the World a Monastery, and the Pope Father* Prior, and
no more in the business, but Say and Do. Alas! there is no such matter. Our
obedience to the Pope is very different from Monastical. A Canonical obedience
we ow him, a submission to his commands legally intimated. This legal
intimation implys the concurrence of the intermediate, subordinate,
Ecclesiastical Authority, and the Civil too, where that is concerned; and where
it can be had, which because here it cannot, we must of necessity take upon us
a little more than would be fit in other circumstances; and remembering we are
accountable to God for any harm which befalls our Country by our means, use our
best judgments to keep our accounts clear. More obedience than this I do not
think any Catholic ows, nor any Country, out of his own Territories, pays.

It would be somewhat a surprising thing, if the Popes Authority should become
greater in England, by the change of Religion. People, I hope, will have some
more love to their Country than to make that unhappiness the step to another,
by bringing it into an Arbitrary subjection, such as was not acknowledged in
Catholic times, and is not acknowledged in any Catholic Country besides, and
which, if it were, would be the ruin of the Hierarchy. For my part I do not see
how the Popes Commands can oblige those who have no immediate Ecclesiastical
Superiors, otherwise than in virtue of the good of the thing commanded, of
which those deprive themselves who refuse to obey the command. Otherwise, when
the frame of Government is taken away, it is, I think, as 'twas before it was
settled. Things are in a kind of state of Nature, where Reason is the only
guide. This indeed will teach them to obey any thing beneficial to themselves,
and not prejudicial to their Country, and the Civil Government. That being
safe, which no Ecclesiastical Authority can violate, whatever contributes to a
conformity of manners, and discipline, as much as the state of things will
bear, with the rest of Christendom, with whom they hold communion in Faith, is
undoubtedly to be desired and embraced. But how he can govern by way of
Authority, where that Authority cannot be duly applied, I can no more
understand, than how fire can burn the wood which it never comes near. Where He
would govern in that manner, He should provide subordinate Pastors, by whose
means and assistance He may govern. Difference of Religion is no bar to this.
For Ecclesiastical Discipline has been preserved, and as good, if not better,
Laws made under Persecution, as since; Persecution much more severe than,
thanks be to God, has been, or is likely to be in so merciful a Climate as
England. To go about it otherwise, is, I think, to go to work without Tools.

But to let this pass, and return to the necessity of Publication; who thinks
the Popes commands oblige to obedience without it, when it cannot be had, let
him tell me, why the Venetians pleaded against the Popes Interdict, that it was
not published, when themselves had hindered the Publishing? Let him tell me, why
the Enactive part, as he calls it, of the Council of Trent obliges not us, or
the French who will not publish it. For the difference between Enactive and
Declarative, of which he afterward speaks, hinders not the matter enacted from
appertaining to the Council. I hope a Pope and a General Council are something
more than a Pope alone. What they have enacted is known with as much certainty
at least, as that the Pope has forbid the Oath of Allegiance. And yet because
that knowledge is not come in a legal way, by which way it is impossible it
should come when people will not, or cannot publish what is enacted, no body
thinks their Decrees obliging, no not this Gentleman himself, who makes this
Argument. How we should come to be obliged by the unpublisht Breves of a Pope,
who are not obliged by the unpublisht Decrees of a General Council confirmed by
the Pope, requires, I think, a very strong passion against the Oath of
Allegiance to unriddle.

And yet, though this be abundantly sufficient, there is something more in the
case. Bare want of due publication for want of due Authority is not all. There
was plain refusal of publication by such Authority Blackwel's answers upon
sundry Examinations. Exam. 5. July 2. 1607.
as was. At that time there was an Archpriest here, one Blackwel; To whom the
first Breve which forbad the Oath was sent. Blackwel would not publish it, and
though challenged both at home and from abroad, and greatly blamed for his
pains, yet persisted in his resolution, and could not be brought to it. Letters
were contrived and sent abroad in his name to that purpose, (For the importance
of publication it seems was well enough understood*) But he disowned, and
declared them counterfeit. On the contrary, he both took the Oath himself, and
by Letters to his Assistants, persuaded them to follow his example, and also to
instruct the Laity to do so too. The second Breve came a while after, but not
to him. This made no change in him. For he writ again both to the Clergy and
Laity, repeating his former Admonitions. And this is what was don at that time.
Nothing has been don since, that I know, by any who have had any pretense of
Authority here.

Wherefore it is plain these Breves have not the force which they might have
had even in the present state of things. Had those, who have that superiority
which is among us, concurred with the Pope, and required obedience to his
Breves, the Topic would have appeared a little more specious. But while that
is wanting, it is very unreasonable to exact obedience upon the score of
Authority, when there is not so much as Ecclesiastical Authority enough to
require it. And when there is, it will be as unreasonable to follow
Ecclesiastical Authority Clave errante, against the commands, and to the
prejudice of the Civil Power. However, we ought at least be let alone till that
day come, there being no color to insist upon Ecclesiastical Authority, when
it is not applied to us as it ought, and might be even in our unhappy
circumstances, and as actually it is applied when it does any thing with us. We
observe Holy days according to a Constitution not long since made at Rome, of
which had it not been as authoritatively, as it could be, recommended at home,
no body needed, and I believe few would have taken notice. In short, to
persuade us that a Bull, or Breve from Rome, no otherwise intimated to us than
by the private assurance which private men give of them, oblige us to observe
whatever they order, is, under the specious pretext of obedience, to put a yoke
upon our necks, which neither our Fathers have been, nor we are able to bear;
to alter the Government of the Church continued from the beginning of
Christianity to this day; and which I see not how he can be either good
Patriot, or good Christian* who obstinately insists on.

What I have alleged is, I think, no news to any body. Yet perhaps it may not
be amiss, by a fresh Example or two, to show, that Catholics actually do
proceed, as I have said. And I will choose them from those very Popes whom this
Gentleman has alleged. The first is Paul V, who when he sent his first Breve
hither, was in the height of his famous contest with the Venetians. That
Quarrel in short was this. The Venetians had made, or renewed certain Laws,
Historia particolare delle Cose passate tra'l S P. Paclo V. e la Seren. Rep. di
Venetia.
which the Pope judged contrary to Ecclesiastical immunity, and proceeded by
way of Justice against two of the Clergy, whom he pretended not subject to the
Civil Power, and only accountable to the Ecclesiastical. The Pope sent Breves
to them, as he did to us, in which he declared, according to the style used
with us, that the matters aforesaid, as being to the damnation of their Souls,
scandal of many, and contrary to Ecclesiastical liberty, were null and invalid;
Admonishes them to consider the danger of their Souls, and under
Excommunication commands the Laws to be recalled, and cancelled, and the
Prisoners delivered up to his Nuncio, ^^reat^ing also to proceed farther in
case of disobedience.

This, upon the matter, is our very case; save that with the Venetians The Pope
proceeded something more severely, joining actual Excommunication, and farther
threats to the disobeying his commands. Otherwise there are Breves in both
cases, and from the same Pope, and those Declaratory, and in matters, which
according to this Gentleman, appertain to him, the salvation of Souls, and
Ecclesiastical liberty. Notwithstanding the Venetians did not obey them, and,
the Pope proceeding to Interdict their Country, suffered not that Sentence to
be published, and continued the usual public exercises of Religion. It was
feared the business might have come to Arms; but ended in a Treaty; by which
the Venetians delivering up the Prisoners to the French Ambassador, in
gratification of his King, and with a protestation of preserving their right to
judge Ecclesiastical persons, were without more ado readmitted to their usual
good correspondence with the Pope, though positively refusing to accept of
Absolution, or so much as a solemn Apostolical Benediction, for fear it might
show like one. Here, I think, was plain denial of External Obedience to the
Commands of the Pope, in matters, according to this Gentleman, appertaining to
him, and no farther than they appertained to him; and this in the face of
Christendom, and by persons, who, when the heat was a little over, were by the
same Pope, who commanded both them and us, acknowledged for very good
Catholics, and by all the World besides.

Urban VIII, the other Pope mentioned by this Gentleman, had a Mercurio di D.
Victorio Siri Tom. 2.
difference with the Duke of Parma, a feudatory of the Sea of Rome, which,
after some monitories not obeyed, came to an Excommunication, and 'twas
expected an Interdict would follow. The Duke, jealous what the Regulars might
do in such an occasion, sent the Foreigners out of his Countries; and signified
to his own Subjects, that such a Sentence being feared, those who were
persuaded they were obliged to obey it, should have free liberty to depart,
before the Sentence were issued; but if they staid till it came out, They
should be punished if they obeyed it. They all promised, and that in writing, he
not being content with bare words, to stand faithfully by him. Only the
Jesuits, for the example they had given at Venice, were not called with the
rest. They apprehending the consequence of this singularity, made an address of
themselves, and expressing much trouble for having been past by, made^
voluntary protestation of continuing firm to the Interest of the Duke. And were
afterward observed to be the most eager of all in persuading the people not to
value the Decrees of Rome.

It is true, this case is not altogether of the same nature with the former,
the Quarrel being about temporal matters, and betwixt a Vassal and the supreme
Lord. Notwithstanding when it came to Excommunication, it was taken out of the
hands of Temporal cognizance, and the Pope proceeded not as Lord, but as Pope,
punishing the Sinner with the Spiritual sword, not the Vassal with the
Temporal. And he, I suppose, in this Gentleman's opinion is to judge with which
sword he ought to strike. However, the matter appertained to him one way or
other; and here again was a denial of external obedience to his commands,
abetted by all the Clergy of his Dominions, and the Jesuits most of all. It
were easy to heap up multitudes of the like Instances; but I confine my self
to the two Popes which were concerned in the Oath of Allegiance. This Gentleman
shall, if he please, tie us to no stricter rules of obedience, than are
acknowledged in other places, and permit his native Country to enjoy a freedom
unblamable even in Italy it self. In the mean time, upon the warrant of the
Jesuits of Parma, and all Christendom besides, I likewise deny the Minor of
his Argument, conceiving it appears very plainly that it is not always, nor
particularly in our case, unlawful to deny an exterior obedience to the Popes
Prohibitions in matters appertaining unto him, and no farther than they
appertain unto him. Sure he must have a strange pique to the Oath of
Allegiance, with whom an Argument against it will relish, where nothing assumed
is true. For neither does the matter of it appertain to the Pope, nor if it
did, were obedience due to the Breves insisted on.

I fear I shall be thought to have dwelt too long upon this Argument; and yet
in the variety of matter, which the subject offered to my thoughts, I have left
more than I have taken, and perhaps better.

We next meet with Answers to such Objections as the Author thought fit to make
against himself; with which to meddle at all perhaps is more than needs. For
since the Argument, by which he undertook to prove the Oath unlawful, is
answered, there is no necessity to examine how he has behaved himself in
answering the Arguments of others. Nevertheless, because diverse things are
woven into his discourse, which seem to have some force, and may be thought to
have more, if they be balkt, I will not, to save a little pains, give occasion
of saying, that any thing which is considerable is dissembled.

Numb. 5. He objects against the Breves, That they are of no force in England,
without the Kings approbation, according to Statutes made in Catholic times.
This Objection reaches not the case. The Breves want not only Civil, but
Ecclesiastical approbation too, and would be of no force though they had it,
since they are prejudicial to Civil Government, which no Ecclesiastical
Authority can infringe. Besides, the liberty of Nations does not depend on
Laws. They have it from Nature, before and without Laws. Every Nation united
into a Government, has power to preserve that Government. Neither are the Laws
alone to be considered, which they make upon occasion to secure their
Liberties, but the power they have to make such Laws, and add, and alter as
they see fit. I conceive therefore the Freedom of England is not to be
determined barely by the words of Statutes. While it remains a Nation united
into a Politic Government, it is, and must be free from all obligation of
submitting to any thing contrary to the good of the Commonwealth. Those
Statutes did not create the freedom of England. They were only an exercise of
it, and the same freedom which was used in making those Statutes, may be used
in making others. Though none at all had been made, the Liberties of a free
Nation cannot be denyd her. I think it then very little to purpose, to amuse
our selves with examining whether the words of Statutes be express to the point
or no, while* he is neither good Englishman, nor* good man, who receives any
thing prejudicial to the good of his Country, or acknowledges a Power which can
oblige him to do so*

Wherefore leaving him the satisfaction of expounding the Statutes as he
pleases, in which yet I suspect few of those, whose trade it is to expound
them, will agree with him; and reserving the slight account he makes of
forbearing the Oath, (as if it were a matter of nothing to refuse to give
assurance of Allegiance) to the place in which he promises it shall appear: I
shall only stop at the Second Answer which N. 7. he gives to the Statutes, viz.
That they are to be understood of Breves Enactive, but not of Breves
Declarative. Enactive Breves he calls those, whereby some new thing is
ordained, relating to the external Government of the Church: Declarative,
whereby a Doctrine is declared false, or action sinful.

This, as I formerly hinted, unsays all that was said before. For since the
Breves do not make, but only declare the Oath unlawful, the Unlawfulness of the
Oath is not to be taken from the Breves, but from that unlawful thing, whatever
it be, which is declared by the Breves, and the Argument is out of doors. The
truth is, we run round. People ask, Why the Oath of Allegiance may not be
taken? This Gentleman undertakes their satisfaction, and answers, because it is
unlawful. Why unlawful? because forbidden. But why is it unlawful not to
observe that Prohibition? because the thing forbid is unlawful, and only
declared to be so by the prohibition. And thus we dance in a circle. All this
might have been said plainer, and shorter, The Oath is unlawful, because it is
unlawful. For if it be unlawful, because forbid, and forbid because unlawful,
as evidently as can be, It Is unlawful, because it is unlawful. However, because
this Allegation, as ill as it agrees with its fellows, may yet be thought to
have some force in it self, it will not be amiss to spend a little time upon it.

In the first place I would gladly know, what unlawfulness that is, which there
was in the Oath for the Breves to declare, and which they have declared. This
Author when he was upon the point, and had made it his business to show it,
either could not find, or at least thought not fit to mention any other
Unlawfulness, than that of Disobedience. Now it seems that is not the thing;
there is an unlawfulness antecedent to the Prohibition, which the Breves only
have declared. Why then, in behalf of those for whose satisfaction he professes
to write, I entreat him to show us this Unlawfulness, because This, and This
alone will be to our satisfaction. For every body is satisfied that unlawful
things are not to be don; but every body is not satisfied, that all Breves are
to be obeyed. On the contrary, the World is generally agreed, that Breves are
not to be obeyed, but in circumstances which want in our case. But till this be
don, people will always remain unsatisfi'd, because if after so much time, and
so much earnestness used in this business, no such thing do appear, there will
be reason to believe there is no such thing which can appear, and that there
was a mistake in the Breves, and the Declaration not warranted by Truth. As the
temper of the World is, I doubt people will not be overmuch satisfied with
these, who would enforce obedience to such Declarations. Had this Gentleman
thought he could have discovered this secret, I see no reason in the World he
had to keep it a secret, and amuse himself and us with topics more subject to
dispute than the matter which he would clear by them, and in which too he has
the consent of Christendom against him. At least, methinks, he has no reason to
say there is something unlawful in the Oath, which is not only declared by the
Breves, unless he could tell us what this something is.

In the next place I would fain understand what privilege Declarative Breves
have beyond Enactive, and what greater necessity of obedience they carry with
them. Either this Gentleman, or Withrington are much out. For Withrington tells
us these Breves are not to be obeyed, for this very reason, because they are
Declarative, and pretends to gather his conclusion from the Doctrine of Suarez.
It should seem by this Gentleman, that they are to be obeyed for the same
reason, because they are Declarative. It is something odd that the I, and the
No, should both be pretended from the same single Term, Declarative. But, I
think, this is not the only thing in which these two Authors disagree. We shall
see what Withrington has to say for himself by and by. In the mean time I would
weigh the reason which this Gentleman has, for what he says, if I could find
any. For he barely tells us, that the Statutes are not to be understood of
Declarative Breves, and that these Breves are Declarative, and then leaves us
to imagine there is something of importance in this Declarative, which we may
find out of our selves if we can; for we have no assistance from him.

For my part, if a Declarative Breve signify barely, as he says it does, a
Breve which declares concerning a Doctrine or Action, I cannot imagine what other
obedience can be given to it, than submission of the Understanding, and
believing the Doctrine or Action to be as it is declared. Now Obedience, I had
thought, belongs to Action, and relates to the Will, not Understanding. Or if
he will have Obedience in the Understanding, it is certainly an interior
Obedience, which if he require, I know not wherefore he talks of exterior
Obedience all along. And yet his Instance from the Council of Trent, shows as
if he expected we should believe the Pope, as we do the Council. But I had
thought, the case had been something different betwixt a Canon of a general
Council, and a Breve of a Pope, even Declarative. We receive the declarative
part of the Council of Trent, because the Faith written in our hearts before
the Council, bears witness to it, and because there needs no new Authority to
oblige us to hold and profess our Faith, which is commanded by an Authority
superior to all other, the Authority of Christ himself. And because general
Councils cannot be supposed to swerve from this Faith, we have the same
obligation to receive what they declare concerning Faith, which we have to
profess our Faith. Otherwise in matters which have no necessary connection with
it, we make as bold with a Council as the Pope, as this Gentleman acknowledges
in the Instance. Wherefore unless he will maintain Inerrability in the Pope as
well as Councils, I see not how our receiving the Declarative part of the
Council of Trent, infers Obedience to Declarative Breves.

The more I reflect, the less I understand how Declarative Breves come to be
more efficacious than Enactive. Since Declaration imports a clearing of
something, these Breves, to deserve the name of Declarative, should clear
something, which Enactive do not, by which clearing they come to have more
force. What may it be which these. Breves have cleared? If you say the Popes
judgment; you make no difference betwixt them and Enactive. For in these too
the Popes judgment is clear, and so all Breves would be Declarative. But the
Popes judgment being one thing, that of which he judges another, one would
expect by a Declaration, that the thing of which he judges, and which he
declares, should be made clear. That which he has declared here is, That there
are many things in the Oath contrary to* Faith and Salvation. Many is plainly a
multitude of Ones, so that some One must be contrary, if many be.
Notwithstanding this Declaration, and the Popes Judgment, it is so far from
clear, that any one is contrary, that there is no Proposition in the whole
Oath, which we may not, according to this Gentleman, unblamably hold and
maintain. This I gather from his permission, Number. 80. to hold and maintain the
French Doctrine, that the Pope has no power to depos^ Kings: because the reason
he gives for this fits all the rest; and because the Author of the first
Treatise says, That if this be not one, there are not Multa in the Oath, to
which the Popes censure is possibly applicable. Now would I fain know how it
can be clear that the whole is naught, when it is not clear but every part of
that whole is good. This is rather inextricable confusion than clearing, and I
should think the direct contrary follows from what this Gentleman pretends. For
since, according to his second thoughts (for his Argument went quite another
way) our obligation of obedience depends upon the Declarative virtue of the
Breves, and we are bound to obey only where there is clearing; where there is
no clearing, as here there is not, we are not bound to obey. If he will say we
are bound, because the Popes judgment is clear, then we are always bound, in
Enactives as well as Declaratives, and the distinction between them is
frivolous, as to the obligation of obedience. Only it seems to follow from mere
Power in Enactives, and from Infallibility in Declaratives.

For the truth is, the Popes Infallibility lies at the bottom of all these kind
of discourses. People are sometimes shy to acknowledge it, because it relishes
not well, as being a point unmaintainable in it self, and pernicious and
destructive to the Church, by bringing in a new Rule of Faith, and that even to
the abetters, Uncertain; in the judgment of others, False. But yet there is
nothing to be don without it. For if the Pope may be mistaken, there is no
necessity that every body should be obliged to be mistaken for company.
However, I conceive it unnecessary to speak to that point, while this Gentleman
expressly waves it by insisting only on exterior obedience; and besides by
allowing us to hold and maintain the contrary of what we conceive is declared.
When he thinks it fit to put it upon that Issue, we shall see what proofs he
will bring; in the mean time there is no reason, that I perceive, for the
efficacy which he would persuade us there is in Declarative Breves, but that,
(which whether he will insist on hereafter*, I know not) at present he thought
it better to give none at all.

Withrington, for his part, discourses in this manner: He borrows from Suarez
the notions of Constitutive and Declarative Precepts, understanding by the
former, such which create a new Right, or Rule of action, and making what they
forbid unlawful in virtue of that Prohibition, and which before was lawful: by
the latter, such which do not make, but suppose the thing forbid unlawful in
virtue of a former. Law, confirmed and declared by the new Precept. Wherefore
unless there were a former Law, and an obligation in virtue of it, He gathers
there can be none from the new; it being the nature of a Declarative Precept,
not to endure a new Right, or Rule of action, but purely to declare the old.
Now the Pope declaring there are many things in the Oath contrary to Faith and
Salvation, and for that reason forbidding the Oath, the obligation to obey this
Prohibition, depends on the truth of the declaration. If the Oath be indeed
contrary to Salvation, people are obliged to refuse it, in virtue of that
contrariety, though no Declaration, or new Prohibition had been made. If it be
not, the Declaration is null, and no body obliged by it. Thus does Withrington
endeavor to show the Breves are not obliging, for the very reason for which
this Gentleman would make us believe they are, because they are Declarative;
with this advantage in the contest, that at least he gives a reason for what he
says.

In what he says N. 8. That it cannot prudently be thought the Statutes, he
mentions, were intended by the Catholics who made them, for such times as
ours; I conceive, he is in the right, because, I conceive, they never thought
of such times; or if they did, had more prudence than to think their Laws would
signify much in them. But I see not what it is to purpose, since the liberty of
Nations depends not on Statutes, but on that Power which makes Statutes.
Neither can I apprehend what service he will draw from the case he puts. For
since Obedience in circumstances is, by his supposition, not required by Law,
there can be nothing but Reason which obliges the Subject to it, and shows him
it is his duty in that case to proceed without Law. And so we may and do obey
the Pope in what Reason shows us is our good; but can have no legally
authoritative obligation, or necessity of implicit obedience put upon us,
where the frame of legal Government is broken.

This consideration unriddles what follows in the two next Numbers. We may
undoubtedly receive from the Pope any thing to our advantage, and no
disadvantage of any body else, nor can any Laws hinder us from doing our selves
all the good we can. So we preserve that intercourse with him which is
necessary for our Spiritual concerns, not purely in virtue of a necessary
obedience to what comes from him, but because what comes is beneficial, and we
should deprive our selves. of that benefit, by rejecting all things. But
because out of the force of Reason we accept what is advantageous to our
selves, and not prejudicial to our Country, it follows not we can have things
put upon us disadvantageous to our selves, and prejudicial to our Country; or
that by the loss of Religion we have lost the freedom of a Nation, and all
power of judging whether what comes from him be for our good or no.

For what is said N. 11. of the difference betwixt a Prince in, and out of
communion with the Pope: It is true, we have the misfortune to want that
public rule of our Actions, which those have, who live under Princes of the
same communion. For the judgment of those who are entrusted with the care of
the common good, ought to guide those Subjects who can have notice of it, and
who are to examine no farther whether the Popes Orders be fit or unfit, than
that they are approved or disapproved by them. But where that cannot be had,
there remains nothing, that I know, but to supply that misfortune by a greater
diligence, and when any thing comes which is against the good of our Country,
to remember we must answer to God if we contribute to the harm of our Country;
and that our fault is the more unexcusable, since there is no obligatory
Authority on which we can discharge our Consciences. For my part, I think, the
going about to subject our Country to an unexamining necessity of Obedience to
whatever Commands come from Rome, a very great inconvenience to it, and such a
one as, however others may satisfy their Consciences, I should be sorry should
be found in my Accounts at the last day.

I would not meddle with what he says in the last place about Excommunication,
since he confesses himself, that care was taken it should be no part of the
case, and content my self with praising the Acuteness with which he concludes,
if it did not embroyl the matter, and go about to persuade us, as if submission
of the offender to Excommunication either were, or at least were thought
necessary by somebody to the validity of it. That I believe is a conceit which
has not entered into many heads, and the truth of the business, I take, to be
this: The Pope may Excommunicate any Christian, even a King, since the
condes^endence of K. James suffered not the Law to forbid us to say so* If he
Excommunicate a Subject for discharge Ne peut aussy (le Pape*) excommunier les
Officiers du Roy, pour ce qui concern l'exercise de leurs charges and Offices,
etc. Libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane, par. M. Patiss^^.
of his duty in cases mentioned by the Statute, this Excommunication is by the
Statute said to be against the rights of the Crown. In which it speaks with
more reserve than the French, who bluntly say, the Pope cannot Excommunicate
the Kings Officers, for what concerns their charges. Wherefore if an
Excommunication come against a Subject, I conceive this Statute warrants the
examination of it, and if it be found against it, the suppression. If it be
against the King himself, it is to be considered, whether he deserve it, or no.
If He do, I conceive it will have its Spiritual effect This too is said by the
French: Quelques monitions, Excommunications ou Interdictions qu'il puisse
fair, les Sujets du Roy ne doivent laisser de render au Roy l'Obeisance deue
pour le Temporel, and n'en peuvent estre dispensez ny absous par le Pape. Ibid.
independent of his submission to it, but it will have no Temporal effect to
the prejudice of his Temporal rights, and the duty of his Subjects. They may
indeed, and ought consider what place there is for the observance of the Rules
laid down in Scripture in such cases, and contribute as much as they can to the
end aimed at by the Scripture, ut spiritus salvus fiat in die Domini, but
failing in any part of Allegiance is no Way to this, nor any way allowable. If
He deserve it not, it will have no effect, nor ought be regarded by himself or
any body else. Whether he do or no, in the extraordinary case of difference
betwixt the two Supreme Powers, I know no rule to judge by but Truth, which
people must come by as well as they can, when the ordinary way is stopped up.

N. 13. He blends several matters into one Objection, some to purpose, and some
not. I know not what our Question has to do with the superiority of Popes, or
General Councils. Only where he would have us, N. 14. bound to submit to the
Popes Ordinances till the contrary be defined by a General Council, it is true
only where those Ordinances are so proposed as is necessary to bind us. No
Council, nor Father recommend Obedience otherwise, nor does the Christian World
practice or acknowledge any other. Again, when he says, N. 15. That the Reasons
one may seem to have against the Popes Decrees out of Council, cannot justify
refusing exterior compliance with them, but only may give ground to make
addresses, I conceive he indulges a little too much to his fancy, speaking more
according to what he apprehends Alex. 3. ad Archiep. Raven. c. 5. Extra. de
Rescripti^.
should be, than what is. For people use not to obey, as long as they think
they have reason on their sides; and to expect they should do otherwise, is to
expect they should act against their Reason. And this is both a judged case by
the practice of the Christian World, and has the warrant of an express Text in
the Canon Law. Aut mandatum nostrum reverenter adimpleas, aut per literas tuas,
quare adimplere non possis, rationabilem causam praetendas. So that even the
pretense of a reason is an excuse for disobedience by the very letter of the
Law.

I conceive also, the Questions of the Fallibility of the Pope, and
Infallibility of Councils, concern us not much. He is in the right, when he
denies Infallibility is necessary in Superiors to bind their Subjects to
Obedience; nor is it want of that, but want of due circumstances in which the
Pope can exercise his superiority, which renders his Breves efficacious.
Infallibility indeed is necessary to oblige us to inward assent, and when he
strains upon the Declarative virtue of his Breves, and makes them purely
Declarative without insisting on, or mentioning the annexed Command, he drives
it to inward assent, how much soever he disclaim it elsewhere. Otherwise, when
we see Laws changed every day, and sometimes with no change of circumstances, I
cannot perceive any ground to require Infallibility in Lawmakers.

Concerning the Popes capacity of being misinformed, and the pretended mistakes
in this matter, he says, N. 8. That if after so much time, and so much
diligence as the Pope assures us he has used, such pretenses be allowable, all
Decrees whether Ecclesiastical or Civil might be rejected upon the like. To
deal ingenuously, I should be of his mind, if there were nothing but pretense
of misinformation in the case; I mean of what was said or don on both sides.
But, I conceive, whether his information in these matters were right or wrong,
he is not to be obeyed, for reasons which I have mentioned too often to need
repeating.

I conceive also, that the Pope was not rightly informed of the merits of the
cause, and that we are not bound to take his word, though he say he was, which
I do not know he has. As much and as materially as this Gentleman says
Withrington has writ, I do not think he will become surety for the Pope, that
he ever read any of his Books. At least, for my part, I do not think he has
leisure to read one Book of a hundred even of those which are dedicated to him.
Those who did read Withrington, in all likelihood informed the Pope, according
to the Ideas which they framed themselves. What these are we see in their
Writings; if I could think them true, I had not now been answering this
Treatise. If he was informed by them, and by whom else he should be informed, I
know not, I must needs think he was misinformed, and persuaded to take that for
Truth, which was not. And so must every body think, whose judgment cannot
acquiesce in his Declaration; nor is there any possible way to take this flea
out of our ears, but to show us which those many things are, which according to
his Declaration, are contrary to Faith and Salvation. For while we are
persuaded there are neither many, nor one, it is not possible but we must be
persuaded he was misinformed, who says there are. This, if this Gentleman
please to do, he may prevail to have it thought there was no misinformation or
mistake in the case: but to leave this plain and easy way (for what can be
easier than to assign one of many) and think to aw people out of their
judgments by a reverend shadow of Authority, is to show a great deal of good
will to have the work don, and bring no tools to do it. It is in short to say;
My Masters! pray do as I would have you, though I cannot, or will not, tell you
why you should.

The substance of the 19. Consideration belongs to the Major of his Argument,
and has already been spoken to. In this place it will be enough to observe,
that as it does belong to the Pope to determine of matters concerning Faith and
Salvation, so it belongs to him also to determine rightly, and does not belong
to him to oblige all the World, purely in virtue of his determinations, to
accept of them whether right or wrong. In two words, this exterior compliance
(the soft gentile phrase into which he has shifted the more rugged term
Obedience) which he requires, must either be due upon the same score of
Authority, or Reason, or Infallibility. If Obedience be urged to Authority, as
to a Magistrate whose Commands, even, though unfit, are often to be obeyed for
the good of Government: This plainly requires the circumstances of a
Magistrate, that there be a settled frame of Government, for whose sake we
should obey. All the Pope does in the Church is by moving the several wheels
which make up the great Machine; where there are no wheels, how he can turn
them, is for this Gentleman to make out. The Government of the Church requires
subordinate, not only Ministers, but Governors, by whom the Pope may govern,
and who so derive his Orders to the several parts, that they judge themselves
whether they be to Edification hic and nunc, and refuse such as are not.
Without this the Church would no longer be a Hierarchy, but a Despotical
arbitrary disorder. If the pretense be from Reason, we shall gladly harken to
any body who brings it; but hitherto our Reason tells us, that what is
required, is against the rights of our Prince, and good of our Country, and
ought not be obeyed, though both Ecclesiastical Powers should join to urge it.
And for Infallibility, that requires more than exterior compliance, more than
this Gentleman thinks to ask, and more than he would yet if he should.

The following Consideration justifies the contrivance of the Prohibition in
gross, without descending to particulars, and this both by Reason and Example.
The Reason, methinks, is pleasant. It would not, he says, be Prudence to design
always the particular Propositions for which a Pamphlet is forbidden, when they
are scandalous and offensive. If Prudence be not always so severe, why might it
not have been a little indulgent in this particular, and treated the solemn Act
of a Nation with some more condescendence than a Pamplet? But to let this pass,
what necessary point of Prudence obliged the Pope to leave us in the dark, and
at liberty to hold and maintain a scandalous and offensive Proposition, not to
be scandalous and offensive? For this we may do, according to this Gentleman,
of every Proposition in the Oath. The worse the Proposition is, the more need,
one would think, people have to be warned particularly of it, and the more care
taken, that they mistake it not for a good one. Sure this might have been don
without any great note of Impudence. Besides, how will this be applied to our
case? Is there any thing so scandalous and offensive in the Oath, that
Christian ears will not bear it out of the Oath? Every body sees all that is
there, and more scandal than they have by that sight, they will not easily take
by a new one. Some scandal, perhaps, might be avoided, if any body happen to
mistake some Proposition for scandalous which is not; but how any should be
given by being informed which in particular is scandalous, is past my
imagination.

Nevertheless, He is in the right, that such Prohibitions are ordinary enough,
and the custom is reasonable enough in many cases. A Book may be so bad, that
to design all, would be to transcribe the whole Book. Particulars may otherwise
be so known, that they need not be mentioned. But besides what may be alleged
in this kind, where the Authority which forbids any thing is such, that
Obedience is absolutely due to it, whether it assign any reason or no, bare
signification of its pleasure serves turn without more ado. But the case is not
so with the Pope out of his own Territories. In other places he can enforce
nothing without their consent. And if they be pressed to consent, and no body
will tell them why they should, Obedience cannot well be expected, at least
will be ill performed. For, I think, no Nation in Christendom obeys upon other
terms. So that where the obligation of Obedience depends on the sight of what
is scandalous and offensive, as in this it seems to do, to refuse to show it,
is to leave them at liberty to disobey.

Besides, when a Book is condemned in gross, the particulars for which it is
condemned, are known to those who condemn it, unless they do they know not
what; and so may be shown if there be occaon. Unless, perhaps, it be condemned
for treating of a forbidden subject, or coming out contrary to order, or such
like respects not pertinent to our purpose. A body would think here is occasion
enough: the importance of the thing, our duty to God and Caesar, the
satisfaction of so many consciences in so important a matter, and what else
would readily occur to one who would stay to consider of it. In so long time,
and after so earnest endeavors, as have been used to this purpose, nothing does
appear. What can be thought but that there is nothing, and that there are no
particulars worthy of condemnation, which make up this condemnation in gross.

By his 21 Consideration, it should seem the point of Excommunication is that
which sticks with this Gentleman. If it be so, I wish he had made the most of
it, and stood to it, that we might have seen the utmost, and either received or
given satisfaction. By the short hints he gives, we may rather guess there is
something which troubles him, than well understand what it is. But since it is
not for me to manage his difficulty, I can only observe what he says. First he
asks, Whether to take the Oath, be not implicitly to deny the Pope has Power
to Excommunicate an Heretical King, and then presently waves the point,
remembering, I suppose, that he had said a little before, that K. James would
not suffer it to be put into the Oath. This, I think, is to put a scruple into
our heads, and leave it there to work if it will. For barely to mention a thing
of such importance, is enough to make us suspect there is some reason for it;
else why should it be mentioned? And then to fly off, and say nothing to it, is
not to show much care of our satisfaction. All I can say, is, That there is no
manner of ground for this surmise, and that, as he acknowledges, particular
care was taken there should not. Could any thing be made of it, I suppose, he
would not have left it so.

But he seems to stand to it, that the Oath denis an Excommunication of such a
King would have those effects which are assigned in Scripture, viz. to deprive
him of all Civil communication with others, etc. And it is true, that the Oath
does deny Excommunication would have any effect, with relation to our King,
prejudicial to his Sovereignty, or the duty of his Subjects. But I did not
expect this knot should be found in the Rush by him, who, if I mistake him not,
offers as much to the full in this point, as the Oath requires. For he freely
offers, Number. 50. to bear true Allegiance to his Majesty, etc. by whomsoever any
thing be attempted against him, and under what pretense soever. I understand,
and so, I think, does every body who reads this, since the Pope is one person
who may attempt against the King, and Excommunication one pretense which may be
made use of to such an attempt, that by this clause, Allegiance is secured
against both. Which if it be, I see not how he can quarrel with the Oath for
requiring that which he freely offers to do of himself.

As for what he argues from Scripture, I doubt all is to be understood of our
own communion, where when any one falls into scandalous offenses, and will not
be reclaimed by fraternal Admonitions, we are taught to avoid his conversation,
and by all our carriage, testify an aversion for his sin. And this for two
reasons: That we be not infected our selves; and that the Offender may be
mended, and shamed into repentance. Yet this seems to be restrained to our own
communion, The Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. taking care they should not understand his
Doctrine generally. I mean not, says he, the Fornicators of this World: or the
Covetous, etc. otherwise you should have gone out of this World: But if He that
is named a Brother be guilty, then not so much as to Eat with him. The World is
by Interpreters understood in contradistinction to the Church. And so Estius
gathers, that in Heretical Countries the conversation of Heretics is not to be
avoided, farther than as the Law of Nature obliges us to preserve our selves as
much as we can from hazard. And so I believe this Gentleman understands it: For
sure he often says Ave, and eats with some who come under the heads mentioned
in Scripture, and evidently he must, as the Apostle says, go out of the World
to do otherwise.

If this be so, as, with submission to better Judgments, I conceive it is,
there is no Use for this Doctrine in a communion settled into a stedy opposition
of the Church, nor has it any thing to do with our case. But whether such a
Communion be to be understood by the word Mundus or no, I see plainly, that
carrying our selves toward sinners, as the Scripture directs, is quite a
different thing from denying them what is their due. The Actions mentioned in
Scripture are such as are otherwise at our own choice. We may Salute, and
Converse, and Eat with whom we please, and we may let any of them alone when
and where we please. In Actions only of this nature we are directed to behave
our selves as our own and our neighbors good requires; but that this Carriage
should despense with Justice, there is no ground to imagine. For can we think
the Apostle meant, if a Creditor of ours become a sinner, we must not therefore
pay our debts, because he is not an honest man, turn dishonest for company, and
make his sin a pretense to sin our selves? We are taught elsewhere, to render
all men their due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Shall we believe all this is unsaid again in the
places mentioned by this Gentleman? This too is spoken with relation to
Princes, as certainly nothing can be more, nor so much, due to private men as
Allegiance to them, because no private good can hold comparison with the good
of the whole. Now a Prince is a Prince, whatever the man be: whether in, or out
of communion of the Church, he is still Prince. And since it is to the Prince we
ow Allegiance, I shall not be persuaded the Scripture warrants us to bate any
thing of that debt, till I am persuaded that Scripture does or can contradict
it self.

The truth is, I take the whole Objection for a slip of fancy, catching at any
thing which seemed to make against the Oath of Allegiance, and not much minding
what would come of it. Otherwise this Gentleman sure does not mean all he says.
For who believes indeed, that Excommunication deprives a Prince of all civil
communication, even that which is necessary to exercise his Office of Prince,
and will stand to it, that this is a kind of Deposing, (as is said here, and,
as in truth it is, since a Prince cannot govern without civil communication,
governing being a communicating his Orders) must also stand to it, that the
Pope can Depose. Nothing is more evident than, that if Excommunicating and
Deposing be all one, who can Excommunicate can Depose. Who believes this has
indeed reason to check at the Oath of Allegiance; nor can I see, how he can
satisfy his conscience, to profess Allegiance to such Princes, or which way
hope to perform it. For some communication is certainly necessary for that
purpose. If, perhaps, a formal sentence be thought necessary in his judgment,
and so he can do well enough with his conscience while that is wanting; an
Allegiance grounded on such a persuasion can last no longer than till the
Sentence comes. And how soon he may be declared to be out of communion, who
already is so, who can tell? Neither, perhaps, is the formality of a sentence
so very necessary. For what great need is there that a man who himself
professes, and all the World knows, is not of such a Church, should with
ceremony be declared not to be of it?

Yet I shall not press these consequences upon this Gentleman, because whatever
be in his words, I hope there is no such thing in his meaning. Else sure he
would not permit us to hold, that the Pope cannot Depose; and it is very certain
he will not permit us to hold, that the Pope cannot Excommunicate. I shall only
entreat him to suffer me to take the meaning of the Scripture from the Example
of a great Saint, rather than his conjecture. Saint Ambrose had occasion to
practice this Doctrine with the Emperor Theodosius, and he did practice it so as
to obtain the end, confound him into Repentance, without disturbing his
Authority or any exercise of it. I am of opinion, that who would hope for the
same success, would do well to go the same ways; other, I think, were neither
meant by the Apostle, nor likely to do any good.

After all, when this Gentleman confesses, that some Excommunicate persons are
excepted from these effects, either by the Popes indulgence, or otherwise, He
says, I think, enough to answer the difficulty. Not to meddle with the Popes
Indulgence, a head which affords matter enough of discourse to one who loved
talking; Who can be meant by his Otherwise, if not Princes, on whom, if
Excommunication should have the effects he mentions, there would remain no
Subject to which the Pope could do good by Excommunication, or any thing else.
For the Temporal Government preserves the matter, on which the Church can work,
and Princes preserve Temporal Government. Put Excommunication to have effects
destructive to the necessary Authority of Princes, and by it you destroy all
the good the Church can do, by taking away the subject to which she should do
good. For evidently to nothing, no good can be don. And so we see in Wars, and
those confusions which attend the ruin of Commonwealths, there is no place for
Ecclesiastical discipline, and the benefit to be had by it, the people by
disjoynting the frame of secular Government, being rendered incapable of the
spiritual. Wherefore, who ever else be meant by Otherwise, Princes are
certainly excepted from these effects of Excommunication which this Gentleman,
I conceive, rather fancies, than believes: And this by the exigence of Nature,
and the good* of Mankind, and the necessity of a subject for the Church to work
upon, besides the express commands of God, without standing in need of the
Popes Indulgence.

I pass by the 22 Consideration of the Popes being party in the debate, as an
Objection which, leaving others to the liberty of their Judgments, I, for my
part, think of little value. What he says in the next, of the Popes not
proceeding according to the Canons, I do not well understand. If he mean of
Canons prescribing what the Pope is to observe in order to his own resolution,
He may have proceeded according to the Canons for ought I know. And because I
know nothing to the contrary, I ought and do suppose he has, seeing that
whether he have, or no, is little material. If he mean of Canons which
prescribe what is necessary, that the World be obliged to obey what he has
resolved, the proceeding in our case is not according to the Canons. For if the
meaning of these Canons may be known by the practice of Christendom, which, I
think, can neither be supposed universally ignorant of them, nor universally to
contradict them, something is required by them to Obedience, which whether it
can or no, most certainly is not found in our case. How much soever the Pope
must be his own Judge, if he judge contrary to what all the World sees, all the
World will see he is mistaken in his judgment. But pray where is this
sufficient declaration he talks of, that the Pope has proceeded according to
the Canons? I mean as is before explained. There is not a word in either Breve
to that purpose, that I see. As far as I can understand, the Breves are not
sufficient for that of which they do speak. How they should be sufficient for
that of which they do not speak, is something harder to understand, unless a
Declaratory Breve be all-sufficient, and can do every thing.

The 24. Consideration lays disturbance of the Church to the charge of the
Defenders of the Oath, because if they would be quiet, we might live in peace.
As if we should not live as much in peace if the Oppugners would be quiet. Why
are not the Oppugners as great Disturbers as the Defenders? Because the
Oppugners have not printed any thing for a long time. Is the Printer the only
Disturber? It Is Opposition, I think, which makes, or is the Disturbance; and
there needs no printing to make Opposition, as long as we can speak and write.
Disturbances are something more ancient than Presses, in the World; could I
hope they would ce^se together, I wish with all my heart the Trade were lost.
In the mean time, I have not printed, I have only writ what is printed, seems
an odd ward to put by the thrust of Disturbance. These things which disturb me
to answer, had never been printed sure, if they had never been written; nor can
I think the hands which carried them to the Press, were the very first into
which they came. I know not what more they can do, now they are printed, than
they did before in Manuscript. If he who prints must be condemned, who writes
will hardly escape altogether free.

I know not, but methinks the case is this: The Shower falls. Those who have
Cloaks put them on, and keep themselves dry. Those who have none, and will get
none, not to be out of fashion, would persuade the former to throw off their
Cloaks, and be wet for company. And because they find them not altogether so
great Courtiers, a little resty in that point, blame them for disturbance. As
if another must needs be disturbed, because I wear such Clothes as I have. And
yet peradventure he has more reason, than who is disturbed because I follow my
conscience. For this will never be out of fashion: Clothes may.

But to leave Metaphors, and look upon things as they are; The Oath of
Allegiance is cause of all. For I will go no higher, to search into the cause
of the Oath, though I have no reason to fear an Inquisition. But to begin
there: This Oath is not to be charged either upon the Oppugners or Defenders,
as being Antecedent to both, and an Act of others, in which neither of us had
any share. I, whose conscience is persuaded I lawfully may, go and take this
Oath. Do I disturb any body by so doing? I do not perceive how any man can
rationally be disturbed, because I obey the Law, when my conscience tells me, I
may and ought. You call me Heretic for my pains, or Schismatic, or
Disobedient. Truly I cannot help being disturbed at this, and believe there are
few honest men who can bear the imputation of a Knave without disturbance. I
endeavor to free my self from this imputation, and make it appear I am not an
Heretic, nor a Schismatic, nor Disobedient. And because I do so, you say I
disturb the Church. This is just, The Child is beaten, and cries, and disturbs
the House; and this disturbance must be imputed to the Child, because, if he
would hold his peace, all would be quiet. And that is true; but who can expect
a Child should not cry when he is beaten? Truly we Defenders are in a sad case,
if we must be Heretics if we hold our tongues, and Disturbers if we speak. But
I shall never believe the Church is or can be disturbed by an unoffensive
Defense. On the contrary, I have a very wrong Idea of her, if she do not take
it well, and is glad when any one can make out his Innocence: nay, though he
could not, Endeavor to appear not-criminal will never pass with her for a
crime. For the Oppugners, if their peaceable stars will not permit any
disturbance should be attributed to them, I will not go about to cross their
lucky influence. Let them satisfy their own consciences as well as they can.
All I ask is, that they would leave us quiet in the satisfaction of ours.

But in reality, All depends on the Truth of the Question betwixt us, and the
sight of that Truth. If the Oath be indeed unlawful, They are to blame who
defend it: if lawful, They who oppugn it. If I be not an Heretic, he wrongs me
who calls me so; nay, though I were, if he know not so much, he offends by
laying to my charge what he cannot justify; and I too for being guilty of what
might be justified, by one that did know it. He that has right on his side, is
only blamless. And that in truth is the only Question which is material. The
rest is insignificant noise; All depends on, and stands or falls, with it. It Is
neither the Oppugners I, nor the Defenders No, which will or ought carry it.
Those who can judge of what is alleged on both sides, and will take the pains,
will decide the difference. And with them I leave it, peradventure more a
Difference, than Disturbance, while things are managed as they may and ought.
War is often necessary to Peace, among Scholars as well as Soldiers. As long as
we truly aim at Peace, and make fair Wars, Scholars possibly may as unblamably
talk, talk, as Soldiers fight on both sides. But there are ununlawful Arms in
both Wars; a tongue may carry poison as well as a bullet. Let the quarrel be
never so good, this way of maintaing it is naught. If the Defenders be guilty
of this kind of Disturbance, I have nothing to say in their defense; only I
hope the World will not think they are. Neither shall I charge the Oppugners:
on the contrary I must acknowledge these Gentlemen are fair Enemies. Let him
who is guilty on either side bear his own sin, and till our differences can be
ended, let both endeavor to manage them without disturbance.

The 25. Consideration tells us, the Pope ought not to refuse declaring an
Action unlawful, when it is so, for fear of disturbance. Which is to say, that
the Pope makes the disturbance, such as is, but has reason for it. Now, if he
think it lies at the Popes door, methinks he. should not have laid it at the
Defenders. Whether the Pope had reason or no, depends on what has been said
already; by which, I hope, appears, there is no Unlawfulness in the Oath, the
declaring against which can be a visible pretense for causing disturbance in
the Church. For the rest, his Parallelling the Popes Breves, with the defining
of Consubstantiality, and preaching of Christian Doctrine, show as if he thought
the Oath contained something like Arianism, or Judaism, or Heathenism. Which if
he do, he has reason to dislike the Oath: but there was no reason to beat the
bush for Disobedience, when there was more and better game afoot. If Heresy
and Idolatry be in the case, or as bad, I wish he would speak out, that we may
know, and avoid such hideous things. But I love not to be a Chapman where there
are but half lights.

The 26th talks of an Intention to dispense in some cases, and not in others,
in which though they would dispense, they cannot. Which, he says, is the Case
of Declarative Decrees. And this is very true, if the Declarations be according
to Truth. But if they be not, I do not know there needs any Dispensation to
stick to Truth. As for this matter of Intentions, this Gentleman and I, have, I
perceive, sentiments something different. As much as I thought necessary I have
declared upon occasion. The rest concerns not our business, and needs not be
mentioned.

The next Consideration undertakes to show, That what the Pope enjoins in his
Breves, cannot be prejudicial to the Duty and Loyalty due to Sovereign Princes.
This is a Consideration of importance, and therefore, as long as it is,
deserves to be fully weighed. And because it puts the business upon this Issue,
whether prejudicial, or not prejudicial, I conceive it agrees, that if the
Breves be found prejudicial, we ought not to take notice of them* as is said in
the Objection.

He says then, That the Popes, though as jealous of their Prerogatives as
Kings, do not enjoin us in these Breves to swear, that they have Authority to
Depose Kings: nor forbid us to take other Oaths of Allegiance, as expressive as
this, or more: nor to take the Clauses of this Oath, which manifestly contain
no more than mere Civil Allegiance: nor so much as to give an interior Assent
to the Reasons why they prohibit this Oath. I would gladly know what all this
is to purpose, and what it concerns us, who are inquiring whether what the Pope
has don be projudicial to our Sovereign or no, to be amused with that he has
not don.

It is plain, the Pope and King may fall out. It is plain, the Pope in such a
case may exercise a power which he thinks he has, and issue out a Sentence of
Deposition against the King; nay, it is undeniable He has don so more than once
since the days of Henry 7. It is possible also He may recur to the Brachium
saeculare for execution of that Sentence, and prosecute it both with foreign
Arms, and as much Intestin force as he can get to join with him. If any of the
Kings Subjects do join with him, (And they whose conscience cheats them into a
persuasion, that they ought in such a case stand by the Pope, must fight either
against their King or their Conscience) I should think they do the King some
prejudice, unless it be none to be deserted by his Subjects in time of need.
And if the Breves do contribute to this, all the Pope has not don, will not
hinder what he has don from being very prejudicial.

Now the Breves which forbid the Oath of Allegiance, manifestly hinder the
Kings Subjects from owning an obligation to stand by him in such a case; and
that is manifestly to leave them at liberty to entertain a persuasion, if they
please, that it is their obligation to stand by the Pope. But in reality they
do much more; Cause a persuasion in them, that they ought to side with the Pope
against the King. For whatever fancies may work on men of speculation, and how
nicely soever they may distinguish betwixt inward assent and outward
compliance, the plain-dealing World goes otherwise to work. Persuade them once,
it is not lawful to swear the Pope has not power to Depose, and they will
persuade themselves he has power to Depose. And when they have got this by the
end, all the School subtilties in the World shall never make them believe
otherwise, but that true obedience is due to true power; and therefore if the
Pope have deposed, the King is not to be obeyed. They must needs then be
perpetually solicited by their mistaken conscience, to withdraw their
assistance from the King in such a case, and perhaps carry it to his Enemies.
And this Conscience they owe to the Breves, and those who bear them in hand
they ought be obeyed. Now a body would think it is prejudicial to a Prince to
have Principles fosterd in his Subjects, which dispose them to refuse their
service, when he has use of it, and take part against him, if they take any.

Were there no more than bare ignorance of the inclinations of his Subjects, it
would be prejudice sufficient, and such as would leave a King but few quiet
hours. For with what satisfaction can He either govern, or live, who knows not
in whom he may confide, and of whom he ought beware? I do not see how this
inconvenience can be avoided, if the Breves must be obeyed. For if no body must
swear that the Pope cannot Depose, for ought he can know, every body may think
he can. At least, He cannot be secure of any one, that he shall be faithful
when time is, because, for any thing He can tell, That one may be persuaded it
is his duty to be otherwise. And so the King must of necessity live in a
perpetual suspicion and diffidence of every body. Which if this Gentleman think
no prejudice to a King, I suspect people will think him better versed in the
Schools than World: If he do, he would have don well to have cleared the Breves
from contributing to these prejudices, and left the consideration of what is
not, till there be occasion to speak of it.

This will not be shifted off by the Common Place of the security in which
Catholic Princes live without such Oaths of Allegiance. For to say nothing of
the difference betwixt Princes of the same, and a different communion from the
Pope; and again of the same, and a different communion with their Subjects; it
is plainly one thing for people to have no Oaths offered, and another to refuse
them when they are. It is to be supposed those Princes understand their own
business; and if they judge such Oaths needless, have reason to judge so.
Whether they have or no, concerns not us. Our Princes are to be supposed to
understand their own business too, and since they have judged such an Oath
needful, it imports us nothing that others judge otherwise. Talking in general
is only to make a show. Who has the Art of managing Common Places to advantage,
may speak plausibly of any thing. Rhetoric teaches it every body. What is only
material, is, whether these Inconveniences do, or do not follow from an
obligation to obey the Breves. For if they do, no example of foreign Princes
can make that they do not.

But to leave this, perhaps, impertinent digression: The Pope, he says, does
not enjoin us in these Breves to swear that he has power to Depose Kings. What
then, if he may enjoin it in others? And why may He not as well and as
rationally declare Deposing power lawful, as not-Deposing power unlawful
(indeed one Declaration serves turn for both) and command us to swear the one,
as forbid us to swear the other? Should the Pope do this, I would fain know
whether he were to be obeyed or no? This Gentleman's Argument seems to bid fair
for Obedience. For Popes are Superiors; Lawful and Unlawful are matters
appertaining to them; and Superiors, he says, are to be obeyed in matters
appertaining to them. The Command would be Declaratory too, and admit of no
dispensation. But yet by his treating this Question, I should guess that once
in his life he should be for disobedience as well as his neighbors. Because to
take advantage of what the Pope has not don, seems to allow, that it had been
prejudicial if he had don it; otherwise it is no such praise to forbear things
unprejudicial. And then by choosing to insist upon this point, that the Breves
are not prejudicial, he seems to allow the Objection, which says, that
prejudicial Breves are not to be obeyed. However, He may please to take his
choice. If he say the Pope is to be obeyed in that case; to what purpose does he
tell us the Pope has not don what he may do every day in the week if he please,
and when he has don it, is to be obeyed? What is this either to the
justification of the Breves, or our satisfaction? If he say the Pope is not to
be obeyed, I see no reason in the World why we may not as justifiably disobey a
prejudicial prohibition, as a prejudicial command. For whatever this Gentleman
would persuade us, few, I believe, will think the prohibition in question is
not prejudicial, but those who think the Pope has power to Depose. And then
indeed he does no prejudice, or at least wrong, to any body by preserving his
own Right. But That, I doubt, is the only Rock in our way. Could we once
weather it, all the rest of our passage would be safe enough.

The truth is, we are either absolutely obliged to obey the Pope in all things,
and then prejudicial or not prejudicial are idle considerations; or we may
justifiably disobey him in some. If we may disobey at all, we must begin
somewhere. Where we should begin, if we may not begin at the Breves, I cannot
understand* For these, our conscience tells us, are prejudicial, besides other
things. Such a conscience, I conceive, this Gentleman allows for a justifiable
excuse of disobedience; because I gather by his discourse, he would take it for
himself to disobey the Pope, in case he should command such an Oath, which not
to have commanded, is made his justification. For I cannot think he would obey
in that case, though the Pope should command never so positively, and
deliberately, and declaratively, and exclusively of all these pretenses which
this Gentleman by and by calls frivolous. If he would obey, that action and
this discourse, in my opinion, would agree but ill. But if such a conscience
would be an excuse for him; we are absolved from disobedience, even in his own
judgment, for we have that very conscience.

But after all, if we will not take National Coin, but stand upon* what is
current in the World, peradventure there is no such great odds betwixt
forbidding us to swear the Pope cannot Depose, and obliging us to swear he can.
For why may I not swear he cannot Depose? Because, says the Pope, it is contrary
to Faith. Why then I must of necessity think either that the Pope is mistaken,
or that it is agreeable to Faith, that he can depose. Who is truly persuaded that
deposing Doctrine is agreeable to Faith, I conceive, is fairly disposed to swear
it, if it be commanded by lawful Authority. And I should think the difference
betwixt actually swearing, and being disposed to swear when required, not so
extraordinarily material. Scruples indeed might be laid in the way, but I
believe none such which might not be easily enough removed.

I, But we are not obliged by the Breves to think that the Pope can Depose.
Should this Gentleman tell the Pope so, perhaps he would have small thanks for
his pains, and possibly be thought no more obedient, than he thinks other
folks. But what difference, as to what concerns the World, is there betwixt
inward holding, and outward acting as if we did. The Conscience may find a
difference considerable enough, when the thoughts and actions agree not. But
the World minds only what we do, and cares not a pin what we think, farther
than as that thinking has influence upon our acting. Take now two men, whereof
one thinks the Pope cannot Depose, and that there are not many things in the
Oath contrary to Faith, and that the Pope was in the wrong when he made that
Declaration; the other thinks quite contrary, that the Pope was every where in
the right. If these two act alike, they are, in reference to the World, both in
the same case.

The second, if he follow the dict^tes of his conscience, plainly must obey
whatever the Pope commands in these matters; and the first must do the same* if
notwithstanding the contrary dictates of his conscience, he be obliged to obey
too. And if he be obliged to obey these Breves, which his conscience tells him
are prejudicial to his Prince, and grounded on mistake in the Pope, whatever
prejudice and mistake he may think in others, he must obey them for ought I
perceive. For could his conscience excuse him then, it might do so now. If this
be true, he seems obliged to every ^ot as much, as He who should swear, that
the Pope has power to Depose. For that Man by that Oath could only be obliged
to obey the Pope in all he should command concerning Deposition; and this man,
by this account, would be obliged to do just the same without taking that Oath.
And then indeed that Oath may well be spared, since all that can be got by it,
is had without it. But, I think, to mention that it was spared, might have been
spared too; what the Pope has don by forbidding us to swear, amounting to
little less, than what he has not don, commanding us to swear the contrary.

He says farther, That I cannot lawfully take possession of a thing under
debate, but may lawfully hinder my Adversary from taking it. I must confess I
wondered to see this from one who seems an Advocate for the Pope. For what? Will
he say the Pope did unlawfully, when he took possession of the Deposing power?
For he did so, as often as he exercised it, there being no more palpable, nor
perhaps other, way of taking possession of a power, than by using it. And that
it is, and ever since its first origin has been a thing under debate, the
Author of the former Treatise will inform him, though, I suppose, he needs no
information in the case. This very prohibition enjoynd by the Breves, is a
keeping possession of deposing power; To take it, the Pope thinks, is not now
to do. For every body knows the Pope claims it, and every body thinks he has
therefore forbid the Oath, because it should not prejudice that claim. And to
prevent being dispossessed, is manifestly to keep possession. But if it were
unlawful to take it, I understand not how it is lawful to keep it, unless in
circumstances which can make a good Title of that which was originally bad, and
which, I think, will not be pretended in this case. I cannot tell how well the
Pope may relish this discourse. We, for our parts, have reason to thank him for
another justification of our obedience. For since the Command in other terms
is, keep possession for me, and this posession is acknowledged unlawful; to say
we must obey, is to say, we lawfully may, and ought do an unlawful thing. And
this puts another scruple into my head. If the Pope cannot lawfully take
possession of Deposing, (since Deposing is manifestly taking possession of
Deposing) that two and three make five is not more evident than that he cannot
Depose. And then why may not this Gentleman swear the Pope cannot Depose, as
well as his Neighbors? I mean, as they swear, according to the persuasion of
his conscience. For undoubtedly he is persuaded that this which he says is true.

He tells us also, That the Breves forbid us not to take other Oaths of
Allegiance wherein all civil Allegiance is contained in as, or more, expressive
Terms, than in the present Oath. I conceive it no great wonder if these Breves
do not forbid other Oaths, when there are no other Oaths to forbid. But I
cannot easily persuade my self that any other Oath will be allowed, whose
Terms, to bate the more, are but as expressive as those of this Oath. Who can
bring me the hand of the Magister sacri Palatij to an Oath, wherein shall be
inserted, That the Pope cannot by any means Depose the King, may convince me.
But till then, he must pardon me if I be something slow of belief.

He tells besides, That we are not forbid to take these clauses of this Oath,
which do manifestly contain no more than mere Civil Allegiance. Peradventure
who would press him to make this good, might put him to some trouble. For since
the Prohibition is indefinite, it may as well be applied to every, as to any
clause. But let this pass. I only desire to know, since the clauses which
contain civil Allegiance are safe, what clauses there are in the Oath, which
contain not-civil, that is spiritual Allegiance? I have not heard of any
spiritual Allegiance claimed by it; and I see it declared by him, who best knew
the meaning of it, that he was even careful that nothing should be contained K.
James* Preface to the Apology. Page 9.
in it, except the profession of natural Allegiance, and civil, and temporal
obedience, with a promise to resist all contrary uncivil violence. And he
charges them with impudence, and wilful malice, who affirm it was devised to
entrap Papists in points of conscience. Neither do I know that the Defenders of
the Oath acknowledge any spirituality vested in the King by this Oath. As far
as I see, all this ado about Disobedience to the Pope, devolves at last to
this: We must take this Gentleman's word, or his who next finds fault, that this
or that clause which displeases them, belongs to spirituals, and cannot be
taken. For more than their words we have not, while the Breves remain in
generals. And so if we say not as they do, This is Civil, This Spiritual, we
are disobedient, or what they please.

Since we can do no better, let us guess which clauses he means by these which
do not contain mere civil Allegiance. Till he assign them particularly, I
conceive these seem as likely to be meant as any: I acknowledge the Pope cannot
Depose; I believe the Pope cannot absolve me of this Oath. The Question is,
whether these contain more than civil Allegiance. I conceive they do not;
because all they say is but this: I believe the Bond of duty in which I stand
bound to my Prince, cannot be canceled by Deposition, or Absolution. This duty,
I conceive, is only what is due from a Subject, or from a member of a civil
Society to the Head, and that, sure, is Civil, and merely Civil Allegiance. If
there were any difficulty, the Oath it self would resolve it plain enough;
which for all the Allegiance it requires, mentions only, not to stand against
the King on Deposing pretenses, and to stand for him, notwithstanding them.
This Civil Allegiance if I preserve, notwithstanding the claim of a spiritual
power, I understand not that I preserve more than Civil Allegiance. And what
contains no more than preservation of mere Civil Allegiance, contains no more
than mere Civil Allegiance I think. It neither makes nor marrs, that the Power
which would exempt me from this civil duty, is called, or is spiritual. For let
it be what it will, that which I keep for the service of my Prince, is not
spiritual. I, and my Estate are temporal things, and remain temporal, let the
power be never so spiritual which would dispose of them. And since all I do by
the Oath, is to preserve these Temporal things, to be disposed of by my
Temporal Superiors, as the necessity of Temporal concerns requires they should,
All I do, and all the Oath expects I should do, concerns pure Temporals, mere
Civil Allegiance, and no more. Wherefore if what this Gentleman says be true,
that we are not forbid to take those clauses of the Oath which manifestly
contain no more than mere Civil Allegiance, there is no clause which we are
forbid to take. For manifestly there is none which contains anything else. And
so we may without scruple take the whole Oath, notwithstanding the Breves, and
have this Gentleman to abet us.

I doubt all this will be thought superfluous, and the Reader find but little
satisfaction in detailing ware, which altogether is nothing worth, as I said at
first. The next thing he tells us is, That since we are not in rigor obliged to
give an interior assent to the reasons for which the Oath is forbid, who
refuses the Oath in compliance with the Popes commands, may think the Oath in
it self, and speculatively speaking, lawful. Say you so? Why then methinks in
reverence to the Pope, and justification of his proceedings, you should produce
some reason, why he should make the Oath practically unlawful, which we may,
notwithstanding all he has don, think is unlawful of it self, and
speculatively. Besides, Obedience to his Breves can no longer be pressed on the
account of their Declarative virtue. For Those, which make a thing unlawful,
are not Declarative. And then all depends on their Enactive virtue, to which
this Gentleman, by flying to the Declarative, seems not willing to trust.
However, what he says, I conceive, is true; though, I doubt, neither of us will
have any thanks from the Pope, for standing upon rigorous terms with him. And,
I conceive, that more is true, and that one may think the Oath practically
lawful too. Yet if he who does not give an interior Assent, must act as he who
does, it is no great matter what passes within them. In the mean time this is
plain, that whoever refuses the Oath, may think it not so much as speculatively
lawful, and refuse it for that reason, and not out of pure compliance with the
Pope. And it is likely he does do so, because that is indeed a good reason,
whereas Compliment is not. For to compliment away our duty, is to compliment
too far, even with a Pope. Wherefore as long as all must refuse the Oath, I
comprehend not what it will avail, toward clearing the Breves from prejudice,
that some may think the reasons of them not true. For all too may think them
otherwise, and who does, and who does not, can never be known.

Yes, says he. These some who think the Acts contained in the Oath do* concern
mere civil Allegiance, are bound, as long as they remain in such a persuasion,
to comply with those Acts, whether they have taken this Oath or not. Truly
these some are beholding to him, for justifying to the World, what they have
always professed for themselves, that it is their obligation to practice their
Allegiance, whatever the Pope say or do to the contrary, and that they ought
follow their own persuasions in these matters. I have only one request to make
in their behalfs, That, since They are obliged to all the Acts of Allegiance
required by the Oath, notwithstanding the Popes Breves, They may have his good
leave to profess that obligation by taking the Oath, notwithstanding the Popes
Breves. I cannot think the Pope would take it worse of those who should act
contrary to his expectation in the case of these Breves, than of those who
should act contrary to his expectation in case of Deposition; who yet, this
Gentleman says, are obliged to act as they are persuaded themselves, which is
plainly contrary to what the Pope is persuaded: neither will he think a greater
disobedience committed by disobeying his Breves, than by disobeying such
Commands as he only made the Breves that he might, when he saw cause, give. And
since this Gentleman says it is their obligation to act according to their own
persuasions in that case, never so little* indulgence for them should,
methinks, prevail with him to allow them to follow their persuasions about the
Breves too.

But how his discourse will relish with his own party, I cannot tell. I doubt
he is as bad an Advocate for them, as he was even now for the Pope. To say that
those are bound to comply with the Acts required by the Oath, who think they
concern mere civil Allegiance, seems to say, that those who do not think so,
are not bound. Now the last thing he said would persuade us, that there are
clauses in the Oath which do not concern mere Civil Allegiance. Those who think
so, should think, in consequence of his discourse, that they are not obliged to
comply with the Acts contained in those clauses. Those Acts are, standing by
the King, in case of Deposition, or Absolution, which if only those can comply
with, who think they concern not Spirituals, for ought I see all must come over
to the Defenders, who have a mind to pass for good Subjects. For they will
hardly do so, who will not comply with those Acts, or think it not their duty
so to do. I am aware of the distinction which may be cast in my way, betwixt
renouncing the power, and obedience to it. But I have spoken of that Argument
already, and think it deserves not to be brought into play again. The
difference betwixt those two is only in words. Who renounces one, in truth
renounces both. Only who says, I will not renounce the power, but I will act as
if I did, and never obey it; if he can satisfy his conscience in making so
bold with his obedienc^, will hardly satisfy any rational man besides, or make
out how it can in reason be expected he will do as he says. For it is nonsense
to say there may be power, and yet can be no obligation to obey it. Nor will he
who acknowledges the power, and refuses obedience to it, be thought an honest
man, so much as by those who think that Honesty requires he should renounce the
power.

Finally, he tells us, the Popes do not forbid us in these Breves an Act of
Loyalty or Civil Allegiance. This sounds something like, and, if it be well
proved, may be to purpose. Profession of Allegiance though shows, methinks,
very like an Act of Allegiance, and it is plain the Breves do forbid that
profession of Allegiance; which the Law has appointed. Why do they not forbid
an Act of Allegiance? Because the taking of this Oath is not (properly
speaking) any Act of Civil Allegiance, but only a security thereof, and how
little trust is to be put in such a security, does appear by the sad experience
of the late Wars. Sure he will not persuade us that Oaths are matters of small
consequence, and which may be spared in the World, because some have broken
them. There are who have don as much with their Bonds, and cheated their
Creditors, notwithstanding all the Caution they could use for their security.
Must people therefore lend money barely on other folks words, and trouble
themselves no farther? This Dotrin, I suspect, will relish but untowardly: For
it is as much as to say, since you have been cheated by relying on Oaths, rely
hereafter on less than Oaths, and take peoples words. For sure enough they will
stand to their words who break their Oaths.

But why is not the taking of the Oath an Act of Allegiance? For this he gives
us his word, that properly speaking it is not. I am apt enough to believe he is
well skilled in the propriety of speech; but for all that, some reason why he
says so, I conceive, would not have been amiss. I think it is an usual custom
for Vassals, when they are invested in what they hold of their supreme Lords to
make a ceremonious profession of Fealty, and that they are Liege men to that
Lord. And I should think an Act by which a man professes himself a Liege man
may properly enough be called an Act of Allegiance. It rather seems the most
proper Act of all, as that on which all the rest depend, and without which
there could be no such thing as an Act of Allegiance. For supplying a Prince
with Money, or Arms, or whatever you will pitch on for an Act of Allegiance, is
Assistance, not Allegiance, unless it be from a Liege man, and upon the score
of Fealty. And this being the Act by which he professes himself a Liege man,
and bound to do those things which this Gentleman calls Acts of Allegiance, I
see no shocking of propriety, if it be called an Act of Allegiance too. And so
the Oath being a profession of the Allegiance we ow our Sovereign, and our
resolution and obligation to perform it, may pass for an Act of Allegiance if
this Gentleman please, and no injury be don to speech. However, as I love not
to dispute of words, if he will have it but an improper Act of Allegiance, I
cannot but think it equivalent to the most proper Act that is. And suspect a
Prince, whose Subjects are hindered from professing their Allegiance, will think
himself as much prejudiced, as if they were hindered from performing that Act
which can with most propriety claim the name. For indeed if they will not so
much as profess they ow him any thing, with what security can he expect they
will give any thing when time is?

Yet suppose it were as this Gentleman would have it, not an Act, but only a
Security. Is it no prejudice to a Prince to have that Security taken away? How
much less is he a Thief who tears the Bond, than he who steals the Money? Or if
you will give him another name, you diminish nothing of his injustice. What
this subtle distinguishing betwixt Act and Security serves for, I cannot imagine
while the injury, give it what name you will, is equal at least, and if I
mistake not much, greater by making the Oath a Security than an Act. For who
hinders an Act, deprives the Prince of no more than was to be had by that Act,
so much money, or so much service. But who takes away his Security, deprives
him of all he can expect from all Acts. For nothing can be claimed but in
virtue of Allegiance, and who refuses to profess Allegiance, refuses to be
bound to any thing. So that the discourse in short is this: The Pope has don
the King no prejudice, because he hinders no Act of Allegiance in his Subjects,
He only takes away more then an Act, only hinders him from being secure his
Subjects shall ever act for him at all.

But a Subject may be obliged, says he, to his Civil Allegiance, and equally
punished for his not complying therewith, or for being a Traitor, whether he has
taken the Oath or not. This is something to those who think the Oath contains
nothing but Civil Allegiance; For They, by this account, are good Subjects, as
being obliged to all which the wisdom of the Nation thinks necessary to Civil
Allegiance. And since taking the Oath is but openly professing that obligation,
which they otherwise have, I see not why they should be obliged to make a
secret of it. But what is it to the rest, and what is it to the Breves? For
that another may be obliged to that duty, which the Law and Prince call Civil
Allegiance, is nothing to him who thinks it is not Civil Allegiance, nor his
duty. This seems little better than to delude his Prince with a Term: bear him
in hand He ows and will pay Civil Allegiance, and when the Princes necessities,
in case of Deposition, call for succor, tell him the case is not a case of
Civil Allegiance, and he will do nothing for him. It Is true, he may, as this
Gentleman says, and undoubtedly will be punished for a Traitor, if the Prince be
strong enough. But sure no Traitor will be so hastily mad, as not to stay till
that danger be over, and till the Prince be no longer in a condition to treat
him like a Traitor; and then what the Prince calls Treason he will maintain is
not Treason, and have this to say for himself, that he never by Oath
acknowledged That to be a Duty the failing in which the Prince calls Treason.
Then for what concerns the Breves, are they no way prejudicial, because some
may be, as indeed all are, obliged to their duty, notwithstanding them, and
because they know they are so, think themselves obliged also not to obey the
Breves? Others may think themselves not obliged, and may be induced by the
Breves to think so. These, if they act agreably to their thoughts, may act to
the prejudice of their Princes Interest, and for this prejudice, for any thing
said here, the Breves may be thanked.

Yet from hence he concludes at last, it is manifest, That Compliance with the
Breves cannot be inconsistent with the Duty and Loyalty due to Sovereign
Princes, because that reaches no farther than to all Acts of Allegiance, and
the Breves forbid us no Act. This is to say, Allow me all I ask, and I will
prove all I undertook. He had made use of his credit before, to recommend one
Proposition purely on his word: viz. That taking an Oath of Allegiance is no
Act of Allegiance, and now recommends another upon die same score, That Loyalty
reaches no farther than to Acts. Truly I dare not entertain this so suddenly,
for fear I should be the only man of the World, besides himself, of this
opinion. Unless he would show some reason to the contrary, people will hardly
think that security of Allegiance is a matter of nothing, in which Loyalty is
unconcerned. To beg both the Premises is a little too much for one who pretends
to prove, when any man may prove any thing who can have but one allowed him.
Besides, why does he conclude with inconsistent, when unprejudicial was what he
undertook to prove? These two are sufficiently different. For there is no
inconsistence betwixt complying with the Breves, and complying with Loyalty. He
who obeys them may be dutiful enough, if he will always do what Loyalty
requires. But because a Prince can have no security that he will do so, he is
prejudiced by the want of that security.

Wherefore I must needs think he has said nothing, by which, what he would
persuade us follows, appears either manifest or true. What he says first, that
the Pope has not don this or that, is as much as to say that who untiles the
house, and leaves it open to the wind and rain, does no prejudice as long as be
pulls it not quite down. What he urges next, that those who think the Acts
contained in the Oath do concern mere Civil Allegiance, are bound to comply
with these Acts, as long as they think so, (to say nothing of the prejudice it
is to a Prince to have his security depend on the good pleasure, and changeable
thoughts of his Subjects, as by his expression it should seem they are,)
plainly supposes there are others who think otherwise, and so are not bound,
and those prejudicial thoughts, for any thing he says, are left to be imputed
to the Breves. The Distinction he brings in the last place betwixt Security,
and Act, though it were true, is so far from clearing the Breves, that it makes
the prejudice greater. It being plainly less to have a part of my Estate taken
away, than my Writings canceled, in which appears my Title to the whole. So
that, I conceive, I may conclude a great deal more rationally, that because
compliance with the Breves is prejudicial to our Sovereign, we ought not comply
with them, and conceive too, that he himself allows so much, by the method he
has taken to answer the Objection.

The 28 Consideration is a pretty one. It happens sometimes between married
people, that Jealousy is pretended on that side, which gives the greatest
cause. This discourse seems to have a tang of that Artifice. Of the two parties
in the present debate, one is for the Pope, the other for the King, and he
would persuade us they are against the King, even by being for him. His Topic
is, That Exceptions grounded on such frivolous pretenses, may be made use of as
well against the King as the Pope, and so open a gap for Subjects to disobey
him, and render his Authority very weak and insignificant, as in effect they do
the Popes. Methinks it suits not well with the sudden zeal he pretends for the
Authority of Kings, to say the Popes Authority is rendered insignificant by
Exceptions which endeavor to exempt us from obedience to him when he commands
what is to the prejudice of Kings. But to let this pass: It were, perhaps,
enough to say in answer to him, that the Exceptions are not frivolous, and that
his Objections are. For why should not the No deserve as much regard as the I?
especially when the exceptions are justified by the consent and practice of all
Christendom.

But to use this Argument with more respect, I conceive, he states the case
wrong, and that his apprehension is wrong even of the wrong case he puts. For
should it be represented to a King, that there was not sufficient consideration
of the Laws, in this or that command of his, or that He was misinformed
concerning them, or mistook them, I believe there are few Kings who would think
such a representation frivolous, and who, if things be carried so as becomes
Subjects to treat with their Prince, would not take it well, and be glad, if
any slip of inadvertence happen to fall into the ground, to keep it from taking
root, and growing. Nothing is more ordinary in diverse Kingdoms, than to have
the Kings grants, or commands pleaded on the one side, and the Law on the
other. And when the Law carries it, as it often does, neither Judge nor Client
is thought a jot the worse Subject, though one have pleaded, and the other
given it, against the King.

But this in truth is not altogether the Case. He speaks only of such Commands
of Kings as relate to matters wholly within their sphere, whereas the Breves in
question relate to matters which concern not only the spiritual sphere of the
Pope, but the temporal too of the King. Now if any King command in a matter
belonging to the Pope, I suppose he will say, that command is for that reason,
not to be obeyed. If he demur to this, I would ask him why he refuses the Oath
of Allegiance? Is it not because he thinks the Law which requires it, exceeds
its bounds, and requires more than belongs to the Civil Power to require? And
so, because he is persuaded some parts of the Oath entrench upon Spirituals,
and Spirituals appertain to the Pope, and the Pope has forbidden the Oath, he
thinks himself obliged rather to obey the Pope than the King. By what he says
in his Book, I take this to be his reason why he refuses to obey the King in
this particular. Which if it be, it is plain he judges a command of the Kings is
not to be obeyed, when it extends to matters without his sphere, and is
prejudicial to an Authority over which he has no power. If this be so, I see no
reason why the case should not be equal betwixt Popes and Kings, and that as
Kings are not to be obeyed to the prejudice of Spirituals, so neither are Popes
to be obeyed to the prejudice of Temporals. So that there is little ground to
fear, that disobedience to the Pope in matters which concern Kings, will
introduce disobedience to Kings in matters which do not concern the Pope. In
such things the Defenders prefer their conscience before the Kings commands, as
well as the Oppugners. And there is less ground for him, who actually disobeys
the King, to asperse those who obey him, because they disobey the Pope, when
they have the very same reason not to obey the Pope, which He himself thinks a
good and warrantable reason not to obey the King.

When he says, the exceptions are to be decided by the Sovereigns themselves,
it is as he means by the word Sovereigns. For some, even Sovereign Princes, use
the concurrence of their Subjects in the decision of such things. But if he
mean the Sovereign Temporal power, however exercised, undoubtedly there is no
farther decision to be expected, and if there were, the power were not
Sovereign. But then, to make his Argument look any thing like, he must put such
a Sovereign power in the Pope in respect of the Church, as there is in the
Sovereign Temporal power, in respect of the Commonwealth. And this, out of his
own Territories, I suspect will trouble this Gentleman to make good. For sure
the inferior Ecclesiastical Hierarchy will expect some regard should be had of
them, and the Temporal Government will expect to be regarded in what concerns
them. Wherefore though the Temporal Supremacy require, and when it is denied
can force, an absolute obedience, to what it determins within it self,
concerning it self; the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as it is vested in the Pope,
seems not altogether so absolute. Peradventure others may expect satisfaction
in his decisions, before they be fully obeyed, and it is plain he can force
nothing till all parties be agreed.

For the rest, if the exceptions be so frivolous as he pretends, be had the
easier task of it to show them so, and need not have given them credit by
answers, at least, as weak as they. In the Consideration of Prejudice, there is
not one word which lessens, there is which heightens it. In that of
Disturbance, whereas the Objection was, that we ought not take notice of the
Commands of the Pope, when the compliance with them may be a cause of great
disturbance in the Church* He answers first; That the Defenders cause the
disturbance. As if it were any thing to purpose, while the Objection talks of
disturbance ensuing upon compliance, to talk of disturbance which comes from
not-compliance. Let the Defenders be as great disturbers as they will, they are
not to be charged with disturbance in not complying with the Breves, if
compliance be not due, which brings disturbance, and this compliance will bring
it. These are the only Questions, and there is not one word said to them. He
answers secondly, That the Pope is not to forbear declaring what he sees fit
for fear of Disturbance. And yet the Objection speaks not of what he may, or
may not do, but whether we ought to comply with what he does, in case of
Disturbance. Whether the Pope do well or ill is nothing to whether we are to
obey him with disturbance of the Church. Lastly, he answers, that the Pope
intends to oblige in some cases, not in other. When we are not a jot concerned
in his intentions, while we are looking after our own duty, and whether that
obliges us to comply with his intentions, when that compliance will cause
disturbance. So that there is not one word to the Question in all his three
Answers. I will recapitulate no farther, because I have been too long already.
It Is not good to spend much time in frivolous things. But yet before people
quit them altogether, I suppose, they will be glad to know what they shall have
more material in their room.

The 29 Consideration offers a new Objection, too long to be transcribed: and
besides, the great Lake is sure to remain dry, if all the little streams be
stopped which feed it: and those we shall meet with as they run. The first is the
Question of Sinfulness, which the Objection imputes to Refusal of the Oath. He
undertakes to wipe off this imputation, and Number. 30. says first, That the
Objection is against all or most of those Catholics who defend the Oath. I
would entreat him not to trouble himself about them. Let them conform
themselves to Truth, if they will, where ever it be, and if they will not, at
their own peril be it. Truth will be Truth, whether they like it or no, neither
is it any matter for, or against whom the Objection is. Let us see what there
is in the Thing: and for Persons, let them take their fortune. But yet why is
it against them? Because their Aim only is to show, not that it is a sin to
refuse this Oath, but that it is no sin to take it. He has a mind, sure, to
compliment these Gentlemen, and let the World know they aim only at the
justification of their own proceedings, and disturb not other men in theirs.
But what is this to the Question in hand? Is a thing the less sinful, because
others have no mind to say it is? Or does he who says it is no sin to take the
Oath, say therefore it is no sin to refuse it? I am of opinion, if they let
this matter alone, it had been more to his purpose to have followed good
example, and let it alone too. For what if the Devil prove surly, and will not
be laid again, when he is once conjured up? Truly now he has put a scruple into
our heads, unless he satisfy it well when he has don, He has furnished us with
the strongest Motive that can be, not to refuse the Oath. For I am very sure he
himself will justify it to be our duty, not to do a sinful thing for any bodies
sake. How then does he provide for the quiet of our Consciences in this matter?

In order to this he considers secondly, Whether the refusal can be sinful,
unless the taking be obligatory. I conceive not. This being agreed, he denis,
in his way of Questions, there is any obligation to take the Oath, since the
taking thereof is no part of Civil Allegiance, as has been already shown. All
that has been already shown is, that he assumed what he pleased without proof,
and made the business worse when he had don. The matter being discou^st so
lately, I have no more to do, but refer the Reader to the place as he does. I
only observe he now calls a Part what before he called an Act of Allegiance, in
which if he lay any stress, as I do not perceive he does, I think, the change
of names alters nothing in the thing. He may well enough say that security that
I will pay, is no part of the money which I am to pay, as a Mason is no part of
the House which he builds. Notwithstanding he is as necessary to it, as Mortar
and Bricks, and so is security to Payment. I will dive no farther into a matter
which has no intricacy, unless of our own making: conceiving it enough to say,
That as plainly he is no honest man, who refuses to give security for what he
ows, so how he should be a dutiful Subject, who refuses to give security for
his Allegiance, we scrupulous men, now he has made us so, cannot comprehend.

Next he tells us, his Majesty does not absolutely require of us the taking of
the Oath, but only conditionally, if we will enjoy such and such Employments or
Privileges which we are not bound to accept of. Till now I thought the
Absolute which he joins to Obligation before, had been a word of redundance,
for which reason I left it out as unnecessary, when I quoted his words,
conceiving that Obligation was obligation, what Epithet soever you join with
it. But now, I perceive, he meant something by it, which, I suppose, is, that
some are, and some are not obliged to take the Oath. For when he says his
Majesty requires it conditionally, if we will enjoy such and such Privileges,
I conceive he means, his Majesty does not require it of those who pretend not
to those Privileges, and does require it of those who do. For if he require it
of all, Privileges have nothing to do with the case. And so conditional
obligation, signifies not-obligation. Those who will have their Privileges
being absolutely obliged, and those who will bate them not at all. This truly
is to purpose. For if none be obliged to take the Oath but those who will enjoy
Privileges, Those who will be content to pass without them, are free.
Wherefore it is but dissuading people from being concerned in Privileges, and
the business is don.

But what are these Privileges, in which we need not be concerned? who refuses
the Oath of Allegiance incurs a Praemunire, and that signifies loss of Estate
and Liberty. Call you these Employments and Privileges, such of which we are
not bound to accept? Is no man bound to accept of his Liberty, or not turn
Beggar? Privileges, I thought had signified extraordinary Rights granted by
favor to some above others. These are common to all; Nature teaches us to love,
and our Need to seek them; and it is the end of Civil Society to preserve them.
They are the things which make a life not only sweet, but useful. For who
languishes out his days in Prison, and has nothing to maintain him there wants,
the means of doing good to himself and his Neighbor, which if he had, might be
very beneficial to both. I say no more of this point, because I think it
needless to tell people that which Nature tells them a great deal more
strongly, that they ought be concerned in these Privileges, if you will call
them so. The hard task is that which belongs to this Gentleman to persuade them
otherwise; and in which he had need employ more Rhetoric, than to tell us
driely we are not bound to accept of them, if he expect to prevail much. Mean
time, since there is as much obligation to take the Oath, as to preserve Goods
and Liberty (For those who will enjoy them, I conceive, it is granted are
obliged) All are obliged without more ado to take it, but those whom he can
persuade they are unconcerning things, and that they have no account to make
God for casting away such useful means of working out their Salvation.

Though it be plain enough that none are exempted by this discourse, from
obligation to take the Oath; yet to put the matter out of dispute, I must
inform this Gentleman, if he know it not already, that there is an Act of
Parliament purposely made to extend the obligation to all the Kings Subjects.
He will find it 7 Jac. c. 6. though with some difference of persons. Those of
employments are directed where and when to take it, the rest let alone till
they are called upon; which if they never be, he may well enough say, they are
free till then. For the Law obliges them not to go and take it without summons.
But there is no Subject who may not be called upon, and when he is, and refuses
the Oath in open Sessions, incurrs not Praemunire. And if requiring it of all,
under such a penalty, do not put an obligation on all, I know not how Subjects
can be obliged by Law.

He says farther, That though those who refuse the Oath in many circumstances,
are liable to some penalties enacted against Roman Catholics, yet they are
punished even in that case, not so much for refusing the Oath, but because by
refusing it they are suspected to be Popishly inclined. What this means I can
hardly tell, unless, perhaps, that who is punished for refusing the Oath,
suffers for Religion. This I must in plain terms say, is a scandal to Religion,
and which, after so plain declarations as have been made to the contrary,
cannot be said with any reason. Though it were as he says, that the Refusers
are punished for inclination to Popery (which in one sense is true, the Oath
having been framed to discover those who are so) it would not therefore follow
there is any less obligation to take the Oath. For taking Popery as Protestants
themselves take it, for an Undue adhaesion to the Pope in Considerations
touching the true way to suppress Popery.
Principles or Practices falsely pretended to be Christian, he must show why
this should not be punishable, even in Catholic Countries, before he can
pretend we cannot be obliged to renounce it in ours. But I rather guess than
know his meaning, being hardly able to make any thing of what he says. The
Refusers, he says, are liable in many circumstances; as if there were any in
which they were not liable, or as if circumstances made or marred. Then, Liable
to some Penalties enacted against Roman Catholics, as if these Penalties were
enacted against Roman Catholics for being Roman Catholics, and not-Roman
Catholics were not as liable to them, as they, if they refuse as well as they.
Again, Liable (for refusal, I suppose) and yet not punished for refusal, so much
as for other suspicions. As if they were not punished for that reason for which
they are liable; or as if the Punishments appointed for Refusal, would or could
be inflicted but for refusal; unless, perhaps, the same punishments be
appointed for other faults, which is not our case. Let there be, or not be
other reasons why refusers are punished, sure they are punished for refusing the
Oath, when by taking it they may escape those punishments. But indeed the whole
to me is riddle. Circumstances, and Reasons, and what else he adds, make a
noise, which a body would think had something in it. But that something is a
secret into which I cannot dive. Yet he would have it follow, that no absolute
obligation of taking the Oath can be proved: as if the Laws enjoining, and
Magistrates requiring, did not put an absolute obligation upon the Subjects to
those Laws and Magistrates. And actual loss of Goods and Liberty were not a
proof, that they oblige those, from whom they take them, to do that for
refusing which they take them.

The 31 Consideration tells us, It cannot prudently be presumed, that the
forbearance of the Oath is manifestly sinful. Methinks the resolution of such
Questions as these should not depend on Presumptions. Many things happen to be
true, which often cannot be very prudently presumed. As time was when he would
hardly have been thought well in his wits, who should have presumed there had
been convenient living under the Line, or that people walk feet to feet to us.
And yet both are now manifestly true. It Is to spoil time and Paper to stick
upon such collateral Topics, which may be multiplied World without end on any
thing, and serve nothing to the clearing of Truth. But yet what are these
presumptions. Grave, and Learned, and Conscientious Men (I forbear to speak of
the Pope, having said so much of what concerns him already) maintain the
forbearance of the Oath against their own Interest, and diverse have suffered
Imprisonment or Death. To their Gravity, and Conscience I have nothing to say;
only I think it no miracle to see a grave and conscientious Man ignorant
enough. As for their Learning, it matters not what it is in other things, if it
fail them here: and that it does not, now he is on the proving hand, he should
do something more than presume. Interest is an harsh string which I will not
touch, but I think he knows there are who dare presume to think, that every
body who speaks against the Oath of Allegiance, does not act against his
Interest. As for the Authority of those who have suffered for refusing the
Oath, it will signify something when he produces reasons sufficient to
justify their so doing. For, Sect. 96. He tells us that no account is to be
made of Authors, whose grounds are false, or inconclusive. If the Refusers of
the Oath had no good reasons for their refusal, they are to be pityed, but not
imitated: If they had, it would do well to bring them forth, that we may have
wherewith to justify our selves in following their example: otherwise it is no
virtue to imitate the defects even of good Men. Neither shall we have that to
say for our selves which they had. For they had reasons, such as they were;
which unless they appear to us, they may have done very well, and yet we shall
do very ill in doing the same action without reason.

It is no great wonder that people were imprisoned for refusing the Oath, it
being the penalty appointed by Law. As for Death, it is an unjust aspersion to
mention it, and an injury to the mercy of the Nation, in which none ever died
purely for that matter. We see diverse are persuaded the Oath is unlawful, and
if they act as they think, the marvel is not great. The wonder is that it
should be expected, that others, who are not so persuaded, should suffer for
company. Among Sheep if one leap into the ditch, the rest will follow; but to
say that Men must do so, is to make Men no better than Sheep. This is the
finest way of doing the business that ever was thought of. Prevail but with
some to suffer, by Sophism, or how you will, and then it is no* matter whether
it were Sophism or no; the rest need not hear of it, but must suffer, because
the first have suffered, and so all are in, without the trouble of giving a
reason why. In short, their suffering is an Argument they were good Men; and
not moved by any interest of the World, since they voluntarily quitted the more
considerable of Temporal Goods. But it is no Argument of the goodness of the
action, or truth of what they suffered for; while the worst of Heretics, and
perhaps Atheists too, can name their sufferers. As good Men of all other, are
the most apt to be imposed upon: they may thank such Arguments as these for
what they have suffered. If others have no mind to be beholding to them for
such obligations, I think they may be pardoned. Sure I am, it is a very
preposterous imitation of their example, and justifiable neither to God nor
Man; if what they did according to the dictates of their Consciences, we do
contrary to the dictates of ours.

Number. 32. The consideration of Schism comes into play; which I for my part,
unless the word be taken improperly, conceive imputable to neither party. For
it signifies a breach of Unity in the Church: and where both sides are united,
both to the Head, and among themselves, I see no Schism. If either proceed so
far, as to refuse communion to the other, let them answer for the Schism when
it happens. For the present, those seem nearer the brink, who object Heresy to
their fellows: because they object what, if it were made good, were a just
cause of breach of Communion. But since they are not so severe in their actions
as words: and communicate freely with those who, if they were such as they say,
were not to be communicated withal: there is no more Schism between us, than
betwixt Jesuits, and Jansenists, Thomists, and Scotists, and the rest. Though
if there were, what he has said makes nothing to the justification of his
party. For since both acknowledge the Head, the Schism must of necessity be
between the Members. Now all he tells us is, that their side joins with the
Head, as if the other did not do so too: and as if it were any thing to
purpose, to say they are not Schismatics in respect of the Head, when the
question is of Schism between the Members. Wherefore, though in my opinion his
discourse is none of the best, yet while it concerns not our question, I think
I may let* it alone.

Number. 33. He tells us, Union among Catholics in England in order to this
point, may be had two ways; if All take, or All refuse the Oath. Union indeed
in this point were to be desired; yet there is no fear of Schism, if we remain
disunited in our judgments, while the unity of the Church is preserved. But
this Union, I fear, is more to be wished than hoped. People have been divided
about this Question, ever since it was first started: and I see no great
likelihood it will be otherwise yet a while. Quiet we may be, if we please, if
every one be content to follow his own conscience, and leave his Neighbor the
liberty he takes himself. And he whose Zeal will needs fly out, is to answer
for his transport, and the harm which comes of it. But united in this point, I
doubt, we shall not be so soon, unless he would give us better reasons than he
does, why All should refuse the Oath. It is more easy, he says, and more
warrantable that the minor part should conform to the major, than the major to
the minor. As if number signified any thing. It is not easy for him who has
Truth on his side, to desert that Truth for any consideration, but by being
persuaded that it is not Truth, nor warrantable if he do. Nor do I think he
will find it so easy a matter to persuade the Takers they are not warranted by
Truth. Again, he says, It Is more rational for the Members to submit to the
Head, than the Head to the Members. This indeed is generally to be supposed.
But yet it may happen, that the Head may slip into what is not rational
sometimes. And then it is more rational for him to conform himself, not to the
Members, but to Reason, than for the Members to conform themselves to what is
not rational. Who has, and who has not Reason on his side, is the only point
worth consideration: all else is but to talk plausibly from the purpose.

The next two Paragraphs are employed in Reasons why Catholics should rather
refuse than take the Oath. And they are all such as should neither be
mentioned, nor so much as thought of. An honest man has no more to take care
of, than to perform his duty, when it is required, and leave the success to
Providence. Selling of duty, and bargaining before hand what I shall get by it,
as if the joy which follows the discharge of a good conscience, were not reward
enough* in this World, and God would forget us in the next, sav^rs of a conduct
not very creditable to Religion. Besides, indeed they belong more properly to
those to whom it belongs to offer the Oath, than those to whom it is offered;
and to their consideration I* leave them.

Yet I cannot take leave of these Paragraphs, without wondering a^ the
confidence with which he so positively affirms, that the far greater part of
English Catholics have hitherto been for refusing the Oath. He says indeed at
last, that it is a confessed point, which if it be true, for I know not what
adversaries he means, I think they with their confession, and he too are both
out. Of the persuasion of the present Catholics we* have a little experience
in what happened among the Catholic Lords. When the Oath was pressed upon them, my
intelligence fails me, if the refusers were the far greater part. I am told
they were the less. And I think there is reason to guess it would be among the
Commons, as it was with them. For the influence of those of his Principles is
thought to be as great on the Nobility as others.

For the ancient Catholics we have the testimony of Withrington, one of them,
and who knew what past. He in his Preface to his Disputatio Theologica tells
the Pope, that very few ( paucissimi) ^ay-Catholicks of any note refused the
Oath: and in his Purgation, that the Oath was daily taken by almost all
Catholics of the better sort, to whom it was tendered even by those who had
Jesuits for their Directors. Possibly this Gentleman may not think very well
of Withrington; but sure he does not think so ill, as that he would tell the
Pope a lie to his face, in a matter of fact which every body could see were a
lie, when he had so many Adversaries ready to catch at every advantage he gave.
Or if he would lie to the Pope, I am sure it cannot with any prudence be
presumed he would lie to an Adversary, who knew how things went as well as
himself, and appeal to his knowledge for the matter. Fitzherbert had said the
Oath was refused by Catholics. Withrington in his last Rejoinder, Chap. 2.
replies, He could not be ignorant that where one Catholic has refused it, a
hundred have taken it. And this was written in the year 1633, almost thirty
years after the framing of the Oath, when in all likelihood it had been taken
or refused by all the Catholics in England. So that, by this Gentleman's favor,
the Ancient Catholics were of another mind than he fancies them. Nor can I
think but he reckons without his Host, when he counts the Refusers far more
numerous at present. We have little more, perhaps not so much, said to us as
they had, and it is strange we should receive for current, what they thought
adultrate.

And so we are come to the head of scandal, in answer to that part of the
Objection, which said, that to refuse the Oath is scandalous to Religion, as if
the Principles thereof were inconsistent with Civil Allegiance due to Princes.
I cannot imagine how this Objection can be answered otherwise, than by denying
the Principles in question belong to our Religion; or are inconsistent with
Allegiance, though they do; or are scandalous to Religion, though they be both
inconsistent with Allegiance, and belong to Religion. This last way, I suppose,
will be trod by few. For to say Religion teaches Principles inconsistent with
Allegiance, is palpably to hinder people from embracing Religion, and that is
palpable scandal. Wherefore all depends on the other two, whereof I, for my
part, should choose the first; and fear who does not, is no friend to Religion,
otherwise than in wishes. Yet if it could be made out that those Principles do
consist with Allegiance, Religion would be saved harmless. But this, I doubt,
will never be done. However, let us hear what this Gentleman says to the point.

He tells us, Number. 36. That the scandal, if any be, is rather Acceptum than
Datum, because Catholics have been Loyal in the late Wars. I suppose he would
have it thought by this, that the Principles in question have no inconsistency
with Civil Allegiance; but I do not think he could have chosen a Topic less to
purpose. For what had those Principles, and that Loyalty to do one with
another? no body ever said or thought, but a man of these Principles might be
loyal enough, in occasions where they have no influence. The Question is,
whether they do not hinder a man from obeying a King deposed by the Pope, and
whom the Pope commands not to be obeyed, and whether that hindrance be
consistent with Allegiance, or no. What is it to this Question, to talk of what
Catholics have done, when there was no deposition, and where the Pope never
meddled? The Loyalty of those Irish, who stood by the King against the Popes
Nuncio and his Excommunications, has indeed some relation to the matter; and
did he approve the Principles by which they acted, he had something to say. And
then, I suppose, he would not write against the Oath of Allegiance. But the
Civil Wars of England have no more to do with the case, than the Wars of China.

The next Consideration tells us, Protestants would think never a whit the
better of us, though we should all take the Oath, and, perhaps, the worse. Till
he have Commission to speak for Protestants, I suppose, they will desire to
speak for themselves, and conceive we ought not take their Sentiments barely on
his word. But what matter is it what Protestants think, or not think? what they
have reason to think, is all that concerns us. There are among Protestants, as
in all multitudes, Reasonable, and Unreasonable. And because they will think,
and speak, and act differently, I presume the Reasonable will not take it well,
if the sentiments of the rest pass for the sentiments of all. As the letter he
mentions, till it be owned by more than a single man, is, I think, unreasonably
made the sense of Protestants. But let them think as they please. We, for our
parts, are to look to our own duty, not other men's thoughts. When we have
complied with that, we have no more to do. What others will think of it, is a
matter out of our reach, for which God is to provide, and will; and to him they
are to give account who think amiss of us for well doing. We are to satisfy
those whom Reason will satisfy: for the rest, at their own peril be it.

Our Question is of scandal; that scandal with which the Church may be aspersed
if she teach Principles inconsistent with Allegiance; and which, I conceive,
consists in this, that those who are not of her Communion will hardly be
persuaded to embrace it, and those who are, easily be wrought upon to desert
it, if that aspersion cannot be wiped off. It would be shown why both have not
reason, when nothing is more manifest than that the Church whose Principles are
inconsistent with Allegiance, is not the true Church. To this he should have
spoken, if he would have spoken to purpose. Nothing can be wider of the mark,
than to tell us there will be unreasonable constructions made of our actions;
As if there were not unreasonable people every where, and those who are so
would not act unreasonably.

The taking of the Oath, he says, would be ineffectual to the End pretended.
This End, I conceive, is to free our Religion from the scandal of Principles
inconsistent with Allegiance. The Catholic now who takes the Oath, testifies
his Religion is not guilty of such Principles, while he complies with his
Allegiance, and still keeps his Religion. Why is not this effectual to that
End? Because Protestants would not therefore have a better opinion of our
Religion, but worse opinion of Catholics who take the Oath, as professing a
Religion, to whose Principles, as by Protestants understood, they are ashamed
to conform. If this were so, the scandal would be removed from Religion to the
persons who profess it. For this imputation falls only on them. And if
Protestants continue still to think amiss of Religion, those are to be thanked,
who have given them occasion to think, that they swerve from the Principles of
it, who profess their Allegiance. Their fault it is if taking the Oath be not
effectual to the end pretended; and they should do well to consider what
account they will make to God for the scandal.

And why should it be thought that Protestants would have these opinions? I
conceive he wrongs them with an unreasonable suspicion. They would plainly have
reason to think, that those who they see stick to their Religion, after they
have owned their Allegiance, are not ashamed of their Religion, or any
Principles of it. Unless they believed all those Fools or Knaves who take the
Oath, they would have reason too to judge, that their Religion has no
Principles inconsistent with Allegiance. For they were Knaves who should
profess Allegiance contrary to the Principles of their Religion, and Fools who
did not know what their Religion teaches. And since there is Reason for
Protestants to entertain other opinions than those he fancies, he may think of
them as he pleases; I, for my part, cannot think but reason would sway with
them.

Besides, what means, as by Protestants understood? This, I suppose, that
Protestants understand the Principles of our Religion consist not with
Allegiance, to which Principles those are ashamed to conform, who are not
ashamed to conform to their Allegiance. When Protestants understand things in
this manner, I would entreat this Gentleman to tell us what he thinks of the
matter, whether they understand things right, or no? If they do, and the
Principles of our Religion have indeed an inconsistence with Allegiance,
Protestants plainly do well to understand things as they are, and he must
bethink himself of a reason to give them, why they should not think ill of a
Religion of such Principles. If they understand wrong, and our Principles be
truly consistent, he should do well to speak out, that we may understand one
another, and in sted of hiding our Question in the Protestants thoughts, tell
us how it happens that they are in the wrong. Whether because those Principles
are not Principles of Religion, or consist with Allegiance though they be. One
would guess he has a good mind to the latter, and would have it at last
believed. But the difficulty lying in this, Whether it be agreeable to
Allegiance to fight against the King, or at best not fight for him when the
Pope deposes him, and puts a necessity of disobeying either the Pope for the
Kings sake, or the King for the Popes, and what influence the refusing
Principles would have in that case, and only that case: there is not one word
to the point in all his discourse, that I perceive, not so much as I, or No.

For what he urges, Sect. 38. That we shall be accounted not Loyal for refusing
the Oath of Supremacy. I know not what reason he has to fear such hard measure
from Protestants. I do not hear they do, what he says they will do, and believe
I can produce Protestants who allow some Catholics loyal, though they know all
refuse the Oath of Supremacy. When the time comes, we shall see what is to be
said to them. I suppose if he had as much to say for refusal of the Oath of
Allegiance, as of Supremacy, he would make better work of it. Yet he proves
this conceit of his, because Protestants acknowledge the Supremacy in
Spirituals is inherent in the Crown, and consequently that to refuse the Oath
of Supremacy is to refuse the Supremacy of his Majesty in Temporals. What
Protestants acknowledge, themselves declare. He may dispute that point with
them if he pleases. But I do not think they acknowledge this consequence of
his, who denis Supremacy in Spirituals (meaning as the word signifies, purely
Spirituals) denis it in Temporals. They have no reason to thank him, in my
opinion, for making them no better Logicians. If that be all they have to say
for fixing disloyalty on the Refusers of the Oath of Supremacy, I believe we
may rest secure. For they are too reasonable to say it. His proof of this, as
indeed it needs proving, is, That who refuses to acknowledge any thing inherent
to the Crown, refuses, at least implicitly, to acknowledge the Crown and his
Loyalty. Which is but to say the same more in general, leaving out the words
which discover the fallacy. Otherwise, by any thing is meant any spiritual
thing, and by Crown is meant power in Temporals. And so it is just the same
again; who denis Spirituals, denis Temporals.

Before I pass farther, I cannot but observe, That what he says here, is an
Argument that Protestants are not likely to judge so crosly as he imagins. For
if they cared for no more than a pretense to asperse Catholics with
disloyalty, right or wrong, what needed they have made the Oath of Allegiance,
when, according to him, the Oath of Supremacy would have served their turn as
well? no Catholic could escape the imputation, if Refusal of the Oath of
Supremacy would fix it on them; this way All may. If any be in love with an
imputation so laudable, and will by no means part with it, the fault sure is
not in the Protestants. It would, in my opinion, become our Reason to judge
more rationally, and our Charity more favorably of our Neighbors.

The last consideration, Sect. 39. That the Takers would create scandal in the
Refusers, seeing how they slight the express order of the Pope; would make a
Man suspect he has forgotten what he is talking of. He is answering this
Objection; that inconsistence of its principles with Allegiance, is a scandal
to Religion: And he talks of a scandal, not to Religion, but to particulars;
and not for inconsistence of principles, but slighting of commands. Let the
Takers be as scandalous as you will, and for what reasons you will, still the
scandal remains upon Religion; unless its principles be cleared from
inconsistence with Allegiance. To do this, I thought had been his business; to
fall upon other things seems a strange way of doing it, and which argues, he
gives it for desperate, and finds nothing will be done in it.

As for the difficulty it self, it is the boiled Capon we have had all this
while, of which I now grow weary. Who justly gives, who blameably takes the
scandal he talks of, depends on what has been discourst all along, who has
right on his side. If any harm come by the ungrounded persuasions of weak
people, I think they owe it to those to whom they owe those persuasions; and
have nothing to say to those, who do what they can to ground them better. Sure
I am there is no scandal in saying, our obedience to the Pope, or any body,
ought not to carry us to any thing scandalous to Religion. There is no scandal
in saying, there is nothing said by this Gentleman, which removes from Religion
the scandal objected to it. For to talk of the Loyalty of Catholics, and
thoughts of Protestants, (all the Meat he gives us with variety of Cookery) is
to feed us with steam, instead of substance. There is no scandal in saying, he
can see into the Millstone as far as another. Which if he do, and no body can
clear the Objection better than he; the refusal is plainly scandalous for the
reason objected. And because, if the Refusal be, the Taking cannot be
scandalous; who fright weak Consciences into such apprehensions, have
something, I doubt, to answer for their own.

The Objection urged further: That should the Pope declare it sinful to bear
His Majesty civil Allegiance (which is due unto him by the Law of God and
Nature) we should not think our selves bound to submit to such a Declaration.
This I conceive he grants, Sect. 40. and then I see not why the dispute is not
at an end. For the case of the Breves is the very case proposed. The Pope has
declared something contained in the Oath of Allegiance is sinful. Besides the
express Declarations of those who best knew what is in the Oath; it is manifest
to eyesight, that nothing is contained there, but profession of civil
Allegiance, due to His Majesty by the Law of God and Nature; and renouncing a
power to take that civil Allegiance away. It Is manifest, that if there were any
such Power, it might work, and take away that civil Allegiance, and deprive the
King of what is due to him by the Law of God and Nature. But to deny unto him
civil Allegiance, due by the Law of God and Nature, he says, is manifestly
sinful; and then how can what he says next, that in matters manifestly sinful,
we are not bound to obey the Ordinances of our Superiors, whether Spiritual or
Temporal, be hindered from being applied to the Breves; and concluding that they
are not to be obeyed. For they do deny him civil Allegiance in case of
deposition, and declare it is sinful to hold it due; at least as far as can be
guest at the meaning of the indeterminate declaration, and as it is actually
understood by those who are against the Oath, and every body else. There is no
means of escaping, that I can imagine; but by saying, ^ither that civil
Allegiance, is not civil Allegiance; or, that civil Allegiance is not taken
away; when the duty of serving the King with our Fortunes and Persons is taken
away: or, that such service is not due, when the Pope forbids it. The two first
are manifest Nonsense; the last is the very case of the Objection, in which he
acknowledges the Pope's declarations are not to be obeyed. Wherefore I should
think there is an end of the story; and the tedious troublesome question, which
has vexed us so many years, fully resolved.

Yet, I suspect he has reserved some Fence for this Flail in this bold manner
of expressing himself, That supposing (as he does suppose) His Majesty is our
Sovereign in civil concerns, and that not only in order to the civil Power, but
also to the exercise thereof; Then to deny, etc. What this means, I cannot
tell. But I think the King is not beholding to any Man's suppositions for his
Sovereignty; and suspect it is plain Treason, to suppose otherwise. Again, what
means Sovereign, not only in order to Power, but to the exercise too? Can one
of these be supposed without the other; or can it be imagined, without Treason,
that the Pope or any body can hinder the exercise of the King's Sovereignty in
civil concerns? Till he explain himself better, and let us know what he means
by them, and for what use he lays them up, I can say nothing to them, and
should not be forward to meddle with such tender matters, though I could. What
I said before, I think, is clear: That the King, independently of suppositions,
is, by the Law of God and Nature, Sovereign in Civil concerns, both in order to
power, and the exercise of it: That the obedience due to this Sovereign power
in Civil concerns, is Civil Allegiance: That the Breves hinder the profession
of this obedience, and the exercise of it in case of Deposition. And because
it is acknowledged, that to deny Civil Allegiance is manifestly sinful, and that
Obedience is not due to the Pope in matters manifestly sinful, the business, I
think, is concluded, and All may take the Oath of Allegiance even with this
Gentleman's good leave.

The 41 Paragraph says, It Is not reasonable, because we may disobey in matters
manifestly sinful, to disobey in matters manifestly or probably lawful. And the
forbearance of the Oath is confessed to be so by his Adversaries. What they
confess I cannot readily tell, nor am curious to examine, as caring more to know
what is, than what is said. But, I conceive, it is not manifestly or probably
lawful to forbear Allegiance, or the profession of it when lawfully required.
And since I cannot see any thing else in the Oath, I cannot see how to forbear
it, when lawfully required, should be manifestly or probably lawful. Unless in
virtue of extrinsical probability, from the number of those who say the
contrary, whom to take for guides, except they have reason for what they say,
is to be guided without reason. In the following Section we have a new account
of what the Pope has not don; which if he thought worth repeating again,
methinks he should have chosen a fitter place. For it suits but ill with our
consideration, what would be, if the Pope should do as is objected, to tell us
he has not don it. Having spoken so lately of this matter, I see no reason to
stop at it again. Only, I humbly entreat him in behalf of the Catholics of
England, to forbear such kind of Topics. For they seem to insinuate as if
their Allegiance depended on the Popes carriage to the King. T^^n which I know
not how he could do them a greater, or more irrational injury. And so his
performance upon this branch amounts to this; To grant the substance, and by
that grant resolve the Question in favor of his Adversaries, and say over
again a thing he had said a little before, nothing at all to the purpose.

The Objection proceeds to urge, That the Oath contains only a mere Civil
Allegiance, as our Kings have declared, and to them it belongs to declare what
is mere Civil Allegiance, and not to the Pope, whose Jurisdiction extends only
to Spirituals. To this he says, Sect. 43. That whatsoever a Prince is pleased
to put into an Oath, which he terms an Oath of Allegiance, is not to be held as
appertaining to mere Civil Allegiance. Undoubtedly; if he put in any thing
which does not appertain to Civil Allegiance. But the business is, since he has
declared he has don no such thing here, why we may not believe him, but must
believe he declared he knew not what. Though he had made no declaration at all,
it is clear enough of it self, that standing by the King with our Lives and
Fortunes, even against the Pope as well as another, if they happen to fall out,
and the Pope attempt on his Civil concerns, is mere Civil Allegiance. Pray why
may we not believe the King said true, that he required mere Civil Allegiance,
when we see there is nothing but this in the Oath?

He goes on to tell us, Sect. 44. That because an Oath, styled an Oath of
Allegiance, may contain things not appertaining to Civil Allegiance, the Pope
may judge of such an Oath. Yes, if it do contain such things. But barely that
it may, is no argument that it does. I would fain know by what Chemistry this
potential may will be turned at least to actual is. If so, says he, since this
present Oath contains such things, as has been declared above, the Pope may
judge of th^^ Oath. I thank him kindly. This since it contains is the thing to
be proved. If he had a mind to assume the point in question, he might have don
it at first, as well as last, and made no such ado with his may-be's. Indeed he
supposes this has been declared above. Thither by his Example I refer my self,
where the Reader will find why I am not of his opinion, and judge as he sees
cause between us. Lastly, he would have us stand to the Popes judgment in order
to such things, rather than the Kings Declaration. As if all Catholics did not
do so in order to such things. But that these are such things, there this
Gentleman leaves us.

Methinks a plain matter needed not be rendered obscure by learned handling. All
that is in the case is, Whether the Oath contain Temporals only, or Spirituals
also? The Pope has declared the one, the King the other. As for what concerns
Jurisdiction, I think both may judge of the case, which in that respect seems
equal betwixt them; one judging independently in Temporals, and the other in
Spirituals. Now our concern is to know, which of the two judges right? For who
goes with the side which judges wrong, as one of necessity must do, must needs
go wrong. The Objection is for the Kings judgment, this Gentleman for the
Popes. His reason is, because there are Spirituals in the Oath, which is the
thing in question. The Objection ass^gns no other reason but the Kings
jurisdiction, and in that point, I conceive, the case equal. But there is this
reason, that the King who made the Oath, must needs know better than the Pope
what is meant. We, who must resolve one way or other, can have no other guide
but the judgment of Authority, or our own. It Is not easy to be guided by
Authority, where the two Supreme Authorites are directly contrary. But if we
will put nothing else into the Scales, there is the better knowledge of the
matter of fact to weigh on the Kings side, which is not on the Popes. Neither
do I think it would have been allowed in Catholic times, to submit the
interpretation of English Laws to foreign Tribunals. The Statutes of Praemunire
and Mor^main were heretofore judged to contain Spiritual matters, and long and
strongly opposed by the Pope; but yet remained notwithstanding; our Catholic
Ancestors preferring their own judgment before hi^

But I doubt, whatever learned men say, people will do at last what their own
judgments tell them is to be. At least did they not carry a great stroke in the
business, this Gentleman and I spend our time, m^thinks, but idly in informing
their judgments.

The Objection goes on, and so do his Considerations; but to what parts of it
they are designed for answers, I am often at a loss. So that I can only observe
what he says, without knowing whether he speak to the point. What the 45th
Consideration says, is true, but what he will make of it, he neither says, nor
can I imagine. The 46th tells us, because the King is to be obeyed only in Civil
matters, and the Pope only in Spiritual, those of his way think themselves not
bound to submit to the Kings Orders, since the Oath contains things not
appertaining to Civil Jurisdiction. And this last, he says, has been proved,
and, I think, his proof has been disproved, and there it rests. This, it seems,
was intended for answer to an Argument made by the Objection in behalf of the
King, parallel to his own. In which he denis the Major, that the matter
appertains to the King, for the reason mentioned. Whether it do or no, has, I
conceive, already been sufficiently debated, and I love not repetitions. Civil
Allegiance, I think, and security for mere Civil Allegiance, are matters very
much appertaing to Kings. I am sure I see nothing else in the Oath, and till
this Gentleman show me the Spiritual thing, which is there besides, cannot
believe there is any such. And therefore, I for my part think my self obliged
to obey the King.

The next Consideration, Sect. 47. attempts to prove, that we ought in this
case, submit rather to the Pope's commands than the Kings. His first reason is;
because, though both be Supreme, yet in their several kinds, the Pope's
Supremacy is of a higher Hierarchy, than the King's Supremacy. And certainly,
when two Supreme Governors clash, we are bound, caeteris paribus, to submit to
him whose Jurisdiction is of a higher Hierarchy, than to the other. This would
have showed something more excusable, if he had kept it confined to this case.
But when he gives a reason which extends to all cases, and by adding the
Universal proposition, argues in this manner; we must obey here, because we
must obey every where; he says, what I hear with extreme grief from a
Catholic, and which I think becomes not the mouth of any good Subject. No King
I believe will take him for such, who is disposed, in all contests with the
Pope, to submit rather to the Pope's orders than His: And our King, for the
difference of Communion, has more reason to be jealous than another. I beseech
him to keep this Doctrine for himself, and those whom he can persuade into it;
In behalf of the rest, I heartily protest against it. Yet Protestants, he says,
will not deny it. I have already observed; that, in my opinion, he undertakes
for Protestants farther than he has commission. But whatever they do, I am sure
there are Catholics who think it very false, and very pernicious besides.

But let us consider too in our turns. The Pope in this case is to be obeyed,
not the King. Why so? Because his Supremacy is of a higher Hierarchy. What
then? what necessity is there of obeying the higher Hierarchy? Because
certainly we are bound, caeteris paribus, to submit to him, whose Jurisdiction
is of a higher Hierarchy. That is, we must obey the Pope, because certainly we
must obey the Pope. For highest Hierarch is Pope in other words, and unless it
be shown how the notion of supreme Governor in holy things, (for that the word
imports) make his commands carry it, against the commands of the supreme
Governor in Temporals; He might have kept his usual name, and that notion
never have been troubled. Besides, if the Popes supremacy be of a higher
Hierarchy, the King's, unless the comparison be Nonsense, is of a lower
Hierarchy. And Hierarchy signifying government in sacred things; the King by
this account is a Governor in sacred things, which who would have expected
from this Gentleman?

His second reason is, because according to the common sentiment of Divines and
Canonists, when it is doubtful whether such a matter considered in it self does
appertain to the Spiritual or Temporal Court, it belongs to the Spiritual Judge
to decide to which of these two Courts it does appertain. I beseech you, what
reason have these Divines and Canonists for this common sentiment of theirs?
Because, says he, other circumstances being equal, the Spiritual Judge is to be
preferred before the Temporal. This is the higher Hierarchy again. It belongs
to the Spiritual Judge, because it belongs to the Spiritual Judge. Those
Divines and Canonists who argue in this manner, will run a hazard of being
thought themselves as common as their sentiments. I but, there is no other
commodious way to decide the Question. Pray why is it not altogether as
commodious, if the Temporal Judge decide it. To travel a thousand miles for a
decision which may be had at home, methinks is no such commodious thing.

Since he would needs meddle with this nice question of the Jurisdiction of
Courts, I think it would have been well if he had advised with some besides his
Divines and Canonists, before he had advanced their Doctrine in England. I am
informed the Law of England is, that, in case of question, the Temporal Court
is to judge whether the matter belong to the Ecclesiastical or not. And that
this Law was made and practiced by our Catholic Ancestors. If this be so, he
should not expect the higher Hierarchy of his Divines and Canonists should
carry it with English Catholics, against English, and those Catholic Laws.
Whether it be or no, he may inform himself at leisure. For I think he will not
take my word; nor will I pass it in a matter wherein I have no skill.

But yet I can see that, if his Doctrine must every where pass uncontrouled,
Temporal Judges will quickly be very useless things in the World. For since,
virtuous or vicious, is a consideration appliable to all even possible cases,
and the determination of that matter belongs to the Spiritual Judge, there is
no case whereof he may not claim the cognizance. And if the Temporal Judge must
always submit, within a while there will be nothing left for him to do. And yet
I think, the World would not find it very commodious, to have Temporal Judges
taken quite away. Again, if the matter be examined, I doubt, it will be found,
that Spiritual Courts were set up by Temporal Authority. To Preach, to Bind and
Loose, and what else was given by Christ, is indeed derived from a higher
origin; but to hold Pleas, and act in the nature of Judges in Courts, I suspect
proceeded from the piety of Princes. Which, if it be true, it seems more
commodious, and more proper, that the Temporal Power should judge, whether a
matter in debate be of the number of these which are by that Temporal Power
committed to the Spiritual. He who gives, I think, can best tell what he gives,
and what he meant to give.

The 3d Reason is, Because the Pope requires less of us than the King. Suppose
he do. Why ought we obey him who requires less? Because, when two Precepts
contradict one another, we ought to submit to that Precept of the two caeteris
partibus, wherein least i^ required of us. Very good, We ought, because we
ought. These reasons, I see, are all of a piece; but, methinks, it had been
more for the credit of his Divines and Ca^^^ists to have let them alone, than
brought them upon the stage with such reasons in their mouths. But yet how much
less does the Pope require of us than the King? Why* the Pope only requires we
should not take this Oath: the King that we should positively take it as it
lies; which is far more. Truly he is in the right there. Speaking is doing
something, and keeping silence is doing nothing, and Something is plainly more
than Nothing. But this is to be understood Metaphysically; for if we consider
the matter morally, the Popes Nothing may, perhaps, amount to more than the
Kings Something. Since refusal of the Oath is Prae^unire* to require us to
refuse it, is to require all our Goods, and our Liberty besides; and this,
whatever notions they have in the Schools, is a very considerable Something in
the World. The King now requires neither, but only security, when he needs
them, of assistance both in our Goods* and personal Service, according to the
proportion allotted by Law, and which we are bound to afford him, whether he
take security or no. Now I should think security, and only for a part, and only
when the time comes, and for that to which we are bound however, is not
altogether so much as the whole it self, all at a clap. But the truth is, I
fear, all this is but time lost. Duty or not Duty, True or False, Sin or
Virtue, and the like considerations are worth examining; what More or Less have
here to do, none but his Divines and Canonists, I think, can tell.

The fourth and last Reason is, Because the Popes Precept in this matter is
negative, but the Kings affirmative. And why must we obey the Negative, and not
the Affirmative? Because when two Precepts oppose one another, we ought rather,
all other circumstances being equal, to embrace the Negative Precept than the
Affirmative, according to the common opinion of Divines. And this again is, we
ought because we ought. And this is all we have from first to last, and which,
I think, needed not have been brancht out into so many particulars. For though
we had never heard of the higher and lower Hierarchy, the Spiritual and
Temporal Court, the More and the Less, the Affirmative and the Negative, we
could well enough have understood in two words, We must because we must.

What follows Sect. 48. has partly been touched before in behalf of the Pope;
here it is pressed against the King. Since Withrington and the rest, says he,
confess that whether the Pope has Authority to depose Kings is yet under debate
between Popes and Kings, Certa^t Scholastici, and adhuc sub Judice lis est, Why
should the King decide the Question in his own favor? Sure Withrington and the
rest, how little soever they understood the Question, understood Latin better
than to render Scholastici certant there is a debate between Popes and Kings.
Which side, of the question proposed, is true or false, is debated among
Schoolmen alone; that point was never debated between Popes and Kings. Each
were resolved of the truth of their own side beyond debate, and thought it, not
to be disputed, but defended. You may call their Contests, Debates, if you
please; but then the word has quite another sense, than when you apply it to
Schoolmen. For there it signifies inquiry after Truth, here a defense, of what
they are satisfied is Truth, by force. I am much mistaken if the King can be
named, who thought there was any doubt to be made whether his Subjects were not
to assist him, when he had use of their service, even against the Pope, and
whatever the Pope would do to the contrary. Not but that diverse have suffered
Schoolmen to dispute this matter without check; For which, I suppose, they had
their reasons. But when the occasion came, they expected the service of their
Subjects, and they had it, even they in whose Territories there was most
freedom for these disputes. Pray what harm is there, if our King decide the
Question in his favor by words, which all Kings decide in their favors by Arms?

Because this is, as it were, to take possession of the part favorable unto
him; and as long as it is under debate, neither can take possession till the
Question be lawfully decided in his favor. I have already observed, that this
peremptorily decides the Question in favor of Kings. For to Depose being
manifestly to take possession of deposing, the Pope, by this account, cannot
Depose; and then the Question, whether he can or no, is plainly at an end. But
why cannot Kings decide Questions even in their favor, and take possession of
what they judge belongs to them, while there are debates among Schoolmen? I do
not think they ow so much deference to the Schools, and suspect the World would
go on but odly, if Kings were obliged to expect till Scholars be agreed, which
will be never, before they proceed to what they find convenient for the good of
the Commonwealth. I had thought it belongs properly to Kings to decide such
Questions. Scholars may dispute, and decide as they please; no body needs take
notice of their disputes or decisions, farther than as their reasons convince.
To what Kings decide, all, even Scholars themselves are bound to submit.
Besides that they understand such things better than all the Scholars in the
World. The Authority to decide what is, or is not requisite for the safety of
the Commonwealth, rests only in them; nor can there be any other, from which
the lawful decision he speaks of, can be expected, if theirs be supreme. If
another supreme Authority acquiesce not in their decision, it is like to be
tried out by the Ratio ultima Regum, if both persist resolute. But their
Subjects ought acquiesce in their decision, and for themselves, since their
Authority is supreme, they have no body of whom to ask leave to make them.

And for taking possession, that follows Decision of course; though in truth,
Kings do not take, but keep possession. They were in possession of the
Allegiance of their Subjects before Schoolmen, and before Popes were in the
World. Popes would put them out of this possession in certain cases, and some
Schoolmen say they may. Cannot Kings keep their own, because others pretend a
title? Were it this Gentleman's case, and that the Pope should claim the land he
holds by inheritance from his Ancestors, quietly enjoyed by them time out of
mind, I hardly believe he would part with it, for all the debates of all the
Schoolmen in Christendom. And yet the King, sure, has a stronger title to his
Kingdom, than he, or any private man to his Estate. In short, that Kings cannot
decide while Schoolmen debate, nor take possession of what they, who are the
supreme Judges of their own rights, judge to be their right, because those who
have nothing to do with judging, make a moot case of it; nor keep possession,
because it is called taking possession; seem to me very unreasonable
assertions, and for which if any reason can be brought, this Gentleman at this
time has forgot to bring it.

The 49 Consideration talks off the Popes Direct and Absolute Power, and says
it is inconsistent with the Sovereignty of the King in Temporals. And it is very
true, that it is indeed very inconsistent. But what he designs by avowing truth,
I cannot guess. I hope he does not mean to obtrude upon us the Indirect Power
in its sted, and persuade us the Kings Sovereignty in Temporals is secured by
shifting of names. For the Indirect Power is altogether as inconsistent as the
other; and should the Pope declare himself Sovereign in Temporals, over any
part of his Majesty's Dominions, with an Indirect, or occasional Power, or what
name soever you would give it, he would declare a thing as destructive to the
Kings Sovereignty in Temporals, as if he declared what this Gentleman says is
manifestly destructive. But it is not for me to enlarge on this point, while he
leaves it only to be guest, whether he meant it or no.

Yet, I think, I may gather out of his Discourse, that since the Direct Power
cannot therefore belong to the Pope, or Spiritual Jurisdiction, because it is
inconsistent with, and destructive of Temporal Sovereignty; no Power which is
inconsistent, and destructive can belong to the Pope, or Spiritual
Jurisdiction. Wherefore, unless the Power of Deposing, which the Pope claims,
call it by what name you will, be consistent and not destructive, neither can
it belong to the Pope, or Spiritual Jurisdiction. Now who will undertake to
show, that the Deposing Power is not inconsistent, nor destructive, undertakes
a difficult, and, I think, impossible task. For to Depose a King, is plainly to
take away his Authority in Temporals: and when Authority in Temporals is taken
away, it is plain there remains no Authority in Temporals. Now, if the Negative
destroy the Positive, not-Authority, I think, must needs destroy Authority: and
unless contradictories can stand together, to have, and not to have Authority
must needs be inconsistent. It Is not a Term which can shift off this matter.
Call the Deposing Power Indirect, or Casual, or Spiritual, or what you will, if
it be a Power to Depose, it is a Power to take away Authority in Temporals, and
Power to take away Authority in Temporals is irreconcilable with Authority in
Temporals, and much more with Supreme Authority in Temporals. Neither is there
any Argument which he has brought against the Oath of Allegiance, which may not
be applied to an Oath renouncing the Direct Power; in case the Pope should
forbid it, in the same terms in which he has forbid the Oath of Allegiance. For
there would be taking possession, and deciding the Question, while the matter
were in debate; there would be disobedience to the Supreme Pastor, in matters
appertaining to him, at least which he declares appertain to him; and we are to
stand to his judgment, whether they do or no, and so of all the rest. But if we
be not bound to stand to his judgment in that case, neither are we in this, and
for the very same reasons; because this Power which he does claim by this
declaration, is as inconsistent with, and as destructive of Temporal
Sovereignty, as the Direct Power. Wherefore I cannot see but the dispute is at
an end again, and all Deposing Power confuted by this Gentleman's discourse as
fully as may be.

Again, when he says, It belongs to a Sovereign Temporal Prince to determine
what is precisely necessary for the conservation of his Temporal Sovereignty in
case he be unjustly attackt by another in his Temporals: This too seems to
determine the Question. For the King does judge, that to renounce the Deposing
Power is precisely necessary for the conservation of his Temporals; nor can he
be said unjustly to attacque the Pope in Spirituals by conserving his
Temporals, but is himself unjustly attacqued in his Temporals, if he be hindered
from conserving his Temporals. Wherefore he does no more than it is confessed
belongs to him. But when the Pope declares him no longer Sovereign in
Temporals, I doubt he exceeds the bounds prescribed him even by this Gentleman.
For he says, It does not belong to the Pope, or Spiritual Court, to declare who
is Temporal Sovereign of such a Kingdom, which, I think, is to say, that it
does not belong to them neither to declare who is not Temporal Sovereign of
such a Kingdom, which is the very thing called Deposing.

The 50th Consideration, to show how willing English Catholics are to give any
just security of their Loyalty, proposes another form of Oath, rather more
expressive, as he thinks, of Civil Allegiance than the Oath in force. And I
make no question but he truly thinks as he says, and, as good meaning is All in
All, conceive his Expressions, as he means them, may do well enough. But yet, I
doubt, he has no more commission from Catholics to offer such a form of Oath,
than he had from Protestants to undertake for their sense of things. I should
think it more becomes Subjects humbly to acquiesce, where with a safe
conscience they can, in what lawful Authority thinks fit to require, than by
their proposals direct that Authority what they should require, unless they be
called to counsel. Yet had he spoken only for himself, I should not have meddled
in his business, but left it entirely to the consideration of those to whom it
belongs to judge of it. But since he talks as if what he said were the sense of
English Catholics, I must needs say, that he has done them no good office in
giving occasion to have it thought so. For his form is liable to so many
exceptions, such as I for my part cannot answer, that I fear, insted of
appearing the loyal Subjects he would have them, they may chance, by sticking
to it, be aspersed with suspicio^s of seeking to delude their King and fellow
Subjects. I thought it became me to prevent that mischief, and show why I
conceive Catholics neither do, nor rationally can insist upon his Form; though
if he can get it approved by those to whom it belongs, I should, and believe
all would readily submit to their Wisdom and Authority.

His first clause is for substance the same with the first clause of the Oath
of Allegiance, though the expressions are not altogether free from exception.
For Kingdom^ i^ not so much as Dominions. But, that I think happened only by
inadvertence, and might soon and easily be amended.

The second is, That they renounce all power whatsoever, Ecclesiastical, or
Civil, Domestic, or Foreign, repugna^^ to the same. There being no word in the
former clause, to which this same can handsomely relate, the sense would be
expressed with more clea^ness. But what is more material, is, that by these
general expressions, i^ ^^^not be understood, what it is which is renounced by
this clause. Do^^ it renounce the Ecclesiastical Foreign power of the Pope, in
as much as it pretends to un-king the Kings of England, or does it not? If it
do, why should the clear expressions of the Oath bewaved, and dark
circumlocutions put in their sted? If it do not, but reserve the deposing power
as not repugnant to the Kings, what security do the big words of this clause
offer, when they renounce not that, (...) Wisdom* of England has judged
repugnant to the King's power, and security too, and ordered to be renounced.

Again, who shall be Judge of this Repugnancy? If the King, a^ one would guess
by his former Consideration; He has already judged* the deposing Doctrine
repugnant. If any other, what security (...) the King have, that the judgment
shall be according to Truth, and that what he, who is the only proper Judge,
Judges repugnant to his power, shall not be judged not-repugnant. And besides,
because one may pretend of any thing, that it is not repugnant, till it be
judged repugnant, nothing at all is renounced till Judgment be past. And when
will that be?

The next Clause is, That they confess themselves obliged in conscience to be
as obedient to his Majesty in Civil Affairs, as true Allegiance can oblige any
Subject to be to his Prince. And here again we are left in generals, and left
in doubt what this true Allegiance means, and to what it obliges. Who should
think that Allegiance to a Deposed King is not true Allegiance, because he is
no true King; or that the Majesty, to which they were obliged, were taken away
by Deposition, and their obligation with it; or that true Allegiance does not
oblige any Subjects to obey a Deposed Prince; would not break his Oath, though
he should not only disobey, but fight against his King, when the Pope had
Deposed him. So that it may very well happen that this true Allegiance, as
handsomely as it sounds, may yet signify no Allegiance at all.

There follows a promise, to bear inviolably, during life, True Allegiance to
his Majesty, His lawful Heirs and Successors, and to defend them against all
attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against their Rights, the Rights of
their Persons, Crown, or Dignity, by any person whatsoever, or under whatsoever
pretense. This seems to bid fair, and yet the manifest change of the
Expressions used by the Oath of Allegiance, is apt to alarm suspicious people.
For why should attempts against the Kings Person, Crown, or Dignity, as it runs
in the Oath, be changed into attempts against their Rights, and the Rights of
their Persons, Crown, or Dignity? By this alteration we are left to dispute
whether an attempt against the King, be an attempt of his Right; and who thinks
he has no right, after the Pope has Deposed him, plainly promises nothing, but
remains at liberty even to attempt against him. There are, if I mistake not,
who maintain that a King Deposed by the Pope is no longer King de Jure, but
only de Facto; an Opinion which is thought, and is indeed, repugnant to the
Authority of Kings. This Form affords it so much countenance (though, perhaps,
but casually) that I cannot think he has befriended Catholics in using their
name to an offer so little becoming them.

In the next place they promise to use their best endeavors to discover to his
Majesty or Ministers all treacherous Conspiracies. And this is well, provided
that by Treacherous he meant what the Law means. For if any should think these
Conspiracies not treacherous, which are made by Authority of the Pope against a
Deposed King, he might be an arrant* Traitor without breach of his Oath.
Lastly, They renounce the Doctrine which maintains, That any private Subject may
lawfully kill the anointed of God, his Prince, a Clause which, as bad words as
it gives that Doctrine, is not very satisfactory. For a private Subject may be
said changed into a public Minister, if he act by Authority. And then, to kill
the Man, may be said, is not to kill the Prince, if he cease to be so by
deposition. To these, and, perhaps, as many more Exceptions, the several
Branches are liable.

But now to look upon it in gross, nothing could be more improper for what he
designs by it; which is to show that Catholics are Loyal, and ready to give
security of their Loyalty. English Catholics were never suspected of
Disloyalty by any body, but only in one case, when their credulity might be
deluded by pretense of Religion; an abuse to which all Nations and all Times
are subject as well as they. The powder Treason, to use almost the words of
King James, plotted by Papists, out of a preposterous Zeal for the advancement
of their Religion, and which had blinded some of them to that degree, that even
at their death they refused to acknowledge and ask pardon for their fault, gave
occasion to the Parliament to use all means of Trial, whether any more of that
mind were yet left. They devised the Oath of Allegiance to make a distinction
between Papists of quiet disposition, and in all other things good Subjects,
and such other Papists as in their hearts maintained the like bloody Maxims,
that the powder Traitors did. All the Disloyalty then, which is laid to our
charge, is maintaining the Maxims of the Powder Traitors; in other things we
are plainly acknowledged good Subjects.

Now would I fain know, what this Form of his contributes toward clearing this
only charge against us. There is not one word of the Pope; and if he, as I
think he is, be always understood excepted, unless he be expressly named, as not
comprehended in any how general expressions soever, one may believe of him all
which those Traitors believed, and act all they acted, and have no check all
the while from any thing sworn in this Form. There is not one word of the
Deposing Power, the only cause of all the jealousy people have of us; which a
man may hold, and practice all the Disloyalty which may proceed from it, and
swear all the Loyalty contained in his Form, and never break his Oath. In
short, there is not one word whereby it may appear that those, who swear
Allegiance in this manner, do not maintain in their hearts, and may not
practice upon occasion the same bloody Maxims, which the Powder Traitors did,
and against which the wisdom of the Nation thought fit to require security.
And, I think, none, but he that has lost his reason, can think they had not
reason to do so. Wherefore, as far as I can perceive, as well as he intended by
his Form in behalf of Catholics, what he has don is to leave all the
Disloyalty, ever charged upon us, still sticking: and expose those, who stand
resolutely to it, to the suspicion of being as bad as the worst Powder man of
them all, which is a great injury to them, and a greater to Religion: as if
that did, or could hinder them from giving good evidence that they are not as
bad as Traitors.

The 51 Consideration has nothing which needs detain us. The Case which he
supposes, when it happens, would be as he says. But when he applys what may be,
to what is, he takes for granted that there is something doubtful, or false, or
some glance at Religion in the Oath of Allegiance, and something more than
Civil Allegiance. Which he must prove, if he would have those believe, who can
find no such thing of themselves. To be perpetually stunned with the noise of
Civil Allegiance, and mere Civil Allegiance, and never be shown what there is
besides in the Oath, will sooner deafen than convince us. No Catholic, who has
taken the Oath, ever thought of giving any Spiritual Prerogative to the King by
it, or taking any from the Pope. Nor can any man else see any thing there, but
a profession that Subjects are obliged to stand by their King with their Lives
and Fortunes, as the Laws of God, and Nature, and the Land require, and this
whatever is pretended for the Pope to the contrary. This necessarily implys,
that the Pope cannot Depose; for if he could, he would take away the obligation
which Subjects have to stand by their King, which is the only thing called
Civil Allegiance. Wherefore since he who professes the Pope cannot take away
the obligation of Civil Allegiance, professes no Spiritual matter, but barely
his tie to perform Civil Allegiance, and nothing else, and the Oath contains
nothing but this substance brancht into several particulars: I cannot perceive
any color of maintaining that the Oath contains more than mere Civil
Allegiance. Who will say otherwise, must of necessity say that Civil
Allegiance, in case of Deposition, is not Civil Allegiance: which, I think, is
plain contradiction.

Sect. 52. He objects against himself the Authority of France, which he takes a
great deal of pains to show has never approved the English Oath of Allegiance.
I know not why he would put himself to all that trouble, to confute no body.
For he acknowledges that his Adversarys do not pretend any such thing, as
indeed it were not reasonable they should: every body knowing that the French
Nation never had authentically approved our Oath, and few expecting that ever
they will.

For one Nation does not use to meddle with the Acts of another, except with
such as they find to their prejudice: and if they did, perhaps* would have but
small thanks for their labor. The World is something jealous, and apt enough
to suspect, where Neighbors thrust themselves unnecessarily into their
Neighbors concerns, that they seek their own good more than theirs. Besides,
who can tell whether the French, or any other Nation, may not be well enough
content, to have the deposing Doctrine take root any where, but among
themselves? It has afforded pretenses, of which people have taken hold to their
advantage. As long as they provide for themselves, I can hardly think they will
be forward to renounce any opportunity of advantage, which others take.
Whatever be their reason, it is certain, there is no National Act of that
Kingdom, which has approved our Oath of Allegiance, nor was it ever pretended
there was.

What has been pretended, is, that within the body of the Catholic Church
there are, and those considerable both for number and quality, who openly in
the face of the World disown the deposing Doctrine: and that without
reprehension, remaining good Catholics, and acknowledged for such by all other
Catholics, even the Pope himself. And so much is evidently true. From hence,
people upon occasion draw such consequences as they find to their purpose.

These, I conceive, are undeniably plain: That the deposing Doctrine is not a
point of Faith: That who denis it, does not stand alone: And that, who refuses
the Oath of Allegiance only for denying that Doctrine, refuses it for a reason
which many Learned Men judge to be no reason. It is like enough he may find it
to be no reason himself, if their Authority move him to examine what they have
to say for themselves. And he may also find that there is nothing as material
objected against the Oath. And so their declaring against the deposing Doctrine
may be, and is an approbation of the Oath, to him who sees there is not any
thing besides, for which it can rationally be disapproved. But otherwise,
standing purely to the force of the Terms; They have declared against deposing,
therefore they have approved the Oath; is a consequence which no body makes,
and whereof he needed not so often inculcate the weakness.

There is enough to be said on every Consideration; but while none hits the
mark, I think it is lost time to measure how far every shot is wide or short.
Only whereas he insinuates as if the Authority of France might be alleged
against the Oath: because in an Assembly of the Estates, an Article proposed by
the third Order against deposing Power was rejected: I must entreat his good
leave to believe, that in such Assemblies things are not carried altogether in
the same manner as in Schools. True, or False, is not the only matter in which
they are concerned. They look as much, perhaps more, upon Expedient, or not
Expedient. That the Assembly judged it unfit to enact the Law proposed, appears
by their rejecting it. And if there were nothing else, there was this to make
them judge so, that they had lost a Friend of the Pope; with whom perhaps at
that time it concerned them to hold good correspondence. But that they judged
the Article false, we cannot know unless they had enacted the contrary. What
Cardinal Peron said to them on that occasion, if he said what goes about in his
Name, every body may easily see, and judge of. If this Gentleman think his
Arguments efficacious, he may make use of them if he please; and show us, what
we cannot see of our selves, that they are so. In the mean time, who thinks
they judged the Article, which they rejected, false, must of necessity think
they judged the contradictory true. Let him who thinks so, make the experiment,
and maintain the contradictory in France, viz. That there is some Power on
Earth, which has right over the Dominions of the Kings of France, to dispose
them, etc. and if he escape the Fate of Bellarmin, and Suarez, people will be
more disposed to be of his mind. But I am much mistaken, if public Justice do
not convince him, that they are for the Doctrine of the Oath of Allegiance, and
neither rejected their own, nor forbear to approve ours, for any thing said in
either, against Deposition.

Of this, it seems, this Gentleman was aware, and therefore Number. 57. begins to
find what other faults he can with the Oath. The first is the word Heretical,
an Inn at which every body baits. He touches the sore wondrous gently, saying
only, it seems hard to censure, etc. as if things did not often seem other than
they are, and the greatest Truths were not hard enough sometimes. Since he does
not give any reason so much as why it seems hard, I conceive it will be enough
to refer the Reader to what I have said of this matter in the second Treatise:
where he will find that Heretical, or not Heretical, is not the point, but
Depose, or not Depose. Who allows the Pope cannot depose, cannot avoid allowing
that the proposition, renounced by the Oath is undeniable and unexcusable
Heresy, and that even in the principles of those who are against the Oath.
There in truth it only pinches, the rest has no difficulty but what we make our
selves. What he adds of censuring the Defenders, is a consequence of his own
making, with which the Oath meddles not, and which therefore need not be made,
whatever it be when it is. And yet I see no great harm would come of it though
it were. To censure Men of esteem, and that deservedly, for Heretics, or as
bad, sounds indeed scurvily. And I suppose he meant to work upon the aversion
which we naturally have from doing so. But when this Heresy with its frightful
sound, signifies no more than material Heresy, it will hardly amount to a
reproach. At least many an honest Man is liable to it, such as it is, and
peradventure few, even among the most Holy, and most Learned, entirely free.

The next Sect. pretends it cannot be sworn with Truth, That neither the Pope
nor any other ^an absolve from the Oath, when the King may absolve from it, by
laying down the Government, or passing away, or losing all, or part of his
Dominions. By the sincerity which is to be expected from one who writes for the
satisfaction of peoples Consciences, does he himself truly think this is the
Absolution meant, and renounced by the Oath? Does he think Protestants so
ignorant, as not to know such Cases may happen, and so wicked as, when they
take the Oath themselves, to swear that what they know may be done, cannot be
done? He knows as well as any body, that his Cases have nothing to do with what
he himself, and all the World besides understands by Absolution. Not but that
the Obligation of obedience to a Prince may cease by such ways, and a great
many more. Death may take away, or sickness* rend^r him incapable to govern:
and I cannot obey him who is not, or who cannot command. But if this were
Absolution, Ravillac, or any body as wicked as he might, absolve too. If he
will by way of Metaphor apply the word Absolution to such cases, he may if he
pleases. But when he knows the Oath does not mean so, he must needs know too,
that his Absolution and the Oath's Absolution agree no more than Absolution and
not-Absolution, and that such difficulties are a great deal more likely to
perplex than satisfy our Consciences.

The 59 Consideration has a very surprising exception against the word
Heartily. It seems he finds reluctance himself, and measures other folks Corn
by his own Bushel. Otherwise, that people should boggle at doing their Duty
heartily, is very strange. Here again it pinches just where it did before; the
Exception in truth being, not to the Heartily, but the Duty. For who believes
the Oath contains nothing but Allegiance, must believe it his duty to take it,
when legally required; since none can doubt but to profess and give security of
his Allegiance, is as much his duty as to perform it. Who think otherwise, may
indeed be startled at the word Heartily, but it is because by mistake they judge
what does belong to their Duty, not to do so. Wherefore they should set the
Sadle on the right Horse, and insted of blaming the Oath, blame their own
thoughts, and those delusions which have caused them. For sure they cannot
expect a Prince should be well satisfied with those who obey his just Commands
grudgingly and repiningly.

But why must every body needs feel a reluctance in this business? Because,
says he, they are forced to swear, to preserve advantages, or avoid penalties.
As if all Laws, both of God and man, were not enforced upon us in the same
manner. Heaven and Hell are set before our eyes to allure us to obey, and
fright us from breaking the Commands of God. Temporal Rewards and Punishments
are proposed with the same design in human Laws. According to him, neither One
nor Other could be obeyed heartily. Then great Difficulties have been raised,
and many Learned men are against the Oath. This we shall believe when we see
it. If those which he calls great Difficulties be such as we meet with here, he
must pardon us if we have not the same opinion of them. For to us they appear
very slight. And for the Learned men he speaks of, it is true, that diverse who
have the reputation of Learning, and who in other matters may deserve it too,
for ought I know are against the Oath. But we can see nothing in their
Arguments answerable to that reputation, and suspect when they came to treat of
this point they left some of their Learning behind them. However it be, sure I
am that Reasons have force from themselves, not their Authors. A good one is a
good one out of John Porter's mouth, and a bad one a bad one out of
Aristotle's. I shall be easily brought to believe, he is a Learned man who
proves what he says; but if he do not prove what he would, let him be as
learned as he will, I conceive, he deserved not that name for what he has don
in that point. As for the share which the Supreme Pastor has in the business, I
hope enough has been said already to show he has don nothing which can hinder a
man from taking the Oath very heartily.

Unless the Proverb be false, and every Wood will serve to make a Mercury, one
would not have suspected the Objection he has found, Sect. 60. The Title of the
Act, wherein the Oath of Allegiance is inserted, being For the discovering and
suppressing of Popish Recus^nts, it seems thereby, says he, to be insinuated
that the taking this Oath is made a denial of the Roman Catholic Religion.
It Is well for him this is not true; if it were, Catholics would be obliged to
take it as fast as they can. For if to take the Oath be judged to renounce
Catholic Religion, the Doctrine renounced by the Oath would certainly be judged
to belong to Religion. And then to refuse the Oath would be to declare that the
Deposing Doctrine is truly a part of Religion. This peradventure he may with a
safe Conscience do, who believes that Doctrine to be an Article of Faith, if he
can acquit himself for believing so. But for the rest, if they consent to it,
they consent to have it thought their Religion teaches, not only what it does
not teach, but what they judge in their Conscience is false, and pernicious.
And that is to be manifestly guilty of scandal, and the greatest of scandals,
to Religion; in which, I think, no Pretense, nor Authority, no not of an Angel
from Heaven, can bear them out. Wherefore either all must hold the Deposing
Doctrine is a downright point of Faith, (as indeed it sticks only there all
along) or what he has said to fright us from the Oath, is the strongest Motive
that can be to take it. No Catholic who thinks otherwise, being able to answer
it at the great day, when it is made a distinctive sign of his Religion, to
allow that his Religion teaches false and pernicious Doctrine, if he do not
unmake that sign, by all the ways he can, and undeceive his Neighbors, and
remove the scandal.

But I must own the Truth, and say there is no such thing, as what to him seems
to be insinuated. And it is the stranger he should miss it himself, when his
next words acknowledge, that other things are contained in the Act, which do
contribute to the discovery of Popish Recusants. For this methinks might have
insinuated, that the Title may properly enough relate to those other things.
Yet the Oath being inserted among the rest, he will needs have this complete
the discovery of them. As if it were not usual for things of several natures to
be inserted into the same Act, or one Title would comprehend All, without being
as long as the Act it self. Besides, when a Bill is brought into Parliament, it
is often so altered upon debate, that little remains of the first draught,
besides the Title. But the matter is not left to our uncertain guesses. The end
designed by the Oath is expressly declared to be, not to discover Catholics;
but, for the better Trial how his Majesty's Subjects stand affected in point of
Loyalty, and due Obedience. And when an Act explains it self, there is no room
for private Glosses; which if they say the same, are needless; the sense of the
Act being plain before; and if they differ, must needs wrest and injure it, and
ought not to be heard against public Authority.

But he concludes, that it is not lawful to do any thing which is by public
Authority made a denial of true Religion, or a distinctive sign of a false one.
It Is strange he should think by dint of Argument to make that pass for a
distinctive sign, which he himself, and all the World besides knows is not a
distinctive sign. Can public Authority be thought to look upon those who take
the Oath, as not-Catholicks, which treats them still as Catholics, and keeps
them liable to all the penaltys to which Catholics are liable? I must confess
I wish it would think fit to do otherwise. For I think Laws would not be the
worse obeyed, if people were encouraged in their obedience. But this* I humbly
leave to their Wisdom. Does he or any Man think those Catholic Lords who took
the Oath, denied their Religion, and are not Catholics still? Do not we find
our selves actually bred up Catholics by our Ancestors, who by taking the Oath
in former times according to him, were all turned Protestants? It is very
unexpected that insinuating, and that but seemingly, should improve at last
into a confident assertion of what is so notoriously not true; and a very
unlikely means, I think, for the satisfaction of those who desire information.

The 61. Consideration, excepts against some ambiguous expressions in the Oath,
but tells us not which they are. Now all my fear is, that the true exception
is, that they are too plain. The exception which the Pope, and those who write
against the Oath in places where they may speak freely, take to the Oath, is
not ambiguity. Here it is a less offensive pretense, than downright maintaining
the deposing Doctrine: and because it carrys some show of tenderness of
Conscience, finds those who sincerely love Peace, disposed to gratify it. For
which reason, I suppose, the Authors he cites, say what they did. But when this
ambiguity comes to be examined, as far as I see, the substance of the Oath is
meant by it; and, till the security which the Wisdom of the Nation has thought
fit to require, be taken away, either that, or something else will always be
pretended. If it truly stick with this Gentleman at ambiguity, let him, if he
please, say more plainly what he knows, as ambiguous as it is, the Oath means;
and then blame the Oath freely for me. But till then, it is an exception against
I know not what; and of any should not be made by him, who, instead of this
ambiguous Form, offers another more ambiguous a great deal.

He closes this matter, Sect. 62. with a pair of exceptions more, whereof the
first is easily compounded. For the Oath requires no more than what he stands
upon, That what is sworn be true in the Conscience of the Swearer, and goes no
farther. The point having been already discoursed in the second Treatise, it is
needless to discourse it over again. The second is, That there is ^^ necessity
of Swearing, or any good to be got by it. As if any obligation imposed by Law,
and required by the Magistrate, were not necessity enough to justify the
taking of an Oath. And as if more good were to be expected from it, than the
discharge of our duty. Though if there were, Liberty, I should think, and
Estate may pass for Goods, among those who are not too scrupulously nice. But
it becomes not Subjects to stand capitulating with their Superiors, what they
shall get by their obedience before they obey. And this too has been touched
before. Then he concludes, That the Authority of France does not clear nor
touch the aforementioned difficulties. To which I shall only say, he much
over-rates his difficulties. There needs no Authority of France, nor any place
else, to clear what has nothing to be cleared; as I think every body will see
these, he calls difficulties, have not. Wherefore he must permit me to conclude
from these very difficulties of his, that there is no true difficulty against
the Oath, but the persuasion that the Pope can depose. For since for our
satisfaction he has made it his business to find other difficulties, and
gathered together as many as he could think of, and produces none but these; we
have reason to think there are no other; and these we can, without Spectacles
from France, see, with our own eyes, are not difficulties.

What follows in several Paragraphs, is but the same over again: That his
difficulties have not been touched, nor the Oath in particular approved; and
then the difference betwixt swearing positively, and Teaching or Exhorting. All
which have been discourst already. His Probabiliy, which, Sect. 66. he says,
ceases by a sentence of the Supreme Judge, I leave him to dispute with the
Curates of France. It is a point in which I am not verst, nor mean to be. All I
swear in the Oath of Allegiance, is, to my best Judgment true, and so much
serves my turn. What becomes of the Probable I am not concerned. The case he
puts, Sect. 67. determined by Supreme Authority, is very true; but when he
applies it, he supposes the Pope is the proper Judge of our question; which, to
our apprehension, since it concerns the Authority, and Security of the King,
belongs to the King. Methinks it would have done well if he had proved his
supposition, before he had insulted over the Defenders for Losing Talkers. It Is
well for them, that the Impugners were gainers by it. For our parts so we lose
not the Testimony of a good Conscience,* we shall be contented with our lot.
But it is strange to me this Topic should return so often. We never were
condemned more authentically than the Jansenists in France, nor did the Oath of
Allegiance ever make so much noise and bustle as the Five Propositions, and the
Formulaire. And yet those Heretical Jansenists, have lived to see themselves
thought and created as good Catholics again, without discarding any opinion
they had. And when Providence pleases, we for all their big words may be on the
right side, and think still as we do. In the mean time, if the Pope have given
sentence for the Impugners, the King has done the same for the Defenders. If
the Question belong to his Tribunal, the Defenders after all are the gainers,
and the Impugners take the Losers leave to talk.

And I should think, as much reason as they have had to forbear Printing, it
may be worth the while to show it does not belong to his Tribunal. For
otherwise whether a King can be un-king'd or no, a body would think at first
sight does something concern a King and his Tribunal. However, it would be a
better reason for Printing than he gives, viz. to get the Oath condemned, which
every body knows was condemned before Pen was set to Paper.

I should be unconcerned in the 68 Consideration, if the Discourse did not seem
to unravel what is weaved in answer to the Second Treatise. These two Oaths, he
says, are very different: I judge the Pope has no Power, and He has no Power.
This is true, and yet that difference hinders not the second from amounting to
I judge he has no Power too. But in the former way of expression, the judgment
may, and is understood to be slight, and unsettled, and conscious the object may
be otherwise than as it is judged. And this they mean who say, I think such a
thing is true, but will not swear it. In the second way, the judgment is firm,
and for as much as the swearer is conscious, absolutely certain the object is
as it is judged. And so, because what is seen, is, it is all one to say It is,
or I see it. Yet even when I say It is so, I am not understood to say more than
I judge it is so, with a firm, and to my conscience, certain judgment, because
all the World knows I can say no more. For I cannot say It is, but in virtue of
my sight that it is, and that sight is my judgment.

It Is not then, as I conceive, the matter alone, but the matter as seen, which
is the object of positive Oaths; and the judgment always makes a part, and a
principal part of the object. For the matter may be true, and I be perjured by
swearing it, if I judge it not true; as likewise the matter may be false, and I
not perjured by swearing it, if I judge it true on sufficient Motives. Whence,
I think, it is plain, that the Judgment, not the matter, is the principal thing
in Oaths however expressed. What he says to the contrary, That it is possible
one should swear false, thinking he swears true, which could not be if the
Judgment were the object, because every one certainly knows his own Judgment is
true, or* not true, as he understands Judgment, and Swearing false. If by
swearing false be meant, that the matter sworn may be false, undoubtedly he may
swear false who thinks he swears true. But if by swearing false, be meant
Perjury, then who thinks he swears true, provided the grounds of such thinking
be warrantable, cannot swear false. Again, by Judgment may be meant such a one
as he mentions, which so judges the matter sworn is true, as probably to know
withal that it may be otherwise. Who swears in that manner that a thing is
positively true, not only may, but is always in danger to swear false, and
therefore I think, with him, cannot swear without an affront to God; though he
knows we have grave Authors against us, who will have probability serve turn.
But if the Judgment neither know, nor doubt any probability, or even
possibility that the matter sworn may be otherwise, and be settled on Motives
which render his mistake, if he do mistake, unblamable before God and Man, I
conceive he cannot be guilty of Perjury, or affront to God, who swears even
what after appears false. Much of this has been said already, and perhaps
needed not be repeated now. For after all, what he assumes at last, That we are
in the Oath of Allegiance bound to swear positively that the Pope has no such
Power, is confuted by the express words of the Oath, which plainly relate to
the Conscience, and Belief, or Judgment of the Swearer.

The three following Considerations have little to do with the business; no
body, that I know, making the Consequence which he says is weak. I can only
wonder in passing, what Adversaries he means by those who seem to have an eye
to the Articles of the Faculty of Paris. Withrington was dead, the Reflections,
and Questions writ, before those Articles appeared. I suppose they were no
Prophets to have an eye to future things, and which were not yet to be seen.
The The Jesuits, too, are brought in, unreasonably enough in my opinion.
Concerning whom I shall only say, that if what he tell us be true, That who
among them should teach the Deposing Doctrine would be severely punished; They
are wronged to be made the Authors of these Treatises.

Sect. 72. He begins to speak of the condemnation of Santarellus, a subject
which takes up several Sections. What he says here, is, that interpreting that
Decree, as some do the Oath, as erroneous, etc. may signify as bad as
erroneous, etc. and so the Doctor; who condemned Santarellus, cannot be
concluded to have thought that Doctrine erroneous; nay may be concluded to have
thought it not erroneous. I conceive those Doctors are to be asked what they
meant by their As in their Censure, and the Parliament in the Oath, not knowing
who else can tell. But whatever the Parliament meant, if it were put to his
Conscience, I do not think he believes in earnest the Doctors thought the
Doctrine, which they condemned as erroneous, was not erroneous. I conceive also,
that since he dislikes this interpretation in his Adversaries, he might have
forborne it himself, especially knowing that Withrington, though he borrowed
that Answer from the Doctrine of Bellarmin, yet relys himself more on another.

Sect. 73. He says the Censures and Propositions being several, it does not
well appear which falls upon which. The Censure runs thus: The Faculty
disapproves, and condemns the Doctrine contained in those Propositions. Which,
since there is no Respective to render the sense indeterminate, signifies, I
think, that all the Censures fall upon the Doctrine of all the Propositions. Yet
it seems incredible to him that those Learned men should so hardly censure this
Proposition, which makes one among them: The Pope may with Temporal Punishments
chastise Princes for the Crime of Heresy, seeing the Pope, or any Confessarius
may impose some Corporal and Temporal Punishment; for example to give Alms, or
build an Hospital, upon an Heretical Prince who should come to be reconciled.
Truly he is something harder of belief than St. Thomas himself, if he cannot
believe that may be don, which he sees is don. He may dispute it out with them
if he please: To me his Reason seems as strange as his Incredulity. Those
Penances which repentant Sinners receive from their Ghostly Fathers, and
perform of their own good will, I think are not understood by the word
Chastis^ments. If you will call them so, the penitent chastises himself, but is
not chastis'd by another. And should he not be willing to do them, neither
Ghostly Father nor Pope could take away his Money, to spend in Alms, or on an
Hospital. I think there is no Defender of the Oath, nor any man in his wits,
who denis the Pope may chastise, if you will needs call it so, any Prince with
the loss of his Kingdom for Heresy, or any thing else, whom he can persuade
voluntarily to part with it. But if he will keep it, how it should be taken
from him in spite of his Teeth, by a Power of imposing Penances, by which not
so much as a single penny can be taken from any man without his consent, is
beyond our understanding. Besides, Chastising a Prince for Heresy, signifies
proceeding against one actually guilty of the fault. When the Proposition
speaks of such a one, who would have thought it had been to purpose to speak of
one who comes to be reconciled, and by doing so declares he is not such a one?
Because the one may be enjoined whatever is for the good of his Soul, will it
follow, the other may be deprived of his Temporal Rights?

The 74. Sect. tells us, Spondanus says, the Book of Santarellus was forbid at
Rome, before it was forbid at Paris; as if it imported whether it were or no. I
can say nothing of that Prohibition, having never seen it. The Author of the
Preface to these Treatises it seems has. He is his Man, if he have a mind to
make a business of it. He adds out of the same Author, that the Animosities of
the University of Paris, arose from some hidden seeds of Schism: A story which
does not tell well. For if they were hidden, how came Spondanus to see them?
There appears nothing but the censure, and I hope he has not a mind to asperse
the Court of Rome with seeds of Schism, by making the prohibition of
Santarellus a sufficient cause for the suspicion. What he gathers from those
promises, has been so often said, that I am quite weary of repeating. No body
infers the University of Paris is for the Oath. But every body, that has eyes,
sees they cannot be again the Oath, for renouncing the deposing power which
they renounce themselves: And that other quarrels against it are too frivolous,
to trouble so famous an University with them.

The 75. Sect. would have the Paris censure understood of deposition for
slighter causes, or at most for Heresy in the Princes themselves, without
enforcing it on their Subjects. And this he says, is different from our present
case, because we swear in the Oath of Allegiance, the Pope cannot depose a
Prince for any cause, even though he persecute his Subjects into his own
Heresy. Undoubtedly, whatever the Title say, he was no Jesuit who writ this.
For to except against the Oath, because it renounces deposing Power in all
cases, is to teach it in some; and that he has told us is punishable among
them. I hope he does not expect a point of such consequence should be yielded
on the credit of his word. When he brings his proofs, we shall see how far they
will carry. In the mean time, the censure speaking so plainly as it does, I
conceive it very needless to inquire, what it means, of Comments less clear
than the Text. The 76. Sect. distinguishes betwixt Heretical, and contrary to
the word of God; of which whatever be the Truth, it concerns not us. For what
is in the Oath renounced as Heretical, is undeniable, and unexcusable Heresy,
unless the deposing Doctrine be true. Who sais it is not Heresy, must of
necessity say his King is subject to a superior power, which may dethrone him:
And that I conceive is a Doctrine no more current among other Men than among
the Jesuits.

These are the Considerations he makes on the censure of Santarellus; not
likely, as far as I see, to pull down the price which his Adversarys, he says,
set upon it. For it is a plain case the Doctrine of the Impugners of the Oath is
condemned by that censure; not in generals, as the Oath, and Writings of the
Defenders, but particularly and expressly. As great as the cry is against it, I
do not know that so much can be said of the Doctrine of the Defenders. Their
Books indeed are some of them condemned, and people guess they are condemned
for that Doctrine. But till I see it, I can hardly believe this Proposition,
The Pope cannot depose, which is the sum of their Doctrine, has ever been
authentically censured for erroneous, contrary to the word of God, etc. And yet
in so many Universities as there are in Christendom, it is much if there be not
some ready enough to gratify the Pope in such a business, if he should desire
it. But at Rome, where they understand the World better, I durst wager they
neither have, nor will in haste, be Authors of such a censure themselves.

Having already in the second Treatise met with the great mistake he talks of
Sect. 77. I think I have said enough there to show it deserves not to be
repeated. The rest has no difficulty. In the 78. he undertakes a business, with
which if he can go through, he shall have it, by my consent, of all that ever
writ against the Oath. It Is to show, That an Indirect, and conditional Power to
depose Kings (which some ascribe to the Pope in certain cases) is not
inconsistent with Prerogatives claimed by the French King, and confessed to be in
the King of England. His reason is, because every King has an Indirect and
conditional Power, or Right, to wage War against any other, and depose him, and
absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance to him, if the War be just. And
the Pope being a Temporal Prince as well as the rest, has the same Power, on
Right which others have. I cannot tell which of the two is more surprising, the
thing to be proved, or the proof. Those who have hitherto appeared for the
Indirect Power, have derived it from the office of Supreme Pastor in the Pope;
and the impossibility of executing it as it ought, without the power of
deposing: and therefore, rejecting the Temporal Power of the Canonists, will
needs persuade us it is Spiritual, even when it meddles with Temporals. This
new Invention derives it from that rank which by time and accidents, out-vy any
Commission from Christ, Popes now a days hold on the World, and leaving the
Pope, considers only the Temporal Prince. As if this were that, which the
Defenders of Indirect Power ascribe to the Pope, or what he has in virtue of
his Temporalties could be thought Spiritual. Poor St. Peter, and those Popes
who were not Temporal Princes, are now quite out of doors; and methinks it is
the oddest thing in the World, the Pope should claim as Successor to St. Peter,
which has hitherto been the pretense, by an Argument which leaves St. Peter no
claim at all. These variable Symptoms, in my opinion, make but a bad
Prognostic for the Indirect Power. For sure it stands but totteringly, when
people cannot tell on what bottom it stands, whether Spiritual or Temporal.

The point it self has been discourst before, and the equivocation is so
obvious, that I wonder to see it return again. The power which Kings have over
one another, signifies nothing but strength; and what he calls Right, is only
Reason, which directs them when and how to use it. Such power and right as this
every stronger man had over a weaker, when no man had power or right over
another, in the state of Nature, before the foundations of Power and Right were
settled. What is understood by that word, by those who are for the Indirect
Power, implys a relation of Superior and Inferior, whereof one is to command,
and the other obey in virtue of that command. So they say the Pope, as Supreme
Pastor, has the relation of a Shepherd to his Sheep, and Kings belonging to the
flock as well as private men, may command them as well as others. And thus much
even Catholic Kings confess to be true, if his power be confined to that
notion in which he is Pastor. But the Indirect-power-men extend it to
Temporals, and say it belongs to the office of Supreme Pastor to dispose of his
Sheep in things wherein they are not his Sheep. Whether they say well, or ill,
which is not now our Question, they plainly maintain a relation of Superiority,
and make the Popes Power consist in it. That this Power is inconsistent with
the Prerogatives of Sovereign Princes, he has saved me the labor of showing, by
making the Power, which he says is not inconsistent, another thing: And though
he had not, it is plain that Sovereignty is not compatible with a Superior.
There remains only to be considered, in which of the two senses the word Power
is understood in the Oath of Allegiance.

And this, I conceive, so clear, that I should be content to put it to this
Gentleman himself. For I cannot believe he thinks so extravagantly of the
Framers of the Oath, that they ever dreamt of obliging us to swear, that the
Pope cannot drive our, or any King, out of his Kingdom, if he be strong enough.
He cannot think those who take it so wicked, as to swear that cannot be don,
which they know as well as he, may be don, whenever the Pope comes to be
stronger than the King, and will employ his strength that way. He cannot think
the wisdom of a Nation, which for their own sake he should not think altogether
foolish, should solemnly vote, and oblige all to swear, a Foreign Prince cannot
assemble an Army strong enough to overpower us, and think of keeping it out by
Oaths and Acts of Parliament. The Oath seems plainly enough to explicate the
Power, which it renounces, of Authoritative Power, by the word Authority joined
to it: but though it had not, I cannot see how it can be understood otherwise,
without a very highly prejudiced animosity against the Oath, to say no more.

I, but the Proposition is negative, and by consequence deny's all Power
whatsoever. As if the words were not always to be understood secundum subjectam
materiam as they call it, according to the matter of which they speak, whether
the Proposition be Negative or Affirmative. No man is immortal, is a Negative
Proposition, and very true, though after the resurrection all men are immortal.
He who should make this exception when every body knows of what men the
Proposition speaks, would be thought a Caviller for his pains. Again, All men
breath, is a true Affirmative; and yet Children in their Mother's womb, and
painted men breath not. And painted men (for of children there is no
difficulty) are as truly men, as the power of Temporal Princes is the Deposing
Power the Oath speaks of. But all this difference may be easily compounded. Let
him but swear, and that only according to his Conscience and the best of his
Judgment, that the Pope has no power to Depose, with a plain declaration that
he means not by his Oath to exclude any power which the Pope has, as a Temporal
Prince, but only that which some ascribe to him as Head of the Church, and I am
much mistaken in Protestants, if they do not accept his Oath, and desire no
more. But if he refuses this, people, I suspect, will be apt to think what he
says here is not that which truly sticks, and that it is with the Oath, as Sir
John Suckling's Watch, so it be wound up, no matter by what hand or trick.

As to the Question he cannot but ask, Sect. 79. I must acknowledge my
ignorance. I understand not King-Craft, and the Laws of Peace and War enough,
to be able to answer it, and resolve him whether Religion be a just cause of
War. I think Divines are not agreed about it, and I have the less curiosity to
study the point, because I apprehend it not a jot material. For that a King may
be dispossessed by the Pope, either alone, or leagued with others, is, I
conceive, as much as needs to his purpose. Whether the War be just, or unjust
imports not; and if it did, it is plain there are other causes, besides
Religion, which make a War just, and every body knows the Pope, being a
Temporal Prince, may interpose in any War he pleases upon any just account, as
any other Temporal Prince may interpose in a War for Religion as well as he. To
gratify this Gentleman then, I will allow that Religion may be a just cause of
War; That the Pope may interpose in it all the ways he has thought of; in
short, I will grant all he asks, and take the Liberty to believe any man
notwithstanding may safely swear, The Pope neither by himself, nor with any
other, ha^ any Power, or Authority to Depose our King, or Authorize any Foreign
Prince to invade or annoy Him or his Countries.

I have already said why the Power, in virtue whereof Princes make War upon one
another, and the Deposition ensuing, cannot be the Power and Deposition
renounced by the Oath. There remains only to consider, whether Invoking be
Authorizing; which I cannot but wonder he would so far strain his credit with
his Readers as to obtrude upon them. Many are Authorized themselves, and know
by experience what the word means; the rest know it, as well as they, even by
not being in Authority. All see that who is Authorized, is, by being so,
enabled to do something which before he could not do, and which those cannot
who are not authorized. A Justice can examine and commit men, a Judge try and
condemn them; and so every Officer whether Civil or Military, can act as he is
empowr'd by his Commission, as long as it lasts; and when it expires or is
recalled, they can do those things no longer. Now it is plain, a Prince who is
Invok't by the Pope, or any body else, (for others may Invoke as well as he)
can do nothing which he could not do before he was Invok't, and which he might
not have don, if he pleased, whether he had been Invok't or no. He gets neither
Men, nor Money, nor Arms, nor any increase of Power to make War. Neither does
Invocation make the quarrel just. There was either breach of Treaty, or
Religion, if you will, or some other of the causes which makes War just, which
Invocation does not put, but find, and urges the Prince to proceed upon. If
there were not, he is plainly called to an unjust War; if there were, he might
have justly undertaken it without any body's Invocation.

Manifestly then, Authorizing is giving another some power which he had not
before: Invoking is only soliciting him to use the power he has of himself.
Which being so, as every body sees it is, there is no shadow of reason, why the
Liberty which the Pope has, and others have as well as he, of Invoking, should
hinder us from swearing, he cannot Authorize a Foreign Prince to invade the
King. And so if you will grant this Gentleman, that the power by which Temporal
Princes proceed against one another, is the Power of the successor of St.
Peter, and that to solicit one of them to use this power, is to give it him,
he has then something to say against the Oath of Allegiance. But since we
cannot but see they are as different as may be, and yet not more different from
one another than from the meaning of the Oath, we cannot but wonder how he
should light on such scruples himself, and more, how he should offer them to us
for satisfaction.

The 80th. consideration tells us, that every Church or Kingdom has not the
same Privileges or Liberties which are granted to the Gallican Church by
particular concessions of the Pope, or contract, or otherwise: as if the Rights
in question were claimed by grant from the Pope, or Sovereigns held of any but
God, or could, without ceasing to be Sovereigns. They may derive their
Liberties from whence they please in France; the Crown of England is, and at
all times has been free in all things touching the Regality of the same, and in
no Earthly subjection to any but God, says the Law of England. But neither is
it true, that the French look upon their Liberties, as Privileges for which
they are beholding to the Pope. A little Treatise of the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, Printed by Patisson, 1594. with License from the Parliament of
Paris, lays for a foundation, that what their Fathers ca^^^ the Liberties of
the Gallican Church, are not favors, or exorbitant Privileges, but rather
natural Franchises, Freedoms, or common Rights, of which there needs be shown
no other Title than Possession, and natural enjoyment. Again, Those which are
commonly called the Liberties of the Church of France, says another, are not
Privileges granted by the Pope, but in truth consist in this, That the Church
of France has not received diverse Papal constitutions made within Four hundred
years, etc. So that it seems the French know the difference betwixt Privileges
and Natural Liberties well enough. Whether they do or no, we know what we have
received from our Catholic Ancestors, and which, by this Gentleman's favor,
we mean to transmit to our posterity; let him and the French agree about it as
they can. Mean time I leave his Privileges to those whom they concern, as they
do not us, even by his own confession.

For he tells us at last, We have the same liberty which the French have, in
relation to our present debate. And then to what purpose are the Liberties of
other Nations brought into Question, or our own in other matters? But since
liberty is given to the English to maintain that the Pope has no power to
Depose Kings, I will take the liberty to say, they are also at liberty to
maintain the Oath of Allegiance. For these Treatises have made it pretty
manifest, that nothing material can be brought against it, but the renouncing
that Power. And yet we shall hardly take the liberty to maintain Truth, for a
Privilege.

He proceeds to tell us, that though they might take such an Oath as ours in
France, if they had it to take, yet we in England might not for several
reasons. The first insisted on Sect. 81. is, because we may prudently suspect
it made out of hatred and contempt of the Roman Church, the Papal Dignity, and
the Popes Supremacy in Spirituals; which because they could not so easily bring
Catholics to deny explicitly, they intend to make them do implicitly, under
a color of Civil Loyalty. I never pretended much to Prudence, and doubt I
never shall, if it be Prudence to give way to private suspicions, against the
declarations of public Authority, and to fancy we know their meaning better
than they themselves. Since the Framers of the Oath plainly tell us the end
they had in it, I should never have thought it prudent to suspect it was not
their end. Neither can I understand the cunning of that trick, by which he
would make them go about to trepan us into an implicit denial of the Popes
Supremacy in Spirituals. For what would Protestants get by it? They know well
enough, that though they should have inveigled us into an acknowledgment of
something implicitly inconsistent with the Popes Spiritual Supremacy, there
would not be a Papist the less for all that. For when ever this implicit
inconsistency should come to be unfolded, and we urged to renounce that
Supremacy, we should desire them to excuse us; and tell them, whatever the
words may import beyond our intentions, we meant no such matter, and stick to
our Supremacy still. They know those who take the Oath do it, as well as those
who refuse it: and while we all profess, and stand to it, to think they should
fancy by a trick to make us all renounce it, and turn Protestants against our
wills, and without our knowledge, is a suspicion which, if it have any
prudence, I think has but little reason.

But where lies the prudence of suspecting that the Oath was made in contempt
of the Pope? The Framers, says he, specify no other Temporal Prince, though
there be as much need of securing our Loyalty against them, as the Pope. As if
every body did not know the Oath was framed upon occasion of a Treason
proceeding from a misapprehension of the Popes Power, not of other Princes. If
those Powers were past by, of which they stood in no fear, and provision made
against that, from which they had newly escaped so imminent a danger, must the
Papal dignity be therefore suspected to be contemned? Rather other Princes
would be thought contemned, as unregarded and unmentioned; but to stand in fear
of the Pope, is no sign of contempt. However it be, he despises not Watermen
sure, who takes no care of Boats, and what may save from drowning, when the
only danger is from Fire.

I, but it is manifest, that this was the design of the Parliament: For they
would have inserted in the Oath a Renunciation of the Popes power to
Excommunicate. That people should not agree in manifest things! I cannot for my
life but think the contrary manifest. For if having a will to insert such a
Clause infer having such a Design, not having a will to insert it, infers not
having that design. And, I think; nothing can be more manifest, than that they
had not a will to insert it, when they left it out. By what means they came to
be changed, whether by King James, or any other motive, imports not. It is
enough that they were changed, when they perfected the Act, and had not the
Will, which he says they had, and therefore had not the Design, which he infers
from that Will. Notwithstanding, he will needs have enough remaining to make us
prudently suspect the Oath was contrived in contempt of the Papal dignity. Not
so prudently, I doubt, unless he would tell us what this enough is. Otherwise I
should think we may prudently suspect, there is no such thing at all, since he,
who makes it his business, can find none. But then, it is a constant opinion
among Divines, that we are bound to refuse a thing, though indifferent in it
self, when it is required in contempt of a lawful Dignity. Suppose it be, where
is the contempt of lawful dignity? He has not proved so much as that it can be
prudently suspected. To assume at last confidently that it is, and then run
away with it, is by his favor a little too much.

I verily think, he might prudentl^ enough have spared the whole Consideration.
It proceeds all upon suspicions, no very good foundation at best. But to make
them show a little more handsomely, he calls them Prudent; and this prudent in
truth signifies ungrounded. For there is not one so much as likely reason of
suspicion. And, when he had done, fairly takes for granted, more than he went
about to prove, and knocks it on the head with Authority. And this in his
Language is Particular Reasons, and Prudent. Suspicions.

For a second Reason, the distinctive sign returns upon the Stage, Sect. 82. as
far as I see only to act the same part over again, there being little added or
altered. He will not have the Oath intended by the Framers, to distinguish
Loyal Catholics from others; because, The Title makes no such distinction, and
the Title he supposes was put in by those who framed the Act to declare their
Intention. I should never have thought this matter had been worth repeating. By
the Act was intended to discover and suppress Popish Recusants, and this
intention is declared in the Title, and but too much pursued in the body of it.
In the same Act is inserted an Oath to distinguish Catholics: and though this
intention be as plainly expressed as the other, this Gentleman would hear us in
hand there is no such matter, because it is not expressed in the same place.
There needs great power in ^hetorick to persuade us that Lawmakers may not
explain themselves where they think fit; and more in Logic to conclude
efficaciously that their meaning is not their meaning, only because it appears
not just where he would have it.

His second reason why the Oath cannot be intended to distinguish Catholics,
is because we might say the same of distinctive signs instituted by Pagan
Emperors, viz. That they likewise were to distinguish Loyal Christians. As if
every thing could be said of every thing; and the Oath could not be intended to
distinguish Catholics, because Pagans intended to make Christians turn Pagans.
For the distinctive signs he speaks of were indeed such, and who complied with
them, was, both by Pagans and Christians, thought to renounce Christianity. For
they were generally to worship, or sacrifice to Idols; which whoever consented
to do, did in the opinion both of Pagans and Christians, become a Pagan. And
when they aspersed Christians with disloyalty, every body saw the aspersion was
unjust, and that what they required, to make them pass for Loyal, was that they
should cease to be Christians. Now every body sees that the Oath of Allegiance
is not a distinctive sign, since every body sees that who takes it, is not
thought less a Catholic, either by Protestants or Catholics, than he was
before, or than he who refuses it. So that I cannot but wonder to see
Catholics, who remain Catholics when they do what Protestants require,
paralelled with Christians, who did not remain Christians when they yielded to
what Pagans required.

His third reason is, because Protestants are persuaded that the very
Principles of our Religion are inconsistent with civil Allegiance. Among
intelligent Protestants I hope there are not many who are so persuaded. But be
it as it will, this persuasion of theirs is it true or false? I hope he will
not say it is true, for the scandal it is to Religion, which must of necessity
be false, and need no second Argument to be proved so, if it be indeed
inconsistent with Allegiance, which is manifestly a duty enjoined by Religion.
If it be, as* undoubtedly it is, false, they should do well to lay their hands
on their Hearts, and consider on the account they have to make to* God, who
have contributed to a persuasion so scandalous. I wish the Authors of these
Treatises be not concerned. To say nothing of the first, who makes the
not-deposing Doctrine flatly erroneous in Faith; this last goes farther in this
point, than he was perhaps aware of, at least than I know how to answer to a
good Conscience. For he would have the Pope obeyed in this matter before the
King; and that, since Religion is the Sphere of the Pope's activity, is to say,
that this matter belongs to Religion; which I fear contributes but too much to
that persuasion. However it be, since Protestants cannot be so persuaded, but
by being persuaded first, that deposing; Doctrine belongs to Religion, I
conceive it is the duty of every good Catholic to unperswade them as fast as
he can, and not suffer an aspersion so scandalous, and so unjust to lie upon
his Religion.

Peradventure, no Defender of the Oath has brought a stronger Argument for the
taking of it, than this zeal against it. For it is plain, that no pretense of
Authority, or any thing else can bear us out in any thing to the prejudice of
Religion; and it is plain, that Religion is prejudiced, by being exposed to the
scandal of teaching Doctrine inconsistent with Allegiance. If the deposing
Doctrine be inconsistent with Allegiance, and taught by our Religion; it is also
plain that our Religion teaches Doctrine inconsistent with Allegiance.
Wherefore, unless it can be made out that it is not inconsistent with
Allegiance, it is plainly the duty of a good Catholic to renounce it, when he
is legally required. And since it appears, by the unsuccessful endeavors of
these Treatises, that there is no rational exception against the Oath but
because it renounces that Doctrine, every good Catholic not only may, but ought
take it. For to refuse it, being to refuse renouncing that Doctrine, exposes his
Religion to the scandal mentioned, for which there neither is, nor can be any
warrantable pretense.

The two following Sections only repeat things formerly said; save that there
is a little touch in the first concerning the Jansenists, who, I think, have
not much to do with our Oath. Yet their case, and ours, may in one respect be
like enough. We have seen them a good while traduced for Heretics, and a
mighty bustle made about them, and people alarmed with fearful dangers hanging
over the Church; and now we see the same men, persisting in the same
sentiments, acknowledged and treated as very good Catholics. So it may very
well happen with the Defenders of the Oath; who for all the past heats, and
present Zeal against them, may one day, without any change in their judgments,
be as good Catholics as the best. In the mean time this suspicion of his, of
the Jansenists adhering to the five Propositions, methinks is pleasant, when
they have often enough declared to the World what they hold in that matter, and
put it past guessing, and suspecting.

In the 85 Section there are several matters scattered, most, in my opinion,
not extraordinarily material. What he would be at, is, that whatever is
produced out of France is of little or no force to justify the taking our
Oath. As if it were nothing toward the justification of renouncing a Doctrine
by the Oath, that the same Doctrine is irreprehensibly renounced by Catholics
in the face of the World. His reason is, because it may prudently be thought
that what the English do, may proceed from indignation against the Pope, and a
design to bring off Catholics by little and little from his obedience, which
cannot be suspected of the French. I have already said why I conceive those
thoughts are not very prudent. But though they were, as long as this suspected
indignation and design requires no more than may be don with a safe conscience,
I cannot think our suspicions can warrant us to disobey our lawful Magistrate,
when we may with a safe conscience obey. Besides, it is not for Subjects to pry
into the Commands of their lawful Superiors, but guide themselves by what
appears in public. The Intention legally declared, is all the Intention of
which we are to take notice. If they secretly harbor any other in their
breasts, it is between God and their own consciences, in which we are not
concerned. Now the Intention legally declared, being to distinguish Loyal
Catholics from others, we not only may, but ought comply with this Intention,
since nothing can be more evidently unreasonable than that we should expose our
selves to a just suspicion of Disloyalty, and our Religion to the scandal of
obliging us so to do. The only difficulty is, whether what they require to this
end, be consistent with our duty to God. Who are satisfied it is, cannot but be
satisfied it is their duty to give the testimony of Loyalty, which is legally
required, and can never answer it to a good conscience to forbear it, for fear
of groundlesly suspected, and not appearing intentions.

For the rest, I understand neither Casuistry nor Law enough, to know whether
the case he puts, of two holding by the same unjust Title, one legally
condemned, the other not, be well resolved. But I am apt to suspect, that he
holds with no very good conscience, who holds by a Title declared unjust. And
for what he adds, that it is not reasonable the English should expect the same
liberty with the French, I think it not worth the while to examine whether it be
reasonable or no. But methinks it is something cross to tell us, a few
Paragraphs before, that we have the same liberty with the French, and now, that
it is unreasonable we should.

The approbation of some Sorbon Doctors, which he mentions Sect. 86 and 87, is
a secret to me, as well as him. And I have the less curiosity to inquire after
it, because I suspect, by his niceness in stating the case, it is not likely to
pass with him, whatever it be. Nor do I think any thing can be so clear, as to
escape such exceptions as he has already taken. And so being come to an end of
this matter, I must follow his example, and apologize for detaining the Reader
so long about it. For whatever this Gentleman think, I conceive it not so very
material, as valuing one good Argument, which discovers the truth of the thing,
above twenty approbations, even of So^bon Doctors. But yet if I had said
nothing, people might have been apt to suspect it had been for want of
something to say.

To my great comfort we are now at the last Objection, which strives first to
put them out of credit who are for the Oath. Of these he says, Sect. 89. that
the Pope gives them a bad character. He had spoken to purpose, if he had shown
they deserve it; for if they do not, they have but the more wrong. The King
gives as bad a character of those of the other side; and yet this Gentleman, I
believe, thinks never a whit the worse of them. Whatever is said of them, they
were conscientious men who took the Oath, and that is all the Objection says.

Sect. 90. He tells us, that actually the Superiors of the Clergy, and of the
Religious Orders in England, unanimously judge the Oath ought not be taken, and
publicly profess they are of this Judgment. If he have Commission to speak for
those Gentlemen, he would do well to produce it. I have the less temptation to
believe him on his word, because he formerly undertook for Protestants more
than, I believe, they stand to, and because he tells us here their profession
is public; which if it were, other people methinks might know it as well as
himself; and I, for my part, never heard of any such matter. All I can say is,
that if the Superiors of the Clergy judge as he says they do, they degenerate
from their Predecessors. For the Superior in the time of King James, approved
and took the Oath, and admonished both Clergy and Laity to follow his Example.
And the Irish Remonstrance was approved by the Superior at that time, which is
so near the Oath of Allegiance, that I cannot think he would have disapproved
the Oath, if it had been put to him. Of the Superiors of Orders, unless I could
meet with the public profession he talks of, I can say nothing. Only I think
it no impossible thing, that they should approve something disapproved at Rome,
because it actually happened in the three Propositions. But I think it but
reasonable they should speak for themselves, and we not be put to learn their
sense from others.

The following Section remains in generals, without applying any thing to the
particular case. Had he gone about to evince there is something doubtful in the
Oath, which he says is so easy to do, there had been something to answer. Now
I can only say, that people, unless they have scruples put in their heads, do
not use to doubt of their own steadfast Persuasions, and those they swear in the
Oath.

The 92 Section confidently vouches all the Divines and Canonists for 500
years, as granted to be on his side by his Adversaries. And this is both
disproved before, and manifestly false, even by the confession of our
Adversaries. For the Author of the former Treatise builds his whole discourse
on this ground, that Schoolmen have been wrangling about this matter 500 years
ago, and may do so for ought he knows 500 years hence. And certainly they are
not very well agreed who wrangle. Then he goes on descanting on his false
ground, till he comes to ask why Bellarmin, and those of his side, may not as
prudently be thought to have seen as far as Withrington and his Cabal.
Comparisons, they say, are odious; and however, his prudent thoughts, I
conceive, make little toward Truth or Falsehood. When he shows that Bellarmin
and the rest have brought convincing proofs for what they say, we shall be all
of his prudent persuasion. In the mean time we must beg his permission to think
a bad Argument is a bad Argument, whoever makes it, and that the greatest men
have their failings. Nor can we think it prudent, when we see those great men,
once in their lives, are out of the story, for their sakes to take wrong for
right.

Sect. 93. He tells us, that Preston, as he is informed, never took the Oath,
nor persuaded any man to take it. What then? no more have twenty others, nor
indeed any man, to whom it has not been offered. He himself, I fancy, has never
refused it; though I know not why he should, if he have no better reasons than
he has put into his Treatise. What Is all this to purpose? And for persuading
others, Preston did his endeavor to satisfy all men that it might be taken, as
he has, that it may not. More persuasion than this it is a praise to Preston
that he used not. For who goes about by earnestness and pretended Zeal to work
upon people farther than their Judgment leads them, discovers more addiction to
the thing, than good will to them, and is a Counselor of whom they ought
beware.

But the same Author grants the Pope has Authority to order and direct the
Temporal Affairs of Princes, and says, the Controversy is only concerning
Coercive Power. I mistake that Author if he do not grant the Pope a Coercive
Power too, provided that Coercion be Spiritual. But this, he says, is contrary
to the Article of Sorbon, which denis the Pope has any Authority over the
Temporals of Princes. As if the Sorbon, or any body in his wits, ever dreamt of
denying the Pope might command a sinner, though a Prince, to abstain from Wine,
or Women, or restore Goods unjustly gotten, or relieve the extreme Necessity of
his Neighbor with Alms, etc. Every Ghostly Father has such power over his
Penitent. Can any man fancy it ever came into the head of the Sorbon, that the
Pope could not do as much as a Ghostly Father? Now Wine, and Women, and Money
being plainly Temporal things, it is plain the Authority of the Pope extends to
Temporal things, and that not only by way of Direction, but Coercion too. For
the sinner who refuses to obey his Directions, may be delivered over to Satan
by him, and with Spiritual Punishments forced into repentance. So much, I
think, no Catholic denis.

Apply this now to our case, and stating it with all the advantage that can be
to the Pope, the utmost which I apprehend can be said, is, That he may Judge a
Prince abuses his Temporal Government to the ruin of his own Soul, and hazard
of many others: and in care of those Souls command him to alter, or leave off
his Government, which is incompatible with his Salvation: and in case of
refusal, draw his Spiritual Sword, and use it against him. The Pope when he
judges thus, may be in the right, and he may be in the wrong. If he be in the
right, the Prince who refuses to obey him, hazards or ruins his Soul; for which
he is to answer to Almighty God, from whose Justice no worldly greatness can
free any man. But he is accountable to no body else, according to the Doctrine
of the best Masters of Christianity. Nor can the Pope take his Kingdom, or any
Temporal thing else from him against his will, no more than he can break open
the Cellers, or Houses of the sinners before mentioned, and break their
Vessels, and let out their Wine, and carry away their Money, unless in virtue
of his Temporal Authority where he has it; or than the Ghostly Father, who
enjoins his Penitent a Discipline which he will not take, can himself whip him
by force. If the Pope be in the wrong, all he does is Clave errante, and he is
to answer to God for his mistaking proceedings; and the Prince does well to
refuse his Directions, and stand out his Coercions. Whether of the two be in
the right, is all one to Subjects. For they are still to stand by their Prince,
who whether virtuous or vicious is still their Prince, and by the Law of God
still to be obeyed in matters belonging to Civil Government. How right soever
the Pope may otherwise judge, when he would alter the frame of the
Commonwealth, and disturb the public Peace, and dispossess their King by
force, there they are sure he is in the wrong, and may, and must stand even by
a vicious Prince against him, and cannot answer it to God and a good Conscience
if they do otherwise.

This, I think, is the Authority which Withrington and his Associates grant the
Pope over the Temporals even of Princes; which what service it will do this
Gentleman, we must expect to see. He tells us, Sect. 94. They will allow the
Pope no more than may evidently be deduced out of Scripture. This is a close
bob, as if they thought the Scripture alone, to be the Rule of Faith, when yet
he knows they do not. Indeed they expect from him, who will have what is
attributed to the Pope, pass for Faith, that he should prove it from Scripture,
or Tradition; or some way by which Faith may be proved. Otherwise they are not
so severe, and will be content with any proof, which is indeed a proof. But to
let pass this gentle touch,

If the Pope, says he, may justly in some cases, and in order to the Spiritual
good of a Nation, command a King to desist from persecuting his Subjects upon
the score of Religion, or otherwise lay down his Government. What this caution
of some cases serves for, I cannot guess; while he speaks but of one case, that
of Persecution. In this case, I will allow the Pope may command a King, and
that justly, to desist from persecution, and if there be no other means to save
his Soul, to lay down the Government too. All that will follow is, that the
King who refuses to obey, sins against God and his own Soul, and shall one day
account to the severe Justice of God for it. So I may very justly command my
Son, who spends his Life in debauches, to desist from his debauches, and pass
over his Estate, if he cannot abstain from abusing it to his own perdition, to
his Brother. And I may disinherit him, if it lie in my power. But if the Estate
be settled on him, I cannot take it away, neither can I knock him on the Head,
but must endure the mischief, which I cannot remedy, as well as I can; and
leave my unreclaimable Son to God and the Laws of the Land. No more can our
Spiritual Father the Pope, take any Temporal Estate away from an offending
Spiritual Child, unless it be held by a Temporal Tenure of the Pope; but must
content himself with the satisfaction of having done all in his power to
reclaim him, and leave the rest to God's Providence and Justice. What will come
of this?

And if, says this Gentleman next, the Pope justly may prohibit his Subjects,
in case he goes on in persecuting them upon that account, to bear him civil
Allegiance: This by his favor the Pope may justly do in no case. He may
justly, and laudably use all the power God has given him, to cause a
persecuting Prince to desist from persecution. But God has given him no power
to forbid that Princes Subjects from paying him what is his due. Subjects have
nothing to do with the Conscience of their Prince, nor does it any way import
them, whether the Pope be in the right when he commands their King, or the King
when he refuses to obey. Till he quit his Throne, whether he do well or ill to
keep it, he is still their King: and if the Pope forbid them to bear him civil
Allegiance, he forbids what is manifestly commanded by the Law of God: nor can
they obey him without disobeying God. What if they be persecuted? That is no
such novelty among Christians, that people should be to seek what is their
duty, when the case happens. We have the instructions of our Divine Master, not
to forbear Civil Allegiance, but, to rejoice and exult, and remember the
plentiful reward prepared for those who suffer persecution for Justice. We have
the example of our Holy Ancestors, who when they were commanded to stand to
their Arms, to fight against this or that Nation, obeyed; when to worship, or
offer Incense to Idols, preferred God before Man. The harm of persecution is
truly to the persecutors; the persecuted are in a blessed condition, and
assured they are so by the Oracle of Infallible Truth. If any thing turn them
out of this way, and make them forfeit their great hopes, by refusing to obey
God in Man, and possess their Souls in patience, that, and not persecution does
them harm. However it be, that the Pope may forbid Subjects to bear civil
Allegiance, because he may forbid Kings to persecute, is what I can by no means
allow, and what I wonder to see assumed.

And yet I wonder more at his conclusion. How then, says he, can they swear
that notwithstanding any sentence made or granted, or to be made and granted,
by the Pope or his Authority, against their Prince, they will bear him true
Allegiance? This in a Catholic, the first I think that ever excepted against
this branch of the Oath, I see not only with wonder, but with extreme grief.
Will he have it thought the Allegiance of Catholics depends on sentences made
or to be made by the Pope, and that they cannot swear the contrary? This clause
says no more than what the most scrupulous voluntarily offer; no more than what
himself offers in this very Treatise. For one branch of his Form professed to
bear true Allegiance to the King, and defend him against all attempts by any
person whatsoever, under whatsoever pretense. This I take to signify,
notwithstanding any sentence made, or to be made. I will hope he meant to
speak, not to the thing, but to his Adversaries; not to deny the clause might
be sworn, but to show it could not be sworn by them according to their
Principles. And this may be some excuse for him, but none for what he says. For
if that Clause be inconsistent with the Principles even of the Defenders of the
Oath, it is much more with those of the Impugners; since these allow the Pope
more Authority over the Temporals of Princes than the other; and would stretch
that Authority to authorizing their Subjects against them, which the other
plainly deny. Catholics by this account, would be at a fine pass with his Zeal
for their satisfaction, unable either of one side or the other, to swear more
Allegiance than pleases the Pope. As to the thing it self I have spoken
already, and declared that Subjects are unconcerned in the contests betwixt the
Pope and their Sovereigns, and obliged by the Law of God to stand by them, and
defend the public peace and safety, whatever the quarrel be on which they fell
out.

The 95 Sect. tells us, That Bellarmin affirms no more of the Popes Power than
the Author of the Questions seems to grant. Why then the Author of the
Questions was in the wrong as well as Bellarmin, and there is an end of the
story. But yet they seem not to me to say altogether the same. Bellarmin, if I
be rightly informed, puts a standing Power in the Pope, derived from Christ,
and included in his Universal Pastorship, to Depose Princes as often as he
judges the necessity of the Church requires it, and acting by the Authority of
a Superior over an Inferior. The Author gives the Pope no more Power to Depose
Princes, than Princes to Depose Popes, or any man to Depose either. In short,
he would have it lawful for any man to do any good which he can do, and which
is absolutely necessary to be don. The Power by which they act in such cases
is, according to him, equivocally Power, importing no Authority, or
Superiority, but only strength and reason to use it; such a power as I have
over my Neighbors life, over which I have and can swear I have no power.
Whether what this Author says be true or no, which is another Question, it is
plain enough, that it is not the same which Bellarmin says And though it should
excuse a Pope, when in virtue of it he Deposes a Prince, (which if it do, it
will also excuse a Prince, or any man else who Deposes a Pope;) yet it concerns
not Subjects. They are still to defend their Prince to the uttermost of their
power; let the necessity be what it will, which sets the Pope against him.

To make way for some Arguments, by confuting of which he means to show the
weakness of his Adversaries, the 96 Sect. assumes, That when the ground,
whereon an Author proceeds, is manifestly false or inconclusive, no account is
to be made of the Opinion or Judgment of such an Author. In this I think he is
much in the right; though I suspect it will hardly please your
Extrinsick-probability-men. For Extrinsick probability, if I mistake it not,
consists in the number and reputation of Authors, as Intrinsic Probability in
the weight of Reasons. If we must no longer value Names, but look after
Arguments, I doubt it will go hard with Extrinsick Probability, and the Muster
Roles of great Names be much shortened. But let what will come of it, as long as
what he says is true, I cannot but be for him. Now this Plea of his, denis not
what is alleged in the Objection, that there are many of Learning and
Conscience who defend the lawfulness of the Oath, but contends the allegation
is frivolous. And truly I never looked upon it as otherwise valuable, than for
the satisfaction of those, who will not be content without Crutches, even
though their own Legs be sound. I am very glad he will have it tried out by the
Merits of the Cause, which I think much the better, and indeed only efficacious
method.

From hence he takes his rise to examine the Arguments of the Defenders of the
Oath. But this pains, I think, might have been spared, because it belongs not
to the Defenders to make Arguments. That task belongs to the Impugners; whose
Arguments if the Defenders can show to be inconclusive, it imports not what
they are which they make themselves, nor whether they make any or no. Kings
were Kings, before there were Popes. They had right to the Allegiance of their
Subjects from the Law of Nature and Reason, before Christ came into the World.
When he came, he confirmed that right by his Law, and those who obeyed his Law
by their practice; till in after Ages pretenses were made, in behalf of the
Pope, to control that right in certain emergencies. These pretenses must be
proved, if it be expected they should pass: nor have those who deny them, any
more to do, than to show they are not proved. The right of Kings needs no more
proof, than my right to my Estate, in which the Law will maintain me, till he
who claims it, can make out a good Title. Wherefore this Gentleman's labor in
this particular is all useless; The Pope being never the better, if those who
speak for Kings discourse weakly, unless they discourse convincingly who speak
for him: and it being nothing to purpose whether their Arguments be good, who
do more than they need if they argue at all. Notwithstanding let us see what he
says.

For the common reason, and ground of his Adversaries, the 97. Sect. puts this
position: That a mere Spiritual Power, such as is only granted the Pope over
all Christendom, in no case possible, does extend it self to any Temporal
thing. As common as he makes this reason, I suspect there are very few among
his Adversaries who say it: neither is it true, when it is said. That Temporal
punishments cannot be inflicted by a mere Spiritual power; by force, and
against the will of him who is punished, some of them do say, and endeavor to
prove: but that Spiritual power, does not at all extend it self to Temporals,
should be put for their ground; whom before, and in the very next Sect. he
acknowledges to confess the contrary, is a little surprising. I think it
superfluous and tedious to speak again of this matter, of which I have so
lately declared my sense, and so have only to observe what will come of it.

This Reason, he says, does not show that the Pope, as Temporal Prince of Rome,
has not an Indirect Right and Power to depose Kings in some cases, such a Power
being inherent to every Sovereign Prince. He is in the right. This reason if he
will call it so, indeed shows no such thing, and 'twere strange it should, and
the Pope's Temporal power, or any Right belonging to it, be shockt by a reason
which meddles only with the Spiritual. Neither does he deal very kindly with
his Adversaries, to make them suspected of discoursing so extravagantly.

But whatever that Reason do, it has been already shown that Sovereign Princes
have no inherent right, or power over one another (meaning by those words what
is ordinarily, and the Oath meant by them) though every body knows they can
make War, upon, and dispossess one another when they are strong enough.
Wherefore, the Pope may keep his Temporal power, and do with it all that
Temporal power can do; for any thing his Adversaries, or the Oath have to do
with it. Which being a point sufficiently discourst already, I see no reason to
discourse it over again.

In the following Sections he sets himself to prove, that mere Spiritual power
may in some cases extend it self to Temporal things; I know not to what
purpose, when he says his Adversaries confess it. They are not like to be in
favor with him in have, if saying just what he would have them, will not
content him. More words about a point agreed on both sides, seems little better
than chat; and yet the crosness of his Discourse will keep me a little longer
than needs. I cannot but wonder to see, always in the same period, that Christ
and his Apostles either had not, or at least did not exercise Temporal power
while they lived, and did use Temporal both of them: Christ against the buyers
and sellers, and St. Peter against Ananias and Sapphira. For their Death too, I
think he makes an effect of Temporal power. Again, that Excommunication takes
away all civil Communication, though due by the Law of Nature. I cannot tell
whether Civil, and Nature be well coupled, but it is the first time I have heard
that bare Excommunication, abstracting from the Temporal Laws, deprives a Man
of any thing due by the Law of Nature, or even of the Land. A Servant must pay
him the service he ows, a Child the duty, a Debtor the debts, etc. only
Spiritual goods, the Sacraments and the like are taken away, or rather
suspended, till Repentance. And those who need not keep him company, unless
they please, are admonisht to abstain from it, for his sake and their own; to
preserve themselves from the infection of his wickedness, and reclaim him by
shame. What besides follows* Excommunication, is I think refunded into Temporal
Laws and Temporal power.

The Confessiarius whom he brings in Sect. 99. is one of whom his Adversaries
make use to declare their sense of Spiritual power, viz. that it extends it
self to directing and enjoining that Temporals be used according to the Law of
God, and punishing the obstinate refuser by withholding Spiritual goods.
Farther than, which it is plain, the Confessarius cannot go, nor as they
conceive, the Popes. And this Gentleman says nothing to the contrary. Neither
does he show what Service the Wife will do him, who cannot live with her
Husband without eminent danger of Perdition. She is undoubtedly free by the
express Law of God, and by the Law of Nature, which endures no tie absolutely
inconsistent with the final and only good. But yet, if she will stay, and damn
her self he does not go about to show that the Spiritual Power can take her
away.

The 100. Sect. tells us, That more Spiritual Crimes are punished with Temporal
punishments in all Nations. Those Temporal punishments being plainly inflicted
by Temporal Authority, is it possible that any thing should follow to the
advantage of the Spiritual? And yet he concludes without more ado, That
Protestants doubtless are not of opinion, that one cannot be Temporally
punished, by a mere Spiritual Power, or upon a mere Spiritual account. Why but
his case is of Spiritual crimes punished by Temporal Authority. Will he persuade
us Protestants are of opinion that who is punished by the Temporal, is punished
by mere Spiritual Power, and that there is no doubt to be made of it? Whatever
he fancy of them, I must beg his good leave to believe, that Protestants are no
such irrational people, and that neither they, nor any Man in his Wits can
harbor an opinion so extravagant. Something I suppose he means by his, or upon
^ mere Spiritual account, but what I cannot tell. Spiritual Power, and
Spi^itual Accounts, are plainly different things, which methinks it is not fair
to tumble together. Let the account on which the Temporal power is exercised,
be what it will, if it be Temporal Power which is exercised, I see not what
mere Spiritual Power, of which he is talking, has to do in the case.

Neither perhaps is so much true, that the Temporal Power, when it punishes
what he calls merely Spiritual crimes, proceeds on a mere Spiritual Account.
Heresy, and Ap^stacy, in which he instances, seldom become Universal without
disturbance of the public peace, the preservation of which plainly belongs to
the care of the Temporal Power, on a Temporal account. Blasphemy, his third
instance, as plainly takes away the respect due to God, and with it the Aw of
Divine Justice; and concern for the next Life. Who thinks the Temporal Power
unconcerned in such things, had not reflected what ill living there would be,
in a Commonwealth, where no Man's Oath, and much less his Word would be
trusted. And manifestly there is no trust to be given to his Oath, who has no
fear of God; and yet without Trust, civil Society, and Commerce, cannot be
maintained. Generally, who considers that fear of Temporal punishments alone,
is an unsafe, and no lasting support of Government (for those who have no other
check will break the Laws as often as they can hope by Favor, or Power, or
Artifice to escape those punishments) and that it is a great deal more easy,
and more secure where people obey for Conscience, will find that, without
relation to Spiritual accounts, the care of the public quiet, and safety,
makes Governors concerned in the virtue of their Subjects, bad Men seldom
proving good Members of the Commonwealth.

The next Consideration is so crosly entangled, that I hardly know how to
unravel it. He objects against himself, that Temporal Prince^ enact such Laws
against Spiritual Crimes as prejudicial to the Temporal good of their Subjects,
or as empowered by several Titles allowed them to defend the Church, etc. The
first of these is what I come from saying; what he means by the second, his
several Titles, and by whom he would have them allowed I cannot guess, nor
imagine what other Title there needs to provide against prejudice to the
Temporal good of their Subjects, more than the Temporal power with which they
are entrusted. But whatever he means, he would have it follow, that The Pope
may deprive one of some Temporal thing (if nothing else do hinder it) when it
is prejudicial to the Spiritual good of Christians: For he is invested also
with several Titles, which enable him to direct the Temporals of Princes in
order to their or their Subjects Spiritual, good. How many Titles he has I know
not, and while one will serve turn, care not to inquire. By his Title of
Universal Pastor, I conceive, he is empowered to direct the Temporals, even of
Princes, to their Spiritual good; but I do not know that he is empowered by that
Title, or any else to deprive them of their Temporals against their wills. To
put Direction in the premises, and Deprivation in the conclusion is foul play.

But he goes on: Because if a mere Temporal power can extend it self to the
Temporal punishment of a mere Spiritual Crime (when it is prejudicial to the
Temporal good, the Judgment of which Crime does not belong to the Temporal
Court) why may not a mere Spiritual power enjoin in certain cases (if there be
not some other obstacle) a Temporal punishment, or deprive of some Temporal
thing, in order to a Spiritual end? The Execution of which punishment, and the
Deprivation of which thing, belongs to the Temporal Prince. I, for my part,
despair to unriddle how that Crime should be merely Spiritual, which is
prejudicial to the Temporal good: and how the Temporal Court can be excluded
from the cognizance of things prejudicial to Temporals. As also how a mere
Spiritual power deprives one of a Temporal thing, when that deprivation is to
be made, not by the Spiritual, but Temporal power. And more than all, how it
will follow, that because a Temporal power can punish with a Temporal
punishment, a Spiritual power can punish with a Temporal punishment too. I
should have thought the direct contrary had followed, That as the Temporal
power can punish even a Spiritual Crime with no other than a Temporal
punishment, so the Spiritual can punish no crime with any other punishment than
a Spiritual.

The Case it self is plain enough if we could let it alone. Every body knows
the same offense may, and most times does concern the care of both Powers: The
Spiritual, as a breach of the Law of God; the Temporal, as harmful to the
Commonwealth. Both may take cognizance of it, both proceed to sentence, and
execution of that sentence, actual punishment. But then as the Powers are
different, so are the Punishments: The Spiritual importing less, or suspension
of Spiritual goods, and the Temporal of Temporal. This, I think, is in two
intelligible words the whole business, and this his Adversaries not only grant
but endeavor to prove. He may make his best on it when he thinks fit. In the
mean time I see not what service the proceedings of the Temporal power against
what he calls mere Spiritual Crimes will do to the Spiritual power. And I doubt
besides, his Zeal, and the heat of Argument has transported him a little beyond
the bounds he had prescribed himself. He professes only to answer his
Adversaries Arguments against deposition, but by no means to assert it himself;
and yet makes an Argument, which, if it were true, would infer Deposition. For
if mere Spiritual power can extend it self to the deprivation of Temporals,
there will be no reason strong enough to confine it to this or that private
case, and hinder it from extending this deprivation even to Kingdoms.

To leave no stone unturned, Sect. 102. he trys what the Spiritual power will
do, and what the Temporal again, but acting now not nothings but persons. Of
the former he says, since the power of Excommunication (which is merely
Spiritual) may punish mere Civil Crimes, why may not therefore, in like manner,
a mere Spiritual power inflict Temporal punishment? This Question seems to
answer it self For Excommunication being a Spiritual punishment, and the power
to inflict it Spiritual power: This is to ask in other terms, why a power to
inflict Spiritual cannot inflict Temporal punishment? To which a body would
think there needs no other Answer than the Question it self. Besides, I
mightily suspect whether there be any mere Civil Crimes for Excommunication to
punish, and if there be, whether mere Spiritual power have any thing to do with
them. And yet if both were true, punishing a Civil Crime with a Spiritual
punishment, is one thing, punishing the same Crime with a Temporal punishment,
another; and these two things are so unlike, that I wonder what like manner he
could fancy to infer one from the other.

Of the second he says, since a mere Temporal power may punish Ecclesiastical
Princes, why may not a mere Spiritual power punish Temporal persons. Truly I
expected not he should subject Ecclesiastical Princes to the punishment of mere
Temporal power in any case. To be as condescending as he, I will allow, that
mere Spiritual power may punish Temporal persons: but when he adds, and with
Temporal punishments, I must entreat him to excuse me, that addition being
violently thrust in, without any pretense which can handsomely introduce it.
Yet he does all he can, and is content, so he can but get it in, that it come
in company of the Civil Magistrate. Now, I conceive, that what the Civil
Magistrate does, is don by Civil Power. it is true, the Spiritual Magistrate may
solicit the Civil to use his Civil Power; but it is plainly the Civil Power
which is used by him, nor does the effect follow from Spiritual Power, but from
him who has it; and who has it not may solicit the Civil Magistrate, and
produce the effect as well as he. So that mere Spiritual Power does nothing at
all in that case, how much soever he does who had it. And all the desire he has
shown, and all the diligence he has used, to enable the Spiritual Power to
inflict Temporal Punishments, serves but to show that False will not be True
for any man's sake.

The 103 Section tells us, the stoutest maintainers of the Oath cannot deny,
but a Subject persecuted for Religion, and in imminent danger of persuasion may
lawfully fly into a Foreign Country, according to the Gospel, Cum persecuti vos
fuerint in una Civitate fugite in aliam. The maintainers of the Oath indeed are
not so stout, as to deny an express Command of the Gospel, nor so irrational as
to affirm, that what they see don every day for profit, and Temporal
advantages, may not be don when it is necessary to Salvation. What then? His
Spiritual directors may counsel, or enjoin him to fly. Very true, for the Law
of God counsels and enjoins this before. And consequently such a man deprives
his Prince, on a mere Spiritual account, of a natural born Subject, which
belongs to the Temporalties of the Prince. The Prince is indeed deprived of a
Subject, when that Subject, who has the warrant of Gods Law for flying, will
make use of the liberty he has. But what is this to the Spiritual Power? can
the Spiritual Power spirit him away, if he will not go? or exempt him from the
duty of a Subject, while he remains under the government of his Prince? If the
Spiritual Power can do neither of these, I see not what pretense she can have
to inflict Temporal punishments, from the liberty, and obligation a man has to
obey the Law of God. It is also true, that Catholics, persuaded that the
command of preferring God before Man, has place in their case, do venture to
transgress several Laws of the Nation. But till he show how it is to purpose;
an instance in which there is neither Spiritual, nor any Power Temporal, nor
any Punishment, seems far enough from proving that the Spiritual Power can
punish with Temporal Punishments.

The 140 Section sums up the particulars, which his Instances, he says, evince.
That Spiritual and Temporal things are not so vastly different that they cannot
Interfare. This is the first News we have heard of Interfaring; of which, if he
will have my Opinion, I conceive they are rather Spiritual and Temporal
Persons, than Things, or Powers which Interfare. God who is the Author of both
Powers never made them inconsistent. Wherefore when any Interfaring happens, I
think there is some fault, of one side or other, in the men who have the
Powers; into which the Interfaring is to be refunded, not into any opposition
in the nature of the Things. That it is not always unlawful to deprive one of a
Temporal thing, on a mere Spiritual account. This indeed has been said before,
but will not make to his purpose, though it be said over never so often.
Whether that Temporal thing can be taken away by a mere Spiritual Power, is the
question; what the account is, on which it is taken away, imports not. And the
Spiritual Power has plainly nothing to do in the case, if it be the Temporal,
which takes it away, though on a Spiritual account. That a mere Spiritual Power
may in some cases extend it self to Temporal things. This being agreed before
he began; why his Instances should be troubled about it, I cannot imagine. He
knows, and confesses, the stout maintainers of the Oath are complaisant enough
in this point. Where Temporals are abused contrary to the Law of God, They say
the Spiritual Power may direct, and enjoin them to be used according to his
Law, and punish the Transgressors with punishments proper to that power; which
is to say, that Spiritual Power does extend it self to Temporals. And sure
there needs no rack of Arguments to make them confess, what they voluntarily
avow. And consequently, that This (Viz. That Spiritual Power can in no case
possible extend it self to Temporals) is no proof, that the Pope cannot Depose.
He may please to tell them so, who say it is. The Maintainers of the Oath, who
say it is not true, are far enough from making a proof on it.

And so we are at an end of the first Objection; which I suspect will afford
his Adversaries more cause of complaint, than satisfaction, or trouble to
answer. If any one among them have made such an Argument, the rest have no
reason to complain, if he and his Argument be bafled as much as this Gentleman
pleases. But it seems not fair to obtrude upon them as the common reason of
most of these Authors, what peradventure no one of them admits, and whereof he
himself says they hold the contrary. Their Reasons and Arguments are no
secrets. They may easily be taken, and how much soever they be confuted, cannot
be disowned by the Authors. These which he makes for them to his knowledge they
do disown, and to take pains to confute them, is little better than* to consult
how he shall be punished who never committed the Fact. How well soever he can
answer it them, for making them say what they do not say, I think it conduces
little to his principal Design, the satisfaction of Catholics. For sure they
will not receive much satisfaction by seeing a great deal of time spent in
disproving what peradventure no body holds.

The next Objection, Sect. 105. is a chip of the same block. He would have it
common among his Advetsaries to infer, that because deposing Doctrine, or the
unlawfulness of the Oath, is no Article of Faith, therefore one may lawfully
take it. Such Arguments becoming only those who wear Fools Coats; he is a
little too severe to pin them on his Adversaries. That the deposing Doctrine is
no point of Faith; indeed they say, and they say also, that the Oath might be
taken; but neither they nor any Man in his Wits, ever went about to infer one
from the other.

The 106. Sect. tells us what we know already, That the defenders of deposing
Doctrine do not unanimously affirm, it is an Article of Faith. Truly it is bad
enough that they do not unanimously affirm the contrary, and that those who do
affirm it, should pretend to be Masters in Israel, and not know so much as what
their Faith is. But some endeavor to prove it from Scripture as a mere
Theological Truth; others from Prescription; others from Donation, or Agreement
betwixt Catholic Princes. I thought they would not have gone less, then the
Universal Pastor, and direct Commission from Christ. For those have been the
Pleas perpetually insisted on in this suit. Now it seems they will be content
to drive the nail that will go, and yield to any terms so they gain the point.
It is some comfort yet to perceive that they themselves think not fit to trust
the former Topics, when they fly to new ones, and such as are the most
unlikely in the World to do them service. For there is little hope in
Prescription where the point has always been contested, as this confessedly
has, and that Princes should voluntarily give, or agree away their Rights, is
yet more desperate. He says the famous constitution of the Council of Lateran
is alleged to this purpose; which is news to me. I think it is usually
alleged to exalt the deposing Doctrine into Faith: to which purpose it is
alleged by the Author of the first Treatise. If he think the back of the knife
sharper than the edge, he may use it as he pleases. But in all appearance 'twil
cut no better. That assent of the Ambassadors of Princes, which he mentions,
seems to me a strong proof, that the Princes that sent them were not concerned
in the Decree. For they were strange Ambassadors, if they assented to a Decree
prejudicial to their Masters, without Commission; and they were stranger
Princes, if they gave Commission to prejudice their own Rights. And though
these strange things could be supposed, it yet remains to be considered whether
such Commissions could validly be granted by those Princes, without the privity
and consent of their Kingdoms, they having so much interest in the business.
Wherefore his unexpected allegation is a strong inducement to persuade one,
that Sovereign Princes, as they are not expressed, so were never meant in the
Constitution.

It is not impossible, says he, Sect. 107. that Catholic Princes should make a
League to attack him among them who should turn Heretic, etc. And what then?
It is not impossible, therefore it is, is no better than It Is not Faith,
therefore it is not true, as he would make his Adversaries argue. Tell us not
what may be, but what is, if you will speak to purpose. And yet it were at
least something, if these Maybe's were a jot serviceable. But he tells us, that
though such a League were made, and the Pope should declare upon it, and a
Prince be deposed, this Prince would not be deposed in force of the Popes
Declaration, but of the Contract. Which is to say, that the Pope and the Oath
have nothing to do with his not-impossible Case. And sure he might have spent
his and our time more profitably, than to amuse us with such things which never
were, and never will be, and which though they were, all would be just as if
they were not. He concludes at last in the following Section, that the
forementioned Reason is manifestly false. Very right. And it is also
manifestly false that any body ever took it for a Reason.

And so he passes to what he calls another main Argument, and of which, he
says, the Defenders of the Oath make great account. This Section 109 he
proposes in this manner: That our Savior came not into the World to deprive
other men of their Temporal Dominions, much less Kings of their Kingdoms. For
which he cries out of the Gospel, Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo, and out of
a Hymn of the Church, Non eripit mortalia qui regna dat caelestia. Hence, says
he, they infer that the Pope has no power, for his power must be immediately
derived from Christ, whose Vicar he is. They do indeed make great account of
the Gospel, and the Church; but I do not think they make any account of this
Argument, or ever made it. They argue not from the end for which Christ came,
but from the Power he thought fit to assume himself, and leave in the World
after him to compass that end. This Power they have learnt from him, and the
Church, is not of this World, or such by which the things of this World are
taken away; and this Power they deny the Pope, because Christ denied it of
himself. Their Inference then is this; Christ had no such Power, therefore
neither has the Pope. Christ came not to take away Kingdoms, therefore neither
has the Pope cannot, or Christ could not, is an Inference of his own making,
and he may do what he will with his own, save putting it on his Adversaries.

Three things he has to say on this Subject. 1. That the Authority of Christ,
and the Apostles, did in some cases extend it self to the deprivation of
Temporals. Which, he says, has been proved. I wish he had said where. For as my
memory is bad, I remember nothing but our Savior's casting the Buyers and
Sellers out of the Temple, and the deaths of Ananias and Saphira, which were
formerly mentioned to show that Christ and his Apostles used a Temporal Power,
which, in the same place, he says, they did not use. If these passages be the
proof he means, I must, before I can answer it, expect to see which way he will
go about to contrive them into a proof. For of themselves they seem far enough
from it.

In the first case there was no deprivation of Temporals, that I perceive. The
Money and Victims were not taken away, only the profanation of a holy place was
hindered, and that miraculously. This, in the opinion of St. Hierom, being the
greatest of Christ's Miracles. In the deaths of Ananias and Saphira I see not
what share the Apostle had, more than a prophetical denouncing of a Judgment of
God ready to fall upon their Avarice. Otherwise he did not cut their throats,
or offer them any violence. Now it is past my imagination, how Miracles, and
no-deprivation, should do this Gentleman service.

Secondly, that this consequence, Christ had no such Power, therefore the Pope
has it not, is null, because since Christ's time, the Pope is become a Temporal
Prince. Very true: but this consequence is good, Christ had no such Power,
therefore the Pope has it not purely from Christ, which is all the consequence
his Adversaries make. And so much he himself grants, by acknowledging this
Temporal Sovereignty was granted by Temporal Princes, or otherwise acquired.
And for the rest, I have often declared that the Oath meddles not with the
Temporal Power either of the Pope, or any other Prince.

Thirdly, That the Scripture and Hymn cited, do not prove, that our Savior had
no Authority in some extraordinary case, to deprive Kings of their Dominions.
The Butter, it seems would not hold out to the Bread, it is so thin spread.
Otherwise it needed not to have been made one Head, that it is manifestly false,
and another, that it is not proved. Proofs are superfluous where things are
manifest. Neither did any Man, that I know, ever deny that Christ had Authority
in extraordinary, and ordinary, and all cases, to dispose of Kingdoms, and all
Nature too, as he pleased. He was God, and might do what he would with his
Creatures. But speaking of that ordinary power which he thought fit to assume
as Man, and establish in the Church after him, what ails the Scripture and Hymn
cited, that they may not pass for a proof?

A body would expect this should be shown by what follows; but for ought I
perceive, he may expect long enough, and get nothing at last. God, says this
Gentleman, has not given me this life to kill my Neighbor; yet I may sometimes
unblameable do it. The King was not made King to take away from other Princes
their Dominions: yet may, if otherwise he cannot defend his own. What then?
This is to say, one may use the power which he has, more ways than one. For who
actually kills his Neighbor, has certainly power to kill him; and who
dispossesses another Prince, power to dispossess him. But, whether Christ, in
the forementioned respects, had power to deprive Kings of their Dominions, or
no, is the question; to which nothing is said, by saying that if he had it, he
might use it several ways. What else he adds, is of the same strain, altogether
wide of the mark, and which I think the Reader will need no more than his own
eyes, to see is so.

In the 110. Sect. he objects against himself, that the cases alleged by him,
may be attributed to an extraordinary power in Christ and his Apostles, not
derived by succession to the Pope. To this he answers, that all the cases
alleged are not such, instancing in the power of depriving a Man of civil
conversation by Excommunation, and separating a Husband from his Wife, inherent
in the Pope according to his ordinary Jurisdiction. This is surprising, nor can
I imagine which way instances of ordinary power in the Pope, should prove the
instances alleged did not proceed from extraordinary power in Christ. He is to
show there intervened no extraordinary power in his instances of the buyers,
and sellers, and Ananias, and Saphira; if he will speak to the purpose. No body
denies the power of Excommunication was ordinary and derived from Christ. The
question is, of the power of deposition. And that I should think will hardly be
proved to be ordinary, by this, that the power of Excommunication is so.

He adds that the forementioned Instances do show, that though Christ's Power
upon Earth was merely Spiritual, and his Kingdom not of this World, yet he
exercised sometimes his powor over Temporals, which was the main intent for
which they were brought. Truly he needed not have put himself to the trouble of
bringing any for that intent. For that Spiritual power may be exercised over
Temporals, no body denies. But it is denied that any instance he has, or can
bring, proves that the mere Spiritual and ordinary power of Christ extended to
deprive Kings of their Kingdoms. When he has proved this by his instances, he
will indeed have done his business, and something more. For he will have proved
too, that Christ's power on Earth was not merely Spiritual, and that his Kingdom
was of this World.

Finally, he says, that it is a very extraordinary case, for Popes to depose
Kings, and even (which is much less) to Excommunicate them. And the deposing
Men say, the Pope has received that power only for extraordinary cases. As if
it were to purpose what the case is, when we are talking of the Power. If the
Power be ordinary, it is to be feared the Case may prove but too ordinary one
day. For it is no such extraordinary thing for a Prince to do, what some of the
maintainers of deposing Doctrine say, is a just cause of deposition. But
letting that pass, I would only know how this, which he says here, makes to his
purpose. He was to show that there was no extraordinary power in the instances
by him alleged. Whether the cases, in which some say the Pope may depose, be
this or that, ordinary or extraordinary, to my apprehension contributes nothing
toward showing, that the Power of Christ and his Apostles, in his instances,
was not extraordinary.

Sect. 111. He cannot but reflect upon his Adversaries. Reflections in my
opinion, are not so very necessary toward the satisfaction of peoples
Consciences, but that they might be well enough spared. Yet it is not to be
expected, his Adversaries should escape them, if they have deserved them. Let us
see how rational they are. They require, says he, that the Kings dethroning
Power be shown out of Scripture. This I have met with, and answered before. It
is not true that they absolutely require Scripture proof. They require proof
from Scripture, or some other Topic, by which Faith may be proved, from those
who will have the dethroning power Faith: and from those who will have it True,
they require such a proof as may make it appear True. And this I think is
rational. But to impose upon them, that nothing will serve their turn but
Scripture proof: to traduce them for making Scripture the only rule of Faith:
and then cry them down for Heretics: is not fair play. And I must needs think
their Conduct more rational than his Reflection.

If, says he farther, the deposing Men produce out of Scripture several
Instances to prove that Christ and his Apostles Power did extend it self
sometimes to Temporals; than they answer, that such cases were extraordinary,
and consequently ought not be brought as proofs of any such power in the Pope.
This is in short, we can make no Argument, which our ill natured Adversaries
will not make a shift to answer; a wonderful rational complaint without doubt.
Twist your Ropes stronger if you will have them hold, or if you cannot,
complain of your selves, and your rotten materials, and not of your
Adversaries. Men are stubborn now a days, and will not be held by Threads which
they can break. Yet he complains on, That though Christ had deposed never so
many Kings, the same Answer, by flying* to extraordinary power, would put them
all off. And this is just the Shepherds quarrel, who fell to cuffs whose flock
should first pass the Bridge, if there had been one, when all the while there
was none. Christ never deposed a King in his Life: what have we to do to
examine whether he had acted by an ordinary, or extraordinary power if he had?

The truth is, all this is empty common place work. That Christ was God as well
as Man, and had extraordinary and miraculous, as well as ordinary power, and
might, and did use now the one, now the other, as he pleased; this Gentleman
with all his reflections will not deny. People may be in the right, and they
may be in the wrong, when they attribute effects to either power. But that
right and wrong cannot be determined, but by descending to particulars. Since
it is manifest that Christ did use extraordinary power; it is manifest his
Adversaries may have reason to attribute an effect to extraordinary power,
unless he show in particular that it proceeded from ordinary. To talk in
generals, is to shoot at random, make a noise, and hit no body, unless by
chance. The trick of enlarging on common places is sometimes used in Rhetoric,
for Amplification; but if it stay in the may be, and come not to the Is, it is
insipid, and and hardly passable even there. When people are in search of
concerning truths, there is no place for it.

The 112. Sect. mentions for another reason of his Adversaries, that, before
the time of Gregory VII* there was no precedent of deposition. I fear this
Gentleman, whom I cannot suspect of dissembling what he thinks makes against
him, has not himself examined matters so carefully, as those whom he concludes
destitute of all rational motives, and moved to stand out only by Ignorance,
and Obstinacy. However it happens, no one of their reasons has hitherto been
urged home. This is the fairest put of any; For it is at least the Truth, but
yet it is not the whole Truth. Want of Precedents is not the only thing
alleged. They allege besides, that none of the Fathers taught deposition, and
not only so, but that many of them taught Doctrine absolutely inconsistent with
it. And they conceive that a Doctrine neither practiced nor taught, for 10
whole Ages, in which too the contrary was irreprehensibly taught, cannot be a
Doctrine of the Church. For this Topic reaches no farther. Who will
notwithstanding stand up for the Truth of it, may do so, and be heard, and do
wonders, if he can, with his Argument. In the mean time, what has this
Gentleman to say to the Reason objected?

He says, It is not solid. First, because those who ground the Deposing Power
upon Prescription or Agreement made between Princes, can easily answer, that in
the time of the Pagan Emperors there was no such Prescription or Argument made.
And we can as easily reply, that there never was any since. Till Time, and
Place, and Persons be specified; The Princes named who agreed away their
Rights; The Commissions and Instructions produced, by which their Ambassadors
were empowered to pass them away; The Nations shown, in which the Prescription
had place, and the Agreement was observed; in fine* till all particulars be
proved, which in a matter of this consequence ought be proved; I doubt the
Reason will appear more solid than the Answer. This Prescription, and Agreement
is a Fancy, which I do not remember to have met with any where but in these
Papers, and which if I had not met with there, I should hardly have believed
could have entered into a sober Head. I cannot look upon it otherwise tha^ as a
twig of a drowning man, and so I leave it with a flat denial.

Secondly, because, since Deposition was to be put in execution by the help of
some Christian Prince, there was not for a long time any Christian Prince at
all, or any one so powerful that could put it in Execution. This Answer is not
more solid than the other. For there were Christian Princes enough, and
powerful enough, betwixt Constantin and Gregory VII, if their help were so
absolutely necessary. But I see not what need there was of them, as long as
there were Christian Subjects. For why might not they have served turn in case
of necessity? Let but Subjects universally withdraw their Obedience, and their
Prince shall be Deposed, though there be never another, besides himself, in the
World. Now if the Pope could absolve them from their Allegiance, and oblige
them to withdraw their Obedience, he might have put his Deposing Power in
practice often enough, and never staid for the help of a Christian Prince. For
it is plain there were Christian Subjects enough in the World before Gregory VII.

Thirdly, because it is no good Argument, such a Power was not exercised till
such a time, therefore there was no such Power till such a time. Truly it is
not very good, and while he has the making of his Adversaries Arguments, none
ever shall, for ought I see. I suspect his Adversaries would hardly take that
Conclusion, though he should willingly give it them, and much less take pains
to settle it. For to say, There was no such Power till such a time, is almost
to say, that at, or after such a time there was, which they are far enough from
allowing. But though they would admit the conclusion, I can hardly think, as
ignorant as he makes them, they would deduce it from an Antecedent which
manifestly infers it not. The Exercise of a Power may several ways be
superseded, without prejudice to the Power. The Case may not happen, in which
it is to be exercised: or, if it do, it may be accompanied with Circumstances
which render the exercise improper, etc. But yet, I fancy, the Shop affords
good Ware, if people would choose it.

Put for the Antecedent, That such a Power was neither exercised nor taught in
the Church, before such a time, and I conceive it follows, That such a Power
was never taught by Christ. This Consequence, even bating that the contrary was
taught in the Church, whoever will deny, must, I fear, be forced to grant, that
the Church was no faithful Depositary of the Doctrine delivered to her by
Christ. For if she did preserve the sacred Depositum entire, and Deposing
Doctrine were not found in her storehouse, it is manifest that Deposing was
never put into it.

Again, Suppose his Adversaries should desire to know of this Gentleman,
whether in those times in which they neither exercised, nor taught any such
Power, he thinks they knew of any such Power? If he thinks they did, it will be
expected he should declare what Motives he has to think so, and from whence he
can gather that knowledge in the Church, but from their Actions or Words. If he
thinks they did not, it will be required he should show, how those in after
Ages came to know what was not known in the former. It Is manifest they could
not learn it, when there were no Masters who knew, and could teach it. And so
there remains nothing to be said, that I can see, but that they found it out of
themselves. Now let him take along with him, that the Power in question
pretends to be derived from Christ, and then consider how he will answer it to
Catholic Principles, to make a point pretended to be derived from Christ,
known to be derived from him, otherwise than by the continued attestation of
Ages succeeding one another.

I forbear to urge farther, because it is not my part to Argue. But when to
this is added, that Doctrine incompatible with Deposition was publicly, and
irreprehensibly, and I had almost said universally taught by the Fathers; That
the Case and Circumstances happened more than once before the time of Gregory
VII, in which, if the Church had known of any such Power entrusted with her by
Christ, she was hardly excusable for not using it; and what else the Topic
affords, to those who would sift it, I think his Adversaries have reason to set
a value upon it, and him no ill friend to his cause in touching it with
tenderness. He talks besides of Excommunicating nominatim, as if there were
mystery in it, and of calling General Councils, both which serving only to
prove, that a Power need not always be exerciz'd, I think I may leave untoucht.

The 115 Section closes up this point with what he calls another Reason; which
is, that the Authors (he impugns) cannot understand the difference between the
Direct, and the Indirect Power. I must confess I am as dull as those he speaks
of. But I have so great a curiosity to understand something of this matter,
that I will not delay my satisfaction, by staying to ask so much as, of what
this is a Reason. Though otherwise, not to understand, seems but an odd Reason
for any thing. He begins with acknowledging, that if a Prince be really
Deposed, the Effect is the same, whether he was Deposed by a Direct or Indirect
Power. Now methinks it bodes ill, that they confessedly agree in the Effect.
For that being the thing in which the Impugners are most concerned, it is to be
feared that other differences will not prove to satisfaction; Airy Quelque
chose being as little proper to satisfy the hunger of Truth, as of Food.
However let us see them, such as they are.

For, says he, certainly it is harder, more extraordinary, and more skill is
required to strike a set mark by Bricol than by a direct stroke. This For comes
in abruptly, and makes me suspect an Error in the Press. The meaning, I
suppose, is, that Indirect Deposing Power is put in execution with more
difficulty than Direct. And if he would show but so much, it were something,
though but little to the security of Princes. For if they may be Deposed as
often as difficulties may be overcome, their condition is but tottering. But
why is there more difficulty in the practice of the one, than of the other?
what more pains, or more skill, or more extraordinary cause goes to the
Indirect, than the Direct? Till he show us where this greater difficulty lies,
there appears no difference even as to the easiness; though when there does, it
will not, as I said before, be much to purpose. For difficult things are
brought to pass every day; nor can a Prince be Deposed even by the Direct
Power, without great, and not ordinarily overcome Difficulty.

But there is moreover a vast difference, and that so palpable, that sure these
Authors could not choose but perceive it. I know not why he should think those
Authors were blind, or kept their eyes shut. Some who read them I am sure think
otherwise. But let them pass, and let us see, or feel this difference, if it be
so palpable. Is there not a great difference between the Power his Majesty has
to Depose, or recall a Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and to Depose a Foreign
Prince, when he cannot otherwise defend his Subjects? And so between several
other Powers he mentions. Certainly such Powers are very different; and as
different is a Direct or Absolute Power, from an Indirect or Conditional Power
only to Depose Princes. How! Absolute and Conditional? why should they thrust
in where they have nothing to do? Pray let them stand by, till they are called.
Our business is with Direct and Indirect. And Bellarmin tells us, that Indirect
(speaking of the matter in hand, the Popes power to Depose) is per se, and
properly Spiritual, and is referred Directly to Spirituals, as the primary
Object; but Indirectly, that is, in order to Spirituals, reductively, etc.
regards Temporals, as a secondary Object, etc. And then Direct must needs be a
Power per se, and properly Temporal, and which is referred directly as to
Temporals the primary Object. It Is betwixt these two we would gladly see a
difference, and a difference (in the words of the Author from whom he borrowed
the Bricol) as to some real effect of Government, and which has influence on
Human Affairs. And he, when he comes to show us a vast and palpable difference
betwixt these two, tells us of a difference betwixt two others, and being asked
of Direct and Indirect, answers of Absolute and Conditional. They are blind
indeed who cannot see a difference betwixt Absolute and Conditional: but they
must be more than ordinarily quick-sighted, who can see the difference betwixt
them, is a difference betwixt Powers which are not they.

This is not to show, but to make a difference; and that by a method, by which
any body may find, or make a difference any where. For allow the dullest man
that is, the liberty to alter the notions of words, and I shall wonder much if
sameness it self escape a difference. And yet when all is don, it had even as
good have been let alone. By confounding Direct with Absolute, and Indirect
with Conditional he makes but a hard shift to leap out of the Frying pan into
the Fire. He may indeed avoid the importunity of being Dun'd for a difference,
but people will be importance still. For Conditional Power to Depose,
signifying Power to depose in certain conditions, or cases: We who think power
to depose in any case, prejudicial to Princes and Civil Government, shall still
be importune to know, how power to depose in some, and those peradventure many;
and often happening cases, is not prejudicial.

He tells us next, that Direct or Absolute Power is inconsistent with the
Sovereignty of Princes, but not Indirect or Conditional. With the perplexing
confusion of these Powers I am at a loss to which in particular I should direct
my Answer, and could find in my heart to turn it off, with desiring him to
prove what he says. For it is unreasonable, his bare word should carry a matter
of this importance. But yet I will tell him, why I conceive he cannot prove it
of any. A Sovereign signifies one who has no power on Earth above him, in those
things in which he is Sovereign. Who puts a power on Earth, which can take away
this Sovereigns power over those things, puts a power on Earth above him, and
makes him not-Soveraign. Call this power how you will, if it be above him, it
is inconsistent with Sovereignty. Let it be only Conditional, or such which
operates only in certain cases, still it will be power above him in these
cases, and in those cases he will not be Sovereign. Wherefore Direct and
Indirect, are equally inconsistent with Sovereignty, Absolute more, Conditional
less, but all inconsistent. And it was not amiss in him, never to go about
giving a reason for an assertion, for which no reason can be given.

He goes on saying, That a direct and absolute Power is easily, often, and many
times at the mere pleasure of him that is invested therewith, put in execution:
whereas a pure Indirect Power is seldom reduced to practice, and in some
extravagant case only. And it is true, that in other cases Direct and Absolute
Powers are practiced often enough. But speaking of the matter in hand, viz.
deposing, neither Direct nor Indirect power is often practiced. For which the
World is beholding, not to any difference betwixt the powers, but to itself
which acknowledges neither. Otherwise why may not the Indirect be practiced as
often, and as easily, and as much at pleasure as the Direct? For few of those
who make the deposing power Direct, make it so Absolute, that there needs no
cause to its exercise. And there needs but cause for the exercise of the
Indirect. And when this cause, or extravagant case happens (which by the way is
not so extravagant but that it occurs often) it may set the one a work as well,
and every jot as easily, as the other.

But Hence he deduces, That the Indirect Power is not inconsistent with the
security of Princes, nor with the Duty, and Respect due unto them. Whence pray?
from what follows I suppose. For I see nothing before, from whence he can
induce it. For certainly, says he, one Prince may be secure of another; and yet
every Prince has an Indirect Power to depose any other Sovereign, in case it be
necessary for the defense of his own Subjects. Why Indirect, I beseech you? For
I should think that every Prince, who has Justice on his side, has very Direct
Power to make, and prosecute War against another Prince, as far as he sees
needful. But letting that pass, what this Gentleman says, in other words, is
this. One Prince may be secure of another, while that other has no power to
depose him. For till it become necessary for the defense of his own Subjects,
it is supposed he cannot, or has not power to do it. But then, if the first can
depose him, the last certainly is not secure. Apply this now to the Pope, and
it is to say, that Princes are secure of the Pope while the Pope has no power to
depose them. Or if you will say, he has Power all the while, only he cannot
Exercise it till then, I see not how ^he case is altered, otherwise then
notionally, and therefore will not meddle with the subtlety. As to any real
effect, Power which cannot be exercised, either is not Power, or aequivalent.
Still it remains, that Princes are not secure, when the Pope has a Power, which
can be exercised. And this is an excellent proof of the consistence of Indirect
Power wi^h the security of Princes, which as soon as it can operate, they are
not secure.

He mentions in the last place, the security with which people walk the
streets, when yet every. Man has Indirect Power to kill any one, who unjustly
attacks him. As if there were any Indirectness in the case, when I direct my
Sword to another Man's breast, and run him directly through. It Is lawless power
this Gentleman means. For indeed we could not walk the streets securely, if we
might happen to meet a Man, who might freely kill any body in his way. But such
kind of Power, I think, was never fancied in the Pope. Those who give him most,
allow him not, with what they call Direct and Absolute Power, to depose a
Prince for nothing. But, when the something which they require, happens it may
set the Indirect Power a work as well as the Direct, nor has a Prince any more
security against the one, than the other.

Sect. 116. He undertakes to clear the Indirect Power, even from the imputation
of want of Respect to Princes. Fond Parents sometimes look more after neatness,
and manners in their Children than Health. I think it would have been time
enough to have considered how mannerly his Doctrine is, when we had been agreed
of the soundness. But he will needs tell us, That Catholic Divines (without
being charged therefore with dis-respect toward him) affirm more of the Pope
in this point, than of mere Temporal Princes. For they openly defend, that
should the Pope become an Heretic, he would, ipso facto, cease to be Pope.
Which they do not affirm of a King, since even Bellarmin and Peron are not of
opinion that a Prince can be deposed merely because he is an Heretic, unless
moreover he does endeavor to pervert his Subjects. What Catholic Divines
affirm or deny of the Pope, and whether they be respectful or disrespectful to
him, is nothing to the question of respect due to mere Temporal Princes. But
will he pass his word for the truth of what he says? will he permit us to vouch
him, if we affirm that they are not Catholic Divines who say, that a King by
Heresy ipso facto ceases to be King? Bellarmin and Peron, he says, are not of
that opinion. What then, if others be? Those others may carry it against
Bellarmin and Peron, for any thing he says to the contrary; nor can I imagine
what respect, or service Princes can expect from their Subjects, by citing
Bellarmin and Peron.

Besides, what they say is purely gratis. Allow their Arguments conclude a
Power to Depose in one Case, and they will conclude for a hundred. With
Perversion, Heresy, and with Heresy all the rest will crowd in, in spite of
all prevention. So that there is no way but to keep the Doors fast shut, and
give entrance to none. But this concerns the Security of Princes, not the
Respect due to them, of which alone I thought he would have spoken. For what
concerns that matter, I see nothing but that, since Divines are not held
disrespectful to the Pope, for saying he ceases ipso facto to be Pope by
Herefie, they are not to be held disrespectful to Princes who say less of them.
Since he speaks only of these, I forbear to observe that the Argument would
justify, for this matter of respect, those too who say more. But I cannot
understand, while this less, which is said of Princes, is enough to take their
Kingdoms sometimes from them, how the Opinion is extraordinary respectful. For
sure dispossessed Princes will not be much respected, or at least not so much as
they were before. In the close, he starts away to Swearing again; of which he
repeats a little of what has been said before, and then gathers, in the next
Section, what he would have, into a Conclusion. Which I leave to the Readers
Judgment, being glad my self to come, on any Terms, to a Conclusion of so
tedious a business.

What remains to the end of the Book is so little material, that I cannot but
grudge the small pains I mean to take about it. Sect. 118. he objects the
Example of such Catholics as have taken the Oath: a Topic on which I should
not lay much stress. For since Ill ought not be don by Example, and Good ought
to be don without it, Example seems either needless, or useless, and Good or
Bad the only pertinent Considerations. Notwithstanding, it being a Comfort to
travel these roads in the company of men of Learning and Conscience, that
Comfort is afforded by the Example. For after he has said all he can, they were
known to be learned and conscientious men who took the Oath. His Exceptions are
a great deal weaker than the Topic. All amount to this, that the Takers may
have proceeded on this, or that slight ground. Which, till he show that they
did do so, is chatting, not disputing. All is pure groundless suspicion, to
which I conceive it neither Charitable, nor Reasonable to hearken. For any body
may causelessly suspect every body. Besides, when they have themselves declared
the Motives on which they proceeded, I know not what can be more vain than to
fancy other Motives for them.

As for the Tricks which Section 121. and in those which follow, he assigns for
the Takers Motives, he may keep them if he please, for those who value or use
them. The Takers are more plain dealing people. They are persuaded it is their
Duty to take the Oath, and they are so persuaded, because they know Allegiance
is commanded by the Law of God; and see nothing in the Oath but Profession of
that Allegiance. Those subtleties of which he talks, suit not with the Candor
of their Conduct. Yet I cannot but wonder, that distinguishing betwixt Malum
per se and Malum quia Prohibitum, he makes it an imputation to proceed on
supposal of the latter, when all his business is to fright people from the
Oath, because it is forbid. Sure he has forgot his own Argument. Were there any
Malum in se in the Oath, as, he says, has been shown above, methinks I might
have found it; for I looked for it as carefully as I could. Sure I am, his
grounding the unlawfulness of the Oath upon the Prohibition, and his learned
Syllogism to prove it, might have been spared. For Ill is not to be don,
whether it be forbid by the Pope or no. Then for the fear he is in Sect. 124.
least people should think that the Direct power only is excluded by the Oath,
and the care he takes to show that the Indirect is excluded too, he may please
not to trouble himself with that matter. For we readily acknowledge that All
Deposing power is excluded by the Oath, by what name soever called, so it be
truly Authoritative Deposing Power. For of strength, or the power of Temporal
Princes, the Oath speaks not. And in that sense we understand and take the Oath.

Sect. 126. He objects, That should the Oath be understood in the Latitude
pretended, (viz. of the Power of Temporal Princes) the Protestants themselves,
who take it, would be manifest Perjurers. For they would swear in taking this
Oath, that the Pope is not Sovereign Temporal Prince of Rome. To this he
answers, Sect. 127. That all Catholics must confess, that whoever takes the
Oath of Supremacy does swear false; and consequently, that those Protestants,
who framed and took it, were manifest Perjurers. And therefore Sect. 128. it is
no wonder if Protestants, out of Indignation toward Catholics, should frame
such an Oath of Allegiance, that even they themselves could not take it without
being perjured.

It is not for me to undertake the defense of Protestants, nor do I believe
they would trust their concerns in my hands. But because this matter serves to
clear the sense of the Oath, I am obliged to say something, and must needs say
I never met with any thing more unreasonable. In places where an Heretic is as
strange a Monster as a Papist here, if such extravagancies be sometimes blurted
out, the wonder is not great. But that One who lives among them, and sees, with
all their Errors and all their Faults, (as there is no Catholic Country in
which there are not bad men too) there are many who fear God and his Judgments,
and live in hopes of Salvation, should fancy such things of them, is what I
never thought I should have found in a sober man.

I, but they are manifest Perjurers by taking the Oath of Supremacy. Pray be a
little more charitable, if you please, and content your self with thinking,
that what they swear is false. But conclude not they are therefore manifest
Perjurers. For Perjury signifies a Lie sworn, and every Falsehood is not a Lie.
What Protestants swear, they take to be True. Whatever he think of them, I
shall never believe their Conscience will suffer them to swear what they know
to be false. Nay, though they had no Conscience, mere worldly respects would
preserve them from so foul a stain. For they would become the scorn of all
their Neighbors: nor would any Treat, or Commerce with them, since none could
confide in any Agreements, how strongly soever ratified, made with people who
should solemnly swear, and by Law oblige their Subjects to swear what all knew
to be false. Wherefore this fancy of his, besides uncharitable, is as
irrational as can be. And it remains evident, that the Oath cannot be
understood in the Latitude pretended; viz. of the power of Temporal Princes:
since Protestants know, as well as He, that the Pope is, and for some Ages has
been, in possession of the Power of a Temporal Prince, and would swear what
themselves knew to be false, if they swore according to the sense which he so
groundlesly pins upon the Oath.

At last he concludes, that the example of Catholics who have taken the Oath,
as grounding themselves upon palpable mistakes and misinformations, cannot be a
prudent motive for others to take it, etc. What work might he make, who had a
mind to it, with promises, which have nothing, but may be they were mistaken
and misinformed there, and a Conclusion which infers, ( justly he says) that
actually they were mistaken and misinformed, and that palpably. But I shall
leave it untoucht to the Reader. When all is don, they were honest men who took
the Oath, and they were not Fools. By this Gentleman's favor, there were good
grounds, on which they may have proceeded if they would. And I, for my part,
think there is more Reason to believe they did proceed on good grounds, than
Justice in suspecting they did the contrary.

The next Consideration, Section 130. is concerning the Authority of the
Ancient Fathers, of which he speaks off and on, and so as to leave it doubtful
to what he would finally trust. Sometimes he would have it thought the Fathers
are for him, because Bellarmin, and those of his side, cite Councils and
Fathers, as well as Withrington, and his fellows. And there is as much reason
to believe Bellarmin as Withrington. I think so too: but till they agree on the
matter, I think there is more reason to believe neither, but take the pains to
look on the Fathers our selves, and judge as we find. I suppose they intend we
should do so, when they cite the Fathers. And I suppose too, that if he thought
the Fathers were indeed on his side, he would stand to it, and never trouble
himself with other Answers to the Objection.

But he thought it not fit to put the matter upon this Issue, and after he had
faintly insinuated thus much, proceeds to bear us in hand it is no great matter
what the Fathers thought, since the Judgment of ancient Lawyers will little
avail a man in a suit at Law, which the moderns determine against them; and that
the ancient Fathers are not to be alleged for an Opinion condemned by the
Church or Pope. This is upon the matter to confess, or at least much to fear,
that the Authority of the Fathers, such as it is, is against him. Yet till that
point be plainly agreed, I think it improper to spend time in examining how far
it is to be valued. But, I conceive, that Children, as bad as the World is,
have so much reverence to Parents, that they will be apt, say what he can, to
be led by them. I am not very well satisfied to see him equal the Condemnation
of the Church and Pope, betwixt whom, unless he be for Personal Infallibility,
methinks he should allow some difference. Besides, the Doctrine of the Oath of
Allegiance has not been condemned so much as by any Pope. The Oath indeed has
in general Terms; but no Pope, that I know, ever has, nor, I believe, ever will
condemn the not-Deposing Doctrine particularly. For, I think, he will not
allege the Dictatus Papae. But let these matters pass.

The main exception against the Fathers seems to be, that they speak not clear
enough to silence all reply. If they be against deposing Power, they are not
therefore for every part of the Oath, at least to such a degree, that we may
positively swear them all; If against deposing Power, in one sense, yet not in
another; If against Direct, not against Indirect, etc. As if it could be
expected, or were ever pretended, from the Fathers, that they should dam up
every winding of a Meander, which was not so much as sprung in their days.
While they lived, it never entered into the head of any Man, that there was such
a thing as deposing Power in the World. If they must stand by unregarded, till
they have unravelled every subtle intricacy, with which a question, woven since
their death, is perplexed, they are like to have little to do with the business.

That which is pretended from them is, that what they did teach, is
irreconcilable with what has been taught since, of deposing, which way soever
disguized. And this diverse, and in particular Caron, think they have evidently
shown. This Gentleman would make us believe he can do wonders against Caron if
he pleased. Nevertheless, the Book remains unanswered; and till those gross
mistakes, he talks of, be laid open, there is no great reason to believe Caron
would delude his Readers with Forgeries, and yet direct them where they are to
be found. For he quotes particularly enough. Not but that there may be very
well more than one mistake in him: but could this Gentleman show he were out in
the main, and did not prove as much as is necessary, I think it would have been
worth his pains to have done it. If he be so scanted of Time, he might at least
more usefully have employed on that Subject, the Time he has spent on this
Treatise. For let him say what he will, the Fathers are men of esteem in the
World, and 'twould be for his advantage if he could draw them over to his party.

Lastly, He asks if it be not the unanimous consent of the ancient Fathers,
that we are bound to afford at least an exterior obedience to the Popes express
Commands, in matters appertaining to him, if the compliance with them be not
manifestly sinful. I suspect that Question was as little thought of by the
Fathers, as Deposing. But I am confident, if it had been asked them, they would
never, with unanimous consent, allow the Pope to forbid a thing, which has a
necessary connection with what they, with unanimous consent, taught to be the
Law of God. Or if he did, that his Command is to be obeyed. But this is the old
dish, served up again with a new sauce of the Fathers, and I am now cloyed with
it.

Section 136. He begins to dispute the Probability of the Opinion which asserts
the Lawfulness of the Oath, and says first, That an express Declaration or
Prohibition of the Church or Pope, renders a thing practically improbable,
which of it self, and prescinding from the Prohibition, is probably or
certainly lawful. I conceive that more than this is true, and that such a
Prohibition renders a thing, lawful before, not only practically improbable,
but certainly unlawful. But then by Lawful is meant a thing left at liberty by
the Law of God, or not contrary to it. Such things are rend^ed unlawful, when
they are forbid by human Laws. If you mean by Lawful, what the case requires
should be meant, commanded by the Law of God, there is no Authority on Earth
which can make such a thing unlawful. And though there were, according to this
Gentleman, it has not been exercised in our case. For, he says, the Breves
which make the Oath unlawful, are Declaratory. And Declaratory Precepts, he
knows, do not make things unlawful, but only declare them to be so. But it is as
I foresaw at first it would be. The unlawfulness varies, according to occasion.
Here the Prohibition makes the Oath unlawful, and a few Paragraphs before, he
quarrels at his Adversaries for thinking the Oath Malum quia prohibitum. I hope
he will not quarrel too with me for making him say, that the Breves make the
Oath unlawful, while he only says, they make it practically improbable, that
it is lawful to take it. For I take these two be the same, since we cannot do
what is not at least probably lawful. And then practically improbable, and
unlawful as to practice is all one.

Section 137. He says, That it is not probable, nor credible, that the
maintainers of the Oath would have made (as they did) their applications to the
Pope, to the end he might give sentence of the Lawfulness thereof, and whether
it did contain any thing contrary to Faith, or not, had they not been
persuaded, that the Decision of these matters appertained to him. And that it
was ridiculous to refer themselves to the Popes judgment, if they were resolved
not to submit, even exteriourly, to his judgment, in case he should give
sentence against them, as he did. As if it were not a great deal less probable,
and less credible, and more ridiculous, they should apply themselves to the
Pope for a decision of matters, which he had decided already. For these
applications were not made, till after the Breves were come out, by which they
knew the Popes sense of things well enough without needing to importune him for
that matter. That for which they applied themselves to the Pope, was to entreat
him to hear both sides, and not rely Supplic. Withring. ad Paul. V. in his
Disp. Theolog. de Jurament^ Fidelitatis.
altogether on the Information of one: To instruct them, in pursuance of his
Pastoral care, what those many things were, which the Oath contains contrary to
Faith and Salvation, or at least to let them know One of the Many; To receive
the maintainers of the Oath into his favor, if after examination of their
Reasons, he should perceive they had incurred his displeasure without cause. In
short, to do them Justice, and either make known all, or some of the things,
for Copy of Withringtons Purgation and Supplication in his last Rejoinder to
Fitzherbert.
which he condemned their Writings, or recall his Condemnation, etc. Whether
these Petitions were reasonable, or no, I forbear to examine; but I would
entreat this Gentleman, the next time he tells us what the maintainers of the
Oath have don, to imform himself a little more exactly of matter of Fact. For
if he trust, as now he seems to have don, altogether to his Fancy, he may
easily be deceived.

The 138 Section talks of what might happen, if the Pope had given sentence for
the Maintainers against the Impugners. I, for my part, love not to talk in the
Air, of things which never happened, and perhaps never will; nor can I imagine
what this consideration serves for, but to provoke people to show, that others
make as bold with the Pope and his Declarations, when they are against them,
and with Exceptions as frivolous at least, as the Maintainers of the Oath,
which he knows very well may be don. But these are unsavory matters, with which
I will not meddle. The Maxim, In dubijs melior est Conditio Possidentis belongs
to the Law, and to the Lawyers I leave it. Only I cannot but wonder he would
make it favorable to the Pope, when the Possession of Kings is undeniably Just,
and the Possession of the Pope, he confesses, is debated, whether Just, or
Usurpt.

Section 140. He is at his Indirect Power again, a Spirit which it is strange
should so often hant us. For nothing is or can be more manifest than that, if
Indirect Power to Depose, be Power to Depose, and to Depose, be to take away
the Power of a King over his Kingdom, and who can take away the Power of a King
over his Kingdom, has Power over that King and Kingdom: Indirect Power to
Depose is absolutely inconsistent with Sovereignty. Since evidently Sovereignty
is a Power over which there is no other Power on Earth, in those things in
which the Sovereignty consists, and the Sovereignty of Kings consists in their
Power over their Kingdoms.

I see no reason to inquire farther into Probability, unless there were
occasion for it; and, thanks be to God, this matter is not left to, It may be
I, It may be No. It Is certain, that Allegiance is our Duty, and it is certain we
may profess our Duty. While we have Certainty, I think I may leave Probability
to those who need it, and pass to his 143 Consideration, of the Interest of
those who impugn the Oath. Of this he says first, That there being a prospect
of Interest on both sides, we ought not to hearken to the Exception on either.
He should have don well then, in my opinion, to have let it alone. Besides,
what he says, I conceive a Doctrine is never a whit the less true, nor an Action
the less lawful, for happening to be according to our Interest. And where there
are better motives, Charity should persuade us, that people do not proceed on
worse. For this reason I should never have started the Question: but since he
needs would, I fear it is not for nothing, that Sect. 119. he urges Interest,
as a good Exception against the Takers of the Oath, and now it comes to be
urged against the Impugners, will not suffer us to hearken to it. This unequal
dealing is a little suspicious.

In the 144 Section he would have the Interest lie on the Maintainers side,
because his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects more depend, and have more to
hope, and more to fear from him than the Pope. This is true, and yet the
Interest lies on the other side. For it is not what we may fear, and may hope,
but what we actually do fear and hope. And actually there is nothing feared by
the Impugners, nor hoped by the Maintainers. For we are both equally treated. I
take the Oath, you refuse it: I write for it, you against it: our condition is
different in nothing, save only in this, that Praemunire precisely for refusal
of the Oath, cannot be inflicted on me, which may indeed, but is not inflicted
on you. Nor does the exemption from that particular penalty much better my
condition, while notwithstanding I am not secure either of my Goods, or so much
as Life. My Estate, on other accounts, may be taken away every day; and were it
not for the Mercy we find, I could neither live with comfort, nor perhaps at
all. For if I be a Priest, or harbor a Priest, (not to particularise farther)
^^ Life is forfeited. And who refuses, or impugns the Oath, can fear no more.

I must confess, I wonder it should be thus. But so we see it is; And while it
is so, I conceive the difference of Interest is not to be determined with
respect to the Civil Government, which treats us both alike, but to our selves.
And there the Impugners carry it clearly. While no body says of them so much as
black is their Eye, they traduce us when they please, with suspicions of
Heresy, or Schism, or Disobedience, or what else their Charity suggests. When
this is gravely whispered up and down, and makes more or less impression,
according to the different temper of the hearer, though something always stick,
those who are concerned live so uneasily, that, I believe, they would gladly
redeem the vexation with a good part of their fortunes, and possibly any thing
but violence to their Conscience. Who has not tried it, may peradventure think
the importance slight: who has, will go near to judge there is no Interest more
considerable: For what is more to be valued than a comfortable life, to which
other worldly goods are only so far good, as they contribute? How* ever it be,
the Interest, such as it is, sides with the Impugners, not Maintainers; between
whom there is no difference in respect of the Government, and a great
difference in respect of themselves.

But the consideration of what is the Interest of English Subjects, considered
purely as English Subjects, I doubt is not all the case. For what if every body
be not at liberty to act according to that Interest? What if some body have a
greater Interest to act against it? It Is known that some, and most of the
Impugners, are incorporated into other Bodies. Some who consider the influence
those Bodies have on their Members, suspect those Members are not always free
to follow what would be their Interest, if they were not of those Bodies, and
apprehend that their own particular Interest is changed, and their greatest and
strongest Interest now is to stick to that of their Bodies. Because they imagine
he lives untowardly in a Body, who is at perpetual variance with it; and out of
it perhaps he could not live at all. Truly therefore the consideration of the
Interest of English Subjects, concerns only those who are not Members of other
Bodies, unless those Bodies have no Interest which clashes with the Interest of
English Subjects. And their Interest, in relation to the Civil Government, it
is to maintain the Oath, and comply with the Laws in every thing, where with a
safe Conscience they may. Because they have no Interest but the Interest of
Subjects. If any of these impugn the Oath, because they act against their
Interest, I know not what Motive they can have but Conscience. The rest may act
out of Conscience too, and I hope, and suppose they do. But if it be the
Interest of their Bodies to please the Pope, there is an Interest to impugn the
Oath, which might tempt such as would act upon Interest.

The 145 Section talks of considerable Pensions, and sums of Money given to the
Maintainers to print their Books, and countenance showed them, and Caresses
made them. Which that it has happened, ^e can, he says, make appear. Till he do,
I know not what to say to it, more than that a Smile, or Hug seem hardly to
deserve the name of Interest. 'Twere strange if they should not be smiled upon
sometimes, who are frowned upon often. And as for Pensions, and Money, it is
possible he may name a man or two who have got something, as Liberality will
not be tied up from showing it self where it is deserved, and needed. But I have
not heard so much as of a single man, who with all his Pensions, and all his
Presents, has grown rich by maintaining the Oath. If all be true which is said,
he is much mistaken in his calculation, and the Impugners of not-deposing Power
have got more, much more, than the Maintainers. But I think it best to follow
his example, and not descend to particulars till he does.

He cannot but reflect, in the next Section, on what is related of countenance
showed by Protestants to some Catholic Priests, to set them altogether by the
Ears. If he cannot help it, there is no remedy; but the Reflection might well
enough have been spared, by one who could have let it alone. For it is nothing
at all to the purpose, and revives, besides, old differences, both
unconcerning, and which 'twere more to his advantage, to keep, as they are,
buried in the grave. Protestants, he says, countenanc't some Priests, to ruin
All. What then? What are their Intentions, to the question in hand of Interest?
What they did, may be something, but people are neither richer, nor poorer, for
the Ends for which things are don. Of the two he names Watson, and Preston, all
the countenance of the one could not save him from the Gallows; the other
indeed escaped hanging, but lived, and if I mistake not, died a Prisoner. Such
countenance, I think, will not be envied, and needs not be mentioned. Excepting
Preston, none of his countenanc't Priests were concerned in the Oath.

The Countenance showed to the Seculars against the Jesuits, of which he
speaks, was in their Wisbich differences, before the Oath was made. The
Protestants would not suffer the Seculars to be run totally down: but afforded
them means to defend themselves, connived at their Appeal to Rome, and some say
furthered it, by procuring them a fair Hearing there. For when they went of
themselves, sinister Informations had so prevailed, that they were imprisoned
without hearing. But having got the protection of the French Ambassador, to
which the Protestants peradventure contributed, and by his means an equal
Trial, they carried their Cause. What harm was there in all this, which must
needs be reflected on? And who is it that must needs be blamed? Pro^^stants are
not accountable to him for their Ends. From Catholics they were hidden; and
they being only to look after the what, not the why, it was all one to them
whether Protestants acted with a good, or bad Intention. They were to thank
Protestants for their assistance in their distress, and more for their
honorable dealing in that assistance. For they took no advantage of the
distress in which they were, to grate upon their consciences, but only
suffered, or perhaps encouraged them, to say and do freely* what they had a
mind to themselves. If any thing be to be blamed, it is* the distress to which
they were driven, and those who drove them. For it is indeed hard, and something
shameful, that Catholics should by Catholics be reduced to stand in need of
Protestants. But had they not been distressed, neither had Protestants had
occasion to assist them, nor Catholics occasion of their assistance. However
it be, I know not why so unconcerning an occasion must needs be taken, to renew
the memory of these things, which serve for nothing but to urge those, who are
concerned, to fresh resentments, and engage them in fresh broils, which may
drive them a second time to need the assistance of Protestants.

Yet he cannot but note farther, That as concerning the present point (for what
has been said hitherto it seems he is aware i^ unconcerning) the Protestants
countenanc't the Priests who defended the Oath, and not those who opposed it.
Great reason he has doubtless, to take it unkindly of Protestants, that they do
not countenance those whose Principles they take to be inconsistent with Civil
Government. But hence appears, that Protestants are of opinion, that the
Defenders of the Oath are against the Church of Rome, but not the Opposers
thereof, since they join with the former, and not with the later; and sure they
would join with the Enemies of our Church, in their opinion, and not with her
Friends.

What may this mean? For notwithstanding the Appearing he talks of, he knows
very well, that Protestants are not of opinion, that the Defenders of the Oath,
are against the Church of Rome, and that they countenance the Loyal Subject
only, not the Roman Catholic, the Friend to Civil Government, not the Enemy to
our Church. For they punish the Friend of it, notwithstanding all their joining
with him. When people make Arguments against their own knowledge, I know not
what to think. But I perceive, that by making it an imputation, whether to
Protestants, or Catholics, or both, that they join together in Principles of
Loyalty, as if they joined in Religion too, the conduct of Protestants troubles
him, and he would gladly have them forbear showing any countenance to those who
are not of his way. By which means it may be hoped in time, that All will pass
over to it, and the Impugners be the only men. As indeed, could he persuade
Protestants to do as he would have them, and fright Catholics by the fear of
being made pass for Enemies of the Church, the business would be in a fair way.

His last Section is bestowed on the whether Defense or Praise of certain
Gentlemen, and concerns only themselves. I will not meddle with it, because it
were to bring their Credit into question, and I have a great aversion from
meddling with the reputation of any body without absolute necessity. On the
contrary, I wish them all manner of Good, and particularly, that to the rest of
their Praises might be added the Defense of the Oath of Allegiance, and that
when they need Apologies, they may find better than those alleged here, which
to my thinking are not very good.

And so we are come at last to his Conclusion, consisting of two parts, whereof
the First believes, that conscientious Catholics will, on perusal of what he
has written, have at least some rational Reluctance to take the Oath, which is
enough to make them forbear it, since they swear to take it Heartily, or
without Reluctance. In my opinion Reluctance is an odd fruit for him to expect
from all his pains, and a strange kind of satisfaction to offer to his Reader
at last. Reluctance agrees as ill with Satisfaction, as with Heartily. This is
upon the matter to say, I undertook to take away the scruples concerning the
Oath, but so I can but cause one, I care for no more. For Reluctance is pure
scruple; who feels it against Taking, will feel it also against Refusing the
Oath, and remain dissatisfied either way. So that the Satisfaction he promises,
resolves at last into Dissatisfaction. It does not mend the matter to call his
Reluctance, as he does, Rational. For put those two together, and they signify
Reasons which do not satisfy; since if they did, there could be no Reluctance
in proceeding according to satisfactory reason, or with satisfaction. Methinks
it needed not have been discovered so plainly, that after all the satisfactory
reasons which he has brought against the Oath, what he finally trusts to, is,
that his Reader will remain unsatisfi'd. For nothing can be plainer than that
Reluctance imports not-satisfaction in its notion. The Objection it self, which
I, for my part, thought not considerable enough to return a second time, has
been spoken to before. And there it was said, that it is not Reluctance or not
Reluctance, but Duty or not Duty which truly presses. If he can satisfy any
man that it is his Duty to refuse the Oath, that man will refuse it for a better
Reason than Reluctance. But who is satisfied that it is his Duty to take it,
must be a strange man if he find Reluctance in doing his Duty.

The second part of his Conclusion sums up the substance of the Treatise, and
concludes his Adversaries destitute of all rational Motives, and that nothing
but Ignorance or Obstinacy can move them to stand out. It Is not amiss to set a
good face on the matter* however things go. But I suspect the true quarrel he
has to his Adversaries is, that they are not ignorant enough. Were they a
little more ignorant than they are, perhaps it might be hoped they might be a
little more flexible too, and better disposed to be blindly led by those, whom,
while they continue their obstinate humor of desiring to see with their own
eyes, they cannot perceive to be clearer sighted than themselves. If he truly
thought them Ignorant, or Obstinate, it was a hopeless piece of business he
undertook, when he set himself to write for their satisfaction; as sure he
meant not to exclude them from the benefit of his labors. For satisfaction
plainly imports seeing, and who cannot see for Ignorance, or will not for
Obstinacy, are not like to be satisfied. But this matter is to be left to the
Judgment of the Reader. I will take the liberty to believe in my turn, that he
will find they would indeed be destitute of rational Motives, if they accepted
those which are offered by this Gentleman; That they have no reason to change
their Ignorance for his Knowledge; and since obstinacy signifies Adhesion
without Reason (for with it, it is Constancy) that Obstinacy does not lie at
their door.

To stay at every Particular of his Sum Total, were to weary the Reader with
the old story over again. Yet the first seems to have something new. He says,
It is certain (neither do his Adversaries deny it) that it belongs to the Pope
to decide whether this Oath be Unlawful or no. In this he reckons without his
Host. His Adversaries think the Oath so certainly Lawful, that there is no
place for Decision, since only difficult or doubtful things need Decision. They
certainly know that the Doctrine of Christ was not made a secret, and entrusted
only to one, or few men, to be by them upon occasion, and as they saw fit,
communicated to the rest; but publicly and universally preached, without
subtraction of any thing necessary, and by the public belief and practice of
those who embraced it, preserved to our times, and to be preserved to the end
of the World. They certainly know that Allegiance to Princes is part of this
Doctrine. They certainly know that as the Law of God forbids Theft, or taking
from another what is his; but what belongs to this, what to that man, is to be
determined by the several Laws of several Countries: so the Law of God commands
Allegiance to Princes; but who is, who is not Prince, depends on the different
Laws and Customs of Nations, by which some succeed, others are elected, etc.
But in general, he is always Prince, who by the Rules of his Country is Prince,
and to refuse Allegiance to that Prince, is to break the Commands of God. They
certainly know, that neither the Pope, nor any Power on Earth can authorize the
breach of a Command of God. They certainly know, that if the Pope can authorize
Subjects to refuse Allegiance to him who is Prince by the Laws of the Land, he
can authorize the breach of a Command of God. And then they certainly know that
the Pope cannot do this, or that he cannot Depose, since he whom the Pope
pretends to Depose, is certainly Prince still by the Laws of the Land. And
because they evidently see there is nothing in the Oath, but that the Pope
cannot Depose our King, nor hinder his Subjects from bearing that Allegiance
which they owe and promise, they evidently see that the Oath is Lawful, and
cannot be made Unlawful, till it become Unlawful to profess a Duty commanded by
God.

His Adversaries think there is no need, nor occasion of having recourse to
Rome for this business; nor know what they should ask when they came thither.
For should they ask, who is King of England by the Law of England? or whether
Subjects are not obliged to Allegiance by the Law of God? or whether the Pope
can make void a Law of God? They were like enough to be laughed at for their
pains. And yet there is no more to ask. For put these three together, and it is
as certain that the Pope cannot take off the obligation which English Subjects
have to bear Allegiance to their King, or in other words, cannot Depose their
King, as that he cannot make void a Command of God: and it is as certain that
it is Lawful to take the Oath, as that it is Lawful to make profession of what we
are obliged to by the Law of God.

I forbear to urge, that to put the unlawfulness of the Oath to the Popes
decision, interfares with his Argument, which makes the unlawfulness consist in
disobedience. For an unlawfulness to be decided, imports an unlawfulness in the
nature of the Thing, which is there, however it be decided, and whether it be
decided or no, whereas the unlawfulness of Disobedience cannot be without the
Command. So that had there been no Command, there had been no Unlawfulness;
neither did they do unlawfully, in that supposition, who took the Oath before
the Breves were made. But enough has been said of this subject already.

The rest of his particulars have been examined in their proper places, and
found not allowable. The most material is Obedience, which as piously as it
sounds, signifies intolerably both to Church, and State. For what would become
of the Hierarchy? what of the Civil Government? if every Command of the Popes
were to be obeyed, either without dispute, or if any happened, the Pope were
finally and obligatorily to decide it. An unlimited Obedience, such as is
discourst in this Treatise, is a speculation which seems to measure the World
by a Cloister, and imagine both governed alike; but irreconcilable with the
nature of things, and the experience of what passes daily before our eyes. For
it is not practiced, I believe, in any part of Christendom, except the Popes
own Territories, nor can be, without unsetling the Commonwealth, and
confounding the Hierarchy of the Church. To enforce it upon us, is to take
advantage of our unhappy circumstances; to bring our Nation into a subjection
which would not have been endured in Catholic times; to which who contributes,
should bethink himself how he will answer it to God and his Country; and to his
Conscience I leave it.

Only there is a particularity in the case, which it is not amiss to observe.
Who thinks Obedience will save him harmless, on which side soever the Truth
lie, will find, as great and as necessary a virtue as it is, that he cannot
practice it cleverly here, though he would never so fain. For it is not at his
choice simply to Obey, or Disobey; but he must Disobey of necessity; only he
can choose whether the Pope, or King. Obedience is manifestly due to both; yet
it is manifest it cannot be paid to both, while what one forbids, the other
commands. The security therefore which other cases afford, by submitting our
private Judgments to public Authority, is not here to be had, since we must
disobey public Authority which side soever we take. In such a straight, where
even Obedience is inevitable Disobedience, I know no remedy, but to seek our
security in the satisfaction of our consciences, and proceeding sincerely and
faithfully in pursuit of that satisfaction, choose the side which our satisfied
consciences tell us is in the right. If there be any other way, I should be
glad to learn it. But when the great Road is barred up, I cannot imagine how we
should go on our journey, but by such paths as we can either find or make.

For my part, my Conscience tells me, it is my duty in this case to disobey the
Pope, and obey the King. I see the Firmness of Civil Government, or the
Politic Body, is absolutely necessary to Mankind, and to no portion of it more
than to the Church it self. I see the Politic Body cannot be firm, if it
depend on any thing out of it self, for what is necessary to its firmness. As
often as it falls at variance with that other thing (and variance cannot be
avoided in the difference of Interests and Humors to which Mortality is
subject) it must of necessity shake and totter. I see a Head is necessary, not
only to the Firmness, but even Subsistence, of the Politic, as of all Bodies.
I see the Firmness of the whole Body depends on the Firmness of the Head, for
the settling and alteration of which, should there be any other Rules, than
those agreed on by the Body it self, by which Rules it may be Elective, or
Successive as is found most convenient, the Body would depend on something
without it self, as to what is necessary for its Firmness, and a gate be set
open to all manner of Confusion. As we see by experience, that Deposition has
seldom, perhaps never, been prosecuted in earnest, without deplorable Effects.
I see that if the Pope could Depose, the Head would depend, even as to its
Being, on something besides, and out of the Body, which being to dissolve the
frame of the Body, and deprive Mankind of the goods received from it, I see as
certainly that God has left no such Power, as that he has not, nor cannot leave
a Power inconsistent with, and destructive of the good of Mankind. Wherefore I
conceive that it is within the sphere of the Civil Power, to command the
renouncing of a pretense inconsistent with the firmness of the Civil Body, and
that I am inexcusable to God and Man, if I refuse to obey it in that particular.

Put case Deposing Power, and let it be restrained too to those cases only
which are pretended for the Pope, were claimed by somebody besides the Pope,
the King of France, for example, or Emperor. I am much mistaken if any
Englishman would endure so much as to hear of it, or doubt whether it were not
his duty, with his utmost force, the hazard of his Life and Fortunes, to oppose
the pretense, as ruinous to the safety, and inconsistent with the Sovereignty
and Independence of the English Government. What alteration does it make in the
case, that it happens to be the Pope who claims it. It is the Sword which does
the mischief, not the Scabberd in which it lies. If Deposing Power, in the
hands of a foreign Temporal Prince, be inconsistent with the Security and
Rights of a free Nation, it cannot be consistent in the Popes hands. For
Deposing Power is Deposing Power, and produces the very same effects, in whose
hands soever it be. It matters not Who is said to have it; for it is the Thing
which is insupportable, the Person is not considerable. A Temporal Prince can
do no more than Depose with it, and a Spiritual can do as much. And yet while
every body would be ready to stone him, who should say the King of France can
Depose our King, we must, forsooth, endure it should be said, and believed that
the Pope can, and hinder people from professing the contrary. As if the
mischief of Deposition, which is the ruin of Civil Government, were not the
same from both Depositions, and 'twere enough to fence the house on one side,
and think it no prejudice if it were blown down by a wind which came from
another quarter. Wherefore, if I mistake not, all the shyness we find, comes
from looking only on one side of the Meddal. Because it bears the Popes
impression, the reverence the Catholics have and ought to have for him, makes
them fear they may shock his Authority. But turn it, and without minding the
Who, which in truth imports not, look on the What; this What, I believe, would
appear so intolerable, that, were the Pope unconcerned, I suspect it would
prove no less than Treason every where.

Not that I have forgot that this Gentleman allows every Prince power to Depose
another, and makes it a Right inherent in Sovereignty. But then he understands
by it, power to make War, and use the Victory, when the Prince gets it, as he
pleases. And this is so far from the power of Deposition, understood by the
rest of the World, that though every body knows that every Prince can do this,
no body therefore thinks, or can endure to hear, that his Sovereign is a
Subject, and deposable by another Prince. Were this Proposition, The King of
France, for example, has Power, (meaning by Power, Right) to Depose the King of
Spain, or any other King of Christendom, or the World, put to any Nation, I am
much deceived if they would not all condemn it, as, not only false, but
Treasonable. It is a sign they are hard put to it, for something to say against
the Oath, who are forced to alter the notions of words, and understand by
Deposing Power what no body understands but themselves. Besides, that nothing
is, or can be so innocent, which may not by that Trick be rendered faulty, it is
as plain a justification of the Oath as may be. For to pin upon it a sense,
which every body knows it means not, and reprehend that sense, is evidently to
confess, that the sense which is meant is not reprehensible.

Whatever this Gentleman think, or would have us think to the contrary, I am
persuaded the Oath is not liable to any material exception, save only
Renouncing Deposing Power in the Pope. And I am so persuaded, because if there
were, I see not how it could escape his Wit, and Diligence, and great Desire,
even to partiality, to find it. For sure it is partiality, Sect. 31. to urge
Authority, as considerable in the Refusers of the Oath, and Sect. 118. of no
force in the Takers; To object Sect. 119. Interest against the Takers, and
Sect. 143. not to suffer the Topic to be hearkened unto, as soon as it touches
the Refusers Copyhold. Now, who, being duly required, refuses to renounce
Deposing Power in a foreign Prince, Temporal or Spiritual (for that imports
not, as neither altering any thing in the Power, nor abating any of its bad
consequences) should do well to consider what he does. It is neither better nor
worse, than as much as in him lies, to bring his Country into subjection to a
foreign Power, and that in Temporals, and the most concerning of Temporals,
that on which the Quiet, and Security, and Firmness of Civil Government
depends. However, it may be disguised, this is the naked Truth; and methinks he
must be very fantastically scrupulous who can feel so much as Reluctance in not
contributing to the subjection of his Country.

Since the whole stress of the business lies on this point, I conceive it
needless, in imitation of this Gentleman, to sum up the substance of what has
been said. The Reader, I think, will find more tediousness than satisfaction,
in hearing the same things over and over again: and peradventure I need his
pardon for those Repetitions which he will have met with before. It is a fault
which this Gentleman and I must share betwixt us. He thought fit to repeat
sometimes, and I have yielded to the temptation of his Example, I fear too
often. There is another thing also of which I think it convenient to give
warning. The Objections which I was to answer, have sometimes forced me, much
against my will, to touch a little on both the Supreme Powers. It is an
Argument from meddling with which I have a great aversion, being more disposed
to reverence, and obey, than dispute them. But as the Reader will see I could
not avoid saying something, so I must declare, I speak not of either, otherwise
than with relation to the present matter. If any Expression of mine show like
extending, or confining either, which was far enough from my thoughts, I
entreat it may be understood only of this present case, which I take to be
clear and predetermined by the Laws of God and Nature. And to be guided by
those Laws, I am sure intrenches on neither Power. Though I am not conscious I
have given any just occasion of being understood otherwise; yet because no
wariness seems enough in such matters, I thought it necessary to make this
declaration, and desire the Reader, when he meets with any thing of this
nature, to remember it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
INtroduct. page 2. lin. 15. would not. r. could not.

Answ. to the First Treatise, p. 9. l. 25. happen. r. happened. l. 30. this is.
r. thus it is. p. 20. l. 4. away. r. a way. p. 21. l. 19. a very groundless,
is, r. is a very groundless. p. 34. l. 32. Christ, uninterrupted. r. Christ, by
uninterrupted. p. 35. l. 31. will, r. well. l. 37. think. r. hint.

Answ. to the Second Treatise, p. 1. l. 9. this. r. his. p. 7. l. 8. Gentleman
innocent. Gentleman was innocent. p. 14. l. 36. imperious. r. impervious. p.
25. l. 2. and. r. or. l. 14. accepts. r. excepts. p. 26. l. 38. notion
Sovereignty. r. notion of Sovereignty. p. 49. l. 22. talk. r. task.

Answ. to the Third Treatise, p. 1. l. 19. this. r. his. p. 3. l. 4. would. r.
could. p. 4. l. 24. their. r. this. p. 13. l. 4. Besides, del., p. 22. l. 14.
del. not. p. 26. l. 4. endure. r. induce. l. 24. in circumstances. r. in those
circumstances. p. 29. l. 9. efficacious. r. inefficacious. l. 18. N. 8. N. 18.
l. 24. r. these. r. those. p. 30. l. 23. del. same. p. 31. l. 3. thinks to. r.
thinks fit to. yet. r. get. p. 38. l. 27. maintaing. r. maintaining. p. 39. l.
3. visible. r. justifiable. p. 42. l. 4. should be. r. would be. p. 45. l. 12.
tells besides. r. tells us besides. these r. those. l. 35. these. r. those. p.
46. l. 37. unlawful of. r. lawful, of. p. 77. l. 5. off. r. of. p. 82. l. 2.
his. r. this. p. 118. l. 23* persuasion. r. perversion. p. 119. l. 8. 140. r.
104.


