A TRUE NARRATIVE AND MANIFEST, Set forth by Sir Robert Walsh KNIGHT and BaTT.

Which he is ready all manner of ways to justify, as relating unto Plots,
Designs, Troubles and Insurrections, which were intended to have been set a
Foot, toward the Subversion of His Most Excellent Majesty's Laws and
Government, not by a private Information, or other, but before any Court of
Justice, Discipline; Either in the Civil, Common, or Marshal Law, and to reply,
or disanul the Printed Paper, in part of Edmund Everard an Irish man, who was
so long Prisoner in the Tower.

AND To make out why he was so detained, nothing relating to the Plot, but was
for his intent, to have Poisoned the Duke of Monmouth, as shall more Amply be
made out in this Manifest.

Printed for the Author, 1679.

AS truth is truth, those who persist therein are the Sons of God, and such as
to the contrary go, doubtlesly time will show the effects, what is due to God,
let us pay, and in what is our Anointed Kings, let us obey. I am his Subject
and renounce his Grace, if disloyalty can be laid to my face; Religion leads me
unto this tenent, so should it Mankind, the great Turk has his Law, to keep
his Subjects in due awe. Give Caesar his due that is the thing, from which
Loyalty does spring; our Sacred King is just, and above all, may give the Law
to rise or fall, in the protection of his true Subjects, a true Protestant he
is out of all doubt, any thinks other is but a Lout. Her Gracious good Majesty
is our Queen, our duty to her should be seen, and owned so as no malignant
tongue, may not lead us along, but into what is just, in Religions many
opinions there be, His Majesty strives to let us see, that the Protestant
Religion he will uphold, if we in duty do not grow cold, weowing Allegiance
unto our King, so let us pay him and his, as in true Religion we are bound
unto, let criminals their fate endure, and Innocents receive their cure. As so
what is it we Subjects can groan under, let us but consider and look of our
Neighboring Subjects, their Poverty Slavery and Misery, then look upon the now
Subjects of His Sacred Majesty's, King Charles the second, and upon the
happiness of his Reign, have we wanted either in trade or splendid subsistence,
when most of the world, have been in war and full of misery, and our Alarums in
breading confusions. O the disatisfaction of man when not contented, never
comprising when he is well, this I intend not to prevent or avoid precautions;
our Sacred King is most certainly our Head, and where can lodge his interest,
surety or safety, but in the uphold protection and preservation of his Loyal
and good subjects, for as he is the Head, the Body cannot subsist but in him,
and by him, would not the son and true heir of a Subject, think it a hard usage
and dealing, that he should last the effects of a crime, and hazard a
conviction therein, ere he where summond to appear or answer, if this may be
allowed, how much more does it regard the true interest of a Prince, (is
undeniable) why did Pilate condemn Christ, but because he stayed not to hear
the truth, O what can be said of the times, but strange his Royal Highness
being brought on the Stage, whose Name, Fame, Glory, Valor, and Gallantry,
has esclatted through Europe. He from his Minority did never refrain from the
hazard of his most Royal Person fairly to win all applause, nay his subsistence
in Foreign Countries, what has not he done, for the safety, honor and Glorious
preservation both by Sea and Land, of his Nation and His Sacred Majesty's good
Subjects. If there be any who knows not this, sure he is a sleep, (but they
are not,) who are Villains, and Impudent Rascals, that most libellously set
forth in Pamphlets, to eclipse his due and rights, such who take that liberty
what would they not be at, to emote troubles and disturbances in His Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions. Were I summond to appear before the face of Justice, or
Persons in Power, I could attest and prove, that in the year 72. and 73. how
some of His Most Excellent Majesty's Subjects, have been trampling, indeavoring
and abetting, to raise insurrections, tumults and disturbances, in His Most
Excellent Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, to the intent of subverting His
Majesty's Fundamental Laws and Government, and I am ready to prove that his
Royal Highness, was so much a stranger and unknowing in the said intermedlings,
as nothing could be more, some malignant spirits, will sensure what I hear say
to be a Paradox, to the contrary I am ready to make appear, nay more, that if
the said insurrections had proceeded or gone on, I will make out or forse it my
head, If that his Royal Highness would not be the first, that would hazard his
Life and person to oppose and suppress the said intendments, had I been
interrogated when I was in the Month of May last 79. summond to appear, as I
have at the Bar of the Honorable House of Commons, as I was before summond, nay
carried Prisoner to the Black Rod, and appeared before their Most Honorable
Committee of the House of Lords, I would not have stuck to have made mention,
of what came within my knowledge, as I am ready to do, and maintain what is
here adjoining set forth in my manifest, may I but be allowed the true liberty
of a Subject, I come not in as an Informer but to pay my Loyalty, without
pretense of Benefice or Promotion, Honor enough I have, the mark of which I
carry at my Breast for which I have His Majesty's of Blessed Memory's
Commission to carry, and wear in any color Blue, Green or Black, in the later
I do not, having never been guilty of any action of the color, for the sins of
my Youth I have, for which I ask God only pardon. As unto the honor of my
Knighthood, some when they want discourse and to derogate from me, will say
that it was Sir John Smith who was Knighted the day of Battle at Edgehill,
and so he was, who well deserved it; that Royal Prince of the Blood, his
Highness Prince Rupert, I am confident will please to remember, as unto this
what I say in my manifest, his Highness being the Person, that introduced me
unto his Majesty upon the top of Edgehill, where his Majesty did then honor
me with the title of Knighthood.

Thousands of Prints are cried up and down, but they will not as I do subscribe
their names to their Prints, to justify in Justification of their malignity,
as I do of my Loyalty.

In this my Manifest may be read, part of Sir Robert Walsh his life, carriage,
actions and sufferances. Enemies enviously and ungroundedly he has had, who
now are disbanded into the other world, yet if any particular man carry any
animosities against him, he knowing not of any ground or Subject he has given,
he is ready to satisfy any that may pretend to the contrary, leaving those who
read this, to judge the hardness of the measure he has met with, wishing he
may be the sole, or only in this Age, who may find the Effects of the like
Injustice as he has.

TO THE READER.
THis manifest of Sir Robert Walsh, does declare that he cant out of France
into England in the Year 1675. not without order; as he can make it appear
(where his Loyalty and Duty did obliege him) and also to declare, what
malignant designs and insurrections, were Ingendring in France, where he lived
most of his time these Thirty and odd years, toward the subversion of His Most
Excellent Majesty's Government, and Fundamental Laws, and he has here
continued these Four Years and above, to make out what his manifest does
thereunto relating, set forth; Remonstrating nothing but what came within his
knowledge, and what he is ready to justify, not only by Oath, but by the Laws
of any Courts of Justice, as either in the Civil, Common or Marshal Law, to the
face of any Subject, any French, Dutch, or Forreigner. And is ready to declare
if summond thereunto; how that in 72. 73. and 74, some of his Majesty's
Subjects have been intermedling therein, presuming that they may be
countenanced and upheld, by a greater person then yet has been quoted, or
named, to have fomented in the said Troubles. Sir Robert Walsh having taken his
dismiss and pass from the French Kings service, being in no trust of his, Sir
Robert by His Most Excellent Majesty's permission, and orders of some of his
chief Ministers of State, did keep Intelligence out of France, with Mr. Edward
Progers one of his Majesty's grooms of the Bedchamber; as shall be made amply
out, in this manifest. As also how this Everard and for what he was made
Prisoner in the Tower, which he charge the Lady Anne Gordon, Colonel Richard
Talbot, and his Brother, to have been the Contrivers of his Imprisonment, some
particulars in his depositions shall be proved most false, and he has no way
to Justify himself. Unless, that as he does profess himself to be very
dextrous in his weapon; that by that he may second his Oath. In all Kingdoms,
some Subjects are good, and some not.

2. What Subject in this Age, has proved more true, then the Duke of Ormond,
give him his due: some are bad, and yet I hope there may be made a true
difference, in some particulars it may be demonstrated, the marks of their
Loyalty conferred upon some Irish, as thus. There is the Lord Coorsy, who by
His Majesty's Authority, is ordered and permitted, to wear his Hat in His
Majesty's Presence; certainly it was for his Loyalty, that that honor was
conferred on him, of which this day the young Lord Coorsy may be covered before
His Majesty, which is for the acceptable service he has rendered the King and
Crown. Nor has Sir Robert Walsh the privilege of wearing His Majesty's of
Blessed Memory His Effigies, and that of his dearest Son Prince Charles, of the
one side of his Golden Medal; and the form of His Majesty's Royal Bannor of the
Reverse, but for the Acceptable Service he has rendered at the Battle of
Edgehill, in the year 43. as his Commission for wearing the same from His
Majesty of Blessed Memory now Exstant, can witness, he having received the
Dignity and Honor of Knighthood, upon the Top of Edgehill. Sir Robert being
Born in Ireland, I hope may not pass for a Crime, though some of the Follies of
his Youth may be thrown in his Dish, as the sin of the Flesh, and Gaming, yet
never was any crime of Dis-Loyalty. The first of his Name that went from
England into Ireland, for His Majesty's Service in King Edwards Time, was Sir
Patrick Walsh, who to Attack the City of Lymberick, caused a Hundred Horse and
Men, to swim over the River of Shannon, and so Surprised and Took Limberick; as
the Chronicle of England and Ireland more largely Expatiates upon. But Sir
Patrick a Horseback, swimming over the River, Bows and Arrows then being in
Use, he shot a Swan Flying, through the Breast, so as ever since the flying
Swan has been his Crest, with the Arrow through the Swans Crest, and his Arms
three Arrows Heads; which has so continued to his line and Name; as now they
do in me; which I give with an addition of the flowers De-luce, which I give by
the right of having Married an Heiress, and I being in France then in command,
having a Regiment in His Christian Majesty's Service, and His Most Excellent
Majesty then being in Paris and in the Louure; some Theses being dedicated at
the College of Cerbone, unto the Noblest and best of His Most Excellent
Majesty's Subjects. There was one Dedicated to me, by one of the Doctors in
Theology of the said College, and my Arms being set forth and displayed,
carrying the Flowers De-luce, and my name being Valois, and so was when in the
Conquest the name came out of France into England, which here is turned to
Walsh; by time, the Duke De Anguleme being De Valois, which name have been
Kings of France, some being curious, sent to the Louure, to know, if I was not
de La Maison de Valois, as some Noblemen now here may please to remember, then
heard the question propounded, so as some who grumbled that I should be named
Valois, may here be satisfied upon what ground I went by the said name, and not
as un nom de guere, some who may read this, will understand why I thus
Expatiate. Another thing Summons me to this Manifest, some whom I cannot call
better than Liars, Cowards, and Villains, who if any of them be living and read
this, they will swallow my Expression: Those I mean, who have villainously, and
most falsely invented, that I was hired by Cromwell, and the Lord of Brohill, now
Earl of Orery, to Kill my Sacred and Anointed King, as I at large set out in my
Manifest. I having been Murderously detained Prisoner in Bruxels Thirty Three
Months upon that false pretention, I renouncing the least Grace or Fav^r from
His Sacred Majesty, then as now I do, if any Dis-Loyalty could or can be laid
to my Charge.

3. If I herein be prolix, pray Noble Reader pardon it, and consider, if that
my unjust and non-parell sufferances in those days, may not plead my excuse,
and withal that in this my following Manifest, or Remonstrance, does not carry
in it a word of untruth, nor other then what I am ready to justify with my
life and fortune. unto my new, or late representments, I may add some old,
which may not be unremarkable, as one at the Battle of Edgehill, in the Year
43. It lay fully in my power to have ended then that unhappy war of England,
and for the supreme advantage of my King; you will say why I did not do it, and
I say when you read what follows, you will own me not condemnable. As thus,
at the said Battle, as those who were there do know, as the most Honorable
Valiant Lord Gerart, Edward Earl of Barkshier, and Colonel Edward Villers, Sir
Edward Brett, Sir Thomas Daniel, and others, and the Lord Warton can also
witness, that our left wing of Horse then Commanded, by the most Loyal and
Royal Earl of Brandford, Henry the Lord Wilmot, and Commissary General of the
Horse, did clearly beat, and put to flight the right wing of the Enemies,
pursuing them through the Village of Kinton, which lay in the rear of the
Enemies Army, being a long Village consisting of thatched Houses; between
which, then lay the Enemies Ammunition, some Cannon, and their Wagons; we
pursuing the Enemy further our foot in body, and the Enemies then hotly
engaged, order came to our Horse, not to pursue the Enemy further, but to
return to our Army. Our reserve of Horse unpremeditatedly coming with us in the
pursuit: In our return through Kington Village, it came into my head, that the
burning of that Village and their Ammunition, would have rendered us that days
victory: Whereupon I ordered my Horse men a foot, and to fire the Village and
their Ammunition, and just as they begun to set fire, the Honorable and Worthy
Brave Lord Carnarvan, and that Worthy Commander Sir Charles Lucas, being my
Superior Officers, commanded me from putting my resolution in Execution,
Saying, that the day was ours, as also that Ammunition and Village. Unto which
I made answer, that the Armies being then in fight, fortuna de la guere may be
Subject to change the face and State of Affairs, and that the Burning of their
Ammunition, could not but assuredly render his Majesty Supreme Victory; yet
notwithstanding I was forced to give obedience, so as by the said Ammunition,
and Cannon, we were forced to retreat and quit the Field. However I then
brought from Kington Two Pieces of their Cannon into the Kings Army; and the
Wagon of my Lord of Essex, which was so complete and made Coffin way; that in
our next two days march, our Army called it Essex his Coffin, but I would it
had been the next Wagon which was to it, covered with Spits and Fryingpans,
for there lay all the Armies money and pay; as one Pudcy who was Chamber-man
unto Essex, who writ to me for his Lords necessaries, some days after did
assure me.

4. Though many more deservedly then I, might in the day of Battle have
attained to the Dignity of the Mark of Honor, I carry at my Breast; I am
confident that there is not many, who can show as ample a Commission of his
Majesty's of Blessed Memory for the like, as I have now Extant; which in this
particular it has profited me in: Where all Noblemen and Knights are liable to
pay pole money, I having sent my badge, Title, and Commission unto those worthy
Commissioners, who were entrusted in the assessment of the Pole Money; they
then sitting at Hicks' s Hall in May 1678. They were civily pleased to
discharge me from the payment for my Dignity; and that I should pay only a
Shilling for my Pole, signed by two of the Commissioners, and sealed, whom I
yet never to my knowledge did see.

Sir Ed. Abney, and William Beversham, Commissioners the 29. May 1678. So in
paying a Shilling I was quit.
READER, pray be so justly favorable, I being forced in Honor and Loyalty to
make this publication, who am no Orator to judge, but with an indifferent eye,
according to the proofs I offer, which I will maintain, stand unto, and will
justify, by Common, Civil, or Marshal Law; unto all Persons and in all
respects, and in particular against this Everard; as in any thing, wherein he
does bring in my name, he is a person that I have known of a long time; as also
his condition, not by the qualification he assumes to himself in the title
Esquire; in his prints, as so he has subscribed his name, which I cannot
imagine on what account; and I must conclude, that he has as much right so to
name himself, as unto the contrary he has to have brought my name in question,
as to suppress the discovery of the Plots, in such as he has mentioned me in.
If he will but take example in following my Rule, as now I find it not
unnecessary to explain my quality, and Title; and that he may truly so
demonstrate his, whereby the world may censure, or give applause, which as unto
their judgments may seem fit. This Everard does set forth in his said
depositions, that in the Year 1673. being in Paris, that he did discover unto
me some designs, and disturbances, which were intended toward the prejudice of
his Most Excellent Majesty's Kingdom, which as he says, he came to the
knowledge of from the Lady Anne Gourdon; a Lady that to my remembrance I never
spoke unto, but heard of her as of a Lady of great Judgment, Birth, and
quality; whose Family has always been adorned with the endowments and
Characters of Loyalty, of which some of late have given dmonstration and
Testimony of, as that Noble Person my Lord Donbarton and his Brother; so as if
this Lady should so fall off, as to intermeddle in the like unseemly
intermedlings; certainly she has degenerated and rendered her self to be much
sensurable, and to have done it unto such a Person as this Everard; it could
render her no less than ridiculous. But malice and invention has so powerful
an influence in this Age. Quod nihil plus. I speak not as to take this Ladies
part, nor to excuse her weakness as I believe not, should she be guilty. But
when I consider that man reduced to poverty, Extremity, want, and misery, as
sometimes this Everard, subject to search after all manner of resorse for his
relief, I will not take on me to Judge of the sequel. Now as unto what he
hints, as having in the Year 1673. discovered unto one Sir Robert Walsh, I
knowing no other, may presume he darts at me. Though he mentions not my style
or quality; pardon Noble Reader, If for reasons I think it not incongruous; but
rather inducing to consequence, that it might be allowed, my precations
grounded upon Honor, may not be involved in other then in duty, and Loyalty,
unto my Anointed King; in whose service, I have had the Honor to have born very
considerable charges, and employments, since the Year 1639. in the first
Northern service, under the Command of the now Lord Stafford, having ever since
served my Kings Honorably, and Faithfully (which no body can deny) and
particularly in the Battle of Edgehill, in the Year 1643. Where fate was no
less favorable unto me, then fortunate in inabling me to render my King
acceptable service; so as that he was then graciously pleased in the Field, to
honor me with the dignity of Knighthood; then giving his Royal Commands, that
when he should arrive in Oxford, that a Medal of Gold should be made for me,
with his own Effigies, and that of His Dearest Son Prince Charles of the one
side: and to inscribe thereon, Carolus Rex, Magnae Britanniae, and Carolus
Princeps, And of the other side to insculp the form of his Royal Bannor, used
at the said Battle, and to inscribe about it, par regale mandatum Careli Regis
hoc assignatur Roberto Walsh; which his Royal Majesty of Blessed Memory gave
me accordingly, out of his own hand, and his Royal Commission for me to wear
the same, expressing in it, that it was for the most acceptable service that I
rendered at the Battle of Edge Hill, which accordingly I have ever since worn;
this was not gained by love or favor, sedex officio gladii, which no Herald can
deny, but may carry the title of right Honor, and now to be upbraided by
Everard or any such, Noble Reader, do but Judge, if it may well by me, be
digested, were I guilty of the least disloyalty, I would condemn my self, more
then any accuser could make me.

Now as to this Everard, he did about the Year 1673. in Paris, come often my
lodging, I then usually making use of him, to translate for me English into
French, as I have diverse of his translations in writing now by me, and extant,
and then sometimes gave him half a Crown; he coming from one end of Paris, the
Reu de St. Antoine to the Saubourge of St. Jermins often unto me, the
Half-Crown did invite him, not as it seemed his love to me; and one night he
did say, and at random, that great designs were intended to breed great
disturbances, in His Most Excellent Majesty's Kingdoms, without specifying upon
what particular grounds, or making mention in the least degree that he had any
intention to discover them, but much to the contrary, vowing that he was
resolved to live and die, as he ever was bred in the Roman Religion; I then did
represent unto him, that as he was a Subject of His Most Excellent Majesty's,
and a Vassal born in the Country Palatine of Tipperary, under his Grace the
Duke of Ormond, that he would do but his duty, if he knew any such immotious
intended, to give me notice whereby to advertise his Grace; which he then
promised he would, but never after did he ever come at me or near me. Some time
before, I had from a very considerable hand, that there were then ingendring in
Paris, to breed disturbances in his Majesty's Kingdoms, toward the subversion
of His Most Excellent Majesty's Laws and Government, in which some of his
Subjects were very officiously intermedling. I then did immediately address my
self unto the marquis de Molac, who was my friend, and one of his Royal
Highness the Duke of Orleans his Chief Gentleman, who did introduce me unto his
Royal Highness, unto whom I did then represent that some Ingins were set a
foot, to beget Tumults and Disturbances in His Magesties of great Britain his
Kingdoms 1672. and that I did hope his Royal Highness, would speak unto his
Christian Majesty not to give ear, or countenance unto such His Majesty's
Subjects, as may therein be made abettors, or incendiaries: Though I was
persuaded, that they were therein countenanced, as I could make Oath, his Royal
Highness did promise me, he would speak unto his Brother, and that he would
carry a diligent and careful eye thereunto, which with Justice I may say, that
his Royal Highness would not this day disown. Now in as much as that this
Everard does set forth in his depositions, that I most unfaithfully did betray
him unto the Talbots, a thing I had no ground for, he not communicating unto
me, that he had any such intention, but much to the contrary, he and, they
being much together, and upon the word of a man of Honor and the Faith of a
Christian I never did, nor was I but once all the time the Talbots were in
Paris conversant with them, nor have I had any intimacy with Colonel Talbot or
his Brother, but rather to the contrary, as some of my Kings best Subjects, I
presume may confirm. Now in as much as that Everard in his depositions makes
Oath, that he was made Prisoner in the Tower by the means of the Talbots, and
the Lady Anne-Gordon. In that Alegation he contradicts himself, for after his
enlargement from the Tower, he meets me in St. James's Park; comes to me and
cries, Sir Robert Walsh you are the man who put me into the Tower, and that
made me a great sufferer there, I then told him I was, and were it to do again
I would; and that I did wonder how such a Villain, that had so malignant
intentions toward the Duke of Monmouth could obtain his liberty; I did not
then know that he had charged the Lady Anne, or the Talbots to have been the
causers of his Imprisonment, and so we parted. Now to come to the true grounds
of his being made Prisoner in the Tower, which shall be justified and made out:
There was in the Year 1673. a Gentleman in Paris one Mr. Dalonson, a person
born unto a good estate, and now in the possession of it, he being in Paris,
very much reduced unto necessity, he came to me declaring who he was, naming
some friends of his that I well knew, and for whom I had esteem, he
demonstrating the sad condition he was in, I did take him to an Ordinary or
eating-house, where I had credit a La ren de Colombie, and did give him credit
for his Diet, and lodging in the said oberge, where he rested two or three
Months, and truly I did discharge him, as I am sure he will own.

III. About the same time, Everard and this Dalonson, coming both at a time to
my lodging, they became acquainted, and so great an intimacy in a little time
they grew into, as that they joined to lodge in a house, and in one Bed; and
they two became as hand and glove. Some time before this Everard having the
French Tongue, was introduced to his Grace the Duke of Monmouth; and in a
little time, his Grace took him into his Service, to be his Solicitor or under
Secretary; he having before been an under Clark to the Lieutenant Crimenel, or
Lieutenant Civel of Paris I well know not which, how he did demean or misdemean
himself under his Grace, I know not, but cast or cashiered from the Dukes
Service he was, and Mr. Sarchevel taken in his place. Everard hereupon grew
enraged against his Grace, and took a most Hellish resolution, which was to
Poison the Duke of Monmouth, in resolution so to do, as in apparances he came
into England. Mr. Dalonson being Everards intimate, he communicates unto Mr.
Dalonson his resolution, to Poison, and did carry Mr. Dalonson with him to buy
the Poison for the said purpose, and so did buy it. After that Dalonson had
fully penetrated into Everards mallgnity; Mr. Dalonson giving me a visit, he
tells me, that he was so happy as to meet an opportunity and occasion, which
may demonstrate unto me, that I had not obliged an ungreatful Person, as unto
the kind civility I did conferr upon him, and that he then came of purpose unto
me; to discover unto me a very great concern, by which I may obliege a very
great Person. Truly I am not of their humor who would not hear; It resting in
me after having heard, to give or take, so I asked Mr. Dalonson what he would
say, who tells me of Everards resolution toward the Duke of Monmouth, and that
he was with him when he bought the Poison, and that Everard was immediately
resolved to go for England to put his malignant Resolution in Execution,
telling me that Everard intended that an other Duke should pass the same path,
which I do not now here name; at which I was not a little startled, and
considering upon the matter, I thanked Mr. Dalonson for his good will, but told
him that the discovery of that concern, was much fitter to have been
communicated unto my Lord Locker; who was the Kings Ambassador, and then in
Paris Mr. Dalonson replies that he had a desire to own his gratitude to me,
besides paying of his duty toward the Duke of Monmouths safety; and adds, that
if so I did not give ear to him, and that any mischief should afterward
insure, that I may repent. Upon this I asked Mr. Dalonson, if he would go
before good witness, attest the putting of this information into my hands, he
said he would and more then that; I presently hereupon sent for witness, and
amongst others for young Mr. Lane my Lord Lansborow his Son, a fine civil
understanding Gentleman, who is now here in Town, and since married unto my
Lord of Northamptons Niece. Indeed Mr. Lane was very loath to meddle in the
business, I telling him in Mr. Dalonsons presence, what it was and how it was,
which Mr. Lane at this day I dare say will say was thus, Mr. Dalonson then said
that he would not only give it under his hand, and seal, but would as well go
in person into England to maintain what he said, and to confront Everard. Mr.
Dalonson did sign and seal before witness, and so I sent it for England to
those it did concern, and in particular the Duke of Monmouth, and Dalonson also
told where Everard would or was to lodge in London, and doubted not that if he
were taken as he would describe where, but that the said Poison would be found
with him; so Everard was seized upon and put into the Tower: Dalanson did come
into England, and confronted Everard before some Lords of the Council, Dalonson
was not ill looked upon for his information, but had his pass and a Viaticum to
boot. So as visibly its more probable that this put Everard into the Tower,
rather then what he says in his depositions, after Everards being confronted
by Dalonson, Everard was returned to the Tower, and Dalonson left at his
liberty. After Everards being in some close restriction, then he fain would
intimate unto Sir John Robinson, some informations as tending to Plots as
Prisoners in such straights seldom fail to foment; hoping thereby to procure
themselves some ease, yet would Everard have dashed upon Sir John for not
representing or giving his ear; but out of doubt Sir John has done the duty of
his place; Everard in his depositions gives out that this Dalonson was his man,
a most palpable untruth; I have known Everard a long time, but never in a
condition to keep a man, but he still was to be kept.

IV. My name being by Everards means introduced and traduced, it gives me scope
to follow with a larger declaration in my sufferance, my credit being thus
trampled upon, by Fobbs, Rascals, and Villains, that never dare appear to lay
any thing to my charge, face to face or before Justice, but still like a
Parator falsely informing behind my back, I am not the only thus served, O what
a pity it is, that the noble Law which was allowed of to the Lord Rea, and
David Ramsy should not again be permitted; which was to fight Lespee a la main
on a public stage, to maintain the Truth, which would give an Allaye unto
impostory and false accusations. Is it not strange as thus, that this Everard
should be so impudent as to have me summoned to the House of Commons Bar, to
make me appear, as I did there in May last 1679. and to referr unto what I
should witness, and such as he names which can witness as now I do?

V. Master speaker did ask me, if that in Paris 1673. that this Everard did not
tell me that Troubles, Plots, Designs, and Disturbances, were ingendring
toward the prejudice of England, I answered in part he did, but that as unto
particulars he did not, nor have I pressed to know, I having notice from other
manner of hands then his, that great engines were at work to prejudice His Most
Excellent Majesty toward the subversion of his Laws and Government, and
fomented to be upheld by greater persons, then yet where named or spoken off.
The speaker asked me why I had not declared them, I replied it seemed he knew
not whether I had or not: I adding that if I had not done, what my duty and
Loyalty obliged me unto; that I would disclaim in the least Grace or Favor
from the King, his most Honorable Parliaments or Laws of the Land, so as I was
ordered to withdraw, not doubting but that I should be summond to declare what
I knew in those concerns, yet I was not, but in a day or two after, was
summoned to appear before the Committee of Secrecy, I did, and they looked on
me, and I upon them, they said they had no orders concerning me, so we parted.
But had I been interrogated, sure fear nor shame should not keep me, from
declaring the names of the intermedlers.

VI. It is in part wonderful that this Everard being ever bred a Papist, and
begotly one as to my knowledge, he never would as much as read any Books of
controversy, often vowing that any Books that gave contradiction to the Roman
Tenets, were Heretically, and so not to be read, and that this man without the
concourse with any Protestant Divine should turn convert, must appear as a
great blessing of God, or that it must be upon some worldly interest; and
whereas he speaks of his reconciliation to chalonton I doubt, it is that were
he put to it, that he could not make out.

VII. I having not named the fomentors of these disturbances, being not
summoned thereunto, may not be of the same resolution in my following
descriptions. Sir Robert Walsh declares to the World, that he ever did and does
renounce the lest of Grace, or Favor from His Sacred Majesty, His most
Honorable Houses of Parliamen or Laws, if any disloyalty is or can be laid to
his charge, yet is he and has been Murdered alive, through false suggestions
and informations, which none ever did or would appear to justify against him,
one was that in the Year 1655. or 1656. that he was employed, by the then
Usurper Oliver Cronwel, and by then the Lord Brohill, now living Earl of Orery
into Flanders to Kill His Most Sacred and Anointed King, and this fomented by
Villains, Rascals, and false Informers, who never did or durst appear to lay
any thing of that nature, or of any other crime unto his charge before Justice,
though they were thereunto summoned, yet was Sir Robert made Prisoner, and his
only Son in Brucels for 33. Months, starving with cold and hunger; If such as
so aspersed Sir Robert had appeared, he had costs damage and interest against
them, which they did not? Though summoned thereunto, by Don John D' Austrea and
the Marquis of Carassenas then Governors of Flanders, Sir Roberts damage would
be more, then they could pay, though not as much as Dunkirk or Clarendon House
was sold for.

VIII. My Most Sacred King, being ever just in himself, was not willing that
Sir Robert should so suffer for want of Justice; so his Most Excellent Majesty
upon the solicitations, of many Nobles, strangers and Subjects of His Majesty,
was pleased to refer the concern unto the Judge Millitary of Flanders to
determine, who certified unto His Most Excellent Majesty, and His Catholic
Majesty, the injustice of Sir Roberts imprisonment, whereupon His Catholic
Majesty sent his orders in these words, which is still extant unto the
Governors of Flanders, being loath to find, that a Gentleman and a Person of
Honor, should so be Martyred under his Laws.

The words of the Order were; to our Governors and Treasurers in Flanders, set
Sir Robert Walsh at liberty, and pay the costs and charges of his Imprisonment
out of our Treasury. He being made Prisoner at the instigation of some of His
Majesty of Great Britains Ministers, (fine culpa) this Order coming, Sir Robert
would not accept of his liberty, but by Order of his own King, so he did
obtain, from that Most Honorable Person the Earl of Castlehaven who is now
here, to carry the said Order, unto His most Excellent Majesty with an humble
desire, that if any thing was or could be laid unto Sir Roberts charge, that it
should be put in against him. Sir Robert humbly praying His Majesty then being
in Bruxels, that any of His Majesty's Subjects English, Irish, or Scotch, may
be made his Judges, he most willingly owning that His Most Excellent Majesty's
Power and Laws, may be of as full sorce and value against him there; unto which
he was as ready and willing to submit himself, as now he is unto His Most
Sovereign Pleasure.

X. Sir Robert at the instigation of Everard, being summoned to the Bar of the
Honorable House of Commons, and having made his endeavors to have discharged
his duty as aforesaid, yet did he petition the house, and put his petition into
the hands of an Honorable member of the said House, to be presented unto Mr.
Speaker, which was so done by Sir John Coriton; who tells Sir Robert that the
Speaker read every word thereof, as is hereunto Annexed, the Copy of the said
petition, I Sir Robert would not be afraid nor ashamed, to have named the
Ingenders, and Fomentors of the Troubles and disturbances, to have been set on
Foot toward His Majesty's Dominions, had he been sammon'd thereunto; and is
not backward to say that the Honorable House of Commons, would not have been
displeased to see, and order that some of the intermedlers may be detected and
executed, no less would any good Subject of England. Pardon Noble Reader, if
that I presume to inmind that Criminals indisloyalty ought to receive Justice,
such as to them may be due; and I to be the first were I criminal therein, so I
wish the same toward all or any Subjects upon proofs, before their competent
Adjudgers or Judges, that thereby criminals may receive indign and public
Punishment, and that Innocence may be protected and upheld. This tends unto Sir
Robert Walsh sufferances, who forgot as unto one of Everards deposition to make
answer, as this, in particular he makes mention of one Mrs wingfield, alias
Hampton, and forsooth, that his man Dalison, he meaning Dalonson, who never was
his man or servant; and that he and Sir Robert Walsh did well know the said
Woman. Upon my Word and Honor, I never did know the said Woman, never saw her
directly, nor nover heard of such a Woman, nor of her name until his now naming
of her in his depositions: Pray Noble Readers, let no man think that I villifie
this Everards evidence, as for the King if he pretends to give evidence; no I
do not, nor would I intermeddle therein, or with any thing therein concerned,
but what may dash upon my own particular, which nature and the law of man
cannot but allow to be justifiable, so as this gap opened unto me by Everard,
putts me into a way of Justifying my self to the world, being forced to declare
my sufferances. Under which I have so long groned, procured me by Liars, so as
it may be said, that Liars are the sons of the Devil, and truth-tellers the
Creatures of God.

The Copy of Sir Robert Walsh his Petition unto the Honorable House of Conpnons.
Shows,
That your Petitioner having lived most of his ^ime, for these Thirty Years
past in the French Kings Territories, and since the Year 1669. particularly in
Paris, until the Year 1675. Mr. Progers of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and
heretofore a Member of this Honorable House, was by His Majesty's permission
ordered to keep a correspondence with your Petitioner, as unto what may relate
unto his Majesty's Service, and the interests of his good Subjects, as may
evidently be made to appear, unto any this Honorable House may please to
appoint, to hear the transactions and passages of the said correspondence; who
as accordingly may make report unto this Honorable House, of the validity
thereof. Your Petitioner also having given an account, in his Representments
unto some of His Majesty's Ministers of State, which had they timely given ear
unto, undoubtly must have conduced unto His Majesty's interest, and that of his
good Subjects, but the aversness of some toward the giving of a just hearing,
unto your Petitioners Representments, has Ecclipsed your Petitioner as also
his Representments; by your Petitioners care and endeavors, he did so prevail
with a person, who has been above Twenty years under secretary in France, to
the secretary of state, in the Transactions of the French concerns, yet he
became discontented and was unsatisfied, and though he was well in Money, yet
much would ambition more, so as your Petitioner prevailed with him to come
hither in 1675. and the rather that in the surintendent Monsiere de Fouketts
being great, this person was known unto His Most Excellent Majesty, and came
resolved hither to give His Majesty great Lights and intelligence, as regarding
the Transactions of France. Here your Petitioner does give a Brief which when
provised, as also Mr. Progers Letters probably this Honorable House may Judge,
that this man's Representments and Intelligence, would have proved of use, but
some ill advisers, who perhaps were here concerned, or that carried an
animosity against your Petitioner, did so deturn that his Representments could
not gain Credit, else undoubtedly he would so have furnished against the French
King, which would put water into his Wine, and have clipped his Wings, here
annexed you read what your Petitioner could draw or gather out of him, which he
Represented, where his Allegiance and duty did bind him to have done, and
withal one of Mr. Progers his Letters, your Petitioner in order thereunto comes
into England being of the first, if not the first, who gave Lights and
Intelligence of ill designs, and of a subversion intended, toward the
Government and Laws of this Kingdom, so as your Petitioner could have no
sinister intention.

Though this Edmund Everard did most pernitiously and falsely say, before this
Honorable House, that your Petitioner in Paris, did precaution the Talbots from
trusting this Everard, so as the malice of this Everard might have scandalously
abused your Petitioner, who is ready and willing to answer before this
Honorable House, disclaiming in any grace or favor, if any disloyalty could or
can be laid to his charge, your Petitioner could look for no other but revenge
from this Everard: for your Petitioner being the Person that procured Everards
Imprisonment in the Tower, an action this Honorable House would have allowed
of, did they but know upon what occasion and grounds, and how I was and am
ready to maintain my acting therein, the Anixels some Years past were showed
unto some of the members of the Honorable House, to the Lord Cavendish, Sir
John Coryton, Sir Francis Winnington, and Sir John Earnly, many others, your
Petitioner humbly prays that any of the members of this Honorable House, may
be ordered to see what your Petitioner can show, as to hear what he has to say
for the good and interests of His Majesty, and that of his good Subjects, and
that in as much as that your Petitioner came into England of purpose, for the
service and interest as aforesaid, that according to the Report made by those
Commissions, your Petitioner may find the effects of your Justice, and he shall
Pray etc.

I. My Representments were given the Ministers of State in the Year 1675. 1676.
These are what Representments attended my Petition, that Sir John Coriton put
into the hands of Master Speaker, Sir Robert in the Year 1675. brought with him
out of France, the person mentioned in his Petition, first he would have made
Evident, that there was then of His Majesty's Subjects a Caball in France, who
were very active and busy, being thereunto much encouraged by a great Person,
to engender great tumults and disturbances in His Most Excellent Majesty's
Kingdoms, who would have put into His Majesty's Hands, some Letters from their
Correspondence, writ from hence unto the said Cabal in Paris, and some of
theirs from Paris into their associates here, and would have declared how they
were introduced unto the French King, and his reception of them.

II. He would have discovered, that some persons in England were gained by the
French King, and his Ministers to be of Intelligence with them, so as that
thereby the French might have given the better conduct, unto their transactions
with the English, and that he would nominate some of those of His Majesty's
Subjects, who were so gained by the French King and Ministers.

III. He would have made it apparent, that the great Preparations that the
French King made for War, did bend to bring the States of Holland to His
Majesty's Bent, which if he did not by force of Arms compass, he was sure to do
when he pleased to afford them plauseable Terms, which-depended on His Majesty
to do when ever he pleased, and that once getting in the states of Holland, the
Confederates would soon come to terms, and that once coming so, the French
King taking Breath would soon employ His Army Elsewhere, as this man would more
particularly and probably into His Majesty's Kingdoms, declare here, had our
Ministers of state given him a hearing, but he being not heard went very
unsatisfied for Holland, where certainly he was listened unto, and gave great
lights to the states as unto the conduct of their Treaty, and accommodation
with France. This man was not wanting in money, I may say he was very well to
the contrary, but disatisfied in France, and being very knowing in the French
concerns, he would thereby increase his Fortune.

IV. I could examplifie much upon what this man could have done, but as the
times go it is more convenient not, when I could not be countenanced in gaining
credit for this-mans representments, I made them no Jewels, I communicating
them unto many, and so were they by others to the French King, and his
Ministers from hence, so as if I went now for France, my reception would be but
cold, I having I may with Justice say, that I was the first, that first gave
notice of these intended revolutions and disturbances, though I never hitherto
did name the persons who were first set on work to contribute unto the raising
these Tumults, however I am not unsatisfied, to have contributed by my
endeavors toward the payment of my duty, unto my Loyalty, and though the
returns I meet with, are leading to deturn in the future, such as may not
resolve to continue in the Principals of Loyalty which I do and ever shall,
which time may give an undeniable demonstration of. Two things I may aver; the
first is, that I have no fear; second, that I am not by any means discouraged,
in persisting to do my Kings service, as willingly as ever.

V. I have been an eyewitness, and active in the War of 1639. until 1646.
Therefore I may give now I am in, some accounts in the said War, when the said
War began, as my Fare has rendered me subject unto Imprisonments, I was then
so, and for the sins and debts of my youth Prisoner in the King Bench. His
Glorious Majesty of Blessed Memory, and her Majesty then quitted London, which
I wish they never had, I was then Her Majesty's Sworn Servant, and but in
extraordinary, I petitioned to the House of Lords, that I might be set at
liberty, as a privilege that did belong unto Her Majesty's Servants; unto
which the Lords consented, and an Order was made for my Liberty, which still
stands upon record in the House of Lords, and I then set at Liberty. It was no
mean thought or concern, that invited Edward Earl of Dorset, the Lord
Chamberlain to Her Majesty, who was a Lord in deed, to uphold the privileges
belonging to Her Majesty, he was my Advocate, nay Solliciter in my behalf and
stuck to me, not by saying, I will do you all the Service that lies in my
power, but in the performance to act what he said or promised: I was by the
Order of the House of Lords discharged from Prison, yet in the year 61
returning into England was again taken for the old Debt, and made Prisoner; but
my Lord was dead, that Noble Dorset, else assuredly there had been paid as
much duty unto her Majesty's Privileges as before, she then being here present
as was in her absence, as in my concern, but the times are changed, and we too
much a La mode, some promises much, and in effect perform little, this is no
romance and less is, what will follow: The wars beginning then; truly I was
offered by the Houses of Parliament a considerable Employment, my Tenent not
leading me that way, I quietly got away, and went for York where my King was;
and I in no ill equipage, and after kissing his hand, applied my self unto the
Lord Henry Wilmot late Earl of Rochester deceased, who left this Young Lord, I
hope to inherit the Fathers Worth and Gallantry. The Lord Wilmot was then
raising a Regiment of Horse for His Majesty, and as soon as I came to him, he
did embrace me, bidding me welcome, not Alamode but in effect, telling me I
should command his own Troop, then a raising, so I did, and in it a Hundred
Valiant brave men, most Gentlemen of Estate and Quality, who not long after did
so approve themselves, who could not choose but so to do, having such a General
in the head of them as was his Lordship, what has not he done to leave his
Name Renowned.

VI. I being made Prisoner last Parliament 1678. all my Papers and Writings
seized upon, and I carried Prisoner to the Black Rod by Sir Edward Cartred, who
was very civil toward me, and carried before the Most Honorable Committee of
Lords, and yet the Noble Lord that moved against me in Parliament, appeared no
more to have made party against me, believing not as I presume what was told
him.

VII. Now give me leave Noble Readers, to give a relation of the first War
betwixt King and Parliament, which truly is uncontradictable, for it shall
carry nothing in it but a real Character of truth. At the Battle of Edgehill,
His Highness Prince Rupert that ever Renowned Person, Commanded the right Wing
of our Horse, who put the Enemies into an absolute rout, and the Earl of
Brandford the left, unto whose share it came to charge the Enemies right Wing,
His Highness putting into a derout their left Wing, the Battle begun upon a
Sunday Morning, and the Lord Digby commanded our reserve of Horse, who gave
more Testimony of his Courage then of conduct, but that never to be buried in
oblivion the deceased Earl of Rochester, this Lord being then Commissary
General of the Horse, and in the head of our left Wing of Horse, and in the
head of his one Troop, Commanded by Sir Robert Walsh, and his Lordships Troop
consisting of at least a Hundred Brave and Noble Gentlemen, as Sir John Dongan,
Sir Brien O Neale, Sir Henry Talbot, sir walter Dongan, son to sir John, brave
Irish Gentlemen, whose most Valiant deportment gave great Testimony of their
Loyalty, as I may say did the whole Troop and his Regiment, as may witness that
first service they were in, his Royal Majesty of Blessed Memory, and His now
sacred Majesty, and his Royal Highness. were not only there as witness of their
Loyal subjects, but also hazardly and dangerously engaged in the said Battle,
to their great and ever Renowned Everlasting Glory. The Lord wilmos having
charged the right Wing of the Enemy, did beat them and put them so in disorder,
as that they run confusedly into Kington, which was in the Rear of their Army,
the reserve of our Horse unpremeditatedly follow the pursuit of the Enemy,
which gave the advantage unto the reserve of the Enemies Horse, as also unto
their main Body, that they fell upon that Renowned Most Honorable Earl of Linzy
our General, and so furiously, as that His Majesty's own Regiment was
disordered, and diverse of their standards taken at the same time, where the
Noble Lord Gerard Commanding Three Regiments of Foot made a most manly stand,
our Horse being for the most part mingled in the Enemies, and his Highness
Prince Ruperts Horse pursuing, fortune proved so favorable unto sir Robert
walsh, as to keep the Lord Wilmots Troop in a Body unscattered, so as he
encountered some of the Horse that charged the Earl of Linzy in their return,
this being in the rear of the Enemies Army toward the Town of Kington, sir
Robert with his Troop charged them and recovered the standards, which they took
from the Kings Regiment, and also took some of the Enemies, and sir Robert
being then in the rear of the Enemies Army in the Town of Kington, did sieze
upon Two Pieces of Cannon and a Wagon, brought them into the rear of His
Majesty's Army. His Glorious Majesty having lain that night upon the top of
Edgehill, his Army not then drawn from the Enemies, sir Robert toward Morning
brought the Two Pieces of Cannon and Wagon to the bottom of Edgehill, and
brought the standard of His Majesty's, and some of the Enemies unto His
Highness Prince Rupert, who immediately did present them, and sir Robert unto
His Majesty, who was graciously pleased, there to Knight sir Robert for the
acceptable service he then did render.

VIII. Some time after, his then Royal Highness the Prince, going to command in
the West of England, Sir Robert was by His Majesty Ordered into the West, to
serve under his Royal Highness Bannor, which he did, as Lieutenant Colonel of
Sir George Vaughans Regiment of Horse, who was a brave Worthy Noble Gentleman,
and then Sheriff of wiltshire, leaving all to Sir Robert, Conduct: But he still
came when any fight was. The Devises being then surrounded by Sir william
waller, and all our Army in the Devises, which were so short of Ammunition and
Match, that they were forced to make use of all the Bed-cords which were in the
Town for Match. His Royal Highness Prince Maurica, that Renowned Prince, the
Famous and Honorable the Lord Marquess of Herford, and the Honorable Lord
Hopson were in the Devises, and Sir william waller surrounded them with his
Horse, Foot, and Cannon, having summoned the Trained-Bands of those parts to
come and join with him, which they then did, the Prince and Lords called then
in the Devises a Council of War, and concluded that their best expedient was to
dispatch an Officer, that would hazard to get to Oxford, to give His Majesty
advice how it stood with them in the Devises, whereupon did depend very highly
His Majesty's Interest: They pitched upon Sir Robert walsh to go, and sent for
him, he being with his Regiment upon the Out-guards, and asked him if that he
would adventure; he made answer that he would most willingly and readily; that
he regarded no hazard, or danger, so as that he could but compass their Relief:
upon which he was immediately ordered to go, which he did, being not ill
Horsed, and went all alone, carrying not a servant or mart with him. He was in
his way closely pursued by the Enemies Scouts, and part of their Out-guards;
but it pleased God he got safe, and the next morning got to His Majesty, who
their was in Oxford. His Majesty did then immediately Order that Relief should
presently be sent, and calling upon the Lord wilmot, did order, without delay,
that he should get ready the Horse, and march unto the Relief of the Devises,
which was as soon as possibly observed; so as the Lord wilmot, the Lord Biron,
Colonel Thomas weston now Earl of Newport, and diverse of the best Commanders
did march, and hardly drew Bit in their march to the Devises, which was no
easy or short march: And when arrived at the Devises, the Horse were weary,
and I may say by she same; and straggling, that we missed Five hundred Horse of
our Number coming from Oxford. My Lord wilmot from Malborough did dispatch Sir
Robert walsh, all alone toward the devices with Order to return as soon as
possible, to bring him notice how matters went, Sir Robert did go and return
quickly to my Lord, whose conduct and Carriage was so evidently, made apparent
to the world, as nothing could be more; my Lords; (as thus) His Highness Prince
Maurite, and she Lord Hopton did march with the Horse out of the devices,
intending to have joined to the Lord wilmot, and in part did, his Highness
Horse were not many, and when he came to join, they advised in Council, what
was to be done, waller and his Army, Horse, cannon and Foot and Train-Bands
very numerous, and our Horse were wearied being not above Fifteen Hundred or
Two Thousand, at the Council the Lord wilmot gave his opinion as thus; that his
Horse were all wearied, and by consequence an impossibility that they could
make any retreat, from the Enemy without being utterly cut off. The Enemies
Army being not half a Mile from them, and therefore if the Prince and the Lord
Hopton pleased to consent, that he would advance with a Thousand Horse, to the
top of a Hill which lay betwixt them, and the Enemy, presuming that the Enemy
would so undervalue them, as that they would march up the Hill to devour them.
My Lord wilmot adding, that if they so would come as they did, perhaps it might
ruin them, which did, the Princes and Lord Hopton did conclude with the Lord
wilmots sense, whereupon of the Horse which were in the devices, my Lord wilmot
of the Western Horse only takes Sir John Digby, a most Noble and brave Officer,
and Sir Robert Walsh, with their Troops to join with him, my Lord sends
Lieutenant Colonel Paul Smith, who was unto his Lordships Regiment with a
Hundred Horse as a forlorn hope, and marches himself in the right Wing of a
party of his Horse, and adjoyns Sir John Digby, and Sir Robert Walsh with their
Troops, to be at the head of his second Division of his left Wing, and his
Highness Prince Maurice marched with the Body of the Horse, it fell out so as
my Lord Wilmet did Prognosticate Sir William Waller Orders Sir Arthur
Haselrick, to march up such a Hill to devour the Enemy, which he undertook in
the Head of a Thousand Horse first, which were Armed Cap a pe, and afterward
named Lobsters. Haselrick sending his forlorn hope, which was encountered by
ours, he marched in the head of two divisions, and the rest of his Horse
marching in Regiments up the Hill after one another, which were between Four
and Five Thousand Horse. The Lord Wilmot first received their charge, then
charges them, beats Haselrick, and Haselrick disorders the rest of his Horse,
the Prince and Lord Hopton advance, so as the Enemies Horse was clean forced to
run away. Then the Prince and Lord Wilmot consults to charge their Foot and
Cannon, which they put in Execution and did Rout them, took all their Cannon,
Foot and Colors, e're that our Foot in the devices could get out to join with
us, this was so clear and fair a Victory, as that it gained his Majesty the
whole West of England, which then was of the last consequence; The Lord Wilmot
then calls Sir Robert Walsh, and says that as he went to His Majesty to bring
this relief, he should immediately post to His Majesty and give him the account,
which Sir Robert did, His Majesty being not at Oxford, but gone to meet Her
Majesty then come out of Holland, which he met at Edgehill where Sir Robert
addressed, and His Majesty and Her Majesty in the Coach, Sir Robert gave His
Majesty the account, which was most mightily acceptable, and his Highness
Prince Rupert and my Lord of St. Albans then by when Sir Robert gave the
ccount, some time after the Lord Hopton retiring, his Brigade of Horse was
given Sir Robert Walsh, who was also made Commissary General in the West of
Horse and Foot, a charge of great trust and Honor, as also of the Counties of
Southampton, Sussex, Surry and Kent, which then were associated Counties, his
Commissions are now extant, which were so ample and spatiously large, as that
the General the Lord Goring was not over pleased, yet signed the Commissions.
His Majesty of Blessed Memory, gives Sir Robert Walsh Commission, to go for
Ireland in the Year 1644. to raise Horse and Foot, and in His Majesty's one
hand, writes to my Lord of Ormond then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to give Sir
Robert all assistance and countenance, which that most ever Loyal untainted and
unchangeable Subject, did most willingly countenance Sir Robert in, giving all
furtherance, so as Sir Robert did bring upon his own cost and charge, without
having a Penny from His Majesty bring then out of Ireland a Hundred Horse, which
he recruted his Regiment with and His Glorious Majesty being then in Cornewal
to oppose Essex, who then was General. Listedel Castle was surrounded by Essex,
his forces, Essex Lying of Listedell side, and His Majesty's Army of the other
side of a small River. Sir James Smith that Worthy Noble brave Gentleman, being
sent with his Regiment of Horse For the Guard of the said Castle, did there
most Worthy service and received cruel Wounds: Sir Robert Walsh and his Brigade
of Horse were then commanded unto Sir James his relief, whose fate was so
prosperous, in the beating of Essex his Foot from the Hedges about the said
Castle, and in view of His Majesty and Army, that His Majesty after Sir Roberts
coming off, sent for him, and took him by the hand, his Royal Highness then
next His Majesty, saying, he hoped to live to gratify Sir Robert, not only for
the service he then saw him render, but as well for his Loyalty and former
services.

IX. Some time after the Lord Wilmots Imprisonment and confinement into Exeter,
by the false reports of some, Sir Robert having been a Creature of the Lord
Wilmots and his Officer, who most perfectly well knew his Loyalty, faithfulness
and Gallantry, and particularly in His Majesty's service, seeing the Lord
Wilmots unjust disgrace, being siezed upon in the head of the Army by Mr.
Thomas Elliot; upon which Sir Robert was surrendering and giving up his
Employment and charge; His Majesty taking notice of which, the Army then
marching, His Majesty stopped, and so did the Army, and called upon Sir Robert,
saying, he heard that he was upon quitting his service, Sir Robert humbly
replied, that he hoped that His Majesty would permit him so to do, seeing that
the Lord Wilmot, whose Loyalty and service he ever was a witness of, was so
used, and truly Sir Robert did plainly so declare his unwillingness to serve
any longer; His Majesty was pleased to give Sir Robert great encouragement to
continue, and in an extraordinary manner, and told him that he should not quit,
and that he commanded him not to quit, unto which there rested no answer, (but
obedience) the world ignores not with what ungrounded falsehood the Lord Wilmot
was then made Prisoner, and how he came off with honor. Then His Majesty came
into Wiltshiere, and came to Andover where Sir William Wallers Army lay near,
Waller sent a considerable party of Horse to observe His Majesty's Army,
whereupon the Lord George Goring, that Worthy Commander then General of his
Royal Highness's Army, immediately did order to draw out a considerable party
of Horse, and did Order Sir Robert Walsh to command the said Party, with order
to pursue Sir William Waller, which readily was put in Execution, where many
Volunteers readily went along, and particularly then Mr. Henry Bennet now Earl
of Arlington, with so much of good will and resolution as none could
demonstrate more Sir Robert then desiring him not to go, he being a person who
was then in the Pen charge and Employment, and so readily kind and careful to
serve and obliege us Officers, so as that if any thing should happen him, it
would infinitely redown to our loss and sufferance, but he would not be
deturned, of bearing a share in that occasion, which was so visibly near of
being put in Execution; in the pursuance of which, he then from the Enemy did
receive that Noble scar of honor, which to this day he bears the mark of in
his Face, which as soon as Sir Robert saw, he immediately did Order Colonel
Garret Moor, now here in Town to conduct him off; and to have him to the
Chyrurgion to be dressed, which accordingly was done.

X. Some time after the Army was given up in Corn-wall, and Most Officers to
shift for themselves, of which number Sir Robert being one, he betook himself
for Ireland, and there treated with the French Kings Envoy, by name Monsieur de
la Monnerie, for Sir Robert to carry a Regiment of Foot into the French Kings
service, who capitulated with Sir Robert in the Name of His Christian Majesty:
that Sir Robert upon his Landing in France should receive Thirty Crowns, for
each man, and should have a pension of Two Thousand Crowns yearly, besides
other great and large promises in words, which never were performed. Sir Robert
upon his one costs and charge, hired Two great Holland Ships, into which he
Shipped Nine Hundred and Fifty men, from the County of Galway, and the City of
Galway, and sailing for France was met by some Parliament Ships, who took one
of Sir Roberts Ships, laden with men, which they sent into the islands, but
fortune favoring the Ship that Sir Robert was in, did escape, and he got into
Haver de Grace with Six Hundred men, he served the French King as Colonel of
the said men, which Agent la Monnerie did not perform his capitulation in a
Tittle; so as Sir Robert grew unsatisfied in His Majesty's Service, and loosing
his Sons who were Captains in Sir Roberts said Regiment: then the Prince of
Conde taking Arms against his King, Sir Robert took his dismiss and pass from
the King, and gave himself into the service of the Prince of Conde. After some
time Sir Robert was taken Prisoner and put into the Bastill, where he was
forced to lie for Three Years, notwithstanding that, the Prince of Conde did
use all endeavors to have Sir Robert exchanged, and did offer one Monsieur
Bougy, for to Exchange Sir Robert; who was Lieutenant General in his Christian
Majesty's Army, which was denied, it being given out, that Sir Robert did
intend to kill Cardinal Mazarine, the ordinary common pretext, that when envy
or malice contrives against man; then usually its babbled and given out, that
he was to kill the Prince or Minister of State.

XI. If gratitude were in practice, sure Cardinal Mazarine would not have
forgot his parts as hereunto; for when the Cardinal er'e he made his escape
from Paris, was in very great apprehension and fear of his life by the Duke of
Orleans, the Prince of Conde Monsieur de Beauford and their party. Sir Robert
having not then quit the Kings Service nor the court party, the Cardinal being
in great apprehension of loosing his life, though he lodged in the Pallas
Royal, though Sir Robert was then very unsatisfied; he did remass and gather a
Hundred Gentlemen, every one with his Sword and Pistol, and had them into the
Inns and Cabaretts in the Reu de bones enfents and near the Pallas Royal, and
the Cardinal then being in hourly fear of being attacked in the Pallas. Sir
Robert writ unto his Eminence, that he lay with a hundred Cavaliers, in Case
that any attempt were made upon his Eminence: That Sir Robert was ready to be
in the head of the said Gentlemen to hazard his Life and theirs in the defense
of his Eminence; who then sent Monsieur de Navaile, now Duke de Navaile, to see
if what Sir Robert writ was so; Monsieur de Navaile did to the Cardinal return,
and certified him, that what Sir Robert writ to him was so. Upon which the
Cardinal, the Alarm being past, Two or Three days after, Sir Robert being in
the Palsas Royal, the Cardinal took him in his Arms, saying he was a true
Person of Honor; and that if ever it came in his way, that he never would
forget Sir Roberts generosity and kindness. But the Cardinal made it his
profession, not to be a slave to his word; yet did Sir Robert when he lay in
the Bastile, put him in mind of his promise, which proved one a la mode de
France: But at long run, Mr. Walter Montegue a Person of Credit and Renown with
the French Court, and Cardinal, was so honorable as to employ himself for Sir
Roberts liberty, which in fine he obtained; but upon such Terms as have rarely
been imposed upon any Officer or Soldier of Fortune, which was thus; that Sir
Robert Walsh should put in Two Colonels of the Kings Army, and Two good
Burgesses of Paris, who should become bound in Fifty thousand Crowns. That Sir
Robert Walsh should not serve nor carry Arms against His Christian Majesty in
Five years following, which was given by Sir Robert and performed. The Lord of
Muskery, and Sir James Dillon were the Two Colonels who became bound, Monsieur
de Couteure, and Monsieur de la Cost the Burgesses, and so Sir Robert was set
at liberty. Could it be thought that so great a King would so far consider a
single Officer, or Soldier of Fortune: I cannot but speak well of the Prince of
Conde; for when he first received me into his Protection, seeing my Dismiss and
Pass from His Christian Majesty, he did afford me his Favor and Countenance,
and when first I came to him, the Armies then lying about Villneufe St. George
a little above Shallonton, the Kings Army lying of one side the River,
Commanded by Mounsieur de Turene, and the Princes Army of Chalonton side. The
Prince bid me take Five hundred Horse and beat about Paris, to find some Booty
which may put me into an Equipage; and that he would but moderately hear any
Complaint that should come against me. I did take the said Horse which were all
Germans; and truly I did more study to render the Prince service than to
plunder, if it came not in my way; and so I marched all Night, and past by the
Rear of the Kings Army, and took some Officers and Prisoners; my intent being
to go to Pontoise to beat up some of the Kings Army who lay there; and in my
return the next Morning I drew up to refresh betwixt St. Germans and St. Clow a
top of a Hill: While I was there, I saw a Coach with six Horses going for
Paris, I sent a Party of my Germains to bring me that Coach, thinking to make a
prize thereof; but who should be in it but the best of men; so the Germains
were greedy, and would understand no French or English; but one of his Lords,
that noble Lord Garret as I take it; comes up to the party, and found me in the
head of them, he asked me who commanded the party; I answered, he was not far
off; then he tells me who was in the Coach, and made Prisoner. Upon which I
immediately drew my Party toward the Coach, and waited on it to Paris. I am
glad it was no other than his Subject that commanded the Party. The Prince of
Conde then being not very affectionate; the Duke of Lorrain being slackened and
I well satisfied in all occasions, which may demonstrate the paying of my duty
and Loyalty; yet I was not a little satisfied, it was I that Commanded that
Party, which prevented further trouble to the said Coach. The Prince of Conde
not being ignorant how the Duke of Lorrain was gained to have proved slow in
the Prince of Conde's then pretensions, without which the French King might
have run the hazard etc.

XII. Fortune was to me so favorable, that at the Battle of St. Antoine; I
gained so much the heart of the Citizens of Paris, as that ever after, they
hardly would stir out of the Gates of Paris, without having me in the head of
them, as I was at St. Dennis, when Monsieur de Semegrine Commanding the Queens
Guards, charged the Parisiens and was repulsed, these troubles of Paris being
appeased by the Prince of Condes quitting Paris, wherein he quit his chiefest
hold: I betook my self for Flanders, and made my address unto his Grace the
Duke of Ormond, who most kindly not degenerating from his ever wonted greatness
and goodness, did afford me his Countenance; so as I by His Majesty's Order and
Consent, did venture for England, in hopes to prove useful for His Majesty's
Rights and Interests. Upon which his Grace the Duke of Ormond writ unto me all
in his own hand; that I should come for England; and to advance my Interest and
endeavors as in all I could for His Majesty's service; assuring me; that if I
could attain to be permitted by the Usurper to be in London; if so I should
sometimes transgress in my expressions, toward His Majesty, that it should not
in the future prejudice my Loyalty: Upon this I came for London, and did use
all my endeavors to come in Thurloes favor, then Secretary to the Usurper; I
did so obtain from Thurloe, that he gave me his word, I should have the liberty
of the Town. I giving him my word that I would not act any thing against the
State, during my being under their Government: So for a Months time I had
access unto Thurloe; but soon after; though I had Thurloe's word for my
liberty, that word was not performed, but I was surprised, I lodging at one
Elkings House, who was a Packer and an Anabaptist, then dwelling in Mark-lune;
and I presume lives their still. I was by Four Files of Musketeers surprised in
my Bed, Captain William Bower then lying with me, and hurried away into the
Tower, where I lay Four Months close Prisoner, none being admitted to me but my
Keeper; soon after was that most Noble and ever Renowned Earl of Orery, the
Earl of Tennet, the Earl of Norwich the Earl of Clanricarde, and many Persons
of quality brought in Prisoners, and as I take it the only then made close
Prisoners, was that Famous never to be buried in Oblivion, the Duke of
Albemarle and I close Prisoner, some who then attended His Sacred Majesty did
assuredly give the Usurper notice, that I was in England as employed by my
King, some time after, the liberty of the Tower being granted me, upon the
intercession of Baxters Wife to her Husband. The Lord Brohil now Earl of Orery,
who is a Person of that Honor, as will own what I here say, through the
Intercession of his Honorable Sister, then in London the Countess of Barimore,
his Lordship did interpose for my liberty: Whereupon his Lordship came to the
Tower, and gave me a visit, his words as near as I can remember were these: Sir
Robert had you served the State, and his Highness the Protector as you did the
King, what post or posture do you imagine you might now be in, I seemingly did
aver what his Lordship said, why then said my Lord can you now resolve to serve
his Highness, if you can I will tell you how, and you shall have your Liberty
and Money to boot, unto which I did seem to listen, then said my Lord, you see
what a deal of Noblemen and Gentlemen lie here Prisoners, and I will tell you
upon what account. It is upon an intelligence we have received, that his
Highness Person is to be attempted, and we fain would sink into a discovery
therein, and here be Two Persons of Quality now Prisoners, who make offer of
their attempt, as unto what I intend to propose unto you, each of them now
offering, that they will find out to make the discovery, but as I am inclined
to get you your liberty, I have propounded to his Highness that you may be the
Person employed, and he has consented thereunto If so you can make it appear
that you may be received at Bridges? and that upon your word and honor unto me,
that you will really employ your endeavors to make the discovery, how his
Highness Person was designed to be attempted, and you shall have your liberty,
and some Money for your Voyage. I replied that I first would address unto the
Duke of Ormond, to see if I could make my peace, and be admitted to Court,
which my Lord Brohill gave me some time to do. And then I writ to the same
tenure unto his Grace of Ormond, and an other Letter in private, unto his Grace
of what past and was to pass, and upon what terms I was to obtain my liberty,
I showing the return to the Lord Brohil, he procured me my liberty, and Fifty
or Sixty pound, upon my word I know not which; upon the Faith of a Christian
this was all, that past betwixt my Lord of Orery and me, or from any other of
the Usurpers Creatures; I never having spoke to the Usurper, only once he
Landing at White-Hall-staires, out of a Pair of Oars coming from Lambert, and
I entering into a Pair of Oars, he asked who I was and called me to him, asked
me whether the Island near Waterford was not mine, I said of right it was, but
that his Highness did take it from me and gave it Colonel Vernon, who had been
his quarter Master General, so parted, and I never saw him since. As unto my
Lord of Orery, I would take the Sacrament that he never spoke one word or
syllable unto me of my King in the whole course of our transaction, but as
heretofore I have mentioned, soon after I Landed in Flanders and went to Gant,
there was casually his Grace of Ormond, unto whom I presently made my address,
but he being busy with the Lord Culpepper, that time was not convenient; the
next day I waited on his Grace, to give him the account of my Transactions in
England, representing all I could gather, only that I would make it out, how
some near His Majesty did betray his Secrets, unto the Usurper and his
Creatures, I offering upon pain of the loss of my Head to give evident proofs
of the said intelligence. My Lord said, he would give his Majesty who was then
in Bruges an account of what I said; some Two days after the Earl of
Clancarthy, came to Gant from his Grace of Ormond, and brought me this message,
that it was His Majesty's Pleasure, that I should appear before His Majesty and
Council to answer what was to be laid to my charge, unto which I replied, that
I was ready to appear, and the next day I being going into the Boat from Gant
to Bruges, in obedience as I conceived to His Majesty's Pleasure, I received an
other message from his Grace, that I should immediately leave the low Countries,
by His Majesty's positive Order so expressed; or that I should run the hazard
of what should follow. I answered I would in all things obey my Kings Command,
though I well know that this Order was procured, by those who knew themselves
guilty, how I would have accused them of their keeping intelligence with the
Usurper. Next day from Gant I took my journey toward Germany, to get unto his
Highness Prince Rupert, and took the City of Bruxels in my way, which was not
much out of it, the Lord Digby and Sir Edward Hyde were then hand and glove,
the world has seen what they have been afterward. Truly I was at a defiance
with either, so as the true liberty of the Subject had been allowed me, for I
neither would creep, or cringe to either: the Lord Digby was then immediately by
Sir Edward Hyde dispatched, and Employed after me to Bruxels, it being well
known that I had entrance so with the Prince of Conde, who was then in Bruxels,
so as to bring me to his Catholic Majesty's State Ministers, and Governors
there; where I would have declared of the Treacheries, done to my King; but the
Lord Digby and Sir Edward Hydes joining their heads, so contrived, that the
Governors Don John d' Austrea and Marquis de Carassenas, were informed and
possessed, that I was then employed by the Usurper, and Earl of Orery to Kill
my King, so the next Morning after my arrival in Bruxels, my Son and Servant
and I ready to take Horse, the grand Provo Casteneda, comes with Forty at his
heels, showing me no Order, conveyes my Son and I to the Prison called Urinate,
and Orders that none should come to speak unto us, which so continued for six
Months, we starving with hunger and cold, after which I found means to address
unty my Sacred King, who was so indulgently just, that he did authorize the
Judge Millitary of Flanders to examine the proceedings, as also to determine
who so did as heretofore is declared, which comprises his Catholic Majesty's
Orders, to pay the charges of my imprisonment who had nothing to do with it,
and to put me at liberty, that was made Prisoner sine culpa: To give an allay
unto my unjust sufferances, this Order did not a little solace me.

XIII. One thing Noble Reader, I being admitted Pen and Ink, be pleased to
observe; I did ever renounce my Kings Grace or Favor, should I be made guilty
of Disloyalty; I would neither beg, desire, or take my Kings Pardon, I never
having sinned against him, his Interests, or Service; nor would I my Gods
pardon, had I no more sinned against him, than I have against my King. I then
in my time of Imprisonment, did represent unto my King that a time would come
that the Lord Digby, and Sir Edward Hyde would be Cashiered, and Banished from
his Court; and that I who was then Tyrannically made Prisoner by their false
Informations and Suggestions, should be at liberty to stand at His Majesty's
Elboe, to see them both in disgrace, and so I have, and seen them; and seeing I
could not then there possess the true liberty due to a Subject, I would I may
here, which hitherto I have not. I may implore, nay press for it, Conscientia
mill Testes; I fear no man upon Earth, my Duty to my King not comprised, nor
no Laws either: My King I am sure cannot in himself err. So good I am sure he
is, I cannot nor will I say that Ministers of State, who govern the consciences
of Kings, and who are to answer may not err: This I intend unto the Ministers
of Foreign Kings.

XIV. You must know Noble Reader, that the City of Bruxels have it by their
Charter, that no stranger made Prisoner there, is to be detained above Twenty
four hours without he be Examined, his Charge given in against him, and the
Cause of his Imprisonment Examined and that besides, if any make a Prisoner
upon Informations, that they should secure to make a party against the
Prisoner; who by their Law in Bruxels are to allow the Prisoner a daily
subsistence, according to the Quality of the Prisoner, else the Prisoner not to
be detained. Upon which it was ordered that I, and my Son, and servant, by His
Most Excellent Majesty's then Council, that Twenty pence a day should be given
us. The World may judge whether that was a proportion fit, and I having lain
Thirty three months Prisoner. Sir Steven Fox being ordered to pay that
considerable allowance; yet for the time of Thirty three months I never
received but Ten pound or about the Value. I do not say this to upbraid Sir
Steven, for I believe him an honest Gentleman; but that money was then not over
plenty in his Treasury. I being forced to address unto the King of Spain, he
set me at liberty, and paid my Costs as here aforesaid, else I had there
perished.

XV. I appeal unto my Most Gracious King for Justice, who never did deny it
unto any of his Subjects, and I shall ever, as now I do submit unto his will
and pleasure. I having ever served under his Royal Banner, and never had a hand
in the War of Ireland; I had many of my Kings Letters and Orders, to have my
Estate not to be made liable unto new Quit Rents, and years Value, which never
had or took the least effects: I have paid ever since His Majesty's happy
Restoration for yearly Quit Rents, at Two pence Farthing an Acre out of my
Estate, an Hundred and Three pound odd money yearly, as is certified under the
Auditor Generals hand out of Ireland; which amounts not far in the time from
being 1900 l. and the years full Value for one year of my Estate, besides
Morgages upon my Estate of above a Thousand pound; which I engaged for to bring
Horse and Foot for His Majesty's Service out of Ireland. I must attribute it to
my fate, or the want of meeting with Justice, whereas I am put in Balance with
such as were in Actual Arms, and Service against their Majesty. Nay, a great
many of such have had their Estates struck out of charge, and their Quit rents
taken off, yet mine still stand charged. His Majesty's Orders and Letters, as
to my particular meeting with no obedience: If loosers may speak, sure none can
blame me for this my Declaration, having never had the least compensation, gift
or grant, nor other usage than what herein is specified; only One hundred
pound from the Privy Purse. To this my Vindication or Declaration I set my
hand, and am ready to justify it; by either Common, Civil, or Military Law, or
place of Justice against any man, that dare to my face contradict what I here
have said; let him be Subject, French, Dutch, or any Forreigner. If any be
here, he may find the lie given him, and he will swallow it, or give his
appearance to charge me.

XVI. Sir Robert Walsh has been detained Three years Prisoner to the French
King in the Bastil, and never any thing laid to his Charge; but for being of
the Prince of Conde's party. Then he came for England, and was made Prisoner in
the Tower by the Usurper, never any thing laid to his Charge. Then was made
Prisoner in Bruxels by his Kings Ministers, and never any thing laid to his
Charge before Justice. These Imprisonments were all, you I hope will say hard;
here lately made Prisoner to the Black Rod, and nothing laid to his Charge in
79. Is this the liberty of the Subject?

XVII. One thing more I may with Justice add, I being in Paris about the year
72. or 73. or thereabouts I had by the means of Monsieur de Mumbas my ancient
Acquaintance, who was Brother in Law unto miniere de Grote, alias Grotius then
Ambassador for the States of Holland, an entrance unto this Ambassador, so as
that I did discover that the French King, and the States of Holland, were then
upon the point, and but very little difference between them of coming unto an
agreement or Joining, His Grace the Duke of Buckingham, then having His
Majesty's Ear, I immediately writ to him, that it would be of very great
consequence to prevent the said junction, by an agreement with the States;
which as I take did very soon issue, France and Holland, having until of late
continued in a War, my Letter unto his Grace I addressed to Sir John Hanmer, who
did tell me since my coming into England, that such a Letter he did receive
from me, and that he believe it did still lie by him, I writ at the same time
to Mr. Progers to the same purpose, who I am sure did show or produce it unto
His Majesty, unto whom I sent Miniere Grotius his Letter to me in Mr. Montegue
his Packet, as may be judged by the effects of the accommodation then we made
with the States; and Mr. Edward Progers his Letter was to have me come in
Person into England.

XIX. The Year of His Majesty's happy restoration, the Marquis de Gudance was
commissioned by the French King to come unto His Most Excellent Majesty to
London, upon some pretext from the French King, Dunkerk then in the Lord
Lockerts time of Government there, and newly rendered unto His Most Excellent
Majesty: the Marquis de Gudance, made it his work to gain some Officers of the
Garrison of Dunkerk, to surprise the Garrison for the French King, and had
contracted a Treaty with them for that purpose, Sir Robert Walsh then living at
Berge St. Venox a League from Dunkerk, this Marquis came to Berge often, he and
Sir Robert came acquainted, so as the Marquis did communicate his design upon
Dunkerk to Sir Robert, sounding him that knew the humor of the English, how he
might so confide in the English, and to prevent and be precautioned that he may
not be trapanned, he offering Sir Robert an assurance of Five Thousand Pistols,
If he would contribute by his advice and conduct. Which Sir Robert did consent
to yield unto, reserving to himself to do his duty to his King; immediately
hereupon, he humbly addressed a Letter to His Majesty, whereupon His Sacred
Majesty immediately writ to Sir Robert in his own hand, immediately to repair
unto him with all speed and privacy. Unto which Sir Robert quit his House,
dwelling and interest in Berge St. Venox, and immediately came to His Majesty.
The now Earl of Arlington being then Secretary of State, His Majesty did Order
Sir Robert to make his address unto him, and to communicate all particulars
unto him, which Sir Robert so doing, my Lord gave thereunto a hearing
answerable, and did receive Sir Robert with expressions very kind, of the sense
he had of Sir Roberts service in that particular, and that he would in Order
thereunto give His Majesty an account; unfortunately soon after Sir Robert was
arrested for a Hundred Pound, and committed Prisoner to the Fleet, under
Chancellor Hide his Verge, who made such use of his power; carrying an
animosity against Sir Robert, that notwithstanding Sir Robert had put in good
security, he could not obtain a day writ, Sir Jeremy Witchcot being so much the
Chancellors Creature, until the Lord Arlington who was not so, writ to the
Warden of the Fleet Sir Jeremy Witchcot, that it was His Majesty's pleasure,
Sir Robert should have a day writ, which Letter Sir Robert this day has, and
upon which his day writ was had; and His Majesty a little time after did order
Sir Robert a Hundred Pound, which was brought him to the Fleet, and the Lord
Arlington did also make Sir Robert a present of Twenty Ginneys: unto my Lord
Arlington, the Lord Chancellor (a thing not unknown) was then no great friend;
yet the Lord Arlingtons Loyalty, Fidelity, and duty to his King, has so
preserved him as to be now what he has deserved, and is, and so may all taste
as they deserve, if not in this world, in the next they must and will, but as
unto, Dunkerk such order was then given, as that the French Kings design took
not, until it was sold him, which I wish had never been: Sir Robert could say
more but hates to trample upon the dead. This was after Sir Roberts being kept
Prisoner in Bruxels, by the instigation of Chancellor Hyde, and the instrument
he made use of to have Sir Robert then made Prisoner, was one that ingratiated
himself with Don John D' Austrea, who was then Governor of Planders, which was
thus, he was an English man and a degree above a Knight, he being some years
servant unto an English Dame, who had had Three or Four Children, he had her
received by Don John for a Maid, and so past her for unto him, and some Five or
Six Hundred Pistols was gained that way, this was not ill mis-trip, as some
that read this well may remember the passage herein, such qualified persons,
not constant in Religion, Protestant or Papist, were the instruments of Sir
Robert Walsh his Murderous Imprisonment, for Three and Thirty Months in
Bruxels, but they never would come as witnesses in this age do, whereby to
maintain their accusations either by right or wrong, those who Treacherously
under hand to gain them a little favor, were accusors of Sir Robert Walsh, he
could name Six of them since gone unto a worse World then this, and few or none
now living.

XX. Now Noble Reader, this Everard dashing at me, that I should be a subduer
of Discoveries, Animosities, Plots, or Designs, intended toward the subversion
of His Majesty's Laws and Government, to prove how far from truth that is, I
appeal to what my King knows, as coming from me in 1675. 76. 77. 78. And what
I did communicate unto the now Honorable Lord Chancellor, the Lord Arlington
and other Ministers in or about the said years, whose names I now mention not,
as unwilling to add calamity unto calamity. I doubt some whom I would have
named in 1675. were I thereunto summoned, are no small Incendiaries or
Promotors in Disturbances. Unto which had I been heard in time, prevention
might have been given, the World cannot but Judge, and so shall, that my
interest is soly in my Sovereigns, and that of his good Subjects, I having
staid here these Four years, in expectance that my Representments should be
verified and so allowed as now they are; and to my great cost I have my Labor
for my pains, sed Tempus edax rerum.

XXI. Now Noble Reader, pardon if I give you the trouble of reading, how the
Sieur Grimings was put to death, who was the Receiver General of Planders, a
Person then most High and Eminent, would make Princes attend their having
Audience, whiles he stayed to see his Daughters dance the Tricote; his Palace
in Bruxels, not much inferior to Dunkerk or Clarendon house: the reason why I
trouble you your Reading his end, is that I was nominated in bringing him to
it, he then being a Prisoner, in the same which I was in at Bruxels, in the
year 1658. that I was the Person, who next his demeanor of not being capable to
account, for the vast sums he had received, of his Catholic Majesty's
Subjects, that I was the person who hindered his escape, a thing I then did own
and now do, which none living can or will blame me for, when they here the
truth, as now here they may of the passages thereof, yet did Sir Edward Hide
and his then Creatures, falsely asperse me, in giving out that I betrayed this
Grimings, the passages were as thus, which is the Real truth of it: this
Grimings being a close Prisoner in a ground Chamber, seeing me walk in the
Yard, had the opportunity of asking me why I was there a Prisoner. I replied I
did not know, and withal, that I renounced the Grace or Favor of all Kings or
Law, for any thing that could be laid to my charge, upon which he said that the
Kings grace was not to be denied, and I replied not for them who had use
thereof; of which number I did conclude he was one, and so we parted; his Lady
was then confined to his Palace in Bruxels, and a Hundred Soldiers there every
Night in Guard, she hearing that I was a person of Honor and a Prisoner, which
lay in the Chamber above her Husband, she disguises herself and comes to my
Chamber, throws herself at my feet, which very much did surprise me, I made her
rise, which she was unwilling unto, she declaring that I was the only person
that could relieve and serve her, I said that sure she was mistaken, and that
she took me for some other more considerable Person, that might be a Prisoner,
she cried no, that it was I, and none other else that could serve her, and
declares unto me how, which was as thus, my Husband lies here under your
Chamber, and I can no way contrive a Communication with him, but by your means,
help and assistance. If that you may please so far to be charitably oblieging
toward me, as to contrive his having a Billet from me, for all his Wealth
lies placed in convents and particular places, that without my having an
account from him, how and where, I and my Children are ruined for ever. Unto
which I replied, that I lay Prisoner I knew not for what, and for to render my
self to be guilty of Intermedling in a concern of that Nature, could show no
Judgment or wisdom in me, but she so did importune me that she prevailed, and I
did contrive to convey her Billets to her Husband, and his to her, by which
means she found where and how all his Wealth lay, upon which she got his
Wealth, which were Millions of Livers, and so conveyed herself into Holland,
out of the King of Spains Dominions, without making me the least return, but by
diverse of her Letters which are yet extant, Grimings being put upon the Rack,
confessed contrary to his Vows and promises, that it was by my means that he
corresponded with his Wife, upon which his Catholic Majesty sent Commissioners
to examine me, who indeed were very civil; I did not deny my guilt, saying why
did his Catholic Majesty detain me Prisoner, and upon what grounds: The
Commissioners said I had given great Treasures out of His Majesty's Cophers,
soon after Grimings his Wife run away, I writ to Grimings, that I had served
him in the trust his Wife imposed in me, and desired him that he would give his
Billet to his son; for me to receive a Hundred Pistols, I being in distress,
which he would not do, then I writ to him, that he should never expect any
favor at my hand, but to the contrary as he found by the loss of his Head. For
he being just ready to have made his escape, I did discover it to Don John d'
Austrea, and to the Marquis de Carassenas, being in no trust for Grimings, for
he intended to have got into the French quarters, and being a person that was
in so considerable an Employment and posture as he was, he would have disserved
his Catholic Majesty to a greater value, then the vast sums of his Majesty's
that he could not account for, which I prevented and made His Catholic Majesty
amends for what I formerly did for Grimings, who as unto his being ungrateful,
did meet the due return, by my means in which he did not entrust me. I long
since made a Declaration of this matter, the Year of His Majesty's happy
restoration, who was graciously pleased to write unto me to come into England,
all in his own hand, which I did obey: I then declared that the Chancellor of
Poland, for his ill managing the Kings Conscience, being chief Minister, was
degraded. So was Monsieur Fouquet in France, that was Treasurer: Then how
Grimings in Flanders lost his head, and I did foresee that the next bordering
Minister should take example in being precautioned, I addressing the same to
the Lord Clarendon, who had me Prisoner under his Lash in the Fleet, I then
showed my Declaration unto that Honorable Person the Lord of Anglisey, Lord
Privy Seal not to conceal the sight thereof from my Lord Clarendon, which my
Lord of Anglisey did not, so as in a little time after my Lord Clarendon,
proved not so vehement in the Execution of his Power. Falix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum.

XXII. This is to declare the Ingratitude of the said Grimings, and what his
not Provoyance did bring him unto; he having been put on the Torture did
confess, that it was by my means, that his Wife did beget a Correspondence with
him, to attain unto his wealth as she has; I being Examined therein by His
Catholic Majesty's Commissaries, who showed me; how Grimings did own it was I
who gave the Expedient; and they carrying themselves very civilly toward me, I
did own, that I was, if it was a Guilt. The helper of giving the Access of her
Billets to her Husband, and his unto her; saying; why did His Catholic Majesty
keep me a Prisoner without producing my Charge; what had he to say against me,
I renounced either Grace or Favor from him, I demanded Justice; withal
declaring that the Tyranny of my so being kept Prisoner, might have given me
scope, to have served all Prisoners, as supposing that they might be as
guiltless as I was. This Grimings after his being put to the Torture, designs
to endeavor making his escape, and begets an understanding with one that was
then there Prisoner, to help him unto Files, to file the Iron Bars of his
Grate, which he did, I having disserved His Catholic Majesty and willing to
repair the same, I lodging above Grimings, in the Night I could hear him file
the Iron Bars, and taking notice thereof, I did walking in the Yard discover
the Bar of Iron he worked upon, and was very near effecting his design, I lying
under His Catholic? Majesty's displeasure, I did calculate, that if I made a
Discovery of his intent to have escaped, it might have allayed the former
disobligement I had laid on His Catholic Majesty, and I being not satisfied
with the ingratitude of Grimings and his Wife; so as I writ unto Don John d'
Austrea, how Grimings was to have made his escape. Whereupon he sent to find
the Utiles, and to search every corner of his Chamber, but found no visibility
of what I had represented, his having sent Commissaries and a Glasier to sound
the Bars, but they could discover no appearance; so Don John sent to me, that I
represented what was not true. I returned to Don John, that those he sent were
Fools; and gave them direction how to discover the truth of what I represented,
and so they did. You must know, that when they came with a Key to sound the
Iron Bars, the Bars did sound all sound, which in a cut Bar is not ordinary.
But Grimings, as soon as he filed, did fill the Oraphis with wax and
Tobacco-powder, and until I gave the Key of this discovery, they could not find
it out; but having found it he was soon Executed, and all the favor he could
obtain, who was once the Great Grimings, was to have his head chopped off in the
said Prison, and was not carried to the Common Place of Execution.

XXIII. I must a little here display in part, what return or reward I met with,
for my coming out of France, with my Representments of the disturbances, which
were intended toward the deturnment of His Sacred Majesty's Laws and
Government. I having been for many Years out of England, upon my arrival here
in London, I was introduced to the Widow of a Hamborow Merchant, by Name E. I.
now O. B. she was represented for a very Rich Widow; we falling into
acquaintance, she very much did importune me to lodge at her House, which I did
for a week, not without representing unto her, that it would bring her name
under a sensure, seeing that there was no concern as unto any thing of Marriage
in the point, for instead of every Thousand Pounds, said she had, that proved
but Four or Five great Sons, and a Daughter, which I finding, as also
discovering her Gossoping and Frolicking qualities, I withdrew in my visits and
frequency with her, whereupon she grew most outragiously inveterate against me,
and whereas her Letr ers of which I have a Bushel, declare that my sheets
should be well aired, and I should be kept warm, and that all her all was mine,
and in her Letters declaring, that she pretended not to have the honor of
marrying a person of my quality, only coveting my Company. The cruel usage of
hers as follows; may admit my thus expatiating, though a thing contrary, to
my nature toward that venerable Sex: It Is true, that in the time of our
converse, I did tell her that there would be great disturbances and troubles
engendered in England, I soon after refraining giving her my visits, she grew
passionately desperate, run out one night out of her House into the street,
stopped my Coach, she half naked; and swore if I came not in and stay all night,
that she would kill herself. I not staying as being unwilling thereunto, she a
little after went in her passion to my Lord Chief Justice, and made a most
pernicious and false affidavit, that I robbed her of a Hundred Pounds worth of
Plate, and that I had pawnd it, unto Mr. John wallis a Goldsmiths in Lombard
street, at the sign of the Angel, who can witness that I never did pawn any
Plate unto him, a Person in whose hands, I entrusted many of mine to be kept,
above Two Hundred Pounds, and that if any was pawnd that she pawnd it herself,
and afterward she came to Mr. Wallis, and fain would have retrieved her Plate,
saying that she only sent it him to be Varnished, this Mr. wallis a man of fame
and credit will aver; but as unto her false Affidavid, she procured the Lord
Chief Justice his Warrant, and in comes the Tipstaff one Otway, with Twenty or
Thirty at his heels, and I scarce out of my bed, they hurried me half naked
through the street, and carried me to New prison, where I lay Two or Three
hours, sent for Bail, who entered into rcognisance of Two Thousand Pounds, for
my appearance as Hick's-Hall, which I did, and the Gentlemen sitting there
cancelled my recognisance, and took Two ordinary men bound in Twenty Pounds a
peace, and I in Forty to appear at Guild Hall the following Sessions, to answer
to the Indictment against me for the King, put in by this Widow E. J. now O. B.
unto which I did appear at Guild Hall, before the Lord Chief Justice and that
Honorable Bench, a Jury being Impanneld, she appearing there and telling her
Story, the Lord Chief Justice and the Bench, found it so nonsensical as my Lord
told the Jury, that there was no Subject for them to be troubled with, so
dismissed them and me from the indictment, though she pretended to have
comprised me in the Number of such as were concerned in the Plot. This. Widow
E. I. now O. B. did absolutely give unto Sir Robert walsh a Dubble guilt
Tankard, which is under her own hand, and arrested by John Chapel Clearke unto
Sir James Butler, Sarah Sing and Frances Duval, the said Tankard Sir Robert
made a present of, unto a Person of quality, yet the said Widow most impudently
did make her address unto the said Person of quality, and did persuade him that
Sir Robert robbed her of her Tankard, and the said Person of quality could not
be rid of her importunity until he gave her the Tankard, without having asked
Sir Robert of the matter; they being at a far distance one from the other, I
had at Guild Hall under her own hand Forty of her Letter, to produce what she
was, which are still extant. In one she writes, that she was so much in the
favor of Sir J. E. as that she was sure if his Wife, who was sickly should dye,
that he would marry her, and that if so, I should be her Gallant, and I should
not want for money, this Letter and all hers are this day extant.

XXIV. In the Year 1655. or 1656, I being here entrusted as is set forth in my
manifest, to steal away then from the Usurpers claws, I was necessitated, to
take up Forty Pounds worth in silk Stockings, to carry me into Flanders, I
being here in 1677. I was arrested upon my Bond of Forty Pounds, and forced to
pay Sixty five Pounds, as Mr. John Wallis Goldsmiths, and Sargent Dike in whose
Prison I was can witness, yet I importuned not His Majesty to my relief as in
that. I lying Prisoner upon the stocking action, comes an action of Four
Hundred Pound against me, upon Bond in the Year 1641. where I then became bound
for the Lord Henry wilmot, late Earl of Rochester, which was to carry him then
after His Majesty of Blessed Memory to York: This action being laid upon me, I
did petition and implore, His Majesty to look upon the hardness of my paying
that debt, which the Duke of Ormond and the Earl of Bathe, did represent unto
His Majesty, who was compassionate, but I was forced to satisfy the debt,
which I could not then have done, but that a great Lord and a great Subject,
did so take me into his consideration, as that he did relieve me, he is not now
in this Kingdom, but is in one of His Majesty's, I dare not mention his Name,
knowing he is not Covetous, that his charitable goodness, in such kind should
esclat. These are the rewards I meet with, in return of my coming of purpose
out of France in the Year 1675. To have discovered the insurrections and
disturbances, which were intended against His Majesty's Kingdoms and good
Subjects, having no other for my labor, charges, and loss of time here these
Four Years past, then have been these misfortunes.

The Conclusion of my Manifest.
I Beg the favor from you Noble Readers, not to censure as that I vaunt of my
services, having done but my duty, or that I complain of the Murderous
imprisonment, I have for Three and Thirty Months, with I may say injustice
groaned under, which I impute unto the most ungrounded ill conduct of some then
Ministers of State, who gave ear unto some false Rascally and most Villainous
intelligencers: Some of which may live this day, and read herein the Character
I give them, whose courage affords them not to take notice, the best of men
does know who they where or be, I do not, I would I did; they soon should here
from me, who am His Majesty's Loyal Subject, and unto you my friends an humble
Servant.

July 3. 1679. Robert Walsh Knight and Batt.

FINIS.

