THE World Bewitched. A DIALOGUE Between Two ASTROLOGERS AND THE AUTHOR. WITH
Infallible Predictions of what will happen in this Present Year, 1699. From the
Vices and Villainies Practiced in Court, City and Country.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

TO THE READER.
AS the Stars would have it, I happened to be a hopeful branch of that ancient
and renowned Family of the Wisemen of Gotam; my Father was a
Moorfields-Astrolologer, and my Mother a Lancashire-Witch; and I being the
firstborn of both, are thought by most People to be a Conjurer: I have a
natural propensity to Sleep in the Day time, and Sit up at Night, to observe
the Aspects and Motions of the Planets: By the frequent use of which, I have
peeped a wonderful height into the dark Mystery of Star-gazing.

When, by long Study and Experience, I had Cunningly crept into the
supernatural Knack of Fortune-telling; and by the help of Heaven's Lamps could
resolve all Lawful Questions, to the full satisfaction of Prentice-Boys or
Servant-Wenches, I hung up the Sign of the Golden-Ball; and professed my self
as knowing a Wizard as ever foretold the downfall of the Whore of Babylon, and
the prosperity of the Protestant Religion: But thought it requisite, like the
rest of my Fraternity, to have two Strings to my Bow; and being luckily
furnished with a few Worm-eaten Receipts to make a Powder-le-pimp, to Charm
away an Ague, stop a Gonorhea, prevent or further Conception, or cause
Miscarriage; I also turned Medicine-Munger, having acquired the true Method of
Sifting Nurses, pretending to discover the Distemper by the Patients Urine.

Thus Qualified as a Student in Physic and Astrology, I supplied half the Town
with Bumfodder, till I had made my self so Eminent by my own Praises, and a
false Catalogue of my Cures, that every minute of the Day I had some
Twelve-penny Fool or other at my Knocker. Having now raised my self to a
Considerable Reputation amongst Strumpets, Idiots and Rope-dancers, I thought
it high time to manifest my wonderful Foresight of future Chances and Changes,
by some infallible Predictions for the present Year; which if they happen not
according to my Calculation, I Will be bound to acknowledge the Art of
Prognostication is all Ridiculous, the Professors of it to be Knaves, and those
who Believe in it to be arrant Fools.

The World cannot be unacquainted with the great Emulation and Irreconcilable
Enmity between G --. P -- r and J --. P -- dg, about a piece of Art which no
body knows, and scarce any Body believes, viz. Making of Sygils and Fore-timing
of Destinies: It being lately my Fortune to bring them together, I cannot but
Oblige the Public with a Vera Copia of a Learned Dialogue that arose between
them; with which I have begun the following Treatise, to the great Credit of
our Wrangling Ephemerists* and I hope to the Diversion of the Reader.

A DIALOGUE Between Two ASTROLOGERS, etc.
Author. I Am very glad, Gentlemen, of this opportunity to bring you Face to
Face, in hopes it may be a means of reconciling that unhappy Difference kindled
between you, by the Contagious Influence of some malignant Star; and am
heartily sorry Men of your Reading in the Library of Heaven, should expose
through prejudice, the little Slips and Failings of your Lives, to the World's
Ridicule.


P -- r. You are mistaken, Sir, it was not the Stars that set us together by
the Ears, our Quarrel was occasioned by the Pride, Ignorance, and Sauciness of
that Cobbling Predicter there, who understands the Sowling of a Shoe much
better than the Motion of the Planets; and never could Foretell any thing by
the Heavens, but what was Communicated to him upon Earth by wiser Noddles than
his own, or else the Prophecies in his Mene-Tekel would have proved as false as
his Calculation of the late Kings Nativity, who was to dye, according to his
Judgment, many Years ago; but is still living in spite of his crowd of
Directions.


P -- ge. Did you ever hear, such an Impudent fellow as this, to disparage a
Man of my knowledge to my Face? It Is true, I am a Shoemaker by Trade, but it is
well for you, I have not my Toolls about me, for if had, I should either lay my
Strap cross your Shoulders, fling a Last at your Head, or stick my Aul in your
Arse, and mark you for a poor paltry, Whistling, Cutling, Ignoramus
Fortune Tellers.


Author. For shame, Gentlemen, forbear these Billingsgate Aggravations; such
Language, is a very scandal to the Art of Almanack-making. Bless us! should the
Stars govern Mankind at no better a Rate, than you Astrologers govern your
selves, what a disordered World should we have? If you are at variance about
being your Arts Masters, this is never the way to decide the Quarrel; you
should have some nice Questions in your Art, stated by a third Person, and try
who can bring them to the best and most regular Solutions.


P -- r. I have given him a fair Challenge, in my last and other Almanacks, to
perform a Trial of Skill with me at these following Weapons; Quadrant,
Fore-staff, or Nocturnal Globe, Celestial or Terestial, Seat and Compasses, at
the erecting of any Scheme, for the discovery of lost Goods, calculation of
Nativities, prediction of National Revolutions, etc. For I would have him to
know, I am a lover of the Mathematics, and can see as far beyond the Moon as
another; but he is nothing, but a Cowardly Pretender, a false Prognosticator, a
mere States Jugler, and dares as well to take the great Bear by the Tooth, as
engage me at anything.


P -- ge. You Broken Cutler, you Astrological Quack, you Mungril in Religion,
you Sigill-maker, nay, You Iacobite-Conjurer, have you confidence to contend
with a Man that can read the Decrees of Heaven in the Stars, foretell the fate
of Kingdoms, and foresee human Destinies? Who amongst you all could predict
Englands happiness, in the wonderful Revolution, but my self? Who could give
the Nation the comfortable assurance of the speedy downfall of Popery and
Slavery, but my self? And shall I stand to be Catechized by a Countefeit
Wizard, a Mob Fortune Tellers? No, I scorn it; I Would have You to know I Am above it.


Author. I protest, Gentlemen, if a stranger were to hear you complement, he
would scarce believe either of you had been bred at Court: If the Planets you
converse with have so rough an influence upon you, that are their Interpreters,
I declare rather than breed my Son amongst the Stars, I would bring him up at
the Bear-Garden.


P -- r. You must needs conceive he is an Illiterate fellow, by the coursness
of his Language; a scurilous Pen, and a busy Tongue, are his only Weapons of
defense; Railing and Lying being the two Talents he is Master of; they are his
security against all Detections, and the main Supporters of his Impudence and
Ignorance against all Assaults of the Learned and Skilful Lovers of Astrology,
who make a mere Bauble of him, and whip him about from one to the other, as
Schoolboys do a Top.


P -- dge. You Iacobitical Planet-peeper; you old Pur-blind Star-gazer; with
what confidence do you thus affront a Man that is well known by the good
Subjects of the Nation, to be a True Blue-Protestant-Prophet? Who never
foretold any thing against Popery through the whole course of my Life, but it
certainly came to pass as exactly to the time, as the Sun comes upon the
Meridian at Twelve a Clock? And here is an old fool with his headful of Circles,
Ovals, Angels, Pentigons, Hexagons, and Octigons, thinks with a little
Mathematical Nonsense to worry me out of my Reputation; but I Would have you to
know, I Will make the Planets piss upon you before I Have done with you yet.


Author. Indeed Mr. P -- dg, you are too Choleric with your Adversary; your
Talk is just like your Writings: Wherein you show more Passion than Discretion;
and more Malice than Art. I am fearful your living so long in Holland has done
you a diskindness, by changing your English Temper into the surly habits of a
Dutchman: Though I must confess your Antagonist is something in the fault too;
but not so much as you are.


P -- r. If you will believe me, Sir, I have no prejudice against him at all; he
has in his Papers used me Scurvily; and has spightfully picked a Quarrel with
me without any manner of provocation, charging me with things as false as his
Prognostications; and I am bound to say something in my own Defense, or every
Journyman Shoemaker would laugh at me.


P -- dg. Did you ever hear such an insinuating old Star-groper? Did ever I
accuse you falsely in my life? Did you not turn Quaker to get a Wife with three
Hundred Pounds, and forsake the Religion as soon as you would Married her? Did you
not at that time keep a Cutlers Shop in Newgate-street no bigger than a
Butter-Firkin? Were you not as poor as a Clapperdugeon, till the Fortune of
your Wife redeemed you from the Stings of Necessity, and danger of the Counter?
Did you not use her basely, to the shame of your self, and distraction of the
Poor Woman? Did you not lock her up in your Garret a week together, and carry
the Key in your Pocket? Did you not use to beat her, and whip her Immodestly
with a huge Rod, to tame her of a Fura Matricis? Did you not at last turn her
out of Doors, and take in her Room a Handmaid, with whom you now Cohabit? If
you can, without a blush, say this is fabulous, I Will be guilty of that
Irreverence as to avouch the Stars are Liars.


Author. What say you now, Mr. P -- r? He has opened a long Catalogue of Crimes
against you: I Will assure you if this be true, you will forfeit my good Opinion
of you: And to be down right with you, I shall think you as wicked a Man as a
Meal-tub Plotter.


P -- r. This is Malice in perfection, Envy without parallel, a pack of Lies
without Color, the very suggestions of the Devil; and begging your attention
Sir, I will justify my Innocence, against these Villainous Reproaches, to the
face of him who was the original Projector of all these Calumnies against me.
In the first place, I was no more a Quaker, than my Adversary a Good Christian,
tho the latter part of my Education was amongst 'em; I never conformed to their
Faith, Discipline, or Preciseness: Tho I acknowledge I have been often at their
Meetings, yet my Opinion was always as foreign from their Principles, as my
Opposite's Practice is distant from the Rules of True Religion and Morality. In
the next place, I never lived in Newgate-street till I was Married, but in
Newgate-Market; and my Shop was as much bigger than a Butter-firkin, as the
best Room in his House is larger than a Meal-tub (He knows my meaning.) In the
Third place, I never had Threescore Pound with my Wife, instead of three
Hundred; and all my Neighbors know, to the satisfaction of my own Conscience,
I used her with that Lenity and Love, as the best Husband could possibly show,
though to the worst of Wives; who with an unnatural aversion sought the Ruin of
her Husband, and Beggary of her Children, in as many Impious Designs and
Detestable Contrivances, as my Rebellious Enemy ever engaged in to destroy King
Charles, and Subvert the Government. And lastly, Instead of my turning her out
of doors, she shamefully deserted me and her Children, as he did the Kingdom,
both equally laden with insupportable guilt of wrongs, which the one had done
to his King and Country, and the other to her Spouse and Family.


Author. I am very glad to hear you have so handsomely discharged your self of
these scandalous Accusations your Opponent has brought against you: And the
deep concern with which you seem to deliver your Vindication, begets in me a
more than ordinary Credulity of your Innocence. For I believe your Adversary,
like other partial Prognosticators, does not always confine his Tongue and Pen
within the strict Bounds of Truth, and Rules of Justice.


P -- dg. How Sir! what do you mistrust me? Do you think I would tell a Lie for
the matter? I Would have you to know I scorn it. What I have said is truth, Sir, I
can bring three or four as honest people to Swear it, upon Occasion, as ever
were Evidence in the Popish-Plot. I Will warrant you he will with the same
Impudence deny that ever he Poisoned his wife in a mess of Water Gruel, or that
ever he hid Linen, and carried her before a Justice of Peace, and swore she
Robbed him.


P -- r. I believe old Nick has set up a Mint in your Brains for the Coining of
Lies. I wonder with what confidence you can insinuate these things to the World
in your Merlinus Liberatus, except you are desirous of robbing the Devil of his
Glory; and be reckoned amongst mankind the greatest Liar in the Universe. To be
plain, both with you and her, she has often (be it to her Conscience) defrauded
me of both Goods and Money, and I have often detected her in it; but as for
hiding of any thing and laying it to her charge, I look upon it to be equally
ridiculous with the harshness of that Father, who having burnt his Bible on the
Saturday, beat his Son on the Sunday, because the Boy could not find it to read
a Chapter. For a Man to commit a fault with his Right Hand, and Swear it upon
his Left, I cannot imagine the drift of such a senseless projection. I thank my
Stars I have more gravity and discretion, than ever to be guilty of such
Whimsies. And as for putting Poison in her Water Gruel, I always loved her too
well to do her a Mischief, and my self too well to be hanged for her: Tho I
confess I have oftentimes prepared her a Mess for Breakfast, but never put any
thing worse in it than Bread, Butter, Sugar, and Salt; and for what harm this
could do her, I am answerable: So that all your Envious Darts are thrown in
Vain, and return, like Balls pelted at a Stone Wall, to him that cast 'em.


Author. Indeed Mr. P -- dge, I begin to be Jealous these Criminal Allegations
you have published this Year in your Merlin, against my old friend, are down
right Impositions, and Inventions of your own, without any Authority, for what
you have there and here asserted. I doubt you don't deal fairly with the World,
for I have observed you have treated Gadbury, Coley, and others, after the same
manner, as if you were aiming to make your self Lord Ascendant over all Artists
in the Nation.


P -- dge. Hem, hah, I say, Sir, he is a fulsom Iacobite, and I believe you are
another; and I can narrowly guess your Destinies by your Physiognomies, without
Calculating your Nativities. I do Justify what I have said against that
thin-gutted Capricorn to be all Truth, for I was told it by three or four of
Mr. B -- ges Congregation, who I dare Swear have never told a Lie since the
Revolution.


P -- r. I wonder a Man of your Ignorance in Astrology, and Experience in all
sorts of Villainy, should dare by false and Studied Calumnies to asperse
another, when the very Truth spoke of your self, you know to be the worst of
Scandals. Were you not guilty of a Conspiracy against King Charles, to Murder
him at the Ryehouse, in order to pull down the Church and Subvert the
Government? Did you not Calculate the Nativity of his Brother, and both
Ignorantly and Maliciously foretell his Death to be Speedy, who is living to
this day? Did you not Treacherously flatter your great Friend the Duke of M --
th with the assurance of the Crown, till you and the rest of his Seducers had
brought him to a sad Catastrophe? Did you not fly into Holland to escape what
you deserved? And is not the Copy of the Depositions made against you, inserted
in the Frontispiece of my Ephemeris, as true as the Bible?


Author. Certainly, Gentlemen, when you have told one another your minds
thoroughly, you will cool by degrees into a more Friendly Temper, or you will
maintain the old Adage to some purpose, Two of a Trade can never agree.


P -- dg. I am so far from disowning my self an Abetter in that Glorious
Design, That it is the Pride of my Age, and Pleasure of my Life, to be put in
mind on it. Is it not an Honor to my Grey-hairs, to have been a Champion in a
Good Cause, for the Redemption of -- Liberty, Property, and Religion, from the
hands of Tyranny, Popery, and Slavery, which had got the Nation by the Crown,
the Church by the Pulpit, and the People by their Estates? The Mistake of my
Calculation of the King and his Brothers Nativity, were willful Errors; I
reported not as I found 'em by my Judgment of the Hileg, but as I would have
found 'em, for the encouragement of the good Friends to the Nation, to have
gone on in the work of the Lord with the greater Cheerfulness; and shall I be
upbraided for the good Service I have done my Country, by a Iacobite
Turn-coat, an Enemy to the Government, a Scandal to the Protestant Church, a
Lover of the French King, and a Believer of Impossibilities?


P -- r. I have observed, for many Years, every Artist that does not comply
with your Nocturnal Imperfections in Astrology, and mistaken Principles in
Religion, you brand with the Name of Iacobite: But I would have you to know, as
I am no Fanatic in my Opinion, I am no, Papist in my Conscience: I have no
Devil in my Brains, or yet a Pope in my Belly. I am for no Tyranny, Popery, or
Slavery, nor am I for a Commonwealth. I am no Knave in the exercise of my
Function, or a Fool in the business I pretend to. I am no Bigot to any party,
or a Rebel to Authority; but can serve my God with Sincerity, Obey my Prince
with Loyalty, pray for the Church of England's Preservation, wish my Country's
Welfare, and show my self in all things an honest Man and a good Subject.


Author. I must confess, Mr. P -- r, I think it very highly concerns you to
quit your self of that unseasonable Title Jacobite, for that is likely to do
you the most prejudice of any calumny he has endeavored to fix upon you: The
very Name is as Odious to a True English Protestant, as a Fart to an Irishman.
Besides, they are a poor Party, and nothing to be got by 'em; and by this time
can pretty well guess at the Fortune of their Cause, without the help of an
Astrologer.


P -- dg. He knows what I say to be true enough; he cannot deny but he has been
building of Castles in the Air for them this seven years, to keep his
faint-hearted Brethren from disponding: But now he finds the Stars look but
with a Malignant Aspect upon 'em, he would be as glad to turn his Coat, could
he do it with advantage, as a Seaman is to change his Shirt when he finds he is
Lousie.


P -- r. How Natural it is for an ill Man to suspect others to do that, of
which himself is guilty? Should my Conscience guide me to be what you suspect
me, interest should never alter my Opinion: But could I once submit to be, what
you really are, Interest might then steer me as the Rudder does a Vessel, and
make me Tack with every Wind that blows for my Advantage. I shall say but
little more, either to detect you, or Justify my self; but refer you, and the
World, to my Ephemeris for this Year, where may be seen a Just and Modest
Defense of my self, against all your Aspersions; an open conviction of your
Ignorance in Astrological Judgments, with a recital of your False Prophecies,
Erroneous Calculations, and other Impositions upon the too Credulous Multitude.


P -- dge. I think Sir, I have taken Care to be pretty even with you, and have
drawn your Picture so to the Life in my Merlinus Liberatus, that every Body
that knows you, says it is much liker the Original, then the Effigies at the
beginning of your Almanac. And as for my Prognostications, the World (contrary
to your Reproaches) has found 'em Truths; and I will boldly say, and think it
no Presumption, That all my Predictions have proved as Infallible as Mother
Shipton's Prophecies.


Author. Certainly, Gentlemen, your Lungs are like an Anchor-Smiths Bellows;
and your Tongues capable of a perpetual Motion, or, me thinks, by this time,
they must needs be tired. Give me leave to interpose something that may give
you a little respit. If you will promise to be Silent, and defer the remainder
of your Iangling Controversy till another Meeting, I will read you over some
Predictions of my own, of strange things that I am assured by my Art, will
happen within the Circle of the present Year; and look you here they are, if
you will give me your attention.


P -- r. P -- dg. Yes, Yes, Sir, with all our Hearts, and think our selves much
obliged to you.


Infallible Predictions For the Year 1699.
AStrologers this Year will Err very much in their guesses, to the great
Scandal of a pack of Prophesying Knaves, and grievous disapointment of
abundance of Fools: And he that puts his Faith in the Stars, as well as those
who give Credit to a Star-gazer, will through the whole course of his life be
liable to be cheated.

He or She that loses either Goods or Money by the Rapparees, and consults a
Cunning-Man, or Woman, about the recovery of 'em, flings Good Money after Bad;
for I have discovered by the Motion of Mercury, the God of Thieves, it is a
Thousand to one whether ever they find them.

Who ever have their Nativities Calculated, will be as much the Wiser, as if
they had kept their Money in their Pockets, but if they will be generous, and
fling away a large Gratuity, they need not fear but their crafty Conjurer will
assign them Long-Life, Health, and Good-Fortune.

That Innocent Young Lady who thinks her Virginity unsafe without a Charm or
Sigil to secure her from the fraud of insinuating Tongues, and other Amorous
Temptations, and buys a Fools-bauble of a Fortune Tellers for half a piece, or a
Guinea, to protect her Virtue, if she be so Silly to be Cozened out of her
Money, may the next hour, if Mars proves Ascendant over Venus, be cheated out
of her Maidenhead, in spite of her Guardian Angel, if Opportunity and
Importunity concur in the Misfortune.

This year will arise great disputes among Prentice-boys, Chamber-maids, and
Cook-wenches, about which tell Fortunes truest, Gypsies or Astrologers. To the
Saffron-colour'd Diviners the Pre-eminence will be given, because they dispatch
their business for less Money; and tell you as much Truth by the inside of your
Hands, as the other can do by the outside of the Heavens. When Almanacks have
done Selling, both their Conditions will be equal, for the Stars being angry
they are false Read by their Interpreters, are resolved, before Sol has run
half his Annual Progress, to make 'em all as poor as Gypsies.

An abundance of Country Attorneys will flock up to London the latter End of
this Term, to the great Consumption of Pricked Wines, and Temple-barr Puddings;
who will fill the Town for a time, with such a Crow'd of Scribletonians,
they will be scarce able to live honestly one by another. Westminster Hall will
be as full of Rooks, as the Change at two a Clock is of Owls: And that unhappy
Bird who falls into their clutches, will be sure to be well plucked before he
gets out again. Many Fools go thither to look for an Honest Man, but may
search, as Diogenes did in Athens, a long time before they find one fit for
their Business, It is a common saying, a good Lawyer must be a great Liar; for
which reason the Devil and a Pleadsr wear both one Color.

The Malice of Law-Adversarys will be pretty well asswag'd when the Term's
over: The long Bills of Attorneys and Petty Foggers will make them agree to
call themselves Fools, and their Lawyers Knaves: Promising to renounce Law for
the future, as good Christians do the Devil and all his Works. A Married State
and a Chancery Suit, the World may account equal; for most People, before the
Snaky Year has clapped her Tail in her Mouth, will heartily repent that ever
they engaged in either.

Old Buffet-Stools will come again into Fashion, and be much in Request. The
true Saxon Tennis, will now be put in Practice, and Balls will fly about in
every Street without the help of a Racket: Many Servant Wenches will have Sorer
Palms by Playing, than ever they had by Working. She that puts a Ball furthest,
will be reckoned a good Play-fellow, and he that can strike furthest at another
sort of Stool-ball, will be accounted by the Maids, a good Bedfellow. Those
who could not purchase New Clothes at Easter, will be glad to have them at
Whitson-Tide, and if they fail of 'em then, especially Women, they will go near
to be had in their minds a Month after.

Abundance of time will be now spent in Bot'ling of Ale, and Baking of Cakes,
and a great deal of Money, by such who have more Wealth than Brains, will be be
flung away upon these alluring Commodities. Many a Maid will go a Mile or two
out of Town, and forgetting her self, will lose that which she had better have
brought home than have left behind her.

Loose Livers, and Loiterers, will now begin to grow Religious, and walk on a
Sunday to Pancrass's Church, with a great deal of Devotion, though in Town, if
they live next Door to the Lord's Temple, they will go a Mile out of the way to
spend their time at an Alehouse; for they Love no Preaching, unless it be over
their Liquor.

Every Gardener will now be as busy as Father Adam in Paradise, to turn
Horse-dung into Radishes, and Ram's-Horns into Sparrow-grass; and will be very
Angry if any of his Family should lay a Sir-R -- ce out of his own Ground.
Abundance of Dung-hills on 'tother side the Water will be painfully Improved to
raise a Summer's Feast for Tailors, but the first, of their Product must be
Sauce for my Lady. Abundance of Distempered Blood will be buried at the roots
of Vines, therefore Drink not too much of the Juice of the Grape, lest it
brings your Body into disorder.

Poverty and Pride next Easter, will go hand in hand, many will pinch their
Bellies to adorn their Backs, and tumble upon their Backs to please their
Bellies. Whoring will be much Railed against in Churches, but never more
Practiced in Chambers. Many London-Prentices will be forced to Eat Suffolk
Cheese, that their Masters Daughters may be kept at a Boarding-School. Honesty
will be reduced to a low Condition, and be forced to tug many a Knave by the
Sleeve, to put him in mind of his Promise; and Virtue, in plain Dress, must Pin
up Vice's fine Gown for a Livelihood. Justice will be in every Man's Mouth, but
in few Men's Hearts; we shall hear often of her Name, but know not where to find
her, and where she ought to dwell we shall not dare to look for her.

Many Limber-ham'd Leachers, and their Ladies of Pleasure, will in the Spring
enter into Aesculapius's Powdering Tub, where with Swelled Heads, and Loose
Teeth, they will make slabbering Protestations against the Wicked Sin of
Whoring, but soon as they are well pursue the same Vice, till at last with
Rotten Bones, Infectious Bodies, Stinking Breaths, and Stinking Noses, they
fall Martyrs in Venus's Cause, coveting Death to avoid Shame and Misery.

When the Sun makes his first entrance into the Sign of the R^m, the Number of
London Cuckolds will begin daily to increase; our City-Dames will now refresh
themselves with Walks to our Neighboring Villages, and more Marmulet Madams,
will be met stroling in the Fields, than Honest Women in the Streets: Ladies
will begin to think of Tunbridge, Epsom, Richmond, Dullidge, etc. to fill their
Bodies with those Impurities, of which they pretend to cleanse them. Any
handsome, lusty young Fellow, that has been in a Starving Condition all Winter,
if he will show himself at the afore-mentioned places, need not Question in a
little time of getting Clothes to his Back, and Money in his Pocket, if he can
but work hard and keep Council. Citizens with Jealous Hearts, and Horned Heads,
begin now to be Tormented with Curtain-Lectures for New Gowns, Petticoats, and
Nick-knacks, and he that refuses to comply with his Wife's Request, shall lead
as bad a Life as a sturdy Beggar in a House of Correction.

Those who have bucksome Daughters, must take care to provide 'em Husbands, or
guide 'em with a strait Rein, lost the active motion of their Spirits, this
Spring-season, begets such an Itch in their Tails, that will make 'em Dote on
your Prentices, or suffer their Heels to be Tript up by your Serving-men, the
first Opportunity.

Punks that are Poor, will begin to dread the approaching Summer, for a long
Vacation is as terrible to them as to Lawyers of the lower Degree; an empty
Town soon brings them to empty Purses, and want of Money to the worst of
Infamy. So that she who had the Honor to be Debauched by a Duke, may in a
little time after, (without the kind Influence of her Stars prevent it) be
Kicked by his Footman, or Kissed by a Porter. For many a Topping Curtesan, now
at a Guinea Purchase, will dwindle from her Velvet Scarf into Rusty
Lute-String, and will be at a Hackney Coachman's Service, the next Vacation,
for a Cast of his Office and a Quartern of Brandy.

We shall find a great Emulation between Pawn-brokers and Tally-men, who should
be thought the Honestest men, though both in their Dealings, according to
Custom, will daily strive who should run first to the Devil headlong. Usurers
in old time were Damned by all good Men for Ten in the Hundred, but we shall
find ever long, every honest Citizen will with a safe Conscience take Thirty,
and think him self in as fair a way to Heaven as the Parson of the Parish.

Women of all Ranks and Qualities will this Year be very forgetful of their
Prayers, and very mindful of their Paint and Patches, some to Plaster up the
Wrinkles of Age and Debauchery, others to hide Imperfections as great men do
Faults, by making greater; some like true English Painters, not knowing when
the Face is well, by endeavoring to mend it, will daub on till they spoil the
Piece: She that begins at Seven a Clock in the Morning, and can get thoroughly
Dressed by Dinner time, will be looked upon by her Sex to be a nimble
Gentlewoman; and she who confines herself to one Gallant at a time, though she
Discards every Month, will be reckoned, as times go, a Lady of great Honor and
Constancy.

Pretty Women this Year will be very plenty, and that generous Gentleman, who
has a mind to have a Handsome Wife with nothing, because she should be the more
Humble, and not upbraid him with her Portion, may easily meet with one that has
not so much as a Smock to her back, and when he has her, I Would advise him to keep
her so, for then he need not fear any body else should take up her Linen.

The Price of Hackney Horseflesh will now begin to be advanced every Week from
Saturday to Monday, by reason of the vast number of Citizens, who having put
their Wives out to Grass, Ride down every Jews Sabbath, to give them a
Breathing, for fear they should suffer themselves other ways to be mounted by
fresh Iockeys, who have no Right to the Saddle.

Pedlars, Juglers, Cadators, Beggars, Fiddlers and Fortune Tellers, will now
begin their Progress round England, to the great Slaughter of Pigs, and
Poultrey, in defiance of Prison, Pillory, and Whipping-Post. Mountebanks are
preparing their infallible Packets, and mustering together their Fools,
Orators, and Rope-Dancers, in order to Cheat Rural Ignoramus's out of their
Health and Money: Scarce a County in England but will be invested with a High
German Quack-Salver, and his Vagabond Retinue to the Plague of the Poor's
Purses, and Punishment of their Carcasses.

As sure as the end of Mirth is the beginning of Sadness, so will the A^^e of
the Spring terminate in the very Nose of the Summer: You may now be pretty well
assured of Warm Weather, for Frost and Snow will be every whit as scarce as
Thunder and Lightning at Christmas. Abundance of Velvet Scarfes and Cloaks will
find the way to the Pawn-brokers, to help to raise Money to purchase thinner
Garments. Warming-pans will be Scoured bright, and hung up behind the
Kitchen-Door as an Ornament. Muffs and Sable-Tippets will be Plenty in
Long-Lane, where you may have as great Choice in every Broker's Shop, as you
may of Cracks in the Eighteen-Penny Gallery.

Farmers, like their Corn, will begin to prick up their Ears, and listen
mightily to the Monthly Promises of their Weather-wise Almanacks, they will
labor with much uneasiness between the Passions of Hope and Fear, and pray as
often for a dry Harvest, as the just Man Sins Ninety-nine times a Day: They
will now begin to be Watchful of themselves at their Devotion, and dare not to
Sleep at Church so near Harvest, for fear Heaven should be Angry with them:
High Winds, and great Rains are as Welcome to 'em as Frost and Snow to an
Indian, or Hot Weather to a Brawny Dutchman.

Persons of Quality will now be going to their Country Houses, and
Shopkeepers will put on as Melancholy Aspects as if their Books and their
Bags had scarce ever a Cross in 'em. Quoits, Cricket, Nine-Pins, and Trap-Ball,
will be very much in Fashion, and more Tradesmen may be seen Playing in the
Fields, than Working in their Shops. It will be Fine Weather both for those who
have Money, and such who want it: He that has it to spare, may spend it with
much Pleasure, and he that has none, may Sleep under a Hedge, without the
Danger of having his Pocket Picked.

There will be more French Protestants in the Fields every Morning, than good
English Christians in our Churches any time of the Day, A Fricasie of Frogs,
and a Dandalion Sallad, will be A-la-mode of Spittle-Fields, where the
Hugonets, upon Nature's Exuberances, shall feed themselves much Fatter than the
Pinch-gut Allowance of Lean Meat, shall ever make the Hungry Pentioners of S --
Hospital.

Hedges will in part do now the business of Houses, they will hide many a Rogue
and Whore from Justice, and cover many a shameful Action, and will be of these
Uses in particular: They will be the Leacher's Bawdy House, the Padder's
Ambuscade; the Vagabond's Lodging; the Traveller's House of Office; the
Cattle's Umbrage, and the Farmer's Security.

The Royal-Oak-Lottery will Thrive much at Islington, but more at Tunbridge;
many Gentlemen of Fortune will go out with Twenty Guinea's in their Pockets,
and be forced to return home by the help of a Boretto; and all such Gamesters
will keep their Nails so short, by Biting their Finger's ends, they will have
no occasion for a Knife to Pare 'em. Abundance of Curses will be breathed out
this Summer against: Fortune, at all Ordinaries and Bowling-Greens, but will
find themselves so little the better for it, they might as well have kept their
Breath to Cool their Pottage.

Ladies of Pleasure this Year, who are Liberal to their Gallants, will prove
very Subl^^ary, for which reason, many a (...) Beau will be forced (for want of
true Labor, Vigilence, and Submission) to make his Summer Suit to last all
Winter; Love's Wi^^^^ will be (...) against him, the Favors he enjoyed, and
the Benefits he received, will be transferred from one Cock's-comb to another,
that every upstart Prodigal, who presents himself as a fresh Labourer in the
Drudgery of Lust, may be made a Fool of in his turn, as well as his
Predecessors.

Weavers, as well as Iourney-men Tailors, will be glad to make many a Meal of
Cucumbers this Summer, or else go to Lamb's-Conduit, and Drink a Health to Duke
Humphrey, and entreat Providence upon their Knees, to take away their Stomachs;
for though Meat will be Cheap, yet Money will be scarce, and he that can have
an Ox ready Roasted for a Penny, if he wants both Coin and Credit, if he is too
Proud to Beg, and too Honest to Steal, is, in the midst of Plenty, in a very
likely Condition to go without a Dinner.

Notwithstanding, Poverty will be a raging Distemper, among Journey-men
Shoe-makers, yet they will be so Proud, they will scorn to Work on a Monday, but
for the Honor of St. Crispin's Memory, will Dedicate that Day to
Shufflle-Board and Nine-Pins, in order to consume the remaining Dregs of their
Saturday's Wages, that they may return to their Work with clear Pockets, and
safe Consciences, though no men are greater Pagans in the Worship of a full
Flaggon, yet the best of Christians can never be more thoughtful on their Last;
their Lives it is true are but dangerous Examples for the Righteous to follow,
yet by the Doctrine of the Hammer, they make more good Souls in one
Twelvemonth, than the Clergy do in Seven.

This Year Distillers will turn Negromancers, and deal in abundance of Evil
Spirits, which will possess the Public (as the Devil did the Herd) to the
Destruction of all those who are Bewitched by 'em, which will be a great means
of advancing Hog-wam, to the Injury of Islington Swine-herds, and the Damage of
Bartholomew-Fair Pork, if they are not carefully bound in Fetters of
Forbearance, by the Wisdom of our great Assembly to prevent Poisoning the
Subjects.

Churchwardens will be accounted Knaves by the rest of the Parish, let 'em
behave themselves never so Honestly, and that poor Sinner who falls into their
Clutches, for answering the End of his Creation, will Wish he had been Gelt,
before his Headstrong Progenitors had trapann'd him as a Prey to such
Capon-eating Canibals, who will Sponge as much upon the Sins of a Fatherly
Fornicator, as Bailiffs, upon the Misfortune of a fearful Debtor in their
Custody.

Coal-merchants and Wood-mongers, will look with an evil Eye upon the Sun, and
complain the Weather is so excessive Hot, they are scarce able to endure it.
Wax and Tallow-chaundlers will be as Angry with the length of Days, as if all
the Fat was in the Fire; and though they are Dealers in Light, yet will
heartily wish (before Summer is ended) the whole Kingdom in the Dark. Butchers,
Cooks, Fish-mongers, and Poulterers, if you wait your Opportunity, will sell
more for a Shilling, than they buy for Two; and when it is served up hot to the
Table, a Nice Feeder may satisfy his Appetite thorough his Nostrils, without
the trouble of Mastication.

Vintners will be very busy in their Cellars, about mending of pricked Wines,
and recovering of Vinegar worth Sixpence a Quart to Port of Eighteen, they
will commit more Sins in the justification of Bad Wines to be Good, within
these Three Months, than ever they can find Leisure to Repent of in the other
Nine: Marlborough Chalk will now be more useful in the Bar, than Pen and Ink;
for Little Credit, Small Measure, and Unconscionable Reckonings, must make good
the Defects of a Tradeless Vacation.

Ale-Drapers will shift off their Winter's Pride, and put on their Summer's
Humility; they will stir up no Fires to burn you from your Seats, but pluck off
their Hats and bid you Welcome for the spending of Twopence; they will be
contented to drink their own Liquor, stand at their Doors, and bid a Neighbor
Good Morrow, and not run to the Tavern for a Morning and Ev'ning's Draught, in
contempt of those Fools who by hugging the Pot, put them in a Condition to
enjoy the Bottle.

The Players in Town must now set their Wits to work, who before lived by
Fooling, or else they will find little to do but to lie a-Bed, and study their
parts against next Michaelmas: An underlin Actor ought to play the part of a
Camelion Four Months in the Year, and when they shut up House he ought to shut
up his Appetite, and learn to Live by the Air, for if he covets more
substantial Nourishment, he must put his Brains upon the Rack to Coin Puns and
Cunnundrums to please some Fool or other that will give it him.

Drugsters will now be very busy in Selling the Sweepings of their Shops to
the Mountebank's Miller, who grinds them all together to a Powder, to make up
an Universal Medicine, either in Pill, Potion, or Bolus; for certain there is
something in the Compound good for every thing, but to know every Ingredient in
this Collection of Gleaning, would puzle both the Druggest and the Dr. who
minds not what is in it, but what is on it, I therefore fear we shall have a sickly
Season, and many Patients this Summer, will dye of the Physician.

An Apothecary, who has a Handsome Wife to keep Shop, is likely to have
abundance of Customers, for many a Young Gentleman will be Sick to be doing
with her; the more the Husband keeps out, the greater Trade he will have, for all
the Patient's Desires will be, that the Wife may serve him.

All Persons who are desirous to preserve their Health, let 'em be Careful how
they trust a Physician with their Purses, lest they endanger their Bodies; for
if once he get into your Cash, he will soon find an occasion to give you Physic,
and when you are under his Clutches, you may solace your self with a Memento
Mori. In the next place take care you eat no Hemlock in your Sallad, or Arsnick
in your Pottage; neither catch Cold, or over-heat your self, and use a Dr. as
you do a Lawyer, never but when needs must, and you need not Question a
continuance of your Health; for it is an old Maxim, drawn from Experience, that
Physicians Kill more than ever they can Cure.

There will be more Religions this Summer than ever, but less Piety; Christians
will prefer their Ease before their Devotion, and think the Weather too hot to
serve God in Crowds, for which Reasons the Churches will have but thin
Congregations. Paganism will be much practiced among young Amorous Idolaters,
who will very frequently fall down on their Knees and Worship Heathen
Goddesses. There will be a great Quarrel between the Rooks and Jack-Daws, about
which is the Fairest, there will be great chattering on both sides to no
purpose, till the Eagle undertakes to Decide the Difference.

Quakers will begin to drink their Bottle, shift off their Sanctity, and
converse without the Formal Dialect of Thee, and Thou, and in a little time
will pluck off their Hats, Drink the King's Health, and be as Complaisant as
the rest of their Neighbors.

Many things by all Parties will be Reported without Truth, and be Believed
without Reason; all sides will expect opposite Miracles to be done, but nothing
will come on it; and that Williamite that proposes to himself, a Vintage in
France, by a Conquest in a new War, or Jacobite that hopes for an Estate by a
Retrograde Revolution this Summer, will be very much Disappointed.

There will arise great Disputes between the Libertines and Puritans, which are
the better Christians of the Two, bitter Words will be thrown on both sides,
the latter will brand the former with the Diabolical Titles of Atheists,
Rebels, Sabath-breakers, Profane, Liars, Swearers and Cursers, Adulterers,
Fornicators, degenerate Sinners, and the Seed of the Devil; in return of which,
they will call the other Hypocrites Publicans, Knaves in Masquerade,
Dissemblers with God and Man, State Tormentors, Punishers of true Piety,
deceitful Dealers, uncharitable Neighbors, Foes to Regularity, Sanctified
Cheats, proud Zealots, Enemies to the Public, Faithless Subjects, and Old
Nick's Agents: The Difference will be so highly Inflamed, there will be no
hopes of Reconciliation, and will be likely to continue so, till the general
Conflagration.

Abundance of People will now forsake the Town, but very few their Vices, for
Cuckold-making will be as practicable in all parts of the Countey, as ever it
was between the Court and the City; and the Servants of great Men will be
obliged to drink their Masters Health in March Beer out of Horns, in respect to
the Venerable state of Cuckoldom. Virtue will become so odious and intolerable
in a Wife, that a man had better be half Hanged than be troubled with such a
Bedfellow; for whoever has more Chastity to Boast on than the rest of her
Neighbors, will be so very Proud, Saucy, and Imperious, that her Spouse may
with more Comfort Row a Week in a Gally, than spend a Day in her Company,
whilst she that makes a By use of her Tail to oblige her self, shall in all
things else, through a sense of her own Failing, be very studious to oblige her
Husband, and make him amends for the uneasy Burden she has laid upon his
Forehead.

Before the Summer has shook Hands with his Younger Brother, Autumn, by the
heat of the Sun will be hatched many Swarms of Maggots in the Brains of Zealots,
which will at last take Wing, and quitting the Nests where they were first
bred, creep into the Ears of all the Fools in the Nation, to the wonderful
Satisfaction of some great men, and the Displeasure of others, but they will
all dye in Winter, so that we shall not be long pestered with this Vermin.

Fat People will be so Lazy in the Dog Days, they will rather sit 3 Hours in a
cool Room over a plentiful Dose of Claret, walk two Miles in the Sunshine; and
most Married Shop keepers will Sweat more between the Sheets, than they will
behind their Counters; for though warm Exercise is forbid this Hot Weather, yet
Women, through an aversion to Restraint, will covet Titilation with as strong an
Appetite, as a Roman Catholic does Flesh-meat in Lent, and will hate to lose
her Longing in this Season above all the parts of the Year; for when men are
most troubled with Whimsies in their Heads, Women have 'em in their Tails, and
whenever the Maggot Bites, the Part aggrieved will call for a speedy Remedy.

A great deal of Plank and Timber will now be brought into Smithfield Rounds,
in order to erect a Nest for Whores, Thieves, and Vagabonds, to the great
Scandal or St. Bartholomew and his Grid-Iron; where all sorts of Rogues will be
very Industrious in their several Occupations to get Money from the Lottery-man
to the Pick-pocket, and all sorts of Fools be as Busy in spending on it; where
many a Jilt will play the part of a Queen in a foul Smock, and many a Knave
represent a Statesman. Swine's-flesh, and Whore's-flesh will be as common as
Beef and Mutton at Leaden Hall Marker, but he that wants Skill to choose, will
go near to be Cheated if he meddles with either, for the one will be very
incident to the Pox, and the other to the Measles. A great many Strong Beasts
will be there to be Seen, and a great many worse Creatures to be Felt. This
will prove a very Sickly Season, for some Hundreds will be glad to get under
the Physicians Hands, before the Fair will be over.

A Pot of Ale, with a To^^t and Cheshire, by a good Fire, and a clean Hearth,
will be an excellent Breakfast for an Early Riser, by that time this Month's
expired, and will he very good to defend his Stomach from those intolerable
Enemies Hunger and Thirst, as well as the (...) Remains which Nasty Tom shall
spill in the Streets from his Unfavoury Vessel.

Autumn will introduce with it abundance of Distempers, and the Inhabitants of
the Hundreds of Essex, will look as White as their Night-caps: He that now
stays a Fortnight in that Country, and returns without an Ague, may leap into
the Thames at Christ-mass, without the danger of catching Cold; for the
peculiar Providence that secured his Careass from that prevailing Evil, will
surely protect him from all Distempers. Many other Diseases will be very
Incident to the diverse Constitutions of People in this Kingdom. Abundance of
Women in Bridewell, will complain sadly of their Backs, and some others of
their Bellies. Many a Saucy Rascal, who has been Corrected for his Insolency,
will complain heavily of his Head and Shoulders, and for the future, hate the
sight of an Oaken Cudgel, as much as a Thief does the sight of a Halter. But
Fox and Poverty above all will be the most Epidemical, and will as commonly
meet together, to the great Affliction of the Patient, as the Ague and Fever.

Virtue and Villainy, are like to meet with equal Encouragement, for as many
will be Starved through Honesty as are Hanged for their Roguery, only this
Difference considered, Poverty shall take away the Life of the former without a
manifest Crime, whilst the Law shall require Evidence to prove the latter
Guilty.

Lawyers will now begin to Whet their Pen-knives against Michaelmas Term (whose
Blades, like their Hats, are grown Rusty by a long Vacation) that they may be
in a Readiness to Cut the Purses of (...) Adverse Clients, who are at Enmity
enough to Cut the Throats of one another.

This Term will highly promote the Welfare of Watermen and Coachmen, for Boats
at Westminster Bridge, and Coaches in the Palace-Yard, will stand much thicker
than Honest (...) in Westminster Hall, where many a Plain Dealer will be glad
to Grease a Knave in the Filt, because he would not be Ruined.

Amongst the (...) many Inns of Court Squirrels will be seen walking, who cover
their Backs with their Tails, and have no other Business there than to crack a
Pennyworth of Nuts, and so to the Ladies, where they Study High-Gammar Cook's
Lesson, much more than they do Cook upon Little^on, and never make it their
endeavor to understand any other Copyhold than what a Woman carries about her.

About this time, the Pomp and Vanities of the City, will be set forth with as
much Splendour to entertain the Mobility, as their Laureat can well contrive,
with a few Painted Boards, and Rusty Streamers; nothing will be heard the whole
Day but ^e^feg^^'s Music Drums, Trumpets, Bells, Hoit-boys, and the Shouts of
the Rabble will make up the Melodious Consort; after which, the Grave Elders,
wrapped up in Coney-Skin, will dance through the Dirt in the sight of their
Wives, to a Sumptuous Dinner, where Mountains of Wild-fowl, and Boggs of
Custard, will be all over-flow'd, with an Inundation of Sack and Claret, to the
Gluttonous Consumption of abundance of good Things, which, contrary to the
Text, will be devoured by the Rich, and the Poor will be sent Empty away.

The Weather will now go near to be very Dirty, and he that has a desire to
keep his Shoes clean, must neither turn Porter, or Penny-Post-man.

Good Protestants will be very careful to remember the Fifth of November, and
adorn their Windows with lighted Candles, in memory of Guido Vaux's Dark
Lanthorn, except such who had rather promote the Interest of the Woodmonger,
than the Good of the Tallow-Chaundler, and they perhaps may give a Faggot to
the Burning of the Pope, and Scorching of the Devil.

Grocers will now begin to advance their Plumbs, and Bellmen will be very
Studious about their Christmas Verses. Fanatics (...) above, are at Variance
one with another, and he is a Cunning Fellow who knows how to R^con^i^e the
Difference.

Thus is the World Bewitched, (...)
To Folly, (...), and (...);
And he who fin^^ a (...),
At least a Conjuro^ (...) be.
FINIS

