WAREHAM taken by the Parliament Forces.

ALSO Colonel MITTONS valiant Exploits, certified by two several LETTERS,
dated at his Quarters. And the Particulars of his good succ^ese at
Shrewsbury-Fayre against the Cavaliers.

AS ALSO, At Welch-Poole, where he took many Prisoners of note, and diverse
Horse, and made the rest of the Cavaliers fly many miles, some in their
Shirts, and some of them naked.

With other atchievments performed by him, and Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON, and the
particulars of each, very exactly Related.

LONDON, Aug. 14. Printed by THO. FORCET, for W. H. 1644.

SIR,
TO relate the onset concerning Welch-Poole, was in this manner; on Sunday
being the fourth day of this instant August, we did go out of Ossestrey in
the afternoon, and where we did gather together to go we did not know, but
setting out in the afternoon came to a Town within a mile of the great River
that does part Shropshire and Mountgomery shire, and there we did stay about
two or three hours till it was dark night, and being dark all the Foot
marched on horseback (by reason it was the shortest way) being all got over we
lighted and marched round about the mountains to gain the Town, lest that the
light marches should discover us, and then compassing and gaining the Town
about break of day the horse sentinel of theirs did meet with our Scout, and
challenged the scout that was ours, and asked who he was for, and our Scout
said he was for the King, and the Cavalier said he was welcome, so more of the
horses came on toward the Town and shot and gave them an alarm, before the
foot could well come up after our horse to surprise the Town round about, and
by that means most of the Cavaliers escaped away, some to the red Castle that
was about half a mile from the Town of Welsh-poole and some were met 8. or
nine miles off as they say, and some almost twenty miles from the Town, some
stark naked, some in their shirts; some with their breeches off: in this
manner they all save about seaventy escaped away leaving their Arms and most
of their horse behind them, and some of the Cavaliers were taken on hors-back,
and some sadling their horses in the stables, the horses that we took were
about three hundred and eighty, being the Princes own Regiment most of them,
they were about five hundred of the Cavaliers in all that were in the Town,
Prince Rupert his own troop horses were wholly taken except his own horse
that he rid on, Prince Ruperts Cornet was taken off, refusing to take quarter,
saying he did scorn to take quarter of such Roundhead Dogs as we, and so was
killd in the Town, then our men rid about the wood up to the red Castle as fast
as they could, and brought away about 200 Cattle being fat Oxen, young steeres
and the like, from under red Castle wall of Sir Peiree Harberts own Cattle,
the Plunder of the Town was great, but it was most of it took away from the
soldiers, Sir Tho: Midleton and Colonel Mitton did promise to give the
Soldiers satisfaction, and restored it to the Inhabitants in the Town.

There was engaged on our part Colonel Mitton and part of his Regiment and Sir
Thomas Middleton joined with him, and marched with him from Ossestrey, there
was also Captain Swift of my Lord Denbighs horse, there was joined with
Colonel Mitton 200 or thereabouts, and of Sir William Breretons foot, there
came two white colors from Nantwich, they met together on Sunday in the
evening in a Town about 4 miles from Ossestrey, and marched toward Welsh
Poole which was from them 8 miles further, the number of our forces so joined
together being in all about 600 horse and foot, resolved not to rest till they
had found out the Enemy and to fall upon them where soever they light of them,
and accordingly it pleased God to prosper us as I have hear expressed. We
took 3 Captains, 2 Lievtenants, 15 Officers in all, and staying in the Town
about 2 ot 3 hours, then we marched back to Ossestry. Cheshire-men parting
where they and we met and lying still all night, the next day they went to
Nantwich, Lieutenant Collonell Coote, one of Sir Charles Cootes sons that was
in Ireland being their Governor; and Sir Tho: Middleton and Coll: Mitton
stayed with us still, whom God may still guide and prosper in all their ways
which they undertake, that's about maintaining Gods cause, and the setting up of
the Gospel, and maintaining the true Protestant Religion. And having no more
to write to you about this or any other occasion, I shall still rest,

Dated at Ossestrey, August 7. 1644. Your obliged Friend, T. J.

ON Shrewsbury Fayre-day our Colonel, Colonel Mitton having before charged
the Country not to carry in provisions to the Enemy into Shrewsbury, which many
Malignants did notwitstanding Colonels Mittons forbidding them; So Col: Mitton
with his Horse faced Shrewsbury, and with one party kept Monvers-bridge toward
the welsh Gate, within three miles of Shrewsbury, and wheeled about the Town
with another party, through Crowmeole, and Brase-meole, to Achum bridge toward
the Stone gate, within two miles of the Town where Colonel Huncks the
Governor of Shrewsbury lies (at Mr. Edwards house, a Gentleman well affected
to the Parliament, but his Brother is high Sheriff of the County for the King,
and active in the business.) The said Huncks his cattle Collonell Mitton drove
away to a great number of Horse, Cowes, and Sheep, and did much hinder the
Fair, and relief of the Cavaliers; Col: Huncks sent out a party of Horse out
of Shrewsbury against Colonel Mitton, who drew them into a Lane, and sell upon
them both ways. The Cavaliers left their Horses behind them above forty, and
fled into the Town over hedges and ditches, and glad they were to escape so
too.

From thence having intelligence of a party of Prince Ruperts horse sent into
Wales, we marched toward them, and by the way there came in 120 of Ruperts
Horse to Col: Mitton; and he sent 60 of them to his Garrison at Wem, and since
there came in 8 with gallant Horse to Wem, and more come in daily both to
Ossestry and Wem.

After having intelligence of the enemies Horse quartering at Welch-Poole, and
Sir Thomas Middletons forces being then at Nantwich, on Saturday last the 3 of
August instant, who marched thence with only two Colors of Nantwich foot, and
his own Horse, joined with us, and on Sabbath day at night we having made a
body of about 550 Horse and Foot, beat up the Enemies quarters, it fortuned to
be Pr. Ruperts own Regiment which had escaped out of the North, wherein were
many gallant Horse, we took about 346 Horse with all or most of their Arms,
three horse Colors, one was reported to be Sir Tho: Dallisons, one
Commissioner of Array, 15 Commanders, and 49 common Soldiers Prisoners, with
great store of riches and treasure-Prince Ruperts own Cornet was slain in his
Quarters refusing to take quarter of the Parliament Dogs as he termed us, and
three common Soldiers. It was not day when we fell on which occasioned the
escape of many of the Soldiers which otherwise had bin taken, there was as is
Reported 500 more Horse quartered about the Country but never one appeared to
our view. We drove almost 200 head of cattle whereof many of them were gallant
Oxen of Sir Pierce Harberts, close from the walls of Red-Castle. There do daily
many of the Enemy revolt and come in to us.

M. D.
TUesday the 13 day of August Intelligence is come to Town, of the surrender
of Warham, the only Garrison of the Kings in Dorsetshire, and most of the old
Soldiers that were in Ireland do take pay in the Parliament service.



FINIS.
This is Printed according to Order.


