SOME QUERIES TO THE PROTESTANTS Concerning the English Reformation.

By J. W. Gent.



Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the Old
Spring-Garden near Charing Cross, 1687.

Some Queries to the PROTESTANTS, concerning the English REFORMATION,
THe Church of England is either the whole Catholic Church, or a Member
thereof; If a Member only, name me that Church or Congregation under the Sun,
whose Sacraments and Liturgy she embraces, unless she have cut her self off
from the rest of the Body?

Does she allow the Sacraments of Lutherans or Calvinists?

From whence was Cranmer that first Patriarch or Reformer of the Church of
England, sent? Who gave him Authority to Preach his Reformed Gospel? Was it
just or honest for him to rise up against the Church of Rome, by virtue of a
Commission from her received? And if so, I pray inform me whether a Bishop or
Minister fallen from the Church of England, may not also take upon him to
Preach against the Church of England, by pretense of the Orders received from
her Hands?

Whether want of Mission be not an error in the Foundation of any Church? It
being Theft and Robbery (as our Savior has taught us) not to enter by the
door into the Sheepfold.

Whether Cranmer entered by the Parliament-dore, or by the Gate of the
Scriptures? But this latter is the old Song of Heretics and Sectaries,
perpetually boasting of Scripture. I demand therefore, does not the Bible admit
of various Interpretations? whence of necessity some Judge is to be assigned,
to determine which is the true Interpretation, unless your inclinations be to
wrangle to all Eternity.

To these Quaeries I have often times-desired an Answer, but never yet met with
any. If you pretend (as many do) that Cranmer and his Associates derived their
Holy Orders from Christ and his Apostles, by the hands of Roman Catholic
Bishops. It follows inevitably, that Roman Catholic Bishops did also receive
their Orders from Christ and his Apostles, and consequently are true Bishops;
and therefore to be heard. By this Answer, the Protestants seem to me, to
destroy their own Cause. But you will say perhaps, that Roman Catholic Bishops
did receive their Orders, not their Doctrine from Christ and his Apostles; Very
good: I would fain know then, by whose Authority the first Reformers rose up
against the Doctrine of the Church of Rome? Untie this knot, or confess that
Cranmer, Luther, Calvin, Socinus, etc. made themselves Judges, Witnesses, and
Accusers.

But the more common Answer is, that every National Church may Reform it self.
Be it so: Then it follows, Scotland may Reform it self to Calvinism, Saxony to
Lutheranism, etc. Moreover, it is false, that the change of Religion was made
here in England by Vote of the National Church, or Clergy of England. No, no,
but by the giddiness of a Few, during the Minority of Edward VI. being then a
Child of Ten years old. Read the Annals of those times, (even Fox himself)
where it is evident that almost all the English Bishops ( Cranmer and two or
three more excepted) were utterly against the pretended Reformation.

Yet let us suppose, but not grant, Religion to have been reformed here by the
Major part of the English Clergy: I understand not how it may be Lawful for the
Church of England, being in actual Communion with the Catholic Church, to
separate it self from the rest of the Body. If you say this was not done by
fault of the English Church, but of the Church of Rome obtruding on the World
her Errors and Corruptions; I answer in short, that all Heretics, themselves
being Judges, will escape Condemnation. And further, let the Reader take notice
that all Presbyterians are wont to urge this very instance in their own defense
against the Church of England, to wit, that they have left only the Errors and
Corruptions of the English Church.

Whether the true Service of God had been corrupted throughout the whole World
before Cranmers rise? If not, tell me in what Provinces of the Earth did it
exist? Whether among the Waldenses? But I am ignorant from whence Peter Waldo,
the Merchant of Lions, received his Mission. Nor do I know whether his
Sacraments are approved by the Church of England.

Whether at this day there be no Pure and Apostolical Service of God in the
World, except that established by Law in England and Ireland? Whether it be
Lawful for the People of England to invent a Church to themselves, divided from
all the rest of the Christian World? By what Authority do they censure the
Sacraments and Rites of the Roman Church?

Whether Cranmer was the first Archbishop of the Church of England? The reason
of my doubt, is, because the Archbishops of Canterbury for nine preceding Ages
were all Roman Catholics? If he was the first, he wanted Episcopal Succession,
because being the first of his Sect, he succeeded to none. Then how could he be
a Lawful Pastor, who had neither Succession, Mission, nor Miracles to recommend
his New Doctrine? I say New, and strange at that time, and for many Ages before.

Whether that be a true Church that wants Lawful Pastors? And whether Pastors,
not Lawful and True, can be said to have true Sacraments? If not, then, is it
not better to Communicate under One Kind with Catholics, than under No Kind
with Reformers?

Whether the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of England be Articles of Faith, yea
or no? If not, then no body is bound to believe them under pain of Damnation.
If they be, then has the Church of England invented new Articles of Faith
besides those XII. instituted by Christ and his Apostles.

Whether the Reformed Religion may not be divided and sub-divided into endless
Reformations?

Whether in the matter of the Eucharist, the Argument drawn from our Senses be
not fallible? The reason of this question is, because the Serpent deceived our
first Parents by persuading them to believe their own Eyes rather than the Word
of God. As that they should eat of the Tree of Knowledge because it was fair to
the Eye. Now if Mankind were so deceived by their Sight, pray whence should
their other Senses deserve more credit?

Whether the Church of England be not changeable according to the various
inclinations of English Parliaments?

Whether the Spirit of Calvin denying, and that of Luther affirming a Corporal
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, be the same Spirit? If not, then both
cannot be of God.

Was not John Calvin a most impudent Creature in assuming to himself the Office
of Reforming the World, being yet but a young Man of 25 or 26 years of age, and
that without all pretense of Miracles, a thing which Christ himself undertook
not under 30 years of age.

Whether, from the Womb of the Reformation have not issued all those
Slaughters, Rapines, Tumults, Plundering of Churches, Schisms, and Civil Wars
which broke out in the year 1641?

Whether Africa produces more variety of Monsters, than Britain does Fanatics,
where every Man may Read, and Interpret the Scriptures according to his own
Judgment of Discretion?

Whether Queen Elizabeth, born of Ann Bolen, Queen Katherine yet living, can be
thought Legitimate?

How admirable was the Wisdom of Henry VIII. by expelling one Pope of Rome, to
raise up infinite Popes of his own Subjects?

By whose Authority did he Divorce his Virtuous Wife Queen Katherine? His own,
or a Foreign? If by his own, why may not other Kings also put away their Wives
at their pleasure? If Mary his Daughter by Queen Katherine, was Legitimate
Heiress of the Kingdom, then Elizabeth was not; because it was not Lawful for
King Henry to have two Wives at once.

If that Religion be Sacred that is Established by Law, why did Queen Elizabeth
destroy the Catholic Religion Established by so many Acts of Parliament?

Elisabeth Expelled 14 Catholic Bishops from their Sees for refusing the Oath
of Supremacy. But how could they Swear her to be Head or supreme Governess of
the Church, when they could not Swear she was Head of the Kingdom?

Did not Cranmer and his Reforming Associates steal their Liturgy out of the
Roman Missal, Ritual and Breviary?

Are not Protestants bound by their Oath of Supremacy to obey the King as
Supreme Governor, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes,
as Temporal? What mean they by these words, As well in all Spiritual as
Temporal Things or Causes, etc. But that Protestants are Sworn to yield to the
King all manner of Obedience, both Civil and Religious? Are they not obliged
therefore according to this Oath, to become Catholics with a Catholic King,
Calvinists with a Calvinist King? Arians with an Arian? I say according to this
Oath, because the King's Majesty is the only Supreme Governor (under Christ)
as well in all Spiritual as Temporal Causes. Which words confess in the King a
Spiritual as well as Civil Jurisdiction. But whence does his Spiritual
Jurisdiction appear without the Power of the Keys?

You will say the King is to be obeyed so far as we may by the Laws of God, and
the Kingdom. Be it so, then it follows, that the King is not Supreme Governor
under Christ, but the Laws of God and the Kingdom. And what if Controversy rise
between the King and his Subjects about the true Sense of Scripture? Who shall
be Judge? the private Spirit, or not? Hence, if I am not mistaken, came the
Rise of our late Civil Wars.

Why did so many Noble Men under Edward VI. and Q. Elizabeth, so readily
embrace the Reformation? Was It for Conscience Sake, or the Lucre of
Church Lands?

Why do Englishmen, (so desirous of Novelties,) hate Popery? Perhaps because
Popery is no Novelty.

The Church of England is either Fallible, or Infallible; if Fallible (as is
confessed by all) then is she not Founded upon a Rock, because she may Deceive,
and be Deceived.

Whether Cardinal Wolsey did wisely by Demolishing Monasteries to Found
Colleges? The reason of this doubt is, because the Tree of Knowledge was not
the Tree of Life.

Is there not wanting in the Church of England a more correct Translation of
the Bible? Many material Errors being found in our present English Bible
tending to Schism and liberty of the Flesh. For instance, Gal. 5.17. Dan. 4.24.
where the Prophet speaks thus to King Nebuchadnezar, Quamobrem, Rex, consilium
meum placeat tibi, and peccata tua ele^mosynis redime, and Iniquitates tuas
misericordiis Pauperum. Which Text the present English Translation thus
renders, viciously enough. Wherefore O King, break off thy Sins by
Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor. Whereas it
ought to have been Translated Redeem thy Sins by Alms-deeds, and thine
Iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor. Again, how are St, Paul's words to the
Corinthians misrendred, 1 Cor. 7.9. Quod si non se continent, nubant; But if
they cannot contain, let them Marry; where this word (cannot) not being found
in the Greek, was devised in favor of the Flesh.

Likewise the words of Christ Matthew. 19.11. are corrupted in favor of the
Flesh, Non omnes capiunt verbum istud sed quibus datum est. All Men (cannot)
receive this saying, but such to whom it is given. It ought to be, all Men do
not receive this saying. Also the words of Job, Chapter 7.1. and many other
Texts, especially Exodus 20.4. in hatred of the Picture of our Savior. Non
facies tibi sculptile. Which word Sculptile, is by the 70 Interpreters
Translated Idol, as indeed it ought to be, because God did not forbid Images,
but Idols.

FINIS.

