Synthesis et Analysis. Vulgo ALGEBRA.
1. WHereas it is universally granted by the Learned, That the Sciences
Mathematical have their Rise and Foundation in Algebra; This then ought first
to be Learned, in order to a True and Easy obtaining the Rest. 2. The most
knotty and difficult Problems, which are to be met withal in the Works of
Euclid, Archimedes, Diophantus, Pergoeus, Vieta, etc. and in those of our own
Countrymen, as the Learned and Reverend Mr. Oughtred, Mr. Harriot, Dr. Pell,
Mr. Kersey, Dr. Wallis, and others; are hereby Explained, Demonstrated, and
made Intelligible to mean Capacities. 3. A Learner, in a Month or Six Weeks,
may know more in Arithmetic and Geometry, by help of this Analytics, than it is
possible he should Ever comprehend by any other Method. 4. YOVTH, about Twelve
or Thirteen Years old, by taking one or two Lessons a day, do in a short time
become good Proficients therein. And the Truth of this Assertion will be
evident to any that shall please to come and see ^^ose Youths, which are
Boarded and Taught in the Author's House. 5. This only true and solid Learning
clears and satisfies the Understanding, leaving it fully convinced, and without
scruple; And consequently it is the most proper and effectual means to settle
the Mind, and fix Reason in Youth. 6. So much of this Learning as is once
understood, cannot be forgotten, by reason of the Demonstration that goes along
with it.


The Professor of this Excellent and Ancient Learning, may be heard of at Mr.
Warner's a Mathematical Instrument-maker, in little Lincoln's Inn Fields, at the
Sign of the Kings-Arms and Globe, near Lincoln's Inn Gate: or at his House in
Fanchurch-Street, London.

The Nobility and Gentry are Taught at their own Houses.

By John Ward.

