A STEP TO THE BATH: WITH A CHARACTER OF THE PLACE.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by I. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard, in
Fanchurch-street, 1700.

Books Printed and Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn -Yard in
Fenchurch-street; and by M. Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel.
1. SOt's Paradise: Or the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House; With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Iamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island. Price Six Pence. 3. Eclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashopper. Price Six Pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six Pence. 5. A Trip to
New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English and
Indians. Price Six Pence. 6. Modern Religion and Ancient Loyalty: A Dialogue.
Price Six Pence. 7. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between Two Astrologers and
the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen from the Vices and
Villainies Practiced in Court, City and Country. Price Six Pence. 8. A Walk to
Islington: With a Description of New Tunbridge -Wells, and Sadler's
Musick-House. Price Six Pence. 9. The Humors of a Coffee-House: A Comedy.
Price Six Pence. 10. A Frolic to Horn-Fair. With a Walk from Cuckold's-Point
through Deptford and Greenwich. Price Sixpence. 11. The Dancing-School. With the
Adventures of the Easter-Holy-Days. Price Six Pence. 12. The First Volume of
the LONDON-SPY: In Twelve Parts. 13. The Second Volume of the LONDON-SPY: In
Six Parts. Price Six Pence each; or they may be had both Volumes Bound
together; and also Bound with the rest of the Authors Writings. 14. The
Metamorphos'd Beau, etc. 15. The English Nun, etc. 16. Laugh and be Fat: Or, an
Antidote against Melancholy. Containing great variety of Comical Intrigues in
Town and Country. To which is added Nine Delightful Tales. Price IS.
A STEP TO THE BATH.
THE Town, and its Diversions, being grown as Stale as a Cast-off Mistress; and
the chiefest of its Inhabitants withdrawn to their Rural Pleasures; and Duns as
Impudent as D -- the Poulterian Officer: So that being Bereaved of the one, and
damnably Fatigued by the other; Necessity, the Mother of Invention, obliged me
to take a Country Journey, for Self-preservation sake; having Money to Spend,
though none to Pay. And the last Summers Expedition at the Wells, not agreeing
with my present Constitution, and my Inclinations being bent after Novelties, I
resolved to Steer my Course Westward, to see what Pleasure those Pools of
Iniquity, called the BATH, would afford me. In order for which, I presently
took Hack, and bid him drive me to that terrible Sign the Sarazens-Head in
Friday-street, where I gave Earnest for a Place in the following Mondays Coach;
but being Saturday, and late in the Season, I thought I should have no reason
to Curse my Company, for mine was the first that was taken: But my Tun-Belly'd
Hostess, to Encourage me, said, That notwithstanding 'twas so late in the Week,
she doubted not but there would be more Places taken before Night.

In hopes of which, I left her to prepare for my approaching Journey; and Money
being the Life of the Cause, I mustered up a pretty tolerable Sum, and for
convenience of Carriage, converted it into the Noblest of Metals. Then I began
to think of the Redemption of several Captivated Necessaries, which an Unlucky
Accident had brought into Bondage; as an Vltramarine Joseph, a Pocket Monitor
of Tompion's Composing, and a Silver Hilted Ripp of the Isebrook's Temper;
three as necessary Implements for a Traveller, as Goose, Yard, and Sheers, for
a Tailor. Well, to Egypt I went, and Redeemed them from Slavery.

And by reason I would be ready on Monday Morning, I went to Lie at the Inn on
Sunday Night; and Enquiring of the Tapster what Company I was like to have, he
said more he believed than I desired; for there was four Places taken just
after I went, and three of the Passengers were in the House, and to Lie there
that Night; the other was for a Merchant of Bristol. Then asking what those in
the House were, he told me two Gentlewomen and their Maid Servant, who were
just going to Supper. Whereupon I bid him go and give my Service to 'em, and
tell 'em I was to Travel with 'em to Morrow, and should take it as a great
favor, if they would please to Honor me so far, as to admit me into their
Company, for I was alone. The Fellow brought word they desired me to walk in,
and they should be very glad of mine. This being what I wanted, in I went; and
after a few Ceremonial Complements, and begging pardon for my Rudeness, I told
them I was afraid I should have gone alone, but now I found I should be Blessed
beyond my Hopes, in having the Honor, or rather Happiness, of their good
Company. I wish, Sir, replied one of 'em, it may answer your expectation, for
our Sex is counted but very indifferent Company to Travel with, and you are
like to be Fatigued with three of us. As for Children, and Testy Age, Madam,
answered I, I agree in the Opinion; but otherwise, condemn it as Erroneous: And
for your Number, The More the Merrier. That Is according as it proves, Sir, said
she; neither would I have you Flatter your self too soon, least your hopes
should prove abortive, but rather referr you to old Saffold' s Advice, Read,
Try, Judge, and speak as you find. I must confess, Madam, answered I,
Experience is the only Touchstone; but I shall be mightily deceived in my
Politics, if it does not make good my Assertion. I Presume, Sir, said the
other Lady, You have Studied Saunders, and are well Versed in Physiognomy, or
you could never pretend to so much Foreknowledge. At which I Craved the Honor
of seeing her Hand, telling her, I had some little Skill in Palmestry, by which
Art I perceived she required not much Castration; which made them both Laugh:
And the first Lady asked me, if I had any Skill in Chiromancy, for the same
Author Professed both. I told her no; but was satisfied she had; for her Charms
had raised such a Spirit in me, that I knew not how to lay it without her
Assistance. I never understood Magic, I Protest, Sir, replied she, and am
mightily afraid of a Spirit: Therefore let us Discourse no more of such Unruly
things, that neither of us know how to Govern. Your Power is as absolute in
Laying as in Raising of them, Lady, answered I; but since it is your Pleasure,
your Command shall be Obeyed, and I Will Shape my Discourse to what Subject you
Please.

But Supper coming in, they desired me to sit down with them, and having more
Manners than to refuse so good a Proffer, I complied with their Request, and
fed very Heartily. The Glass went Briskly about, that we were as Merry, as a
knot of joval Tinkers over a Cup of Nappy-Ale, and I began to like my Company
extraordinary well; but the Charming Inchantress and I, interchang'd so many
learing Ogles, that I could hardly mind our Discourse; Yet I understood so
much, that she was a Widow, the other a Wife, and both Sisters, and also
Strangers to the Place they were going to, as well as I; and had no other Call
but Recreation; But I was for fulfilling the Scriptures, in comforting the
Widow. Supper being ended, they called for a Bill, which was presently
brought; out I lugg'd, and was going to Discharge, but they begged my Pardon,
and would by no means suffer me; telling me I must submit to the Rule that is
generally observed in Traveling, for the Major of either Sex to Treat the
Minor. I must Acknowledge, Ladies, said I, it is an Old Custom so to do, but we
are not now on the Road; however that Availed not, they pleaded the Prerogative
of the Majority, and carried it Nolens Volens. Seeing they were so Resolute, I
dispensed with the Affront, considering I had often put up a greater, and would
not press too hard least it should prevail; but that was a needless Thought,
for the Young Widow drew from between her Snowy Breasts, a Purse Crammed as
full of Yellow-Boys, as a Clerk of a Markets Bag of Copper John's, and
Discharged the whole. Seeing of which, I thought I could do no less in Honor
than call for my Flask; Craving Leave to present them with it as my Foy; and
being a little Elevated with the Noble Juice, we were as jocund and
frollicksome, as a Countrey-Vicar at a Gossiping. In came the Wine, without
Disputing who should pay for it; but at last, Night, the Lovers Bliss, and Bane
of good Company, Obliged us to withdraw to our Chambers. Upon which, I told the
Ladies, I should think the time very tedious till I should be so happy as to
Enjoy their good Company again. We are apter to believe Sir, answered they, you
will think the Journey so, by reason of the Dullness of it. Say what I will,
Ladies, said I, you Foy'l me with my own Weapons, and are pleased to retort my
Words to their own Center. So after a profound Cringe or two, with a Gripe of
the Paw, and as many Amorous Glances at my Charming Widow, who returned me the
like, we parted: But never any happy Bridegroom Longed for the Approaching
Night, more than I for the succeeding Morning.

No sooner had I entered my Chamber, but I found a Secret Passion had possessed
my Soul, and I was all on Fire: Ye Powers, cried I, what strange Fever's this
that Rages in my Breast, and Riots in my Blood? Not Liquid Fire by its first
Cause Fomented, burns Fiercer in Earths Center, than I flame within. Tame this
Unruly Flame, or touch her Heart that first Kindled it, with a Cole from the
same Altar. Nay it is impossible to relate how violent my Passion raged; but in
Love I was, that is certain; but whether her Purse or Person begat this Flame,
is a very Nice Question, and I protest I know not; for, as Mr. Cowley says,
Gold alone does Passion move,
Gold Monopolizes Love.


For Gold has Unresistable Charms as well as Beauty; is of a Corroding Quality;
of an Attractive Nature, and bears a great influence over the Optics. And
'twas very probable that Purse was only Prologue to a far greater Sum; so by
consequence must needs have some Operation; not but the Ladies were both very
Amiable, in the Bloom of Vigorous Youth, bore a good Aspect, had no mean Air,
Free, and without Reserve in their Conversation; and their Deportment declared
them of no Vulgar Quality. But the Charming Golden Widow was the Idol of my
Soul, Subject of my Thoughts, and Center of my Wishes; Musing on whom, at last
dull Morpheus Sealed my Eyes, to relieve my Captivated Senses. But, Oh ye Gods!
no Rest could I obtain,
The Charming Fair did over my Slumbers Reign;
And in strange Dreams Augment my Rapid Flame.


By that time Forked Cynthia had withdrawn her influence, and bright Aurora
rose from Thetis Lap, I shook off the Drowsy God, and blessed the joyful Day.
Looking out of my Window I perceived they were preparing for our Journey, which
made me Rig with all imaginable speed; and as I was going down, who should I
meet but my Cherubimical Widow, equipped like a Goddess, and Adorned with Ribbon
like the Fore-Horse of a Country-Team? After we had given each other the Time
of the Day, Lord Sir, said she, are you but just up? Why we are almost Ready to
go; Certainly you Slept very Sound. No Madam, answered I, since I have had the
Happiness of see-you, Rest has been a Stranger to my Breast. Have I disturbed
you Sir, said she? If so, I ask your Pardon, and am sorry for it. Ye Gods,
cried I, what shall I say? Or how shall I express my self? Inspire my Tongue
with Eloquence, thou God of Love, to make her sensible of my pain. Oh Madam,
cried I, you are Innocent of your Crime, and guilty of the Fact: You have
Robbed me of my Rest, Fired my Blood, and Stolen my Heart; see how it Hovers
over your Panting Breast, and fain would gain Admittance. I Vow Sir, answered
she, your Discourse is so Mysterious, that it wants another Oedipus to unfold.
And for what you are pleased to charge me withal, is a false Accusation;
neither have I Vacancy to Entertain it. Ah Madam, replied I, I could soon
convince you of your Error, if you would give me leave to search in a certain
Corner you have about you that shall be Nameless. At which she Blushed, and
told me I was mightily Mistaken: But allow it so, since 'twas Ignorantly
committed, and without any premeditated design, she hoped I would be so
generous as to Forgive her. Never Madam, said I, unless you vouchsafe to cast
an Eye of Pity, and Commiserate the Condition of your Languishing Lover, on
whom the God of Love, if there be any such a Deity, has Emptied his whole
Artillery, and pierced my Heart with your all-Conquering Eyes: O Fie, Sir,
answered she, this is mere Railery, and only for your Diversion, a thing
Customary with you General Lovers, in whom every New Face Creates a new Flame;
of the Libertines Opinion, that a Woman, after she is once enjoyed, grows Dull
and Insipid; and what you have now so solemnly pretended to me, is no more then
you have already done to half our Sex, if possible; and such I take it.

By my Soul I thought she was a Witch by her guessing so right, and was a going
to tell her so, for every Syllable she uttered was as true as an Oracle. But
finding by her Parlying I had made a Breach, I resolved to Storm the Castle. If
you Harbor any such thought of me, Madam, answered I, by Heaven you do me
wrong; for so pure is my Flame, and so Assiduous my Passion, without you give
me speedy hopes, I shall fall a Sacrifice to your disdain, and Phoenix-like,
expire in my own Flames. It Is but Breathing a V^in Sir, answered she, and your
Fever will soon abate. Oh Madam, cried I, how can you be so Cruel? You gave
the Wound, but Administer a contrary Cure. Wrack me no longer thus with Doubts
and Fears, either retalliate me in the same Nature, or pronounce my Doom; for
on your Lips my Fate depends. Indeed Sir, answered she, that requires more
Consideration than the time will admit of now: Yet take this for your
Satisfaction, if your Character and Quality answers your Appearance, and your
Passion be real, you need not dispond of the Entertainment of that Trifle you
are pleased to Charge me withal, but it shall find a Reception Suitable to its
merits. At which she Sighed, and said our Company waited for us, but in the
Evening would take an Opportunity to discourse further of it. Now Madam, you
have raised my drooping Spirits to an Extacy of joy, answered I, Pardon my
Presumption, and Abrupt proceeding I beseech you, in taking this opportunity to
reveal my Passion, and impute it to nothing but Love, Almighty Love, for what
will not a sinking Wretch catch hold on to save his Miserable Life?

At which we separated, and joined our Company, who were preparing for an
Antidote against Fasting, which we had scarcely completed, but were called on
to Board our Leathern-Conveniency, and were penned up like the Beasts in the
Ark; but I took care to have my Mistress my Opposite; and being settled, Whip
proceeded on his Journey, and having a plentiful Mornings Draught, Tickled his
Cattle, drove like Iehu, and soon conveyed us to the Sign of Englands Champion
at Cole-brook, an Inn famous for an Hostess, and Extravagant Bills for short
Commons.

Having refreshed our selves with a good Breakfast, we re-enter'd our Coop, and
was but very indifferent Company, for our Masculine Traveller, the Married
Lady, and Mrs. Betty the Chambermaid, had a Long Game at Noddy: However it
presented me with several Opportunities of Saluting my Widow, and Exercise
abundance of Palm Letchery; but being come to Reading, we Dined at the
Canonical. Nabb, where our Landlord was as Remarkable for his Bulk, as our late
Hostess for her Tail; formerly he was a professed Baptist, but being chosen one
of the Head Loobies of the Corporation, he renounced his Religion, Embraced the
Faith, and was Christened Lumpus; his Corpse is of the size of a Rhinoceros,
Measures full three Yards in the Waste, and his Legs bigger about than the
Piers of the Town Bridge, the Doctor of the Parish has excommunicated him from
the Church; because his Snoaring not only drowns his Voice, but disturbs the
whole Congregation. Being deprived of the Church, he then took to the Flesh,
and is reported to have overlaid three of his Servants. Having now stocked our
selves with Substantial Belly-Timber, and Liquor'd our Whistles, we pursued our
Journey, and were more Sociable; the Ladies obliged us with several Songs,
which they performed with an Excellent Voice, and good Judgment: But my
Thoughts was chiefly Ruminating on the Fair Object before me, and how to manage
my Amor at Night, every fresh Glance discovered concealed Beauties, nor was
she unsensible of my Anguish, for her repeated Sighs betrayed her yielding
Heart. Oh what Celestial Motion had her Eyes!
Her Panting Breasts, how they did fall and rise!
Conspiring both to fall my Sacrifice.


And our Merchant took Notice of her Sighs, and asked her the Reason, she told
him 'twas only a Foolish Custom; but I believe had he asked me, I could have
given him a better Account. But come, Fellow-Travellers, said he, will you
please to take a Dram of Right Nants? A good Cordial on the Road, and will
digest our Dinner, I protest I forgot it in the Morning: So we accepted of his
kindness, and drained his Bottle: but promised to recruit it the first
opportunity; and to pass the time away, we engaged Mrs. Pert to sing a Song,
and our Merchant and I promised to tell a Story: She pleaded she could not
Sing, but would oblige us in relating a very strange Accident lately
discovered; which was as follows.

About fifteen Year since, There was a Noted Tradesman near Aldgate, had two
Children, a Son and Daughter, the Son was Aged about fifteen Years, and the
Daughter twelve, he had a desire to put his Son Prentice to some good Trade in
the City, and gave him his choice, but he was very much Averse to it, his
Inclinations being altogether for the Sea, and nothing would serve him but a
Tarpaulin Master. At last his Father with much Regret Consented to it, and put
him to a Master of a Ship that was bound for a Trading Voyage up the Streights:
At which the Young Man was Extraordinary Glad, took Leave of his Friends, and
went Aboard with great Joy, but before three Months was Expired, News arrived
that they were taken by the Algerines, from whom at that time there was no
Redemption: The News of which, and a Considerable Loss the Old Man had lately
Sustained by Fire, not only Reduced his Condition to a mean Subsistence, but
broke his Heart, nor did his Wife long Survive him; and with the remains of
their decayed Fortune, the Poor Orphan was put to a Sempstriss, but before her
time was Expired, one of Exeter fell in Love with her, Married her, and took
her with him to Exon, unknown to her Friends or Acquaintance; in a few Years
after he left her a Widow, no Children, and but little to Trust to; which to
improve, she set up her Trade, and Maintained her self very Handsomely, Living
in good Credit; but her Unhappy Brother, who had the Misfortune to be a Slave,
was bought by one that Lived several Leagues up in the Country, never having
any Opportunity of sending to England, his Friends dispair'd of ever seeing him
again, and gave him over for Lost. But see how Providence Ordered it, his
Master Dyed, and by reason he had been a good Servant, not only Bequeathed him
his Liberty, but also a great Sum of Money to Maintain him; and his Mistress
who had often given him several Evident Testimonies of her Affections, would
have Married him, provided he would Renounce his Religion, and Embrace the
Mohammedan, which he denied to do; but her Love was so Violent, or rather Lust
so Raging, that it o'ver flowed the Bounds of Modesty, and by the Allurements
of her Gold, enticed him to satisfy her Exorbitant Desires, by which means he
had gotten a very Considerable Estate. But the Natural Inclination for his own
Native Country, and great Desire to see his Friends, out-ballanc'd the Embraces
of his Mistress, whose Gold was more prevailing than her Charms, and came the
first Opportunity for England, and in a short time Arrived at Plymouth, the
next day reached Exon; and having present occasion for some Linen, he
Accidentally goes into his Unknown Sisters Shop and furnished himself, then
posts for London; where to his great Grief he found as I have already Related,
and by no means could get any Information of his Sister, his long Absence not
only bereaved him of his Friends, but also of all his former Acquaintance; that
he was become an Alien in the Place of his Nativity. The Deprivation of which,
was an extraordinary Trouble to him, and the only way to Redress it, he thought
would be to Alter his Condition; he Coveted not Riches, but Content, to
Compensate for his hard Fate. But, Oh, how often are we Deceived in our
Expectations, and our hopes Frustrated by an All-Seeing Power? His Fancy
presented none so Charming to his Eyes as the Exeter Widow: Nay, so great was
his Passion, that immediately he goes down, Courts her, and in a short time
Married her, brings her up to London, takes a House, and Lived very Happily
together, had two Children by her; and no Discourse as yet of their Parents
happened between them. But see how Fate Ordained it! Not long since, as he was
Walking by Fleet-Ditch, he Espies his Fathers Picture Exposed to Sale among Old
Goods; which presently he Bought, and made a very strict Enquiry where they had
it, thinking thereby to trace his Sister, but 'twas so long since they bought
it, that they could give him no Account; however he Imputed it to be a very
Lucky Accident, had it brought home with him, and with abundance of Joy shows
it his Wife. Telling her, 'twas the Picture of his Father, and how Accidentally
he came by it: At which, she was mightily surprised, and told him, If that was
the Picture of his Father, (which Heaven forbid) she was his own Natural
Sister: He Astonished at this dreadful News, asked her a few more questions,
she Resolving of which, Confirmed the Discovery, and has Involved them into a
great deal of Trouble and Consternation of Mind; for the Easement of which they
have had the Opinion of several Learned Divines; who Advise them to join no
more in their incestuous Bed, but Live after the Natural Bonds of Affinity, and
since 'twas Ignorantly Committed, it mitigated the Crime, and they were more to
be Pittyed, and none could be so Barbarous, as to reflect on their Unhappy
Offspring. But it is to be Feared, it will prove Fatal to them both, for they
Labor under an Agony of Mind, that nothing but Death or Distraction is
Expected.

Her Story being Ended, the Ladies Confirmed it, and declared they knew the
Parties; and it had not been Discovered above two or three Years; but while we
were Commiserating their hard Fate, we came to a Vilage called Theal, and Stopped
at Old Mother Cleanly's, at the Sign of the Divine Clamor; as Noted a House
for Bottle-Ale and Plumb-Cakes, as the Folly on the River of Thames, for Bad
Wine, and Lewd Whores: Nay, Slash declared he dares no more pass by without
calling, than the Forked Animals miss Cuckold's-Point, in their Journey to
Horn-Fair: But having participated, and given our Approbation on her Commodity,
we Traveled on, and our Bristol Merchant told us, he presumed, we were a going
to the BATH for Diversion; but his Journey to London was such a Novelty, that
'twas scarce to be Paralleled, and Notwithstanding it had occasioned him a
great deal of Trouble, it might Divert us; with that we desired him to Relate
it, which he presently did, after this manner:

The Place of my Habitation you already know, of which I have been a Merchant
almost this thirty year, am a Widower and have several Children, but my Eldest
Son being very Desirous to Live at London, I put him to an Eminent Draper in C
--, but before he had Served half his Time, he kept such high Company, and was
Acquainted with so many Rakes of the Town, that his Master was as weary of him,
as he of his Master; so I was obliged to take him Home, and Designed to bring
him up a Merchant, but the Infection he received at London, made too great an
Impression to be Discharged by my Documents, which often occasioned no small
difference between us; about a Month since, having some very Urgent Business in
Wales, which required my Absence for at least twelve or fourteen Days, I left
my Daughter to manage my Domestic, and he my other Affairs, and took my
Journey; but that Night I left him, he sends Word to all my Correspondents at
London, that I was Dead, (as I understand since) and that he should be with
them in a short time, for his Father having left him a Plentiful Estate, he
designed to leave off Merchandising. This News Startled my Acquaintance, and
they sent him several Letters of Condollence; and my Death past as Current on
the Exchange, as if it had been sworn by twenty Irish Witnesses. My Daughter
who kept my Cash, sent him a Letter of Advice, of the Payment of some Bills, I
had lately drawn on him, which he received and answered; he also intercepted
the Letters I sent his Sister, and about six days before I came Home, takes
fifty Pound of my House Cash and posts for London, and before he Appeared
Public, Cloths himself in deep Mourning, Visits my Correspondents, tells them
he came to Administer to his Fathers Will, and Balance Accounts, and takes up
of my Goldsmith 1300 l. who paid it him all in Gold, as he requested; having
Accomplished his Ends, Cast off his Mourning, New Rigged, and now I hear is
gone for Rome, to assist at the Iubilee; but when I came home, missing of him
and my Money, I presently Conjectured he was gone for London, and was afraid he
would take up more, therefore made all the speed I could after him, to prevent
it, but he was too Nimble for me; my Acquaintance was all possessed with a
Pannick Fear, and so surpised, that they took me for a Spirit, and would
hardly believe their own Eyes, but I soon Convinced them of their Mistake, and
they me of my Sons Proceedings.

And this Generally the Product of sending our Children to London: Well, had I
forty, I Would never send any of them to London again: Now he is gone Loaded with
Gold to Rome; Perhaps, about a Year or two hence, I shall have him return, as
Light as a Common Strumpet, as Shabby as a Broken Officer, and as Foppish as a
City Beau; but I will never Look on him again. Make no Rash Vow, however, Sir,
said I, least you Repent it; (for Nature will prevail) he may Return a very
Accomplished Gentleman, for Traveling conduces much to Education. Yes,
answered he, As going to the Dancing-School, does young Wenches, who if they
have but a little Money are presently Caught up by some Hopping Coxcomb or
another, that has nothing to Trust to, but a Pair of Rotting Shanks, which are
scarce able to support his Wavering Carcass. I find Sir, replied one of the
Ladys, You have a great Aversion to London Education, and the very Thoughts of
it gives you the Spleen? Pray, what is the BATH for a Nursery? For during the
Season, that is a Place of great Resort. Why, answered he, That Is out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire, and as Eminent for Wickedness as London, 'Bating its
Magnitude. With that, I told him, I perceived he Harbored no better Opinion of
the Tuition of his own Country, than of our Metropolian Seminary; and my Story
would but Augment his Disgust.

Now being got to the end of our Stage for that Day, we referred mine for the
next, and Newbury was as welcome to us, as Michalemas Term to the Bauling
Quill-drivers, after the Long Vacation: Our Quarters was at the King of Beasts,
and after we had Saluted our Ladies, and bid them Welcome to Newbury, we
Viewed our Chambers, gave Order for our Supper, and Refreshed our selves with a
Glass of good Burgundy; and having some spare time, our Merchant went to Visit
a Friend in Town, and I gave the Ladies an Invitation to take a Walk, which my
Mistress was willing to, but her Sister, being something indisposed after her
Journey, desired to be excused; and as Good-Luck would have it, the Maid was
obliged to stay with her: So my Charming Widow, after she had dismantled
herself of her Riding Accouterments, and I Augmented the weight of my Bush, by
almost half a Pound of Powder, was ready to March; our Landlord understanding
we were disposed for a Walk, Conveyed us out at his Back-gate, where we found a
most delicate Grotto of Nature's, not Art's Composing, half environed with a
Murmuring Brook whose purling streams Created a most Melodious Harmony, and the
whole Composure seemed a Second Paradise.

Having walked a turn or two, I thought it convenient to put my Widow in mind
of her Promise. Pardon my Presumption, Madam, said I, in taking the boldness,
to put you in mind of this Mornings Conclusion, for no fitter opportunity than
now can present it self; here we are retired, and the place seems to be
dedicated for the same purpose. Sir, answered she, how can I be assured your
Passion is real, since your Acquaintance is so slender, in which if I should be
deceived, how shall I be Ridiculed by the Censorious World? I presume not,
Madam, replied I, to lay any Claim of meriting your Esteem, as to the Quality
of my Person; nor yet am I so despiseable in my Descent or Fortune, to incur
your disdain. But Love, Almighty Love, who knows no Bounds or Equals, is my
Plea; and notwithstanding my Love is of so late a Date, it is as pure as
Vestals Flames, and firm as Fate, and all my pretensions Honorable. If so,
Sir, said she, I do Agnize your Passion, and return you mine; for Blushing I
must own it, when first I saw your Face, an unusual Flame seized my Heart and
kindled in my Breast Unknown Desires. At this Confession I flung my circling
Arms about her Lovely Wast, and almost stiffled her with Kisses. What then
remains, cried I, my Life, my Soul, but to Quench our Desires, and delay our
Bliss no longer? At which she started back, and told me she thought, or she was
much Mistaken, before she revealed her Passion, I declared I designed nothing
but what was Honorable; if so, what means this unruly Proceeding? Only the
extreme Ardour of my Flame, my Dear, answered I; for who can behold the
Tempting Tree, and forbear to pluck its luscious Fruit? Not till the Priest
has made it Lawful, Sir, said she, for Fear, -- Oh, for Fear. -- By Heaven,
and all that is Sacred, Madam, cried I, those Fears are Needless; for sooner
shall the Silver Morn forget to dawn, the Glorious Sun to steer its course,
than I prove false to you. What then should hinder us now, from Satisfying our
Craving Appetites, before the Sluggish Priest has Craved a Blessing. At which,
she sunk into my Arms, and by her Dying Eyes gave her Consent; then calling to
mind the Alacrity to be used in Courting a Widow, and that now might be the
Crittical Minute, I laid her down on Nature's Carpet, and made bold with
Mother Earth for a Boulster; and notwithstanding all her faint Resistance,
rifled her joys, roving through all the hidden Labyrinth of Love, and by our
Mutual Embraces Quenched our fierce Desires, then Coo'd and Bill'd like a pair
of Amorous Doves, swearing Eternal Constancy afresh, and to tie the Gordian
knot the first opportunity.

But in our Discourse I took an occasion to make a scrutiny into her Affairs,
that I might understand what Bargain I was like to have, if I performed my
Promise. She told me she had been a Widow near two years, had no Child, was
worth 3000l* and lived with her Sister, who was Married to a Gentleman near
Hackney; and living so far off, was the reason they lay at the Inn last Night.
This News methought Augmented her Charms, and having enjoyed the Shadow, I
hoped in a short time to reap the Golden Substance. Having out-staid our time,
a Messenger came to Desire us to make haste, for our Company and Supper waited
for us: But when we came, and had given them an Account of our pleasant walk,
and Description of the Delightful Grove, (but not a word of the Paradise of
Love) they seemed to be sorry they did not go along with us (that neither of us
was, I am certain.) Having Supt, they brought us a Bill, which was as
reasonable as a Reckoning at a Hosier-lane Bawdy House during Bartholomew-Fair;
for a Brace of Midling Trouts, they charged us but a Lease of Crowns, Six
Shillings for a Shoulder of Mutton and a Plate of Gerkins, three and Sixpence
for Six Rowles, and three Nipperkins of Belch; and two Shillings more for Whip
in Drinking our Healths. Their Wine indeed was good, so was their price; and in
a Bill of two pound four Shillings, they made a Mistake but of Nine; I asked
what Countryman my Landlord was? answer was made, Full North; and Faith 'twas
very Evident, for he had put the Yorkshire most Damnably upon us. But being to
rise very Early, we went to Bed soon after we had Supt; and was called by Break
of Day, my Widow presented us with a Pot of Chocolat of her own Preparing; and
filling my Dishes fuller than ordinary, I Conjectured 'twas for my good
Performances, dashed with a little self-interest; after which we recruited our
Bottle, and renewed our Journey; but I marked his Gate with a Cross as red as
the Sign. And before we had Traveled a Mile, the Ladies laid claim to my
promise to relate my Story, which I was obliged to perform, and was thus.

There was a very Eminent Shopkeeper in Westminster, had the misfortune to have
a very Extravagant Son, who by his Continual Profuseness, Consumed him a great
many Baggs of a certain Commodity much better then Cherry-Stones; he was not
only very Indulgent to him, but Maintained his Family; he being of a Roving
Mind, could not Confine himself to Business, but went from his Father and
Family, changed his Name, and Raked about the Town; but by Accident got
Acquainted with two Young Women, who kept Shop on the Royal Exchange; the
youngest of them he Courted for a Wife, and in a short time Married her, made
an Extraordinary Figure, and as Mighty Pretenses; but he had not Enjoyed her
long before 'twas Discovered, and he Obliged to Live with his First, who was no
ways deserving of such an Unkind Action; but rather Worthier of a better
Husband; and being asked the Reason, why he would offer to Commit Poligamy? He
answered, Though Plurality of Caesar's was not Safe for a State, Plurality of
Wives could be no Crime.

But the Poor Young Woman was very much Disappointed; all her hopes Blasted,
and her Promising Imaginations proved Vain Chimera's. For he in a little time
after abandoned both, and took a Trip to Iamaica, where in three Months he
Married a Rich Widow, worth at least 7000l. Sterling, and before three years
was Completed, she made her Exit; which he esteemed to be the Happyest Day in
all his Life, the result of all his hopes, and the only mark he aimed at. Now
being Master of a Plentiful Estate, he soon Converted it into the Commodity of
the Country, and Sailed for England, with a Joyful Heart, and Prosperous Gale;
and upon his Arrival at London, found himself a double Widower, and his
Exchange Wife Married to a Dutchman, who was so Enamored with her Fiz, that
notwithstanding he had heard of her Misfortune, he tied the Nooze, and became
One Flesh, though of two very different Constitutions. She was Young and Airy,
and Married him more for the sake of his Money than Person; he Old and
Impotent, and as Jealous as a Spaniard, by which her Condition was much worse
than before; for on the least Distaste, he would be Reflecting on her former
Husband, who had not seen her since the Discovery, nor she him, but heard of
his Success, though not by what means he had attained it; and was extreme Sorry
she had Contracted the last Marriage; but he having a desire to see her, though
not to take her again as a Wife, and thinking Time, Absence, and the Alteration
of his Attire, and Hair, (for when he Lived with her, he wore his own, but now
a Full Wigg) was Disguise sufficient to Conceal him from her Knowledge, goes to
the Shop, and she Congratulated him, with the usual Complement, of What do you
want, Sir? Two very necessary things, Madam, said he, Clean Gloves and a Pretty
Wife; and I Presume you may supply me. Of the First, Sir, answered his Wife, We
have Choice; but the last is a very scarce Commodity, and very difficult to be
had. I was in hopes, Madam, replied he, you could have furnished me with both;
but more especially the last. But she and her Partner both knew him, contrary
to his Expectations: Sir, said her Partner, I am persuaded you have no occasion
for a Clogg; for so a Wife is generally Termed. But such a Pretty Lady as this
is, would be counted rather a Blessing, Madam, answered he. You wrong your
Judgment very much, Sir, replied his Wife, For Nature has not been so Liberal
to me in her Indowments, as you are pleased to Flatter me with all. Besides I
am a Wife already; and here the dull Animal: comes. As he approached the Shop,
the other spoke to him after this manner: I have been Courting this Lady for a
Wife, Sir, but I find you are so happy as to be before hand with me. That Is
more than he knows, Sir, said she Smiling. By which he perceived they knew him;
but her last Husband being Ignorant who he was, took it as a great Affront, and
in a mighty Passion abused her in a very high degree; and Upbraided her with
her first Husband; which so grated his Spirits, that it revived the glowing
Embers of his Love, and the Concealed Sparks broke out into a violent Flame.
Thou Mercenary Villain, said he, to Upbraid thy Wife with what her Innocence
was imposed on; and as I am the Man that was the Aggressor, I Will do her that
Justice to make you ask her Pardon, here Publicly on your Knees: Or by Heaven,
this Moment is your last. At which he drew his Sword, and the Glittering Steel
so scared poor Hogan, that he presently fell on his Marrowbones, Craved her
Pardon, and was Glad he came off so. Now, Madam, said he, to his Wife, had not
you been so dis-honourable to me, on the Discovery of my Contract with you, I
would have freed you from the Embraces of this Insip'd Coxcomb; but since you
was so Unkind, I can only Condole your second Misfortune, who was so
Ungrateful to me in your first; then departed, and left poor Butter-Box, to be
ridiculed by the whole Society of Thimberkins. A Friend of mine was an Eye
Witness of this, and knew both the Husband and Wife. Without doubt, said the
Gentleman, This Spark was one of Solomon's Race, and Londons Masterpiece. Oh,
Sir, it is Reported he is very much Reformed to what he was; and Lives very
Sober and Sedate. Then it ought to be Chronicl'd for a Miracle, said he.

But being come to the Rocky Decent into Marlborough, we were so Damnably
jolted, that our Merchants Pocket Comfort Vanished, and the Brittle Metal was
shattered into a thousand pieces; for the loss of which, I entailed such a
Hearty Curse on the Place, that never since has a Coach past, but it
Over-turn'd, a Wagon or Cart, but it breaks either Wheel or Axeltree, a Horse,
but he Stumbles; and all the Beasts that Graze near it, Die of the Murraine: At
last with the help of a couple of Gigantick Loobies, to support our Tottering
Caravan, we got into the Town, and tipped them a Hogg for our safe Conduct.

Being come to Marlborough, we broke our fast at the Royal-Diadem, and had Mr.
Mayor for our Landlord, a good jolly Bachanalian, who has bestowed more in
adorning his Fiz, than the Market-house cost Building; and being a Magistrate,
I made a heavy Complaint against that Cursed Hill, demanded satisfaction for
the Damage we had sustained, in breaking our Brandy Bottle, and told him,
unless they took speedy Care to have it mended, I would Indite the whole
Corporation. That we cannot do by no means, Sir, said he, For in so doing we
should Ruin half the Town; for the Damage that Hill occasions, brings a
Considerable Trade to our Wheel-wrights, Farriers, and Chyrurgions; also
Creates no small Business to those of my own Function, and Maintains three or
four Families to support the Coaches, and Assisting at other Accidents: But
however, I Will present you with a fresh Cargo, and Advise you to take more Care
for the future: Before we had Breakfasted, he was as good as his Word; but to
retalliate his Kindness, we called for two or three Flasks Extraordinary.

Having laid a good Foundation to Travel on, we quitted Marlborough, and soon
came on a curious Down, much Noted for its Flocks of Gray Weathers, which often
gave us Confounded Jolts, and put us in Mind of our Landlords Caution,
concerning our Bottle. But before we had Rod five Mile, we received Information
of a Party of Light Horse that lay Perdue to Ease us of our Rin^. This News
made us look very queer, and my Company to sink the Cole with abundance of
Agility. My Mistress was in a Peck of Troubles, for the security of her
Ponderous Purse; and I thought by the motion of her Pettycoats, she was a going
to put it where my Lady -- did her Watch: Our Merchant shuffled Loose
Yellow-Boys by dozens, into the Linning of his Coat, and I Trusted to
Providence: But at last to our great Satisfaction it proved to be a false
Alarm, and by the help of our Nanterian Cordial, we Recovered our straggling
Senses: The Discourse of which lasted us, till we got to Sandy-Lane, where the
Road was so Damnable heavy, that two mile in three hours was an Extraordinary
Journey, and the Corporation Trot to St. Paul's on Sunday, was a Fool to it: But
at last we Arrived at the Sign of Chevalier Bruine, where we was to Dine.

Here we had such an Amsterdam W -- for our Landlady, that the like was never
heard of. She has Buried five Husbands, never had but one Son, and he was
Hanged; thirteen Daughters, and a Dozen of them was of their Mothers Stamp, and
the other Died an Infant; the Old one was a Widow, her Daughters Maid, yet
between them had more Children, then Rosemary-Lane affords on a Sunday; and
most of their Sires was Soldiers or Cattle-Firkers. There was more Coaches and
Wagons, drawn up before her Gate, then Hacks in Palace-Yard, during the
Sessions of Parliament, or Term-Time. All her Entertainment is Loins of Mutton,
or Rabbets; and she makes more Broth in a day, then all the Chop-Houses in
Castle-Alley in a Week. At last, with much ado, we got two of the aforesaid
Dishes for Dinner, and a Nasty Jade to Attend us; who, as we understood
afterward, was one of her Daughters; but by her Looks, one would Conjecture
the Devil was her Father; yet she was Recommended to us, for the flower of them
all: But in my Judgment the Old one is more Inviting then any of her
Offspring. The best Accommodation we had there was the Juice of Pippins, which
we Drank very Plentifully, but by its Urinical motion, hindered Whip one Mile in
four; and the Ladies Emissary, Mistress Pert, once was so hard put to it, that
we thought by her Sower Looks, and the Ringing of her Knees, she had the
Dry-Gripes; but at last a Natural Evacuation gave her Ease, and Created us a
great deal of Laughter. Our Bill was composed in a few Words; and was very
Moderate, considering what Extravagant Prices, we often give for Mutton and
Conny in some Places.

Having Dined, we proceeded on our Journey, but with a great deal of
difficulty; for the Road was so Rocky, Unlevel, and Narrow in some places, that
I am persuaded the Alps are to be passed with less danger, in the Performance
of which our firking Essedarian was obliged to use abundance of
Horse-Courting-Rhetorick to his Tired Ambulators; and when that prevailed not,
to Exercise his Tickler; but we were jolted so Cursedly, that I thought it
would have made a dislocation of my Bones; we all complained, but could find no
Remedy; nor would I advise any who have been Sufferers in Venus sports, to
Adventure the Fatigue of a Coach to the Bath, least it dis-joint a Member or
two. At last when our Patience was almost worn out, we agreed to light rather
than endure it any longer; but our Chariotier informed us, we were almost at
our Journeys-end, which we presently found to be true, and Bath was as Welcome
to us, as a good Dinner to a Covent Garden Tooth-picker.

Being come to the White-Hart, our long wished for Port, we refreshed our
selves with much Joy, after our tedious Mortifying-Journey: And there our
Merchant took his Leave of us, in a fresh Coach for Bristol: Then Enquiring for
a Lodging, we were recommended to a Tonsers, whose Wife kept a Milliners-Shop
in the same House, where was Accommodation for us all, though he had several
other Lodgers in the House of good Quality. That Night my Widow and I had an
opportunity to enjoy our selves to our mutual Satisfaction, without any
suspicion, and agreed to be made one Flesh, the first opportunity that offered.
In the Morning we were saluted by the whole Fraternity of Cat-Gut-S^rapers, and
could not get rid of them without the Assistance of an Angel. My Mistress and
her Sister would not appear public, till their Baggage Arrived from London,
which they did not expect in three or four days, so I had the Liberty to stroul
alone.

After I had Accounter'd my self to the best Advantage, (in which I made no
small Figure) I went to the Coffee-House, where I found several of my
Acquaintance, who seemed to be Overjoyed at my Appearance, Embraced and
Slabber'd me, as an Old Woman does her Grand Child; asking a thousand
Impertinent Questions concerning London, and what Company came with me? If
Ladies, or Gentlemen? Whether any Quality was on the Road bound for (...) In
which I satisfied them to the best of my knowledge; but after we had (...) or
two, of that insippid Liquor, we Adjourned to Honest C -- at (...) where we
Enlivened our Souls with a Glass of good Bordeaux, (...) and from thence we
went to see the Diversion of the Baths.

Of which, it is not my Design to give you an (...) Original, and Eminent Cures;
or a Description of their Structure (...); for that is already performed, in
most of our Chronicles; (...) on the Ways and Intrigues that are managed there
during the Season.

The first we went to, is called the Kings; and to it (...), both running in
one; and the most famous for Cures. In this Bath(...) least fifty of both
Sexes, with a Score or two of Guides, who by their (...) Carcasses, and
Lacker'd Hides, you would think they had lain Pickling a Century of (...) Lake:
Some had those Infernal Emissaries to support their Impotent Limbs. Others to
scrub their Putrified Carcasses like a Race-Horse. In one Corner was an Old
Fornicator hanging by the Rings, Loaded with Rotten Humidity; Hard by him was a
Buxom Dame, Cleansing her Nunquam Satis from Mercurial Dregs, and the remains
of Roman Vitriol. Another, half covered with Sear-Cloth, had more Sores than
Lazarus doing Penance for the Sins of her Youth: At her Elbow was a Young
Hero, supported by a couple of Guides, racked with Aches and Intolerable Pains,
Cursing of Middlesex Court, and Beveridges Dancing-School, as Heartily as Job
the Day of his Birth. At the Pump was several a Drenching their Gullets, and
Gormandizing the Reaking Liquor by wholesale.

From thence we went to the Cross-Bath, where most of the Quality resorts, more
Famed for Pleasure then Cures, though they pretend it has wrought Miracles on
Barren-Soil, and wonderfully helps Conception. Not long since, a Gentleman of
Quality was beholden to it for an Heir, as he reported; but his Lady is of a
Contrary Opoinion; yet I know not what Operation such Tempting Objects may have
by causing Titilation, and heighten Imagination, to procure an Immediate
Conjunction. Here is performed all the Wanton Dalliancies imaginable;
Celebrated Beauties, Panting Breasts, and Curious Shapes, almost Exposed to
Public View; Languishing Eyes, Darting Killing Glances, Tempting Amorous
Postures, attended by soft Music, enough to provoke a Vestal to forbidden
Pleasure, Captivate a Saint, and Charm a Jove: Here was also different Sexes,
from Quality to the Honorable Knights, Country Put, and City Madam's: Nay, the
Circumciz'd Jew, could Bathe in Delight, Swim in Pleasure with the Gentile, and
outvie a Courtier in Splendour, though they Crucified his God; and Dispense with
Christians-Flesh, though not with Swines. The Ladies with their floating
Iappan-Bowles, freighted with Confectionary Kick-knacks, Essences, and
Perfumes, Wade about, like Neptun's Courtiers, suppling their Industrious
Joints. The Vigorous Sparks, presenting them with several Antic Postures, as
Sailing on their Backs, then Embracing the Element, sink in a Rapture, and by
Accidental Design, thrust a stretched Arm; but where the Water Concealed, so
ought my Pen.

The Spectators in the Galleries, pleasing their Roving Fancies with this
Ladies Face, Another Eyes, a thirds heaving Breasts, and Profound Air. In one
Corner stood an old Letcher, whose years spoke him no less then threescore and
ten, making Love to a young Lady, not exceeding fourteen. The usual time being
come to forsake that fickle Element, Half-Tub-Chairs, Lined with Blankets,
Plied as thick, as Coaches at the Playhouse, or Carts at the Custom-House.

Bathing being over for that Day, we went to walk in the Grove, a very pleasant
Place for Diversion; there is the Royal-Oak and several Raffling Shops: In one
of the Walks, is several Sets of Nine-Pins, and Attendance to wait on you:
Tipping all Nine for a Guinea, is as common there, as two Farthings for a
Porrenger of Barley-Broth, at the Hospital-gate in Smithfield. On several of
the Trees was hung a Lampoon on the Marriage of one Mr. S -- a Drugmonger, and
the famous Madam S -- an old B -- of London.

Having almost tired our selves with walking, we took to a Bench to ease our
weary Pedestals. Now, said my Friend, I Will give you an impartial Account of the
Perfections, Qualities and Functions, of a few particular Persons that are are
among this Amphibious Crow'd. For Notwithstanding I have been here not above a
Fortnight, I am as well acquainted with the Town and its Intrigues, as old
Justice P -- with More-fields and Drury Lane Bawdy houses.

Those two Ladies with the Gentleman in Blew, are Sisters, live near the Church
that is Dedicated to a Saint who expired on a Gridiron, they are Amorous Dames;
the Gentleman is a Broken Officer, and lives better on their Allowances, than
he could on his Pay. This Gentlewoman in the White-Damask Gown, is a
Sea-Captains Lady; who, while her ^orniferous Mate is Plowing the Ocean, takes
Care to manure his Pasture, that he may have a Fruitful Crop this Harvest. That
Foppish Beau in Scarlet Stockins, whose Hilt of his Sword bears a bob with his
Calves, and his Jubilee Hatband, lies stitched cross the Crown, was a
Pettycoat-Pensioner to Madam C -- near Bucklersbury; but being lately
Discarded, is come down here for promotion. That young Lady with the Gold Orice
Pettycoat, was a great Fortune, and not long since was married to a Flannel
Wastecoat, and a double Nightcap of the same Stuff; But now by reason of her
Husbands Imbecility, is forced to have recourse to the Bath. That tall
Gentleman attended by three Liveries, is something of Quality, a right
Courtier, for he abhors the Citizens Wives as much as the Sword Bearer does
Custard. That Broad-piece Doctor, in the diminutive Band, makes a purchase
every year by the Wickedness of the Age; and Vindicates W -- ing more than ever
G. K -- Writ against the Quakers. That Pert young Gentlewoman with the two
Silver Fringes, was compelled by her Friends to Marry a Slovenly Stockjobber,
and now is surfeited with his Embraces; and came to the Bath to mend his Breed.
That Crafty Priest, that Son of Levi, is as fickle as a Weathercock, and would
sooner discard a good Conscience, then a fat Benefice. This Tun of Iniquity, in
the Crimson Gown with Monsieur at her Elbow, two Devils behind her, Aetna in
her Face, all the Water in the Severn is not able to Quench her desires; she is
a second Masselina, will tire, but never be satisfied; she has already
quartered a Troop of French Dragoons, a Regiment of Dutchmen, and now is come
to Exercise a Battalion of Britains. That Powdered Lobster in the Edged Hat,
is the Spawn of a Broker; from thence Evapulated to a Bully, now shams an
Officer, sets up for a Stallion of the first Rank, and pretends he receives
several Favors from a Qualitificated Lady. That Spark with his Hat under his
Arm, is a Limb of the Law, but has Studied Chamberlins Midwitry, more than
Cook's Reports. That Dowdy Minx in the Scarlet Topping, and Pinck'd Scarff, is
the Relick of a broken Grocer; an Industrious Woman, for her Head's no sooner
laid, but her Breech is at Work. In short, for Fops, Beaus, and Bellfa's, this
Place exceeds Greys-Inn-Walks on a Sunday Evening; and consists of greater
variety of Persons, Remarkable for some Vice or Folly, than there are
Ingredients in a Lombard-Pye for a City Feast; to give you a particular
Description of each of 'em, will require a Weeks time at least. Come therefore
let us go to some Tippling Mansion, and Carrouse, till we have Exhilerated our
Drouthy Souls: To which I readily agreed. About five in the Evening, we went to
see a great Match at Bowling; there was Quallity, and Reverend Doctors of both
professions, Topping Merchants, Broken Bankers, Noted Mercers, Inns-of-Court
Rakes, City Beaus, Strayed Prentices, and Dancing-Masters in abundance. Fly,
fly, fly, fly; said one: Rub, rub, rub, rub, cried another. Ten Guinies to
five, I Uncover the Jack, says a third. Damn these Nice Fingers of mine, cried
my Lord, I Slipped my Bowl, and mistook the Bias. Another Swearing he knew the
Ground to an Inch, and would hold five Pound his Bowl came in. But in short,
the Citizens won the Courtiers Money, and the Courtiers Swore to be Revenged on
their Wives, and Daughters.

From hence we went to the Groom-Porters, where they were a Laboring like so
many Anchor-Smiths, at the Oak, Back Gammon, Tick-Tack, Irish, Basset, and
throwing of Mains. There was Palming, Lodging, Loaded Dice, Levant, and
Gammonning, with all the Speed imaginable; but the Cornish Rook was too hard
for them all. The Bristol Fair Sparks had but a very bad bargain of it; and
little occasion for Returns. Bank-Bills, and Exchequer-Notes, were as Plenty,
as Fops at the Chocolat-Houses, or Patternoster-Row. Having satisfied our
Curiosity here; we left them as busy a shaking their Elbows, as the
Apple-women in Stocks-Market, Wallnuts in October.

And meeting with three or four more Acquaintance, we stroul'd to a
Bristol-Milk Dary-House, and Enjoyed our selves like (...) At Night I stole
into my Mistresses Arms, as Vigorous (...) and Love, could inspire me; but she
Urging mightily for (...) was not very backward to, we agreed to be Rivented
(...) to engage the Maid to Assist her, and I, our (...) which accordingly was
performed the next day, with a great deal (...) the Expense of half a score
Guineas; and Spouse denied it might (...) continued in the Country, for some
particular Reason (...) by the Priest, Madam Bride, and Mrs. Pert, managed it
so, that we (...) any Mistrust. Let a Woman alone for a Contrivance, to (...)

About ten in the Morning, I was sent for by some (...) to the general
Rendezvous -- Coffee-house, where Fools, Cullies, (...), resort as thick, as
Stock-Iobbers about the Effigies on the Royal Exchange, (...) Witicism was
Abdicated, and Nonsense banded to and fro, like a (...). The last Nights
Intrigue Whispered with abundance of Caution, and (...) was Prognosticated
would be very Noble, for 'twas given by a Lady (...), and after an hour or two
of their insippid Fustian and Block-headly (...) went to Raffle for a Present
for our Mistresses; and with the loss of (...) off a curious Snush-Box, worth
four: But though I was Fortunes (...) a young Mercer of twenty Iacobusses, and at
the Oak the same Night double the Number, and a Bay Gelding.

From thence we went to the Hot-Bath, and Leppers-Bath, but there was nothing
worth our Observation, but a parcel of old Crutches, hung up in Memory of the
Persons, that received those Miraculous Cures. The next place we adjourned to,
was to Horrid-Toms; where we had good Wine, and better Company; and being my
Wedding Day, I went home to Dine with my Bride, and in the Evening prevailed
with her to go to the Ball.

Which is always kept at the Town Hall, a very spacious Room, and fitted up for
that Purpose. During which, the Door is kept by a couple of Brawny Beadles, to
keep out the Mobility, looking as fierce as the Uncouth Figures at Guild Hall;
there was Extraordinary Fine Dancing, (and how could it otherwise choose) for
Spouse and I had a Hand in it. A Consort of Delicate Music, Vocal and
Instrumental, performed by good Masters: A Noble Collation of dry Sweat-Meats,
Rich Wine, and Large Attendance. The Lady who was the Donor, wore an
Extraordinary Rich Favor, to distinguish her from the rest, which is always
the Custom; and before they break up, to choose another for the next Day, which
fell upon a Shentleman of Wales; but hur no ways Derogated from hur Honor, or
Disparaged hur Country in the least, but hur was as Noble, and as Generous, as
ever an English Shentleman of them all: To hur Honor be it Spoke.

The next Day the Ladies Baggage Arrived from London; then they made as topping
a Figure as any of them all; and the first Night after their Public
appearance, we were so troubled with some serenading Coxcombs, that the whole
Family got up, and had not Mrs. Betty, been very vigilant, my new Adopted Flesh
and I, had been caught abed together; for which good Service, I rewarded her
with a broad piece of her own Name. A Sunday we went to Church to the Abbey, a
very Ancient Cathedral piece of Antiquity, and kept as badly in repair; it is
Crowded during Divine Service, as much as St. Paul's, in which time there is
more Billet Deaux conveyed to the Ladies, than Notes to desire the Prayers of
the Congregation at B's -- MeetingHouse: and as the Ingenious Doctor in his
Discourse, told the Audience, He was afraid most of them came more out of
Custom and Formality, than in Devotion to the Sacred Deity, or a suitable
Reverence to the Place of Worship. Which was very True I am Confident, and the
Ladies were the only Saints several came there to Adore; as this Billet Deaux
will confirm; it was conveyed in a Candid Orange to a Lady in one of the
Galleries, which she by Accident dropped, and I had the Fortune to find.

Madam,
Had Fortune that Fickle Goddess, but honored me with your Acquaintance, as
she has by seeing of your Person, I should not have been so Presumptious as to
have offered these imperfect Lines to your fair (...) Stars ordained me no such
happiness, I was forced to make my (...). Commit that to Writing, which ought
rather to have been (...) this Evening I shall be in the Meadows, pity your
Slave, and (...)

R.


In the Evening (...) much resorted to for pleasant Rivers, and delicate (...)
Parkfor Coaches, and a St. James's for Beau's and (...) there was Chaucer's
Sempstress, my Lord R -- Mantua-Makers (...) Fops, Antic Beaus, and Blustering
Bullies innumerable, London(...) like Countesses, and case-harden'd Impudence;
bantering Young (...) Shopkeepers Prentices: Nay my Millenian Landlady, and her
Sister (...), and as well matched as a pair of Nice Coach-Horses; much much
(...) for an obliging Temper, the other for a Beauty; but ask (...) Cook, he will
tell you they Rival each other in their own proper (...)

After an (...) Walking, I Treated my Ladies with the best the Place afforded,
and then returned Home. But the next Morning I received a Letter of Advice from
London, of the Death of an Aunt, who had made me her Heir; which put me in mind
of the Old Proverb, It never Rains, but must Pour. However this was no ill News
to my Bride, nor me neither; only requiring my speedy appearance at London; but
I promised Spouse and the rest of my Acquaintance to be with them again in a
Fortnights time, and though an Heir, took Leave of them with as much Regreet, as
the Dutch-Guards of Kensington; and the next Morning took Post for London.
Having now given you an Account of my successful Step, I Will make bold, and give
you my Sentiments of the BATH.

A Character of the Bath.
IT IS, neither Town nor City, yet goes by the Name of both; five Months in the
Year it is as Populous as London, the other seven as desolate as a Wilderness.
It Is chiefest Inhabitants are Turn-spit-Dogs; and it looks like Lombard Street
on a Saints-day. During the Season, it has as many Families in a House as
Edenborough; and Bills are as thick for Lodgings to be Let, as there was for
Houses in the Friars on the Late Act of Parliament for the Dissolution of
Privileges; but when the Baths are useless, so are their Houses, and as empty
as the new Buildings by St. Giles in the Fields: The Baths I can compare to
nothing but the Boylers in Fleetlane or Old-Bedlam, for they have a reaking
steem all the year. In a word, it is a Valley of Pleasure, yet a sink of
Iniquity; Nor is there any Intrigues or Debauch Acted at London, but is
Mimick'd there.

FINIS.

