Licensed, (...) 19. 78.

W. JANE.

THE Proselyte of Rome CALLED BACK TO THE COMMUNION OF THE Church of England.

IN A PRIVATE LETTER, THOUGHT Very fit and seasonable to be made Public.

To the ROMANS.

Cap. XI. v. 20.22. Be not high minded, but fear: Otherwise, Thou also shall be
cut off.

Apoc. II. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do thy first works.

LONDON. Printed for R. Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

To the Reverend and Learned Author.
SIR,
SInce I had the honor and satisfaction of seeing your Papers, I have blamed
your delay in the publication of them; especially being designed to recall a
Romish Proselyte that was gone from the Communion of our Church, they might (in
this unhappy and distracted Juncture) have seasonably helped toward the
recovery of others, whose temporal as well as eternal Interests make them as
eager and desirous of satisfaction. I know that Modesty is a virtue, and
Caution a very commendable thing: but Charity and Love to the Souls of men is
much more so. You have lived to see the Church forlorn and desolate, persecuted
and seemingly forsaken; and after a little respite and the hopes of settlement,
to be again threatened and menaced with a final overthrow. Psalm. 137.7.
Down with it, down with it even to the ground, cry our Modern Edomites. And
when the Church did need the Aids of those who loved her, we know she found
your Zeal, and Resolution and Courage in her service: And that now you should
flag when you are so well armed and prepared for Combat, or be backward when
her Adversaries are pecking at the very foundations with Axes and Hammers, and
striving to undermine her by Artifice or Violence; And you a Champion so tried
and experienced, and furnished to defend her; I cannot imagine, unless you are
more tender than formerly, and fear taking of harm by being exposed to the open
Air. I think I have heard that the time has been, Neh. 4.1.
when, like Nehemiah's Builders, you wrought with one hand in the Churches
service, and with the other you hold a weapon for her defense and succor. You
know the Arguments that moved you then; and what hinders but they should now
prevail? I am, you see, warm in the Churches cause, nor do I believe that you
are less concerned. But if I seem to reproach or lament your remissness in
these seasonable Circumstances to send abroad your useful preparations, let me
not be thought rude or unmannerly, because I hereby not only vindicate you from
the common fault of being forward to print, but likewise show the high value I
have for your Person and Papers, and that I believe them to he very useful for
the Public benefit.

As to the Gentleman you design to reduce, I only know him upon this occasion,
and therefore can say little of his Learning or Ingenuity, or the Motives that
made him depart from us: But if after all your endeavors to convict him he
still remains hard and untractable, and refuses to hear the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely, he must be let alone in the obstinacy of the
deaf Adder, and to our Prayers to soften him, when your Arguments cannot alter
him; but when the World have seen your Papers, and know that he has done so;
They Will strain their Charity to suspect, that something else besides the
pretended advantage of Infallibility persuaded him to revolt; and till he can
answer your Arguments, they will be apt to think, that the exchange of Opinion was
not for Faith but Fancy, and that while he dreamed that he left uncertainty, it
was to be secure of nothing.

But if you should have that Friendly influence upon him by your pains and
endeavors to call him back, he will (by that Charity that is more Catholic than
the Religion he leaves) be glad, that by his fall so great an advantage has
been offered to the world, and that others may be reduced thereby to the sober
enquiry upon what bottom they trust their Salvation, and see upon what slender
and fickle grounds their Faith has been fixed; And what those Grounds are, all
men will see when they peruse your Tractate. Besides, we have reason to thank
such men as you for asserting the Churches cause in these Controversies; For
who now that is most freakish in folly and Enthusiasm, has a front to say, That
the Sons of our Church are warped from what is Primitive and truly Orthodox; or
Factors for the Romish Interest; or wish well to the promoting that Cause
amongst us, etc Let us hear no more such outcries against the Church of
England, nor against those who are exact and punctual in the decent performance
of Gods public Worship, and the circumstances of Order and Discipline. For the
gaudy Superstitions of Rome and Italy are more contemned by such men, than the
looser and more careless dress of Amsterdam and Geneva. And you amongst many
others have freed our Church from this whining and unjust imputation, in that
you have not only shaken, but everted that fundamental Principle, upon the fall
of which all the superstructure tumbles.

As to your Quotations, they are so proper and peculiarly adapted to every
period, that you had very great luck to happen on the choice of them. And for
the Translations which your Charity suffered to be made of them, for the use of
your meaner and more unlearned Reader; they, I perceive, were done by one whose
skill in Grammar did exceed his sense in Theology and Divine Controversies,
which may excuse them to the Critics and men of brisker fancy. However,
Translating is a very tedious task, and so long as they are true and literal,
they are justifiable enough against the keenest and most snarling Censurers.

I am loath the Messenger should stay, and therefore only wish your Reader may
be impartial and considerative, unprejudiced and serious, and that your Papers
may convince and confirm him, that they may have their design on the Gentleman
you would recall, and advance the interest of Truth and Goodness amongst all men;
that they may help to allay that bitterness, and heal those Animosities and
wild Conceits that trouble the Christian World, and that all that see them may
endeavor after the things that make for Peace. Which is the Prayer of,

Sir, Your faithful Servant.
Dec. 2. 1678.
THE RELIGION OF THE Church of England, etc.
IN A PRIVATE LETTER.
Sir,
SInce I have known you so long, I am sorry I knew you no better. I assure you
I intended to treat you as an entire Friend, but you wrest my words to a harsh
construction. For Mr. S -- he was so far from giving any partial account, that
he did not so much as positively say, you had left our Communion. I confess
upon a vehement suspicion (for which we had other grounds) I took the freedom
to tell you (what would fall under every ordinary apprehension,) that your
departure would unavoidably expose you unto censure. That some would impute it
to a hot head, others to a weak Judgment, and a third sort perhaps to
discontent, that you were not gratified according to your great merits. Herein,
Sir, I only played the part of a Rehearsal. For my own part, in imputing what I
had heard of you to a fit of the Spleen, I gave an evidence of my Charity, in
regard you had formerly complained of such a fit as had unhinged your faculties
and stifled your Pen into a long silence; and sure, I could never reckon that
for a fault in you, which I knew to be your infelicity and affliction. Hitherto
therefore my carriage was very innocent. And (when I longed so much to hear
from you) if I were a little impatient at the disappointment, yet a little
ingenuity would have given it a better interpretation than the want of common
prudence; and a fast Friend would have taken it for an argument of a fincere
affection. However I must lament my own loss; that what you intended for my
information was, by such an unfortunate misadventure, cast into the common lot
of waste Paper. But whatever the conception was which those Letters miscarried
with, these give me an intimation of your present change. And to question
whether this were Mutatio dextrae Altissimi, a change wrought by the right hand
of the Most High, were, no doubt, in your Judgment to make a breach upon
Charity and Prudence both together. Yet seeing you applaud your self (as all
such Proselytes use to do) that you have changed Opinion into Faith, and
Doubtfulness into Infallibility; give me leave, for once, to enquire into the
real advantage, you flatter your self to have purchased by your Separation from
us. In order hereto I pray resolve me where the Infallibility is lodged, which
you so much boast of; I presume you will not say, you have it in your own
bosom; for that would smell a little too rank of arrogance; if you say, it is
lodged in the person of the Pope, that is rendered very improbable; because it
was not long since one of them professed that he was no Theologue, and
consequently not fit to determine a point of Faith; and if we may believe some
of the Roman Writers (besides Schism) Heresy, Infidelity and Atheism, have been
found amongst them. And this Doctrine is so false and scandalous, that Mr.
White makes it more criminal and dainnable than destouring of holy Virgins upon
the Holy Altar Vide T. bulae Suffragiales.
.

2. If you place your Infallibility in the diffusive body of the Clergy, or of
Christians in general, That will be of no more advantage to the determination
of Controversies than the private Spirit, that is utterly unprofitable and
useless; for why may we not find it then, in Bishop Andrews as well as in
Bellarmine, in Bishop Sanderson as well as in Cajetan, and in Dr. Hammond as
well as in Stapleton?

3. If you lodge it in General Councils, there we are ready to join issue with
you. For those which are truly such, we have the greater veneration for. And I
will give you one instance in matter of Faith, that shall make it evident
beyond contradiction, (for matter of Jurisdiction afterward.) In the Third
general Council held at Ephesus, Council. 3. Generale Ephesians. habit. Can. 7.
Justell. Codex Canon. Eccles. Univers. Can. 177.
Decrevit Sauct a Synodus no^ licere cuiquam aliam fidem afferre, vel scribere,
vel com ponere praeter came, quae a Sanctis Patribus Nicaeae Congregatis, in
Sancto Spiritu desinita est -- etc. The Holy Synod has decreed, That it shall
not be lawful for any one to bring in or allege, to write or compose any other
Faith besides that which is defined by the Holy Fathers assembled at Nice, with
the (assistance of the) Holy Ghost. This Canon, which the Church of England
observes inviolable, the Church of Rome does egregiously prevaricate; witness
the Faith composed, after the Council of Trent, by Pope Pius the Fourth, which
is solemnly sworn by all the Clergy in the Church of Rome at this day. If you
say, this was not another Faith, nor any addition to the Ancient Creed, but
only an explication of it, the very letter of that Symbol will evince the
contrary; and to use your own expression, that defense dwindles into more
Evasion. Let the Reader judge by the matter of Fact and the Observations
following.

The Confession of Faith, by Pope Pius, according to the Council of Trent set
forth -- 1564.

1 A. B. do steadfastly believe and profess, all and singular the Contents of
that Symbol of Faith which the holy Roman Church uses; That is to say,

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all worlds, God of God,
light of light, very God of very God, The Council of Nice consisted of 318
Bishops from all parts of the World, East and West, and was held in the year
325. And of Constantine M. the Tenth. The Council of Trent was not held till
the year 1545. and ended not till 1563. wherein were in all, with Legates,
Cardinals, Abbots and Proctors, but 255. and most of them Italians and the
Popes Creatures. Lud. Bail. Sum. Council. Tom 1. p. 600. B. 1. Edit. Paris. 1659.
begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made; who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man; and was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, he suffered, and was buried, and
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven,
and sits on the right hand of God the Father; and he shall come again with
Glory to judge both the quick and the dead: whose Kingdom shall have no end.
And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son: who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church: I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of
sins; and I look for the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the World to
come. Amen.

[Thus far is the Faith of the Council of Nice, to which the Pope adds these
Articles following:]

I do steadfastly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions,
with the rest of the Observations and Constitutions of the same Church. I admit
also of the holy Scripture, according to that sense, which has been held, and
is held by the holy Mother the Church whose office it is to judge of the true
sense and interpretation of the Holy Scriptures: Nor will I ever receive or
interpret the same, but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. I
profess also, that there are seven Sacraments of the new Law, truly and
properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary to the
Salvation of Mankind, though all of them be not necessary for every man; That
is to say, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction,
Orders, and Matrimony: and that they do confer Grace; and amongst these, that
Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, cannot be repeated without Sacrilege. I do
also receive and admit all the received and approved Rites of the Catholic
Church in the solemn administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments. I do
receive and embrace all and singular the things which were defined by the holy
Synod of Trent, concerning Original Sin and Justification: I profess likewise,
that in the Sacrifice of the Mass there is offered unto God a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and dead; and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is verily, really and substantially the Body
and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
that there is made (therein) a change of the whole substance of the Bread into
his body, and of the whole substance of the Wine into his blood; which change
the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation. I do also confess, that Christ
whole and entire, and the true Sacrament is received in either kind alone. I do
steadfastly hold, that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls detained therein
are relieved by the Suffrages of the Faithful. Likewise also, that the Saints
reigning together with Christ, are to be worshipped and prayed unto; and that
they do offer up prayers unto God for us. And that their Relics are to be had
in veneration. I do most steadfastly affirm, that the Images of Christ, of the
(Blessed) Virgin, the Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to be had and
kept, and a due honor and veneration to be given unto them. Also, that the
power of Indulgences was left by Christ unto his Church; and I affirm, that the
use of them is very salutary (and beneficial) to Christian people: I
acknowledge the holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church to be the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches. And I promise and swear true obedience to the Pope of
Rome, successor to B. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of Christ. I
do also undoubtedly receive and profess all things else, which are delivered,
defined and declared by the sacred Canons and general Councils, and especially
by the most holy Synod of Trent. And I do likewise condemn, reject and
anathematize all things that are contrary, and all Heresies whatsoever, which
are condemned, rejected and anathematized by the Church. This true Catholic
Faith, without which no man can be saved, which at this present I do freely
profess and truly hold, by Gods help, I will most constantly to the very last
breath of my life, entirely and inviolably hold and confess the same, and take
care, as much as in me lies, that the same shall be held, taught and preached
by all my Subjects, or all those under my care and charge, in respect of my
Function. This I A. B. do promise, vow, and swear. So God be my help, and these
his holy Gospels.

This is the Creed of Pope Pius, according to the Council of Trent. Now betwixt
these Articles and those of the Church of England there is a vast difference,
both 1. In the matter; and 2. In the imposition; and 3. In the end of them.

1. For the Matter of these Articles: Those of the Church of England are not to
be believed as Articles of Faith, no further than they can approve themselves
to be contained in the holy Scriptures; for thus we are taught in the Sixth of
these Articles.

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby Licet interdum a
fidelibus ut pium and conducibibile ad ordinem and decorum admittatur. In the
Margin of that Article.
, is not to be required of any man, that it should be belived as an Article of
the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. But amongst the
Articles of Faith enjoyed by Pope Pius, some are quite beside the Holy
Scripture, some against it; some are mere speculations of the Schools, and
others but probable, and matters of doubtful disputation. For instance; (1) The
multiplication of Advocates and Ghostly Patrons: (2) The Sacrifice of the Mass:
(3) The Adoration of the Host: (4) The power of Indulgences; as they are
maintained and practiced in the Church of Rome. These are, at least besides the
Holy Scripture.

(1) The Invocation of Saints, and veneration of Images (as practiced generally
by the Common people, according to their Books.)

(2) The public Service of the Church in an unknown Tongue. The administration
of the Lords Supper, ordinarily to the people, but in one kind: And that the
Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches. These are
against Scripture.

(3) Transubstantiation (whatsoever it signifies more than a Real presence, and
the benefits which flow from it) with the unaccountable hypotheses which depend
upon it: And Purgatory, as it is blown up into Climaerical flames by the
Schoolmen; with the means and manner of deliverance out of it, are no better
than Scholastical speculations. And many of the rest valued but as
probabilities, or matters of doubtful disputation.

2. For the imposition of these respective Articles the difference is vast. For
those of Pope Pius we have not only, I receive, admit and embrace (this Faith;)
not only, I do affirm and aknowledge, constantly hold and most steadfastly
assert it: not only, I do with a steadfast Faith believe and profess it; but
under the high and solemn obligation, I do promise, vow, and swear, to hold,
teach and preach the same to the very last breath of my life, and to procure
all others under my charge to do the like. But to the Articles of Religion in
the Church of England subscription is only required, without any obligation to
teach, profess or assert them, further than they are contained in the Holy
Scripture, or may be proved thereby to be Articles of the Faith; or admitted
for discipline and good order. And it is moreover to be observed, That his
Majesty in his Declaration before these Articles printed 1630, though he
forbids the offering violence to the liberal and Grammatical sense of these
Articles; yet he seems to allow a modest liberty (without contention) in
putting the most favorable construction upon them. The words are these, Though
some differences have been ill raised; yet we take comfort in this, that all
Clergymen within our Realm, have always most willingly subscribed to the
Articles established; which is an Argument to Us, that they all agree in the
true literal meaning of the said Articles: and that even in those curious
points, in which the present differences lie, Men of all sorts take the
Articles of the Church of England to be for them; which is an Argument, that
none of them intend any desertion of the Articles established. Where we see his
Majesty took notice, that men of all sorts took these Articles to be for them;
and he declares, that he took comfort therein. Which argues, that the
imposition was not strict and rigid as to the sense and meaning of the
Articles. And though in the Synod 1640. Can. 6. an Oath was enjoined; yet it
was with as much modesty and tenderness, as any sober and peaceable Subject can
desire: for thus it runs, I A. B. do swear, that I do approve the Doctrine and
Discipline, or Government in the Church of England, as containing all things
necessary to salvation. Where two things are very observable, (1) The assertion
is only this, That I do approve the Doctrine, etc. the (2) Only as containing
all things necessary to salvation; for which we are referred to the authority
of the Holy Scripture by the Sixth Article, as was observed before.

3. As to the end of these respective Articles; Those of Pope Pius are declared
to be necessary to salvation, not only Necessitate praecepti, sed Medii;
necessary as well upon the account of a Means as of a Precept: for the Pope
declares, Hanc (esse) veram Catholicam fidem, Extra quam nemo salvus esse
potest. That this is the true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be
saved. But the Articles of the Church of England generally are intended for a
decorum and order (matters of necessary Faith being herein restrained to the
Holy Scriptures) to keep out disputes and vain jangling, and to preserve peace
and concord in her Communion. Thus much is intimated in the very Title prefixed
to those Articles; but much more clearly in his Majesty's Declaration before
mentioned, where he says, We hold it most agreeable to our Kingly Office and
our own Religious Zeal, to conserve and maintain the Church committed to our
charge in the unity of the true Religion, and in the bond of peace, and not to
suffer unnecessary Disputations, Alterations, or Questions to be raised, which
may nourish Faction both in the Church and Commonwealth. We have therefore
thought fit to make this Declaration, That the Articles, etc. do contain the
true Doctrine of the Church of England agreeable to Gods word; which we do
therefore ratify and confirm, etc. But this is more clear in a Book set forth
1571. called, Liber quorundam Canonum Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae SS. de
Concionatoribus. Where it is ordered thus: Imprimis vero videbunt, etc. Let the
Preachers take care, that they teach nothing in their Sermons, which they would
have the People hold and believe as a matter of Religion; but what is consonant
to the Doctrine of the Old or New Testament, and what the Catholic Fathers and
Ancient Bishops have gathered out of the same. And because those Articles of
Christian Religion, which were agreed upon by the Bishops, etc. are without
doubt collected out of the Sacred Books of the Old and New Testament, and do in
all things agree with the heavenly Doctrine contained therein: Also, because
the Book of Common Prayers, and the Book of the Inauguration of Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, do contain nothing that is contrary to that
Doctrine; whosoever shall be sent out to teach the People, shall confirm the
authority and belief of those Articles, as well by their subscription as in
their Sermons. Qui secus fecerit and contraria doctrina Populum turbaverit,
excommunicabitur; Whosoever shall do otherwise, and disturb the People with any
contrary Doctrine shall be excommunicated. Here indeed the Clergy are
implicitly enjoined to preach up the belief and authority of these Articles:
But withal, (1) The belief and authority of them is required, not as grounded
upon the Declaration and Sanction of the Ecclesiastical Governors (though a
hearty submission and obedience is due thereto in matters of Religion,
Discipline, and Order, upon the account of a Divine precept,) but upon their
Congruity with the Holy Scriptures, according to the sense of the Ancient
Fathers. (2) That such as transgress these Articles are punished (for want of
good manners) as disturbers of the public Peace.

Wherefore, though the Author of the Guide in Controversies* Disc. 3. cap. 7.
, has made it his business to strain every Sentence, Phrase, and word in the
Canons as well as the Articles of the Church of England, to make those Articles
seem to run parallel in the Charge of a new Imposition of Faith, with those in
the Creed of Pope Pius the Fourth aforementioned; yet, by what has been
observed, it is evident, that the Articles of the Church of England were not
intended (as those of that Pope clearly were) for an Addition to the Faith
declared by the Fathers at Nice, which (with all Christian Churches) we profess
as Catholics; but for information to direct our public discourses generally
as occasion serves, in matters of Religion, as we are united in the Communion
of the particular Church of England, after a deliberate and sober Reformation;
which to attempt and perform, as far as in them lies, no doubt all Bishops are
as well obliged in duty by Christ's Command, [ Apoc. 2 and 3 Cap.] as
prescribed to do it orderly, by the 34. of the Apostles Canons Episcopos
uniuscujusque gentis nosse oportet eum, qui in eis est primus, and existimare
eum ut caput: and nihil facere magni momenti, praeter illius sententiam: illa
autem sola facere unumquemque quae ad suam paroeciam pertinent, and pagos qui
ei subfunt.
.

To leave this long, though not unnecessary digression; This Infallibility (in
the latitude the Roman party pleads for) is so very improbable, that Mr.
Cressey (in his Neophytism) was not able to swallow it till he had shrunk it up
into an Indefectibility; wherein we can heartily close with him. And for all
that great privilege, which make so much noise in the world, I do very well
observe, that in many cases they are glad to rest satisfied with a probable
Conscience. And in spite of that Infallibility, They must stand to the
courtesy or hazard of a probable Opinion, to secure themselves (according to
their practice) from the peril of Idolatry. And this is acknowledged by the
Jesuit Ant. Terill, our Countryman, in his Tractate de Conscientia Probabili:
Edit. Leodii, 1668. p. 387, etc.
His words are these; Quid magis ad mores, etc. What does more concern manners
and the strictness of the Law of Nature, than that the worship due to God be
not bestowed upon a Creature; and yet it is lawful many times, out of a
probable Opinion only, to bestow Divine worship upon the Eucharist, and to
adore God when he is but probably latent there. For there is no true certainty;
but only a Probability, that this numerical Host is rightly consecrated. First,
It is not certain that he who did consecrate was a Priest, both because it is
not certain that he was baptized, as also, because it is not certain that he
was (lawfully or) validly Ordained by a true Bishop, having an intention
requisite to that effect, etc. Secondly, It is not certain that he did
pronounce the words of Consecration. If he did duly pronounce them, yet
Thirdly, perhaps he had not a due intention. If all these things were
(observed) as they should be, It is not certain, in the Fourth place, that a
due matter was made use of; for the Bread might not be made of Wheat. Fifthly,
Although all these things proceeded well and rightly; yet it is not
indubitable, that the Officer to whom the custody of the venerable Sacrament
belongs, did not expose an Host that was not consecrated, instead of one that
was (truly consecrated) to be adored. All these are generals, to which we may
add the malice of man's heart, which is too vigorous in some persons. Upon these
heads (says he) we have known many Cheats too frequently practiced in this
matter; and they know it much better, who are employed as Judges upon the
Tribunal of the Sacred Inquisition. Thus far Father Terill.

Now, if they of the Church of Rome have no certainty in their Sacraments, no
certainty in their Sacrifice of the Altar, no certainty in their Priesthood, no
certainty, but they may commit Idolatry every day; if they cannot be certain,
but the malice of their Priests may frustrate all the sacred Ordinances of God
to them, and make them absolutely null, though they be never so worthily
disposed to receive the benefit of them: (And this is the Doctrine and Belief
commonly maintained in the Church of Rome.) They should rather blush at such an
Infallibility, than boast of any great advantage to be reaped from it. For
grant further, that that Infallibility were such as they would have it, yet
they can have no security in it for salvation. It Is such as a man may carry
into Hell with him (if it proves not a means to lead him thither,) where (for
ought I know) the Devils have it as much as he. And Gregory the Seventh was of
the same mind; Nam, ut Jacobus frater Domini testatur, fides sine operibus
mortua est, qualem and Daemones habere fatetur; Non Ergo minus est resistendum
pertinacibus authenticarum institutionum impugnatoribus quam Sacrae fidei
violatoribus, cum and Daemonibus assimilentur quicunque institutionem SS.
Patrum in fide tantum, and non etiam in conversatione pro viribus assectatur?
For as James, the Brother of our Lord, does testisie, Faith without Works is
dead, which kind of Faith he does acknowledge to be in the Devils. We ought
therefore no less to resist such as are obstinate impugners of Authentic
Institutions ( viz. of Piety) than such as do violate the Sacred Faith, seeing
they that do earnestly follow the instruction of the Holy Fathers in (matter
of) Faith only, and not in (a holy) conversation are like unto the Devils. For
this Infallibility is restrained to matters of Faith, and that Faith is but
historical (as they call it) and not sufficient to salvation. To the Essence of
a Church, right Doctrines in Practicals are as necessary as in Speculatives, if
mortal Sin excludes from salvation, as well as an erroneous Faith R. H. Disc.
of the Necessity of Church Guides. p. 82.
; as the Author of the Guide in Controversies does acknowledge. And this is the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. de Justificatione: Si quis dixerit,
sola fide justificari, ita ut intelligat nihil aliud requiri quod ad
Justificationis gratiam consequendam cooperetur, and nulla ex part necesse
esse cum suae voluntatis motu praeparari atque disponi, Anathema sit, Can. 9.
If any man shall say, that Faith alone does Justify, so that nothing else is
required to cooperate toward the attainment of the Grace of Justification, and
that it is in no wise necessary that he should be prepared and disposed (to it)
by any motion of his own will, let him be accursed. Et Can. 19. Siquis dixerit,
nihil praeceptum esse in Evangelio praeter fidem, caetera esse indifferentia,
neque praecepta neque prohibita, sed libera; aut December Praecepta nihil
pertinere ad Christianos, Anathema sit. If any man shall say, there is nothing
commanded in the Gospel, but Faith; that all other matters are indifferent,
neither commanded nor forbidden, but left free: or that the Ten Commandments
do not concern Christians; let him be accursed. Et Can. 21. Si quis di^erit
Christum Jesum a Deo hominibus datum fuisse, ut Redemptorem, cui fidant, non
etiam ut Legislatorem, cui obediant; Anathema sit: that is, If any man shall
say, that Christ Jesus was given unto man of God, as a Redeemer in whom they
should trust, and not also as a Lawgiver, whom they should obey; let him be
accursed. (Which Canons we can readily subscribe to:) From which it appears
beyond exception, that the Infallibility pretended by the Church of Rome is not
to be relied on as sufficient for salvation. The Creeds chiefly comprehending
Speculatives, there must be a great body of Articles also of necessary Faith
relating to Practicals; as R. H. C. 1.. 3. p 4.
maintains in his Discourse of the Necessity of Church Guides. But does this
Infallibility extend to all matters of Practical belief, as well as
Speculative? Yes, says R. H. Christ has left an Infallible Guide for Manners
as well as Faith Id. p. 176
; and a little after, God has provided by the same Church Authority to
preserve his Church in truth, and to restrain it from sin; giving an equal
Commission to teach the ignorant, and to correct the vicious. And that since
their Doctrine directs our Manners, as well as Faith; their Infallibility is as
necessary for things of Practice, as of Speculation. But if there be such an
Infallibility in the Guides of the Church, not only in reference to points of
Faith, but to Doctrines of Practice also, 1 Samuel 15.14.
What means then this bleating of the Sheep in mine ears, and this lowing of
the Oxen, which I hear? Of the degeneracy of the Church in his time V. Bid
writes thus: Apud Meisner de Ecclesia. p. 681, 682, 684.
Videt quisque non sine lachrymis, etc. Every one sees not without tears, into
what a weak and infirm condition the state of the Church does daily dwindle.
And St. Bernard, in his time; Hodie serpit putida tabes, etc. Nowadays an
infectious and spreading Consumption has seized the body of the Church, which
the further it is dilated the more desperate it grows; and it is so much the
more dangerous, by how much the more inward. And after him the Cardinal, Petrus
de Aliaco, in a public Sermon at the Council of Constans. Manifestum esse,
says he, etc. It Is apparent, that the Church has of a long time been in
several respects deformed, and not only has (in time past) but does now
extremely want a reformation as well in Faith as Manners. The like complaints
are made in these our days; not against the corrupt Manners of wicked men only,
but against the New Extravagant and pernicious Doctrines, which do lead to, and
encourage such ill Manners: witness what was lately written by Macarius
Havermans Canon of the Church of St. Michael, Ordinis praemonstratensis, in his
Tyrocinium Christianae Moralis Theologiae Printed at Antwerp An. 1674.
. Where, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Abbot, writing of the (unhappily)
fertile Age into which we are fallen; he says thus, Quot Theologias Morales
non edidit, etc. How many Systems of Moral Divinity has this Age brought
forth, which are as so many whimsical fictions and opinions of Divines,
grounded upon philosophical Arguments, swelling with curious and exquisite
probabilities, and big with humane inventions. And in his Preface to the Reader
he complains of the Arrogance of these new Doctors, in preferring their own
Sentiments before the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, Councils, and Holy
Scriptures: Hinc vix ullum, says he, etc. Whence it comes to pa^^, that in
their Writings you shall scarce find any place of Sacred Scripture, or the
Ancient Councils, or Holy Fathers alleged; but they weight every thing in the
balance of their own understanding: And thus for Christian Divinity (whose
conclusions concerning God and his Attributes, etc. ought to be deduced from
the unerring and uncontrollable Doctrine of Gods word, and from the most secure
Decrees of the Holy Fathers) they set up a Natural Theology or Philosophy
grounded upon the Principles of Aristotle and his Followers, whose Authority
they allege more frequently than that of St. Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, or any
other Holy Father; not to say they do more value them: nay, so devoted are they
to their own Inventions, that a plausible Reason of their own shall be
preferred before the gravest Sentiments and Maxims of the Holy Fathers.

Hereupon Caramuel breaks out into that ingenuous acknowledgment, I spend not
much time, or rather lose it not, in turning over the Writings of the Ancients.
And gives us his reason elsewhere, Because, says he, as to Manners the
Opinions of the Moderns are to be preferred to those of the Ancients. For as a
late Writer has it [in novae libertatis explicatione] the Modern Schoolmen had
a greater insight into things, than the former. And have also thought fit to
reject whatsoever they approved or looked upon as not improbable: And (says
he) now, who sees not at the first glance, that those exorbitant Tenants are so
abhorring from the Decrees of Antiquity, that they need no consutation; but
that barely to mention them is to confute them? So that, to speak with St.
Austin, I think them fitter to be bewailed by Believers, than disputed against
by me. Their clamours will sooner be drowned by Prayers and Tears, than by the
noise of Arguments: And without doubt we shall do more advantage for such
persons, if with our Prayers we endeavor their reformation, lest they perish
with their great Wits, or ruin others with their damnable presumption.
Moreover, this slighting of the Holy Fathers is like to be very, pernicious to
the Church; for if their Authority be so disesteemed and undervalued in matter
of Manners, and that by Roman Catholic Writers, who can blame the Heretics
for not valuing their Authority in matters of Faith? for why should they be
valued in matters of Faith, more than in matters of Manners? Are not Manners to
be directed by the Authority of Divine Tradition, as well as Faith? Are not the
Faithful as well Trustees of the Tradition of Manners, as of Faith? And a
little after he exhorts his Reader thus: Pro paradoxo ergo reputamus, etc.
Wherefore let us account that of a late Writer for a mere paradox (viz.) [Tota
Theologia Moralis est nova] All Moral Divinity is wholly New. For if it be New,
then it was not delivered by Christ, nor by his Apostles, nor by the Holy
Fathers: And consequently, neither Christian, nor Apostolical, nor Orthodoxal;
and that which is more, neither is it true, nor genuine; but spurious and
adulterate, and for that reason not to be applauded, but condemned, not to be
embraced, but banished, not to be alleged, but exploded. Tantum enim a veteri
simplicitate, etc. (as it follows a little aftey) For we have so far started
from the Primitive simplicity and Obedience, that there is scarce any Law but
is rendered useless by the glosses of the Schoolmen, as it may appear, if we
please to trace them in some particular Laws: Of what great efficacy (I pray)
will that Ecclesiastical Law be, concerning Anniversary Confession and
Communion, if it may be satisfied by a bare external, though sacrilegious
Communion and Confession? Nevertheless, that a man may satisfy that Precept by
such a sacrilegious Communion, many Schoolmen, de facto, do still teach. Again,
of what force is that Law about hearing the Sacred Offices on the Lords day,
and other Holy Days, if that Command may be satisfied only by an external
presence of the body; although during the whole time of the Sacrifice a man
suffers his mind voluntarily to wander and be distracted, and taken up with
impure and filthy Cogitations? And yet many Schoolmen teach this Doctrine. The
Law for the observation of Fasting, how unprofitable it is rendered, is very
notably set forth by Marchantius in the Complaint of (his personated) Sr.
Jejunium Querimonia S. Jejunii, by Marchantius.
. The like may be showed in other Instances. Thus for Havermans. By all which
we see the fruits of this great privilege of Infallibility in the Church of
Rome; viz. by their own Confession they have entertained a new Moral See
Montaltius's Provincial Letters, with Wendorchius's Notes upon them. Latin
Colon. 1678.
(and not the Primitive) for matters of Practice; and in our observation, they
have done the like in matters of Faith and Speculation. And when we find so
great a variation, we must needs conclude, That either the Ancient Church was
not then; or else, That the present Church (which differs so much from it) is
not now Infallible.

And now the Question may be put, Which particular Church is in the more safe
condition? In the Church of England we have The Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
as St. James calls it, ( James 2.1.) we have St. Peter's (...) (1 Peter 3.15.)
his Rationale of the Christian hope. We have St. Paul's Depositum, 1 Timothy 6.20.
Quid est Depositu^? id est, quod tibi creditum est, non quod a te inventum,
Quod acceptisti, non quod excogitasti. Rem non ingenii, sed doctrinae. Non
usurpationis privatae, sed publicae traditionis. Rem ad te perductam, non a te
prolatam, in qua non Author debes esse, sed Custos; non institutor, sed
sectator: non ducens, sed sequens. Vincent. Lirinensis.
and form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. And it is undoubtedly St. Judes Faith we
contend for, which, as Beza very well notes upon the place, was once, (and at
once) so delivered to the Saints, that it ought never to be changed. That Faith
which the Fathers of the Council of Nice professed we do very heartily embrace;
we keep this Faith whole and undefiled. But from receiving any other, we are
deterred by the Sentence of the Synod of Ephesus forementioned; Qui aliam fidem
audent componere, etc. Whosoever shall dare to compose, allege or introduce
any other Faith, if he be a Bishop or Clergyman, he shall be degraded; if a
Layman, excommucated. If the Faith thus delivered were sufficient for their
salvation (in genere fidei) why not for ours? And herein, without all doubt, we
are no less Infallible than the Church of Rome. And to the Ancient Fathers in
the most Sacred Councils, this was their Lud. Bail. Sum. Council. Tom. 1. in
decreto de Symbolo. Sess. 3. m. pa. 522.
Shield against all Heresies, Quo solo, etc. Through whose attractive power
alone they have, in times past, drawn unbelievers to the Faith, resisted and
rooted out Heretics, and confirmed the Faithful; as the Fathers of the Council
of Trent do acknowledge. If there be any other points of Faith needful to
salvation, our ignorance thereof (after a long and diligent search) is both
involuntary and invincible, and that will totally excuse us.

For that superfatation of Articles by Pope Pius the Fourth, we were never
Baptized into them, nor can we answer for them. The truth is, the Faith of the
Church of England the Romanists can never justly reprehend, being more pure,
more Primitive, and more Catholic than their own, and was professed entirely
by all Christian Churches before some Articles of the present Church of Rome
were ever known to have had a being. And for part of this we have a pregnant
acknowledgment in the Council of Trent, where they set down this Symbolum fidei
totidem verbis, quibus in omnibus Ecclesiis legitur; Lud. Bail. ubi supra.
In the same words in which it is read in all Churches: And this they set down
as that principle, wherein all that do profess the Faith of Christ do
necessarily agree; (and) as that firm and only foundation, against which the
gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail.

This Faith (I say) we do keep whole and undefiled; but, it seems, it was a
foundation too narrow to bear up the Popish superstructures of Hay and Stubble:
but yet, being the only foundation (as they confess,) and so firm, that the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against it; we do steadfastly rest upon it,
building our selves thereon, as St. Epist. Jude v. 20, 21.
Jude directs us, in expectation of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to
Eternal life. Toward the accomplishment whereof our Charity is so much more
Catholic than theirs, that (with some craft and sophistry, though with little
reason) they take an Argument from thence to delude the weak, and make them
Proselytes to their party.

For our Agenda, or matters of Practice, we have a Liturgy that is full, solemn
and intelligible, we have all Sacraments and Sacramentals that are generally
necessary, or of any efficacy to salvation. And (besides all public Offices)
for private devotion and use, we have Institutions, and forms of Christian
piety, no part of the Christian Church better. Our Priesthood and Government
you cannot, with any truth or reason, deny to be Apostolical; and if our
Discipline be in some instances collapsed from the severity which it obtained
in the practice of the Ancients, that of the Church of Rome is so likewise. And
if we reflect upon the many disadvantages and perils, which are in Their
Communion, they will warrant the security in ours to be far the greater.
Amongst the disadvantages on that side, I reckon their half Sacraments against
the express letter of our Saviors Institution Mat. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
; and their Service in an unknown Tongue, contrary to the express discourse of
the Apostle 1. Cor. 14.
. Amongst the perils, I must account (1) That of Idolatry, in the adoration of
the Host. (2) The veneration of Images: (3) And the invocation of Saints.
Secondly, Such as arise from the abuses in the matter of Confession and
Penances, of Indulgence and Dispensation, with many delusions under pretense of
Revelations. Thirdly, Such as arise from several of their Doctrines, viz. That
the Sacrament does conferr Grace [ex opere operato] from the Act performed,
without any worthy or moral disposition in the Receiver. That Attrition, for
fear of Hell, is sufficient, without Charity, to obtain Grace and pardon in the
Sacrament of Penance. That in a case of Conscience, I may follow a probable
opinion, which is more benign and gentle, and reject that which is more safe,
if it be more severe and rigid. That a man is not obliged to decline and avoid,
Proximam occasionem peccandi, the immediate danger of sinning, though he has
had sad experience of his own frailty and recidivation: That the precept of
Repentance does not bind presently, but only in the time of sickness, or at the
point of death. These Doctrines are taught and practiced, without any the least
check of his Infallible Holiness.

Nor is the danger small, which arises from the persuasion of their
Infallibility. For from thence proceeds a belief, that whatsoever they take
upon them to define is as true as Gospel: And what sad work this has made in
the Church of God we may observe from that single instance about the Sacrament.
In a Council at Rome, under Nicholas the Second, An. Dom. 1059.
Berengarius was enjoined a form of Recautation, wherein he professed and
swore, that the Bread and Wine, which are set upon the Altar, after
Consecration, are not only a Sacrament, but also the true Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And (that the said Body) is not in Sacrament only, but in
truth (N. B) Sensualiter manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi and fidelium
dentibus atteri, i. e. sensually handled by the Priest, broken and torn by the
teeth of the Faithful. Expressions so gross to unfold an inexplicable mystery,
that the Author of the Gloss upon Gratian gives his Reader this sober warning
of them, De confect. did. 2. c. 42. ego Bereng.
Haec verba nisi sane intelligas, in majorem incides Haeresin, quam ipse
Berengarius habuit: i. e. Unless you understand these words in a sound sense,
you will fall into a greater Heresy than Berengarius was guilty of. And upon
the account of this pretended Infallibility, I might add some Reflections upon
those horrid Murders, Treasons, and Rebellions, which have been encouraged and
carried on out of a belief of the Popes Supremacy and Power over Princes, at
least in ordine ad Spiritualia, in order to Church Matters; which must needs
make a great flaw in their Allegiance. What think you of the Popes Nnncio at
the head of the Irish Army.

Sir, if you will give your self the freedom impartially to consider the
Answers that are made by the Romish Writers, to excuse what is charged upon
them for these, and some other loose Doctrines and practices, you will find it
no Fable, That their defenses dwindle into mere evasions. I shall now conclude
your trouble and my own with a few Animadversions upon the whole matter.

First, That (how hot soever your Zeal may grow for the Church of Rome) you
might have done much better service for the Church Catholic, if you had
continued in the Communion of that part of it which is established in this
Kingdom.

Secondly, To use the word of the Ingenious Author of [The Notion of Schism,]
that for any to desert the Church of England to communicate with that of Rome,
is such a framick humor, as for a man to quit the neatest appartment and
exchange for the most sluttish Rooms in the same House.

Thirdly, That you have given a scandal to your Brethren of the Church of
England, contrary to that Caveat and Admonition of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.32.
Estius ad locum.
And he that gives offense to his Brother, sins against God, whose handiwork
he destroys, Romans 14.20. He sins also against Christ, in destroying him for
whom Christ died, Romans 14.15.

Fourthly and Lastly, That by withdrawing your self from that subjection and
obedience, which by the Laws of the Catholic Church you owe to your own
Bishop, Primate, or Metropolitan, you run desperately into Schism, while you
are superstitiously solicitous to avoid it. For Schisma est contumax adversus
Episcopum rebehio, qua quis ejus communionem deserit, etc. Schism is a plain
Rebellion against the Bishop, whereby a man forsakes his Communion and endures
no fellowship with him in Divine matters; as Christian Lupus has it upon
Tertullian Schol. ad cap 6. de praescript. Epist. 65.
. And St. Cyprian in an Epistle ad Rogatianum Novensem, who had been affronted
by his Deacon, says thus: Haec sunt initia Haereticorum, etc. By these means
Heretics are hatched, and the endeavors of ill-minded Schismatics promoted;
who, that they may gratify their humorsome whymfies, do supercilionsly contemn
him that is set over them: thus men depart from the Church, and set up a
profane Altar (that is a Conventicle) without (the Communion of it): Thus they
make war upon the Peace left by Christ, and rebel against Unity and the
Ordinance of God. And Epist. 69. ad Florentium Pupianum, writing in reference
to himself, he says thus: Inde Schismata and Haereses abortae sunt and
oriuntur, etc. Hence Heresies and Schisms have their rise; when as the Bishop,
who is but one, and presides over the Church, is most presumptuously contemned;
and the man dignified with a vocation from God, is thought unworthy thereof by
men. That St. Cyprian writes thus, not in reference to the Bishop of Rome, but
to himself and other Bishops of particular Churches, is evinced by Goulartius
in his Annotations, ad Epist. 55. n. 27. against Pamelius.

With great reason therefore did the Council of Nice decree, Can. 6. Antiqui
mores serventur, etc. Let the Ancient customs and privileges be preserved,
That the Bishop of Alexandria may have the Junisdiction and power of them who
are in Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis; for so the Bishop of Rome has customarily
had (over his Province.) Likewise also in Antiochia and other Provinces, let
their Privileges be preserved (inviolable) to their (respective) Churches. The
Epitome of which Canon runs thus: Super Aegyptum, Lybiam, and Pentapolim,
Alexandrinus Episcopus potestatem habeat, and Romanus super Romae subditos.
Item Antiochenus aliique super suos: i. e. V. Pandect. a Guil. Beverege Edit.
in 1. Council. Nice. Ca^. 6.
Let the Bishop of Alexandria have Authority over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis,
and the Bishop of Rome over the Subjects of Rome. In like manner the Bishop of
Antioch, and (all) other Bishops over their Subjects (in their respective
Provinces.) And Alex. Aristenus has this Gloss upon it, Ibid.
Unumquemque Patriarcharum, etc. Every Patriarch ought to be content with his
own privileges, and not to usurp upon any other Province which was not
heretofore, and from the beginning, under his power and Jurisdiction; for this
is the pride of an (unjust) secular Dominion. And in the Second General Council
held at Constantinople, Can. 2. it is decreed thus: The Bishop shall not pass
the bounds of their own Diocesses, nor confound (the privileges of) the
Churches, but govern themselves according to the Canons: And if we observe the
Canon prescribed concerning Diocesses, it is clear that each Province shall be
governed by the particular Synod of the same Province, as it is decreed by the
Council of Nice. And Leo the Great had so great a veneration and zeal for the
Authority and honor of that Synod, that in an Epistle to Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, blaming him highly amongst other miscarriages, for invading the
privileges of the Churches of Alexandria and Antioch, he writes thus: I grieve
not a little, that you are fallen into so great an Error as to attempt the
violation of the most sacred Constitutions of the Canons of Nice. viz. In
attempting to invade, after Alexandria and Antioch, the dignities and
privileges of all other Metropolitans: And blaming him for endeavoring to
wheedle the most Christian Emperor, and the holy Synod (called by his
Authority, for the extinguishing of Heresy and the Confirmation of the
Catholic Faith) to serve his ambitious designs, he tells him, That the Synod
of Nice, consisting of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, was so Sacred, and
consecrated Tanto divinitus privilegio Consecrata.
with so great a privilege from God, that whatsoever was done by any of their
Councils, be they never so numerous, who assembled in them, it should be
utterly void and of no Authority, Leo Mag. Epist. 53. inter opera Paris, 1623.
if it were differing from what was Ordained by those Holy Fathers Quicquid
abiliorum fuerit Constitutione diversum.
. And in his Epistle to Martianus the Emperor, blaming the Ambition of
Anatolius, as aforesaid, he condemns him for this reason; Privilegia enim
Ecclesiarum, etc. For the privileges of the Churches being established by the
Canons of the Holy Fathers, and fixed by the Decrees of the venerable Synod of
Nice, Let the Pope of Rome consider well these weighty Letters of his great
Predecessors.
are not to be changed or shaken by any wicked attempts of Novelty; but to be
preserved inviolable: In which business, with Christ's help, it is necessary
that I exert my utmost endeavors as one instructed with a Dispensation. And it
would become my guilt, if the Sacred Constitutions of the Fathers established
by the Holy Ghost in the Synod of Nice, for the Government of the whole Church
of God, should through my neglect or connivence Lud. Bail. reads it, Te (quod
absit) connivente: and so applies it to the Emperor. In Sum. Council. Tom. 1.
m. p. 141. B. 2.
(which God forbid) be violated or infringed, and the gratifying of one
Brothers humor should be of more concern to me than the common benefit of the
whole Church of God. And in an Epistle to Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, and
the rest of the Bishops assembled in the holy Synod of Chalcedon, he writes
thus concerning the keeping of the Ordinances of the holy Fathers, which are
fixed by inviolable Decrees in the Synod of Nice. I advise, That the rights of
the Church may remain as they were ordained by those three hundred and eighteen
Fathers, divinely inspire^d. Let not wicked Ambition covet another Right, nor
let any man seek to augment himself by the lessening of another. For by what
assentations soever a vain elation may arm it self, and think to strengthen its
inordinate desires by the name of Councils, whatsoever shall be disagreeable to
the Canons of the foresaid Fathers shall be void and of no validity. Thus Leo
the Great. And if there were any such thing as Infallibility or Authority,
either in this Pope Leo the Great, or in that first General, and most sacred
Council of Nice, that Canon of theirs concerning the Jurisdiction and
Privileges of the Churches, is of full force, and ought to be observed
inviolably at this day.

Now to apply this to our own case. It is evident out of several Records, See
Bedes Histor. and the berty of the Britannick Chapter by Dr. Basier. Land. printed
for John Mileson. 1661.
That the Britannick Church was ever (...), and Independent, subject to no
foreign Bishop, but under her own Metropolitan, having her Primacy and
Headship, with all privilege Ecclesiastical, within her self for six hundred
years after Christ, till Austin the Monk, transgressing that Canon of Nice, did
by force of Arms subdue and captivate her to the Sea of Rome. The Popes
Usurpation began here in blood, with the slaughter of Twelve hundred innocent
and holy Monks, at Bangor; and all attempts to reinforce that Usurpation, are
carried on by methods of the like nature, i. e. practices of fraud and
violence. W. Beverege Anno. ad Can. 6. Council. Nicae. p. 58, 59.
Nevertheless, as the Learned Beverege has observed, the unjust violation of
that Canon, cannot prejudice the high and perpetual Authority of it. Wherefore
though the Bishop of Rome, ever since he sent the aforesaid Austin hither, has
exercised the chief Authority in this Nation; yet at last having shaken off his
Tyrannical yoke, our Church (through Gods blessing) does most deservedly enjoy
her Ancient privileges, by that most worthy Ordinance and Canon, prescribed by
the Universal Church, in this matter.

It is manifest then, that the Bishop of Rome can afford you no good Sanctuary
against the Authority of that Bishop and Metropolitan, whose Communion you have
forsaken. What therefore St. Hierome says against John of Jerusalem, I may
fitly apply to the Pope of Rome, Tu qui regulas quaeris Ecclesiasticas, and
Nicaeni Concilii Canonibus uteris, and alienos Clericos and cum suis Episcopis
commorantes tibi niteris usurpare; Responde mihi, Ad Alexandrinum Episcopum
Palestinam quid pertinet. Thou who seek for Ecclesiastical Canons, and usest
the Constitutions of the Council of Nice, and notwithstanding pretendest to
usurp the Government over the Clergy of other Bishops, tell me, what has the
Bishop of Rome to do with Great Britain? Sir, from what has been suggested it
is evident, that the Bishop and Church of Rome have shamefully prevaricated
both the Doctrine and Government of the Catholic Church, as it was declared
and fixed by the most Ancient and sacred General Councils; The Doctrine, as
well in matters of Faith as Manners; And the Government by usurping the
Jurisdiction and privileges of other Churches.

And if (as you profess) you have not changed your Loyalty, I am very apt to
believe, the wicked Plot now under Examination (with many of the like nature)
may be sufficient to make you abhor the Communion of that Church, whose Morals
can hatch such Monsters, and whose Governors do make it their business to
Lowbel their pliant Creatures into designs of Treason and Assassination, by the
help of false Lights, Bulls and Dispensations; and encourage them in the
attempts by the fond applause of Merit, and a Crown of Red Letters. In short,
the scandal hereof is so foul, it may very well become your ingenuity (and
without doubt it will tend much to your reputation and inward peace) to take
your leave of such Company, with good old Jacobs imprecation, Genesis 49.6. O my
Soul, come not thou into their secret: unto their assembly, my Honor, be not
thou united. And this is the Advice, which proceeds (though but from the common
prudence, yet) from the highest Charity of,

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, L. W.

FINIS.

