A FROLIC TO HORN-FAIR.

With a WALK from CUCKOLD's-POINT THROUGH Deptford and Greenwich.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by I. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in
Fanchurch-Street, 1700.

Books Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in Fanchurch-Street; J. Weld,
at the Crown between the Temple-Gates in Fleet Street; and Mrs. Fabian, at
Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside.
1. SOt's Paradise: Or the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House: With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Iamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island. Price Six Pence. 3. Eclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashopper. Price Six Pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six Pence. 5. The London
Spy, the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth,
Tenth, and Eleventh Parts. To be Continued Monthly. Price Six Pence Each. 6. A
Trip to New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English
and Indians. Price Six Pence. 7. Modern Religion and Ancient Loyalty: A
Dialogue. Price Six Pence. 8. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between Two
Astrologers and the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen in
this Present Year, 1699. From the Vices and Villainies Practiced in Court, City
and Country. Price Six Pence. 9. A Walk to Islington: With a Description of New
Tun-Bridge-VVells, and Sadler's Musick-House. Price Six Pence. 10. The Humors
of a Coffee-House: A Comedy. Price Six Pence.
All Written by the same Author.

A FROLIC TO HORN-FAIR.
WHEN the near approach of Horn-Fair had Conjured up the Spirit of Cuckoldome
in the Dissatisfied Minds of abundance of City-Wives, who have Just Reason to
Complain of the Unkind Usage, and sl^nder Performances of either their Drowsy,
Lazy, Morose, Insufficient, or Superannuated Husbands, I happened (from the
Hands of a sorrowful young Lady, who had grieved for some time under the
Weakness and Imbecility of an Infirm Husband) to receive this following
SVMMONS, to attend her Person to Charlton, on the 18th of October, in order to
Redress those Intolerable Grievances, which she wanted in all Love to exhibit
unto me.

SIR,
As it is a Duty Incumbent upon all Batchelors, to supply the Defects of their
own Sex, who knowing their Deficiencies, have, contrary to the Laws of Nature
and Sound Reason, bound themselves For ever and Aye, in the mutual and
Indissolvable Tie of For better or for worse: I having just grounds of
Complaint, in these my Iuvenal Years, of the great and many Impediments on my
Husbands part, which give me a Just and Unquestionable Title to your Aid and
Assistance; and as Procreation is the Main End of Wedlock, and I, by the
Infirmities of my Lawful and Well-beloved Spouse, being in a great Measure
deprived of the Wholesome, Delectable, and Indearing Means thereof, having full
and true Desire of Completely answering my Duty, according to the known Laws of
our Creation, That is, to do good in my Generation, and raise Seed to the World
as may prove a Blessing to Posterity. I do therefore, by Virtue of this
Summons, strictly Charge and Require you to meet me on the 18th of this
Instant, by Nine of the Clock in the Morning, at the Mermaid-Tavern at
Billingsgate, there to Drink Canary, and Eat Oysters, till Eleven; Then to take
Boat and Land at Cuckolds-Point; and from thence (according to the Ancient and
Laudable Custom of the Corniferous Society, and in pursuance of their Orders)
to Walk from thence through Deptford and Greenwich to Horn-Fair, there to receive
a Horn Fairing, as a Token of one Years Friendship, which you are Carefully to
Maintain and Preserve with all Love, Constancy, and Industry, till that Day
Twelvemonth, with that Uncomfortable She, from whose kind Hand you shall
receive the Present: Having full Power given you, from that time, over her own
Body and her Husbands Goods, so far as they can be Clandestinely Converted,
without discovery, to your Good Use and Benefit.

Therefore Fail not to give your Personal Appearance at the Time and Place,
aforesaid, under a Weeks reserve, Lustily Fed, and well Accouter'd, as you will
hazard the Revenge of a Desirous Woman, whose Name is under Written.

E -- F --


You Cannot but Imagine I Read the Summons, it being from a pretty Woman, with
a little more satisfaction than a London-Prentice does his Sundays Chapter, or
a Married Man that Intercepts a Love-Letter to his Wife; insomuch that I
thought my self very highly Obliged to answer the Demands of the Fair Lady, yet
could not forbear Ref^ecting on the Conjugal Vows she was under, and how far I
must be guilty of the same Crime, in submitting to her Unlawful Desires, which
I thought might as well spring from her own Exorbitant Concupiscence, as any
Just Reasons she had to Complain of her Bedfellow's Incapacity. Laboring for
some time under these Struglings of Conscience, at last I bethought my self of
an Old Story, which removed my Scruples, and restored me to my former
Resolution of Pursuing the Intrigue. And that you may not be Unacquainted with
this Balsamic Tale, so Excellent for Strengthening a Weak and Tender
Conscience, I have here given it by the Way; in hopes not to Corrupt the
Reader, but to make him Merry.

A Bachelor Gentleman, of Good Estate, desiring, through Covetousness, to
increase his Riches, applied himself to a Young Lady of Great Fortune; and
notwithstanding his Estate was somewhat inferior to her Portion, yet the
Comeliness of his Person, and his Engaging Accomplishments soon prevailed upon
the Lady to become his Bride, who having nothing before her Eyes but the
Prospect of a Happy Life, and the Comfortable Embraces of a Gentleman of Sweet
Temper, Affable Behavior, Incomparable Wit, and Excellent Proportion, insomuch
she gave him but very little Trouble to bring his Design to its proposed Issue:
So that they were soon Married, and Bedded accordingly, with all the
Solemnities and Formalities of a Public Nupital. But as soon as the
Frolicksome Company had quitted the Bridal Chamber, the Gentleman in his
Minority having reciev'd a Kick from a Horse, which Occasioned his Castration,
was rendered incapable of gratifying the Expectancies of his Panting Bride,
Concluding it the best Way to Discover his Infirmities, and put her past the
thought of what is Natural in such a Case for the most Modest Woman to expect,
which he accordingly discovered, but with as much Art and Rhetoric as was
possible to be used, to take off the Impression of so great a Disappointment,
telling her, That tho himself was Impotent, he would grant her the Liberty of
making good his Deficiency to herself, by choosing any other Person to be her
Confident, that should be most agreeable to her own Inclinations. The Young
Lady fearing this might be some Trick of her Husbands to sift whether any other
Person had any share in her Affections, made a Jest of his Discovery, and
suspended her Choice till after a further time of Consideration: But found at
last she was brought in Good-Earnest into this Misfortune; and being not a
little Uneasy under this Intolerable Disappointment, began to be thoughtfully
intent upon the freedom that was given her by her Impotent Bridegroom: And
observing his Butler to be a handsome Jolly Young Fellow, Looking as if he was
well Qualified for so pleasing a Task, insomuch that she resolved to pitch upon
him to supply the Deficiency of her Unhappy Husband, and accordingly acquaints
him with what Choice she had made; with which the Gentleman seemed very well
contented; and sending for his Butler into his Closet, informed him of the
whole Affair, with all its Circumstances; telling him he would allow him an
Hundred Pounds a Year, as long as he would take Care, through Secrecy and
Prudence, to prevent any Disreputation that otherways might by his carelessness
fall upon the Family. The Butler, overjoyed at this Proposal, made so many
fair Promises and Protestations, that the Master was well Satisfied, and
thought him a proper Confident for his purpose: So accordingly Lodged him in a
Room near his own Bedchamber, that his Lady without Danger of Detection, might
change her Bedfellow as often as her Inclinations led her. This Good-natured
Liberty of the Gentleman's was mutually enjoyed, between his Wife and his
Servant, for a considerable time, without either Discovery or Mistrust; till at
last, the Lady on a Summers day, having added an unusual Warmth to her youthful
Desires by a Glass or two of Rich Wine at Dinner, above her ordinary Custom,
went into the Buttery, where the Butler was alone in the Afternoon, taking a
Lazy Nap to indulge his Idleness. The Lady shuting the Door, awaked her
Gallant, and soon made him sensible, by intelligible Signs, of what her
Ladyship wanted.

He rubbing his Eyes, and speedily understanding her Meaning by her Gaping,
laid her down with a Finger and a Thumb, upon a Lolling Convenience, in Order
to Oblige her: In which Interim, the Chaplain being dry after his Dinner, came
to the Buttery Door, and knocked for Admittance into the Cellar. The Butler
being too deeply Engaged to answer, the Parson Judged by his Silence, he was
making much of some of his Friends in Private; and having a mind to be
Satisfied, peeped through the Keyhole, and beheld with the Eyes of Truth, the
sad Shame and Dishonor his Lady and the Butler, by the Instigations of the
Devil, had brought upon the Family; and immediately Runs open-mouthed to his
Patron, and acquaints him, with a Sorrowful Countenance, by what a Providential
Accident he had stood Pimp to his Ladies Debauchery, setting forth the Villainy
and Treachery of his Servant in thus abusing of him.

The Gentleman being concerned at their Imprudence, to be thus Foolishly
detected, had no way left to excuse the Matter, but to tell the Truth, and
discover his own Infirmity; also that it was done by his Inducement and
Permission; and that he allowed the Butler a hundred pounds per Annum to
recompense his Diligence, and enjoin him to Secrecy. Lord, Sir, says the
Chaplain, Why would you not employ me? I Would have done it for Fifty with all my
Heart, and have Read Prayers Twice a Day into the Bargain.

I rightly applying the Moral of this Story, rid my Conscience of those Doubts
and Fears that would otherwise have retarded me from embracing so fair an
Opportunity; that I began now to query with my self, which was the most
inexcusable Fault, to commit the Sin, or disoblige the Lady; and remembering
Ingratitude to be styled the worst of Crimes, and that to disoblige a pretty
Woman in distress, and slight her Favors so generously thrown upon me, was
Ingratitude; I soon reasoned my self into a compliance with my Mistress in
Elect's Desires; and took up a Sturdy Resolution of meeting my bold Challenger
at the Place appointed.

When the happy Morning came, and nothing but Cuckold-makers, Cuckoldome,
Cuckolds, and Horn-Fair, were the common discourses of every Sober Citizen to
his next Neighbor, as soon as the Shops were opened, I getting up an Hour
before my time, had recourse to the Barbers, that my Face and Perriwig might
not want the Advantages of his nice management, but have all the Effeminate
Improvement of Powder, Washball and Perfume, that I might be as Fragrant to my
Mistresses Nostrills, as a Bermoodoes Breez, and smell as Odiferous as any
sweet-Bag. When I was thus Washed, Curled, and Combed, like any Ladies Lap-Dog;
and after I had spent as much time in Dressing, as a Merchants-Wife on a Sunday
before Church-time, I did at last judge by my Glass I was a very complete
Figure to make an Amor, though to a squeamish Lady. My Shoes were as black as
Spanish-Balls could make 'em, and Shined like a Physicians Ebony Cane new rubbed
upon a Visit to an Alderman. My Stockins were garter'd up as tite as a Boot
upon a Last, and stuck as close to my Calves as a Bag to a Boild-Pudding. My
Garters being as hard girted as a Fillet bound for Bleeding, that I did more
penance than a Man half Throtled to be pricked in the Jugular. My Knees hoop'd
round with Rowles, turned up with that exactness, that a Wedding Ring upon a
Citizens Wives Thumb, could no ways sit more precisely Regular. My Breeches
stuck so close to the Ignoblest of my Flesh, that I durst not Stride an Inch
beyond the given bounds of my Tailor, without the danger of a Rent; and when I
came to a broad Kennel I was forced to Wade through, because I could not venture
to step over without Damage. My Coat was Cut All-amode a Paree, with Skirts not
much longer than those of a Water-mans Iacket. My Linen was made by an
Inns-of-Court-Sempstress, and was Digitiz'd with her Handle-Bauble Fingers,
into as much Formality as a Ladies Head-Dress. My Wig, like the rest of the
Fools, was so woundily be-Powder'd, that whenever the Wind sat in my Face, it
endangered the Eyes of him that walked behind me. Which procured me as many
Curses in a Day, as a Good Man has Prayers for his Charity. My Hat was in the
Mathematical Cock, with the Brims tucked up to the Crown, into an exact
Triangle. My Gloves were right Cordivant, and stunk so of Muscovy Cats-Turd,
that Persons subject to Vapors started from me as I walked (like a Beau from a
Chimney-Sweeper) for fear of being Suffocated. Thus equipped according to the
Nice Rules of Foppery and Courtship, I went along, Cursing the Rudeness of the
Wind, that at every Street's Corner ruffled the Curles of my Wig into some
disorder, being forced to give as many strokes to each Bushy side as a
Milk-Woman does to a Cows Teat at a Meal, to reduce the straggling Hairs into
their proper Places: Till at last, with a Panting Heart, like a dispirited
Lover, I came to the Place appointed; where, with as much Courage as I could
Summon together, I asked for my Lady, who was not yet come. I thinking it my
Duty to wait, rather than hers, it made me Careful to be something Earlier ^ha^
the Time prefixed, to manifest my Diligence, as well as the eager Desires I had
to her Dear Company. I bid 'em show me a Room, and then called for a Pint of
Canary, as the most Amorous Cordial I could think on, over which, I sat near
half an hour, sometimes Disheartening my self with the thoughts of being
Iilted, than Comforting my self up with the assurance of her Sincerity, from
some little knowledge I had of her Person. At last, to remove my Doubts and
Jealousies, in steps my Lady, Dressed up with as much Art, as if all the
Tyre-Women in both Exchanges had been her Chamber-Maids. But, to tell you the
Truth on it, finding her no more afraid of Tumbling her Pinners, than I was of
Rumpling my Cravat, our greeting was so mutually kind and satisfactory, That it
would have made the Readers Heart go Pit-a-Pat to have seen our Loving
Salutation. She beging Pardon for her Presumption, and desiring my good
Construction of the Freedom she had taken. I answering her in a familiar
Dialect, That her Company was the only Happiness I had long Covetted; and had
not the Conjugal Obligations she lay under frighted me from Discovering my
Love, she long before now should have received sufficient Testimonies of my
unextinguishable Affections; or had I in the least known the just Reasons she
had to withdraw her Friendship, and alienate that Beauty and Delight remaining
in her Dear self from her Marriage Bed, no Addresses and Importunities should
have been wanting from her humble Servant, to have happily supplied those
Impotencies, which, according to the Laws both Divine and Humane, she might
Modestly Complain of.

In such a sort of Amorous Discourses, we expressed the Impatient Desires of
each other. I well knowing nothing takes more with the Fair-Sex, under these
Circumstances, than to put a Gloss upon the Iniquity. For he that has but the
true Knack of extenuating a Crime, will have no great difficulty in drawing
those to the Guilt, who give Credit to his Doctrine. Having now, by a few
Love-Toys, and Light Expressions, together with the assistance of the Wine,
introduced a little Familiarity, we agreed upon a Dish of Fish, that we might
fortify our Stomachs against the Cold Breezes we must expect upon the Water.
During the Time the Cook was Laboring to Delight our Pallats, we Reciprocally
obliged each other with Lushious Kisses and Endearing Words, that melted both
our Hearts into an equal Concupiscence of Loves Enjoyment.

Citizens and their Mates, Swarm now to the Waterside, in order to take Boat
for the Horn-headed Rendezvous at Charlton: And nothing being heard beneath our
Window, but the Wrangling of Watermen about their Fairs, and the Noisie
Mouthing Acclamations of Greenwich, Greenwich Ho, That had we been Seated at
the Hockly-Hole-Theatre, when the Blind-Bear had been let loose, our Ears could
not have been terrified with more discording Outcries. Upon which we arose
from our Seats, and moved to the Window, to divert our selves a little with
seeing the Batchelour Cuckold-Makers and Citizens Wives; also City Cuckolds,
and their Maiden-Looking Mistresses, stow themselves as close in a Boat
together, as they do in a Cheap Side Ballcony, at my Lord-Mayors-Show, to gaze
like a Drove of Bullocks, between one another Horns, at the Triumphs of the
City. The first Couple that I happened to know, pressing amongst the Crowd to
board their Double-handed Wherry, were a Jewish Wine-Merchant and a Vintners
Wife; who, I suppose, through the great delight they took in Cuckold-Making, went
to do Reverence to Cuckolds-Point; and from thence to buy a Horn-Tumbler at the
Fair to Drink the Husbands Health in; and so recall the Pleasures of their past
Sins, by the Sweetness of reflection. My Lady observing I had added a more than
ordinary Cheerfulness to my Countenance, required the reason of my Smiling. I
told her I could not forbear Laughing to see a Jew scatter his Affections out
of his Tribe, and make so much of a Christian; and to find a City Dame, with so
good a Conscience, to have so much Charity for an Unbeliever. That Lady, said
I, that you see with the Jew, is a very great Meeter, and a Mighty Religious
Christain in her Way, having as Jolly a Man to her Husband as a Woman would
desire to lie by. But I find, notwithstanding her seeming sanctity, she loves
Circumcision much better than Christian Baptism. At which Information my Lady
lifted up her Eyes, expressing her self after this manner, Bless me! What is
the World come to! That a Woman should be so Wicked! As if there were not Good
Christians enough deserving of a Woman's Favors, but, like a Profane Minx, she
must bestow her Kindness on a Jew! Well, I would not be in her Condition, and
have such a Sin to answer for, for the World. If I should, I am sure my
Conscience would never rest after it, but should think every Minute I deserved
Damnation. Foh! A Jew! A Stigmatized Rusty-Bacon-look'd Infidel, that cannot
Spit from him! A Black Goggle-Eyed Overreaching Vagabond! Foh, I smell him
hither, he stinks in my very Nostrills. If it were only through the respect a Body
has for ones Religion, sure I Would have chose a Christian for my Gallant, though he
had been a Porter, or a Carman; and not have dishonored my Church so much as
to have taken up with an Antichistian Vermin, a very Caterpillar of
Christendom. I Vow and Protest, if I was in her Room, I should be afraid the
Boat would sink. Thus did my Mistresses Zeal to the Christian Religion, carry
her to such a Pitch of Envy, to see a Refined Protestant and an Infidel in such
Charitable Communion with one another, That I was afraid, in the height of her
Fury, she would have leaped out of the Window, and have separated the Righteous
from the Ungodly; quite forgetting, as Whores do, their own Failings, when they
brand another with the same Title; not considering the Honest Design on foot
betwixt her Ladyship and me; looking upon herself all this while, to be as
Justifiable in what we had undertaken, as a Poor Woman that wants Bread, is in
Begging a Crust of her Neighbor.

We had not at the Window spent much time in Prittle-Prattle, but the Vintner
whose Wife was Stragled with the Jew, out of the Pale of the Church, had most
Ceremoniously Joined himself with an Iron-mongers Daughter, who in her early
Years being Tempted by a Sea-Captain to taste the Forbiden Fruit, had unhappily
brought herself under the Suspicion of Incontinence, and quite spoiled her
Market in the business of Matrimony; that she was grown a pretty stale
Thorn-back, yet had Remains enough of her Youthful Perfections to entitle her
to the handling of a Vintner's Apron-Strings: I could not forbear Smiling, at
the Odness of this Accident, when I considered what a rare Discovery there
would be made on both sides, if they should Chance to meet in the Fair; for it
is Reasonable to believe, they were absolute Strangers to each others Intrigue;
for sure, thought I, it is Unnatural for a Married Couple, to give one another
the Liberty of Adultery; though it is very common I believe, for each other to
take it. Since Chance had flung a thing so remarkably observable in my Way, I
thought my self obliged to impart it to my Mistress, that she might share in
the satisfaction of so Uncommon a Contingency; accordingly I showed her the
Vintner, telling her he was the Husband of that Woman who had so highly
disobliged her, in Communicating her Honor to a Jew, and Pinning her Faith
upon the Sleeve of an Infidel; adding, that I knew the Woman that was with him,
from whence I had reason to believe he was upon the like design with his
Companion, as his Wife was with the Jew? Bless me! says she, If my Husband was
like other Men, and should serve me so, I Would study as many ways to Torment him,
as ever a Papist Priest found to Punish a Heretic, marry would I; he should
neither Eat, Drink, nor Sleep in any quiet, till I had Plagued his Heart out,
before he should run Rambling among strange Women; but as he is, by my Troth I
may venture him, for I can guess by his Performances at Home, how his Abilities
are Abroad. Which words, were no sooner out of her Mouth, but in the Crow'd she
espied him. Bless me! says she, Yonder he is with my Neighbor the Apothecaries
Wife, pressing toward the Stairs, to go into a Boat: But I Will spoil their
Intrigue, with a Pox to 'em. Stay you here, says she, and I Will be with you
again presently: Down Stairs she ran in a great Fury, lays hold of the Woman,
as she was Descending the Stairs: How now Madam, says she? Whither are you
going with my Husband? I thought I should Catch you one time or another; I had
Intelligence of your Design last Night, and have been waiting for you in yonder
House, this hour or two. The Poor Woman, so greatly Surpised with this
Discovery, was ready to sink down under the Hand of her Opponent; but the
Husband through a great Presence of Mind, forces his Wife to quit her hold, and
bid the other step into the Boat, ordering the Waterman to go off with her, and
land her where the Gentlewoman directed, holding his Wife fast till the Boat
was adrift; and so at once secured her from the Hands of the Mob, as well as
her rash Adversary. Now thought I, I find when a Woman has a mind to be Lewd,
she will not want a Pretense to Justify herself in her Liberty; nor could I
forbear thinking it was more her Ungovernable Lust, than her Husbands
Impotency, that induced her to be Wicked; for it may be observed, the Common
Excuses that a Woman makes to extenuate the Guilt of her Corruption, are either
Love, Necessity, or the Mis-behaviour of their Husbands, either in his
Neglecting what he ought to do, or Doing those things, which he ought to
forbear: But while I was thus Ruminating on the Cunning of the Kind Sex, my
Mistress had betaken herself to her Crocadile Submission; Crying, What had she
done, to Occasion such Ill Usage from him, as to alienate his Affections, from
his Lawful and Loving Wife, and place it upon other Women less deserving than
herself? These Hypocritical Words, and Dissembling Tears, so softened the Heart,
of the poor disappointed Cuckold, who at first was so highly displeased at her
unexpected Discovery, that he had much ado to forbear striking of her; but she
I suppose, well knowing how to appease his Fury, put on this Counterfeit
Behavior to bring him out of his Passion, to the Calm Use of his Reason, and
Good Nature. The Fluminous Rabble all this while hollowing the the other Lady
over the Water, who questionless was as well pleased at her safe Deliverance,
as she was Concerned at first for her Detection. By this time, my Lady and her
Spouse, had withdrawn themselves a little out of the Crow'd, she Soliciting his
Company home, as she informed me afterward, which she was very Sensible he
would not Consent to; But told her Although she had spoild his Project in one
Affair, he would make himself amends in another; and since he was a Broad, he would
have his Belly full of Wine before he went Home again. Do that and Welcome,
says she, For I would rather find you Ten-times in a Tavern, than Once in
another Woman's Company; and so they parted. She returning to me, extremely
Delighted with the thoughts of her Adventure.

Indeed Madam, said I, I wonder you should give your self all this Trouble; for
what is matter, who your Husband keeps Company with, if he be under such
Circumstances as you Report him. Poh, says she, you don't know what Policy, I
had in my Head; was it not much better for me to detect them, than to give them
the Opportunity of Detecting us; for I suppose, they were bound to the same
Port: And now I have stopped their Journey, the Coast is Clear, and we may
Accomplish our own Undertaking, with less Fear, and more Safety.

I could not forbear reflecting in my Thoughts on the Wit, as well as the
Wickedness of Woman, who had no sooner a Conception of the Danger she herself
must have been in, had she suffered them to have proceeded in their Voyage, but
at the same Instant, projected a method to remove that stumbling Block out of
her Way, which might otherways have proved of fatal Consequence to her own
Intrigue. The Goodman, to be sure, making a kind Construction of her Accidental
Discovery; and thought she had taken all that Pains, on purpose to detect him
in his loose Practices, which he must needs acknowledge, as an argument of her
Love, because she thought him worth her Looking after; and its commonly allowed
the greatest Demonstration a Woman can give of her Love, is her Jealousy; for
its a certain Sign we vallue that most, that we are least willing, and most
fearful should be Enjoyed by another.

By this time we had an Island of Fish, floating in an Ocean of Butter, brought
up to the Table; of which, like the Lady of a Feast, she Ceremoniously helped
me to a very plentiful Plate, I gratefully repaid her Favor with a Cringe,
which she returned with a Bow, that we Nodded at one another, like two Rams in
a Challenge, just a going to Butt: Every Bit that was better than ordinary, she
would force upon my Plate, that no Country Turkey Cock, fatted against Christmas
to be sent to my Landlord at London, was ever so Crammed: I believe, I swallowed
as many boild Shrimps, and fried Oysters, as an Estrich could Hob-nails at a
Meal; besides shoveld down as much Fresh Cod, as my Lord Mayors Weapon Porter
does Custard at a Feast; my Lady's chief Diversion all Dinnertime, being to
fish in the Sauce for Delicious Morsels, to feast the Palate of her new humble
Servant; using so many kind Expressions to Court me to Eat, that I was quite
surfeited with her Sweet Words, before I had half satisfied my Stomach with our
Enticing Dainties; being forced sometimes to be Unmannerly, and Bumpkin like,
Court my Mistress to Eat, with my own Mouth full, for fear she should think by
my long Silence, I did not regard her. When I by the Manly Industry of my Hands
and Jaws, and my Mistress, by her Effeminate Piddling and Picking, had both
satisfied our Appetites, with our Nice and Well-dress'd Dinner, according to
Custom, we thought it necessary to make our Fish Swim a third time, in a more
Noble Element, than either Butter or Water; calling accordingly for half a
Flask of Red, that the Noble Tincture of the Wine, might Enrich our Food of a
Purple Color, and make its Juice the fitter for our Veins Reception.

All the Superfluous Implements of Eating being now taken away, we made each
Glass a further Key to unlock the Secrets of our Souls, and began to Spin out
the Threads of Love, to a lasting Length, Wetting each kind Word with Wine, that
the Knot of Friendship might be tied the faster; how far our mutual desires
might carry us beyond the Rules of Modesty, is neither my Business to tell, nor
the Readers to enquire into; for there are many things that are Justifiable in
Action, that are not Decent to Repeat; so that we will make that Modest by the
Concealment, that might be thought Rude in the Discovery.

When our Flask was out, we thought it high time to begin our Voyage: In order
to set forward, we called for our Reckoning, which my Lady after many
Expressions of Apology, for her Rude Unpracticable Attempt, but she was
Resolutly bound to Defray the Days Expense, Entreating me to excuse the
affront; at which, though I seemed to be dissatisfied, yet with much Persuasions,
I was at last very heartily reconciled to my Mistress's Prodigallity, and
thought I had as much Reason to be good Humored, asif I had Paid it my self.

Having thus pretty well secured our Bodies from the Coldness of the Water, we
took Boat at Billinsgate-stairs, and away for Cuckolds-Point* but were no
sooner put off from the shore, but we were got into such an Innumerable Fleet,
of Oars, Skullers, Barges, Cock-boats, Bum-boats, Pinnaces and Yawles; some
Going, some Coming, and all attacking each other with such Volleys of hard
Words, that I thought Billingsgate-Market had been kept upon the Thames, and
all the Fish-Whores in the Town, had been Scolding for a Plate, given 'em by
some Rich Oyster-Woman, to encourage the Industry of the Tongue; calling my
poor Lady and I, so often by the Opprobrious Names of Whore and Rogue, that for
my Part, I thought they were Witches, and had known what we had been doing;
tossing Ladles-full of Water into one another Boats, till the Passengers were
many of 'em as wet, as a Turbulent Woman just taken out of the Ducking-Stool.
At last an Unlucky Rogue, with Bridewel-Looks and a Ladle in his Hand, fishes
up a floating Sir-reverence in his Wooden Vehicle, and gives it an Unfortunate
Toss upon my Ladies Bubbies. She crying out to me her Protector, to do the
Office of a Scavenger, and take away the Beastliness, she being herself so very
Squeamish, that she could no more endure to touch it with her Fingers, than a
Monkey does a Mouse, it being Lodged in the Cavity, between her Breasts and her
Stays, she could not shake it off, but I was forced to lend a hand to remove
the Poisonous Pellat from her Snowey-Temptations, giving on it a Toss into
another Boat, with the like Success, wounding an old Cuckoldy Waterman just in
the Forehead, and so Be-dung'd his Brow-Antlers, that I make no question but
they spread and flourished, being thus Manured like the Horns of an Ox after
well greasing, which put the grisly Churl (who I Will warrant, by his Gray
Hairs, had at least served Nine Prentice-ships to the Thames) into such a
wonderful Passion, that he began to roar out his Aquatick Scurrility at us,
with as much Indignation and Revenge, as a she-Mumper when bilk'd of her Crib,
or an Alley-Scold when called Barren-Bitch, by her Neighbor, clawing the
Unsavory Birdlime off his Face, Snapping on it, as a Barber does Suds from the
ends of his Fingers; Saluting my Mistress, and I, in the height of his Fury,
after the following manner. You Shiten-Skull'd Son of a T -- d, that has spit
your Brains in my Face, who was Begot in Buggery, Born in a House of Office,
and Delivered at the Fundament, fit for nothing but to be Cast into a
Gold-finders Ditch, there lie till you're Rotten, and then be sold out to
Gardners, for a hot Bed, to raise Pumkins to feed the Devil withal. And as for
you, You Brandy-Fac'd, Bottle-Nose'd, Bawdy, Brimstone-Whore, Every time you
Conjobble together, may he Beget your Belly-full of live Crabs and Craw-Fish,
that as you strive to pluck 'em out, they may hang by the sides of your
Tuquoque, and make you Squeak nine times louder than a Woman frighted into
Labor a Month before her Reckoning. This, and such sort of Water-bred
Language, he pelted at our Ears, till we were out of Hearing: Being both as
glad when we had out-Row'd his Impudence, as a Man that has Outrun a Bailiff;
for if ever any body was under an Ill-Tongue, we thought our selves at that
time in the same condition.

Every Boat that came by had a pelt at my poor Mistress and I, who being but
Two, besides Watermen, were most lamentably Mauled by other Boats, who being
better Manned, were quite too many for us, and rattl'd us into Silence with a
Broadside of Bilingsgate Language, which was thrown on all sides so thick upon
us, that we found it but a vain attempt to endeavor to be Heard amidst this
Shower of ill-Words. We jog'd gently on, as fast as our Neighboring Enemies
would give us leave, who lay a Head of us, upon our Bow, Broadside, Quarters,
and Stern, that we could not turn our Heads any way out of Tongue-Shot, but
either Rogue, or Whore, Pimp, Cuckold, or Tailor, hit us a box of the Ear, that
almost Deafen'd us. Dear Heart, says my Mistress, I wonder the Magistrates of
the City do not take some care to prevent these sad Abuses upon the Water; for
it is a shameful thing that Civil People should be called thus out of their
Names. Prithee, said I, never mind 'em; for if my Lord M -- were here himself,
they would be as ready to call him Cuckold as they would any body else; and he
would not know which way to help himself, but must put it up as we do, there is
no remedy*

After we had spent about half an hour upon the Water in this Misery, we
Arrived at our intended Port, Cuckolds-Point, where we Landed in a Crowd, with
as much difficulty as a Man crosses the Change at Two a Clock, or squeezes into
Paul's Quire on a Sunday, whilst they are Singing of an Anthem. Having
discharged our Watermen, we went into the House, where the Troop of Merry
Cuckolds used to Rendesvouz; Armed with Shovel, Spade, or Pick-Ax; their Heads
adorned with Horned Helmets; and from thence to March, in Order, for Horn-Fair,
Leveling the Way as they go, according to the Command of their Leaders, that
their Wives might come after with their Gallants, without spoiling their Laced
Shoes, or dragling their Holiday Petticoates. When we had procured a Fire to
recover our Natural Warmth, of which the Coldness of the Water had almost
Robbed us, I began to enquire of the Dame of the Tenement from whence the
Custom of the Meeting, Marshalling and Marching, of this Cornigerous Troop was
at first derived? Who told me, That in the time of King John, when Religion
could no more keep a Prince's Codpice Buttoned, then it can now infuse Charity
in a Priest, In the room of this, House says she, here then stood a Water-Mill,
and Providence having blessed the Knave the Miller, with a very handsome Wife,
King John coming often this Way to Hunt upon Greenwich-Heath, and thereabouts,
happened to see her, and became so Enamored with her Lovely Looks, that he
could by no means restrain his Inclinations, but must needs Cuckold the Miller;
to which, when an Opportunity stood fair, the Dame Consented; but as it is
believed, so Cunningly managed the matter, that her Husband should come Home,
and Catch 'em in the Height of their Pastime, which the Miller did
accordingly; and seeming not to know that he was King, took him up in his Arms
and Threatened to fling him into the Mill-Dam, and Grinil his Head off, which so
frightened his Majesty, that he told him if he would spare his Life, he would
give him all the Land as far as he could see one Way. Which the Miller made him
Vow to perform, before he would quit his hold; but then set him down very
Civilly, and went into his Mill, Leaving the King to finish his Business with
his Wife, as a means to further Engage him to the Performance of his Promise;
the Miller waiting with a great deal of Impatience, till his Wife had submitted
herself, like a Good Subject, to her dread Sovereign, and quietly surrendered
that Fort, upon Discretion, which the King greatly wanted to be Master of: But
as soon as the Fatigue was over, and the Royal Cuckold-Maker had gratified his
ambition in adorning the Brows of the Mealy Peasant, the Miller began to
Solicit his Imperial Rival for the generous Reward he had promised, to
facillitate the wearing of that Forked Burden, which otherways would have sat
very uneasily on his Forehead. The King assured him he would be as Good as his
Word, and bid him look out, and the Land, as far as he could see one Way, on
that side the River, he should possess as his own, Paying only this anuual
acknowledgment, That he should once a Year, upon that day Twelvemonth, which
proved the 18th of October, Walk to the farthest bound of his Estate, with a
Pair of Bucks-Horns on his Head, attended with all his Family; or in Neglect of
which, the Land should be forefeited; to which the Miller had Cunning enough to
very readily Consent. The Cuckold-maker and the Cuckold being thus agreed, he
was about to turn and look up toward London; which the King forbad him,
telling him he had nothing that Way in his Power to dispose of, but ordered him
to look downwards, and as far as he could see that Way, should be given him.
The Miller having Washed his Eyes in Maids Water, to make him Clear Sighted,
according to the Kings Order, looked downwards, and saw as far as
Charlton-Hill, all which Land between that and the Point, he afterward
Enjoyed, only performing the aforementioned Ceremony, according to Agreement:
Whish, says she, was the Original of this Custom, and it is said that there are
Lands hereabout, that are held even to this Day after the same manner.

With this piece of History we were mightily pleased, the Woman herself showing
a great deal of Zeal in the belief of the same; which indeed I swallowed
without Chewing, as the Mob does the Political Reports of State, or an Ignorant
Congregation does the Hum-Drum Doctrine of a Dark Priest.

When we had Warmed and refreshed our Chilled Carcasses, we set forward for
Deptford; and having heard great Commendation of that Serviceable Projection,
the N^w-Dock, I had a great desire to take a View of that by the Way, and so
Shaped my Course accordingly. After we had passed by a long Range of little
Cottages, at the Doors of which sat abundance of Dutch-Buttock'd Lasses, with
Sea Handkerchiefs about their Pouting Bubbies, which were swelled with much
handling, so far beyond their Natural Proportion, that their Breast and their
Bellies, like Mother Shipton's Nose and Chin, met one with the other; some
Knitting, some Spinning, and others picking Okum; but all, as I suppose, ready
enough to quit their several Exercises and betake themselves to a Pleasanter
Pastime, if any Body will hire 'em. Having past by a great Number of these
Condescending Mortals, we came to a Field which led to the Entrance of the
Dock, about a Stones Cast on this side which, were a parcel of
West-Indian-Creolians, lately come on Shore, Cooking in the open Air, an
English Porker after the Indian manner, which was attempted to be performed as
follows: They drove Sticks in the Ground, and Fenced in a square place with Old
Tarpaulins, leaving one side open for the Wind to Fan the Fire which was made
in the middle with Charcole, directly over which lay the Grunter on a
Grid-Iron, made of Spits; which were laid Cross, from side to side; the part
that lay uppermost, being covered with the Dripping-Pan, to preserve it from
Cooling, and the Fat droping into the Fire, cast up such savoury Fumes from the
burning Grease, that the Nossel of foul Candlesticks thrust into a Kitchen-Fire
by a Good House-Wife of a Cook, could not perfume her Sluttish-ships
Territories with a more Obliging Odor; and about Six or Eight foot distance,
from the main-Fire, was another Fire, to the Windward of the Pig, most
Cunningly Contrived to Warm the Air, as it passed, lest its Coldness otherways
might be some Impediment to the Grilliading, or beastly Cooking of their III
favored Beast, whose Eyes were Roasted in his Head accordinging to the Negroes
Cookery, that he star'd like a Dead Pig; and that side that lay next to the
Fire, with the Smoke of the Driping was almost as black as the Charcole beneath
it; that I question not but by the Time it was Ready, it stunk like a piece of
Cheshire-Cheese, Toa^ted in the Flame of a Candle, and looked all over as black
as the Rind of a Flitch of Bacon, that has hung Six months in a Country Chimney.

We left them as busy about their Savage Piece of Cookery, as so many chosen
Housewives dressing of a Weding Dinner, and went into the Yard appertaining to
the Dock, reported by Competent Judges to be able to receive 200 sail of Large
Ships; which Serviceable Project, has so highly Disobliged the King of the
East, that he had Vowed Cuckoldome to the whole Parish of Deptford, which of
late has occasioned every Mariner and Ship-Carpenter adjacent, that has a
handsome Wife, to look as narrowly after her, as a Hen does after her Chickens,
to preserve 'em from the Kite. When we came about the middle of the Dock, we
were obliged either to return back and go a Mile about, or else cross the Top
of the Floodgates, at the Mouth of the Dock, which were about the common
breadth of a Deal Board, and about Ten Yards over. My Mistress was much more
ready to be at the Pains, than choose the danger; Remembering, That the furthest
way About, might be the nearest way Home; and I was for running the hazard, to
avoid the Pains, and endeavored to prevail on my Lady to take Courage, and run
the risque of being Duck'd, to Abridge our Journey; with much ado, by
upbraiding her with Cowardice, and giving her some Words of Encouragement, I at
last chased away her Effeminacy, and made her resolve to endanger the Cooling
of her Leachery, to oblige her Gallant; which she undertook and performed with
so much Bravery, that had the Stoutest Stallion in Christendom been on the
other side, to have received her, she could not have run through the danger with
a more Undaunted Resolution; but I found by her Countenance, she was as well
pleased when she had got safe over, as a Country Fellow that has Shot the
Bridge, or a Town Bully that had survived a Duel.

From hence we proceeded till we came to Deptford, where I think the first
House in the Town, like many others, is accounted a Convenience for his
Majesty's Water-Rats, when residing upon Land, to Cool their Tails in; when we
came a little further into the Town, we might easily discern, by the built of
the Houses, what Amphibeous sort of Creatures chiefly Inhabited this part of
the Kingdom; their Dens were chiefly Wood, all of one form, as if they were
obliged by Act of Parliament, to all Build after the same Model; here a pretty
Woman or two at a Door, there another o^ two at a Window, all looking as
Melancholy as Old Maids and Widows, for want of Male Conversation; gazing upon
each Man that passed 'em, with as much Earnestness and Desire, as ever our
Great Grandmother did upon the Forbidden Fruit. The Ladies that chiefly
Inhabit these Cabbins, were the Wives of Mariners, whose Husbands were some
gone to the East Indies, and some to the West, some Northward, some Southward,
leaving their Disconsolate Spouses, to make Trial of their Virtue, and live
upon Public Credit till their return, who if it were not for the Benevolence
of a well-disposed Neighboring Knight, and a few more Charitable Worthy
Gentlemen, they might, though Married, grow Sullen, like the Negro Women, for
want of Husbands, and pine away because Nature is not supplied with due
Accommodation. Many Shops we observed open in the Streets, but a Brandy-Bottle,
and a Quartern, a Butcher mending of a Canvas Doublet, a few Apples in a
Cabbage-Net, a Peel-full of Deptford Cheescakes, an old Waste-Coat, a Thrum
Cap, and a pair of Yarn Mittings, were the chief Shows that they made of their
Commodities, every House being distinguished by either the Sign of the Ship,
the Anchor, the Three Mariners, Boatswain, and Call, or something relating to
the Sea: For as I suppose, if they should hang up any other, the Salt Water
Novices would be as much puzzled to know what the Figure represented, as the
Irishman was, when he called the Globe the Golden Case-body, and the Unicorn
the White-horse with a Barbers Pole in his Forehead.

The Women we chiefly met in the Streets, were Accouter'd most commonly like
the meanest of our Oyster-women, in Ragged Gowns, Daggled Petty-Coats, Blew
Aprons, Speckled Handkerchiefs about their Necks, and their Heads adorned with
Flat-Caps; those that we met Coupled, had generally short squat
well-tr^ss'd-Fellows by their Sides, in New course Cloth-Coats, Speckled
Breeches, Gray Stockins, Round-Toe'd Shoes, Picked Heels, stitched round the
Quarters, tied on with Scarlet-Tape instead of Buckles, with Mittings on his
Hands, a Fur-Cap on his Head, Armed with an Oaken Cudgel, with a Head as big as
a four Pounder. I observed they all, Spaniard like, kept up to one Fashion, so
that the same Description would serve any I saw, with a very Slender Variation.
Now and then, it is true, we met a Bluff Blade, who looked as Burly as if he had
Fed his whole Lifetime upon Peace and Swines Flesh, with a Campaign Wig on, the
Hairs of which, for want of Combing once in a Month, hung in as many Tangle
Locks, as if he had been flying, and a Sword tied on as high as the Waste-band
of his Breeches, and had no more motion when he walked, than a Two-foot Rule,
stuck into the Apron-Strings of a Carpenter: These sort of Sea Monsters, I
observed the Mumpers saluted with the Title of Noble Captain, and had the right
Knack of Coaxing these Quarter Deck- Blunderbusses out of their Farthings and
Halfpence, with the taking and insinuating Cant of Honor and Worship, as fast
as a Horse Mountebank Gulls the Mob out of their Two-pences, by calling of them
Gentlemen; his Noble Worship looking round him as big, after he had paid the
Beggar a Penny for his Title, as an old Cozening Curmudgeon, who has Built an
Almshouse, or a Rich Citizen that has got a poor Brothers Child into the
Blew-Coat-Hospital.

We walked on till we came to the upper End of the Town, where stood some very
pretty Houses, whose Gates for Ostentation-sake, were made with Bars, that each
Passenger might Delight his Eyes, with an External Prospect of these their most
Creditable and Beautiful Habitations: In this Row stood a most famous Hospital,
Erected for the Entertainment of Thirty-one Decayed Masters of Vessels, or
their Widows, depending on the Trinity-House; the Masters of which, having the
Care thereof; to the relief and support of which Charitable Design, every Ship
at her Clearing, pays according to her Burden so much Money. Our Curiosity led
us to take a Turn into it, which we found very Pleasant and Commodious, as to
the Building and Situation; but when I inquired into the Allowance, I found it
so very small, that it might rather be called Pinch-Gut-Colledge, than an
Hospital for Poor Pensioners; who with much difficulty gaining Admittance into
these Starving Confines, have no more allowed 'em, to find Meat, Drink,
Washing, Fire, Cloths, and all Necessaries of Life, than Twelve Shillings per
Month; and four Months in the Year are set at five Weeks, to take in the Odd
Month; most that are there having Paid more Money toward it, before they came
into it, than ever their Allowance would amount to, if they were to Live Fifty
Years in the Hospital; to which many great Legacies have been left, but the
Number of Pensioners never Increased, nor their Pensions Advanced; so that how
it is sunk, or lmbezell'd, or to what Use Converted, no Body knows, but those
Persons who have the Discretionary Power, as it is supposed, of laying it safe
up in their own Pockets. An East India Captain, some few Years since, Dying,
Bequeathed Thirteen Hundred Pounds to this Hospital; out of which Money, it
never Received any other apparent Advantage, than the Statue of the Benefactor
set up in the Garden, for the Pensioners to Feast their Eyes, instead of their
Bellies, withal. The Members of this Society of Tarpaulin Paupers, are only
during the Pleasure of the Masters of the Trinity, and are liable to be turned
out, upon very slender Mis-behaviours. There is another such Hospital by the
Church, Originally Founded by Queen Elizabeth, for but Twenty-one Poor Masters,
or their Widows; and except in Number, is equal in every particular, with the
former; so that by all the Observations I could make, in so short a Passage
through the Town, I could not but think it very well deserved this following
Character: The Town's without Necessaries; they have Butchers without Meat,
Alehouses without Drink, Houses without Furniture, and Shops without Trade;
Captains without Commission, Wives without Husbands, Whores without Smocks, a
Church without Religion, and Hospitals without Charity.

From thence we made the best of our Way, toward Greenwich, finding nothing
remarkable by the Way, but now and then, a Knot of London Prentices, Armed with
Lad^es of Defense, to secure their Noddles and their Elbows, from the Insolent
Assaults of the more Unlucky Mob, drawn out of Spittle-Fields, Clare-Market,
and Sweet St. Giles; in which parts of the Town, Rude Rogues and Reprobates are
as Plenty as Lice in a Campaign, or Flies in July in the Shop of a
Confectioner. The first part of Greenwich Town that I came into was the
Churchyard, where the Numbers of the Dead, had almost Buried the Church, that
could each Corpse Buried against the Church Wall, raise his Head but half a Foot
above the Surface of the Earth he lies in, he might peep in at the Church
Window, on a Sunday, and frighten the whole Congregation out of the Church. As
I Entered the Holy Ground, I took Notice of several Good Houses on the Left
Hand, which looked like Habitations fit for Christians to Live in; but in some
parts of the Town, the Huts were no bigger than Indian Wig-wams, scarce big
enough for a Cuckold and his Wife, to lie at length, without putting their Head
or their Heels in the Chimney Corner. Hearing the Kings House being Converted
to an Hospital, for Disabled Seamen, as a means to Encourage others hereafter
to venture their Limbs in the Nations-Service, to be rewarded with a Lazy Life,
no Money, and short Commons, when either Age or Lameness has made them a Misery
to themselves, and a Burden to the World; we took a Walk into it, to take a
Brief Survey of this New and Well-intended piece of Charity; which like the gay
Buildings of Northampton, looks very Stately and Magnificent without side, but
Examine within, and you will find but very poor Inhabitants; one part of it was
almost finished, wherein I observed every Pensioner was designed a distinct
Cabin to himself, and was alloted a little more room than he is like to Enjoy
in the Churchyard, and not much neither: When it is all Completed, 'twill be a
Noble Edifice, not at all Inferior to any of those great Gifts, where much
more Grandeur is Visible in the Walls, than Hospitallity in the Kitchen; but
its Situate in a good Place for a little Victuals to make a great show; for
Greenwich, like a Spanish Town, is under such a Scarcity of Flesh Meat, that a
Gentleman not long ago, brought his Mistress down with a Design to lie all
Night in the Town, but was forced to go back to London, at seven a Clock at
Night, against Tide, because never a Public House in the Town could procure
him a Supper. It Is a rare place to Punish a Man troubled with a Caninus
Appetitus, for a Walk in the Park is a rare thing to put his Stomach in an
uproar, and the Town an excellent place to make him run Mad for want of
Victuals to allay his Hunger: Here many Citizens in the Summer time keep their
Wives at Board-Wages, purely because there is no manner of Dainties to incline
them to Extravagance: here many of 'em also put their Children to Nurse,
because it is a sharp Air, and fit for the Breeding up a Young shopkeeper.

From thence we walked on till we came upon the Heath; but Climbing up the
Hill, we saw at the bottom of a deep Precipice, the Mouth of several Caves,
Pray, Sir, said my Mistress, What Ugly Frightful Places are those at the bottom
of the Pit? Indeed Madam, said I, I cannot well tell; but they took as if they
were the Back Doors to the Devils Territories, and that the People of Greenwich
had found out a nearer Cut to Hell, than the rest of their Neighbors. We were
no sooner come upon the Heath, but every Fool was become a Tom-Ladle; and every
Bush was made a Fence to a Furmity Kettle, the Gentlemen Quick-workers in the
dark Mystery of Mischief, were here assembled in a body, in order to break the
Elbows of all Nonconformists, that would not come over to the Ladle-Discipline;
which my Mistress and I observing, were forced to Conform to the Custom of the
Country, and each Arm our selves with a Ladle, as a Protection from the
Rabbles Insolence; who indeed, were afterward as Civil to us as could be
expected of such Tameless Monsters; and let us pass with now and then a little
Knock of the Elbow, not much harder than would have Cracked a Fill-bert; which
we were forced to bear, with all Patience and Submission, till we came into the
Fair, of which I shall proceed to give you a True Character.

It stands near the Church, to make good the Old Proverb, viz. The nearer the
Church, the farther from God. Though it is the Rudest Fair in England, it begins
with a Sermon; which makes another Old saying Good, viz. In the Name of the
Lord begins all Mischief. They say the Parson usually takes his Text upon this
Occasion out of Solomon's Proverbs; and I asking why he did so, was told,
Because Solomon was a great Cuckold-maker, and therefore his Doctrine was the
fitter to be prench'd at Horn-Fair. The People of the Town eat so sparingly,
that they never Exonerate but once a week, and that is on Sundays, making the
Churchyard their Dunghill, which you cannot cross without wading up to your
Ancles in Sir-reverence. All that is Sold at the Fair of use, are Shoes,
Pattins, and Leather-Breeches; the rest are Horn-Toys, and Fools-Baubles? The
one bought to vex Cuckolds, and the other to please Children. The whole place,
for the time, is a Commonwealth, where the Rabble make Laws, and all that
approach must keep 'em. It Is an Ill place for a Proud Man to walk with his Arms
on Kimbo, for they have more spite against the Elbows than any part of the
Body. He that brings Money to this Fair, must look after his Pockets; for the
Waterlane-Anglers are here as busy as Milk-Maids on a May Day. It is an Annual
Rendesvouz for the Mob of London, where it is as rare to see Persons of
Creditable appearance, as it is to see an Honest man in Newgate, or a Fool in
the Jews Synogogue. Here is a great deal of Furmity to be Sold, but very few
People that buy any. Here are a great many Thieves, but few that have any thing
to Lose; and abundance of Beggars, but few or none to relieve 'em. The Fair
seems to stand bounded between God and the Devil; for the Church stands at one
end of it, and a Musick-house at the other. It Is good for nothing, as I know on,
but to humble the Conceit that a Proud Man may have of his Person; for it is
enough to make a Man out of Love with Humane Shape, to behold the Folly and
Rudeness of so many Reprobates, that were at it. It Is a Sanctuary for Ill
Manners, a Protection of all Rudeness, an Encouragement of Wickedness, a
Revelling of young Libertines, a Looking-glass of Confusion, hurtful to good
Manners, and hateful to all Good Men.

FINIS.

