A true and particular ACCOUNT Of the Total Defeat of Coll. SARSFEILD and his
PARTY, Not far from BELLISHANNON; Occasioned by the intercepting of a Letter
from Coll. Sarsfeild to Monsieur d* Avaux, General of the French Forces in
IRELAND.
LICENSED, Aug. 28. 1689.
SIR.
SINCE my last the News is very great* For we are certainly informed, That
Coll. Sarsfeild and his Party are totally routed. The manner as we hear, this
Coll. Sarsfeild hearing of the Landing of his Grace D. Scombergh, and the
defeat of the Lord Montcastle, began to be afraid of himself, and therefore not
believing he was strong enough to prevent the Men of Iniskillin from joining
his Grace, which he mainly desired to hinder, called a Council of War, where it
was resolved to send a faithful Messenger to the French General Monsieur d'
Avaux, to advance with those Forces which he had under his command, giving him
also to understand, That Coll. Sarsfeild would decamp at the same time, and
join him the next day by such an Hour. The Letter being thus written and
directed to Monsieur d' Avaux, was delivered to a Trusty Messenger, and such a
one he might probably have been, had not Providence thrown him into the hands
of the Protestants. For some of the Iniskillin Scouts being abroad in the Road
between Coll. Sarsfeild and Monsieur d' Avaux, intercepted this faithful
Messenger and carried him to Iniskillin, where the chief Commander of the
Iniskillin Forces caused him to be searched, and finding about him the Letter
written from Coll. Sarsfeild to Monsieur d' Avaux; This Letter was read, and a
great consulta^^on ^eing had thereupon it was concl^ded, That they should lay
hold of the opportu^ity which s^^^ed to the Chief Commander to be a very fair
one. It was concluded therefore, that they should write a Letter back to Coll.
Sarsfeild, as from Monsieur d' Avaux, wherein d' Avaux promised not to fail
Sarsfeild at his hour and place appointed. By that time they thought that the
Letter might be delivered, they set forward, and putting themselves into the
Road which D' Avaux was to take, that he might join Coll. Sarsfeild; they
marched forward* Sarsfeild thus deluded, sets forward to meet D*Avaux, and when
he saw the Iniskillin Men at a distance, verily thought they had been his
Friends; which made his Party upon the same presumption much more remiss and
negligent in keeping their Orders, as then they should have been. On the
otherside, the Iniskillin Men marched with all the silence, and in the best
order that could be imagined* considering the disadvantages of the Place: But
no sooner were they got near enough to show Coll. Sarsfeild his Error, but they
fell upon him with an extraordinary fury and bravery. In this surprise Coll.
Sarsfeild and his Men were at a loss, not dreaming of such an Entertainment.
However, for a time they made as stout a resistance as could be expected from
Men so surpised, and in that condition as they were; till at length being all
in confusion, they were at last totally routed above Two thousand slain, a
great many Prisoners taken, with good store of Arms and Provisions: And it is
farther said, That the Iniskillin Men are in pursuit of the rest. We daily
expect a confirmation of the Particulars, which so soon as it comes to our
hands you shall not fail of. Remaining in the mean time

Your very loving Friend L. W.

London* Printed for R* Robinson in the Strand. 1689.


