SEVEN SERMONS PREACHED BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD, SETH Lord Bishop
of Sarum.

The Second Edition.

DIEV ET MONDROIT
HONI SOIT QV MAL Y PENSE

Printed for James Collins at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street



LONDON, Printed for James Collins at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, M. DC.
LXXIV.

THE CONTENTS.
I. AGainst Resistance of Lawful Powers, on Romans 13. 2. And they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation. Preached at White Hall, November. 5. 1661.
II. Against the Antiscripturists, on 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God. Preached at White Hall, Feb. 20. 1669/70. III. Concerning
the Sinfulness, Danger and Remedies of Infidelity, on Heb. 3. 12. Take heed,
Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. -- Exhort one another daily. Preached at Whitehal, Feb.
16. 1667/68. IV. A Sermon Preached before the Peers in the Abby-Church at
Westminister, October. 10. 1666. on Eccles. II. 9. But know, that for all these
things God will bring thee to Judgment, Rejoice, O young man, etc. -- V. A
Sermon concerning the Strangeness, Frequency, and desperate Consequence of
Impenitency. Preached at Whitehall, April 1. 1666. (soon after the great
Plague) on Revelat. 9. 20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by the
Plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands. VI. A Sermon against
Ingratitude, Preached at Whitehall, Feb. 26. 1664/65. some time before the
great Plague, on Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people
and unwise? VII. An Apology for the Mysteries of the Gospel. A Sermon Preached
at Whitehall, before the King, Feb. 16. 1672/73. on Romans 1. 16. For I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of christ, for it is the Power of God to Salvation, to
every one that believes.
Against Resistance of Lawful POWERS.
ROMANS xiii. 2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
AMongst all the stratagems of the Devil, tending to the undermining of
Religion, and the subversion of the souls of men, though there cannot be any
more unreasonable, yet there was never any more unhappily successful, than the
creating and fomenting an Opinion in the World, That Religion is an enemy to
Government, and the bringing Sincerity and Zeal in Religion into jealousy, and
disgrace with the Civil Powers.

It was by this jealousy, blown into the heads of the High Priests, and the
Sanhedrim amongst the Jews, and of Herod, and Pontius Pilate, that Christ
himself (the Captain of our Salvation, the Autbor and Finisher of our Faith)
was accused, condemned, and executed on a Tree. By this the Apostles were haled
before the Governors of Provinces, forced from one City to flee unto another:
for this they endured bonds, and imprisonment, and sundry kinds of death. It
was through this fancy, that the Christians, for three hundred years together,
endured the rage of Heathen Emperors; being destitutel, afficted, and
tormented. Our Lord Christ was traduced as an enemy to Caesar, a man refractary
to the Roman Laws, and a Nonconformist to the Religion, and Laws of his
Country. The Apostles were charged as disturbers of the public peace, with
turning the world upside down. The Primitive Christians were accounted enemies
to the Commonwealth, adverse, and malevolent to the Empire: and the Christian
Religion it self was bruited, and surmised to have something in it offensive,
and dangerous to the Civil Government; as appears not only by the Edicts of
Healthen Emperors, but also by the Apologies of Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Athenagoras, etc.

Neither was it thus only of old, before the Roman Empire was become Christian,
but even since the time of Constantine, down to our Fathers days, nay to our
own, we shall find the Devil still managing the same pretense, carrying on the
same Antichristian mystery of iniquity, which began to work in the time of our
Lord Christ, and his Apostles.

Those, that prosess to know the Arcana Imperii, and publicly proclaim
themselves to the World to be qualified for Molders of Commonwealths, and
Dictatours to Princes, are the Writers of Politics; Machiavel abroad, and
others nearer home: some of these, pretending discoveries of things unknown to
all our Fathers, if they be strictly analyzed, will be found to resolve their
whole mystery into this one pretense, That Religion, in the height and
exaltation of it, is prejudicial to Policy; and that, to be a thorow-paced, a
sincere and zealous Christian, is to be dangerous to the State.

As the remedy for which evil, they have thought fit and necessary to enervate
the Principles of all Religion so far, as to remove the Doctrine of Good and
Evil, the Immortality of the Soul, the Rewards and Punishments of the World to
come; that so Religion may appear wholly to derive from Policy.

How destructive these Doctrines are, not only to the souls of men, in
reference to the World to come; but to the interests of this life, (the regular
and secure acquisition and enjoyment whereof, are entirely derived from the
great and everlasting Ordinance of Government) I am not now called to speak.
But surely it cannot be unnecessary to endeavor to state this Question, to
search into the grounds of this pretense, to examine thoroughly from whence all
this clamor, these fears and jealousies; whence all this mighty scandal has
arisen.

The Gospel of our Savior is not like the Alcoran, which hates the light, and
abhors a strict examination of the Principles whereon it stands. When the Jews
contended with our Savior, and opposed his Doctrine, he desired to bring the
matter in question to a rational decision, John x. The Question there was,
Whether he were the Son of God? And he propounds them this fair (...), Verse
37. If I do the works of my Father, believe me: if I do not, believe me not.

And I verily, as a Minister of Christ, (though the meanest of ten thousand) am
bold in the power, and through the evidence of the truth of the Gospel, to say,
Let the Adversaries of Religion search and look; let them employ their Wit,
their Industry, their Logic, if any thing can be found in the Principles of
Christianity, prejudicial to the power of just and lawful Magistrates: Nay
moreover, if it be possible for Men or Angels to state the Rights of Civil
Government upon clearer and firmer Principles, to secure them by more powerful
Obligations, to urge them upon men by more efficacious Motives of Rewards and
Punishments, than those are, which the very Foundations of Christianity do
expressly propound: then let the Gospel, and the Ministers of it, endure all
that contempt and obloquy which these men desire to cast upon them.

And for the Foundations of our Religion; there are those, that tell us, that
Christianity is founded upon Cephas, ( which is, indeed, by interpretation a
Stone) but the Apostle tells us, ( Ephesians. ii. 20.) that we are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone: wherefore by these the present Question is to be decided.

If any men, at any time, taking upon them the sacred name of Christians, have
swerved from the Rule of their Profession, and (acting contrary to the Spirit
of Christ) have made that holy Name to be blasphemed; it is reason that they be
esteemed the utter enemies of Christianity, and that they themselves should
bear their condemnation: but to charge their exorbitancies upon that Profession
which they have profaned and injured, is such an injustice, as cannot consist
with moral honesty, or Philosophical ingenuity.

So then, hic Rhodus, hic saltus. As Saint Paul (1 Cor. xv. 14, 17, 20.)
concerning the Resurrection of Christ, If Christ be not risen, our preaching is
vain, and your faith is vain: -- but now is Christ risen: so I; If, within the
compass of those Foundations, which I have mentioned, be found any color or
shadow of license for any person whatsoever, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
entrench upon the power of lawful Magistrates; if any warrant at all for open
Rebellion, or privy Conspiracies; for murdering or deposing of Princes, or
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance: then let Kings cease to be our
Nursing Fathers, and Queens to be our Nursing Mothers; let David look to his
own house; let the Light of our Eyes, the Breath of our Nostrils, the Restorer
of Religion, the Defender of our Faith, look rather first to defend himself. It
will then be reasonable to expect, that the Kings of the earth should stand up,
and Psalm. ii. 2
the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his Christ,
that they should break their bonds in sunder, and cast their cords from them:
then our Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain.

But now indeed the case is otherwise, and that evidently. What the Laws of men
could never do with all their Temporal Rewards and Punishments, in that they
are weak; that Christianity, in the true Spirit of it, performs, to the utmost
height that is conceiveable.

The Foundation of Government and Obedience, is deeply and firmly rooted in the
Foundation of our Religion. And, if the Scripture cannot be broken, if it be
true, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot of it shall pass
away: it is as true, that the Ordinances of the Sun and Moon shall fail, before
this Ordinance shall be dissolved. For if by the Principles of our Religion we
are obliged to believe concerning the Books of the Old Testament, that they
have been delivered by holy men of God, who spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost, 2 Pet. i. 21. then the holy Ghost has said, By me Kings reign,
etc. Prove. viii. 15. If Christ be the Son of God, the Son of God has said,
Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, Mat. xxii. 21. If the Holy
Spirit did overshadow Peter, and the rest of the Apostles; then Peter,
overshadowed and filled with the Spirit, commands us in the Name of God to
submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. ii. 13. If Saint Paul were
called to be an Apostle by the miraculous appearance of our Lord Christ after
his Ascension, and was by him immediately instructed in the pure and genuine
spirit of Christianity; then Saint Paul's Theory concerning Government is an
authentic Christian Theory, whereby the Doctrines and practices of Christians
are to be judged: and that Theory is delivered in the seven first Verses of
this Chapter; Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, etc. And they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

I call it a Christian Theory of Government, because it is a brief and
comprehensive Scheme, whereby all Questions concerning Obedience and
Government, may, according to Christian Principles, he resolved.

The whole discourse of the Apostle consists of two general parts;

First, A strict Injuction.
Secondly, Effectual Motives.
First, The Injunction in the first words, Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, etc.

Secondly, The Motives in the words following, which are taken from

I. The Original and Institution of Government; it is ordained of God: hence
follows

II. The Sinfulness of Resistance; They resist the Ordinance of God. And

III. The Danger of it; They shall receive damnation. Which is again enforced by

IV. The End of Government in respect of evil and good men.

Out of all which follows
V. The necessity of subjection; Wherefore ye must needs be subject. And

VI. The nature of that necessity; it is not of prudence, but of Conscience.

After all which the Apostle (like a legitimate Demonstratour) resumes his
Proposition, and concludes it with an (...), Verse 7. Render therefore to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor.

The words, which I have chosen, contain in them the danger of resistance to
the Civil Powers. They relate both to the Antecedent and Subsequent part of the
Apostle's Discourse, and are as efficacious toward the pressing of the
Injunction of Obedience, as it is possible for words to express, or men to
conceive.

The strongest, and most operative Arguments upon men (at leastwife -- (...))
are Arguments of terror. The most terrible thing within the compass of humane
apprehension, is Damnation; which imports, besides the judgments of this life,
the eternal privation of the enjoyment of God, utter darkness, and everlasting
burnings.

Those that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

Those that resist] (...). Resistance Expl.
is a Relative Act, and it implies some person or thing to be resisted. What
then is the Correlate of (...)?

That is delivered in the first Verse, Those that resist (...), the Authorities
set over them, Civil Authorities having jus Gladii, the Authorities supreme, or
subordinate, justly obtaining over them. It is not (...), or (...), which is
here used, (which signify corporal strength and power) but (...), which the
Scripture distinguishes from both the other. From (...), Luke iv. 36. and ix.
1. 1 Cor. xv. 24. Ephesians. i. 21. from (...), Jude 25. It answers the Hebrew word
(...), which the Septuagint translates by all the names of Legal Authority;
(...). It is taken for the Persons of Governors, as well as for their Power:
so Ephesians. iii. 10. That to Principalities and Powers (...) might be known, etc.
and (...), against Powers, and the Rulers of this World, Ephesians. vii. 2. So that
we may not separate their Personal and their Politic capacity.

It remains, that we enquire the meaning of (...), and (...), what it is to
resist in the Language of the Gospel. Now,

1. That to oppose by force is to resist, it is so plain, that I need not speak
to it. We meet both the words in that sense, James iv. 6,7. (...), God
resists the proud; and (...), Resist the Devil.

2. But the word signifies Opposition by subtilty, as well as by force. The
Opposition of Elymas the Sorcerer to Saint Paul, is expressed by this word,
Act. xii. 8. (...). and the opposition of Jannes and Jambres to Moses, (...),
2. Tim. iv. 15.

3. And lastly, it signifies opposition by Words, as well as by Deeds. So
(...), to gainsay, and to resist, are the same, Luke xxi. 15. and (...) is to
contradict, Acts vi. 10.

The words then do clearly and plainly comprehend all manner of resistance or
opposition.

This hitherto concerns the Proposition taken materially: if we reflect upon
the form of it, there will be two things to be considered.

First, That the Proposition is indefinite, and equipollent to an Universal;
They that resist, that is, (...), every soul (as in the first Verse) that
resists, without any exception of persons.

Secondly, That the Act of Resistance is set down likewise absolutely without
any restraint, in respect of any pretenses or causes. whatsoever. So that the
sense of the words resolved, and expounded by the Scriptures, is this; Every
Soul, which upon any pretense whatsoever, in any manner whatsoever, shall
resist the lawful Authority that is over him, shall receive to himself
damnation, that is, he puts himself thereby into a state of damnation.

This I conceive to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the words of my Text. I
must acknowledge, that two things have been questioned in this Proposition by
the men of this unhappy, viperous, and adulterous Generation.

I. The first is, Whether (...) ought to be interpreted so severely, as to
signify eternal damnation.

II. Whether that, which is said concerning all persons and pretenses, can be
made good upon the Principles of Christianity.

I. As to the former of these, I shall only say, that the Argument brought
against this interpretation does, in truth, exceedingly confirm it.

The Allegation is, that (...) is used in Scripture for Temporal Object.
Judgment. The place produced is, 1 Cor. xi. 29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks (...), damnation to himself: where the Apostle
seems to explain (...) by the following words, Verse 30. For this cause many
are weak and sickly, and many sleep; viz. by Temporal Judgments.

Sol.
And indeed this is true; but these things likewise ought to be observed.

1. That the same penalty is denounced in the Gospel to those, who resist
Authority, and to those, that are guilty of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. xi. 27.
and trample upon the blood of the everlasting Covenant. Heb. 10. 29.


2. That neither Ananias and Sapphira, nor yet the Corinthians, were by their
Temporal Judgments exempted from Eternal.

3. And lastly, That seeing the great difference betwixt the Legal and
Evangelical dispensation did consist in this, that the express Promises and
Threatenings, under the Law, were Temporal; and under the Gospel, Eternal: if
God shall, under the Gospel, besides Eternal punishments due to every sin, add
moreover to some particular sins the threatenings of temporal Judgments, let
these men consider what advantage they have gotten, and what can more be
devised to contribute to the aggravations of such a sin. I shall say no more to
the first Question, nor to that part of the Text, which concerns the damnation
of Resisters precisely considered: but shall apply my self to the resolution of
the second.

II. It is impossible in half an hour, to speak concerning all those pretenses
for resistance of Magistrates; which, being raised by Satan, and made use of by
the children of disobedience, are falsely charged upon Religion. I shall single
out some of the chief of them, and examine them by the Law and the Testimony,
by the Old and New Testament; adding to them, as occasion requires, the
judgment and practice of the Primitive Christians; and afterward make a brief
Application.

Those, which have given the greatest scandal, as having troubled the Christian
World, and almost turned it upside down, are reducible to the two Heads of
Religion, and Civil Affairs.

First, Those which refer to Religion, are such scandalous Tenets as these:

I. That Erroneous (suppose Heretical or Idolatrous) Powers may be resisted;
especially if they endeavor to force men to their own Religion.

II. That Christian Magistrates have no power in matters of Religion: viz. None

1. In religious Causes.

2. Over religious Persons.

By Orders. By personal Gifts.
Secondly, Those which refer to matters Civil, are reducible to such as these;

I. Harsh Administration.

II. Pretenses of Competition of Power; and the like.

Now I shall not be afraid or backward to acknowledge, that if any one of these
Tenets be agreeable to the Principles of Christianity, or to the practice of
the Primitive and purest Christians, who are to be presumed to have known the
mind of Christ and his Apostles; then we are to admit, that there is reason in
what is alleged to create a Jealousy upon Religion.

For, 1. If Erroneous, Heretical, or Idolatrous Magistrates may be resisted,
(because they are so, or because they join oppression of godly men unto their
error in Relistion) how can any Kingdom stand? These are matters wherein every
man makes himself a Judge; and it is not material, whether he judge righteous
or unrighteous judgment, the matter once stated in Thesi, that in such cases
men may resist, the Hypothesis is easily made, and men let loose to act
according to their proper apprehensions, or the pretenses of those, who have
power with them.

What shall be done, when, at the same time, a Prince shall be judged by one
part of his Subjects Heretical and profane, for departing from Superstition,
and vindicating his power from unjust Usurpations over it; while another part
shall judge him to be Superstitious, and will never believe him to abhor Idols,
so long as he will not commit Sacrilege? What shall be done, while some
conclude him to be irreligious, because he will not worship Images; others
Idolatrous, because he kneels at the Communion? and both esteem him an
Oppressor, because he restrains their Zeal, and hinders them from that excess
of Riot, which they pant after, to the devouring of one another?

Supposing this Tenet to be true, it is indeed evident no Government can be.
But now what color can there be, to charge this Tenet upon Christianity? Does
the Old or New Testament give any occasion to this Doctrine? Is it countenanced
(1.) by Moses, or (2.) by the Prophets? or (3.) by our Savior? or (4.) by the
Apostles? (5) That Cloud of Witnesses, (the Noble Army of Martyrs) did they
give Testimony to this Assertion, or to the contrary? I may not insist: a word
to each of these.

1. Moses was so far from the Doctrine of Resistance, that, notwithstanding the
hardness of Pharaoh's heart, the cruelty of the bondage, the weakness of the
Egyptians by Plagues, the numbers of Israel, six hundred thousand, and three
thousand five hundred and fifty fighting men above twenty years old; besides
the Tribe of Levi: yet he would not lead them into the promised Land without
Pharaoh's positive and express consent to their departure.

2. As for the Prophets; in the third Chapter of Daniel we find three of Gods
Children put to the trial (the fiery trial) of this Doctrine, by
Nebuchadnezzar, an Idolater, and a Tyrant, acting highly under both those
Capacities together. They were cast into the fiery Furnace, because they would
not worship the Golden Image which he had set up. And in the sixth, we find
Daniel thrown into the Lions Den, only for praying to the God of Israel. Let us
consider their Behavior, did they resist, or mutiny, or labor to alienate, or
discontent, or (by denouncing threats or terrors) to discourage Subjects from
Obedience? How had they been instructed by their Prophets? Jeremy (2 Chronicles.
xxxvi. 13.) had taught them, that Zedekiah had turned from the Lord God of
Israel, in rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: and
that they ought to seek the peace of the City whither they were carried
Captives, and to pray unto the Lord for it, Jer. xxix. 7. And therefore the
three Children in the third of Daniel only refer themselves to God for
deliverance; and Daniel, in the midst of the Lions Den, prays heartily for
Darius, O King, live for ever! Dan. vi. 21.

3. In the next place, let us consider the case of Christ and his Apostles, and
see whether any such Tenet may be collected from their Doctrine or Practice,
their Speeches or their Actions. As for what concerns our Lord Christ, I have
had the Honor formerly in this place more at large to vindicate him from such
aspersions. He paid Tribute at the expense of a Miracle, Mat. xvii. 27. He
submitted himself to all the Powers that were over him; to the Sanhedrim, and
their Delegates, to Herod, to Pontius Pilate: he submitted himself to death by
an unjust sentence, even to the bitter and accursed death upon the Cross,
Philip. ii. 8. This was his Practice: as for his Doctrine; He taught men to
render to Caesar the things that were Caesar's, Mat. xxii. 21. He acknowledged
Pilate's power to be from above, John xix. 11. He rebuked Peter for smiting
with the Sword; and told him, that Those that take the Sword, shall perish by
the Sword, Mat. xxvi. 52. He taught his Difciples to pray for them which should
persecure them, Mat. v. 44. And the utmost permission which he gave them, was,
when they were persecuted in one City, to flee unto another, Matthew x. 23.

4. As for the Apostles: They taught men to obey them that have the rule over
them, Hebr. xiii. 17. To submit themselves to every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet.
ii. 13. To do all things without murmuring or disputing, Philip. ii. 14. To
pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy ii. 2. Saint Peter has
told us, that such as despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, are (in an
especial manner) reserved to Judgment, 1 Pet. ii. 9, 10. and Saint Paul, in my
Text, that they shall receive damnation.

This Doctrine they Sealed with their blood. Saint Peter (according to
Ecclesiastical Tradition) was crucified, and Saint Paul beheaded, James the Son
of Zebedeus slain with the Sword, etc.

Now, as for the Powers, to which all these Instructions and Behaviors did
refer, they were for Idolatry, and Tyranny, and Persecution, Humani generis
portenta.

If it be objected, That all these Obj.
submitted, because thev were not able to resist: the Answer, upon Christian
Principles, might be; Sol.
That He, which restrained the Flames, and stopped the mouths of Lions, could
have given his Servants power to resist; that Christ could have prayed his
Father, who would have given him more than twelve Legions Matthew. 26. 53.
of Angels for his relief; that the Apostles, who wrought mighty signs and
wonders, could have rescued themselves: had it not rather pleased the great
Ordainer of Powers, by their submission, to ratify and establish the Doctrine
of Obedience.

5. But the belief, and practice of the Primitive Christians will satisfy this
Objection even to common Sense and Reason.

The Instances in this kind are infinite, where Christians, abounding in
numbers, being in Arms, and abundantly able to make resistance, have chosen,
with the expense of their lives, to yield obedience to Idolaters, persecuting
them for their Religion. I shall name but two Examples.

Tertullian Apolog. 37.
tells the Emperor, that his Cities, Islands, Castles, Councils, Armies,
Regiments, and Companies; the Palace, the Senate, the Courts of Judicature were
filled with Christians: and yet they submitted to persecution.

And we read that the Thebean Legion consisted of six thousand, six hundred,
sixty and six persons, every man Christian, when they submitted to the
Decimation of Maximinian for Religion.

I shall say no more to the first Pretense.

II. Now the second is like unto it, alike prejudical to Government; alike
false, and scandalous to Religion.

An House, or Kingdom divided Mat. xii. 25.
cannot stand: and God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; 1 Cor.
xiv. 33.
and that especially in Religion. If none have this power to order matters of
Religion, there must be Confusion: if any other beside the Supreme Magistrate,
there will be Division. The inevitable Inconveniences of the exemption of
religious Things, and religious Persons, from the power of the Magistrate, are
abundantly set forth by such, as would improve them to the disadvantage of
Religion. And, indeed, to go about to deny, or to diminish the dismal
Consequences of such Pretenses, were to endeavor to put out the eyes of all
the men of Reason, and Experience in the world.

My present Duty is to enquire, what relation these Pretenses have to the
Principles of Christianity; and that

First, As to religious Causes.

Secondly, As to Ecclesiastical Persons.

Thirdly, As to holy, or gifted Brethren; as they style themselves.

Now, in order to a resolution in these Enquiries, I shall (as a Lemma) humbly
propose one Observation.

It is this, That, whereas there are two things, whereon all Political
administration does depend: 1. Concerning the Rights, and Bounds, and
regulation of Sovereign Powers; 2. Concerning the Duties, and Obedience of
Subjects: we find both Christ, and the Apostles, frequently laboring to settle
in the Consciences of men that part, which concerns Obedience; but no where
restraining, or limiting, or particularly regulating the Office of Sovereign
Powers; but leaving them to those general Rules, which concern the Account and
Duty of all men in their several stations, and to the terms, whereupon the
Providence of God was wont to settle the Princes, and Governors of the World.
Let the rights of Caesar be what they will (in reference to Tribute, or other
matters) Christ will not determine them: This he will; those things, which
belong to Caesar (according to Jus Gentium) must be rendered to him. He does
not examine Pilate's power, in case of Blasphemy, or Treason; but acknowledges
it, and submits. He falls not upon sifting, or examining the power of the
Sanhedrim; either their original power, or the power left them by the Romans:
They sit in Moses Chair, etc. Whatsoever therefore they bid you do, do it,
Matthew. xxiii. 2, 3.

And so likewise the Apostles, they seem to be unconcerned (as it were) in the
governing part of Civil Policy. No word is found in all their Writings,
enquiring into the Rights of the Roman Emperors (who were sovereign) or
limiting the Exercise of their Power. Only thus much they take for certain,
such, as they were, they were ordained of God. And they spend all their labor
in founding deeply, and firmly establishing that other part, which concerns
Obedience.

From this Observation it will follow, That whatever Things, or Persons were
not before the times of Christ, and his Apostles, exempt from the power of the
Magistrate, are not by the Foundations, and Principles of Christianity
exempted. ( Non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia.) And it will only
remain for us to enquire, what was the manner of the Nations of the World, and
of God's peculiar people, in reference to these Particulars, before, and at the
times of Christ, and his Apostles. To which if we shall add the practice of the
best, and most ancient Christian Emperors, I know not what more can be desired
to clear the present Argument.

I suppose it needless to put in a Caution, that while we speak of the
Magistrate's power to order matters of Religion; we do not entitle him to the
Priest's Office (the Spiritual Function) or the Execution of it, in preaching
the word, administering the Sacraments, exercising the power of Ordination, or
of the Keys, etc. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put it into
our Sovereign's heart to be tender of the rights of the Church, as of the Apple
of his Eye.

This is a Calumny insisted on generally by almost all our Adversaries, but it
is too rude, and gross, to be spoken to in this place. Rather let us see
whether the Sovereigns among all people, Heathen, Jews, Christians, have not
claimed, and exercised power in all Causes, over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil.

1. For Causes. The New Testament sometimes divides the Gentiles Romans i. 14.
into Greeks, and Barbarians; sometimes into wise, and unwise: according to
which division the Romans are, I suppose, reckoned under the Greeks, from
whence they were mostly extracted, and with whom they contended in Civility.
Briefly, 1. the Greeks, 2. the Romans, 3. the Barbarous Nations did always
exercise such a power.

(1.) Aristotle, the greatest among the Greeks, tells us, that Polit. lib 7
cap. 8.
the first, and principal thing in a Common Wealth is (...). And, accordingly,
if we consult the Fragments, which are left us, of the Laws of the most ancient
Grecian Commonwealths, we shall find nothing so frequent, as the Ordinances
concerning their Religion.

2. Amongst the Romans, Cicero (the wisest) says, that Religion is the
Foundation of Humane Society; as in truth it is. To say nothing of the
Ordinances of Numa, the Jus Pontificium etc. the Titles of the Twelve Tables
are many of them concerning Religion.

(3.) As for the Barbarous Nations, I shall not multiply Testimonies, nor go
beyond the line of Scripture. In the third of Daniel we find an Edict of the
King of Babylon enjoining all People, Languages, and Tongues to commit
Idolatry; Verse. 4. 5. And, by and by, another Edict, that no man should speak
amiss of the God of Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego Verse. 29. In the sixth we
find Darius (the Persian) by the advice of his Council signing a Decree,
against petitioning (for thirty days) any God besides himself; Verse 9. and
shortly another, that all men should tremble, and fear before the God of
Daniel; Verse 26. In the third of Jonah, the King of Nineveh, and his Nobles
proclaim a public Fast. In the first of Ezra, Cyrus puts forth an Edict to
build the Temple at Jerusalem. In the fourth, Artaxerxes reverseth it. In the
sixth Darius re-inforceth it.

I suppose it is now evident, that Greeks, and Barbarians did exercise this
power.

To think to elevate the force of these Instances, because all these were
Strangers from God, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians, ii. 12.
is to mistake the purpose for which they are alleged.

However, it was not thus among the Kings of the Nations only, but among the
holiest, and wisest of the Governors, and Kings of Israel, and Juda; who for
abolishing false Worship, and ordaining the true, are often highly commended by
the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. The time would fail me to speak distinctly,
and particularly, of the Ordinances concerning Religion, which were made by
Moses, Joshua, David Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Manasses also, and
Josiah: concerning whom the Scripture gives these Characters. Moses was the
Deuteronomy. 33. 1.
man of God. Joshua the servant of the Lord. David a man after Josh. xxiv. 29.
Gods own heart. There was none 1 Samuel xiii. 14.
like unto Solomon. Asa his heart 2 Chronicles. ix. 22.
was perfect with the Lord. The Lord 1 Kings xv. 14.
was with Jehoshaphat. Hezekiah did 2 Chronicles. xvii. 3.
that, which was right in the sight of 2Cron. 20. 2.
the Lord. Manasseth was heard of 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 13
God. Josiah did that, which was 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 26.
right; and his Goodness was recorded.

Now the Acts of every one of these concerning the Worship of God, and matters
of Religion are recorded, and applauded in the Scriptures. For these all
ordered, and regulated Services, and Sacraments, and Covenants with God; they
erected Altars and Tabernacles, and Temples, and dedicated them unto the Lord;
they destroyed Idolatry, reformed abuses in Gods Worship, settled both the
standing Worship of God, and occasional Thanks-givings, and Humiliations: to
omit other matters.

The whole Aaronical Ministry, which consisted in ceremonies, and Sacrifices,
Typical, and Carnal Ordinances, was not ordered by the hand of Aaron, but of
Moses, who was King in Jesurun. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5.


The Tabernacle, and Templeservice (which, beside the Mosaical Institutions,
consisted of Spiritual abiding Ordinances) was instituted by David: who, being
the sweet Singer of Israel, and acquainted more then ever any man (for ought
appears) with the ways, and helps of listing up the Heart to spiritual
intercourse with God, to that end appointed the use of Music in the Church;
and (without fear of stinting the Spirit) he prescribed Set-forms of Praise,
and Prayers for the use of the Temple; and ordered the service for every day. A
Psalm, consisting partly of the one hundred and fifth, ninety sixth, and one
hundred and eighteenth, he first delivered to Asaph, and his Brethren, at the
reduction of the Ark from the house of Obed-Edom; 1 Chronicles. xvi. 7. And diverse
other Psalms were composed by him for the Service of the Church.

And what he had ordained, Solomon put in practice. In the fifth Chapter of the
second Book of Chronicles, we find the pattern of the Service of this Time, and
Place, the Sons of Asaph, Heman, and Verse. 12.
Jeduthun, arrayed in white Linen, with musical Instruments, praising the Lord,
saying, For he is good, etc. viz. reciting the one hundred Verse. 13.
and eighteenth Psalm: and, in token of God's acceptance, a Cloud filled the
house. Verse. 14.


The one hundred thirty and sixth Psalm likewise was wont to be sung in
Thanksgivings. So we find also Hezekiah, and Josiah, 2 Chronicles. xxix. 25.
praising the Lord in the words of David, 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 15.
and Asaph.

Thus stood the matter under the Law; the ordering of matters of Religion was
not exempted from the. Supreme Power. Hezekiah varied from Moses his Law, and
was blameless. Neither was it otherwise in the best, and purest Times under the
Gospel.

It had been but a slender invitation to the Emperors to become Christian; if,
by submitting to Christianity, they must lose so considerable a part of the
Sovereign Power enjoyed by all their Predecessors, and be thereby exposed
inevitably to Seditions, and Rebellions, upon every Frantic eruption of
religious Melancholy. The primitive Emperors understood themselves otherwise,
and so did the Christians under them. I may not stand to recite the Annals of
the Church.

If Constantine had not interposed for the composing of the Arrian Heresy,
what had become either of Government, or Religion?

The drawing up of Canons for the regulation of Religion was by our Lord
committed to the Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons: but, that these Canons should be enforced as Laws by
temporal Penalties it, was by sanction of Civil powers.

In the second Ecumenical Council, the Fathers, assembled at Constantinople,
beseech Theodosius the Elder to ratify the Decrees of that Synod.

Thus we find Justinian establishing Novel. Coastit. 131.
the Nomo-Canonicon, or Code of the Universal Church, consisting of the Canons
of the four first General, and five ancient Provincial Councils; and commanding
them (...), to be kept as Laws. Briefly, to determine this Question, we need
only to view the Titles of the sixteenth Book of the Code of Theodosius, the
thirteen first Titles in the Code os Justinian, Photius's Nomo-Canon, and the
like.

The Pretense of exemption of Ecclesiastical Causes, so as has been intimated,
as it is inconsistent with Government; so it is also with the Principles of
Christianity.

2. Thus much having been spoken concerning the regulation of Matters of
Religion, it will be needless to enlarge concerning the second Pretense of the
exemption of Ecclesiastical Persons.

This Tenet is equally dangerous with the former, and equally contrary to the
Principles of Christianity. It were to be wished, that all men professing
themselves Ministers were thoroughly convinced of the Doctrine of Obedience:
otherwise, as they grow popular, they become dangerous. Sacerdotum quidam eo
sunt ingenio, ut, ni pareant, territent. And Saint Chrysostom commenting upon
every Soul, etc. says, (...). Both the Apostle, the Evangelist, and the
Propher. Our Savior was both Priest, and Prophet; and the Apostles were
Ecclesiastical persons: yet did not think themselves exempted. Such persons
were not exempted, either before, or after the Times of our Savior; neither in
Kings ii.
a Single, or 7. Ibid. 35.
Joint capacity. From the beginning Mat. xix. 8.
it was not so.

1. As to Single persons under the Law, we find an Instance of the Exercise of
the Sovereign power over an High Priest offending, in Abiathar, whom Solomon
thrust out, and placed Zadoc in his room.

2. As to the calling of Assemblies; before the Gospel Times, it did belong to
the Supreme Magistrate. We find Moses, not Aaron; Joshuah, not Eleazar; David,
not Abiathar; Solomon, not Zadoc; summoning the Priests, and Levites, to meet
together. And

In the Primitive Times of the Christian Emperors, we do not meet with
Councils, or Synods called by the Bishop of Rome, nor with Ministers, casting
themselves into Classical, and Synodical Meetings; nor with Assemblies of
Divines, called against, or without the Prince's consent.

The indiction of Times, and Places, the convocation of Persons, the
Presidency, the order of Debates, the dismission of the Assemblies, the
roboration of Canons (as to making them Laws of the Empire) in the General, and
provincial Councils, were all the work of the Supreme Magistrate. And

As for matters of Appeal, we find Paul appealing to Caesar: Athanasius (from
the Synod at Tire) to Constantine; to whom three Appeals were likewise made in
the Cause of Caecilianus, and Donatus: and many more instances of this, and the
like nature.

3. I should now dismiss this Head concerning Religion, did there not remain
one Pretense more, and that so wild, and monstrous, that it looks as if it were
the last effort of the enemy of mankind ( ultimus Diaboli conatus) for it
strikes at the Heart both of Government, and of Religion. It is this, that
Saints, and gifted Persons, (as they call themselves) are exempt from humane
Laws: and in effect resolves into this, that to reprobate others, and assume to
themselves the Title of the Godly Party, to talk of Reformation, and the Power
of Godliness, of advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ etc. is to justify
Sacrilege and Treason, and horrid Rebellion, and to qualify them for the
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets of the world.

How far this Satanical madness has prevailed, to the confusion of all things
Civil, and Sacred; to the scandal of Religion; the planting, and watering of
Atheism, and Infidelity; I tremble to call to our remembrance.

If my present business were to refute the men, that have given this ofsence,
how easy were it to examine their Gifts, and their Saintship, and how hard to
find them. But as the woman of Samaria said to our Savior, Art thou greater
than our Father Jacob? Joh. iv. 12.
are they greater Saints, or better gifted, then Peter, and Paul, and the rest
of the Apostles? He, that said, Let every Soul be subject to Rom xiii. 1.
the higher Powers, had been wrapped up (whether in the body, or out, he 2 Cor.
xii. 2, 3.
could not tell) to the third heavens: has any of them been carried higher?

Christ the natural Son of God, the Brightness of his Glory, the Heb i. 3.
Express Image of his Person, said, Render to Caesar the things that are Matt
xxii. 21.
Caesar's: are they greater then Christ also?

But my present purpose being chiefly to remove these scandals from Religion;
come, and let us reason together, What could Christ, and his Apostles have done
more to prevent this scandal, then they have done? Their Doctrine, and practice
has been already shown; and the Danger, and Heinousness of the Sin of
Resistance (in all the kinds, and degrees of it) discovered; neither can any
thing more be imagined, which might be desired to anticipate, and obviate this
pretense, unless it be, that these things should have been particularly
foretold, and the Persons (at least their Party and Sect) described; that the
world might be forewarned of them.

Will it then satisfy the enemies of our Religion,. concerning the Truth, and
Infallibility of the Scriptures, and the abhorrency of the Christian Principle
from this damnable Tenet; if it shall briefly appear, that these things have
been punctually foretold by Christ and his Apostles?

Christ has given warning of grievous Wolves in Sheep's clothing. Matthew. vii.
15.


More particularly Saint Paul has told us, that in the last days perilous
times should come 2 Timothy iii. 1.
that there should be heady, high-minded Traitors, Ibid. Verse 4. 5.
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Saint Peter, that there should 2 Pet. ii. 1.
be false Teachers, which should privily bring in damnable heresies,
presumptuous, Ibid. Verse 10.
self-willed, not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

Now, if all this be not sufficient, Saint Jude has taken up this Prophecy of
Saint Peter and given us two clear Characters of these Persons, whereby they
might be known. He tells us, 1. That they shall be Separatists from the Church,
and 2. false-pretenders to the Spirit. These are they, which separate Jude 19.
themselves, being sensual, having not the spirit.

I shall say no more to the Pretenses relating to that Head which concerns the
matter of Religion.

2ly. Neither shalll I enlarge upon that other Head referring to matters Civil,
where I instanced in two Pretenses taken from,

I. Harsh Administration in the Magistrate.

II. Competition as to power in Subjects.

I. Neither the Time, nor the Design, which I have propounded, nor (indeed) my
Profession nor Abilities do allow me to enter into the depths of the Politics,
or to discourse of the limitations of Sovereign Powers. Thus much is obvious to
every man.

That there is no Cruelty so great as laxness of Government, nor any Tyrany in
the World like the rage of Subjects let loose; and that the little Finger of
Licentiousness is harder then the Loins of the severest Laws, and strictest
Government.

I shall briefly show, that the Scripture, foreleeing the easiness (by reason
of the Self-love, and partiality of men) of this Pretense, and the danger of
it, has directly opposed it self against it.

I shall not mention particular Commands: let us have recourse to the main
Foundations; the Body, and Substance of Christianity, the MISHPATHAMELEK (the
Jus Regium) the Fundamental Law of the Kings of Israel.

1. Christianity obliges us to believe not only, that Christ is God, and that
the Gospel is from God: but that all the Circumstances of the Ministry of
Christ, and his Apostles, were ordered by his Providence. Why then were the
times of Tiberius, and Caligula, and Claudius, and Nero (out of the Series of
the Time spun out from the Creation) chosen, and selected for the promulgation
of the Doctrine of Obedience. If harsh Administration of Power will exempt men
from Obedience; at that time, when Claudius, or Nero was Roman Emperor, why
should the Holy Ghost move Saint Paul to write to the Romans, They that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation? So much briefly for the Gospel.

2. As for the Jus Regium in the eighth of the first Book of Samuel we find the
Israelites desiring a King: and God (though rejected by this motion) commands
Samuel to hearken to their voice. Verse 9.
Yet, that they might know what they did, and not be surprised (believing they
might cast of again their King at pleasure) he charges him to protest solemly,
and show them (...). Our Translation renders it, The manner of the King. The
Septuagint, and all ancient Eastern and Western Translations render it by words
of signifying the Law, or the Right of the King, Jus Regium

This (says Samuel) shall be Verse 11 12. etc.
(...) He shall take your Sons, and Daughters, your Vine-yards, your Fields,
and your Flocks, etc. He tells them of harsh Administrations.

Was it the meaning of the Holy Ghost, that ( de Jure) Princes ought to do, or
that it was lawful for them to do after the manner there described?

In the seventeenth Chapter of Verse 14.
Deuteronomy we find the Duty of the Kings of Israel described in a way
directly contrary to this; they were to fear the Lord, and not to Verse 19.
turn aside to the right hand, or to the left from his Commandments. Bewise now
therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth: Psalm. ii. 10. 11.
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

Was it a Prediction of what would be their condition, what would be the manner
of their Kings?

Not that neither. We do not read of any of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, that
proceeded to the height there expressed. Even Abab, who sold himself to work
wickedness, 1 Kings xxi. 25.
did not take Naboth's Vinyard, by force; he would not seize on it, till
Jezebel had brought about the pretense of a Legal Forfeiture.

What then is the meaning of (...)? Surely it imports thus much, that, if all
this hard usage should come upon them, they might cry unto the Lord; (Verse
18.) but that it would not dissolve Jus Regium (the right of Sovereignty) or
enable them to resist their Kings, or rebel against them.

II. There remains yet one Pretense to speak to, it concerns Competition of
Power, either on

I. Pretenses of Succession into the Magistrate's place in case of failour of
Duty, or upon supposals of forfeiture of Power.

2. Pretenses of the last resolution of Power into the people, the diffused
multitude, or the peoples Representative, and the like.

Concerning which kind of Pretenses I must repeat what has been said of the
other. If they be admitted, they are distructive to Magistracy. If they be
encouraged by Religion, there will be reason, that Magistrates be jealous over
it. But now is the Spirit of the Scriptures, and the tendency of it entirely
bent another way.

The New Testament affords no Instance in this kind. As to the Old, I shall
desire, that two Instances may be considered.

1. The Case of David, and Saul.

2. The Case of Corah, and Moses: which two Instances (if the time would bear
it) would take in the Substance of all, that may be alleged in this kind.

1. It is (I conceive) impossible to carry the first sort of Pretenses higher,
then they were stated in the Case of David, and Saul. Saul was at first
declared, and constituted King by Samuel, acting in the Name of the Lord: and,
when he had reigned two years, the same Samuel, in the Name of the same God,
before the same people, denounces publicly, that his Kingdom should not
continue; 1 Samuel xiii. 14.
and that God had sought a man after his own heart, because he invaded the
Priests Office. After this, he limits a certain day, he tells him, This day the
Lord bath rent Chap. xv. 12.
the Kingdom of Israel from thee, and given it to thy neighbor, because of his
rebellion against God in the Case of Amalek.

The pretense of Failour, and Forfeiture can go no higher. Now for the
pretenses of David to step into his Government, and wrest it from him: He was
anointed by Samuel, for ought appears, Chap. xvi. 13.
without reservation for the life of Saul. He was qualified for Government; a
valiant man, a man Ibid. Verse. 18.
of War, prudent in matters, a comely Person, and the Lord was with him. He had
received Testimony from God of his Election: the Spirit of God departed from
Saul, and rested upon him. He had power in his hand, he was set Chap. xviii. 5.
over the men of War, accepted by all the people all Israel, nd Judah loved
him. After all this, you know his Provocations, his Advantages, and his
Behavior; he durst not touch the Lords anointed; and, when another pretended
to have done it at Readiness entreaty in extremis, he revenged his death, and
lamented over him, Ye mountains 2 Samuel i. 21.
of Gilboa, etc.

2. But that other Pretense, that after a lawful Sovereign is established
(according to the Supposition of my Text, and my Discourse) the power still
remains in the people, (in the diffused body of them, or their Representatives)
to alter the Government, as they please; it is in respect of Policy, and
Government, what the Sin against the Holy Ghost is to Religion, it destroys the
foundations of the peace, and safety of men, and makes that to be the Artifice
of man, which is the Ordinance of God. How much God abhorred this Pretense,
will appear in the Case of Corah, and his company. When God sent Moses to bring
the Israelites out of Egypt, he sanctified him, and put his Name upon him; Thou
shall Exodus iv. 16.
be to him instead of God: and when he had brought them forth, he Acts vii. 35.
made him a Prince and a Lawgiver over them. Deuteronomy. xxxi i. 4.


The supreme Power was in Moses, who called to his assistance a Senate, or
Parliament, ((...)) consisting of the Heads of the Tribes of Israel. In this
Council Nature soon began to work, Number. xvi.
some envied Moses, whom God had Psalm. cvi. 16.
chosen, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Dathan, and Abiram, the Sons of
Eliab, Heads of Families, in the Tribe of Reuben, thought both the Civil Power,
and (if that must be transferred, from the firstborn, to one Tribe) the
Priesthood also was due to them, being Eldest Brethren of the Eldest Tribe.
Korah, an eminent man amongst the Levites, was offended, that the Highpriests
Office went beside him, and was settled upon Aaron, and his Posterity.

These were their secret griefs; for a redress whereof they make a party in the
Parliament, they gain to them two hundred and fifty men, famous in the
Parliament, men of renown; and, in order to their ambitious Designs, they
remonstrate against Moses, Verse. 13. and their Declaration was this Pretense,
which we are upon; that all the Congregation (...) were Holy, and that Moses,
and Aaron had lifted up themselves above them; that is, that their power was a
contrivance of themselves, not an Ordinance of God; that, notwithstanding what
God had done to settle the Civil, and Ecclesiastical power, it remained still
in the people, or their Representatives assembled together. Now the Scripture
tells us, that, since the world began, God was never more highly provoked, then
upon this occasion; when he heard this, he was wrath, and greatly abhorred
them; he invented a new thing in the world for their sakes; for the Earth
opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered Numb. xvi. 31.
the Congregation of Abiram.

I have now done with these Pretenses, and my endeavor has Application.
been to vindicate Religion from the charges of unbelieving Politicians, and
indeed to show, that it is not a Spirit of carnal Compliance, but the true, and
genuine Spirit of Christianity, which runs through the Doctrine, and Government
of the Church of England. After what has been spoken, I hope, I may presume to
say with the Apostle, Do we now make void Romans iii. 31.
the Laws through Faith? yea, we establish the Laws.

We have seen the Christian Theory; does the Philosophical Theory provide
better for the safety of Princes, and the estabishment of Government?

It tells us in effect, that Might is Right; that every thing is just, or
unjust; good, or evil according to the pleasure of the prevailing Force, whom
we are to obey till a stronger then he comes, or we be able to go through with
resistance.

That, in reference to this life, Obedience is a matter of Wit, and Prudence,
and after life there remain for us no Concernments.

How stramineous is this Theory compared with the Christian Theory, which
speaks in this wise, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, etc?

That this is the genuine Christian Theory, has in some measure been
demonstrated; so that indeed it may be wondered from whence these Prejudices
have arisen.

But alas! that my head were waters! They have one grand Objection, to which
having spoken I shall conclude.

If this be the Doctrine of Christianity, how comes it to pass, that those, who
pretend the highest to Religion, and profess themselves the only Christians,
(the Bigot, and Jesuited Romanist; the frighted, and transported Reformist)
have been authors of the most horrible Treasons, and Rebellions?

On the one hand, what mean the Catholic Leagues? On the other, the Solemn
League, and Covenant, forced upon Subjects, renitente Principe?

On one hand what means (shall I say the lowing of the Oxen, or rather) the
roaring of the Bulls, the thundering of Excommunications, the absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, the Actual Murders of Princes, the attempts for blowing
up King, Lords, and Commons at one clap? What is the meaning of the noise of
the Bells, of the claps of Squibs, and Fireworks, which we hear? On the other
hand what was the meaning of that black, and terrible dispensation, which will
cause the ears of all Posterity to tingle.

It is but a little while since the anointed of the Lord, the holiest, the
wisest, the best of Kings, was taken in the snares of men pretending to
reformation, and sacrificed to the fury of men possessed by an evil Spirit from
the Lord. He was offered as a Lamb that is dumb, or rather like the Lamb of
God, to the rage of wild fanatical Enthufiasts.

It is but a very little while, since the Lamentation of Jeremy was in the
mouth of all the faithful in the Land.

Our Kings, and our Princes were amongst the Gentiles (provoked to Lam. ii. 9.
serve other Gods) the Law was no more, the Prophets also received no vision
from the Lord. And all these things were brought to pass by men pretending
wonders in Religion.

And they would know the reason of all these Dispensations. But who art thou, O
man! who pressest into the secret of Gods Pavilion? How unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out; such knowledge is too wonderful, we
cannot attain unto it.

It may be, these things have been done, that the Sayings of our Savior might
be fulfilled, It cannot be but offenses will come but woe be to them, by whom
they Matthew. xviii. 7. Ibid. Verse 6.
come; and, It were better, that a millstone, etc.

It may be, the Gunpowder-Treason was permitted to be designed, that the
disappointment might be had in everlasting remembrance, and celebrated, as it
is this day: Son of man, write the name of the day, even of this same Ezekiel.
xxiv. 2.
day: the King of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.

It may be, God fuffered the late Rebellion to prevail, that he might not leave
himself without witness, but show forth his wonders in our days, in the
miraculous restitution of our gracious Sovereign, and the Church. If he had not
been driven out, how could he have been restored? not by might, nor by power,
but by the Spirit of our God.

It may be, this was done, that we might say no more, The Lord lives, which
delivered us from the Treason of pretended Catholics: but The Lord lives
which has delivered us from the Tyranny, and blood rage of the wild Fanatical
Enthusiasts.

Surely, all these things have been permitted, that the Stone which, the
Builders refused, might be made tried and precious, and that his Patience, his
Piety, his Constancy in Religion, his Christian Magnanimity being manifest to
all the World, by the impatient desire of all Nations, he might become the head
of the Corner.

Surely, these things were suffered, that the Faith, and Patience, and Loyalty
of the Church of England might be made bright and glorious by the Flames of
Persecution: and that in the day, when God shall have given our most Gracious
Sovereign the hearts, or necks of all his Enemies, it may not repent him of the
Kindness he has shown to Religion, and Government, in lifting out of the dust
the despised Head of that only Church, (for ought I know) which makes Obedience
without base restrictions, and limitations, an Article of its Religion.

Lastly, these things, it may be, have been permitted, that by the Triumph of
this day, and by the vengeance lately executed in the sight of this Sun, the
Atheistical world might be convinced, that the Powers, that be, are ordained of
God, and that, though the wicked do evil an hundred times, and God prolong
their days; yet Vengeance is his, and he will repay it, and They that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

FINIS.
Against the Antiscripturists. A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. February 20.
1669/70.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of Sarum.

Printed by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Arms within Ludgate
near St. Paul's, 1672.

Against the Antiscripturists.
2 Timothy, iii. 16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God.
IN the verse preceding it is said concerning the Scriptures of the old
Testament, that they are able to make a man wise unto salvation, (...) (by the
faith which is in Jesus Christ): And it follows immediately, All Scripture, etc.

(...) (the Faith) is often by a Metonymy taken for the Gospel, which is the
Object of the Faith of Christians. We read often Gal. 1. 23. 3. 25.
of the Preaching, and Hearing of Romans 12. 6.
Faith; of the Analogy of Faith, the common Faith which was once delivered Tit.
1. 4. Jud. 3.
to the Saints (in the preaching of Christ, and the Writings of his Evangelists
and Apostles) and so I conceive it is to be taken in this place. So that the
meaning of the whole is this, The Old Testament understood and expounded
according to the Analogy of the New, is able to make a man wise. And the
Penmen of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament (wherein Timothy had been
instructed (...)) and of the Books of the New Testament (which except those of
St. John were extant before the writing of this Epistle) were inspired and
directed by the Spirit of God.

The words of the Text are an entire Proposition, asserting the Divine
Authority of the Canon of Scripture; and my endeavor shall be at this time to
prove the truth of that Proposition. Wherein, that I may proceed with all
plainness and clearness, I shall premise two words by way of Petition,
Precaution.


1. By way of Petition, I suppose and take for granted;

1. The great principle of the power of God, and his providence in governing
the world.

2. That our Body of Canonical Books of the Old Testament, is the same with
that which was in Use in the time of Christ and his Apostles, And our body of
the New Testament the same which was anciently received in the Church. So that
what shall be proved of those, is applicable to the Original Scripture used in
our time.

3. That those Books of New Testament whose Authors were not anciently
questioned, were written by those Authors whose name they bear. And that those
few others which were sometimes questioned by some particular Churches, and
afterward Universally received, contain in them no one point of Faith or
Manners diffentient from the Contents of those Books which were never
questioned.

2. By way of Precaution and Admonition I must entreat you to take notice, that
I shall not now meddle with the Controversies concerning Apocrypha,
Translations, Keri and Chetib, Hebrew points, various Lections, dubious Authors
or parts of Scripture.

But my endeavor at this time shall be to Assert the Divine Authority of the
body and substance of the Original Books of the Canon of the Old and New
Testament: And this not in the way of common place, but in a particular
Examination or Refutation of the most dangerous Opinions of the
Antiscripturists, which are these:

I. Of those who pretend to believe the truth of the New Testament, and yet
they deny the Divine Authority of the Old.

II. Of those who pretend to believe the truth, but deny the Divine Authority
of the New Testament.

III. Of such as pretend to believe matters of Fact to have been truly related
in the New Testament, but do not believe the truth of the Doctrinal parts
relating to Faith and Manners.

IV. Such as deny the truth of the Relation of matters of Fact in the New
Testament, and in consequence reject the whole Body of Scripture. Of these as
briefly and plainly as I can.

I. The first Opinion is of those, who pretending to believe the Truth of the
New Testament, deny the Divine Authority of the Old Testament. The Severians,
and the Manichees, Basilides, and Carpocrates of old: The Catabaptists of later
times, some Anabaptists, Antinomians, and other Fanatical Sectaries amongst our
selves.

In opposition to these, I shall show, that supposing the truth of the New
Testament, the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is to be acknowledged:
Because the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is asserted by Christ and his
Evangelists and Apostles in the New.

1. Next to the Redemption of the world, the great business which Christ had to
do upon Earth, was to Convince men that he was the Messiah, and so to assert
his Legislative Authority. And the great Argument which he used for the
conviction of the world was this.

All the Marks and the entire Character of the Messiah, and of his Actions and
Passions, were prefigured and foretold by the Law and the Prophets, and the
Psalms, Luke 24. 44
i. e. in the Volume of the Old Testament.

And all things foretold or prefigured concerning the Messiah, were
accomplished by himself.

So that though the great Works of Christ, and the purity and excellency of his
Doctrine, and of his Life, were of themselves sufficient to justify the
Introduction of his Law into the World, yet he was pleased to resolve (as it
were) his own Authority into the Divine Authority of the Old Testament, and to
make use of those other manifestations of himself, in a co-ordination with that
principle.

And therefore we find him still pressing the Jews with this, that if they did
believe the Writings of Moses, and their other Scriptures, they must of
necessity believe him also.

Moses wrote of me (says he) Joh. 5. 46.
wherefore, did ye believe Moses, ye would believe me. The Scriptures testify
of me, therefore search them diligently, (...). For the Joh. 5. 39.
attaining of everlasting life he refers the Lawyer to the Law, What Luke 10.
26.
is written in the Law? how read thou? For the avoiding of the place of
torments, he makes Abraham refer the Relations of Dives to Moses Luke 16. 29
and the Prophets.

In all his disputations with the Pharisees and Sadduces, the Lawyers and the
Scribes, he makes his appeal to the Scriptures of the Old Testament. And lest
any one should think that in all this he did only argue ad homines (that
disputing with the Jews he only proceeded upon their own Hypothesis) we find
him in the course of his Ministration positively afferting, that the Scriptures
must be fulfilled; Mar. 14 49.
that they cannot be broken; Joh. 10. 35.
that he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them; Mat.
3 31.
and that Heaven and Earth shall Mar. 5. 18.
pass away, before one jot or title of these should perish, until all was
fulfilled. Thus he asserted the Authority of the Old Testament before his death.

And after his Resurrection he made a real demonstration that the Old Testament
was given by inspiration of God; for on the day of his Resurrection, falling
into company of two of his Disciples, going to Emmaus: He began at Moses and
all the Prophets, Luk 24. 17.
and expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.

And afterward when the Eleven were come together, as a recapitulation of this
his method, and that he might instruct his Disciples in it, he said unto them,
These were the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, Verse 44.
that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and
in the Prophets, and in the Psams (in the Volume of the Old Testament)
concerning me. He opened their understandings, and said, thus it is written,
and thus it behoved: And as a short Idea of what they were to do, he tells
them, and ye are Witnesses of these things.

2. In pursuance of this method we find the Evangelists very curious, and very
frequent in observing the accomplishment of the predictions of the Old
Testament, reciting sometimes the speeches of Christ, saying, that he did such,
or such a thing, to the end that the Scriptures might be fulfilled: I will not
eat of the fruit of the Vine till all things be fulfilled.

Sometimes in their own Persons observing the accomplishment of particulars,
and noting either particular portions of Scriptures which were fulfilled, or
the fulfilling of the Scriptures cited at large, without any particular
Quotation. Thus the Evangelists writing of the Conception, Nativity, Name Mat.
1 22.
of Christ, of his coming out of Egypt, dwelling at Nazareth, migration Mat. 2.
15. Mat. 2. 23.
to Capernaum, riding to 4. 14.
Jerusalem; Say, that these things were 21. 4.
done that the Scriptures (or the saying of the Prophet) at large might be
fulfilled: So likewise for the circumstances of his Passion, the flight of his
Disciples, casting lots Mat. 26. 56. 27. 35. Joh 19. 24. Joh 19. 29.
upon his Garments, Vinegar given him to drink, piercing his side, bones
remaining unbroken, Verse. 37. 36.
etc.

Other times they note the particular Prophet, Christ healed Diseases, spoke in
Parables, that the Mat. 8. 17. Mat. 13. 15
saying of Isaiah the Prophet might be fulfilled. When Herod slew the Children,
then was fulfilled that Mat. 2. 17.
which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, Rachel weeping for her Children, etc.
and once we find a quotation of the second Psalm, and the like: This for the
Evangelists. Act. 13. 33.


3. Lastly, the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is asserted by the
Apostles: Whom we find every where in their Writings, citing the Testimonies of
the Law and the Prophets, and Gal. 3. 10. Act. 7 42. Act. 1. 22. and 13. 33.
Romans 43. Gal. 3. 24.
the Psalms; appealing to them, what says the Scripture? the Scripture has
concluded so or so: Arguing out of them, often times directly; thus not only the
Apostles but Apollos mightily convinced the Acts 18. 24. 28. Jam. 4. 5.
Jews, sometimes ab absurdo, do ye think the Scripture speaks in vain?

In a word, the Apostles followed the way and method which their Master taught
them; they asserted that the Gospel was promised by the Prophets, witnessed by
Romans 2. 12. Rom 3.21. Act. 13. 18. and 10. 43.
the Law and the Prophets: by all the Prophets. Affirming of themselves, that
they believed all things Act. 24. 14.
written in the Law and in the Prophets: and that they continued testifying and
saying no other things than Act. 26. 28.
the Prophets and Moses did say should come.

Finally, lest any place should be left for doubting concerning any part of the
Old. Testament, the Apostles have expressly asserted concerning the Law, that it
is Romans 7 12
holy, just, and good; that the Prophets Act 3. 21. Tim 3. 15. Rem. 3. 2. Act.
7. 38. Act. 3. 21.
are holy, and the Scriptures holy; that they are the Oracles of God, lively
Oracles; that God spoke by the Prophets; that holy men of God 2 Pet. 1. 26.
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Lastly, (in the Text) that 2 Timothy
3. 15.
the (...), wherein Timothy had been instituted by his Mother, were gived by
inspiration of God.

This is the sense of the New Testament concerning the Old Testament; supposing
therefore the Truth of the New Testament, the Divine Authority of the Old
Testament is to be acknowledged, contrary to the first Opinion of the
Antiscripturists.

II. The Second Antiscriptural Opinion is of those who pretend to believe the
Truth, but they deny or doubt the Divine Authority of the New Testament, either
of the whole body of the New Testament, or at least of that part which delivers
the Speeches and Writings of the Apostles.

Of this sort there are said to be many, who by the power and influence of
their Education are restrained from denying or dis-believing the Truth of the
New Testament, and yet through the infelicity of corrupt conversation are
fallen from that Veneration which is due to writings supposed to be of Divine
Authority.

For the History of the New Testament they have the same respect which they
have for Tacitus or Sallust, or some such other History; for the Mystery of the
Gospel, the same which they have for some part of Plato, or remnants of
Pythagoras; for the practical parts, the same which they have for some parts of
Cicero or Seneca, or Epictetus. All which writings they believe to be true, but
no man believes them to be Divine. And some there are who pretend a great
veneration for the speeches of Christ, but have a meaner esteem for the words,
and writings of the Apostles.

In opposition to these opinions, I shall show, that supposing the words of
Christ and the Apostles to be True, it will follow, that they are to be
esteemed to be of Divine Authority.

Because Christ and the Apostles did profess and declare, that what they
delivered to the world, was of Divine Authority.

And because our Lord Christ did undertake not only for himself, but for the
Inspiration of his Apostles also.

1. In the examination of the next Opinion, I shall be obliged to lay before
you some of the evidences of Divine Authority in Christ and his Apostles, here
it is sufficient to produce their assertions of it.

The time of our Lord Christ's ministration (betwixt three and four years) was
spent in preaching and working, and his Authority was often questioned.

In Luke 20. 1. and in the parallel Matthew. 21. 23. Mar. 11. 27.
places, While he was in the Temple teaching the People, and preaching the the
Gospel, the Chief Priests and the Scribes and the Elders came upon him, saying,
tell us by what Authority thou do these things (preachest to the people,) and
who gave thee that Authority?

Knowing the perverseness of their minds, he was not pleased to gratify them
at that time with a direct answer, but confounded them with a question
concerning the Baptism of John.

But at other times, upon other occasions, we find the Divine Authority of his
teaching abundantly declared and asserted by him.

I am the way, the truth and the Joh. 14. 6. Joh. 6. 63.
life: The words which I speak unto you they are spirit, and they are life. The
words which I speak, I speak not John 14. 10.
of my self, but of the Father which dwells in me. My Doctrine is not Joh. 7.
16.
mine, but his that sent me. I do nothing of my self, but as my Father Joh. 8.
28.
has taught me so I speak. I have John 12. 49.
not spoken of my self, but the Father that sent me, he gave me a Commandment
what I should say, and what I should speak. Whatsoever I speak therefore; even
as the Father said unto John 12. 50.
me, so I speak. Heaven and Earth shall Matthew. 24. 24.
pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

Thus did our Savior afsert the Divine Authority of his Words.

2. And so likewise the Apostles are very frequent in asserting the Divine
Authority of the things which they delivered.

In the 15. of the Acts, we find them assembled about the question of
Circumcision; and they accounted it no robbery to entitle their Decrees to the
Holy Ghost, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, v. 18.

Nor do they pretend to revelation when gathered in Council only, but each one
severally for himself.

St. Peter professes of himself, that he was a partaker of the glory which Pet.
5. 1.
was revealed: And of his Gospel, that it was revealed from Heaven. Pet. 1. 5.


St. John declares that he had 1 John 1. 3.
(...) with the Father and the Son; as for his other writings, that they
contained the things which he had heard and seeen with bis eyes which 1 John 1.
1.
he had looked on, and his hands had handled of the Word of life.

As for the Apocalypse, he professes, Apoc. 1. 9. 10.
that being in the Spirit in Isle of Patmos he received it, and was commanded
to write it in a Book.

The greatest writer among the Ibid. 19.
Apostles was St. Paul, and the greatest question has always been (amongst
Unbelievers) concerning his Calling and the Authority of his Gospel.

He knew this very well, and therefore we find him asserting both his Calling
and his Gospel with abundant care and diligence.

He affims himself to have been an Apostle not of man, neither by man, Gal. 1.
1.
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father; That by God himself he was Romans 1. 1.
separated to preach, constituted a Preacher, an Apostle, and a defender 2 Timothy
11. Phil. 1. 17.
of the Gospel. As concerning his Gospel, he professes to have received Ephesians. 3.
1.
it by Revelation of God.

As for the Spirit wherewith he wrote and preached, he professed himself ready
to give a proof of Christ speaking in him. He appealed to the 2Cor. 13. 3.
Prophetic Spirit then in the Church, If any man think himself a Prophet or
Spiritual, let him acknowledge 1 Cor. 14. 37.
the things which I write to be the Commandments of God.

Out of this assurance it was that he enjoined his Epistles to be read in the
Churches of Coloss, Laodicea, Col. 4. 16. Ibid. 2 These. 3. 14.
Thessalonica, and excommunicates such as should be disobedient in that
particular.

And lest any one should here repeat the Objection made against our Savior,
Thou bear witness of thy self, thy witness is not true.

St. Paul speaking of all the Apostles, affirms that God had set them in the
Church, and that the Ephesians. 4. 11. 3. 5.
Mystery of the Gospel was revealed to the holy Apostles by the Spirit.

Particularly notwithstanding that dispute betwixt St. Peter and St. Paul (from
the first Ages of the Porphyr. Hier. Prooem. Galat. and in c. 2. Celsus.
Church to our own Times, objected by Unbelievers to the prejudice of Religion)
it is remarkable, that, in the same place where St. Paul gives an account how
Peter was to be blamed, and how and Gal. 2.
wherefore he withstood him to his face at Antioch, he does expressly affirm,
that the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to Peter, and that God
wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision.

On the other side St. Peter, in that very place, where he may seem to complain
of the (...) 2 Pet. 3. 15.
of St. Paul, yet even there he owns him as his beloved Brother, acknowledges
his Wisdom to have been gigiven him of God, and numbers all his Epistles, inter
(...) amongst the other Scriptures.

3. Lastly, For such as would put a difference of degrees betwixt the Authority
of the words of Christ, and the writings and Sermons of the Apostles, they may
take notice, that the Authority of these resolves it self into the veracity of
Christ himself.

He it was who being to leave the World, promised his Disciples again and
again, that he would send down upon them the Holy Spirit, Joh. 15. 26. Joh. ^^^
that should instruct them and teach 14. 26. 16. 13.
them all things, that should Lead them into all truth, Bring to their 14. 26.
remembrance all things which he himself had spoken, that should show them
things to come, that with this 16. 13.
Spirit they should not be lightly dashed, or sprinkled, but that they should
be Baptized, and as it were Act. 1. 5.
plunged into it.

How all these promises were performed, and how the Assertions of the Divine
Authority of the Words of Christ, and the Apostles were proved to be true, I am
next to show. In the interim I conclude that supposing the truth of the words
of Christ and his Apostles, they are to be esteemed of Divine Authority.

III. The third opinion is of such as pretend to believe matters of fact to
have been truly related in the New Testament, but they do not believe the truth
of the Doctrinal parts relating to Faith or Manners.

Of these there have always been too great a number, not only pretenders, who
under a form of Christianity deny the power thereof, but generally all forts of
Heretics. When Porphyrius had revolted from Christianity to Platonism, and had
bent all his forces against the Scripture-History, he was refuted not only by
Lactantius, and Methodius, men Orthodox in Doctrine, but by Eusebius and
Apollinaris; and of late days, Socinus and others have well asserted the truth
of the Scripture-History, who yet have been offended at the dogmatical parts of
the Gospel, and concerning the Faith have made shipwreck.

In Opposition to these I shall endeavor to demonstrate, that, Supposing
Matters of Fact to be truly related in the New Testament, it is unreasonable to
suspect the truth of any of the Doctrines delivered by Christ or his Apostles.

Amongst the various fancies concerning Religion, wherewith the whole world
has been always embroiled: Two things there are wherein all the Sons of Adam
have agreed; namely, 1. That that is to be believed which has received the
testimony of God. And 2. That this Testimony is to be gathered from instances
of supernatural Wisdom and Power.

In the study of natural and Philosophical Theology, the Speculativi amongst
the Greeks and Romans, and other Nations, sought after wisdom, (Reason, and
Demonstration.) But, to reduce the People to the forms of religious Rites and
Sacrifices prescribed them, they were made to believe the Epiphanies of the
Gods, and the manifestations of their Wisdom, and Power, by Oracles and Works
supernatural.

To these even Mahomet pretended, though his great Argument was from the Sword:
and of the Jews I need not speak.

For a Foundation of Religion, and in our inquisition after that, short of this
Testimony we ought not to stay; further we cannot go: And herein is the utmost
of humane wisdom to consider well those Evidences upon which we adventure the
interest of our eternity.

To this evidence therefore we appeal in asserting the Doctrine of our Lord
Christ, and his Apostles; Namely to the instances of Supernatural Knowledge and
Supernatural Power, whereby their Doctrine was attested.

I shall not here wave the force, but I shall decline the repetition of what I
have formerly spoken concerning the attestations given to it by Visible Signs,
Audible Voices, Apparitions of Angels, Fulfilling the Prophecies, Evidences of
Christ's Resurrestion, Mission of the Holy Ghost.

In Joh. 7. 15. the Jews wondered at Christ that he knew any thing: How knows
this man Letters, seeing he never learned tbem? but if we mark the Scriptures,
we shall find that he knew all things, and that nothing was withdrawn from the
reach of his understanding.

He knew the sickness and death Joh. 11. 11.
of Lazarus, though absent and at a distance; He saw Nathaniel under 4. 17.
the Fig Tree, and convinced him that he was the Son of God, and the King of
Israel: Come see a man (said Joh. 4. 29.
the Woman of Samaria) which told me all things that ever I did, is not this
the Christ?

He was (...): The secret Joh. 6. 61. 64.
murmurs at his hard sayings, the inward desires to ask him Questions; 16. 16.
the Reasonings and dialogisms Luke 9. 47.
of the hearts of his Disciples; the secret Councils of the Scribes Mat. 12.
15. 25 Mat. 2. 8.
and Pharisees, their evil surmisings, their treacherous intentions to entrap
Luke 6. 8. Luke 11. 17.
him, their mental Blasphemy were all naked and manifest before him.

He knew what was in man, and needed not that any one should tell Joh. 2. 24.
25.
him; He knew the various Kinds Mat. 17 21.
of Devils, and how they were to be ejected: This Kind comes not out but by
Prayer and Fasting. Mat. 17. 21. Mat. 17. 27.
He knew the Fishes of the Sea, and where they were, and what was in them.

He knew not only things past and present, but to come; He foresaw Joh. 18. 4.
11. 11. 13. 11.
all things that were to come upon him, who it was that should betray him, he
foretold his Disciples all the circumstances of his Passion, how he was to be
Betrayed, Condemned, Mat. 20. 18. Mat. 10. 23. Mat. 16. 21. Joh. 14. 28.
delivered to the Gentiles, mocked, scourged, spit on, killed and Crucified at
Jerusalem.

Behold, says he, I tell you before; Luke 19. 44.
Let this saying sink into your hearts. He forewarned Peter of Mat 26. 34. 31.
his denial, and the Disciples of their flight.

He foretold things to come aster Luke 21. 20.
his death, the time and manner of the destruction of Jerusalem: The success of
his Gospel, the Effect (unlikely) of his Crucifixion, that it should draw all
men after him, that John 12. 32. Matthew. 24. 14. Matthew 13. 31.
it should be preached and believed in the whole world, spreading it self like
Leaven, and like a grain of Mustardseed, that Satan's Kingdom should Luke 10. 18.
be destroyed suddenly like lightning; notwithstanding the false Christ's and
false Prophets which should Matthew. 24. 15.
arise.

These and many more were instances of the supernatural knowledge of Christ:
And for his power, the time would fail me to insist upon the many and various
instances mentioned in the Gospels.

I shall omit the exercise of his dominion over the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
Plants, and Animals, Earth, and Water, the Wind and the Sea, and briefly mind
you of those which concerned the bodies of men; how he 1. Fed their hunger, 2.
Healed their distempers, 3. Raised their dead, and 4. Cast out Devils.

He fed 4000 at one time, and Matthew 14. 19. 15. 36. Matthew. 15. 30. 9. 27. 4. 23.
5000 at another, with 5 or 7 Loaves, and a few little Fishes.

He healed the blind, lame, deaf, dumb, maimed, feverish, hydropical, Mat. 8
14. Mat. 14. 4. Mat. 4. 13. Mat. 17. 12. Mat. 4 23. Luke 22. 51
paralytick, leprous, and lunatic persons. He cured not green wounds only, but
ancient inveterate Maladies of 12, of 38 Mat. 9. 20. John 5. 5.
years continuance, one that was born blind.

He used no Plasters nor Potions, no Telesmans or other Charms, but performed
all these things by a touch of his Hand or of his Mulios. Mat. 9 20.
Garment. He healed absent persons as well as present, he spoke Mat. t. 6. John
5. ^
the word only and they were healed.

He raised to life the Daughter Mar. 5. 41. Luk 7. 11. John 11. 39. Matthew 27.
52.
of Jairus, the Widows Son at Naim, his Friend Lazarus, and many bodies of the
Saints. Many of which healed and raised persons lived till about Trajan's time,
as Quadratus Eus. Eccl. H l. 4. c. 3. 3 37. Annct p. 8
a Disciple of the Apostles affirmed in his Apology to Hadrian the Emperor.

Like a strong man armed he cast out Devils, whatever kind they were of he
quickly disloged them; that foaming and tearing Devil Mat. 17. 18
which withstood the power of his Disciples, and threw down and tore the
possessed person even as he was yet coming to Christ himself; he presently
rebuked, and healed the child, and delivered him to hts Father.

Neither their long possession, nor their numbers could secure them, he cast
seven at once out Mar. 16. 9. Luke 8. 27.
of Mary Magdalen, and an whole Legion out of a certain man of the Country of
the Gadarens, who had been possessed by them a long time.

Moreover, for attestation to the truth of his Gospel, he delegated all this
power to others, to the 12 Apostles, to the 70 Disciples: Mat. 10. 7. Luk 9. 3.
Luke 10. 1.-9. Mat. 16. 17.
He bequeathed it to Believers at his death, and they also received and
exercised this supernatural power.

I have given a few instances of the Supernatural Wisdom and Power of Christ
solitarily considered: The History of the Gospel affords us many Examples
wherein they were gloriously combined.

By his Knowledge he foretold his Resurrection, he performed it Mattb. 16. 21.
Mat. 28. 2. John 16. 16, 28. 20. 17. Luke 24. 57.
by his Power. By his Divine Understanding he foresaw his Ascension, and by the
Power of his Divinity he ascended.

He ascended, and by his power he fulfilled the Predictions and Promises which
he had made. He sent down the Holy Spirit, and Acts 2. 4.
shed forth the gifts of supernatural Wisdom and Power upon his Apostles.

Not to mention the Apparition of Angels, and of Christ himself, Acts 9. Act
10. 10. 22. 17. Acts 16. 9. 16. 6, 7.
the Bath Kol, the Ecstasies, Dreams, Visions, and Impulses which were given
them for their own assurance: That they might be enabled to preach the Gospel
to all Nations, and deliver to the world those Scriptures whereof we are
speaking, they had the word of Knowledge and of Wisdom and of Faith, and 1Cor.
12. 9
the gift of diverse Tongues, and interpretation of Tongues bestowed upon them.

And to justify their Doctrine to the Ages present and to come, they had the
Gifts of Prophecy, and of Healing, and of Miracles.

John (the beloved Disciple) heard a voice as it were of a Trumpet, talking Ap.
4. 1.
with him, which said, Come up hitber, and I will show thee things which shall
be hereafter; and immediately he was in the Spirit, and received the Revelation.

Paul an Apostle (though born Acts 27. 10 22. 2 Cor. 121
out of due time) came to Visions and Revelation, he twice foretold what should
happen to the Ship wherein he was carried Prisoner to Rome. He foretold the
Apostasy of the latter times, the 2 These. 2.
rising of Antichrist, the perilous times which should come upon the 2 Timothy 31.
world in the last days. Agabus a Believer at large foretold the Famine Act.
11. 8. 21. 10. Act. 5. 13
which was to come upon all the world, and the binding of Paul at Jerusalem,
etc.

But the instances of supernatural Power exercised in healing of Diseases,
raising the dead, confounding the Opposers of their Doctrine, and in several
other kinds by the Apostles and their Companions and Adherents, the Preachers
and Writers of the Doctrine of the Gospel, are so abundantly delivered in the
New Testament, that I shall not offer at particulars.

In the 4. of the Acts we find all the Apostles praying (...) that God would
stretch forth his hand to heal, and that signs and wonders might be done by the
Name of his holy Child Jesus. And immediately the place was shaken, and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and with Power.

The particular Miracles of particular persons are recorded. In one word, they
went and preached every where the Doctrines which are written in the Gospel;
the Lord working with them, and confirming Marc. 16. 20.
tbeir words by mighty signs and wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost.

This is the state of the matter of Fact, as it is propounded in the New
Testament: I conclude therefore, that, supposing matters of Fact to be truly
delivered in the New Testament, there is no reason to doubt of the Doctrines
delivered by Christ or his Apostles, relating to faith or manners. And I come
to the consideration of the last and extreme Opinion of the Antiscripturists.

IV. The last opinion, is of those who deny the truth of the Relation of
matters of Fact delivered in the New Testament, and in consequence reject the
whole body of the Scriptures.

I could wish there were no such as these, and that what I have yet to say were
altogether needless for that reason.

But what mean then the public Rumors which we hear? and whence is an Opinion
gone into the world, that some great Philosophers and men of generous reason
are dissatisfied concerning the truth of Scripture, and believe the Authority
of it to be wholly derived from the Magistrate?

In reference to these I shall endeavor,

1. Briefly, to show that the ground upon which these Wisemen and Philosophers
reject the Scriptures, is contrary to the Reason of mankind.

2. To evince, that the belief of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures is
most agreeable to Reason.

1. As for the Argument and ground of those (amongst us Christians) that reject
the body of the Scriptures, I do not remember to have heard of other than this.

They have often called upon Believers, Pastors perhaps, or Doctors in the
Church, for a clear and undeniable evidence of the truth of the story of the
Gospel, and they have not afforded it: therefore they conclude, the Scriptures
are to be rejected.

But is this the reasoning of generous wits? and men of mighty deeds in
disputation, of men pretending to the depths of reason and Philosophy?

To give a man a clear and undeniable evidence of any thing, there are but two
ways, viz. To convince either his Senses or his Understanding; the former where
of is to be done by experiment, the later by demonstration.

Would they have now an Experiment whether such or such a thing were done 16 or
17 hundred years ago? Would they have a demonstration of particulars, in their
nature indifferent to be done or not to be done, depending upon the liberty of
Causes?

Well were it for the world, if these Beaux Esprits would have the patience,
and endure the fatigue of acquainting themselves with the ways of knowledge
(Experiment and demonstration) it would not then be troubled with the dangerous
impertinency of such Pretenders

Then these men would not call for Experiment in a subject incapable of it, and
(being instructed that demonstration is only of Universal Propositions in
materia necessaria, whose contrary Positions imply a contradiction) they would
know, that to demand this kind of evidence of the truth of the story of the
Gospel, is to be absurdly injudicious, and to act contrary to the Reason of
mankind.

For seeing we may not with civility suppose this principle to be advanced only
for the destruction of Religion, and the ruin (or at least undeniable hazard)
of the Souls of men; We ought to believe that these Philosophers intend this as
a General Maxim; that (in matters at least of moment) men ought not to
adventure to act, but upon clear and undeniable evidence, and (speaking
properly) that wise men ought to believe nothing at all. Wherefore let us
suppose this for a general principle, and consider what will follow.

Setting aside the knowledge of the Affections of a few Lines and Numbers, is
not all learning to be cast away? Must not the Civil world of mankind be
brought to swift confusion? must not mankind it self, in a few days come to an
end?

Suppose a subject should not yield his Obedience, or a Tenant his Rent, till
Titles be made out by Experiment or demonstation. Suppose the husbandman and
the Merchant, the Artificer, the Soldier, the Banker, and the Judge Arist.
polit. l. 7. c. 8.
should not adventure, but stay for the assurance of Experiment or
Demonstration, would not the whole world be confounded?

Suppose men should not marry, nor take Physic, nor eat or drink till they
should have clear and undeniable evidence, that all these things are what they
suppose, and shall succeed according to expectation, would not mankind quickly
be spent, and brought to an end?

If the management of all humane concernments, Political, Oeconomical,
Personal, proceed upon the grounds of Belief and Hope, and rational (but not
demonstrative) inference. If neither these Philosophers (if they would
consider) nor any other Person, either ever did, or possibly could, perform any
one action, upon such evidence, as these men require concerning the truth of
the ftories of the Scripture; then to reject them for want of such evidence, is
repugnant to the Reason of mankind.

I proceed therefore to my second assertion, that the Belief of the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures is most agreeable to reason.

That the Divine Authority of all the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
are undeniably concluded from supposition of the truth of the Relation or
History of matters of fact in the New Testament, I have already shown. And that
the rejection of all History is against the Reason of mankind is evident,
because all mankind receive some History or other: wherefore I shall briefly
show,

1. That the History of the New Testament has all those advantages whereof any
History is capable.

2. That it has greater advantages than any other History.

1. The Arguments inducing men to the belief of any historical Relation, are
all of them Either Ab intra, Internal, from the 1. Credibility and Scibility of
the Object. 2. The Knowledge and Integrity of the Writers. 3. The way and
manner of writing. Ab extra, External, from the 1. Reception of it in the
world. 2. Concurrent testimonies of strangers. 3. Concessions of Adversaries,
and the like.



In all which particulars, no History in the world can justly pretend any
advantage above that of the New Testament.

1. For the credibility of the Object, and Cognoscibility of it.

1. To say that instances of supernatural Power and wisdom are Ob. sol.
impossible, is to deny the power of God and his providence in governing the
world: And to say that such things are incredible, as are and have been
actually believed, in all times, and by all sorts of persons, Jews and
Gentiles, Christians and Mahometans (a few Atheistical persons only accepted)
is an absurdity.

The History that we speak of, pretends to no intrigues or Cabalistick
Counsels, or Myisteries of State, but conteins it self within the limits of
things Visible and Audible, things that were done or spoken; so that no History
can have advantage over it, respectu objecti.

2. As for Knowledge in the deliverers, I shall show it by a brief Induction.

The whole New Testament consists of the Books of the Revelation, Epistles,
Acts of the Apostles, and the Gospels.

The Authors of the Epistles and the Revelation, in the Narrative parts of
them, deliver the things done or spoken to or by themselves, and could not be
ignorant of their own experiences.

The Book of the Acts contains some things done by or to the rest of the
Apostles, but chiefly the concernments of Paul; and it was written by Luke, who
was an individual Companion of Paul, and intimately conversant with the rest of
the Apostles.

For the things Related in the Gospel of St. Luke, he says they were delivered
to him by those who from the beginning were Eye witnesses of the works, and
Ministers of the Word, and his History agrees with the other Evangelists.

The Gospel of St. Mark has nothing which is not in St. Matthew or St. John,
and was dictated by St. Peter, the Head of the Apostles.

St. Matthew was an Apostle, and St. John the Bosom Apostle of Christ. The
Apostles were chosen by him for Witnesses of his Words and Actions, they were
with him from the beginning of his Ministry, continued with him till his death,
couversed with him till his ascension; That which they had heard, which 1 John
1. 1.
they had seen with their Eyes, which they had looked on, which their hands had
handled of the word of life, that they delivered in writing to the World: And
more than this no Writer or Relater of History can pretend to.

2. For Arguments of their sincerity, 1 Cor. 5. 8. 6. 4. 8. Phil. 4. 8. Jam. 3.
14. Ephesians. 4. 25. Apoc. 21. 8. 27. 22. 15.
they have left Precepts of Veracity, and prohibitions of lying, under pain of
Hell torments, the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone: They have
protested that they did not follow cunningly 2 Pet. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 2. 17
devised Fables; that they did things sincerely as in the sight of God.

They have appealed to the searcher of hearts: The God and 2 Cor. 11. 31.
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. The things which I
write unto you, behold, before God I lie not, Gal. 1. 20. says St. Paul.

They have left behind them various 1 These. 2. 3. 4.
instances of their simplicity and Godly sincerity in representing their
failings to the world, and of candor and ingenuity in distinguishing the
dictates of their own Reason from the inspirations of the Holy Spirit: I speak
by permission, not by commandment of the Lord: This say I, not the Lord; Thus
it is according to my judgment etc. 1 Cor. 7.

But besides all this, let the matter be estimated according to common reason:
If these men did devise a Fable and impose it upon the world, what end could
they propound to themselves in so doing? was there any profit in being
destitute of all things? or pleasure in being persecuted, afflicted, and
tormented? or honor in being counted Fools and Madmen.

Before they began to publish the Stories whereof we speak, their Master was
gone, and all worldly hopes were gone away with him: If they were not bound in
Conscience, and in Spirit; what obligation had he laid upon them to labor and
suffer for his honor as they did?

To omit the severity of his behavior to them, He called them off from their
Vocations, Peter, and Andrew, James, and John from their Fishing, Mattbew from
his Customers place, the rest accordingly. Mat. 9. 9.


They forsook their Nets, their Ships, Mat. 4. 20. 22.
their Relations, and all their interests, and followed him.

And this they did (clearly and plainly) believing that he was to be a Great
Temporal Prince, and in hopes of preferment under him. In this Expectation they
continued to the last minute of his conversation with them upon Earth, and he
permitted them so to do.

Their last words to him were delivered in this question, Lord Act. 1. 6.
will thou at this time restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Of the thing it self
they never doubted, they only desire to be informed of the time,

Now after so long expectation? Consider his Answer.

His Answer was this, It is not for you to know the times, etc. but ye shall
receive power when the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
of me unto the utmost parts of the earth; and immediately he vanished away.

Was this an answer to their Question? or a satisfaction to their expectation?
Was this an Obligation laid upon them? If he had not sent down the Holy Ghost,
this would have moved them indeed, but it would have been to rage and
indignation; this would have obliged them indeed, but it would have been to
detest and abhor the name and memory of him that had abused them. But for the
honor of his name, not their own, they did and suffered all things, and
gloried in it. An irrefragable argument of their sincerity in the things which
they delivered.

3. Of the internal Arguments for the belief of History, there remains only the
Consideration of the way and manner of writing.

Histories then carry their own credentials in them, when the principal parts
of them are delivered with such circumstances of times, places, and persons, as
may render them liable to Examination, and Refutation, if they contain any
falsehood in them.

And in this particular, no History has any advantage over that History
whereof we are speaking, as will be evident to him that considers it throughout.

Concerning John the Baptist, it is recorded, that he was born some few Months
before Christ, that his Luke 1. 5.
Mother was Elizabeth, that his Father was Zachariah, a Priest of the Course of
Abia, that they lived in the Hill Country.

He began to preach in the 15. of Tiberius, Pilate being Governor of Judaea,
Herod Tetrarch of Galilee, Luke 3. 1.
his Brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Region of Trachonitis, and
Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilene. Punctual and particular. Mat. 14. 3. Vide Joseph.
Ant. 18. c. 9. 10. Luk 2. 1.


Soon after this he was Imprisoned and Beheaded by Herod, for reprehending him
about Herodias, all which were matters of Fact, very easy, if false, to have
been refuted.

Concerning Christ, his birth is stated to have been at a time the most
remarkable that ever was, when the whole world was taxed by Augustus, in the
days of Herod, when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria; the place easy to be
enquired of, it was in a Manger, in an Inn, Mat. 4. 6.
in a Town that was a little one Mic. 5. 2.
among the thousands of Juda, easy to be examined.

When he was about 30 years old, he was Baptized of John, and Luke 3. 23.
within a few days after he called his Apostles; and in less than four yeears
space he performed all his mighty Works, whereof I shall mention only some few
particulars.

At Cana in Galilee he turned Water into Wine, at a Wedding, where Joh. 2. 1.
11. Mat. 9. 18.
was much company. He raised the Daughter of Jayrus, the Ruler of the
Synagogue, there was but Mat. 8. 6.
one in that place, she was his only Daughter, and about twelve years Old. He
healed the Servant Luke 7. 2.
of that Centurion that had built a Synagogue. Can any thing be more particular?

At Bethany, fifteen Furlongs from Jerusalem, a few days before Joh 11. 18.
his death, he raised Lazarus after he had been dead four days. Could any thing
be more examinable?

His death was at Jerusalem, at the time of the Passover, a time of greatest
annual concourse in the world, and then it is said, that the Sun was darkened,
the Veil rent, the Rocks torn in pieces, the Graves opened. Can any thing be
more refutable than these things, if they had been false?

So likewise for the Apostles. The healing of AEneas at Lydda, Act 9. 33. 40.
10. 1.
raising of Dorcas at Joppe, the passages with Cornelius Captain of the Band
called the Italian Band at Caesarea, and many other acts of Peter. The
increpation of Barjesus 13. 6.
at Paphos, in the presence of Sergius Paulus the Governor. The healing of a
Cripple at Lystra, in 14. 13.
the presence of the Priest of Jupiter, besides many other acts of Paul, and
the rest of the Apostles, are so cirumstantiated in the History, that if false
they might have been very easily contradicted.

But besides all these, this History contains a Narration of things done and
said, not only by persons well affected but by Herod and Pontius Pilate, and
the Roman Governors, by the Pharisees, the Scribes, the High Priests, and the
Sanhedrim; all of them Enemies both to the Historians and the History; and if
any of these things had had been convicted of falsehood, would not the credit of
the whole Gospel have (at once) been utterly overthrown?

I conclude therefore, that in respect of internal Arguments for belief, no
History has, or indeed can have any advantage above the History of the New
Testament.

2. As for External Arguments, I can but name them. Though the whole world
interessed themselves against the story (so examinable as you have heard)
though the Books were extant, while the memory of things was recent, Matthew
within seven years, Mark within eleven, Luke about twenty four, post mortem
Christi; the Epistles of Peter and Paul within thirty years, all the rest intra
unius hominis aetatem, yet no man could ever convince them of falsehood.

The stories were received by men of the greatest Wisdom, Learning, and virtue
amongst the Greeks and Latins. Many of the hardest passages were attested and
confessed by Enemies and Unbelievers.

The Authors owned by Julian: Cyrill c. 10. c. Jul. Orig. c. C. Eusebius. Tertio
Historiarum, Citat a Julio Afr. 3. Chronogr. Orig c. C. l. 3. 15. 44. Annalium.
the Miracles confessed by Celsus: the checking of the operation of the Devil
by Porphyrius: the Darkness and Earthquake at the death of Christ by Thallus
and Phlegon Trallianus: the Crucifixion of Christ (by Pilate under Tiberius) by
Tacitus: And in one word, The entire Volume of the Scriptures, the very same
which our Church receives (by virtue of the belief of the History of the
Gospel) before Athanas. Synops. Constable. ad p. p. Nicco. vide Theodoret. l. 1. c.
5. Gr. Lat. Pan
any general Council, or the time of Constantine, without any Convocation of
the Clergy, or imperial Edict for that purpose, was instinctu quodam
Christiano, generally received by all Christians, and the world made Christians.

In respect of all these Arguments, internal and external, I might have justly
said, that the History of the Gospel has the advantage of any other History;
but seeing there are some particulars wherein the advantages are super eminent,
I shall speak a little of that distinctly by it self, and so conclude.

2. These advantages I shall reduce to two heads, Testimonium Rei. Dei.



1. For the Testimonium Rei, consider, 1. Opposition to 2. Prevailing of the
Gospel.

1. Never any story was so much opposed as the Books and History of the New
Testament, by Jews and Gentiles, by the World and by the Devil.

The beginnings and propagation of the Gospel was by the Jews maliciously and
strenuously opposed in the times of Christ and his Apostles, and in all
succeeding Generations.

Lest all men should believe in Christ Joh 11. 48.
(because of his Miracles) the Rulers took counsel to destroy him, the People
cried out to have him Crucified.

Lest the last error (as they called it) should be worse than the first, they
Matthew. 27. 46.
sealed up his Sepulcher, and set a watch upon it; and lastly, suborned the
Soldiers to say, that his Disciples came by night while they were sleeping
(how could they know this?) and stole him away.

That the first Miracle wrought Acts 4. 6.
by Peter and John might not spread among the People, the Rulers and Elders and
Scribes, Annas and Caiaphas, and John and Alexander, and all the Kindred of the
High Priest, laid hands upon them, and put them in hold, and threatened and
commanded them not to speak at all in the Name of Jesus.

When Stephen had uttered his testimony, the people cried with a loud voice,
and stopped their Ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of
the City, and stoned him. Acts 7. 58.


Wherever they met with Believers, Acts 9. 2.
Men or Women, they haled them into Prison, breathing out threatenings and
slaughter. Wherever they met with the Preachers, they opposed and blasphemed,
they tumultuated, they stirred the Gentiles; Act. 13. 45. 14. 2. 13. 50.
they enraged the chief men of the Cities and the honorable women against them.

The instances of their malicious opposition, in all ages of the Church, are so
many as are not to be numbered in a few Minutes, but would require many days
only to name them.

They first stirred up Nero to persecute the Christians, they contrived the
death of Polycarpus, they Eus l. 4. 15
stood by, and insulted over the dying Martyrs; in a word, whoever shall read
the stories of primitive times, he will find that the Jews were generally the
Setters and Informers against the Martyrs, and the Brokers for their Goods
after execution: And the Histories of our own and other Nations will show us
the height of their malice, and the continuance of it.

Now, beside the little Nation of the Jews, the rest of the whole world, when
this History began to be published and the Books written, were Heathen,
universally devoted to the Devil, whom therefore our Savior styles, the Prince
of this world.

And now that feud which had depended betwixt the seed of the Serpent and the
seed of the woman 4000 years, was by the preaching and writing of these things
brought to a Crisis.

The professed and declared design of the Gospel, was to drive the Devil out of
his Dominion, notwithstanding the antiquity of his possession, theuniversality
of his Church, and the consent of all Nations, whereby he held his title.
Notwithstanding his Empire was supported by Governors and Laws, and fortified
by the Arms and actual strength of all the world, he saw, that if the Gospel
were not suppressed, a little time would spoil the pride of all his glory, that
in a moment he should fall like lightning from Heaven.

That he should be exorcised out of the bodies which he possessed: That his
famous Oracles should soon be put to silence: his gorgeous Deuteronomy. 7.
Temples and Images should be torn down, his Mysteries and lying wonders set at
naught: That Prayers and Vows would be made to him no more, and he should cease
to be celebrated in the Songs of his Poets, and Hymns of his Hieropbantae

That his revelling Festivals would be turned to mourning, no more gifts would
be presented, no beasts, nor children, women or men sacrificed upon his Altars.

The Contention was de rerum summa (pro aris and focis) and his rage was
kindled accordingly: He summons together all his wiles and stratagems, he
musters all his forces, he sounds an Alarm to the world, stirs up young and
old, rich and poor, all ages, sexes, conditions, the people wise and unwise,
the Common Soldiers and Commanders, Counselors and Orig c C. l. 1.
Judges, Senate and Emperors, by suppressing these Books, and destroying the
Believers of them, to erase the memory of the Gospel, and abolish it for ever.

The people were enraged against the Believers, as against the common Enemy of
mankind, and pro solenni suo, they slandered them with unthought of wickedness,
they imputed to them all the calamities of the world: And required them to
death: Si Tiberis ascendit in moenia -- Christianos ad Leones --

Against these Books, the Learned employed their Learning, and the Witty
employed their Wit. Celsus, Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Hierocles, and other
Philosophers, endeavored to dispute them out of the world, Symmachus and
Libanius, and other Rhetors to declaim them away. Julian and Lucian and other
Scoptick wits, endeavored to jeer and droll away the credit of them.

Mean while the Senators and Lawyers employ themselves to destroy the Books, by
stretching against them the ancient Laws against bringing in Foreign Religions,
and against Magical and Fatidical Books: and to destroy Books and Believers by
New Laws made for that purpose against Combinations ( Hetaeriae) Sacrilege,
Plin. Ep. 10. 97.
Treason, the Law that none should buy or sell, or draw water without
Thurification to the Gods, and the like.

By force of these they persecute the Believers, as Enemies to the
Commonwealth, and Traitors to the Emperor, as sacrilegious persons, and
contemners of Religion.

The people sometimes rising upon them without any edict, sometimes by virtue
of Edicts Imperial or Proconsular.

From the beginning of the Gospel to the end of Dioclesian and Maximian, this
was the state of Believers.

Their Scriptures were forbidden to be read, and required to be burned; their
Oratories and (obscure) Churches were pulled in pieces; their Estates were
plundered and confiscate; their bodies were imprisoned and tormented; Fire and
Sword, hot Iron Chairs and Coffins, Gridirons, and Cauldrons, Hooks, Stakes and
Gibbets, the Teeth of Lions, and Tigers, etc. were their portion.

It cannot be showed, that ever any Book or story met with equal Opposition

2. Consider then how it prevailed, how quickly and largely, how deeply and
effectually, although the Precepts were not contrived to solicit the
Affections, nor the Doctrines to court the Reason of men.

At one Sermon of Peter three thousand, Act. 2. 41.
at another five thousand were converted: Within a few years after the Death of
Christ we find by St. Peter, that the Gospel was preached throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia; 1 Pet. 1. 1.
and Paul had planted it from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum: Besides what
was done Acts 15.
by other Apostles, in the Provinces assigned them at the Council of Jerusalem.

Within sixty six years this grain of Mustard seed was become a Tree, Pliny
Proconsul of Bithynia (to whom the care of Religion, Lih. 10. Epist. 10.
ex officio, did appertein) appointed by Trajan to suppress the Christians, he
writes to him, that this Belief was Long lateque diffusa, Civitates, Vicos,
Agros, impletos Christi cultoribus.

During the second Century, it had shot out great branches, the boughs of this
Tree were stretched out, Hesterni sumus and vestra omnia implevimus. Tertullian
reckons up the known parts of the World, in quibus omnibus Christi nomen
regnat, and concludes, ubique Adv. Judeos, c7, 8.
porrigitur, creditur, colitur, regnat, adoratur.

And lastly, During the third (a morte Christi) the Fowls of the air, and
Beasts of the field lodged under the shadow of it: The Net drew good and bad to
shore; the Roman Emperor and Empire declared themselves Christians, i. e.
Believers and Assertors of these Books: So mightily grew the word of God and
prevailed. Act. 19. 20.


It went on conquering and to conquer, not by the Spirit of the Sword, but by
the Sword of the Spirit; the powers of the Earth, and the gates of Hell could
not withstand it; it drove the Devil away with all his Temples, Idols, Oracles,
Priests, Sacrifices, Services, like lightning: So fell the Dragon, the old
Serpent that deceived the World, he was cast out with all his train.

So fell Lucifer the Son of the morn, his Friends and his Followers lamenting.

How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer the Son of the morning! Desolata
Templa, rarissimus Victimarum emptor! Pliny.
Some complain of people forsaking of the Gods, others of the Gods forsaking
their Oracles and Temples, and becoming useless to the World: Prophy.
He said I will ascend into Heaven, and exalt my Throne above the Stars, but he
was soon brought down to Hell.

For the Gospel like Leaven or Fire from Heaven, seized upon all that stood
before it; it leavened Cities, Islands, Castles, Councils, Camps, the Tribes
and Decuries, Tert. Ap. 37.
the Palaces, Senate, Pleading-places.

It took possession of the Learned, and the Wise, the greatest and noblest Wits
of the Eastern and Western Nations: It raised up Philosophers to confound the
Philosophy, and noble Orators to confound the Rhetoric wherewith it was
opposed.

Against Celsus it excited Origin, against Porphyrie Apollinarius, and
Methodius; against Porphyrie and Hierocles, Lactantius and Eusebius (besides
what was written sparsim Jerome, Augustine, Cyril, etc.) It set up Chrysostom
against Libanius, Prudentius against Symmachus and the Rhetoricians.

And as it spread it self large and high, so where it took possession, it took
a deep possession, Quantum vertice -- tantum radice: Those that received it
truly, received it in the love thereof, it took possession of their hearts: It
penetrated their spirits, and took its lodging in the inmost recesses of the
soul. The Contents of these Books was their most precious Pearl, and they hid
it in their heart. The Books themselves were their greatest worldly treasure,
and rather than they would deliver them to be burned, they chose to suffer the
loss of Honor, Liberty, Estate, Wives, and Children, nay even Life it self.
When Di oclefian required the Scriptures that they might be burned, In one
Province ( Egypt) in one Month 17000 persons chose rather to dye than to
deliver them: In comparison Eus. l. 8. c. 3.
of these they counted not their lives dear to them; the love of them was
stronger than Death, many waters could not quench it, neither could the floods
drown it. This was Testimonium Rei, and an advantage above all other Histories,
or Writings in the World.

2. Moreover they had Testimonium Dei. Indeed all that is already spoken is an
evidence of a Divine assistance: But more particularly, God gave Testimony to
these Books, by

1. Their operation upon Believers of them.

2. His cooperation with Believers of them.

1. The Gospel which they contein, was the power of God to every true Believer.
That which no Institution in Philosophy, nor Initiation in the Mysteries of any
Vide Orig. C. Ceis. l. 3.
of the Gods, was ever able to accomplish, that was every where achieved by
the belief of the Gospel, in a moment. Like a charm from Heaven, it stilled the
passions, and mortified the lusts of men. What a Beadroll does Paul reckon up
in the Corinthans: But ye are 1 Cor. 6. 9.
washed (says he) but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Notwithstanding all the calumnies thrown upon Believers, and the Lact. de
falls. sap. l. 3. c 26.
prejudice wherewith they were loaded, the unpropitious and relucting world
were forcibly convinced that the Believers of these Books were effectually
taught to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world: through the cloud of ignominy wherewith they
were encompassed, their innocence broke forth as the light, and their just
dealing as the noon day; the piety, loyalty, justice, charity, magnanimity,
patience, meekness, and purity of believers of these Books, convinced the
unbelieving world, that God was in them of a truth: for they taught as having
Authority and Power, and not as the writings of other Scribes.

2. But beside the operation of these Books upon the Believers, God was pleased
to give testimony to them by his cooperation with them in signs and wonders,
and mighty deeds.

The History of the Gospel tells us, that when Christ was even now leaving the
world, he left this Legacy to believers for confirmation of the truth of the
Gospel; These signs (said he) shall follow them that believe; In my name they
shall cast Mar. 16. 17
out Devils; Speak in new tongues; Take up Serpents; If they drink any deadly
thing, it shall not hurt them; They shall lay hands on the Sick, and they shall
recover.

Now that this was made good, and that these signs (so long as there was need)
were continued among Believers, we have as good assurance as we can have of any
thing beyond our own memory or experience.

They have been delivered to us by a Cloud of Witnesses; by men of the greatest
Wisdom and Learning in their Generations, by persons of such Integrity, that
they laid down their lives in testimony of their veracity; delivered not by
hearsay, but upon their certain knowledge; delivered in their Disputations
with, and apologies to the Adversaries of Christianity, with a challenge to the
examination of the truth, or a conviction of the falsehood of them. Instances
are very numerous, I shall produce only a very few.

Justin the Martyr (who suffered Dial. cum Tryphone.
Anno 165) affirms to Trypho the Jew, that these supernatural gifts were found
in his time among Christians.

Irenaeus an Auditor of Polycarp, who was a disciple of St. John (suffered
circa 206) affirms upon his own knowledge, that the gift of Prophecy was then
frequent in the Iren. l. 22. c. 56. Eusebius. 5. c 7. item. c. 20.
Church, that many had the gift of tongues, ipsi audivimus; Others cast out
Devils, Others healed Diseases, Others raised the dead; and those raised
persons continued many years amongst them, pro certo.

Tertullian in his Apologetica adversus Gentes affirms that Jam de vobis
Daemonas ejiciunt.

Origin against Celsus, says, that he himself had seen by invocation of God,
and the name of Jesus very many that were delivered from L. 3.
grievous maladies, (...) ( alienatione mentis) (...).

Not to mention others, St. Augustine in his Book de Civitate Dei (begun about
410, but many years in writing) l. 22, c. 8. gives an account of very many
Miracles done at Hippo, Carthage, and other places, of no great distance,
noting times, places, persons, occasions, appealing to the Country, delivering
them under terms of the greatest assurance; Scio ego; cognosco ego; nos
interfuimus, and oculis nostris aspeximus: And in his Retractations, Ea quae
cognoscimus neque refer neque enumer are possimus.

Other Histories and Writings, and the Authors and Believers of them canpretend
no higher than to the testimony of men, these have the testimony of God also:
If we believe the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater. I conclude
therefore; that there is greater Reason to believe the History of the New
Testament than any other History in the world.

The sum of all is this, The Divine Authority of the Scriptures is the great
fundamental and comprehensive Principle of Christianity, which being admitted
it stands, and being removed it presently falls to the ground.

Against this therefore the great Enemy of Religion in these later days (under
pretense of Reason and Philosophy) directs his Forces, and is said to have
found a success very pernicious and deplorable.

I humbly conceive that the Resolution of the belief of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures into the Decrees of Popes, or Determinations of Councils with
those who call themselves Roman Catholics, into private impulses and dictates
of the Spirit with the Enthusiasts, and into the Laws and Edicts of Princes and
Magistrates with our new pretenders to Reason and Philosophy, is that engine
whereby the Devil has prevailed to scandalize the world, and cast it into
Antiscriptural infidelity.

It is for this cause that I have conceived it requisite (after many others who
have done worthily) to have recourse (once more) to the Original Reason of
things, and Vide Philos. Essay.
the common grounds whereupon mankind does proceed in matters of this nature.

Where (hoping that I have escaped the absurdity of begging the matter in
Question, discoursing in a circle, and the inconveniences of some other
methods) I have endeavored to demonstrate: That supposing the truth of the New
Testament, both 1. The Old Testament, and 2. The New Testament are to be
received as of Divine Authority.

3. And supposing matters of fact to be truly related, the Doctrinal parts are
to be believed.

4. For the Historical Relation of matters of fact, that there is no ground to
dis-believe it.

That for the reception of it, it has 1. All the advantages whereof an History
is capable.

2. Far greater advantages than any other History.

Wherefore I conclude, that All the Scriptures (i. e.) the Canonical Books of
the Old Testament and the Books of the New Testament) were Given by inspiration
of God. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Concerning the Sinfulness, Danger and Remedies OF INFIDELITY. A SERMON
Preached at Whitehall, February 16. 1667/68.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Arms within Ludgate
near St. Paul's, 1672.

THE SINFULNESS OF INFIDELITY:
Heb. iii. 12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God. -- Exhort one another daily. --
I Shall not spend time in a disputation concerning the Author of this Epistle,
viz. whether it were Paul, or Barnabas, or Luke, or Clemens, or Apollos, etc.
but shall with the Church of England, suppose St. Paul to have been the Author
of it.

If the Author of it be not infallibly known this ought not to detract from its
Authority.

Most of the other Epistles have been acknowledged to be of divine Authority,
because they were known to have proceeded from Apostolical writers.

This (on the contrary) has been concluded to be an Apostolical Epistle,
propter (...) Characterem, by reason of that divine and Apostolical Spirit,
which to those who have had their Senses exercised, has manifestly appeared in
it.

If it were lawful (in this sense) to compare spiritual things with spiritual;
I should not fear to affirm, that this Epistle has in it some peculiar
advantages, compared with some other of the Epistles. (Advantages, I mean, of
usefulness, not of Authority, seeing all of them issued from the same Spirit.)

The design of it is General, Fundamental, Comprehensive, not Private,
Circumstantial, Occasional: And it has peculiarly conveyed to the Church two
great treasures. 1. A Complete Model, or Systeme, of Christian Divinity. And 2.
the way of that Analogy, and manner of ratiocination whereby the true Spirit,
and meaning of the Types and Prophesies of the Old Testament is to be found out
and applied.

It was directed to the Hebrews; That is, to those of the Jewish Nation, who
had received the Gospel, and made a profession of Christianity. And the main
Scope and design of it, is to preserve the Professors of Christianity from
Apostasy and Infidelity.

The means used to this purpose are partly Didactical, and partly Protreptical;
Demonstrating the truths of the Gospel, and then urging the professors of those
truths, to be steadfast in the faith, and to beware of Infidelity.

The Method here used is a mixed method of Doctrine and Application; Dogmatical
truths and pathetical Exhortations continually interwoven.

He begins with the Great foundation of our faith. Christ is the if the Word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation?

From the Comparison of Christ Moses he concludes against Hardness of heart and
Infidelity.

He demonstrates the Priesthood 5. 6. 7. 8.
of Christ to be more Excellent then that of Aaron; and in the midst of his
argument, he falls into an Application, or Corollary, concerning the dreadful
Condition of them that fall away.

This is his design, and method throughout the Epistle; Whatever Doctrine he is
upon, this is still the drift and aim of all his Applications, namely to
preserve the Professors of Christianity from Apostasy and Infidelity.

The words, which I have chosen, are a Reiteration or Reinforcement of an
Application, or Corollary, arising from the Consideration of the Excellency of
Christ above Moses. Moses was faithful in the house as a Servant; Christ as a
Son, over his own house. This bouse are we, if we hold fast our faith.

Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, Harden not your hearts.....

Take heed brethren, lest....

I say, the words are an Use of Exhortation, and in them are considerable,

1. The Persons to whom directed: Professors of Christianity, expressed in the
Word Brethren.

2. Matter or Object about which it is conversant, Unbelief: heart unbelief.

3. Form of Exhortation by way of Caveat. (...) take beed.

Now every Caveat implies,

1. Evil in the thing.

2. Danger of the thing.

3. That there are ways and menas to prevent it. This is employed in the Caveat,
and expressed in words following.

My design, at this time, will be to enforce the Exhortation of the Text: And
seeing that every Application is a Consequence or Corollary arising from some
Antecedent Proposition, and the force of it is finally resolved into the truth
and evidence and concernment of that Antecedent: Therefore it will be necessary
to draw out that Antecedent by reflecting briefly upon the Text as it lies in
the Series of the Epistle.

I. Then, for the Persons. They are here styled Brethren, and elsewhere, Holy
Brethren, Partakers 3. 1. 6. 4.
of the heavenly Calling. They were (...), baptized into the profession of the
Gospel, they had tasted of the Word of God, and the powers of the worldto come.

II. The Matter. Unbelief, or rather Disbelief, (not Negative Infidelity, but a
positive Revolting from the faith which they had professed) Generally, a
Disbelief of the Word of God; Particularly, a Disbelief of the Gospel, as to
the Doctrines, or Promises, or Threatenings Thereof.

III. For the Form; that which is here expressed by (...) (look to it) is in
the other of forms Exhortation, throughout the Epistle, expressed by terms of
the greatest Emphasis and earnestness imaginable, Let us Fear lest we fall
short, 4. 1. Labor to enter, 4. 1. Use diligence, be not slothful, 6. 11, 12.

Press earnestly, draw near, hold fast, 10. 22.

(...); Let us give more deligent heed lest by any means we should let it slip,
2. 1.

So that the Sum of the Apostles Argumentation is this: The last resolution of
all the Obligation of men, is into reasons of Duty and of Interest.

If there be Wickedness in Infidelity, it is matter of Duty; if there be Danger
in it, and Danger of it, it is matter of Interest and Concernment to Beware of
it.

This Heart of Unbelief is an Evil heart ((...)) there is Wickedness in it. It
grieves the Spirit of God; It provoked him so, that he swear in his wrath, that
he would take Vengeance for it: there is Danger in it. Yet it was a thing
Ordinary and common amongst the Fathers of these Hebrews, it was neque Novum,
neque Rarum, there is Danger of it.

It is the Duty and Concernment of every one Professing Christianity, to take
heed lest there be in them an heart of Unbelief; and to use all means to
prevent it. This is the Antecedent.

Wherefore take heed brethren, etc. -- which is the Exhortation by way of
Caveat; -- -- Exhort one another daily, etc. which is the way to prevent it.

So then for the enforcement of the exhortation upon the whole matter, I am to
speak I. Of the Evil of Infidelity. II. Of the Danger of falling into it. III.
Of the means of preventing it. And then to conclude with IV. The Exhortation of
the Text.


In speaking of the Evil of Infidelity, I shall not discourse at large, but
confine my self to an enquiry into two pretenses, (Which having been broached
in the late times of Infidelity toward the King, are said to have operated
very far toward a general Apostasy from the faith, and the production of
Infidelity toward God) both which appealing to the tenor of the Scriptures,
must be examined by them.

1. The first is of a famous Author, and it is this, That the Scriptures do not
make Infidelity to be a Sin, at the time of the delivery of the Scriptures.

2. The second is of a Writer more 2. C. W.
obscure, but in it self, so agreeable to the disposition of the present
generation, that it has possessed the minds of many; it is this, that

Although Infidelity (according to the Scriptures) in the times of Christ and
his Apostles, were sinful, and inexcusable; yet in our times, it is excusable.
These are the pretenses to be examined.

The Substance of the Gospel, as it immediately relates to Christian duty, is
summarily reduced to the Doctrines and Injunctions of our Lord Christ, and his
Apostles.

The Author of Leviathan (cap. 42. page 286.) tells us in plain terms, that We
do not read any where (in the Scriptures) that they which received not the
Doctrine of Christ, did therein Sin.

And again, that the Injunctions of Christ, and his Apostles, men might refuse
without sin.

Now concerning this assertion, I cannot choose but say, that had I not been
acquainted with the works of that Author, (especially those relating to
religion) I should exceedingly wonder at it, because it supposes men never to
look into their Bibles, which is the thing it would persuade.

In the 21. of Matthew. Our Savior Mat. 21. 42
asks the Jews this question, Did ye never read in the Scriptures such a
thing? a question which I must repeat to the Assertors of this doctrine. Did
they never read in the Scriptures the Sinfulness, the Danger, the Heinousness
of Infidelity? Surely he that runs may read it.

1. Our Savior Christ before his death, did oftentimes vehemently rebuke his
Disciples, for Infidelity, O Luke 9. 41.
faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I endure you? (Quousque
tandem abutemini patientia nostra:) And after his Resurrection, he calls them
fools and slow of heart, for unbelieving: Chapter 24. 25.
Did they never read these Increpations?

2. The Author of this Epistle, and the rest of the Apostles, do every where
vehemently and earnestly dehort from Unbelief. Did they never read these
Dehortations?

3. In the 8 of John, Christ tells the Jews, that if they believe not, they
Joh. 8. 24. 3. 36.
shall dye in their Sins. That the wrath of God abides on them, that he that
believes not, is damned already. Did they never read these Denunciations?

Yes! these last, it seems, this Author had read, and as his manner is,
thinking he could accomodate an answer to these, he has pronounced securely of
all the rest: To these he says that they import only a non-remission of the
sins committed against the Laws of their Country; (that they should dye in
them;) but that they do not evince any sinfulness to be in Infidelity;
Wherefore I must crave license to proceed.

4. The Apostle in the 21 of the Revelations, gives a Catalogue of 4. Rev. 21.
8.
such sinners as are of the highest rank, Such as are most abominable in the
eyes of God, Such as are to have their portion in that lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, and he puts Unbelievers in the head of this Regiment; The
fearfut, and Unbelievers, and Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Liars shall have their portion in that lake.

But it may be, perhaps, that the Scripture does not in plain and express Obj.
1.
terms, affirm Infidelity to be Sinful!

The Text tells us plainly and Res. 1.
expressly, that an heart of unbelief is (...) (not (...) but (...), not
incommodious but wicked.) Obj. 2.


But Philosophers and Mathematicians (pretending strictness and demonstration
in discourse) regard not general words; but have recourse to the Definitions of
things, and from thence proceed to affirm or deny the Attribution which is
under question. Let us Res. 2.
therefore have recourse to the definition of Sin.

Those who have spoken most accurately concerning the nature of Sin, they have
resolved, that the formal notion of it, consists in a departure from God. It is
Aversio a Deo, and Conversio ad creaturam. Jer. 2. 12.


In the second of Jeremy, and the twelfth, we find the Prophet as it were in
furore sacro (in a prophetic rage) breaking forth into this Exclamation, Be
astonished, O ye heavens, be ye horribly afraid, be very desolate, says the
Lord! What ailes the Prophet to cry so loud? to make the heavens resound his
Exclamation? My people (says he) have committed two Great evils, they have
Forsaken me, that is the first. An heart of unbelief, is an evil heart, in
departing from the living God.

It is true that the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, does not usually descend
to Logical accuracy, to the quatenus, or Causality, to the observation of the
rules of (...).

And this makes it often times, harder to deal with men of perverse minds, then
many do imagine. But the more rare this is, the more you will take notice of
the Providence, when you shall consider, how accurately, and how fully, the
Scripture has determined that which is in Question.

In the 16. of John, v. 8. our Savior Joh. 16. 8.
tells them, that the Spirit shall rebuke the world of Sin, of righteousness,
of judgment: Of Sin, Because they believe not on him. Joh. 3. 3. 18. 19.
18. he that believes not is Condemned, because he believes not. (...), the
rejection of the Gospel is said to be the very Condemnation, So expressly is the
(...) delivered to us, (by Causal and Identical propositions) in the Scripture;
Who is it now, that can persuade us, that the Scriptures do not affirm any
Sinfulness to be in Infidelity?

Yes verily! the Scriptures not only teach us, that unbelief is a sin, but they
teach us likewise

6. The Heinousness and Aggravation, the Sinfulness and Punishment of this Sin.

It was this that brought all other sin into the World; and every Premeditated
sin arises from it. It hardens the heart, and sears the Conscience, and makes
it bid defiance to the Lord of Glory.

Concerning David we read in the Psalms, that once he said in his haste that
all men are liars, did he revoke it when he was at leisure? No, the more he
thought of it, the higher he proceeds, and becomes the more assured in this
charge; Surely (says he) Men of P sal. 62. 9.
low degree are Vanity, and men of high degree are (not liars but) a Lie. Yet
if one gives the lie to one of these liars, it is the utmost provocation; it is
the stated word of defiance, concluded fit to justify Neh. 23. 19
the Duel or the Stab. On the other side, God glories in this, that he is not a
man that he should lie, Numb. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 29.
that the strength of Israel will not lie, yet infidelity gives him the lie. He
that believes not God makes him a Liar. (1 John 5. 10.)

7. I desire to know what is that (...), whereby the Heinousness of any sin is
to be estimated.

Is it the denunciation of Future Vengeance? The Lord Jesus 1 The. 1. 7.
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance upon Unbelievers, and they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the presence of his power.

Is it Old or New, Past or Present Instances of Vengeance? Were not the body of
this people newly Romans 11. 20
cut off for unbelief? And of ancient days, whose were the Carcasses that fell
in the wilderness; and to whom did God swear in his wrath, Heb. 3.
that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?

Consider but the story, from whence the Exhortation of the Text arises. How
God was provoked through unbelief. The text tells us, that he was Moved, he was
Tempted, he was Grieved, he was Provoked, till he swear in his wrath --

The words are taken out of the 95 Psalm, to which the 78. is parallel. Psalm.
95.
They were (says the Psalmist) a stubborn and rebellious Generation; They
tempted God, and spoke against him, Therefore the Lord heard this and was
wroth: So a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger against Israel; Because
they believed not in God, and trusted not in his Salvation -- When God heard
this, he was worth, and greatly abhorred Israel, he gave way to his
Indignation, wrath, anger, displeasure and Jealousy.

I conceive now the first Question to be stated, viz. Whether (according to the
tenor of the Scripture) Infidelity were sinful and dangerous, in the time of
the delivery of the Scriptures: I proceed to the second Question, viz. (However
it was in ancient times)

2. Whether Infidelity, be not in such times as ours Excusable?

My meaning is this: Whether (speaking according to the Scriptural grounds, and
reason) Now that Miracles; extraordinary gifts and Prophesies are ceased,
Infidelity be not become Excusable (however it might be Sinful and inexcusable
during the time when Prophesies and Miracles were in use?)

The first verse of this Epistle (to the Hebrews) tells us what powerful and
noble motives to believe, God had afforded to the Fathers.

God himself was pleased to speak to them, (...), at sundry times, and in
diverse manners.

In the times of the Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, and Prophets, by the ways of
Visions, Dreams, Voices, Similitudes, Urim, and by diverse miracles and wonders.

So likewise, for those that are here exhorted; About the time of the Writing
of this Epistle, God had spoken to them by his Son (the brightness of his
Glory, the image of his person) And by the Apostles, to whom also he bare
Witness, by mighty signs and wonders, by diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost.

Now that such men as these, who had so great advantages to bring them to
believe, should be severely punished for Infidelity, I am persuaded there is
hardly any man but thinks it very just and reasonable.

That such as had seen the wonders of God, in Egypt and the Wilderness, so
manifestly miraculous, so often repeated, and yet for all this would not
believe, that their Carcasses should fall in the Wilderness.

That Ananias and Sapphira, who had known the miracles which had been done by
the Apostles, should think to Cosen the Apostles: it deserved the Judgment
that befell them.

As for our selves had we lived in times of Miracles or Prophesies, we doubt
not but we should have. believed. Or, as Philip said, show us the father, and
it suffices. Could we but once see a miracle, or talk with one returning from
the dead; it should suffice, we would believe.

But seeing it is now many hundreds of years, since these things are ceased,
and we have nothing left us, Praeter miraculorum famam; If we shall not believe
the Gospel; by some it is openly pretended, and by many it is secretly
imagined, that, in this case we may be Excused.

I could wish that the time would serve, clearly to rid away this phantasm; In
order to it, I shall briefly do three things.

1. Show that this Fantastical imagination is no new invention, but that it
has of old, been the conceit of abominable Hypocrites.

2. 2ly. I shall inquire a little into the grounds of this Conceit, and show
the mistake of those suppositions, into which it is resolved.

3. 3ly. I shall show, that our Savior (Knowing the thoughts of men) has
taken particular care to prevent this Imagination; and has clearly decided the
matter in Question.

1. Though the present age be fruitful in inventions tending this way, yet this
has been Anticipated by the Wits of former times

In the 11 of Luke 47. We find Luc. 11. 47.
the Scribes and Pharisees, building the Sepulchers of the Prophets, whom their
fathers had killed.

If we would know, what they pretended, in so doing, we shall Matthew. 23. 30.
find it in the parallel place of Matthew. They said, if we had been in the
days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them, in the blood
of the Prophets.

That these men, did not believe the Prophets, it is manifest; Christ tells
them, if they had believed the Prophets, they would have believed him; for they
wrote of him.

But that they would have believed the Prophets, (and not have murdered them)
had they lived in their times, this they pretended: and it is very probable
they had that opinion.

Yes Verily! had they lived in the days of Miracles and Prophesies, they would
have believed, the very conceit which is now Pretended!

But the Truth is, these men were abominable Hypocrites, and the cause of their
Unbelief, was not the want of miracles and Prophesies, but Carnal prejudice,
and interest, and the Vile affections of their hearts. Did not Christ work
miracles? Was not he that Prophet which was to come? Yet they took him, and
with wicked hands they slew him, and brought upon themselves the blood of all
the Prophets.

But 2 ly. If we shall examine the bottom of this fancy, and resolve it into
its Principles, we shall find that it supposes these things.

1. That the want of the sight of miracles, is sufficient to Justify unbelief.

2. That to live in the very age of miracles, is apter to create belief, then
to be born and educated, in a believing nation, after the world has been
convinced by the miracles of former times (which is our Case.)

3. That the bare sight of miracles, is of it self alone, sufficient to create
belief, in every person that should see them.

Of which suppositions, the first is contrary to common Reason, and the two
later are contrary to Scriptural Reason, and to the experience of the world

1. If the want of the sight of miracles were enough to justify Infidelity,
then for every Dogma to be believed, Every Individual person, were to expect
the sight of miracles; which if it should happen, the wonder should cease, and
miracles become no miracles, by the frequency of the performances of them, and
so they would be inept to create belief.

Every work of nature, is in it self a miracle; Who would not think it easier
to recover a man, (who had all his parts and humors already formed,) from the
dead, then from that liquid principle whereof Job speaks, to raise up flesh
and skin, bones and sinews: Joh. 10. 10.
to advance an understanding creature, capable of adoring or blaspheming the
maker of him? Yet that is a miracle, and this is none, only through the rarity
of one, and frequency of the other.

Again, if every one were to see miracles, the merit of faith would Ic. 20. 29.
be taken away. Jesus said unto Thomas, because thou have seen -- thou have
believed, Blessed are they that have not seen, yet they have believed. This for
the first supposition.

2. The second is this, that to live in the very age of miracles, is apter to
create a belief, then to live in a believing nation a good time after the times
of Miracles.

But, contrary to this, we have instances both in Jews and Gentiles. After near
4000 years, how pertinaciously do the Jews adhere to Moses, against whom their
fathers Murmured, and rebelled, notwithstanding the sight of all his miracles;
and when he had wrought that great miracle upon Corah and for his rebellion,
the next day they rebelled again.

And we find now all the whole world, (especially the wiser part) Converted to
Christianity, whereas the Apostles complain of the paucity of professors, and
the Infidelity of the Jews, in the Age of Christ and his Apostles, was so great
and resolute that it has a fatal operation upon that nation unto this day.

I am sensible, that in the Comparison of later ages with the days of miracles,
I may be thought (...), and to advance a paradox, where that I may not lean on
my own understanding, I beseech you to consider our Saviors decision of the
Question which we have in hand.

I suppose, I may take it for granted, that the condition of the Jews in our
Saviors time, was in respect of Moses, the same (as to the matter in Question)
with our Condition in respect of Christ.

The tradition of the law, was accompanied with mighty Signs and wonders. And
so likewise the tradition of the Gospel.

In the times succeeding Moses, God for a Season continued the sensible
manifestation of his presence, by miracles. So he did likewise in the times
succeeding Christ.

But before the time of our Savior both miracles and Prophesies had a long
time ceased. We Psalm. 74. 9.
see not our Tokens (says the Psalmist) there is not one Prophet left; as it
is with us at this day.

Only, they had the books of Moses and the prophets, Just so Conveyed and
propounded to them, as our scriptures have been to us.

So that, if the Question be proposed concerning those Jews; whether the
present miracles of Christ, or the complexion of Motives which they had, to
induce them to believe the writings of Moses, were apter to create belief, It
is the same with our Question, Whether the living in the time of Miracles, or
our Motives; are more powerful to believing. To determine which Question; we
may observe; That the Apostles after the sight of all our Saviors miracles,
continued in unbelief, till he had opened unto them the Scriptures, of Moses
and the Prophets. That after many miracles, he refers the Jews to the searching
of the Scriptures; (bringing them a notiori ad ignotius.) And in the 5 of John
and the 47. he decides this Question by another If ye do not believe the
writings of Moses how shall yet believe my Words? John 5. 47.


Thus much concerning the second supposition.

3. The third is this, that the sight of miracles, is of it self alone,
sufficient to bring every person to believing.

We ought indeed to own it, to the eternal glory of our blessed Redeemer, that
the Faith of Christians is founded upon his Miracles as well as on his
Doctrine, and example. And he himself tells the Jews, that if he had not done
miracles they should not bave had sin (i e. the sin of Infidelity.) But Joh.
15. 24.
Now to dream of miracles, and hanker after them; or to think to Excuse our
Infidelity, for want of the sight of them, (as if that alone would certainly
make believers of us all,) it argues that we have been sloathful readers of the
Scriptures.

It happened to our Saviors miracles as it did to his Preaching; according to
his parable of the sower. Some of them lighted upon hearts that were honest and
good, and brought forth the fruit of believing. Others fell by the way side, or
upon stony places, or among the Thorns.

The prepossession of their minds, by an expectation of a temporal Messiah, in
the Rulers; The fear of persecution by them, in the People; The Cares of the
World, and deceitfulness of riches; The pleasures and and lusts, to which the
Austerities of the Gospel-rules, were opposite; and many other prejudices,
deeply rooted in the hearts of a perverse and froward Generation, prevailed
against the sight of miracles; and none were more pervers and resolute
unbelievers; then some of those, who had the Advantage of this great argument
for believing.

If the sight of Miracles alone, were sufficient to produce belief, in all
kinds of Spectators, certainly the Scribes and Pharisees, (who by their
learning were able to Judge of a miracle,) the Countrymen and Kinsmen of Christ
(with whom he was most Conversant,) should have been most Eminent in believing.

But behold the enchantment of prejudice and Carnal Interest! In Luke 5. 21.
the 5. of Luke 21. The Pharisees and Doctors saw the miracles of Christ, and
yet they concluded him a Blasphemer. And when he had healed him that was born
blind; they (hypocritically) bad the man give Glory to God, and said they knew
that Jesus was a sinner.

They turned his miracles into wantonness, feigned themselves Just Joh. 9. 24.
men that they might tempt him, i. e. put a trick upon him: demanding a sign
for a sight, only to satisfy their wanton Luc. 20. 20.
Curiosity.

As for his Country men, this Prophet had no honor there, he did not many
miracles, among them because Matthew. 13. 58
of their unbelief. His friends said, he was beside himself, and went Mar. 3.
21. John 7. 5.
to lay hold on him.

As for the People, In the sixth of John we find, that Christ fed five thousand
men with five loaves Joh. 6. 10.
and two small fishes, so that they said, this is of a truth that Prophet. But
the very next day (ver. 22.) the Very men that had eaten of the loaves (26)
Said unto him, what sign show thou that we may believe? what do thou work?
(30) as if a miracle had not been a Sign!

He wrought a miracle among Mat. 5. 17.
the Gadarens, and they besought him to be gone. Others were offended at him,
and cast him out of their City. The issue of all his miracles, was Joh. 7. 12.
this; Some said he was a good man, Others Nay! but he deceives the people.
Joh. 10. 20.
And many said he had a Devil and was mad.

Nay when he hung upon the cross they acknowledge his miracles, and jeered him
with them; He saved others, himself he cannot Matthew. 27. 42.
save; let him do one more miracle, let him come down from the Cross. and we
will believe him: So Vain is the pretense of those, who think to excuse their
Infidelity, because they cannot see a miracle! So false are the Grounds of that
opinion.

3. Briefly, to bring this Argument to an issue.

If it were granted to these persons, to see a miracle, what kind of miracle
would they choose, to convince their understandings, and settle them in
religion? We are here I confess in loco conjecturali, and no man can tell what
miracle another man would choose, but I am persuaded, that which most men would
agree upon, as most conducing to that purpose whereof we are speaking, would be
this; that to assure them of the Immortality of the Soul and of the rewards and
punishments of the world to come, and to satisfy their Curiosity in some other
doubts and scruples; They might once be allowed to see and converse with some
one, that might rise from the dead, who might resolve their Questions,
concerning the condition of those that are in Hades.

3. I say then, that our Savior who knew, what was in man, and needed not that
any one should tell him, foreseeing this Fantastical conceit, has showed the
folly of it, and preoccupated this vain resort.

In the 16 of Luke 27. Dives makes it his request to Abraham; that he Luc. 16.
27.
would send Lazarus from the dead; to testify to his brethren, those things
which these men dream of.

Abraham refers them to the Scriptures, which were in the same manner
recommended to them as our Scriptures are to us. They have Moses and the
Prophets, etc. let them hear them.

He says unto him, Nay father Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead,
they would believe.

And he (Abraham) said If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

This I take to be a clear and a full Joh. 11.
determination of the matter in Question; And if any one should magine, that
this determination was but Conjectural, Our Savior afterward tries the
Experiment, and raises another Lazarus from the dead.

What was the effect of this man's coming from the dead, did it Convert the High
Priest or the Scribes, the rulers or the people; nay, but from 53.
that very day they took counsel together how they might put Jesus to death And
the Chief Priests consulted, how they might put Lazarus to death also.

Upon these Considerations we may infallibly Conclude, that Infidelity in Such
times as ours, is no more excusable, then it was in the days of Christ or his
Apostles; the times of mir cles and prophesies.

So much of the first Supposition, in the Caveat of the Text, the Sinfulness of
Infidelity in General, at all times, And the Inexcusableness in our times,
which makes it our Duty to take heed of it.

II. I pass to the second supposition, concerning the Danger of falling into
it, which makes it our concernment and Interest to beware of it. For if this be
clear, the Exhortation will be powerful, take heed brethren, etc.

Now the Danger of falling into infidelity is in it self so conspicuous, and
made so sensible by every day's experience, that I wish the proof of it were
difficult, so as to Justify a studious and laborious demonstration of it.

At once to shorten my discourse, and to remove the suspicion of any Satirical
reflection upon those that hear me; I shall show, that the Greatest Advantages,
have not preserved the best of men, from sometimes falling into Infidelity.
Take heed therefore brethren.

The greatest Helps and Advantages against unbelief, I conceive to be these
ensuing.

1. Evidences of Gods presence. 2. Or these lighting on a good understanding.
3. At least upon the Ablest of men. 4. Such as have held Communion with God. 5.
Or have been eminent for the habit and exercise of faith. 6. Or these with
warnings to prevent the Danger of falling. 7. And those reiterated. Yet all
these, have not preserved good men from sometimes falling. A word of each.

1. First then, to begin with the persons in the Context, What greater
Evidences of the Presence of God can be Imagined, then they enjoyed? In Egypt,
in their passage over the red Sea; in the Wilderness, my presence, says God,
shall go along with you, They were conducted by a Pillar of a Cloud, etc. they
were supported, and Corrected by Visible and palpable instances of Gods power
and presence: Yet they tempted and grieved the Spirit of God, by their
Infidelity, for they believed not for all his Wondrous Works.

2. But these Jews were a dull and stupid people. If God should once manifest
himself, to a wise and understanding person (such as we take our selves to be)
We may think it impossible to fall into unbelief.

I suppose it will be no disparagement to these Objectors, to say, that Solomon
might be as Wise and Knowing, as Wary and Philosophical as they. And as for the
manifestation of Gods presence, the Scripture tells us Expressly, that God
appeared to him at Gibeon: Where 1 Kin. 3. 5.
he made a promise to him which he performed.

Yet Solomon fell into the grossest Infidelity; to think there were Gods and
Goddesses, To worship Ashtaroth, the Goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the
Abomination of 1 Kin. 11. 5.
the Ammonites.

3. But it may be yet Objected, that Solomon did this in the Dotage of his
years, and his Dotage upon his Idolatrous wives, which turned away his heart,
but that it could not have proceeded from him before his understanding was
impaired.

Behold then a greater then Solomon! even Adam in his full strength, when he
was newly made after the similitude of God, a little lower then the Angels. God
several times appeared to him in the Garden; Yet he fell through unbelief, and
drew all his posterity into his ruin.

4. But Adam, though he had perfection of Nature, yet he wanted Grace, whereby
he might have held communion with God; which having been once enjoyed, would
for ever have kept him from infidelity, or deliberate sin, which always
proceeds from it.

Consider then the case of David, of whom it is said, that the 1 Samuel 16. 13.
Psalm. 89. 4.
Spirit of the Lord God came upon him; That God himself made a Covenant with
him, and Swear unto him by his holiness, that he would not fail him.

And as for David, who was like unto him, for Devotion and Zeal, for spiritual
Communion and intercourse with God? He was the sweet singer of Israel; and how
often do we find his Spirit inebriated and transported in the Celebration of
his divine and ravishing enjoyments?

Yet we find him falling from all this height; and great and terrible was his
fall; he went mourning for it all his days, and bowed down his head continually.

5. But perhaps it may be thought, that though David was an Excellent man, yet
seeing his Eminency lay not in the gift of Faith, but in Zeal, or in some other
Grace, the danger may not yet be so very considerable.

Behold then even Abraham, the Darling of the almighty, who conversed with God
as a man converseth with his Friend: to whom God communicated his presence in
Dreams, in Visions, in Apparitions, (...).

He was imbued with the Habit of Faith; he exerted it in the noblest exercise;
he manifested it in the heroical degree; so that he became the Father of the
Faithful.

Yet once we find him offending (tripping) at this stone of stumbling;
Equivocating through unbelief.

6. But all these instances were during the Ancient Dispensation, when the
Communication of the presence of God was more Obscure; before the fullness of
time was come, when the word was made flesh and dwelt amongst men, and they saw
his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of God.

Besides, we do not find that they were particularly and distinctly warned of
their danger, which may lessen the Wonder of the fall.

Consider then the Case of Peter, the first of the Apostles. He had been
closely conversant with Christ during all the time of his Ministry; Was a
witness of his miracles, saw his Transfiguration, heard the Voice which came to
him from the Excellent glory, saying this is my beloved 2. Pet. 1. 19.
Son --

As for his faith; he it was, that made that confession, upon which the
Christian Church is founded. And Christ had prayed for him that his faith
should not fail.

He was a Valiant man; and he undertook that though he died, he would neither
forsake nor deny his Master.

When Christ forewarns him plainly and punctually, that his faith would fail
him, that very night, before a certain hour; So that it was impossible he
should be surprised.

You know his Undertakings, and of his Failings it is unnecessary to speak.

7. I know nothing now that can be alleged, against the general propensity of
all men to Unbelief, but this; that Peter was now single and alone, that he
failed only this time; when he was environed with Bills and Staves, and in
Danger of his Life.

Wherefore let us call to mind the Case of all the Apostles, in the great
Foundation of our Faith, the Article of Christ's Resurrection; when these
temptations were away.

The resurrection of hte dead was in those times so commonly believed, that it
was conceived of Christ, that he was one of the Old Prophets risen from the
Dead, and Herod said, he was John the Baptist risen from the dead.

Of the resurrection, the Apostles had seen Experiments, in Lazarus, and in the
bodies of the Saints which arose.

Concerning Christ's resurrection, how plainly and often were they forewarned?
After he was risen, how often were they told of it? Yet how grossly and often
did they fail?

In they 8 of Mark 31 Christ tells his Disciples, that he should be killed,
Mar. 8. 31.
and the third day he would rise again: He spoke this saying Openly; 32.
So Openly that the Jews took no-of it ( this deceiver said that the third Mat.
27. 63.
day he would rise again) moreover he promised them plainly that after he was
risen, he would go before them Mar. 16. 11. 13.
into Galilee; and appointed them a certain Mountain where they should see him.

Yet after he was risen; Mary Magdaten told them that he had appeared to her.
But they believed not Mary Magdalen. Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, told
them the same, But their Speech seemed to them as Idle tales. Luc. 24. 11.


The two Disciples told the rest, that he had appeared to them going to Emmaus,
but they believed them not.

He appeared in the midst of ten of them at once, showed them his hands and his
side, But they believed not for joy.

Christ when he appeared to the Luc. 24. 41. Mar. 28. 7.
Women, bade them tell the Disciples and Peter, that according to his promise,
they should see him in Galilee.

And the eleven Disciples went into 17.
Galilee, to a mountain which Jesus had appointed them, And when they saw him,
they Worshipped; But some doubted.

So that Christ, almost in his last May. 16. 14.
words, Upbraided them with their Unbelief -- because they believed not them
who had seen him, after he was risen.

So prone are even the best of men, after their highest seize, under the
best advantages, to fall sometime into Infidelity! So great is the danger of
Unbelief!

It is true indeed, that all these, might say with the Prophet, Rejoice Mic. 7.
8.
not against me O mine enemy, for though I fall, I shall arise again. Yet all
these things are written for our learning, that he that thinks he stands,
may take heed lest he fall. If 1 Cor. 10. 11, 12.
these things have been done to the green tree, what may be done to the dry? If
the worthies and the mighty have fallen (how have the mighty fallen?) ought not
the feeble to take care? Yes certainly they ought.

III. And to use all means to prevent their falling, which is the third thing,
supposed in the Caveat, and expressed in the words following Take heed brethren
least, etc. Exhort one another daily --

Now the Means to prevent the falling into Infidelity are the Arguments
evincing the truth of the Gospel, which are very numerous. Whereof I cannot now
speak particularly.

The Apostle in this Epistle makes use of two sorts viz. From 1. Scriptures of
the Old Testament. 2. Common Reason; where-of I shall speak a little.

The Argument from Reason is delivered in the 2. Chap. v. 3. 4.

The Gospel was delivered by the Lord, and confirmed (to us) by them that heard
him.

God also bearing them Witness with Signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost,

God bare witness to Christ the Author of the Gospel: And to the Apostles, the
Promulgers of the Gospel. Wherefore it is to be believed.

The Antecedent of this Enthymem is the sum of what I shall deliver.

When the Pharisees said unto Christ, thy Record is not true, Io. 8 13.
because thou bear record of thy self. I am one (says Christ) that bear
record of my self, and the Father that sent me, bears witness of me.

Moreover he tells the Disciples 18. 15. 26. 27.
that the Comforter should testify of him. And ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning.

So that beside the Witness of the Apostles, the Gospel had the Attestation of
all the persons of the Trinity: viz. of the 1. Father, 2. Son, 3. Holy Ghost.



1. God the Father bore witness to his Son; and that he did, by 1. Visible
Signs, and 2. Audible Voices, 3. by Mission of Angels, 4. by Cooperating in
his Miracles, etc.

1. At his Nativity a new Star appeared. At his Baptism they saw the heaven
opened, and the Spirit sent from the Father in the visible shape of a Dove, and
lighting upon him. Before his Passion, he was transfigured in their sight. And
At it the Sun was eclipsed when the Moon was full, the Veil, the Rocks, rent,
so that the Centurion said, Surely this man was the Son of God; Bodies of
Saints were seen of many: All these were visible signs.

2. As for the (...) ( the Daughter of the Voice) In his Baptism Lo! Mar. 3.
17. 17. 5.
a voice from heaven, Saying, This is my beloved Son -- At his Transfiguration
a Voice came out of a cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son -- hear him. A
little before his death, as he was Praying, Father, glorify thy Name, There
came a voice from heaven, Saying, I have Jo. 12. 2, 8.
both glorified it, and will glorify it again.

3. For mission of Angels by the Father, We find them still ready upon all
occasions from before his Coming down, to the time of his Ascension into Heaven.

Before his Conception, the Angel Luc. 1. 16. 19. Mar. 1. 20.
Gabriel appeared to Zachary and to Mary, before his Nativity to Joseph,
saying, fear not Joseph. At the time of his Nativity a whole Chorus appeared to
the Shepherds. Luc. 2. 9. 31. Mar. 2. 13. 1. 9. 20.
In his Infancy an Angel appeared twice to Joseph, admonishing him of his going
to Egypt and his return from thence.

In his Adult age they ministered to him in his hunger; Before his 4 11. Luc.
22. 43. Mar. 28. 2. Mar. 16. 6. Jo. 20. 12.
death, they strengthened him in his Agony; After it, they rolled away the stone
from his Sepulcher; They declared his Resurrection; and in Act. 5. 16.
his Ascension, they stood by, and foretold his coming again to Judgment. Ye
men of Galilee why stand ye gazing? This same Jesus --

4. The Father co-operated with him, according to that of our Savior, The
father works hitherto and I work -- etc.

These are some of the Attestations of the Father.

2. Christ bore witness of himself. And this he did, by proving himself to be
the Messiah; viz. by fulfilling all the prophesies relating to the Person or
Offices; the Life, and the Death of the Messiah.

His Generation was such as cannot be declared, he was born at Bethlehem, of
the Tribe of Judah, of the Family of David, about 490 years after the return
from Captivity. When the Scepter was just now departed from Juda.

He performed not only the Substance of the Prophesies, but all the
Circumstances foretold, concerning the Life and Death of the Messiah.

1. He was to be a Prophet, and so he was. The Spirit of the Lord anointed him
to preach, and he spoke as never man spoke. He foretold many things to come,
they all bare him witness.

2. He was to be a King, and so he was. His Name was Wonderful; his Power was
shown throughout the universal System of the World; the Angels good and evil,
the Heavens, Elements, Plants, Fishes, Brutes, Health and Sickness, Life and
Death, were all obedient unto his Word.

3. He was to be a Priest, and so he was. He made an Atonement by his
Obedience, and by his sufferings to the least punctilio (to the taking of a
little Vinegar) and when all things were fulfilled, He cried with a loud voice
(...), it is finished, and he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost. Joh. 19. 30.


Moreover, for the Justification of his Gospel (and that he might leave no
place for Infidelity;) he rose again from the dead, appeared to many, convinced
them by all their Senses; They saw him, They heard him, They felt his hands and
his side, They Eat and Drank with him; They Conversed with him 40 days; He was
seen by more then 500 at once; and (lastly) in the sight of Many of them, he
Ascended Visibly into Heaven.

These were some of the Testimonies, which our Lord Christ bare to himself.

3, The time would fail me, if I should speak of all the Testimonies given by
the Holy Spirit.

In his Conception, to Mary, fulfilling the Promise of Gabriel.

Before his Nativity, to Zachary and Elizabeth, in his Infancy to Simeon and
Hanna, in his Baptism to John. I knew him not, says John, but he that sent me
to baptize, said unto me, upon whom thou shall Joh. 1. 31.
see the Spirit descending and resting on him, that is he: and I saw the Spirit
descending: Throughout his whole Ministry, till his Death, the Spirit gave
witness to him.

Moreover, in his Resurrection he was declared the Son of God, with power by
the Holy Ghost. After his Romans 1. 4.
Ascension, the Holy Ghost fulfilled all his undertakings, in that Grand
Manifestation at Pentecost, at the time and place which Christ had undertaken
for; A manifestation made to all the Senses, and to men of every nation under
heaven, Parthians -- besides a Multitude of other Act. 2. 5.
Instances.

Such were the Attestations given to Christ ( the Author and finisher of our
faith)

2. And for the Apostles (the Promulgers of it) besides the Change of their
Spirits from darkness to light, Whereby they were led out of Ignorance and
Infidelity, into all Truth. And from torpid and pusillanimous persons, during
thelife of their Master, they became, when he was dead, the most active and
magnanimousin the world. (I say, besides this Change) They had bestowed upon
them, All things necessary, either for their 1. Own Assurance, or for the 2.
Conviction of the World. (Concerning the truth of the Gospel which they
delivered.)

1. As for themselves, besides the Conversation with their Master before and
after his Resurrection; they had 1. Apparitions of Angels. And to one of them
Christ himself appeared after he was ascended to his father.

2 They had the Bath Kol, (Voices from Heaven.) In the 9 of the Acts, we find a
Voice from Heaven maintaining a Dialogue with Paul; and at another time, a
voice saying to Peter, Arise Peter, Kill and Eat.

3. They had extatical Visions. Act. 22. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 2.
Peter was in a trance (Act 10. 10, 19.) Paul rapt up to the third heaven.

4. They had monitory Dreams. Paul saw a man in a Dream, saying unto him, Come
into Macedonia and help us.

5. They had Impulses of the Spirit; So Paul was forbid by the Act. 16. 9.
Spirit, to preach the Word in Asia.

II. And for the Conviction of the unbelieving World,

They had diversities of gifts and 1 Cor. 12.
different Administrations. To one was given the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge, to another Faith, to another the gift of Healing, to another
Miracles, Prophesies, Discerning of Spirits, The gift of Tongues.

As it is in the words which I quoted, God bare them witness with gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and with Signs and Wonders; and that he did, so far, that I shall
be justified by Christ himself, if I shall affirm, that the Apostles after his
death, Joh. 14 12.
did greater miracles then he himself did in his life.

Of the same kind with our Saviors, some they performed, by means having an
appearance of greater strangeness, (Christ healed by his touch, his word, his
spittle, Peter by his Shadow, Paul by Handkerchiefs taken from his body.) But
one great thing there was, wherein they exceeded; The Great and Manifest, and
frequent Effusions of the Spirit, the Reception of it upon themselves, the
communication of it to others, by Prayer, Preaching, Laying on of Hands; By
these it was that the unbelieving world was convinced, and even Simon Magus
himself; It is by the power and Virtue of those effusions that we are here met
together at this time, that the World continues Christian at this day. And
these are some of those standing means and Arguments, whereby the proneness of
our hearts to infidelity may be overcome; and faith may be begotten, confirmed,
recovered at this day: These are therefore to be revolved, Exhort one another
daily. To come therefore to a Conclusion.

My text it self is an Application, by way of Exhortation; Exhortations are
enforced by Reasons of Duty and Concernment, and these I have hitherto
endeavored to lay before you.

If indeed there were no Sinfulness in Infidelity, Or, if in such times as
ours, it were excusable. If there were no danger of falling into it, or no
means left to remedy or prevent it; it would then indeed be to little purpose
to Exhort men to beware.

But if the state of all these things is otherwise, if that be plain and
evident; agreeable to Scripture, to Reason and to Experience; if the Speaker
has not beaten the Air, nor the heaters been careless and inattentive, I know
not what can be required, to enforce and sharpen the exhortation.

If the time would suffer it, and I were speaking to a Common or Injudicious
Auditory, I might think my self concerned, after all that has been spoken to
the understanding, to Apply my discourse to your affections, I should take unto
me the various forms of Application used in this Epistle. I would Reprove,
Rebuke, Exhort; I would cry aloud, and would not spare. I would lift up my
voice like a Watchmans trumpet, warning you from the Lord, concerning the
Spirit of irreligion and infidelity which is said to have overspread the land.

I would take to my self a Lamentation, yea it should be for a Lamentation, for
the Professors of Infidelity, and the Infidelity of Professors, every where.
But I may not now be permitted to enlarge upon these things. I may only pray to
God to give you understanding in all things, and beseech you earnestly to
consider what has been spoken, Concluding in the words of the Text, Take heed,
brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. Exhort one another daily. --

FINIS.
Die Jovis 11o Octobris, 1666.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
thanks of this House be given to the Lord Bishop of Exon. for his Pains in the
Service he performed in Preaching a Sermon before the Peers in the Abby-Church
at Westminster yesterday, being the day appointed by His Majesty for Fasting
and Humiliation, in consideration of the late Dreadful Fire which wasted the
greater part of the City of London: And that his Lordship be, and is hereby
desired to Print and Publish his said Sermon.

John Brown Cler. Parliam.

A SERMON Preached before the PEERS, IN THE Abby-Church at Westminster: October
10th. M. DC. LXVI.

BY SETH then Lord Bishop of EXON.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Arms within Ludgate
near St. Paul's, 1672.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Peers AT WEST MINISTER.
ECCLES. xi. 9. -- But know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment. Rejoice O young man, -- etc.
THE great and general design of the Ministry and preaching of the Gospel, is
to bring men to Christianity; not in the outward profession, but in the true
spirit and power thereof; to the end they may be justified and sanctified, and
finally saved through Christ for ever.

The Particular design of this Days Observation is to humble our selves under
the mighty hand of God, in Consideration of his Judgments, especially that late
one in consuming with Fire the Ancient and noble Metropolis of this Nation; and
to endeavor to appease the wrath of God gone out against us.

To compass both these designs (whereof the later is subordinate to the former)
I know no better expedient, than to reason a while upon that important argument
suggested in the Text.

Who can think upon the Conflagration of our late Glorious City, and not call
to mind the great and terrible day of Judgment?

Who can think seriously of Judgment, and not be compelled to come in, (driven
to Christianity) that he may be saved from the wrath to come?

The great Instructor and Example of Christian Preachers (he who says of
himself, that Christ sent him to preach and not to baptize) found no means so
powerful to persuade men to Christianity, as to reason upon this argument; as
first to lay before them the terror of Judgment, and then (whilst that was warm
upon their hearts) to make them a tender of the Gospel. This is the great
advantage and use the Apostle makes 2 Cot 5. 10, 11.
of the Doctrine of the Text. We must all appear (says he) before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, -- Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men.

Upon these Considerations I shall hope for the pardon of this Noble Auditory,
if (without affectation of Science) I shall, in a practical and familiar way of
reasoning, endeavor to imitate our Apostle in this particular.

If in the mean time it will be irksome and unpleasant to hear of the Judgment
to come, we shall do well to consider what it will be to undergo it; we shall
do well to reflect upon our Souls, and search out the ground of this aversness;
Is it because we do not believe a Judgment to come? or that we our selves shall
be brought to Judgment? Is it because we never consider, who it is before whom
me must appear? or, what things will be charged on our account? Is it because
we are so far gone in our arrears that it is to no purpose to call these things
into our remembrance? -- What ever it be, we may perhaps hear of that which may
meet with and remove the prejudice and imposture that is upon us. It is neither
our Negligence nor Infidelity that will make void the Truth of God. Whether we
will hear, or Whether we will forbear, the Words which I have read remain firm
and unalterable, and they clearly contain these Propositions:

1. There is a Judgment to come.

2. Thou shall be brought to Judgment.

3. God will bring thee to Judgment.

4. God will bring thee to Judgment for these things, the ways of thy heart,
etc.

5. God will bring thee to Judgment for All these things.

6. All this is certain and evident; for it is not think, or believe, but --
Know that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

1. First then, There is a Judgment to come. This is no Politic invention
found out to fright thee from thy pleasures; this is no Engine of State devised
to keep you in a subordination to your Brethren; this is no vain Thunder or
foolish fire, to affright you in to a blind obedience, but it is the Tenor of
the Scripture of the voice of God, King Agrippa believe thou the the
Prophets? I know that thou believe, (says St. Paul.) Brethren do we believe
the Scriptures? I hope we do believe them; This we do all profess to believe,
so often as we repeat our Creed; and I hope the dissolution of our times has
not yet shattered that foundation of our faith, the ground work of our hopes,
even the Salvation of our souls. Surely there are rewards for men; doubtless
there is a God which judges the earth. What though the foundations of the
world be out of course, the pillar of Faith remains unshaken; the Rod of the
ungodly shall not for ever rest upon the back of the righteous: I desire to
make a little use of your faith for that which anon will be obtained from your
reason. There is a Judgment to come, it is as sure as death, nay far surer; they
shall be judged which shall not die, they have been judged which could not die;
the one at the end, the other at the beginning of the world.

There is a Particular and a General Judgment; the one at the dissolution of
the lester, the other of the greater world; the one at the hour of death, the
other at the day of Judgment. A Judgment I say, a strict examination, an exact
account, a severe sentence; words which make no thundering noise, or tragical
sound, and so they may pass our hardened hearts without any motion; wherefore
let us judge of the tenor and moment of them by their antecedent signs.

Before one of them, the evil days come: The other is called the evil day.
Before one, Solomon tells us, that the Sun, and the Moon, and the Light, and
the Stars shall be darkened: Before the other, a greater than Solomon tells us,
that the Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, and the
Stars shall fall from Heaven. Before one, the Keepers of the House shall
tremble, and the Strong men bow themselves; Before the other, the Mountains
shall quake, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken: Before one, we shall
rise at the voice of the Bird; Before the other, at the sound of the Trumpet.
Before one, the silver Cord shall be loosed, and the golden Bowl broken, and
the Pitcher broken at the Fountain, and the wheel broken at the Cistern: Before
the other, the silver Zone of the ecliptic, and the golden Globe of the Sun,
the Orbs, and the Vortices shall be confounded, (the wheel within a wheel) the
Heavens shall be rivel'd as a scrowl of Parchment, and the Earth and the
Elements shall melt away with fervant heat. In the one, the dust shall return
to the earth as it was, and and the spirit to God that gave it: At the other,
the dust shall return from the earth to be as it was, and the spirit from God
that gave it.

Come now and let us reason together.

Are all these the forerunners and symptoms of approaching Judgment? then why
art thou so drowsre O my careless soul, and why are thou so secure within me?
What strange Lethargy has seized on thee? Awake thou that sleep, and Christ
shall give the light. The time of thy dissolution is coming, and after death,
the Judgment. Retire therefore a while into thy self, and commune with thy
heart: Enter thou into thy Closet, and shut thy Door upon thee: Let us examine
our selves before we come to that strict Examen: Let us make a Judgment of our
expectation before we come to Judgment. Do we believe a Judgment will come?
Then how are we provided against that Day? Are our accounts ready? Art thou
able to stand in Judgment? Shall thou be clear when thou art judged? When Paul
reasoned before Felix concerning the Judgment to come, Felix trembled; and
because it was an unpleasant argument, he put him off to another time.

There is no doubt but our treacherous hearts would gladly put off these
Considerations, and deferr them to a more convenient season. Nay! but there is
no time so convenient as the present, when we are wrought into some
apprehension of Judgment: if we stay till our present thoughts are over, we
shall again be brought to lose the apprehension (to forget the import and
moment) of the Judgment; we shall come again to hear the Name thereof, and to
neglect it as an idle Noise, and empty Sound.

Let us therefore not neglect this opportunity; Let us search our seleves to
the bottom; Let us make a discovery of our final Resolution, and secret
Reserves in reference to Judgment. We profess openly to believe that Christ
shall come with Glory, to judge both the Quick and Dead; What are our inward
thoughts in that particular? and how are we provided against the Day of
Judgment?

There is a Judgment to come, that Judgment terrible, the Examination strict,
the Condemnation insupportable, and most of us utterly unprovided; yet for all
this, it is possible it may be avoided. All these things are true in Judgments
here below, and we see the proof of them at every Assizes; yet all Offenders
are not brought to Judgment, but many Thieves and Murderers escape it: It may
be thus in the Judgment to come; it is possible it may be avoidable.

II. A miserable hope, if this be all; for Thon shall be brought to Judgment:
That Is the second Proposition.

And it contains the Universality or Particularity of the Judgment, (which you
please:) thou, and every man, singuli generum, and genera singulorum; all sorts
of men, and every man of every sort, from Him that sits on the Ihrone, to
Her that grindeth in the Mill: For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ. It is appointed for all men once to die, and after death the
Judgment. Death shall deliver up our Souls to the first, and death shall
deliver up our Bodies to the second Judgment. The Grave shall deliver up her
spoils, and the bodies of all men, devoured of Beasts, consumed of Fire,
swallowed by the Sea, scattered to the four Winds, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, shall be brought to Judgment.

And here shall I bewail the infirmity, or inveigh against the negligence of us
Men, that suffer our selves to be hurried headlong by the power of our
imaginations against the striving of our Consciences; that suffer our Senses to
carry away the crown from our Understanding, and give over our selves to the
impetuous stream of our passions: That when we have a full information, a
complete judgment, a clear dictate of conscience, we will suffer all these to
be overborn in us by the Idola Specus, Tribus, etc. which are brought into our
imaginations: That having clear and evident Principles, we can yet doubt of
their immediate consequences; or whilst we profess an universal truth, never
descend to think of the particulars.

We know there is a vast difference between the things present, and those to
come; and yet we form our thoughts of those, according to the analogy of these,
deluding our selves with idle and childish imaginations. God keeps silence; we
think he is such an one as we: Vengeance is not presently executed, we set our
hearts to do wickedly. We profess that all men must die, and come to judgment;
yet we do not really believe that we our selves shall die, and come to judgment.
This is the fountain of our misery, and the original of our spiritual
miscarriages: the discovery of the causes and remedy whereof, lies deep in the
Philosophy concerning Humane Nature; but the thing it self is of every days
observation: we may recount it in these authentical examples. David knew full
well what belonged to Murder and Adultery, and what himself had done in the
matter of Uriah; yet he cried not out that he had sinned, till Nathan had
charged him, Thou art the man.

Ahab undoubtedly had read the Law of Moses, and knew the guilt of Murder and
Oppression; yet he goes on triumphantly, he kills, and also takes possession:
but when Elijah charges hime home, In the field of Jezreel shall Dogs lick thy
blood, even thine, then he cries out, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? (1
Kings 21.) and having applied things to his particular, he Rent his Clothes,
and put on sackcloth, he fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

Once more: It Is likely Belshazzar had a general Judgment, and an universal
Maxim in his mind, That it was unlawful to spoil the House of God, to plunder
those things which were dedicated to the Lord, and to debauch in the Bowls of
the Temple, and probably he had seen the handwriting of the book of God to
that purpose: yet all this does not restrain him: But when the Fingers write
upon the Wall, Mean, Mean, etc. thou art weighed, etc. then his countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his loins were loosed,
and his knees smote one against another. This then is the Office of this second
Proposition, it charges us home, it lays down the Universal, and it brings it
down to the Particular.

Thou shall be brought to Judgment. Thy Judgment is unavoidable.

O but then thy Evasion is crossed, O my stupid Soul! Thou art spoiled of thy
frivolous ground of hope: Thou shall surely be cited, and thou must appear, if
thou refuse to come thou shall be brought to Judgment. Return then again into
thy self, and take a review of thy condition; what will the issue be of that
Judgment to which thou must be brought? What hopes are now remaining that thou
shall not be condemned? when the Officers have haled thee before the Judge,
that thou be (...) delivered to the Executioners.

If thou art called to Examination, Can thou elude thy Judge by thy wily
Answers? or Can thou baffle or suborn the Witnesses? Can thou work off thy
Jury not to find the Verdict? or bribe the Judge to favor thee in thy Doom?
Can thou withdraw him from the Rigor of Justice by the mediation of thy
friends, or melt him into compassion by the loudness of thy cries, the sadness
of thy lamentation? Can thou procure a Reversion or Reprieve of thy sentence,
or appeal from thy Judge unto another? Can thou make an escape from thine
Executioner? Or lastly, Can thou stoutly endure the sentence of Condemnation?
These are the hopes of men here brought to Judgment, and why may not some of
them be mine? No, thou know, O treacherous heart, all these to be fond
impossibilities, dreams, and suggestions of a childish fancy; If once this day
be over, and that time come, thy hopes are barely these, that Omniscience and
Wisdom it self may be deluded by stupidity, that Omnipotence and Power it self
may be evaded by poor contemptible infirmity, that Severity and Justice it self
may be perverted by iniquity; all this is evident by that which follows: For we
must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ.

III. God will bring thee to Judgment.

And here we are concerned to raise our thoughts, and employ the utmost of our
attention, lest by the prejudice which our Idleness has brought upon us, we
treasure up wrath to our selves against that day of Judgment. It Is true, we
daily hear of God, and receive the names of his Attributes into our ears, but
we pass over his Name as if he were like to us, and never bestow so much labor
as to attain to a considerable notion of those names. O that the God of Heaven
would afford us here some glimpse of himself; That he would illustrate us with
some beam of his Majesty; That he would be pleased to visit every unprovided
soul, and insinuate into it a full and clear apprehension of this Proposition
-- God will etc --

But how shall we endure to see his face? No man can see my face and live,
(Exodus 33.) if the Israelites durst not hear him proclaim the Law, how shall we
endure to hear him denounce the Judgment? If the Angels veil their faces, not
able to behold his Excellency, how shall we be affected with his terrors? If
the Cherubims are oppressed with the sight of his glory, what shall we be with
the sense of his fury? If we find our selves confounded and swallowed up into
inextricable Labyrinths, when we set our selves to consider of his immanent
Attributes, of his eternal Duration, his unbounded Essence, his unconfined
Presence: With what disposition can we entertain the terror of his Judgment,
the search of his Omniscience, the stroke of his Omnipotence? If the best and
choicest of the Saints of God, have been afraid and trembled at the thoughts of
Judgment, if they have been surprised with horror and confusion at the mere
imagination of that Dreadful voice, Arise and come to Judgment, what shall the
worst and most obdurate sinners, when they shall be stripped of this cloud of
flesh and error, and cited before the great tribunal, there to render an
account of their Creation, Preservation, and Redemption?

What fear, what horror, what agony will possess thee, O sinful soul, when thou
shall be brought into a perfect apprehension of thy Judge, and of thy self, and
he shall begin to order out before thee the things which he has done; when the
whole Trinity shall begin to unfold its common work, and that sacred Person
blessed for ever, upon whose shoulders the Judgment is laid shall unfold to
thee his peculiar, and thou must render a severe account of thy returns?

When the mystery of thy Creation shall be unveiled to thee: When thou shall
apprehend thoroughly, what it is to have been fetched out of the dark and barren
shade of an eternal privation to be put in a capacity of glory. When he shall
recount to thee the proceedings of his handy work, the method of thy making,
the several articles and gradations of his Providence in the formation and
information of thee. How at first he poured thee out like milk, and crudled
thee cheese; How he spun out thine arteries and veins, and whilst thou were yet
in thy blood, he said unto thee, live: How he guarded thee with muscles, and
strengthened thee with sinews, and propt thee with bones, and covered thee with
skin, furnished thee with organs, endowed them with senses, invested thee with
reason, crowned thee with freedom, enlightened thee with principles of Science
and Conscience, bounded thee by his Precepts, encouraged thee by his Promises,
restrained thee by his threatenings. When he shall run over the benefits of thy
daily preservation, and rigorously examine what thou have done for him.

When God the Son shall display to thee what he has done and suffered for
thee, and shall set before thine eyes the great mystery of thy Redemption; When
he shall bring thee to apprehend the price that he has paid, that ransom which
thou have not regarded: When it will not be in thy power to pass over these
considerations as now thou do; but they shall be forced into the essential
center of thy Soul: When thou shall have a clear sight of the abasement of a
God incarnate: When thou shall know how to be moved at the sight of a despised
and an abused Godhead.

When he shall charge thee with the blewness of those stripes, and the
ghastliness of those wounds which thou have made: When he shall rehearse to
thee the miseries of his life, and the circumstances of his death: When he
shall recount to thee the woundings of the taunts and reproaches, the smart of
the whips, the terror of the agony, which made him sweat great drops of blood,
the pricks of the thorns, the piercing of the nails, the launcing of the spear,
and the ineffable horror of the dereliction, when he cried out in the
bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And when he
shall fiercely call upon thee to answer for the wounds that thou have made, to
render him his blood that thou have spilt, to account to him for that life
which thou have bereft, to show him the fruit of all his pains and sufferings,
to present him thy returns for all these benefits and favors; then tell me
what thou will answer, O stupid soul. How art thou provided to reply?

Will thou deny that he has done these things for thee? or can thou show as
much for him? Have thou returned him that being which he has given thee, and
so been even with him in a form of words, though that come infinitely short
indeed? Have thou sacrificed thy self for his benefit, or abased thy self for
his commodity? What will thou plead when thou art called? The time is coming,
thy Judgment hastening, thine account is unavoidable, thy Judge inexorable.

Alas! what could I have done for him? what profit could I have brought him? if
I should have pined away in the exercise of Devotion, and been eaten up with
zeal? If I should have spent my sabstance in Burnt-Offerings, or Calves of a
year old? If I should have presented him with thousands of Rams, or ten
thousand Rivers of Oil? To what purpose then should I end eavour that, which I
could not have performed? Why should I trouble my self with vain attempts, and
spend my strength about that, which I never could accomplish? neither if I be
righteous is he the better; nor if I be wicked is he the worse: our goodness
extends not to him; if thou sinnest, what do thou against him? if thou be
righteous, what receives he at thine hand? Is this then the evasion? I need
not stand to unfold the disingenuity, the stupor and madness of this evasion.
However though these things shall be urged upon us, they are not all; these
offer themselves in the consideration of the person of the Judge, but are not
all the matter of thy Judgment.

IV. For Thou shall be brought to Judgment for these things; there is the
matter of thy Judgment.

V. For All these things; there is the extent. Because this latter adds only a
Modality to the former, and I desire not to be over tedious, we will put these
two together.

And now we are descended from those less familiar Considerations, to which we
were forced to strein our understandings in the contemplation of our Judge,
into the compass of our own sphere, to the survey of our own operations; we are
come from the incomprehensible ways of God, to the ways of our own hearts. Walk
in the ways of thy heart, etc. and, But know, etc. In the judgment of this life
men are tried by the works of their hands, or the words of their mouths; for
theft or murder, for slander or Treason men may be brought to Judgment, but
thought is free, he has lived well that has carried his crimes close, the
crafry Politician and the conceealed Hypocrite escape: There the case is quite
contrary, the Judgment takes in primarily the ways of the heart, and the words
and actions as they proceed from them. Wherefore let us withdraw a space into
our selves, and endeavor to mete out the extent of that Proposition. For all
the ways of the hearts of men, God will bring them to Judgment.

How would it trouble us to recount and bring to memory every thought but of
one only day? and how many disorders and irregularities should we find in such
a reflection? How do our thoughts flote upon our brains, and we know neither
whence they come, nor what becomes of them? When they are broken in upon our
minds we cannot hold them, and when they are gone from us (as it was with
Nibuchadnezzar's dream) it is not in our power to recover them. How many roving
fancies present themselves unto us in a moment; and how many sudden and
imperfect Complacencies and distastes are raised by them? Leave but thy self
unbound, unfixed (by hearing, or reading, or business, etc.) for an hour, and
then tell me what suppositions and consequences, and resolutions thou have
made? And how thou have felt thy self to strein upon the borders of Lust or
Envy, of Pride or Anger, of Discontent or Melancholy. O that you would but
reflect a little upon your souls, and consider how many wandering thoughts have
broken in upon your minds since I began to speak of this important Subject. You
might save me the labor of further speaking and raise your selves to that
which I endeavor: I fear you might find among your sacred thoughts, a mixture
of others very unsuitable; your envious, your ambitious, your covetous, your
idle thoughts All these are the matter of our future Judgment, and however they
slightly pass us here, they are noted in the Book of God; and when that Book
shall be opened, they will be charged on our account. Thou tellest my
wanderings, (says the Psalmist) Are not these things noted in thy Book? I have
already said enough to take up the consideration of the remainer of our time:
But our hearts being too heavy, and our ears too dull of hearing to be moved
with generals, I must crave leave that I may be permitted to run over the heads
of some particulars.

Thou must give an account of all things committed to thee, Inward or Outward,
Natural or Spiritual, thy senses and thy understanding, thine Outward and thine
Inward faculties.

If thou have been at a constant covenant with thine eyes, and have never
suffered them to rove in loose disorders: If thou have bowed thine ears to
discipline, and never let them open to vain entertainments: If thy taste has
been moderated by the necessities of nature, and the laws of temperance, and
never let loose according to the lust of Riot: If thy hands have been wholly
employed in the works of God, and never been instruments to the machinations of
the Devil: If thy speech have never uttered any idle words, but ever
administered grace to the hearers: If thy feet have only traced the ways of God,
and never stood in the way of sinners.

What has been the exercise of thine inward faculties, thine Apprehensions and
thine Appetite? If thy fancy has ever been employed in administering help to
thine understanding, and never afforded incentives to thy vile affections: If
thy memory have been taken up with the things which God has done, and Christ
has suffered for thee, and has afforded no place to Ribaldry and vanity: How
thou have ordered thine Anger and Concupiscence: What have been the object,
measure, and end, and circumstances, of thy love, hatred, desire, aversion,
delight, sadness, hope, despair, fear, boldness, anger, envy, jealousy, and
compassion.

How thou have managed thine understanding, and improved thy contemplative and
active principles. If thou have advanced in the discovery of eternal verities,
or herded with the beasts that perish: If thou have cherished the principles of
thy Synteresis, and the dictates and reflections of thy conscience, and never
rebelled against them: How thou have determined the freedom of thy Will, in thy
volition and intention, thine election and consent, fruition and duse, when
Good and Evil, Life and Death have been set before thee.

How thou have behaved thy self in Spirituals, in gifts and graves. If thou
have accepted that which has been offered, and improved what thou have
accepted, or hid it in a Napkin. In outward things, how thou have acquired, and
how thou have managed thine Estate: How thou have behaved thy self in thy
Relations public and private, in thy charge, and in thy duty. -- But the time
would fail me to reckon up a considerable part of the exercises and objects of
the ways of the hearts of Men: And now all these and many more, are but the
simple elements, and common heads of our account.

Consider then, O negligent and incogitant soul! if thou could reckon up the
ways of thy heart, in any one of these kinds; if thou could call to mind but
every idle word whereof thou must give an account, or thy motions upon every
thing thou have heard, and remember in any one of these elements, what thou
have done or else omitted. Then tell me how would thou find thy self
possessed, and how would thou be disposed to Judgment? Would thou deem it
needless or idle to call it betimes to thy remembrance? Would thou drive off
thy thoughts of it to the time of sickness, to the hour of death, and rudely
throw thy self upon it? -- But then try, and examine all these together,
contemplate a little upon the mixtures and combinations of them; these will
afford us many millions of millions of ways (far exceeding the varieties of
the corporeal nature, which proceed from the mixture of fewer elements) so many
as will utterly confound our thoughts to number. Who can reckon up the ways of
the hearts of the children of Men? Who can understand his errors?

And now, that he that has the World to uphold, the Planets and Stars to
guide, the course of nature to maintain, should keep a Register of our
impertinencies, and bring to Judgment all the ways of Men; (the traces of a
Ship in the Sea, of a Serpent upon a Rock) who has believed our report? we are
apt to think it cannot be. Surely he sees not these things: Tush he cares not
for them. This is indeed the last resort of the treacherous hearts of men, the
grand imposture which resolves into a species of Atheism and Infidelity. O but
then, if I shall use the language of the Scriptures, I must call thee fool and
beast, to doubt of that which is plain and evident, to disbelieve that which
may be known. This Article concerning the Judgment to come, is not a problem of
Philosophy to be disputed this way and that way with equal probability; neither
is it only an Article of faith, but it is a principle of natural Theology, the
Scripture speaks of it under terms of greater evidence St. Paul reasoned with
Felix, he disputed with the Philosophers concerning it, he speaks of the terror
of Judgment under terms of certainty, and of a kind of Demonstrative evidence;
Knowing the terror of the Law, etc. and hear in the Text, it is not said,
Think, or believe; But know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment.

VI. He is a fool that has said in his heart there is no God, and he that
thinks he has no understanding may well be compared to the beasts that perish
and so sure as there is a God, and that man has an understanding soul, so
surely it may be known, That for all these things, etc. For if there be a God,
he must be infinitely just; and if so, he must render to every one according to
their actions; and if not here, then hereafter; and if so, he must bring them
to Judgment. But he does it not here: The ways of Providence seem to be
promiscuous, there is a wicked man to whom it happens according to the way of
the righteous, and a righteous man Eccles 8. 14.
to whom it happens according to the way of the wicked. Dives receives
pleasure, Lazarus pain; therefore so sure as there is a God, there will be a
Judgment.

Again, If man have an understanding soul, he must have freedom in his actions;
and if so, he deserves either good or evil; and if there be deserts, there must
be rewards; and if there be rewards, there must be a Judgment. So then, so sure
as thou art an understanding creature, so sure there is a Judgment to come.

Once more, Reward is answerable to desert; and desert is only in what is free;
and what is free in man is the ways of his heart: wherefore they are to be
brought to Judgment, and if any, then all: for no reason can be fancied, why
some should be brought to Judgment, and others not. Wherefore, if it be sure
that God is in Heaven, and that Man has an understanding soul, then it is also
sure that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment, that God shall
bring to judgment every secret thing.

And now how sure and evident are these things? more sure and more plain, if we
will attend, than any other truths in the world; for there is not any known
truth which does not evict the truth of these things. We know a truth, because
we plainly and evidently understand the composition or division of the notions
in a Proposition, or the Deduction of a Proposition from some others; therefore
if we know any truth, we presuppose that we have souls which understand the
notions of things, and if souls which understand these notions, then to be sure
they are not bodies, (no combination of fire and air, and earth, and water, no
disposirion of insensible atoms can cause the subject to apprehend and judge,
to reason and discourse) and if they be no bodies, then they are not subject to
corruption: It is evident therefore that our souls are understanding and also
immortal, deserving and capable of future Judgment.

And as evident it is also that there is a sovereign Power, a God that governs
and will Judge the Earth.

This is not a Rhetorical undertaking, but a just and measured truth; there is
not anything in the world from whence these two may not be plainly and
evidently evicted, viz. a Godhead from the Creature, and thine own Immortality
from the discovery of a Godhead. The world which thou see, had it a
beginning, or had it not? if it had a beginning, he is thy God that made it; if
it had no beginning, then there are past as many myriads of years as minutes of
time, which is infinitely more absurd to grant, than to say, thou have as many
hands as fingers, as many wholes as parts.

If then at any time we find our selves to doubt of these things, it is not
because we are the beaux esprits, or forts esprits; our doubting proceeds from
dullness, and the want of that strong reason to which we do pretend, the things
are certain in themselves and evident. He is not far from any one of us, in
whom we live, and move, and have our being; and the Light of nature discovered
our Immortality not only to Philosophers, but even to the Heathen Poets, to him
that fung to us, that, We are also his offspring.

So that now thy pretenses are all taken off, and every imposture of the heart
discovered.

Return then once again into thy Applic. general.
bosom, and take account of thy apprehensions; The day of the Lord is coming
and stealing upon thee as a thief in the night, the day of Judgment, the great
and terrible day. A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of a whirlwind and
a tempest, a day of anguish and tribulation: Where will thou hide thy self? O
that is impossible, Where shall we go then from his presence? shall we call to
the Mountains to fall upon us? How will thou appear? O that is intolerable, for
our God is a consuming fire. What will thou do when the day of Judgment comes,
and this may be the hour, this minute thou may be smitten and hurried hence
to Judgment? Thousands have fallen besides us, and ten thousands at our right
hand, and why may not we be next?

The time of our particular Judgment cannot be far away, and why may we not
reasonably apprehend the approach of the General Judgment, either of this
World, or at leastwise of this sinful Nation?

Our Lord Christ indeed tells us, that of the day and hour of the final
Judgment, Knows no man. Yet he has given us the signs of his coming: The
Apostles have left us Characters of the last days, the Prophets have declared
the manner and apparatus of the coming of the Lord to Judgment.

We read that when the Disciples admired the stones and the buildings of
Herod's Temple at Jerusalem; Christ told them, That the day was coming when
there should not be left one stone upon another: upon this the Disciples ask
him (privately) three Questions. 1. When shall these things be? 2. What shall
be the sign of thy second coming? And 3. of the end of the World?

As for the precise moment of these things, he denies to tell it them; (Nay, he
professes, that as he was the Son of Man he did not know it.) But for the other
two he condescends to their curiosity, he tells them the signs of his coming,
and of the end of the World, and that they shall be such as these;

You shall hear, says he, (Matthew 24.) of Wars and rumors of Wars, Nation
rising against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. There shall be Traitors and
false Prophets, Saying, Lo! here is Christ, Behold! (a new Messiah) in the
Wilderness: Lo! there is Christ, Behold! he is (at a Conventicle) in the secret
Chambers: He tells us, that iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall
wax cold, that he shall hardly find faith on the earth, as it was in the days
of Noe, they ate, they drank, till the flood came and swept them all away; so
shall the coming of the Son of Man be.

He tells us ( Luke 21.) there shall be Famines and Earthquakes, Pestilence,
and fearful sights, great signs from Heaven; in the Earth distress of Nations,
great perplexities, the Sea and Waves roaring; Men's hearts sailing them for
fear, looking after those things that are coming upon the Earth.

Concerning the last days, St. Paul tells us, that there shall be perilous
times; that on one hand there shall be a sort of men, that shall be lovers of
themselves, Covetous, Proud, Boasters, Ranters, and Blasphemers.

On the other hand there shall be a Race of heady, high minded Traitors, having
a form of godliness, creeping into houses, leading captive silly women. They
shall despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities; they shall be Separatists
from the Church, and false pretenders to the Spirit. These, says St. Jude, are
they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit,

St. Peter tells us, that in the last times there should be a loose, profane,
a bold Atheistical Gigantick race of scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
saying, Where is this God of Judgment? let him make speed and hasten his work,
that we may see it. Where is the promise his of coming? since the fathers fell
asleep all things continue as they were before.

And for the manner and Apparatus of his coming, Our God shall come (says the
Psalmist) and shall not keep silence, there shall go before him a devouring
fire, and a mighty Tempest shall be stirred up round about him.

Behold! the Lord will come with fire (says the Prophet) and with his Chariots
Esai. 66. 15.
like a Whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames
of fire. The streams of Zion shall be turned into Pitch, and the dust thereof
into Brimstone; the Earth thereof shall be burning Pitch, the smoke thereof
shall ascend day and night, and shall not be quenched, [compare Revel. 6. with
Esai. 34.]

The Kings of the Earth shall tremble, the Captains and the mighty shall be
horribly asraid, the great men and the rich men shall hide themselves, all the
bondmen and all the freemen shall fly to the Rocks of the Mountains. And soon
after all this, The Heavens shall be rivel'd as a scrowl, the Earth and the
Elements shall melt away; for God shall arise to judge terribly the Earth.

Have not all these things come upon us, the men of this Generation? Is it
weakness, is it a vain and superstitious scrupulosity to call these things to
our remembrance? Have we no reason at all to apprehend the approach of a
General Judgment, either upon the World, or upon our sinful Nation?

Do we not now envy those despised souls which have made their accounts ready?
We thought it madness to see them pine away with poenitential exercises, and
macerate themselves with mourning. We thought it folly which they called
Conscience, for which they denied themselves the pleasures and enjoyments of
the World We fools counted their life madness, and their latter end to be
without honor. But the time is coming when they shall be comforted, and we
shall be tormented. Because he has called and we have refused, he has
stretched out his hand, and we have not regarded, He will laugh at our
calamity, and mock when our fear comes. When our destruction comes as a
Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon us.

May we not therefore give up our selves to the torments of our hearts, and
surrender up our souls unto Despair? so Israel said, there is no hope, we will
follow every one the devices of his heart: after 20, 30 or 40 years continuance
in our courses, it is in vain to think of turning from them. Our arrears are so
far gone, that there is no hope to discharge them; and why should we trouble
our selves with the thoughts of our Account? Nay, that which must come, let it
come, and what is a few days respite to Eternity? Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Let us go forth as at other times, and shake our selves
and scatter these troublesome apprehensions of future Judgment. What if we
should drink a little to drive away Melancholy?

Yes! and fall perhaps, and spew, and rise no more.

Nay, but I beseech you, stay a little, and consider, consider at least in this
your day the things which belong to your peace: It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God; Who among us can dwell with a devouring fire?
Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Such careless and desperate resolutions are the advantages which the Devil
aims at, that he may sear our Consciences, and seal us up in a final
obduration. But there is another kind of advantage, which God and our Lord
Christ and the Holy Spirit, and the Gospel, and the Ministers aim at, That
advantage, which I told you of in the beginning of my Discourse. That knowing
the terror of the Lord they may persuade men.

And now what is it that they would persuade us? that we will be contented to
part with the tormenting fears of Judgment, that we will condescend not to be
miserable to all Eternity: That we will accept of deliverance from the wrath to
come, that we will not neglect so great salvation, nor trample on the blood of
the everlasting Covenant.

Behold! God calls upon us, Turn you, turn you at my reproof, why will you dye,
O House of Israel? As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of
sinners. Our Lord Christ calls upon us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you In the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles,
he stood and cried, Saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
The Spirit says come, and whoever will, let him come, and take of the water of
life freely The Gospel assures us, That God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.

Behold! I set before you this day life and death, blessing and cursing, and as
an unworthy Ambassador in Christ's stead, I pray you be reconciled to God,
take his yoke upon you, his yoke is easy, and his burden light; embrace now
the tender of the Gospel, only repent and believe in the Lord Jesus, accept him
for your Savior and your Lord. Your Prophet to instruct you, your King to
govern you, your Priest to save you, and you shall be saved. Saved from the
fears and horrors of a Guilty Conscience condemned by, its own witness. Saved
from the wrath of God and of the Lamb. You shall meet the Lord with Confidence.
We shall be able to stand with boldness in the Judgment, to lift up our heads
with joy, because our redemption draws near.

This is the way of save our own souls from perishing, which is the General
design of all our Preaching. And this is the way to appease the wrath which is
gone out against us; and to preserve our Nation from destruction, which is the
particular and more immediate end of our present Humiliation, whereof I am yet
to speak.

THe hand indeed of the Lord has been heavy upon us, Applic. particular.
his wrath has been kindled, it has waxed hot against the Sheep of his
pasture, and he has plagued our Nation very sore; His Judgments have been
multiplied, his strokes have been redoubled; and for all this his anger (...)
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Wars and Pestilences, and those other forerunners of Christ's coming to
Judgment have been seen and felt amongst us, and now when these have not been
able to prevail,

To awaken a drowsy people, to rowse up a Lethargic Nation, to ferment a
people settled upon their Lees: God has made a new thing in the midst of us, he
has wrought a work in our days, which makes the ears of all that hear it to
tingle. A work not to be paralleled perhaps in all the circumstances since the
Creation of the World.

How has the Lord covered the Daughter of our Zion with a cloud in his anger,
and has cast down from Heaven to Earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not
his footstool in the Day of his Anger? he has swallowed up the habitations of
his people, he has taken away his Tabernacles, and destroyed his places of
Assemblies, the Ramparts and the Walls lament and languish, ber Gates are sunk
to the ground, her Bars are destroyed.

Who can express the terror of this fatal Judgment, the unexpected eruption,
the sudden increase, the irresistible force, the remorsless rage, the
insatiable voracity of this fiery Judgment? the present sufferings, the lasting
miseries of private persons are inexpressible; the public damage, the
dangerous consequences (it may be) unconceivable.

What thing shall I liken to thee O Daughter of my People? Whereunto shall I
compare the day of thy Visitation? To the destruction of Jerusalem? to the
great and terrible day of Judgment?

O the terrors and affrightments, the shriekes and lamentations, the agonies,
the confusions of that Day! They that were on the house top, durst not stay to
take any thing out of their houses; nor he that was in the field return back to
take his Clothes; they that were in the City betook themselves to the Fields
and Mountains, where they beheld their flaming habitations, where they trembled
to behold the abomination of desolation raging in the holy places.

How were the wise men amazed, and the strong men terrified? despair seized
them, counsel and strength fled away from them, there was no help in them, they
presently gave all for lost; they stood affrighted at a distance gazing at the
dreadful spectacle: in vain they thought it to contend, it looked so like the
coming of the Son of Man.

The breath of the Lord kindled the fire, he rode upon Cherub, he came flying
upon the wings of the wind. He made the winds his Messengers, and the flames of
fire his Ministers: He brought the Winds out of his Treasure, and (to point the
flame directly upon the bulk and body of the City) through his power he brought
in the South-East wind: as a thief in the night, as pains upon a woman in
travel, as the lightning that comes from the East and passes to the West; so
came this flaming Judgment; and so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. I
cannot endure to dilate upon this Argument; Sorrow and anguish are in the
consideration of it: Animus meminisse borret luctuque refugit. Great is the
Judgment, and there is reason for us to fear that it may be portending and
symptomatical.

YEt who can tell, but God may have mercy upon us, but he may yet save us from
destruction? though our breach be great as the Sea, yet is not in it self
irreparable; though our wounds be deep and gaping, they are not desperate or
uncurable; hitherto we may say with the Apostle, We are chastned, but not
killed; afflicted, but not in despair.

The signs and symptoms of an approaching final Judgment are not so decretory
and peremptory that we should despair. God's signal Judgments have hitherto
been accompanied with signs of mercies, and this is a plain case, that he is
not fond of our destruction, and that he had rather that we should live: He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. He stands pausing
and hesitating, as he did once before, O Ephraim, how shall I give thee up, O
Ephraim? O England, How shall I give thee up, O England?

What mean else those Alternations and those mixtures, and combinations of
wonderful Judgments, and of wonderful deliverances and mercies which our ears
have heard, and our eyes have seen?

We have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have told us what wonderful
deliverances he wrought in their time of old.

We have seen vicissitudes great and prodigious, mixtures and combinations,
mavelous in our eyes, horrible destructions and wonderful restitutions,
succeeding one another, raging Plagues at home, and signal Victories abroad.

God has filled us with bitterness, and covered us with ashes: But it is his
mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. If the arm of
his Justice and Severity has been made bare, that it might be seen of all the
people, He has not left his mercy without witness. If his Judgment has been
great and terrible, in that which is consumed, his Mercy is wonderful and
miraculous in that which is preserved. Plainly! except the Lord had left us a
Remnant, (and visibly interposed to do it,) we should not have had this place
wherein to humble our selves before him. We should have been as Sodom, and we
should have been like unto Gomorrah.

It was he that in the midst of Judgment remembered mercy; when the flaming
vengeance was in its height, when in the opinion of all men it had arrived at
the state of irresistibility, and when every man's heart failed him, when the
hopes of all men were sunk into despair; He checked the domineering vengeance,
he put up the flaming Sword, he controlled the streaming waves of fire, and
said thus far shall ye come and no further.

In a wondeful manner he preserved the Goods and Persons of the poor
Inhabitants of the City.

He restreined the rage of our enemies, that cried concerning our Jerusalem,
Down with it, Down with it, Aha! so would we have it.

He suffered not a foreign Enemy to land, nor our domestic foes to make a head
in our confusions.

He was a wall of fire about the the persons of our Gracious Sovereign and his
Royal Highness, and of those valiant Noble Persons which adventured boldly and
strenuously, and indefatigably labored the public preservation.

He has given signal Preservations and Victories to our Fleets abroad, he has
restored our Highborn and Noble Generals, and our Fleet in health and safety.

He has given us plenty of all things necessary for the life of man.

In one great word, to sum up an aggregation of great and various mercies, he
has upheld our Religion and our Government in peace; and for an earnest of his
further preservation, he has given us this seasonable opportunity with health
and safety in this place to attend the Public Service, to advise and assist
in this arduous Juncture of affairs

Arduous and difficult indeed it is, to restore our City and defend our
Country, to restore the Houses of God, and Public Buildings, to re-edifie ten
Thousand private habitations; to sustein the poor and needy, to preserve the
rights, and properties of men; to find such a temper of Justice and equity,
that there be no decay, no just complaining in our Streets. To uphold the
Traffic of the Nation, and to keep it in order and security, free from private
Robberies and public Insurrections; and therefore in order to all those ends,
to uphold our religion in the zealous and effectual exercise, in the sincerity
and uniformity thereof, to preserve it from encroachments and undermining
Tolerations, ruinous to Religion, destructive to the Government of the Nation.
And all this while to make provision against our dangerous and cruel enemies,
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, the French, Dutch, and the Dane, who have conspired
to our destruction.

These things are arduous, but not insuperable; difficult, but not to be
despaired of.

Concerning Jerusalem burned and laid wast by the Assyrians, Daniel foretold,
that the streets and the walls thereof should be rebuilded even in troubleous
times; and when the time came that they were reedified, we read in Nehemiah,
that the laborers in one hand held the trowel, and the other held a weapon;
one half of the people labored in the work, and the other half held the Spears
and the Shields, the Bows and the Habergeons, because of their cruel enemies on
every side.

If God shall be pleased to give us a spirit of Understanding, and teach our
Senators Wisdom; If he shall pour out a public spirit upon our Councils, a
spirit of tenderness and compassion, of Justice and Equity, Temperance and
Frugality, Fortitude and Magnanimity; If all Orders and Degrees amongst us,
Civil, and Military, and Ecclesiastical shall take to themselves the spirits of
Christians and of men.

If our Counsels and endeavors shall be answerable to the care and benignity,
to the servour and strenuous industry of our gracious Sovereign, and to the
alacrity and magnanimity of our courageous and generous Countrymen; then
(speaking humanely, and abstracting from our Deservings) we need not greatly
fear, but we may yet subdue the pride and insolence of our barbarous Enemies;
we may yet behold our City rising out of its ashes in greater splendor than we
have seen it heretofore.

Wherefore arise, and gird your selves O ye Princes, ye Nobles, ye Rulers of
our Israel! Consult, Consider, and give sentence. Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
let us arise and labor; let us up and be doing, be strong and of good courage,
and the good hand of our God shall be upon you; he shall give you the honor to
be the defenders of your Country, he shall make you repairers of the breaches,
restorers of our City to dwell in.

Yet I cannot, I may not forbear to put you in remembrance of this one thing;
Except the Lord build the City, their labor is but lost that build it. It is
not our wisdom or industry, much less our confidence, that will do it, unless
God be for us; neither will God be for us, unless we turn from the evil of our
ways: except we repent, we have reason to fear, that what we have seen
hitherto, will be no more but the beginning of our sorrows. The Prophet Esaias
tells us, That the Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it lighted on Israel; and
all the people shall know that say in the pride and stoutness of their hearts,
the Bricks are fallen, but we will build with hewn Stones; the Sycamores are
down, but we will change them into Cedars. Therefore the Lord will set up their
adversaries, and join their Enemies together, the Syrians before, and the
Philistims behind, and they shall devour Israel with open mouth; Because this
people turns not to him that smites them.

Wherefore turn you, turn you every one from the evil of his ways. Let us
search our hearts, and try our ways, and turn to him that has smitten us. Turn
unto him with all our hearts, with fasting and with weeping, and mourning; be
has smitten us, and he will heal us, because his compassions fail not. Come
and let us reason together, says God, though your sins were as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow.

There is yet a way open to take away the terror of our Particular Judgment,
and to prevent a final Judgment from falling upon the Nation. We are yet in the
Land of hope, and space is given for Repentance, the door of mercy is not yet
shut upon us, nor the ears of our Judge sealed against us.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
wonders that he has done for the children of men! that has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our Iniquities; that has not cut
us off in the midst of our sins, nor in the height of our impenitencies
snatched us away to Judgment; that has not dealt with us as with the Apostate
Angels, and with Thousands of our Brethren, who were better and more righteous
than we.

Let us once more then return into our selves. Let us consider our condition,
let us veiw over and balance the grounds of our hopes, and the reasons of our
fears: Let us take an exact account of our whole estate and interest in
reference to all our concernments, National and Personal, Temporal and Eternal.
Let us deliberate and advise what is to be done, and what is to be avoided.

Did I say deliberate? Whether we shall save our souls from utter darkness and
everlasting burnings? Whether we shall save the Nation from final ruin and
desolation? -- Nay rather,

Let us break off our sins by repentance, and our Iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor.

Let us make our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when we
fail, we may be received into everlasting habitations.

Let us lend unto the Lord, that we may have treasure in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal.

Let us fast the fast that the Lord has chosen; Loose the bands of wickedness,
feed the hungry, cloth the naked; he that has two Coats, let him give to him
that has none; and he that has meat let him do likewise.

Such an occasion scarce happens in many hundreds of years; and for motives to
charity, they are all comprised in that great argument of the Judgment to come.

When the Son of Man shall come to Judgment, and shall sit upon the Throne of
his Glory: When all Nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall set the
Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left: This shall be the mark of
their discrimination,

He shall say to those on his right hand, I was hungry, and ye fed me; thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; naked, and ye clothed me; sick and in prison, and ye
visited me; Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you.

And he shall say unto them on the left hand, I was hungry, and ye fed me not;
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Wherefore go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

The way is short and compendious to save all our interests. What does the Lord
require of us but to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly before the Lord
our God? Let us be merciful therefore as our heavenly Father is merciful, and
let us humble our selves under the Almighty hand of God, as we pretend to do
this day. Let us betake our selves aforehand to our Judge, and pour out our
complaints before him. Let us confess our wickedness, and be sorry for our
sins. Let us lay hold on the feet of our Blessed Redeemer, and give him no rest
till he has sealed our pardon. Let us bathe with our tears the wounds that we
have made. Let us cry mightily to the Throne of Grace. Let us wrestle and
strive with our Redeemer, and not let him go until he bless us: Until he open
our eyes to see the dangers we are in, and through his mercy show us a way to
escape them. Till he quicken us up to resolutions of amendment, and carry us
strongly through these resolutions. Until he heal our backslidings, and make up
our breaches: Until he save our souls from death, and our Nation from
destruction.

To work our selves to these Resolutions, and to fix us in them, to make them
abide upon us all our days, let us remember what has been spoken, and let us
frequently meditate upon that Sarcastical Concession of the Text,

Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth; walk in the ways of thy heart, and the sight of thy eyes; But know,
that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

FINIS.
A SERMON, CONCERNING The Strangeness, Frequency, and Desperate Consequence OF
Impenitency: Preached at WHITE - HALL, April 1. 1666. (Soon after the great
Plague)

BY SETH then Lord Bishop of EXON.

LONDON: Printed by E. T. and R. H. for James Collins, at the Kings-Arms within
Ludgate, near St. Paul's, 1672.

A SERMON, Containing The Strangeness, Frequency, and Desperate Consequence OF
IMPENITENCY.
Revel. 9. 20. And the rest of the men, which were not killed by the plagues,
yet repented not of the works of their hands.
ALthough I am not without apprehension, that the frequencie of penitential
discourses, and the seeming easiness of repentance may indispose some persons
for such an attention as is necessary both to speaker and hearers, for a due
performance of the Offices, which we are about; yet I shall not spend time in
making Apologies for the Argument, which I have chosen.

Among all the aggravations of our sins, there is none more heinous, than the
frequent hearing of our duty: Among all the errors of our lives, there is none
more fatal, than that concerning the easiness of the duty of Repentance.

To discover the fallacy, and to prevent the dangerous consequences of this
imagination, I have chosen at this time to treat of this instructive instance
of the Text.

If Repentance were so easy as is imagined, why did not these men repent, that
are mentioned in the words, which I have read?

They had not only the Dictates of Nature, and the advantage of the Scriptures
to move them to it; they had the Ministry of Angels to persuade them; they had
Thunders and Trumpets to awaken them, and rouse them up: they had signs and
wonders in the heaven above, and in the earth below: they had providential
instances of prodigious judgments, and wonderful mercies.

They were spectators of grievous Plagues brought upon their neighbors; they
were Monuments of singular mercies and deliverances a long time continued to
themselves.

When thousands fell beside them, they were a remnant kept alive; when others
were destroyed, they were preserved; for experiment, to try whether yet they
would repent.

I say the persons in the Text were (...), the rest of the men that were not
killed by those Plagues: And the rest of the men that were not killed, yet
repented not of the works of their hands.

My endeavors at this time will be, by showing the danger and fatal
consequences of impenitence, to move my self and others to repent. And to
determine precisely who these persons were, of what Nation, of what Church, of
what condition, in what time they lived, what were the Plagues brought upon
them, when and how they were executed, and such other particulars, I am no way
obliged by the design which I have propounded.

About these particulars Expositors extremely differ; in this they all agree,
that they had the advantage of the Scriptures to bring them to repentance.

Whatever is the exact, either liberal, or mystical meaning of this vision of
the seven Angels, and the seven Trumpets; and of that losty tragical Scheme,
wherein it is represented, thus much is evident, that notwithstanding all Gods
dealings with men to bring them to repentance, they will sometimes continue in
impenitence, and that this is an horrible provocation.

The words which I have chosen contain the sad result of the labors of six
Angels, the warning of six Trumpets, the operation of six Plagues, and six
Deliverances.

And they are the common node, or term, connecting the Antecedent parts of the
vision (beginning at the 8th. Chapter) with the Catastrophe thereof (delivered
in the 10th.)

They are to be considered two ways.

1 Absolutely, where we have I Matter, containing the character of their
persons described by 1 Gods dealing with them: not killed; remnant of others
killed; killed by grievous plagues. 2 Their dealings with God; repented not;
not of the works of their hands; worship of Devils, Idols, (first Table:)
Sorceries, Murders, Fornications, Thefts, (second Table.)

2 Form and manner: in the form of an Epiphonema, expressed by the particle,
yet, repetible upon every part of their character, (not killed, yet repented
not; yet repented not of the works of their hands.) Yet is vox Admirantis,
Accingentis advindictam;

It first implies the strangeness of the case, and secondly, the desperateness
of the provocation: for the words are to be considered not only absolutely; but
also


2 Relatively; as they look backward and forward; and are the connection of the
Antecedent parts of the Vision with the Catastrophe. Six Angels sounded six
Trumpets, and executed six Judgments; yet they repented not -- They repented
not, and the seventh Angel sounded and swore, that time (ie. Time of
repentance, and respite of vengeance should be no longer.
The words thus resolved would afford many considerable observations; I shall
take up three that lie uppermost.

1. From the form and manner of the words (as they are an Epiphonema expressing
a kind of wonder, and admiration) I shall observe the strangeness of the
impenitency, of such men as these, considered in common reason.

2. From the matter of them, I shall observe the frequencie of such
impenitencie in common experience.

3. From the relative consideration of the words (as they connect the
Catastrophe of the Vision with the Antecedent parts of it) I shall observe the
lamentable consequence of this impenitency: And

4. Conclude with a few words of Application.

I. First then to bring to our apprehension the strangeness of impenitencie of
such men as these (considered in Thesi, and in Theory) it will be needful only
to reflect upon the causes of admiration, and to lay before you some of their
advantages, and Motives to Repentance.

Things wonderful in their nature are those, whose causes are unsearchable;
things strange and admirable to common reason are such as happen contrary to
the Laws of Nature, and of Reason.

From the former cause the motion of the heavens is wonderful; from the latter
it was prodigious and admirable, that the sun stood still in Gibeon, and the
moon in the valley of Ajalon.

That God should take advantage upon the lapsed Angels, that upon their offense
he should bind them up in chains, that he should exclude them from the benefit
of Repentance, and reserve them to the Judgment of the Great Day.

That he should allow this privilege to lapsed men; that he should reveal
himself to them; that he should make them understand their duty, and their
interest; that he should set before them good and evil, happiness and misery,
the desire and the detestation of humane nature; that he should by all means
court and woo them to that which all men naturally desire; and discourage, and
divert them from that which they naturally abhor: That after all this he
should not prevail in such a case as this; that they should scornfully reject
the end of all their hopes; that they should studiously pursue the object of
all their fears; This is that rational wonder that I am now to lay before you.

To manifest this wonder a little more explicitly, let us consider the
advantages of Nature, and the Motives from Scripture to bring men to repentance.

The grounds and fundamental elements of the Doctrine of Repentance are these:
The Being and Attributes of God; The immortality of the Souls of men; The
principles of Synteresis; The terrors of natural Conscience; The forecasts of
vengeance; The apprehension and desire of an Atonement: And all these are
manifest from the Dictates and discoveries of the Light of Nature.

The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work: They speak it loud, they spread it largely, they proclaim it constantly,
Their Psalm. 19
sound is gone out into all the world -- there is no speech, or language, but
their voice is heard among them.

The invisible things of God Romans 1. 20.
from the creation of the world are clearly seen; -- even his eternal power and
Godhead.

Concerning his providence in governing the world, St. Paul tells the men of
Lyftra, and the Priest of Jupiter, that he did not Act. 14. 17.
leave himself without witness amongst the Heathen.

The whole earth is full of his righteousness, and all the people see his
glory: So that a man shall Psalm. 97. 6.
say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God,
that judges the earth.

He is not far from any one of us; Act. 17. 28.
in whom we live and move, and have our being.

He is the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12. 9.
and we are his offspring. Surely Act. 17. 28.
there is a spirit within a man, and that spirit immortal, deriving Job 32. 8.
from Him, who only has immortality. 1 Timothy 6. 16.


And these things have asserted themselves with so great evidence, that they
have been generally acknowledged by all sorts of heathen Authors, Philosophers,
Historians, Orators and Poets.

Moreover, they show the Lam Romans 2. 15.
(of Synteresis) written in their hearts; they have consciences accusing, or
excusing; they find themselves concluded under sin, and are perplexed and
tormented under the apprehensions of an offended God.

For Conscience condemned by its own witness is very timorous, and always
fore-casteth grievous things.

The starting of Alexander, when he had killed his friend; and of Nero, when he
had destroyed his mother: The confusions Tacit.
of Tiberius, when he wrote from Capreae to the Senate concerning the death of
Sejanus: The fore tastes of an avenging Nemesis described by heathen Orators,
and Historians: The passions ascribed to Medea, and Hercules, and Orestes, etc.
by the Poets: The Rites and Sacrifices of all the Pagan world: The prodigious
ways of expiations devised to make their atonement with their imaginary
Deities offended: They were all of them the products of natural Conscience,
exerting it self in such a disquisition, as is delivered by the Prophet;
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, or bow my self before the high God?
shall I come fore him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? will the
Lord be pleased with thousands Mic. 6. 6.
of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression? the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

All these, and many more are the Indications of Nature; the incitements and
provocations of natural Conscience to bring men to repentance.

But beside these common Motives, the persons of the Text (whether they were
the Grot. Dr. Ham.
Jews, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem at the time of the destruction of it by
Titus and Vespasian, or any that called themselves Christians) they had a
clearer, and more glorious light to guide them; they had far more efficacious,
and noble Motives to (...) and urge them to repentance, the Light and Motives
of the Holy Scriptures.

There it is, that the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and Severity of God are
gloriously displayed; the immortal Nature, and sinful condition of the souls of
men; the rewards and punishments of this life, and of the world to come are
clearly discovered.

The elements of the Doctrine of Repentance, the Motives to it are there
explained and applied, mixed and combined a 1000 several ways.

The Scriptures of the Old and the New Testament, are nothing else but a
Systeme of various powerful Methods to bring men to repentance.

This is the general aim, and common scope of all the Doctrines, the Histories,
the Logic, and Rhetoric of the Book of God.

This was Noah's Text upon 1 Pet. 3. 20.
which he preached to the, old world 120 years: Upon this errand God sent all
the Prophets, rising early, and sending them; they said, Turn again now every
Jer. 7. 25.
one from his evil way.

This was the message of him that was the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Repent, for the Matthew. 3. 2.
kingdom of God is at hand. Our Lord Christ, and his seventy Disciples, and his
twelve Apostles, Marc. 6. 12.
they all with one voice infisted upon this Theme; and when the Holy Ghost
himself descended, he likewise drove at this conclusion; Repent therefore, Act.
3. 19.
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

The time would fail me, if I fhould attempt in any measure to lay before you
the declarations, promises, threatenings, exhortations, dehortations,
reasonings, expostulations, instances of mercies, and of judgments delivered
in the Scriptures to bring men to repentance.

To this end God has declared himself, slow to anger, gracious Psalm. 145. 8.
and merciful; He has said, that he would have no man perish; 2 Pet. 3. 9.
He has sworn that he does not desire the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
but had rather that he should turn and live.

He considers our frame, and his Psalm. 103. 14.
ways are equal: He is ready to pardon; to pardon iniquity, transgression Ezekiel.
33. 17.
and sin; though they are as scarlet, to make them white as Isai. 1. 18.
snow; if they be a cloud, to scatter Isai. 44. 22.
them like a cloud. Wherefore let the wicked forsake his ways, Isai. 55. 7.
and the unrighteous his imaginations, and return unto the Lord.

On the other side, to break the hardness of the hearts of men, to rouse them
up from their impenitency, he declares his justice, and asserts his propriety
in vengeance; Vengeance is mine, Romans 12. 19.
and I will repay it. He protests, that he will by no means acquit Nah. 1. 3.
the guilty; that he is of purer Hab. 1. 13.
eyes, than to behold iniquity; that Psalm. 68. 21.
he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as
goes on still in his wickedness.

If a man will not turn, he Psalm. 7. 10.
will whet his sword, and bend his bow.

If a Nation will not repent, then smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy
foot, and say, alas! for Ezekiel. 6. 11.
it shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.

Now the general inference of all these is still the same; this is still the
Logic of the Scriptures: Our God shall come, Psalm. 50. 3.
and shall not keep silence -- wherefore Psalm. 50. 22.
consider this ye that forget God. We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ -- Knowing Romans 14. 10.
therefore the terror of the 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Lord we persuade.

To this end we find the Lord sometimes disputing logically to convince, and
sometimes with divine and noble Oratory endeavoring to persuade; sometimes by
signal instances of pardoning mercies, and of avenging judgments to induce men
to repentance.

He speaks to their reason, to their affections, to their very senses, (...).

Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, if ye be willing, and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; if ye rebel, Isai. 1. 18.
ye shall be devoured. Are not Ezekiel. 18. 39.
my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? Again,

He expostulates with them sometimes upon the principles of ingenuity: Thus
says the Lord, Jer. 2. 5.
What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone away from me?
O my people, what have I done unto thee? wherein have I wearyed thee? Testify
against Mic. 6. 3.
me, O Israel; what does the Lord thy God require of thee?

Sometimes he expostulates upon the point of interest; How Jer. 4. 14.
long shall vain thoughts lodge in your hearts? How long ye simple Prove. 1. 22.
ones will ye love simplicity? what will ye do in the end Jer. 5. 31.
thereof?

Again, he sets before us a multitude of glorious instances to show that never
any penitent was rejected, however heinous, however numerous were their sins.
The prodigal devoured his substance with harlots: Mary Magdalen had seven
Devils: Peter denied his Master with horrid oaths, and imprecations: Saul was
Act. 26. 11.
exceedingly mad against him; yet upon their repentance were accepted.

He had delivered Israel seven times, and they forsook him; and he said, he
would deliver them no more; but they repented, Jud. 10. 10, etc.
and his soul was straightway grieved, and he delivered them.

Instead of many, consider that one instance of Manasses, the evil son of good
King Hezekiah: He 2 Chronicles. 33.
set up altars for Baalim, and worshipped all the host of heaven: Altars in the
court of the temple; an idol in the very temple; he caused his sons to pass
through the fire; he observed times, used enchantments, dealt with familiar
spirits, and with wizards; made Judah, and Jerusalem to do worse than the
heathen. And the Lord spoke to him, and he would not hear. After all this, in
his afflictions he humbled himself, and then God was entreated, and heard his
supplication.

His ways are not as our ways: Isa. 55. 8.
He forgave Nineveh, and Jonah was displeased exceedingly; he taxes him with
easiness in relenting, he charges him as if he had an ancient known infirmity
of flexibility to his veracity, and the honor of his Prophets: Lord (says he)
was not this my saying? Jon. 4. 2.
and therefore I prevented it to flee to Tarshish; for I knew that thou art
merciful; -- therefore take, I beseech thee, my life from me.

His thoughts are not as our thoughts: when Nathan had told David a story of a
poor man, who had his ewe Lamb ravished from him, then David was exceeding
wroth, and he swore, As 2 Samuel 12.
the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing shall surely dye: But when
David, who had taken Bathsheba, and murdered Vriah, said, I have sinned;
Nathan said unto David, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

On the other side, we have instances of horrible judgments for Impenitency;
whereof I shall after take occasion to speak.

Now considering all these things, is it not strange, that men should not
repent? That no consideration of ingenuity, or of interest should move them to
it? That neither the Law written in their hearts, nor that which was delivered
by the mediation of Angels, nor the Gospel given us by the Son of God should
bring them to it? That neither reason, nor experience; neither mercies nor
judgments; neither the sweetness of a good conscience, nor the torments of a
bad; the beauties of virtue, nor the deformity of sin; the shortness of life,
nor length of eternity; the lightness of things present, nor the exceeding
weight of those which are to come? That neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Trumpets; nor things present, nor thing to come; nor height nor depth, nor any
other thing should be able to separate men from the love of sin?

Is it not strange? The Apostles, the Prophets were astonished at this; nay,
God himself seems to be affected with wonder: Hear, Oheavens, and give ear, O
Isai. 1. 2.
earth! Be astonished, O ye heavens, Jer. 2. 12.
and be horribly afraid; they have for saken me.

This is that wonder considered in it self according to common reason, the
object of our first observation, drawn from the form and manner of the words by
way of Epiphonema, expressed by the particle yet; yet they repented not.

II. The second Observation was taken from the matter of the words: However
such impenitency is very strange to common reason (considered in the Theory)
yet it is too frequent in practice, and in common experience: The rest of the
men repented not.

This is that grand contradiction, that fatal paradox of the life of man: His
very being consists in rationality; his acting is contrary to all the reason in
the world: Man only was created under the Law of Reason; man only maintains a
constant opposition to the law and reason of his creation.

He appointed the moon for certain Psalm. 104. 19.
seasons, and the sun knows his going down. The blustering winds, the raging
storms, the unruly Ocean; the Lion, the Tiger, and the Bear, these all pursue
the law of their creation, these all are obedient unto his word; charmed to it
by that Psalm. 148. 8.
powerful voice, whereby they were created.

Man only stops his ears, and refuses to hear the voice of this Almighty
charmer; charm he never so wisely, so loudly, or so variously.

The general ways and methods of his charming have been already mentioned; I am
now to lay before you the general success of those methods: The success

1. Of his word, and his messengers.

2. Of his works of. 1. Mercy, 2. Judgment, Single, Intermixed.

1. For the success (or rather the unsuccessfulness) of his word, for the
entertainment (or rather the barbarous usage) of his messengers; how often do
we find God, and his Prophets, Christ and his Apostles complaining and, as it
were, fretting themselves with indignation?

As for the word, sometimes they will not hear it. More than seven times Jeremy
complains almost in the very same words: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the Jer.
7. 21.
God of Israel, since the day that your fathers came forth of the land of Egypt
until this day, I have sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily,
rising early and sending them; yet they hearkened not to me, nor inclined their
ear.

Whereunto shall I liken this generation? Matthew. 11. 17.
I have piped --

Sometimes they hear it as a song: Lo thou art unto them as a Ezekiel. 33. 12.
very lovely song.

Sometimes they refuse it positively: They say to the Seers, see Jer. 44. 16.
not; and to the Prophets, prophefie not unto us. As for the word of the Lord,
which thou have spoken in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

They endeavor to suppress, and to destroy it. When Jehudi had read three or
four leaves in Jeremies roll, he cut it with a Jer. 36. 20.
penknife, and cast it into the fire, until all the roll was consumed in the
fire.

Instead of faith and obedience, it meets with infidelity, and atheistical
opposition, and contradiction: Who has believed our Esa. 53. 1.
report? says one; All the day Esa. 65. 2.
long have I stretched forth my hands to a gainsaying people, is the complaint
of another.

They say unto God, depart from Job 21. 14.
us; for we desire not the knowledge of his ways. Speak to them in the name of
Lord, they say, Who is the Lord, that I should Exodus 5. 4.
fear him? discourse to them of the Almighty, they say, What Job 21. 15.
is the Almighty, that we should serve him? What can the Almighty do? What
profit shall we have if we pray unto him?

Speak to them of God's searching Eye; Surely say they, God sees it not; Tush,
God cares not Ps. 10. 11, 13
for it: of his overruling Providence; nay, say they, but all things come
alike to all; there is one event to the just, and to the Eccl 9. 2, 3
unjust.

Tell them they must appear before the Judgment Seat of God, and of Christ;
they scoffingly reply, Where is the Promise of his coming? since the Fathers
fell asleep, all things continue 2 Pet 3. 4.
as they were before. Where Mal. 2. 17.
is the God of Judgment? let him Isa. 5. 29.
make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it. This is the general
entertainment of their message; and for the persons of the Messengers, they
devise devices Jer. 18. 18.
against them; they smite them with the smiting of the tongue; they threaten
them, they beat them sometime, they take away their Liberty, and sometime their
Lives; this was the portion of Jeremiah; the men of Anathoth sought his life,
saying, Prophesy not by the Name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hand.
Jer. 11. 21.
They charged him falsely, they smote him, they imprisoned him in the house of
Jonathan; they cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah; they let him down with
chords into the mire. Jer. (...). 13. 38. 6, 9.


What do I instance in one particular; since at once we read the general
entertainment of the Prophets, that were of old? That they had trial of cruel
mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover of bands and imprisonment; they were
stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they
wandered about in Hcb. 11. 37.
sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

Moreover they scourged and crucified the Lord of Glory; they put him to an
open shame. Neither were the disciples above their master, or the servants
above their Lord; after scourgings, and bands, and imprisonments, and many a
sad and barbarous usage, St. James was knocked on the head, S. Peter was
crucified, S. Paul was beheaded, and the rest were used accordingly.

Behold (says God) I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, Mat. 23. 33
and some of them ye shall scourge in your Synagogues, and some of them ye
shall kill and crucify.

If we diligently search the Scriptures, and histories of the Church, we shall
find this to have been generally the success of the Word of God, and of his
Messengers; instead of trembling, and penitence, and reformation, to be
enterteined with scorn, and contempt, and persecution.

2. But it may be the Works of God may have better success upon the hearts of
the children of men; his works of 1. Mercy, or of 2. Judgment. The Apostle
tells us, that God's patience and forbearance leads men unto repentance; Romans
2. 4.
And the Prophet, that when his judgments are abroad, Isa. 26 9.
the inhabitants of the World will learn righteousness.

Indeed a Logical man, reasoning upon Principles, will be apt so to conclude:
But alas! it is not so with men; alas! that so clear reasoning should be
contradicted by evident experience and observation!

Nay they despise the riches of God's mercy, and treasure up wrath against the
day of wrath. To. 2. 4, 5.


From the patience, and longanimity of God they make perverse, and Atheistical
conclusions; when thou saw a thief Ps. 50. 21.
thou consentedst unto him, and have been partaker with the adulterer; -- these
things have thou done and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest wickedly that I
am such an one as thy self.

Because sentence against an evil Eccl. 8. 11.
work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of men are
fully set in them to do evil.

Solomon tells us, that the prosperity Prove. 1. 36
of Fools shall destroy them; and there are few so circumspect and wise, as not
to stumble at this stone of stumbling. Neither Salomon's Wisdom, nor his
Father's Piety could preserve them upright amidst the snares of prosperity. The
danger as well as wickedness of this is intimated in Nathan's exprobration to
David: Thus says the Lord the God 2 Samuel 12.
of Israel; I anointed thee King over Israel; I delivered thee out of the hand
of Saul, I gave thee thy Masters house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom; I
gave thee the house of Israel, and of Judah, wherefore have thou killed Uriah,
and taken his wife to be thy wife?

This was a temptation, which the Israelites never could withstand,
notwithstanding all the Caveats given them by Moses: When the Lord shall bring
thee Deuteronomy. 6. 12
into the good land; and shall give thee cities and houses, which thou
buildedst not, Vineyards, and Olive trees which thou plantedst not; when thou
shall have eaten, and be full; Then beware lest thou forget the Lord thy God.

But Jeshurun waxed fat and Deu. 32. 15
kicked; as the Lord multiplied his mercies, so they multiplied their
transgressions: his prodigious and wonderful deliverances were answered with
prodigious and wonderful ingratitude; for they sinned yet the more and lightly
esteemed the God of their Salvation. Deu. 32. 1


But if the mercies of God will not prevail to draw men to repentance, surely
his judgments cannot fail to drive them to it; whether they are sent upon a
city, or upon a man only: Shall the Lion roar, and shall not the Amos 3. 6.
forest tremble? shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be
afraid?

Behold therefore and tremble, and be afraid all ye that look upon Repentance
as a slight and an easy duty; and that deferr it for that reason: It is not
every horror and shaking, that will bring a man to Repentance. And the
instances are many, wherein the judgments of God, instead of softning, or
breaking the hearts of men, have hardened them yet more in a course of
desperate impenitency.

Felix trembled, and said, Go thy way --.

When Belshazzar had plundered the house of God, and was making a debauch in
the bowls of the Temple, the finger wrote upon the wall MEAN. -- We read that
his countenance was changed, and an horrible trembling Dan. 5. 6.
seized upon him: The joints of his loins were loosed, his knees smote one
against another; But we do not read that he repented.

As plagues were multiplied, so Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he vowed he
would not let the people go.

When the King of Moab was in anguish, and in great distress, it was a warning
to repent; but he took his eldest son, and offered him for a sacrifice upon the
2 King. 3. 26.
wall.

When the Philistines made war upon Saul, and God was departed; when he was
sore afraid, 1 Samuel 28.
and his heart greatly trembled; who would not expect, that he should have
turned unto the Lord? But he betook him to the witch of Endor.

Of Ahaz it is said, that in the time of his afflictions he trespassed 2 Chronicles.
28. 22.
yet more (this is that King Ahaz.)

And we read, that when a great hail fell from heaven, Men Apoc. 16. 21.
blasphemed God because of the hail.

But if single mercies and judgments will not do, perhaps an intermixture of
them may prevail; and indeed for a rational and probable means to bring men to
repentance, the imagination and apprehension of man can go no higher than to
such a case, where signal and remarkable judgments are brought upon some; and
others are reserved, and set, as it were, upon a Scaffold, or a Theater, in
safety to behold the destruction, and plagues brought upon their Neighbors; --
Turbantibus aequora ventis
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
So Israel beheld the Egyptians drowned in the Sea; and Corah Numb. 16.
and his accomplices swallowed in the Land.

This is the case of those, whom God preserves from plagues, and famines, and
desolations, making them survivors and spectators of the destructions brought
upon the world. And this was the case of the persons in the Text; this one
would think should never sail.

When he slew them, then they, (i. e. the remnant) sought him, Psalm. 78. 38.
and turned them early, and sought after God. Nay! but even this has also too
often failed; for even these did but flatter him with their lips, and
dissemble. The Israelites, that were spectators of the drowned Egyptians,
within three days fell to their wonted murmurings. The Spectators of Corah
within one day returned to their rebellion. The Prophet Amos in the name of God
complains of those that had escaped famine, and pestilence, and sword: I have
overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom, Amos 4. 6.
and Gomorrha; and ye mere as a firebrand snatched out of the burning; yet
have ye not turned unto me, says the Lord. And this was the case of the
persons in the Text; they were a remnant of men, which were not killed by the
plagues brought upon others; yet they repented not.

Notwithstanding the wonder according to reason, we have seen the truth, and
observed the frequency of such men's impenitency in common experience; it
remains that we consider the consequence and issue of it, observable from the
Text, as it stands in relation to the Antecedent parts, and the Catastrophe of
this Vision: They repented not -- And the seventh Angel swear, that there
should be time no more (no more time for repentance, no longer reprieve of
vengeance.)

III. Such an obstinate impenitency is the great provocation of the wrath of
God; such a final impenitency is the certain forerunner of final ruin, and
destruction.

Though the Lord be patient, he is not of wood, or of stone; though he be slow
to anger, yet he can be angry; and who can stand before him, when he is angry?
Psalm. 76. 7.


It is true, that the Lord is strong, and patient, and our God Psalm. 7. 12.
is provoked every day; he is longsuffering, and abundant in forbearance;
though we do evil an Fccles. 8. 12.
hundred times, he prolongs our days.

He is not extreme to mark what is done amiss: He considers that Psalm. 130. 3.
we are but dust; and as a wind Psalm. 103. 14.
that passes away, and comes not again.

Many, and many a provocation he passes by; for, He does not Lam. 3.
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men.

Behold, he stands at the door and knocks; By his word, and by his works, and
by his spirit striving to reclaim the sons of men; that he may keep their life
from the pit, and their soul from perishing.

But if all this cannot prevail, what can reasonable men expect? or what would
they have him do?

His Spirit shall not always strive with men; his abused lenity, and his
affronted longanimity will be turned into jealousy, and fiery indignation. For
to him belongs vengeance as well as mercy; and the God to whom vengeance,
the God to whom vengeance belongs will shem himself. Psalm. 94. 1.


God will arise, and his enemies Psalm. 68. 1.
shall be scattered. He will awake as one out of sleep, he will Psalm. 78. 65.
rouse himself up as a Giant refreshed with wine. He will smite his enemies in
the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, the mighty one of Israel; Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries, and
avenge me of mine Isai. 1. 24.
enemies.

Concerning persons the Apostle tells us of a certain state, wherein there
remains no more sacrifice Heb. 10. 26.
for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment.

Concerning Nations our Savior tells of a certain measure of iniquity; Fill ye
up the measure of your fathers; so false is Math. 23. 32.
that conceit, fo dangerous is that imagination, that men can repent at any
time (at leastwise, whenever they shall have a mind to it) They shall call
(says God) but Prove. 1. 28.
I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. As I
live (says the Lord) I Ezekiel. 20. 31.
will not be enquired of by you. Saul enquired of the Lord, he answered him
not, neither by prophets, nor by Vrim, nor by dreams.

Esan sought for repentance, Heb. 12. 17.
but he he found no place for repentance, though he sought it even with tears.

I gave her space to repent, but she repented not; behold I will Apoc. 2. 21.
cast her into great tribulations.

This is a case, which I tremble to insist upon: What tongue can express the
misery of such a person, or such a people? How dreadful is this place! surely
this is none other, than the gate of Hell; the entrance of all the miseries of
this world, and of the world to come: 1. Temporal, 2. Spiritual, and 3. Eternal.

1. The Lord shall send upon Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
them cursing, and vexation, and rebuke, until they be destroyed, and perish
quickly. They shall be cursed in all their interests and concernments, in their
estates, in their credit, in their relations, in their persons: Cursed shall
they be in the city, and cursed in the field; cursed in the basket, and in the
store. They shall become an astonishment, and a proverb, and a byword, and a
reproach among all their neighbors round about. Cursed shall they be in the
wife of their bosom, and cursed in the fruit of their body. The Lord shall
smite them with a consumption, and with a fever, with an inflammation, and
with an extreme burning. He shall smite them with the botch of Egypt, and with
the Emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch (with a botch that cannot be
healed, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head.)

Their carcass shall be meat for the fowls of the air, and for the beasts of
the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

2. Moreover, he shall pour out spiritual judgments upon them; he shall give
them over to the wickedness of their hearts; he shall let them alone, that they
may commit sin with greediness.

He shall send upon them a spirit of blindness, and hardness of heart, a spirit
of slumber and carnal security.

Then, when they have filled up the measure of their enormities, he shall smite
them with Deuteronomy. 28. 28.
madness and astonishment, with terrors of conscience, and desperation.

His arrows shall stick fast in Psalm. 38. 2.
them, and his hand shall press themsore; there shall be no health in their
bodies, because of his displeasure; nor any rest in their bones by reason of
there sin.

The iniquity of their heels shall take hold upon them; the terrors of death
shall compass them about, and the floods of their ungodliness shall make them
afraid.

Every man that sees me, shall Genesis 4. 14.
slay me, said cursed Cain: my punishment is greater than I can bear: I have
slain a man in mine anger, and a young man to my wounding. If Cain shall be
avenged seven fold, surely Lamech Genesis 5. 23.
seventy times seven. Hearken unto me, ye wives of Lamech. --

They shall be weary of life, and wish for death; and hasten sometimes to break
off their torments by tragical and fearful ends: Fall thou upon me, and 1 Samuel
31. 4.
slay me, says desparing Saul; Behold anguish is upon me, because my life is
whole in me: Away with the wages of iniquity, cried despairing Judas; and he
betook himself to the fatal halter and the tree.

3. Yet all these are to the finally impenitent but the beginnings of sorrow;
the praeludium to those unutterable miseries, which are eternal; to the worm
which dies not, to the fire which never shall be quenched, to utter darkness,
and everlasting burnnings. For they go down quick into hell.

As it is with persons, so it is with Nations, when their iniquity is full;
when once they have filled up the measure of their abominations; if none of all
his methods will bring them to repentance; if they will not humble themselves;
if they will not fear, if they will not turn from their evil ways, he will set
his face against them to destroy Jer. 44. 11.
them.

He will pour out blindness upon them also, and the things belonging Jer. 7. 12.
to their peace shall be hid from their eyes: He will do to them as he did to
Shilo; he will take away their light; he will come quickly, and remove the
candlestick out of its place.

He will give them over to the career, and swinge of their abominations:
Ephraim is joined Hos. 4. 17.
to idols, let him alone.

Though it be with violence to his nature, though it be with reluctance to his
inclination ( O Ephraim; how shall I give thee up O Ephraim! Hos. 11. 8.
) yet their numbers shall not defend them, their privileges shall not excuse
them from destruction,

Though Coniah were as the signet Jer. 22. 29.
upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence. Though Ephraim Jer. 31. 20.
is his dear son; though Israel be a pleasant child; though Hos. 5. 4.
Judah is a pleasant plant; yet if they will not frame their doings to turn
unto the Lord, therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquities, and
Judah also shall fall with them.

Though Noah, Daniel, and Ezekiel. 14. 20.
Job were there, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter, but their own
souls only.

For unnatural and extraordinary rebellions, he has supernatural and
extraordinary judgments: The windows of heaven were opened, the cataracts were
poured forth, and drowned the old world. Fire descended, and brimstone came
down from heaven, and consumed the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha. The earth,
opened, and swallowed up Dathan, Psalm. 160. 17.
and covered the congregation of Abiram. The Sun stood still, till Joshua was
avenged of the Lords enemies. The stars in their courses Jud. 5. 20.
fought against Sisera.

For the usual, and ordinary impenitency of Nations, he has his three fold
national scourge, his judgments in ordinary; The famine, the pestilence, and
the sword.

Sometimes he breaks the staff of bread; and they shall eat bread Ezekiel. 4. 16.
by weight and with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with
astonishment; that they may want bread and water, and consume away in their
iniquity.

Their seed shall be rotten under the clods, their garners desolate, their
barns broken down; their beasts shall groan, their cattle shall be perplexed;
the Joel 1. 17.
flocks of sheep shall be made desolate.

They shall eat their children of a span long; they that did feed delicately,
shall be desolate in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet, shall
embrace dunghils. Lam. 4. 5.


Sometimes he sends forth his Plague (...), the raging and the noisome
pestilence, the pestilence that walks in darkness, Psalm. 91. 6.
the plague that destroys at noon day.

He scatters infection like lightning; Psalm. 144. 6.
he casts forth his Contagion, and tears them in a moment; he shoots his
poisoned arrows, and consumes them.

Sometimes he gives commission to the sword to revenge the quarrel of his
covenant, by intestine rebellions, or foreign invasions.

He suffers a fawning Absalom to steal away the hearts of the 2 Samuel 15. 6.
people from their Sovereign; or a cursed Sheba to blow a trumpet, and cry, To
your tents, O 2 Samuel 20. 1.
Israel.

He permits a spirit of giddiness, of fears and jealousies, and of fanatic
wildness to inrage whole Nations, to tear the womb that bare them, to destroy
them, and their king.

He causes nation to rise against nation, and kindom against kingdom: He calls
in the families of the North, he hisses for the Assyrian, the rod of his anger.
Isai. 10. 5. 7. 15.


Behold (says our Savior) the day is coming, when thine enemies Luke 19. 43.
shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee on every side. Then all
things shall be filled with plunder, and confusion, and garments rolled in
blood.

Her stately Palaces, her goodly Temple shall be destroyed. The thorns shall
come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses Esa. 34. 13, 14.
thereof, and it shall be an inhabitation for dragons, and a court for owls: --
The satyr shall cry to his fellows; the owl, and the vulture to his mate: the
scrichowle shall make its nest there. Faunes and satyrs shall Esa. 13. 21.
dance there.

Babylon is fallen, it is fallen! Jerusalem is a place for dragons! Behold the
reward of obstinate, and final impenitency; behold the portion reserved for the
persons in the Text.

When neither interest nor ingenuity, judgments nor mercies could work upon
them; when six Angels could not convert them; nor six Trumpets awaken them; nor
six Judgments subdue them; nor six preservations allure them to repentance.

Then John beheld, and he saw another mighty angel, clothed Apoc. 10. 1, 2, 6.
with a cloud; and he set his left foot upon the earth, and his right foot upon
the sea; and he cried, as when a lion roareth; and he lifted up his hand to
heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever -- That there shall be time no
longer.

APPLICATION.
I Have now done with the persons in the Text, and the observations arising
from them. Suffer me for a word of Application, humbly to pray that ye will
come near, and consider the things that have been spoken.

That ye will search the Scriptures, and see whether it be as you have heard,
or no; that you will ponder the matter, and weigh the concernment of it; that
ye will not hear it as a song, or slightly pass it by. Is it nothing unto you,
O all ye that pass it by?

I shall not undertake to make a precise Interpretation, or Application of this
Vision of the seven Angels, and seven Trumpets; I know the destiny of the bold
expositors of the Apocalypse. He frustrateth the tokens Isai. 44. 45.
of the liars, and makes diviners mad.

The Vision indeed speaks of Angels and Trumpets, Gods Messengers, and his loud
alarms; of plagues and prefervations, of a remnant kept alive. It tells of
extraordinary thunder and lightning; of blasting of grass, and of trees; of the
death of hoves and cattle; of part of the Sea turned into blood; of mountains
of fire cast into the Sea, and a third part of the Ships destroyed: Of two
unusual Stars or Comets; of smoke issuing from the bottomless pit (it may be
groundless fears and jealousies) of Locusts, which sometimes are said to have
no king; but in this place to have Abaddon, or Apollyon for their King: It
tells us of men killed by fire, and by smoke, and by brimstone (by gunpowder.)

Yet all these things shall not extoit from me a literal and particular
Application of this Vision to our selves: I know there are many things which
cannot; I trust the sad Catastrophe shall not be so applied.

However methinks it may be lawful in a general way to quicken my self, and all
that hear me, to examine our selves, touching the considerations laid before us
in reference both to our personal, and our national concernments.

Is there any one person that hears me this day, upon whom God has not called
aloud, and often that they would repent? with whom he has not contended sundry
ways, and in diverse manners to turn them from the evil of their ways? By
powerful instructions, and personal experiences, by signal mercies, and
wonderful deliverances; by checks of conscience by happy diversions, and
wholesome disappointments; by a welltimed sickness; by the wind, which blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, Joh. 38.
and know not whence it comes.

For God speaks once, yea Job 33. 14.
twice, though man perceives it not: In a dream, in visions of the night. Is
there any man so stupid as not to have considered national invitations to
repentance? the Angels and the Trumpets, the warnings of Gods Ministers, the
loud alarms of his Providence, the interchanges and intermixtures of National
mercies, and National judgments, which we have had?

Since the day that he brought our fathers out of Egypt, his Jet. 7. 21.
Book has been opened, his Trumpet has given a certain sound; he has sent
his Messengers rising every day, and sending them.

The Lord gave the word, Psalm. 68. 11.
great were the company of the Preachers; precept has been upon precept, line
upon line. Isai. 28. 10


Has any Nation had the experiences which we and our fathers have had? Enquire
from one end of the heaven to the other. My song shall be of mercy, Psalm. 101.
1.
and judgment.

Concerning Gods own people once we read of it as a wonder, that their land had
rest forty Judge. 3. 11.
years. Twice forty years together God was pleased to deliver the land of our
Nativity from foreign invasion, and domestic rebellion.

He put to flight the armies of Heb. 11. 34.
the aliens; he scattered the Armada's that called themselves invincible; The
virgin the daughter of Sion, laughed them to scorn; Isai. 37. 22.
They came forth one way, and returned Deuteronomy. 28. 7.
seven: He disappointed the insolent invader; he said, he shall not come into
this city, nor Isai. 37. 33.
shoot an arrow there; nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against
it: The horse, and his rider were thrown into the sea. Exodus 15. 1.


He disappointed the plots and stratagems of domestic traitors: the gates of
hell could not prevail; he suffered not their devilish machinations to succeed.

Peace and plenty, and the public profession of the true Religion flourished;
there was no decay, no leading into captivity, Psalm. 144.14.
no complaining in our streets.

No! but there was pride, and Ezekiel. 16. 49.
idleness, and fullness of breaed, the sins of her ancient sister Sodom; the
cry thereof went up to heaven, and suddenly we tasted of the fire of Sodom, and
the brimstone of Gomorrha.

The bottomless pit was opened, and the smoke arose of absurd and groundless
fears and jealousies; and the Sun and the Moon were darkened by reason of the
smoke. And there came out of the smoke Locusts; Their faces were as the faces
of Rev. 9. 9.
men; they had breast-plates of iron; their sound was as many horses running to
the battle: They had a king, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, in
Hebrew Abaddon, in greek Apollyon.

Twenty years the Nation lav under the dreadful scourge of war and confusion;
the most horrible kind of war, the most lamentable of confusions.

The fire came out of the bramble, Jud. 9. 15.
and consumed the cedars of Lebanon: The anointed of the Lam. 4. 20
Lord was taken in their pits; the breath of our nostrils, our king, Lam. 2. 9.
and our princes were among the gentiles. The law was no more; the prophets
received no vision from the Lord. Hunted we were from form to form; emptyed
from vessel to vessel; scattered like the bones, which the prophet Jer. 48. 11.
saw in the valley, which were very many, and very dry.

When behold another interchange of providence, sudden and wonderful! There was
a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together; bone unto Ezekiel.
37.7.
his bone: lo! sinews and flesh came upon them, and the skin covered them;
they were restored as at the first; breath came into them, and they lived, and
stood upon their feet, and were a great army.

Five years are not completed since we are tried again by such a miraculous
restitution; indeed by an absolute resurrection.

And now since that time how various have been the mixtures, how quick and
sudden have been the changes of his providence?

Three years he expected fruit Lue. 13. 7.
of his barren fig tree; he let it alone the fourth also, saying, If it bear
fruit, well; and if not, he seemed to say, I will cut it down.

He called a destroying Angel; he put a new sword into his hand, and with it a
commission to kill, and to destroy his thousands, ten thousands, hundred
thousands.

Who can express the horror of his execution, the terrors and consternations of
them that did escape; the various complications of anguish and misery, torments
and deaths of them that fell in the execution?

How did the city become solitary that was full of people? she sat Lam. 1. 1.
as a widow, her children forsook her, her friends fled away from her, her
streets were desolate, her houses were full of the noisome carcases of the
slain.

O that my head were waters, Jer. 9. 1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night, for the
slain of the daughter of my people.

And now again, behold another interchange, the goodness as well as the
severity of God, toward them that fell severity, toward Romans 11. 22.
us goodness, if we continue in his goodness.

He has mingled mercy with his judgments; he puts the experiment to the
utmost to try if yet we will repent.

He has not suffered us to fall into the hands of man; not given us over into
the hands of our insolent and barbarous enemies. He has given victory to the
King; he has wonderfully preserved the person of his Royal Highness; he has
kept our Ships and Navies from destruction.

In a marvailous way of mercy he has sheltered our most gracious Sovereign,
and his Royal Relations, and his whole Train and Family. Those noble and
eminent persons both of Church and State, who to make themselves a stay and
comfort to the poor and infected of the City, cheerfully and constantly exposed
themselves to danger, he has delivered from the snare of the hunter, and from
the noisome pestilence. He has given plenty. --

And lastly, he has caused the destroying Angel to sheath his sword, and stay
his hand. And we are met together a preserved remnant of men, that have not
been killed by these plagues.

What shall we render? -- Psalm. 116. 12.


O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 107.
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

Let (...) repent therefore, and turn from our evil ways; let us do no more
foolishly, lest a worse thing come unto us. We have seen the danger of
Impenitency, after so many Motives to Repentance.

Behold now wisdom cries unto us, and utters her voice in this great and noble
Congregation: How long ye simple ones Prove. 1. 22
will ye love simplicity, and ye scorners delight in scorning? Turn ye, turn ye
at my reproof; for why will ye dye, ye house of Israel?

Never let it be said of us, which is here spoken of the persons of the Text,
that the rest of the men, which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented
not of the works of their hands.

FINIS.
A SERMON AGAINST Ingratitude: Preached at WHITE HALL, (Soon after the great
Plague)

By SETH then Lord Bishop of EXON.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for James Collins, at the Kings-arms within
Ludgate, near S. Paul's, 1672.

Note, that the Sermon against Ingratitude ought to have been placed before
that of Repentance.

A SERMON AGAINST Ingratitude.
DEUTERONOMY. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?
THese words are part of a Song made by Moses; and both the song it self, and
these particular words are so very considerable, that I should think it a
disrespect put upon the judgments of a venerable intelligent auditory, to be
very laborious in gathering arguments to persuade your attention to them: the
matter, the antiquity, the penman, do all render it considerable.

For as for the subject matter of the song, it contain in it (as the Hebrew
writers have observed) a summary of the law, or pentateuch of Moses.

Consider it as a piece of Antiquity, there is hardly any poem so venerable: it
was written before Homer, or Hesiod, Orphens, or Linus, David's or Asaph's
poems; and except a piece of the same hand, it is the most ancient song, that
is extant in the world.

It was penned by one of the most considerable persons: look upon him humanely,
and he was very remarkable, for his abstruse learning; ( He was learned in all
Acts7. 22.
the learning of the Egyptians) for his military conduct; for his policy in
administration of Government; for his felicity in giving a law so suitable to
the genius of the people; that after so many thousand years it alone of all
ancient laws continues in veneration to this day.

But if we look upon him in reference to God, there was none like unto him; he
conversed with God face to face; he was admitted to his secrets, he was
entrusted with the administration of his powers in signs and wonders, in the
sight of Egypt, and of Israel.

It was inspired and dictated not by the Muses, or Apollo, but by God himself;
Write thee this song, and he wrote this song the 32. 19. v. 22.
same day whilst he was yet Deo plenus; before the divine afflatus, before his
transport and rage had left him: and therefore although he was the meekest, and
most modest man upon the earth; although he resolutely declined his Embassy
(till God was angry) because he was not eloquent, but Exodus 4. 10.
of a stammering speech, yet now being conscious of that Spirit, which moved
within him; he commends and justifies this song; he undertakes for the fluency,
and Deuteronomy. 31. 30, 32.
smoothness, and the exuberance of it; he summons the tribes to record the
expressions of his rage; he calls upon heaven and earth to hear the verses made
by indignation; by indignation kindled and conceived by the contemplation of
the greatness, and excellency of God, and his goodness in his dealings with
this people of Israel; and of the unworthiness of their return: Give ear, O
Heavens, says he, and I will speak; and hearken O earth to the words of my
mouth, my doctrine shall drop as the rain, etc.

The song indeed it self is large and very satirical; but the great argument or
burden of it is in the words of my text: Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise?

The words are (as I said) the burden or argument of the song applicable to
every part of it, repetible at the end of every stanza, and indeed of every
period.

God is a rock, his work is perfect, his ways are judgment: They have corrupted
themselves, they are spotted, perverse, and crooked: Do ye thus requite the
Lord?

But more particularly, God has been good to Israel, he raised him from
nothing, he redeemed him from bondage, he was his Protector, his Guide, his
Proveditore, his food was of the most delicious, his drink was generous, of the
pure blood of the grape, and he grew fat upon it -- But Jeshurun waxed fat and
kicked: Do ye thus requite, O popule ingrate ((...))?

Again; well; but will God endure this base ingratitude? does he not see it, or
not resent it? does it not move him? can he not, will he not revenge himself
upon them? Yes, the Lord saw it, and was moved to Jealousy; a fire was kindled
in his anger. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?

This is the Interest, which these words have in the song; and they consist of
two general parts:

1. An expostulation; Do ye thus requite the Lord?

2. A censure; O foolish people, and unwise.

The former of these needs no explication, being an ardent and vehement
exprobration of the ingratitude of this people; wherein every word is weighty,
and very Emphatical. The manner of the retribution, the parties Requiting and
Requited. Ye men! Ye men of Israel! do ye make such a requital? such a requital
to the Lord?

To requite evil for good among Equals is against the light of the sons of
Noah, and much more against the light of Israel. But for Israel after their
instruction, and their experiences to do despite to the great and the
gracious, and the terrible, jealous and avenging God, it implies so much
ingratitude, and so high a degree of wickedness, and madness as is not to be
measured. And therefore he does not attempt to delineate or describe it, but
like one astonished at it, he expostulates with them in a vast abrupt
Interrogation; Do ye thus requite the Lord?

But now the latter general part, which contains the censure of them, may
perhaps require a little explication: Foolish and Unwise may possibly seem to
some to have a little flatness in it, and tautology.

Here therefore we must be take our selves to the Original; and there we shall
find a considerable difference, betwixt the notions of those two words, which
are thus translated.

The words for Unwise is [(...)] which signifies, that they were imprudent, and
acted against their interest and concernment.

The words translated foolish people, are [(...),] Interlin.
Ingrate popule, signifying base unworthiness, and perverseness.

They were Am Nabal, such for a people, as Nabal (afterward) for a man. Now
concerning Nabal the Scripture tells us, that the Character of his person was
answerable to the notion of his name; As is his name, so 1. Sam. 25. 25.
is he; Nabal is his name, (...) vilitas cum eo, Interlin. Dedecus cum ipso,
Syriac.

A base, unworthy, dishonorable v. 3.
person; churlish and evil in his doings; surly and morose; such a man of
Belial, that one might not speak to him; v. 17. v. 10, 37, 26. v. 21,
Insolent, and, as such persons use to be, cowardly, and dead hearted, a
drunken, stupid, sottish, and, to sum up all, an ungrateful wretch, that
requited evil for good. This was the Character of Nabal, and this the folly
bound up in the heart of the Children of Israel; so that there is no tautology
in the text: The first word signifies the Wickedness, the second the imprudence
of Israel's Requital. And these are the things, which I am to speak of.

I. Isreal's requital toward God; employed in the expostulation; Do ye thus
requite?

II. The Wickedness of that requital III. The Imprudence pressed in the censure.

IV. Application.

1. Requital is a word of a reciprocal notion, it signifies a return made for
something done: And to set forth Israel's requital to the Lord, we are to
consider 1. Gods dealings with Israel, and 2. Israel's return to God.

1. Of the former we have various instances in the following words. God has
prevented them with Grace, and favor; and followed them 1. Made. Fathers them
2. Bought 3. Established with mercy and loving kindness.

He contrived advantages for them before their Original; he designed them
great, and glorious privileges long before they had any being. The Scripture
computes their Original from Jacob, who was called Israel (A Syrian ready to
perish was their Father;) but long before Jacobs Genesis 25. 23.
time, The most high divided to the Nations their inheritance Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
when he separated the Sons of Adam, the Lords portion was his people, and
Israel the lot of his inheritance. He chose Jacob for himself, and Israel for
his peculiar treasure; before Jacob or Esau had done good or evil: he chose
them, because he loved them; to show his prerogative, and manifest his absolute
Sovereignty.

When Abraham was an hundred years old, and Sarah ninety Genesis 15. 5.
, and they had no child betwixt them, he contracted with Abraham both for their
being and their inheritance: He brought him forth, and said: Look toward
Heaven, and tell the Stars, -- so shall thy seed be.

And the same day he said, Unto thy Seed (yet in Idea) have I v. 18.
given this land from the River of Egypt to the great River Euphrates.

So that he was their Father, and maker in a peculiar manner, even as if from
stones he had raised children unto Abraham.

Seeing that from one, and him Heb. 11. 12.
as good as dead, there sprang so Deuteronomy. 10. 22.
many as the Stars.

Nay far more than the Stars which Abraham could see, when he looked up into
the Sky; the number of all the Stars visible to the naked eye upon all the
various positions of the Sphere, not exceeding eleven hundred; whereas there
were numbered of this people at one time 603550 fighting men above twenty years
old, beside the tribe of Levi, and beside women and children.

As was their first creation, such was their conservation and propagation,
instances of the united forces, of the goodness, wisdom, and power of God, when
he saw them in their blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
he said unto them, Live; when he found them in the howling wilderness, Deuteronomy.
32. 20.
he kept them as the apple of his eye. He protected them from all the storms,
which passed over them (when they passed through the water, when they went
through the fire) he provided for them when there was famine in their land. In
a prodigious way of mercy he made use of their own wickedness, and turned it to
their preservation. When they sold Joseph into Egypt, Joseph says, God sent
him to preserve them a posterity and to save their lives: (ye thought evil
against Genesis 45. 7. Genesis 50. 20.
me, but God meant it for good.) He sent them down into Egypt for their
preservation; he preserved them there 430 years; and when the Egyptians were
turned against them, the more they were afflicted, the more they multiplied
Exodus 1. 12.
and grew. Doubtless he was their father, though Abraham was ignorant of them,
and Israel knew them not: for in their affliction his Esaias 63, 15, 16.
bowels sounded toward them.

And 2. he was their Redeemer as well as their Maker; he bought them; for so
says the text (...) possedit, acquisivit eos, (i. e. asseruit in libertatem.)
When by the rigor of the Egyptians their lives were bitter, God heard their
groanings, and he remembered the Covenant made with Abraham, and his prediction
that they should serve and be afflicted 400 Genesis 15. 13.
years; and that then he would Exodus 2. 24.
judge that nation whom they should serve. Surely I have seen, says he, the
affliction of my people; Exodus 3. 7.
I have heard their cry, I know their sorrows, and I am come down to deliver
them: He sent Redemption to his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

He gave Commission, and Power, and Command to Moses, to make known his
Omnipotence and his favor to his people, and his vengeance upon their enemies;
and they wrought a trein of mighty signs and wonders in the land of Egypt for
their deliverance. And all Israel saw the great works which the Lord did upon
Pharaoh Exodus 14. ult.
and his host, and they sang with Moses that (...), He has triumphed Exodus 15.
1.
gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea, for he
brought forth his people with joy, because he had a favor for them.

3. He was not their maker and their redeemer only, but their establisher; he
perfected deliverance, and followed them with all things perteining unto life
and godliness: He was their conductor in the wilderness; in the day time he led
them with a Ps. 78. 14.
cloud, and all the night with a pillar of fire: He was their Protector, As an
Eagle flutters Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
over her young ones and spreads abroad her wings, so he stretched out his
everlasting arms for their defense; he suffered no man to do them wrong, and
drove out the nations before them: He was their provider of meat, drink and
clothes; he smote the stony rock and the waters flowed; he gave Ps. 78. 15.
them Quails and Manna from Heaven so, that they did eat Angels food; Deuteronomy. 29.
5.
he led them 40 years in the wilderness, and in all that space their clothes
did not wax old upon them, nor their shoes upon their feet.

And lastly, he was their establisher; formed them into a Church and State, and
dictated to them laws for their perpetual establishment; he gave testimonies
unto Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, a law written by the finger of God,
delivered by the mediation of Angels. He set before them life and death; he
confirmed the Covenant made to their fathers; he entered into a Covenant with
themselves; he spoke to them sundry ways and diverse manners; and finally to
take away all pretenses of ignorance or infidelity, he appeared often to their
fathers by the name of El-shaddai; to Moses, by his name Jehovah; to themselves
he came Exodus 19. 11.
down (in the sight of all the people) upon mount Sinai, he often filled the
Tabernacle with his glory, and the glory of the Lord Number. 14. 10.
appeared to all the people. Lev. 9. 23.


These are some few instances of Gods dealing with this people. Now for their
requital the Scripture tell us their behavior toward Moses and Aaron the
instruments, and toward God himself the Author of all their mercies, of their
deliverance. Many a time they murmured against Exodus 14. 11.
Moses and Aaron in Egypt, Exodus 15. 24.
and in the wilderness: before they were out of Egypt, they quarreled at Moses
for attempting their deliverance: within three days after their triumphal song
they murmured at Marach: about six weeks after the whole congregation murmured
again, and wished, that they had died by the hand of the Exodus 16. 3.
Lord in the land of Egypt: they murmured at their very Manna, and cried out in
remembrance of the fisb that they did eat in Egypt, the Cucumers, and the
Melons, Numb. 11. 5.
the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic. When the spies returned from
Canaan, they made a down right mutiny; they said one to another, Let us make us
a Captain, Number. 14. 4.
and let us return into Egypt.

They sided with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram in their rebellion; and after the
earth had opened and swallowed them up, they still owned the rebels and adhered
to the good old cause; on the morrow all the congregation murmured against
Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 41.
saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord: still persisting in an opinion
that they were Patriots and godly men.

But what do we speak of Moses, or of oblique and consequential actings against
God? the Scripture tells us of their stupidity and infidelity; they understood
Ps. 106. 7.
not his wonders in Egypt: How long, says God, will it be ere they believe me,
for all the Numb 14. 11.
signs which I have wrought among them? neither signs among them nor signs upon
them could cause them to believe. He smote them for their unbelief, and for all
this they sinned still, and believed Ps. 78. 32.
not for all his wondrous works. It tells of their forgetfulness; they forgot
God their Ps, 78. 11.
Savior, which had done so great things for them; they soon forgot his works,
and his wonders: of their falseness and treachery, their heart was not set
aright, their spirit was not steadfast; Ps. 78. 37.
when he slew them they would seek him for a while, but they did but flatter
him with their Ps. 78. 36.
lips, and dissemble with their double hearts. It tells of their base idolatry;
they changed their glory for the similitude of a calf, yea, they offered their
sons and Ps. 106. 24.
daughters unto devils: of their pride and scornfulness; they despised the
pleasant land: they were a provoking generation, a stubborn and rebellious
nation. How often did they provoke God in the wilderness, and grieve Ps. ^8. 40.
him in the desert? Many a time did he deliver them, but they provoked him with
their Counsels. He divided the Sea for their passage, and clove the rocks for
their sustenance, and covered them with a Cloud for their protection, and they
sinned yet the more. They tempted him, they spoke against him, they provoked
him at the sea, even at the red Sea: they turned back and tempted God, and
limited the holy one of Israel. In one word; they were a rebellious house, a
stiff-necked people; they kept not the Covenant which Ezekiel. 44. Ps. 78.
themselves had made; they would none of his precepts, they despised his
promises, and his threatenings, their neck had an Iron sinew, Is. 48. 4.
and they had a brow of brass.

This was their behavior, even then when Gods miracles were fresh, and Moses
was still among them. And God foresaw that after his decease they would provoke
him yet more. This was that requital, which stirred and inflamed the spirit of
Moses; and quickened him to that abrupt Expostulation, the first general part of
the text, whereof I have hitherto been giving an account, Do ye thus requite
the Lord?

You have seen some part of Isreal's ingratitude; it follows that we consider
the Turpitude and the Imprudence of this ingratitude, which gave occasion for
the censure here passed upon them, (O foolish people and unwise.) And first of
the Turpitude II.
of their ingratitude, whereby it will appear that they were (...) Now to set
forth the unworthiness of their in gratitude against God in all the
aggravations of it, it is a task too heavy for me (nay, even for Angels;) and
Moses when he was inspired, and in the height of his rapture, did not attempt
it; but making a chasme, and drawing a veil over that part, insinuates it to be
unexpressible. I shall not therefore offer at impossibilities, but follow the
method, which the Scriptures have provided for us in like cases. It is the
manner of the Scriptures in things concerning God, which are incomprehensible,
to bait the mind, and train it on by exercising it in the Analogy of things
familiar. The love of God to his chosen people is incomprehensible; to give us
therefore a little notion of it, the Prophet brings men to the consideration of
the love of a mother to her child; can a Mother forget her Child etc? The love
of Man to God holds no proportion to his Excellency, and his goodness; and the
heart in judging of it is obnoxious to mistakes, and very deceitful; therefore
the Apostle helps us toward an apprehension of it. He that loves not his
neighbor; 1 John 4. 20.
whom he has seen; how can he love God, whom he has not seen? So seeing the
turpitude of men's ingratitude toward God is ineffable and inconceivable, it
will be requisite to speak a little of the unworthiness of Ingratitude toward
men, and leave you to work out this proportion; Look how high the heaven is in
comparison of the earth, so great, nay infinitely greater is the unworthiness
of ingratitude toward God.

And here I shall not go about to Philosophize, or to demonstrate the turpitude
of ingratitude, from the nature of it, a priori. The immediate and evident
corollaries of natural principles, admit only of jejune and inconsiderable
reasonings in that kind of demonstration. The odiousness of ingratitude is such
a corollary, naturally and immediately flowing from that universal maxim, quod
tibi fieri non vis, Matt. 7. 12.
etc. which runs through all morality; and is not only the last resolution of
Philosophy, but of the Law and the Prophets, and of the Gospel. Luke 6. 31. As
therefore, when an abstruse proposition in matter of speculation is resolved
into an evident principle, or the contrary position into a plain absurdity, the
demonstrator goes no further, but has said all that can be pertinently spoken:
so when a piece of doubtful Morality is once resolved into this grand
absurdity, Omnia dixeris, there is no more to be added, all the rest is
diminution.

It is said that Lycurgus made no law against ingratitude, because Nature had
made one to his hand. So some Divines have observed, Prove. 17. 13.
that there is no direct precept against ingratitude in the Scripture, though
many testimonies in effect against it, because it was needless, as being
supposed from the light of nature, and below the Majesty of the spirit
breathing in the Scriptures, to insist upon it (according to that of our
Savior, If ye love and do good, and lend to them Matt. 5. 48.
that love and do good to you, what Luc. 6. 32, 34.
thanks, or reward have you? do not Sinners or Publicans even the same?) To
that spirit which commands us to return good for evil, to love our Enemies,
etc. it were a kind of whiffling to command the return of good for good, or
prohibit the return of evil to those that have obliged us. Now of these two
sorts of ingratitude, the former is branded in Scripture with an everlasting
brand, in the case of Pharaoh's Butler to Joseph, the Israelites Genesis 10. 23.
to Jerubaal, and the like: But Jud. 8. 35.
the ingratitude in the text being of the latter kind, and of a deeper die, and
because the easiest Criterion of turpitude is the detestation of all the sons
of men, I shall endeavor a posteriori by some Scriptural instances of the
resentments of that kind of ingratitude, to show the turpitude of it in the
judgment of mankind.

We read when Joash had commanded Zachariah to be stoned 2 Chronicles. 24.
(who was the son of Jehojada, who had preserved him in his minority from
Athaliah, and made him King,) his own servants conspired against him, and
killed him in his bed, because he remembered not the kindness of Jehojada, but
slew his son. When Abner apprehended ingratitude in Ishbosheth, whom he had
made 2 Samuel 29.
King, consider his resentment, he was very wroth, he said, am I a Dogs head,
who do show kindness 2 Samuel 3. 8, 9.
to the house of Saul? God do so to Abner, and more also, except I translate
the Kingdom from the house of Saul; He swore he would do it, and he did
perform it.

It may be objected that the resentment of these men was not so considerable,
as that the Judgment of Mankind should be collected from it; those that
conspired against Joash were Zabad the son of an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the
son of a Moabitess; and we read not any great praise, either of the piety or
morality of Abner. Consider then the resentments of Gideon; of whom it is said,
the Lord was with Gideon, and of David, the man after God's own heart. When the
men of Succoth dealt ungratefully with Gideon; he said, that he would tear
their flesh Jud. 8. 7. 16.
with the thorns of the Wilderness, and he took the Elders of the City, and the
thorns of the Wilderness, and with them he taught the men of Succoth, i. e. he
taught them better Morals.

When Nabal had (upon a good day, the shearers feast) refused to give a little
something that should come to hand, and put a scorn upon David ( who is David,
etc.) then David said, Surely in vain have I kept the goods of this fellow, and
he has requited me evil for good: so and more also do God to the enemies of 1 Samuel 25.
David, if I leave of all that pertains to him before the morning light any
that pisseth against the wall.

But it may be said that these be men of war, and those enraged, and these
might be the resentments only of their passions: Proceed we therefore to the
resentments of Prophets and righteous men; let us have recourse from David the
Captain to David the Prophet, and the Psalmist (when he was composed, and when
he was composing.)

Had it been my open enemies then Ps. 55. 12.
I could have born it; but it was thou my friend, and my acquaintance; it was
an act of Treachery and Ingratitude; let death seize v. 15.
upon them, and let them go down quick into hell. And again; They Ps. 35. 12.
rewarded me evil for good; let them be confounded, let them be as the dust
before the wind, let their way be dark and slippery; and the Angel of the Lord
persecute them.

Shall evil be recompensed for good? (says Jeremy) I stood before Jer. 18. 20.
thee to speak good for them, and they have dug a pit for my soul; Therefore
deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out their blood by force of
the sword, etc.

Briefly, because it may be objected that all these were the resentments of a
legal, and Mosaic spirit, consider the resentment of the lamb of God, the son
of man, the man Christ Jesus, when he denounced a woe upon Corazin, etc. Woe
unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; Luke 10. 13.
for if the mighty works had been done in Tire, etc. Therefore it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for thee. Consider
his resentment, when he pronounced a judgment upon Jerusalem; O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem; thou that killest the Prophets, and Luke 13. 34.
stonest those, that are sent unto thee; How often would I have gathered thy
children --? and ye would not. Behold now your house is left unto you desolate.

From what has been spoken of the resentments of men, the wickedness of
Isreal's ingratitude against God, though it cannot be perfectly, yet it may in
some measure be collected.

It remains that we consider the imprudence of it: O foolish people and unwise.

III. I may not, I need not insist long upon this Argument. There are (as I
conceive) but these five suppositions, which possibly might exempt them from
the censure of the text. 1. If their God were like the gods of the heathen, and
did not know their behavior toward him. Or 2. If he were the God of Epicurus,
and did not resent it. Or 3. If they could escape from him. Or 4. If they could
excuse themselves to him. Or 5. If they were able to support themselves against
him. If none of these were in the case, they will stand convicted of horrible
imprudence; it will then be manifest, that they were a foolish people, and
unwise. Of these things briefly.

1. Did not God know their behavior? The Psalmist indeed tells of a brutish
people, which wrought all manner of wickedness, and yet they said, The Lord
shall not see it, neither shall the Ps. 94. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
God of Jacob regard it: But, O ye fools, says he, when will ye be wise? He
that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall not he
see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? The Lord knows the
thoughts of men. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the Zach. 4. 10.
whole earth, beholding the evil and the good. For the ways of man, are Prove.
5. 21.
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. He penetrates
all things, and searches all things. If they say, per-adventure the darkness
shall cover Ps. 139. 11.
them, then shall the night be turned into day: the darkness is no darkness
with him, but the night is as clear as the day.

2. But it may be, though he knew their behavior, yet he did not concern
himself about them; it may be he did not much resent their dealings with him;
Neither if they be righteous is he the better; neither if they be wicked is he
the worse. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may
profit the son of man; but if thou sinnest, what do thou against him; and if
thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? Nay but did not he
concern himself for them? what meaned then the sounding of his bowels toward
them? what mean such pathetical exclamations as these; O that there were such
an heart in them, that they would Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
keep my Commandments always; that it might be well with them, and with their
seed for ever. Again, O that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
would consider their latter end. O that they had hearkened -- what iniquity
have they sound in me?

Did not he resent it, when they made the calf? He said, Behold I have seen
this people, and it is a stiff-necked people; Exodus 32. 9.
let me alone, that I may blot out their name from under Heaven. Deuteronomy. 9. 13.


When they murmured; I will come in the midst of them in a moment, and consume
them at once.

When they rebelled against Moses; Get you up from among Number. 16. 25.
them, that I may consume them in a moment.

When they tempted him and questioned his power; He heard it and was wroth, and
greatly abhorred Ps. 106. 40, 23.
Israel. Many a time would he have destroyed them, had not Moses stood in the
gap to turn aways his anger.

3. But possibly for all this there might be some way to escape from him, and
to conveigh themselves out of the sphere of his activity.

There have been those, who have conceived the God of Israel to be a topical
God; a God of the mountains only, and that 1 Kings 20 23, 28, 29.
the valleys were out of his power and jurisdiction: true; but because the
Syrians said that he was not God of the valleys, he delivered them into the
hands of Israel, who slew a hundred thousand footmen in one day.

Nay but, Behold the Heaven of Heavens cannot contein the God of Israel; he
fills all things. Shall they escape for their wickedness? Whither can they go
then from his Spirit? or whither can Ps. 139. 7.
they flee from his presence? If they could ascend into Heaven, he is there; if
they could make their bed in hell, behold he is there?

4. But though they cannot escape out of his reach, possibly they may plead
something in excuse of their doings, which may mitigate his indignation;
perhaps they were ignorant, that God was concerned, ignorant of his will, and
of his ways, they had no instruction, they had no warning of their danger. But
I say unto them, Had they no Caveats? Take heed (says Moses) keep thy soul
diligently, lest Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
thou forget the things, which thine eyes have seen. When thou Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
shall have eaten, and be full, then bew are lest thou forget the Lord thy God.

Had they no memento's? How often does God command them to bind his precepts,
and his prodigies for a sign, and a token, and a memorial upon Exodus 13. 9.
their hands, for frontlets between Deuteronomy. 6. 9, 11.
their eyes; to write them upon their posts, and their gates, to teach them
their children, lest they should forget them?

Did they not know? I call heaven and earth to record this Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
day against you (says Moses) that I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing.

Had they no warnings of their danger? If thou do forget, I denounce this day,
that thou Deuteronomy. 30. 18.
shall surely perish; and this song was made to testify against them.

Had they not heard? had they not seen? Yes, that which had not been heard, and
seen, since the foundation of the world from one side of the heavens to
another. Did ever people hear the voice of God, speaking out of the midst of
the fire, and live?

They saw Thundrings, and Lightnings, Noise, Trumpet, Exodus 20. Ex. 24. 9, 10,
11.
Mountain smoking, Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, the Seventy Elders, the
Nobles, the People saw the Lord; and the sight of the glory of God was like
devouring fire on the top of the mount, in the eyes of the children of Israel.
so that they were without excuse.

5. And the only remaining consideration is this; whether they were able to
resist the Lord, to support themselves against him, or at leastwise to endure
the utmost of his indignation.

What is their hope, that they behave themselves proudly, that they kick
against the Lord? or wherein lies their confidence that they rebel against
him? Who art thou, O man, that strivest against God? Can thou overturn
immensity, or circumvent omniscience, or grapple with omnipotence? The Lord is
a man Exodus 15. 3.
of war, great, and terrible is his name; who can stand before him, when he is
angry?

Behold the Nations are as the drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: he takes up the Isles as a very little thing: all
Nations are Es. 40. 15, 22.
counted to him as Grasshoppers, nay less than vanity, and nothing.

Where were they, when the foundations of the world were Job 38. 4, 5.
laid, and a line was stretched upon it? Can they command the thunder, or
furnish out the lightnings, or bring to their assistance the stormy wind and
tempest?

Can they Marshal out the host of heaven, or put the Constellations in array,
or command the stars in their courses to make resistance for them? Can they
bind the influences of Pleiades, Job 38. 31, 32.
or loose the bands of Orion; or bring forth Mazzaroth, or conduct Arcturus and
his sons?

Are they able to stand before a jealous God; and to support themselves in the
presence of a consuming fire? When a fire is kindled in his anger, and shall
burn to the lowest Hell, and shall consume the earth, and set on fire the
mountains.

Are they able to sustein the fierceness of his anger? Who among them can dwell
with the Es. 33. 14.
devouring fire? who among them can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Briefly and plainly to lay the case before you; This people had heard with
their ears of the drowning of the old world; Their fathers had told them of the
fire and brimstone, which devoured the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha; They had
been witnesses of the plagues brought upon Egypt; They beheld the fire that
consumed Nadab and Abihu; They stood by, when the earth opened and swallowed up
Dathan, and covered the congregation of Abiram; Thousands had fallen beside
them, and ten thousands at their right hand for their ingratitude, and
rebellion; and yet they behave themselves so as has been represented. Judge in
your selves, was it wisdom thus to requite the Lord? Were they, or were they
not a foolish people, and unwise?

We have now seen the case of Israel; the wickedness of their folly, and the
folly of their wickedness has been in some measure displayed before us. And
who is it that does not feel his indignation rise against this people? Ah
sinful people! ah people laden with iniquity! ah Seed of evil doers! O
ungrateful, stiffnecked, brutish nation! do they thus requite the Lord that
made, that redeemed, that established them? Shall not his soul be avenged on
such a nation as this? Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: It is but
just, and equal, That he should consume them in a moment, and blot out their
remembrance from under heaven.

Nay! but who art thou, O man, that judge another, and do the same things?
think thou that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Alas! how easy is it
in a figure to transfer all that has been spoken to our selves, to our selves
of this Auditory, to our selves of this Kingdom, in every capacity, private
and public, Ecclesiastical and Civil.

1. Has not God dealt with us as he dealt with Israel?

2. Have not we requited him as they requited him? come now, and let us briefly
reason together.

For Gods dealing, let us examine our selves upon the heads of enquiry here
propounded by Moses in this song. Has he not 1 made 2 redeemed 3 established
us in every sense and every capacity.

1. Has he not made us? is not he the Creator and preserver of every
individual person? is not he the disposer of nations? the ordainer and orderer
of Governments? the framer of Churches in the world? In every one of these
respects it is evidently true, which is delivered by the Psalmist, It is he
that has made Ps. 100. 3.
us, and not we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. As
for our personal being, and better being, was it not from him that we received
our bodies, our Souls, our Christianity (all things pertaining unto life and
Godliness?) His eyes did see our substance yet being Ps. 139. 16.
imperfect, and in his book were all our members written. He poured us out like
Milk, and curdled us like Cheese, clothed us with skin and flesh, fenced us
with bones and sinews: he breathed into us life and spirit, saying unto us,
Live: he stamped his Image upon us, and made us live the life of men; he
commanded, and we were born of Christian Parents, and baptized, and regenerated
into the life of Christians. Has he not made us? Nay, does he not make us, and
that every moment, by susteining and upholding our being by the word of his
power; by reteining our spirits, and preserving our souls and life by his
perpetual visitation, by his protection, and by his provision? There is no man
that has power over Job 10. 12.
the spirit, to retein the spirit. All the wit and industry and ability of all
men upon earth, nay of all creatures in Heaven and earth, cannot make one grain
of any one of that infinite variety of things, which are of necessity or of
convenience to the being or preservation of men. And this is so evident upon
the shallowest consideration, that S. Paul at Lystra, when the Priest of
Jupiter (supposing him to be Mercurius) would have sacrificed to him, appealed
to this instance, as Gods witness against the depth of heathenish darkness. He
left not himself without witness in that he gave rain from Act. 14. 17.
Heaven, filling our hearts with food and gladness. So that in this respect our
case is parallel. Has not God dealt with us as with Israel? Has he not made
us as to our personal and private condition?

Again, if we consider our selves in our national public capacity in reference
to the political frame of our Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, has he not
made us?

It was in reference to this that Moses asked this question; and to help their
understandings in the consideration of it for an answer, in the words
immediately following he calls upon them to search into their antiquities, to
reflect upon their original, and their progress. Remember, says he, the days
of old, and consider the years of many generations. Ask thy Fathers and they
will tell thee, thy Elders and they will show thee.

And now I say unto you, Have you not heard long ago how he has done it, and
of ancient days how he has formed it? How he has formed the state of this
Island, and reformed it; how he never gave over working, hewing, and
fabricating the inhabitants thereof, till he had framed them into a glorious
Christian Kingdom, from a most barbarons, savage, scattered, heathen people.
How often did the Almighty Potter bring the stubborn matter to the wheel;
overturning, overturning, overturning? To civilize the Britains he brought in
the Romans, then tried the Britains again. When that would not frame to his
hand, he brought in the Saxons, and upon them the Danes; then tried the Saxons
again; and lastly he brought in the Normans; nations os various tempers,
customs, religions, languages; caused nation to rise against nation, etc. he
committed them one with another, and among themselves; he mixed and blended
them by many a terrible combat and collision; he polished the roughness of
them; by the leaven of the Gospel he fermented and matured and sweetened them,
till by his powerful word light was brought out of darkness; out of a multitude
of disorders and confusions sprang forth a noble well-tempered form of
Government and System of Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, equal at least to those
of any other people; harmoniously conspiring (if duly executed) to conserve all
estates, orders, and degrees in the greatest happiness whereof any society is
capable; conducting us by the hand of Moses and Aaron, and their subordinate
Ministers, to the great ends of the great ordinance of God in the world, and
apt to enable and to dispose well-minded men (by the means of grace, and
motives to sobriety, righteousness, and godliness, which we enjoy) by peace and
plenty, by liberty and prosperity (in all which we exceed all others) to
produce effects of noble courage and magnanimity, such as we read of in the
stories of our Ancestors; and of Piety, and Devotion in proportion answerable
to those of our glorious Predecessors (that is not inferior in their kind to
any nation in the world.) Surely this also has been of the Lords doing, in
reference to Society Civil and Sacred: it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves. Now let us pass to the second enquiry.

2. Has he not redeemed us? and that also in both capacities, personal and
national.

1. For our persons spiritually and temporally; has he not bought our souls at
a price; has he not offered us a plenteous redemption by the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, redeemed us from the curse of the Law, the bondage of
Sin, the power of Satan, the wrath of God? Again, is there any one single
person to whom he has not given many a temporal deliverance (known and
unknown, or at leastwise unconsidered?) Has not he redeemed us from the
prison of the womb, from the hazards of our infancy, from the perils of our
childhood, from the wildness and precipitancy of youth, from the snares and
entanglements of our riper years? Is there any one whom he has not redeemed
from six troubles and from seven, in our bodies, estates, liberty, reputation?
whom he has not powerfully and frequently rescued from the folly and
perverseness of our selves, from the malice of our neighbors, from the rage of
Devils? Has he not redeemed us in our personal capacities?

2. Has he not redeemed our nation again and again, in all its interest civil
and sacred? Who else was it that delivered our fathers and our selves from
Barbarism and Idolatry, from Tyranny and Superstition, from fanatical Anarchy,
and Irreligion.

To omit former deliverances, can we forget how it is but a little while since
the wrath of God was poured out upon this Kingdom to the uttermost? since our
Sun was turned into darkness, and our Moon into blood, our stars ravished from
their Orbs, the Royal father Martyred, the Son banished, the Nobles confounded;
the State dissolved, the Church destroyed, our Religion, Laws, Liberty,
Property, torn away; our bones were dried, our hope was gone, and we thought we
had been clean cut off. Then when we cried unto the Lord in our trouble, he
delivered us out of our distress: He sent redemption to his people, he turned
our captivity as the Rivers of the South; then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with Joy. The Symptoms of joy and triumph were heard,
and seen in all the corners of the land; nay the Sea roared, and the floods
clapped their hands, the hills and the heavens resounded because of the
redemption; for he comes, for he comes- etc. And now I say unto you, has he
not redeemed us?

3. Has he not established us? that is to say, the Estalishment, which we
enjoy, is it not all from him? and has not he done his part for our
establishment? our spiritual and temporal, our private, our public
establishment?

Does not the God of all grace continually press upon us the means of grace,
calling us to his Eternal glory; endeavoring to make us perfect, to establish,
strengthen, and settle us in his truth, to establish us in the faith, and in
holiness, to strengthen our inward man, that we may be rooted and grounded and
built up in him, to a lively hope, and an humble assurance of eternal life.

All spiritual Establishment, is it not from God? is there any person within
the verge of his Majesty's Dominions, for whom God has not provided plentiful
means for this Establishment?

Again, for our temporal private condition, is there any one of us destitute of
some sort of provision, subsistence; some sort of settlement, or Establishment?
Is there any one that hears, or hears me not, for whom God has not provided
some honest way of Establishment by donation of pious Founders and Benefactors,
by legal descent, by voluntary Bequest, ( houses which they Deuteronomy. 6. 11.
builded not etc.) by labor of the hand, or contrivance of the brain; by
assistances of Alliances, or friends; by charitable benevolence, by the bounty
of contingency or the like? Are not every one of these from the Lord? is any
one destitute of one or more of these ways of establishment, or that can
answer', that God has made no provision for them? has he not given us our
temporal establishment?

Lastly, has not God done his part toward a National and a public
establishment of this Church and Kingdom?

Has he not in order thereunto resetled our gracious Sovereign in the throne
of his Royal Predecessors? Re-established the Church upon its rightful Basis
and foundation? Restored all orders and degrees to their legal rights,
proprieties, privileges and liberties? Reinforced our Religion and our Laws in
the due administration of Discipline and Justice? Reduced all things into that
ancient frame and constitution, which had from many Generations derived
happiness and glory to the people of England?

Finally, for preservation and continuance of all these, has he not restored
the actual strength of the Kingdom, our Forts and Castles, our stores and
magazines, our Towns and Cities, our Armies and Navies, lately rescued out of
the hands of rebellious Usurpers to those Royal hands, to which they do of
right belong? In one word therefore to conclude this first enquiry, has not
God dealt with us as he did with Israel; has he not made us, redeemed us,
established us?

The next consideration ought to be, whether we have not so requited the Lord
as they requited him. Whether our behavior has not been answerable to that of
Israel, in reference both to the foolish part, and the unwise. And here alas!
how clear and conspicuous is the parallel in respect of their ingratitude, and
imprudence.



Have we not dealt, do we not deal ungratefully with the Author and instruments
of all our mercies? Have all Gods methods and various dealings with us
prevailed so far as to bring our persons to repentance, or our Kingdom to a
Reformation? Have we been convinced, or have we not been hardened by his
wonders, converted to his fears or sealed up into a sottish stupidity and
senseless contempt of Religion, a spirit of Atheism, and downright infidelity?

Do we not murmur against Moses and Aaron? do not some amongst us still abet
the cause of Corah, Dathan and Abiram? are not some of us ready to make them a
Captain, and to return into Egypt?

Have we not soon forgot God our savior? have we not flattered him with our
lips, and dissembled with him in our double heart?

Do we not despise our very Manna; and wish again for the Garlic of Egypt?
ready to change our glory for the Calves of Egypt or the confusion of Babylon?
In a word, are we not a sinful people laden with iniquity, as ungrateful and
Nabalistical as Israel, a foolish people?

Again, for matter of imprudence, wherewithal can we purge our selves from it?

Does not God know our miscarriages also? does he not understand us and our
ways? and does he not interest himself in us? does he not resent our
provocations? can we escape for our wickedness? With what apologies shall we
come before the Lord, and bow our selves before the high God? Have we had no
caveats from the Ministers of God, no warnings, no Alarms from God himself?
have we not heard, have we not seen, has it not been told us? The thunders,
and the lightnings, the trumpets sounding, the mountain smoking, the Angel
destroying, the Sword devouring. Are we able to contest with a jealous God? are
we stronger than he? are we able to tear him out of his Throne, or to divest
him of his Thunder, or to stand the storm of his fiery indignation? Have we not
been a foolish people and unwise!

What then remains, but that God should execute upon us the sentence which we
our selves have been ready to pass upon the people in the text, that he should
do thus, and thus, unto us; that he should consume us in a moment, and blot out
our names from under Heaven?

Nay, rather it remains (men and brethren) lest he should do thus, and thus,
unto us, that we prepare to meet the Lord our God; that we rouse up the spirit
of our minds, and discuss and scatter that Lethargic stupor that is upon us:
Awake, awake, Deborah; and arise, Barak, the son of Ahinoam.

Who can tell but God may yet have mercy upon us, may have mercy upon our
souls, and speak peace to our land!

When I say to the wicked, thou Ezekiel. 33. 14, 15.
shall surely dye; if he turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die: he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live.

Wherefore let every one of us examine himself and find out the plague of his
own heart, and be deeply sensible of his own ingratitude; let us search and try
our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; let us make haste to escape, before the
decree bring forth, and we be surprised by the stormy wind and tempest; let us
lose no longer time, but make haste in this our day, before the things
belonging to our peace are hid from our eyes. Let speaker and hearers (O let my
self and all this assembly, let every soul here present, let all the people of
the land) turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, with fasting, weeping,
mourning. And let the priests (my Joel 2. 12, 17.
brethren) the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the alter, and
say, spare thy people, O Lord; be favorable, O Lord be favorable; O Lord deal
not with us after our sins, nor reward us according to our iniquities, though
we have thus requited the Lord, being a foolish people and unwise.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by James Collins at the Kings-Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1672.
OBservations upon Military and Political Affairs, by the most Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle: Folio. Price 6. s.

A Sermon preached by Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum at the Funeral of the Most
Honorable George Duke of Albemarle: Quarto. Price 6. d.

Toleration not to be abused; or, A serious question soberly debated and
resolved upon Presbyterian Principles. viz, Whether it be advisable,
especially for the Presbyterians, either in Conscience or Prudence, to take
advantage from his Majesty's late Declaration, to Deny or Rebate their
Communion with our Parochial Congregations, and to gather themselves into
distinct and separate Churches? By one that loves Truth and Peace: Quarto.

Philosophia Pia, or, A Discourse of the Religious tendences of the
Experimental Philosophy; to which is added a Recommendation and Defense of
reason in the affairs of Religion, by Joseph Glanvil, Rector of Bath: Octavo.
Price 2. s.

The Way to Happiness represented in its Difficulties and Encouragements; and
cleared from many popular and dangerous mistakes, by Joseph Glanvil.

A Praefatory Answer to Mr. Henry Stubbe the Doctor of Warwick, by Joseph
Glanvil: Octavo. Price 1. s. 6. d.

The Life and death of Mr. George Herbert the excellent Author of the. Divine
Poems. Written by Iz. Walton: Octavo. Price 1. s.

A Discourse of the forbearance or penalties, which a due Reformation requires,
by Herbert Thorndike one of the Prebendaries of Westminster: Octavo.

A Private Conference between a rich Alderman, and a poor Country Vicar made
Public, wherein is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths, which have been imposed
on the Subjectsof England: 8o 2. s.

The Episcopacy of the Church of England justified to be Apostolical from the
Authority of the Primitive Church: and from the confessions of the most famous
Divines beyond the Seas, by the Right Reverend the late Lord Bishop of Duresm,
with a Preface written by Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet: Octavo.

TATAOON, or Divine Goodness explicated and vindicated from the exceptions of
the Atheist: Wherein also the consent of the Gravest Philosophers, with the
holy and inspired Penmen, in many of the most important points of Christian
Doctrine is fully evinced, by Richard Burthogge Doctor in Physic: Octavo.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE Mysteries of the GOSPEL. BEING A SERMON PREACHED At
WHITE HALL, Feb. 16. 1672/3.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of SARVM.

PRINTED By his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for James Collins at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1674.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE Mysteries of the GOSPEL.
ROMANS I. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the power
of God to Salvation, to every one that believes.
THE former part of this Text (being delivered in terms unusual) has afforded
matter of Disputation to Interpreters.

The Question is, Whether it be to be taken for a (...); or to be understood
simply, and plainly, according to the usual import and meaning of such
expressions.

That St. Paul, so long after his Miraculous Conversion, (a little before his
Appeal to Caesar) drawing near to the finishing of his Course.

That St. Paul, after he had planted the Gospel, from Jerusalem round about
unto Illyricum, Romans 15. 19.
after the composing of all those excellent Epistles written before his bonds,
whereof this Epistle to the Romans was the last.

That St. Paul (I say) after all this, should descend to so poor an Expression
as might insinuate, that there was something in the Gospel, whereof it was
possible, that some of the Romans might imagine that he ought to be ashamed.

(That in the judgment of St. Paul the Gospel should administer occasion for
the Anticipation and Amolition of so contemptible a Prejudice,)

It seems to many very improbable, and therefore they say that the words are a
(...), and that the Apostle in saying that he was not ashamed of the Gospel,
intended to signify that he exulted and gloried in it.

Indeed, we find our Apostle, not only in his other Epistles 1 Timothy I. II.
(and in his Apologies) but in 1 Cor. 4. 4. 3. 7. 10. 8.
this Epistle to the Romans, often magnifying his Office, and glorying in the
Ministry of the Gospel which he had received; he styles it the light of the
glorious Gospel, a Ministration exceeding glorious, and professes that if he
should boast of his Authority, he should not be ashamed.

Yet (with submission to better Judgments) I humbly conceive that he is not so
to be understood in this place.

Though the Epistle was directed to those at Rome, which were already
Christians; yet this passage was put in with reference to others, to whom the
Epistle was to be communicated (persons not yet converted to Christianity.) To
them who were Ver. 8. bujus.
already called to be Saints, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the World;
to talk of not being ashamed of the Gospel, had been a (...) very incongruous.

But (on the other side) for him who (by his original Commission) was
constituted the Apostle Act. 22. 21.
of all the Gentiles, made a debtor to them all (as he says;) Ver. 14.
to the Wise as well as unwise, to the Greeks and Romans as well as the
Barbarians.

That he, who in pursuance of this Commission, had already planted the Gospel
amongst the more Barbarous Nations, from Antioch in Syria as far as Lystra Acts
14.
and Derbe, Cities of Lycaonia; and among the Greeks, in all the chief Cities
of Macedonia and Achaia (from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum) so that
nothing now remained but to Preach at Rome (as he speaks Emphatically) at Rome
also.

That he, whose Preaching 1 Cor. 2. 1.
was not in a way of Humane wisdom or excellency of speech (in the way either
of Rhetorical Harangue or Philosophical argumentation) intending to preach at
Rome (the Seat of the Empire of the World) the Resort of the Noble, the Mighty,
and the Wise, of all those who in the Phrase of our time, are styled the Beaux
esprits, the Wits and Braveries of the World.

Briefly, that St. Paul, who knew the Prejudices which these men had against
the Gospel, and with what Contempt and Scorn they generally looked upon it (as
a Dispensation whereof a man ought to be ashamed.)

That St. Paul, who (as it appears by all his Epistles and Orations) well
understood (the (...)) the Congruity and decency of speaking or of writing;
intending, before he should conclude, (after he should have evinced the
Excellency of the Gospel) to take strength and confidence, and glory in his
Romans 15. 17.
Ministration; Being yet in his Prooemium only, whose Office is ((...)) by a
modest and smooth insinuation, to make way for his Discourse which was to
follow;

I say, that in this place of his Epistle, he should take notice of the
Prejudices which lay against the Gospel, and plainly and clearly (without a
(...)) Anticipate and Obviate the imagination that he ought to be ashamed of
it; This, I humbly conceive to be most agreeable to the design and Character of
St. Paul, and that according to this interpretation we ought here to consider,

I. A supposal in the Romans, intimating the prejudices against ^^e Gospel. And
therein,

1. A thing imagined; that Paul would not adventure to Preach the Gospel at
Rome.

2. The reason of the imagination, an Opinion that he would be ashamed.

II. A removal or Amolition of that supposal, intimating the Iniquity of those
Prejudices: viz.

A Removal of

1. The thing that was imagined, I am ready to preach the Gospel, even at Rome.

2. And of the imaginary reason of the supposition, For I am not afhamed of the
Gospel.

III. The Grounds and Reasons of this Amolition.

And these are drawn from two heads and adjuncts of the Gospel:

1. Necessarily implied and presupposed, and that is Veritatis evidentia, (if
the Gospel were not the truth of God it could not be the power of God.)

2. Explicitly and expressly proposed, and that is Virtutis excellentia, it is
the Power of God to Salvation (and that (...)) to every one that believes. I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to Salvation
to every one that believes.

So that I am to speak of these two general Heads:

I. Of the Prejudices against the Gospel.

II. Of the Iniquity and unreasonableness of those Prejudices.

From whence it will follow that we ought to Preach the Gospel, and not to be
ashamed.

Concerning which things I shall not endeavor at a Rhetorical Harangue, but
crave leave that I may be admitted to speak in a plain and humble Analytical
and Didactical way of discourse.

I. Then, I am to speak of those Prejudices against the Gospel, from whence it
is (by some persons) imagined, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be
ashamed of it.

And herein I shall

1. Show that there always have been, and always will be such Prejudices
against the Gospel.

2. Enquire what it is in the Systeme of the Gospel, which is the special
object of these Prejudices.

3. Then make a brief reflection upon the nature and symptoms of the
Prejudices.

4. And upon the Characters of the persons most obnoxious to them.

1. First, That there always have been, and always will be, Prejudices
against the Gospel (and an imagination in some persons, that Ministers and
Christians ought to be ashamed of it) is so deplorably manifest, that I need
not insist upon either the proof or declaration of it.

That it is, and has been always so, it is not only the unhappy complaint of
the present Age, but has been of every Age and Generation since the first
Promulgation of the Gospel; And that it will be so, we have an infallible
assurance from Christ and his Apostles; That the latter days shall be times of
Infidelity and departure from the Faith, that there will be Scoffers at the 2 Timothy 3. 1.
Gospel, and cruel Mockers, we have the assurance of the Apostles 2 Pet. 3. 3.
Jude 18.
St. Paul, St. Peter, and St. Jude.

That when the Son of man shall come to judge the World, Luke 18. 8.
he shall hardly find Faith on the Earth, we have the Prediction of our Lord
Christ himself.

Briefly and summarily, our Lord Christ in several places of the Gospel,
declares and supposes that many will be offended at Mat 23. 3. Mar. 8. 38.
him, that they will be ashamed of him, and of his words, both of his Person,
and of his Gospel.

Our Apostle declares that he himself is not ashamed, exhorts 2 Timothy 1. 8, 12,
16.
Timothy not to be ashamed, commends Epaphroditus that he was not ashamed; St.
Peter exhorts 1 Pet. 4. 16.
those that suffered for the Gospel not to be ashamed. If there had not been an
imagination in the world that they ought to have been ashamed, to what end were
all these Declarations, Commendations, Exhortations concerning being not
ashamed?

2. I pass therefore to the second thing propounded, to enquire what is the
special Object of these Prejudices, or what are those things contained in the
Gospel, whereof (in an especial manner) it is imagined that we ought to be
ashamed.

Though the whole System of the Gospel lies under Prejudices, yet not all parts
of it alike, some more than other, and some by reason of the other.

The whole Gospel is generally dividable into

1. Historical Narrations.

2. Moral Institutions and Motives.

3. Dogmatical Mysteries.

These are delivered sometimes distinctly and severally, and sometimes they are
combined and mixed together.

That there was such a person as Christ, that he was born of Mary, that Joseph
was his reputed Father; The manner of his Life and of his Death, his Actions,
and his Teachings, are matters merely Historical.

That this reputed Son of Joseph was indeed the Son of God, conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of a Virgin, and the like, have in them a Combination of the
Mystery together with the History of the Gospel.

[I stand not to show, how the Morality is sometimes simply delivered, and
sometimes in Combination with the Mysterious parts of the Gospel]

1. Now concerning those parts of the Gospel which are merely and simply
Historical, and Moral, I suppose they cannot be here intended; Because that to
such persons, as the Romans were, (men pretending to Reason and Philosophy)
they afford no color for an imagination that a Minister or Christian ought to
be ashamed.

Supposing the truth of what is there delivered (whereof In Sermon. against
Antiscripturists.
I have spoken heretofore) what was there in the Birth, or Life, or Death; the
Conversation, or Actions, (ordinary, or extraordinary) of Christ, or his
Apostles, whereof in the opinion of a Philosopher, a Christian ought to be
ashamed?

Was it the meanness of Christ's Nativity? That he was the reputed Son of
Joseph, who was of a mean and despicable Occupation.

Was it that he lived an Ambulatory kind of life? teaching and disputing
concerning good and evil, happiness and unhappiness, in the Synagogues and in
the Temple, and the Streets and Markets, and in the Wilderness (every where)
Preaching the Doctrine of the Kingdom.

Or lastly, Was it because of the occasion and manner of his Death? because he
was Condemned, and Executed by his Contrymen, upon an accusation of
corrupting the People, and making an Innovation in Religion, upon pretense of
holding intercourse with God?

Every one of these circumstances had been coincident in Socrates long before
the time of the writing of this Epistle to the Romans.

He was the Son of Sophroniscus, as poor a man as Joseph (a Carver of Images in
Stone) his Mother was a Midwife.

His Conversation was Ambulatory, discourfing and reasoning at all times, and
in all places, (in Academia, in Lycaeo, in Foro, in places of walking, and of
public Exercise; (when he ate, or drank, or played) in the Camp, the Market,
or the Prison) with all the men he met withal concerning Virtue and Vice, and
the summum bonum; concerning Wisdom and Folly.

Vide Xenoph. in Soc. Apologia.
And he had been condemned and executed by the Athenians, upon the very same
pretenses which were objected against our Savior.

Yet all these disadvantages had not hindered Socrates (at that time, after
about 500 years) from the Admiration, and almost Adoration of all men
pretending to Philosophy and Wisdom, not only amongst all the rest of the
Gentile World, but even amongst the Romans also.

And therefore the mere Historical part of the Gospel could minister no color
of suspicion why a Minister or a Christian should be ashamed of it.

2. Moreover, the same may be said of those parts of the Gospel which are
merely Practical, and Moral, (The Precepts concerning Piety and Justice, and
Temperance in all the several branches of them, and the motives to them.)

The Morality of the Gospel infinitely excells the Institutions of any of the
Heathen Philosophers, all that they could object against it, was its too great
purity and holiness, that it puts a violence, and stretch upon Humane Nature,
causing men to strain after degrees of purity and sanctity unpracticable and
unattainable. It excells all the Precepts and Institutes of the Jews, Christ
made a (...) even of the Moral Law of Moses, and tells us, that the
Righteousness of Christians must exceed the Mat. 5. 20.
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; and the Apostle (comparing the
entire Systems of the Heb. 8. 6.
Mosaical and Christian Oeconomies in reference to Christian Duties and the
motives to them,) justly pronounces, that the Christian has received a better
Covenant, founded upon better Promises.

3. It remains therefore, that the peculiar and special Object of those
Prejudicate imaginations (whereby it is concluded, that Ministers and
Christians ought to be ashamed) are the Articles of mere Belief, Dogmatical
Mysteries of the Gospel.

At the expense of your time and patience (in a long discourse) to tell you
what are the Mysteries of the Gospel, were to suppose that (in compliance with
the barbarity of later times) you had neglected to be instructed in your
Catechism, and had need that one should teach you what are the first Elements
of Christianity. My design engages me no further than only to name them, and
that also very briefly.

In the two first Chapters to the Corinthians, we find our Apostle handling
this Argument largely and ex professo.

And there he reduces the whole mystery to two words, namely, the Cross of
Christ, he tells them that he was sent to Preach and not to Baptize, that this
was that which Christ sent him to Preach; and that he determined to know
nothing else among them, but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, and in Chap 1. v.
23. he declares this to have been the occasion of the Scandal, taken both by
Jews and Gentiles; I Preach Christ Crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, etc.

The Scandal taken, was against the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the Nature,
and Mediatorian Office; the Character and Personal Concernment of Christ, and
work of Redemption by his blood spilt upon the Cross, are the two great and
comprehensive heads to which the whole Mystery of the Gospel is easily,
naturally, and immediately reducible.

The Justification, Sanctification, entire Economy of the salvation of man,
depends immediately upon the work of Redemption by the blood of Christ.

The value and efficacy of his blood, resolves into the Excellency of his
Person, and of his Nature; That he was the Son of God the Father, Conceived by
the Holy Ghost, which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one.

So that in the last resolution, the conjunction of the Divine and Humane
Natures in the Unity of the Person of Christ, and the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Nature of the Godhead, is the (...) of the Gospel.

And this is also the (...), that great thing whereof it is imagined that a
Christian or a Preacher ought to be ashamed.

Which will be yet more evident if we shall make a brief reflection upon the
Nature and Symptoms of the Prejudices against the Gospel, and the Character of
the persons more especially obnoxious to these Prejudices.

3. Beside the consideration of Interest, (real or imaginary) and the
disappointment of men's desires and expectations, (an ordinary, eminent and
predominant ingredient in the prejudices of all men) there are two things which
(in men pretending to prudence and virtue, or to reason and understanding) are
apt to create a distaste against any way of Institution, or any Doctrine
wherein they are supposed or presumed to be.

1. (...), an apprehension of Turpitude or dishonesty, either intrinsecally
contained in that which is propounded, or consequentially involved with it.

2. (...) or (...), an apprehension of some Absurdity or unreasonableness in it.

1. Of the former sort, are Principles of Atheism, Irreligion, Immorality, the
Doctrines of Diagoras, who denied the being of God; of Carneades, concerning
good and evil; of Diogenes, concerning Incest, etc. (which have an Intrinsic
and immediate turpitude;) The Doctrine of Epicurus concerning the Mortality of
the Soul, a consequential Principle of all Impiety, Injustice, and Debauchery,
if that be the case, Let us eat and 1 Cor. 15. 32.
drink, etc.

These are injurious to the Interest of Mankind, and they put an indignity
upon the practical reason and principles of men, and are apt to be distastefull
and offensive, instances whereof there are very many among the Heathens, (as
among others that of the Athenians, who banished Protagoras, and caused his
Books to be burnt in the open Marketplace, because he wrote doubtfully
concerning the being of a God) But as for these, it has not been in the power
of malice to fasten them upon the Gospel, or in the compass of mistake to
suppose them in it; so that it has been clearly exempted from this Prejudice.

2. The other thing that creates an aversion against any Doctrine is (...) or
(...) (an Apprehension of absurdity or unreasonableness in the things
propounded) wherein the Wit and Theoretick Reason or Understanding of men takes
it self (no matter whether it be justly or unjustly) to be affronted, and this
is as distastefull as the former.

An Instance whereof we have in the sixth of St. John, where when Christ told
those that followed him of eating his flesh and drinking his blood (speaking in
a figure not obvious to their vulgar understanding) they cried out (...), (that
was a hard saying) and taking themselves to be abused they finally forsook him.

I say, that the apprehension of Moral turpitude, or Logical absurdity are
equally distasteful, But in their more peculiar Subjects, and Symptoms, and
Aptitude to mistake and Prejudice, they differ.

The former aversion has its peculiar seat and residence in Virtuous and
Prudent men, (the (...) and (...)) and discovers it self in Zeal and
Indignation, as against things dangerous and pernicious; the later is subjected
in persons, who are (or take themselves to be) men of Wit and Learning (the
(...), and the (...),) the Symptoms of it are scorn and contempt, as of things
absurd and nonsensical, foolish and irrational.

And in matters of this nature men are more inclinable to fall into mistake and
Prejudice than in the former.

The Notions of Truth and Falsehood lie more abstruse than those of Good and
Evil, and men are more apt to be deceived in their wit, than in their honesty.

No Truths are so liable to mistake and prejudice as the professedly
Mysterious, and without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness. The
ground of this Prejudice is an Impotency to distinguish betwixt (...) and (...)
and (...), betwixt Truth and Clearness, Obscurity and Absurdity, Being
inconceivable and incredible, Being incomprehensible, and Being unaccountable.

4. This Impotency is an Infirmity to which the Brisk and the sudden, the
forward and impatient, the talkative and disputatious, (all such as scorn the
dullness of consideration, and think themselves above the drudgery of thinking)
that is to say the Wits and Beaux esprits are of all men living the most
obnoxious.

And from hence it is, that by persons of this Character to be despised, has
always been the fortune of the Gospel.

The condition of the Gospel amongst our selves, I shall not in this place, at
this time labor to declare, I come not hither to accuse my Nation; But that it
was thus in the Apostles time we have sufficient assurance.

He tells us that the most eminent despisers (the Contemptores legitimi) of the
Gospel, were the (...), and the (...), and the (...). The Tropical Rhetorician,
and the Flanting Orator, the Jibing Satyrist, and Scurrilous Comedian, the
Sophistical Philosopher, and Everlasting Disputant, the Conceited Scribe, and
Pharisaical Opiniator. Where (says the 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Apostle) is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this World?

The entertainment which the Gospel found at the hands of such as these was
generally that of scorn and contempt.

Speaking in the person of men of this Character (whether Jews or Gentiles) our
Apostle in the compass of two 1 and 2 of 1 Ep. to Cor.
Chapters does nine times call the Mysteries of the Gospel foolishness, and
foolish things, things weak, ignoble, and despised, and things which are not.

The sum of the whole Mystery of the Gospel is contained in two words, ( Christ
Crucified) I preach (says he) Christ crucified, Chap. 1. 23.
to the Jews a scandal, to the Greeks foolishness; the opinion they had of it
was that it was an absurd and a foolish dispensation, a dispensation whereof a
Christian, a Preacher ought to be ashamed.

Thus much of the first general part of my Discourse concerning the Prejudices
against the Gospel.

II. I come now to the second part,

To show the Iniquity and unreasonableness of these Prejudices.

And here I shall endeavor to evince two things.

1. That there is reason for the Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed of
their Prejudices.

2. That there is no reason for Christians or Ministers to be ashamed of the
Gospel.

1. First, There is reason for the Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed.

Because their Contempt of it does not proceed from any Generous or Noble
Principle or qualification, it comes not from height of Spirit or Wit, from
depth of Reason or Judgment, from largeness of Learning or Knowledge.

But from the want of all these qualifications, and is finally resolved into an
ungentile, and (if I may be permitted to speak plainly) a kind of Rustical
Ignorance and want of Ingenuity.

In Acts 17. 11. St. Paul comparing the Thessalonian Jews with the Beraeans,
says that the Beraeans were more Noble ((...),) because they did not
precipitously, and temerariously reject the Gospel, as the others did, but were
diligent in searching of the Scriptures daily, and in a strict enquiry
concerning the Grounds and Motives to Belief alleged by the Apostles (whether
they were of that weight which was pretended) whether they were so or no.

In matters of so great moment as the Gospel does pretend to be (in reference
to this world, and that which is to come) to despise, or to reject the
Proposals, without a just consideration of them, and without an impartial and
ingenuous examination (and full understanding) of the Grounds and Reasons, upon
which they are propounded, savours not of Prudence or Wisdom, Wit or Learning,
Ingenie or Ingenuity; in one word, it savours neither of a Gentleman, nor a
Scholar.

Now that this is the Case in the Contempt of the Gospel, I think it will
appear if we shall attentively consider,

1. What was the Judgment of Christ (who was the Author of the Gospel)
concerning this matter.

2. The signal Instances of the contempt and neglect of the Gospel mentioned in
the Scriptures

3. If we shall make a rational enquiry into the Principles and Postulata, into
which the contempt of the Gospel is finally resolved.

1. First, this will receive evidence from the Judgment of Christ himself,
concerning the resolution of the rejection and contempt of the Gospel.

I suppose none will be so Jewish as to object, the bringing of Christ to be a
Witness in his own behalf, seeing his case is not the case of an ordinary
witness, but resolves it self (as afterward will be briefly showed) into
attestation of the greatest credit.

I say then, that Christ himself (who knew what was in man, and needed not that
any man should teach him) has resolved the contempt and rejection of the
Gospel into want of understanding, and of due and ingenuous consideration, into
Ignorance, and want of Candor and Ingenuity.

In the Parable of the Sower we find this Argument largely and profoundly
handled by our Savior, the Parable is three Mat. 13. 3. Mar. 4. 3. Luke 8. 5.
times delivered in the Gospel, and is very well known, so that I need not
stand upon the declaration or repetition of it. The (...) concerning the bad,
(that is the highway, the stony, the thorny) and the good, (that is, the
fruitful) ground, I shall not mention; He that shall harmonize the triple
Narration, and Analyze the '(...) of this Parable, shall find, that our
Savior therein propounds and intimates the causes immediate and mediate;
Mediate, nearer and remoter, of the reception and rejection of the Gospel,
whereof (as to the point in hand) the sum is this:

That the irregular endeavor after the attainment of temporal good things, and
the avoidance of temporal Evils, The lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life, the Cares of the World and Deceitfulness of Riches, the
lust of other things, Pride and conceitedness of Wisdom, and other Carnal
Interests, are the cause of the want of an attentive, and patient, an ingenuous
and impartial consideration; And that the want of such a consideration, is the
cause of the want of a through Understanding; and that the want of a through
Understanding, this is the cause of the Contempt, or Rejection, or neglect of
the Gospel.

In the Gospel of Luke 8. 15. (...).
St. Luke he resolves the causes of the Reception of the Gospel into honesty
and goodness of heart (sincerity, and ingenuity) into a patient and constant
attention to (hearing and keeping of) the word.

In the Gospel of St. Matthew Mat. 13. 23.
he resolves the whole matter into this one point of a perfect and through
Understanding. The good ground, says he, is he that (...).
hears the Word and brings forth fruit with understanding.

A fair and honest, a candid and ingenuous attention and Consideration, and a
full Understanding, are the causes of the Reception; Therefore an Attention
hypocritical and unsincere, An ignoble ignorance, perverseness, and want of
candor and ingenuity, are the causes of the contempt of the Gospel in the
judgment of our Savior.

2. The same also will further appear if we might be permitted to examine the
several Instances of contempt and neglect of the Gospel, and so go through the
various degrees of the Symptoms of Infidelity mentioned in the Gospel. I shall
only touch them very briefly, and the heads of them are such as these:

1. The egregious hesitation or slowness in believing.

2. The refusal or rejection of the Gospel.

3. The Offense or Scandal at it.

4. The quarrelling and disputation against it, and opposition to it.

5. The downright scorn and contempt of it.

6. And lastly, the Persecution for it.

I say, if we might stay upon this Argument, it would appear, that as the
Remoter causes of every Case, are easily reducible, to the lusts and interests
mentioned by our Savior, so the more immediate Causes, whether in Jews or
Gentiles, will be found to resolve into want of Ingenuity and Understanding.

1. The Apostles were slow in believing before the Resurrection and Mission of
the Spirit. Christ tells them, that then they were Fools, and slow of heart
(inconsiderate and inadvertent, stupid and Disingenuous.)

2. The most eminent Rejecters of the Gospel were the Scribes and Pharisees: if
we shall enquire after the Virtue or Modesty, Candor or Ingenuity of these
men, we will find them the most barbarous and covetous, proud and
supercilious, insincere and hypocritical in the world, (how often does our
Savior charge them with all these things?) And if we enquire after their
Knowledge and Understanding, we shall find them to have been mere
Braggadocio's and pretenders; Christ often calls them blind Pharisees, and
blind guides; he tells them that they were blind leaders of the Mat. 23. 16,
26.
blind: that seeing they did see and not perceive, hearing they did hear and
did not understand.

3. In the sixth of John we find a mighty Scandal taken at the Gospel among
the Auditors of Christ, they murmured, they strove amongst themselves, they
finally revolted, upon a word, because they judged it to be, (...) a hard
saying; They judged it so, because they did not understand it; they did not
understand it, because they had not the Modesty and Meekness, Patience and
Ingenuity to enquire the meaning of it, or to attend to that Explication which
our Savior made of that expression.

4. In the 22 of St. Matthew, Ver. 6. 3.
and the parallel places, we find the Pharisees, the Scribes, the Lawyers, the
Herodians, coursing our Savior, charging him with questions about paying
Tribute unto Caesar, the Resurrection, the Great Commandment, etc. If now ye
will judge of the Ingenuity of these men, consider there how thick and
threefold, how furiously and how rudely, they fall upon him, how stupidly they
persist, every one judgeing that he was too hard for all the rest, ( and
answered them well,) but every one adhering to his own Conclusion; Consider how
before they set upon him, they took counsel to entangle him, and sent spies to
entrap (or trepan) him; And for their Understanding, consider how ignorant they
were, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

Neither was it thus among the Jews only, but among the Gentiles also; nor only
in these, but in the two remaining degrees of the downright scorn, and the
contempt of the Gospel, and Persecution for it.

5. In the 26. of the Acts we find the opinion that Festus had concerning the
Gospel, (with what contempt and scorn he speaks of it, how roundly he
pronounces that Paul was mad.) If you should judge of his Ingenuity in
pronouncing, by his skilfulness in understanding of the Gospel; Consider how
profound an account of Paul's case, and of the Gospel he renders to Agrippa;
Act. 25. 19.
how that it was a (trifling) question concerning the Jewish Superstition, and
concerning one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

In the 17 of the Acts we find Ver. 32.
the Athenians (...), Making a mock at Paul, and scorning his Gospel as a most
ridiculous thing; If you will know their manners and ingenuity, you may
observe, that they condemned him for a Babbler before they heard him Ver. 18.
speak, and if you will measure the depth of their Understanding of that which
they despised, you may observe, that as they imagined Jesus to be a strange
God; so they understood Ibid.
Anastasis (the Resurrection) to be a Goddess. He seems (say they) to be a
setter forth of strange Gods, because he Preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection.

6. The utmost degree of Contempt of the Gospel, is Persecution for it; and the
highest imaginable instance of this, was the betraying and murdering of Christ
himself; Concerning the Ingenuity or disingenuity of the contrivance,
management, and execution of this prodigious Action, it were no less than
madness to undertake to speak proportionally; And that this also proceeded not
only from wickedness and want of Ingenuity, but from Ignorance and want of
Understanding, we have an irrefragable assurance. Christ himself says, that
they knew not what they did; and our Apostle, Luke 23. 34.
that if they had understood themselves, they would 1 Cor. 2. 8.
not have crucified the Lord of Glory.

So that by all these instances, and many others of like nature, it does
appear, that (agreeably to the Sentence and Judgment of our Savior) the
contempt of the Gospel is finally resolved into a shameful Ignorance, and want
of Ingenuity; which will yet be more evident from Reason.

3. I come therefore in the third place to a consideration of the

(1) Principle into which the contempt of the Gospel is resolved, and of

(2) The Postulata upon which it is grounded. And from the Absurdity of one,
and the Unreasonableness of the other, to make it appear, that there is reason
for the Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed.

1. From the consideration of their Principle: After what has been spoken in
the former part of this Discourse, and what is attested by experience, I take
it for granted,

1. That the special Object of the Contempt of the Gospel is the Mystical part
of it.

2. That the immediate reason of the contempt of these Mysteries is an
Imagination, or Opinion of the falsehood of them.

3. That this Opinion of the falsehood of them, is derived from the Obscurity
and Difficulty of them.

Because they are inexplicable, incomprehensible, unintelligible, they conclude
them to be false and incredible, merely Fantastical and Chimerical
Imaginations, and so to be despised.

So that the Principle into which these Scorners do resolve themselves, is
this; That whatsoever is Inexplicable, Incomprehensible, Unintelligible is (by
Philosophers at least and Wise men) to be accounted incredible, fantastical,
fictitious, and so to be despised.

If this be not the Ratiocination, and this the Principle of those Virtuosi, of
whom we are speaking, I desire to be better informed. But if it be, I would
entreat them to stand a little, and consider whither they are going, and
whither this Principle and reasoning will lead them.

Will it not lead them to cast off not only Christianity, but even all natural
Religion, and force them (with the wise man in the Psalmist) to say in their
hearts that there is no God? Because the Nature, and Essence, and Attributes of
God are inexplicable, incomprehensible, and unintelligible; He dwells in a
light which no mortal eye can approach unto, such knowledge is too wonderful
and excellent for us, and we cannot attain unto it.

But this I fear they do not account an inconvenience, but rather that this is
that they would be at.

Again therefore, I entreat them to consider;

Will not this Principle lead them to deny the most obvious things in nature?
Will it not take away the very grounds of all that wisdom, to which they do
pretend, (the force even of Experiment and Demonstration?)

Nay, Will it not finally bring upon themselves, that horrible inconvenience,
that they are not to be offended if it shall be doubted or affirmed that they
are not such Wits as they pretend?

The most obvious things in Universal Nature, are Continued Quantity, and Local
Motion: These are either infinitely divisible, or they are not. Will they deny
this Disjunction, (and say, that they neither are so, nor not so?) Or will they
make choice of either Member? Will they clear the difficulties that are in it?
Or answer the Objections that may be made against it?

I presume they may have heard of that famous Argument of Zeno ( AEliates)
called Achilles, How whilst that mighty Disputant (by the impossibilities and
absurdities on either side) was demonstrating that Local Motion was a thing
impossible, one of his Auditors rose up and silently and sliely walked about
the School, and so confuted him.

The most previous, most clear, and comprehensible of all humane Sciences are
the pure and unmixed Mathematics, yet even in Geometry and Arithmetic how
many things are forceably concluded to be true, which are inexplicable,
unimaginable, incomprehensible? I shall instance in a very few; So few as not
to need an Apology to the unlearned in those Sciences: So trivial, as not to
admit of an Explication to the Learned.

That the least imaginable space should be equal to another (upon the same Base
of the same Altitude) whose sides are protracted in infinitum, or a Finite
greater than an Infinite. The equality of all Circular Angles of Contact. The
everlasting approximation and impossible concourse of Asymptots. The affections
of surd and irrational Quantities, etc. are undeniably demonstrated to be true,
yet all these (and many more) are inexplicable, incomprehensible,
unintelligible.

They say they cannot explicate or imagine, (they cannot conceive or
comprehend) the Mystery of the Trinity, and Unity of the Godhead, and therefore
they despise it as a mere fictitious imagination.

Do they therefore clearly understand, and fully comprehend, and can they
express and explicate the Affections of Unity and Trinity in Numbers? That
there should be a Quantity in Nature (one and not another) which with its
infinite q. c. qq. etc.
ascending powers and q. c. qq. etc.
descending roots are all of them equal, or rather one and the same among
themselves? Can they explicate, or imagine, or comprehend any one of the
infinite potential roots of the Number Three? q. c. etc.


They say, they cannot understand how Christ should be conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of a Virgin, and therefore they deride it.

Can they therefore understand how they themselves have been conceived, and
born, and nourished up? And are they able to explain how, and by what progress
from a little water spilt upon a too luxurious ground there should spring forth
such a Race of Titans, such a Gigantick brood of fighters against Heaven, of
Scoffers at Religion?

Briefly, they say they cannot comprehend how God and Man should be one Christ,
and therefore they contemn the Gospel, and the Believers of it.

Can they therefore understand how the reasonable Soul and Flesh should be one
man?

Either they themselves consist of two natures (the one Corporeal, the other
Spiritual and Incorporeal) or they do not. If they have nothing in them
Incorporeal, can they understand and explain how senseless Atoms, how stupid
Matter, and Local Motion should work themselves up to Sense and Cogitation,
Reflection and Discourse, to Wit and Gallantry? (so as to make Jests and
Ballads upon the Gospels.)

If they consist not only of a Body, but of a Soul (a spiritual Soul) also; Can
they explain by what (...), these two natures have been brought together; by
what bands and ligaments they are united, and how the Communication betwixt
them is performed? In one word, Can they explicate the Phenomena of Sense,
Imagination, Memory, Reason, Wit and Bravery?

If they are able to perform these things, let the world be made happy by their
labors, and let them receive the Paeans, and Acclamations, the Crowns and
Garlands denied to all that were before them. But if they must be forced to
confess that all these things are inexplicable, unimaginable, unintelligible,
and incomprehensible, and will yet continue to despise the Mysteries of the
Gospel only for that reason, because they are inexplicable, unintelligible,
incomprehensible, let them not be offended at a poor despised Minister of the
Gospel; if he shall declare and testify to all the World, that these are not
the Wits, or Beaux Esprits, or Forts Esprits; that they are Flesh and not
Spirit, mere ordinary mortal Wights as others are; that all their boasting is
but empty noise, and all they have to show is a mere Deceptio visus; that they
may be Masters of some devices that are pretty, skillful in the Arts and
Mysteries of Circulation and disguise, but they are not such dreadful
Archimago's, such mighty Conjurers as they pretend. Let them therefore abandon
their unreasonable Principle, and be ashamed.

2. But secondly, as is the Principle upon which they contemn, such are their
Postulata, (the (...), or (...), as the Philosophers and Mathematicians call
them,) that is to say, the terms or demands upon which they pretend that they
would cease to despise the Gospel, and for want of which they do contemn it.

These Postulata are reducible to two Heads:

1. Philosophical Demonstration. Or,

2. The sight of Miracles, Signs and Wonders (at their demand.)

This is the pretense of the Wits of these Times: if the truth of the Mysteries
of the Gospel might be proved to them by Demonstration, or if they might see a
Sign they would believe; This was the pretense at the time of the writing of my
Text; ((...)) The Jews required a Sign, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
the Greeks ( i. e. the Gentiles) sought after Wisdom ((...), i. e. (...),) and
because they were disappointed of these, the mystery (of Christ Crucified) was
to the Jews a Scandal, to the Greeks foolishness. For brevity let us name these
two:

1. The Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum.

2. The Judaick or Semiotical Postulatum.

Now that the former of these proceeds from Ignorance, and want of Learning and
Understanding; the later from Pride and Arrogance joined with a blockish
Stupidity; That the former is disingenious, the later disingenuous, that both
of them are irrational and absurd is evident.

1. And first for the Grecanical Postulatum;

In the case of any Doctrine or question, to refuse a proof that is Cogent, and
sufficient, (the only proof whereof a thing is capable) and to hanker or seek
after a Proof impossible, or improper, (such as implies a Contradiction, or
such as the nature of the question will not bear;) This (I say) proceeds from
Ignorance, from want of Learning and Understanding, and this is the case of the
Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum.

To give a rational or Philosophical Demonstration of the truth of the Gospel,
there are but three ways imaginable in Nature: By Arguments, either,

1. A Priori, from the common Principles of Intelligence. Or,

2. A Posteriori, from experiment and sensible observations.

And this latter way of arguing must be drawn either,

1. From instances of things Novel and Anomalous in Nature, things purposely
designed for such Arguments: Or else,

2. It must be taken from the common and ordinary, the standing and perpetnal
Phenomena of Nature.

A Demonstration a posteriori by particular Instances of the Divine Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, purposely designed for that end, was the proof offered by
Christ and his Apostles; This they rejected; To prove particular Mysteries,
Mysteries hidden from Ages, (and so declared and professed to be by the
Promulgers) by general and perpetual Phenomena of Nature, is in nature
impossible to perform, and senceless to require: To prove any thing concerning
the Essence and Nature of God per causas, by Arguments a Priori supposes causes
precedent to the Essence of God himself, and implies a Contradiction; So then,
the Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum proceeds from Ignorance and want of
Learning, and is at best disingenuous, and Theoretically absurd.

2. Again secondly, (concerning the Judaical or Semeiotical Postulatum) After
numerous, or rather innumerable Attestations by Signs and Wonders notoriously
known (and by themselves acknowledged) or sufficiently and authentically
proved, or delivered down by uncontrollable and irreproveable Tradition, yet
still to demand and require more Signs, Signs of their own election,
accompanied with circumstances of their own prescription; Is not this to tempt
and limit the Almighty? To make themselves Arbiters of the Emanations of his
Power and Wisdom? To suppose that those ought to be subservient to their wanton
curiosity; Is it not to expect that God himself should Lacquey after them, to
make him a doer of Tricks at their senceless and impudent demand? Is not this
an A sinine and an impious stupidity? A composition of the highest degrees of
Intellectual and Moral Absurdity which is imaginable?

Now (therefore) that this was, and is, (and to the end of the world must ever
now be) the case of the Jewish or Semeiotical Postulatum, is a so plain and
evident.

In Confirmation of the Gospel, Christ and his Apostles wrought far more (and
more considerable) Signs and Wonders, than before (or since) that time were
ever wrought since the Creation of the world, yet all this will not content
them: Notwithstanding all this, (...), (they require a sign) the meaning
whereof is better interpreted by their Practice and behavior to our Savior
than by the Dictionary; And of this their behavior I shall only produce two or
three instances.

In the sixth of John we find that Christ fed 5000 men with five Loaves and
two Fishes, and when they had seen the Miracle, they were so taken with it,
that they Ver. 14. (...). Ver. 15.
said that he was that Prophet which should come, and they would have taken him
by force and made him a King.

But the very next day, these very men, that had seen, and felt, and tasted of,
the Miracle (because he told them that they followed him for the Loaves) take a
miff at him, they pirk up themselves, and come boldly and malepertly to him,
saying, Ver. 30. (...);
What Sign show thou, that we may see and believe? What do thou work? As
if the former Miracle had not been now a Sign.

When Christ hung upon the Mat. 27. 40, 41, 42.
Cross, the Noble and the Mighty, the Grave and Wise amongst them, (the chief
Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders) came, and offered him a bargain, if
he would then (just then) come down from the Cross, they would believe; but our
Lord Christ had just then something else to do.

In the eighth of Mark the Pharisees Ver. 11. vide Mat. 16. 1, 4. 12. 38, 39.
Luke 11. 16, 29, 30.
came forth, and began to question him ((...), to cavil, and dispute with him)
(...), ( requiring a sign) seeking of him a sign from Heaven tempting him; They
would have (and that presently upon the spot) a sign, not (...), but (...), or
that which is properly (...); not from Vide Joh. 4. 48.
Wind, or Sea, or Earth, but from Heaven; not that they intended to be his
Disciples, but for a trial of his skill and ability; was not this a Gallant and
a Wise, a Noble and a Worthy Postulatum? Could it choose but move him to a
compliance?

This moved him indeed, to comply so far with his own defign, as to promise
them a sign; the sign of the Prophet Jonas (that irrefragable (...) of his
Gospel) which should render them inexcusable; But though he was meek and lowly
of heart, the soft and gentle Lamb of God, so that he snffered himself to be
accused, condemned, buffeted, and spit upon, and yet held his peace (as a Lamb
that is dumb so opened he not his mouth) Yet the nobleness and ingenuity of
this Postulatum kindled a fire within him, so that he spoke with his tongue.
This moved him to scorn and indignation, so that in effect he called them
bastards for for their labor, telling them that they were (no sons of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, but) a wicked and adulterous Generation; and that no sign
should be given Mat. 12. 38, 39.
them but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.

I suppose I shall need to say no more concerning the absurdity and
unreasonableness of the Jewish or Semeiotical Postulatum. And

I have now done with the former part of my undertaking, which was to endeavor
to make it appear,

That the Comtemners of the Gospel have reason to be ashamed of their
Prejudices.

2. I come now to the second, which is the last part of what I have propounded,
viz. to show,

That there is no reason for Christians or for Preachers to be ashamed of the
Gospel;

And that upon two Considerations:

1. Propter veritatis Evidentiam.

2. Propter virtutis Excellentiam.

The former of which is implied (if it were not the truth of God, it could not
be the Power of God.)

The later is expressed, For it is the Power of God to salvation to every one
that believes.

The evidence of the Truth is so great that whosoever duly considers it will
certainly believe the Gospel.

The Virtue and Excellency of the Gospel is so great, that whosoever truly
believes the Gospel shall infallibly be saved.

1. First, I am to speak of the Evidence of the truth of the Gospel. But
because it is here only implied, and because I have Sermon. against Antiscript.
formerly employed my poor endeavors upon that Argument, I shall only briefly
touch upon it.

The Mysteries of the Gospel, though they are inexplicable and inconceivable,
yet are they not incredible, though incomprehensible, yet they are not
unaccountable; Nor was the Author and Finisher of the Christian Faith so severe
upon the understanding of his followers, as to exact a Belief without a
sufficient proof and Demonstration of the truth of that which he delivered.

Though he would not offer at the Grecanick way (which he knew to be impossible
to grant, to be absurd and unreasonable to require) yet he would afford it that
Demonstration whereof it was capable (a Demonstration properly so called,
accommodate to the Understanding of all Mankind, Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and
Barbarians, Noble and Ignoble, Learned and Unlearned) (...).

He that refused to gratify the impudent Scribes and Pharisees in their way,
would not leave the truth of the Gospel undemonstrated in his own.

And of the truth of all the Mysteries which he delivered, this is the Analemma
Catholicon, the Common, the Universal, the Comprehenfive demonstration.

He that made himself the Son of God (as the Jews express it) That said he was
one with God ( I and the Father are one) that Joh. 10. 30. 14. 11.
he was in the Father, and the Father in him; That declared the Mission and
Emanation of the Spirit from the Father and the Son, and that always spoke of
him as a person distinct; And that these three are one.

In a word; He that was the 1. Joh. 5. 7.
Author of these and all other Mysteries whereof we have been speaking, did not
put the issue of believing upon his (...), but upon an undeniable and
unrefuseable Criterion.

If I do not the works of my Father believe me not; but if I do, Joh. 10. 38.
though ye believe not me, believe the works, ((...)) that ye may know (by
Demonstration) as well as believe, that I am in the Father, and he in me.

He did not only bear witness to himself, (although he died in testimony of his
Doctrine) He had not only the glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs for his Witnesses; But he
called Heaven and Earth to witness, He subpena'd whatever was in Heaven, and
Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places, to bear testimony to him.

There were three that bore witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, those three which he affirmed to be one. The Angels ministered unto him;
The Devils trembled and fled before him; Plants and Animals, the Wind and Sea
obeyed him; The Stars in their courses, or rather out of their courses
militated for him. To give testimony to Consummatum est, at the time of his
Death, the Sun was eclipsed, the Moon being at the Full. To indicate the place
of his Nativity, at the time of his Birth a new Star was made on purpose.
Health and Sickness, Life and Death, and Hades, gave in their testimonies by
their obedience to his word. Yet once more, he shook the Heavens, and sent down
the Holy Spirit upon his followers: he shook the Earth also, he tore the Rocks
and opened the Graves, and at his powerful voice the bodies of the Saints
arose: And lest it should be said, He raised others but himself he could not
raise; As he finished the Great Mystery of Christianity by his Death, so also
he proved the truth of it by his Resurrection; As he died for our Sins, so he
rose again for our Justification, Romans 4. 24.
for our Justification is in the Belief of that, and all other, the Mysteries
of Christianity.

These and many more, are heads of Arguments, which whoever duly considers and
understands, will certainly believe the Gospel propter veritatis Evidentiam.

2. It remains only to show, that whosoever does truly believe the Gospel,
shall infallibly be saved Propter Bonitatis, or Virtutis Excellentiam; Because
it is the Power of God to salvation to every one that believes.

In speaking of which Argument, I need not go about to prove, that the Power of
the Gospel is the Power of God, (in which respect it is called the Act. 11. 21.
Hand or Isa. 53. 1.
Arm of the Lord, Romans 10. 16. Ephesians. 6. 17.
the Sword of the Spirit, Tit. 2. 11.
the Grace of God, bringing Salvation, and the like.)

Neither shall I stand upon a Comparison of the Gospel, with the Grecanical or
Judaical Institutions, (a man may believe all that ever was written by
Philosophers, and yet doubt whether there is, (or can be) such a thing as
Salvation, yea or no. A man may believe, whatever is explicitcly and expressly
delivered in the Law of Moses, and yet not be saved) But my intention is
(barely and nakedly) this, By a short Reflection upon the Way and Method of the
Actions of Mankind, and the Discoveries and Contents of the Gospel (well known
to those that hear me) to manifest the truth of this Proposition, That, every
man that believes the Gospel (i. e. that truly and actually (...). Luke 8. 15.
(...) Romans 1. 28.
abides in that belief) shall infallibly be saved.

Because whosoever frames his Actions according to the Rules and Principles
(the Precepts and Prescriptions of the Gospel,) shall infallibly be saved.

And because, it is of the nature of man, to frame his Actions according to his
Actual and persevering Judgment and Belief.

The Nature and Essence of man consists in his Understanding; and for a man not
to follow the steadfast and constant, the actual and final dictate of his
Understanding, is impossible in Nature, and indeed implies a Contradiction.

He that believes, that there is neither God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell,
Salvation nor Damnation; And that he has not an Immortal Soul ( i. e.) a Soul
to save; such a man (If at least he has attained to those great
accomplishments of Rudeness and Incivility) will make it his business to fill
up his measure of Debaucheries, and Impieties; will think it Brave (perhaps)
and Witty, to Blaspheme God, and scoff at Religion; will make it a matter of
Gallantry and noble Courage and Resolution, to challenge God to damn him, or
bid the Devil take him Body and Soul; will spend his time in Revelling and
Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness; Expecting and hoping to die like a
beast, he will be sure to live like one; And in conclusion will find himself
disappointed of this glorious hope (this goodly, noble, manly expectation) and
that his Miscreancy and the error of his Judgment has betrayed him into
eternal misery.

Whilst (on the other side) he that believes the Declarations, and Promises,
and Threatenings, of the Gospel, will have his fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

He that firmly and steadfastly believes, that the Soul which Actuates his body
is an Immortal Being (a subsistence which shall and must endure to all
eternity;)

That after Death he must appear before the Tribunal of God 2. Cor. 5. 10.
and Christ, to answer for the things done in the body;

That from thence he shall be transmitted to a state either of Eternal
Happiness, or Eternal Misery; either to be entertained (in the Vision of God,
in the fellowship of Saints and Angels) with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory:
Or secluded from the sight of God, and treated with the Devil and his Angels,
with torment unconceivable, unexpressible, and that to all Eternity.

This man, if he might gain all the Profits, and Honors and Pleasures, if he
might decline all the afflictions of this world, will not lose his own Soul:
Frustra blanditiae venitis ad hunc, frustra nequitiae venitis ad hunc.
Considering that light and momentany things bear no proportion to the exceeding
weight and moment of those which are Eternal, he will forthwith endeavor to
lay hold upon Eternal Life, and make haste to escape the Wrath to come; And to
that end he will devour all difficulties, and neglect no means or opportunities.

He that believes, that the only way to Happiness is the way to Holiness; That
without holiness Heb. 12. 14.
no man shall see God; That no unclean thing shall enter there, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
That the Impious, the Unjust, the Intemperate, the Lascivious (continuing so)
shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

This man will endeavor to purify himself, to mortify all his carnal lusts
and affections, to cleanse himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and
to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

Again, he that believes and considers the Corruption and Impotence of his
natural Condition, and the design of Christ's coming into the world, what he
has already done, and what he is still in doing for him;

How that himself (and every Ephesians. 2. 3.
man) is by nature a child of wrath, that Sin reigns in his mortal Romans 7. 24.
body, that he lies under a bondage from which he cannot redeem, a Guilt from
which he cannot acquit himself;

That no flesh is justified in the Romans 3. 20.
sight of God.

Whosoever, I say, does believe this concerning himself; and (on the other
side) concerning Christ, that to this end was he born, and for this cause came
he into the world, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
that he might save sinners; Joh. 3. 17.
That the world through him might be saved;

That to this end (and this end only) he descended from Heaven; This was the
end of his Conversation upon Earth, his Life and Doctrine, his Preaching and
Example; This was the end of his Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Session at the Right hand of God; That by the sufferings of his Life, and the
inestimable value of his Blood, the world might be Justified and Redeemed from
the Guilt of their sins, rescued from the miseries of the world to come.

And that by the operation of his Doctrine, and Example, and the power of his
Intercession, the world might be sanctified, Delivered from the Dominion of
sin, purified and prepared to be admitted to the Vision of the most holy God,
Fruition of the Life to come.

I say, that the man that firmly, and steadfastly, and actually believes these
things, will not (nay, indeed that he cannot) neglect so great Salvation; That
he will not trample upon the blood of the everlasting Covenant, or despise the
Spirit of Grace, or crucify afresh the Lord of Glory, and put him to an open
shame. But that for his continual cleansing, from his past transgressions, he
will daily resort to the fountain which Christ has opened for sin and for
uncleanness, offering and presenting his head and his heart (his mind and his
affections) to the blood of sprinkling; And that for the obtaining of
preventing, and following Grace, to preserve him from lapsing for the time to
come, He will throw himself daily at the feet of that High Priest, which is
sensible of his Infirmities, and which sits at Gods Right hand, making
Intercession for him, and with sighs and unutterable groans he will implore the
Assistance of that Spirit which helps our infirmities:

And that continuing, and persevering in this Course, (by the Grace of God
which never fails them that seek him) he will certainly conform himself to
the Commands of Christ, and compose himself to his Example, till at length he
be transformed to his Image; He will add to his Faith Virtue, and to Virtue
Knowledge -- and so onwards, He will go on from strength to strength until he
appear before God in Glory.

I say, that such a man, by denying Tit. 2. 12.
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and living Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly
in this present world, will work out his Salvation with fear and trembling, and
in the end of his days will certainly and infallibly attain to the end of his
hopes, namely, the Salvation of his Soul. So that the Gospel is indeed the
Grace of God which brings Salvation to all men: It is the power of God to
Salvation to every one that believes.

TO come therefore to a Conclusion: Judge now in your selves Brethren, and
judge Righteous Judgment; Is this a Gospel which is to be despised? A
Dispensation whereof a Minister or a Christian ought to be ashamed? Are the
Mysteries of this Gospel to be derided and drolled upon? To be travestied or
turned into Burlesque or Macaronique? Is this to be a Brave and a Gallant
person? A Spark and a Wit? Or is it indeed to have never a spark of Wit or
Gallantry?

Men, Brethren, and Fathers; If the time, and your patience, and my strength
would bear it, I would take unto me boldness, and freely speak unto you
concerning the Gospel of our Savior; I would Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort.

I would severally and distinctly address my self to every sort, and every
Degree of those that hear me, Ecclesiastical and Civil, Young and Old, Wise and
Unwise, Noble and Ignoble.

I would speak unto you young men of the Clergy, that you would not be offended
at the Mysteries of the Gospel, or think it a matter of Wit or of Learning,
either to despise or to go about to mend them.

That you will neither be Drolled nor Disputed, Cajoled, nor faced out of your
Religion, or suffer the Mauvais hont (the evil shame) to be put upon you.

That you will not believe that it has been only dull formality, a want of the
smartness of your Wit, or depth of your Learning, which has retained your
Fathers and Predecessors, in the belief and the Profession of the plain, and
simple Articles of the Catholic Faith. Be not deceived Brethren; Vixerunt
fortes ante Agamemnona --

Be not seduced by those who pretending to remove the Scandal of the Cross of
Christ (which thing St. Paul counted an absurdity Gal. 5. 11.
in Christianity) would rob you of a most divine and excellent Religion, and
substitute in its place a rotten and depraved Philosophy; Those I mean who
never have been able with all their Wit, Reason, and Learning, to explicate or
comprehend the Mysteries or Mechanies of a Mite, or of a Flea, of a Plant or
Stone, or any one of the innumerable things which are before them, and yet they
take upon them to control the plain literal, designed and reiterated
Declarations of Christ and his Apostles concerning the Mysteries of the
Godhead. Those who Grammaticizing pedantically, and Criticizing spuriously,
upon a few Greek Particles or words, would cozen the World of the benefit of
the blood of Christ, and Christ himself of his Divinity; and put him off with a
fantastical and Poetical Apotheosis.

I would speak unto you Fathers, because ye have known the Father and the Son,
ye understand the effect and consequence of the Mysteries of the Gospel to the
Salvation of men, that ye will continue to strive earnestly to retain that
faith (which is thought by some to be upon the wing, that Faith) which was once
delivered to the Saints.

I would speak unto you ((...)) Wise men or Philosophers; Paul speaking to the
men at Athens, Act. 17. 28.
puts them in mind of a saying of a Poet of their own: I would call to your
Remembrance a Saying of a Philosopher of our own, (a Philosopher of great
renown) which is to this effect: That a profound consideration of the reason,
and comprehension of the circumstances of things (a deep dose of Philosophy)
will make a man Religious; And that the contempt of Religion is an infallible
argument of one that is a smatterer only, and half-witted.

I would speak unto ye Nobles, that ye would be Noble as the Beraeans were,
That ye will search, examine, and consider, whether the case of the Gospel be
such as has been represented, yea or no: And then I am sure ye will continue
zealously and vigorously to support the Gospel.

I would take heart and courage, and improve in an humble confidence, so far as
to prefer a Petition to King, Lords, and Commons (the Noble, the Mighty, and
the Wise) that (at this time especially) they will be careful of Religion, and
tender of the Interests of the Gospel.

I would humbly endeavor to bring to remembrance, who it is by whom Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice; And what it is to be Defender of the truly
Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

I would endeavor to Demonstrate that neither Forts nor Castles, Armies nor
Navies, Arms nor Ammunition, Money nor Men, (to say nothing of Allies or
Confederates, or the Staff of Egypt) are so powerful a support of the Crowns
of Princes as the Gospel; Nay, not as a few lines of this one Epistle of our
High nosed Galilean (as the Scoffers have been wont to call him) duly imbibed
into the Souls and Consciences of men, namely, that saying at the beginning of
Chap. 13. Let every soul be subject to the Romans 13. 1, 2, etc.
Higher Powers, for there is no power but of God, the Powers that be, are
Ordained of God -- And they that Resist shall receive to themselves Damnation;
the belief of this would be sure to compose the minds of all Dissenters so as
to keep peace and obedience at home.

And the belief of that which follows would defend us from our enemies abroad;
this would raise, Taxes and Contributions, Subsidies and Royal Aids, procure
all things necessary for the maintenance of Just Wars abroad; For for this
cause also pay ye Ver. 6, 7.
tribute, because they are Christ's Ministers, etc. So powerful and useful is
the Gospel, where it is believed, to maintain all the parts and Interests, and
to command all the succors and necessary supplies of Government, to bring fear
to whom fear, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute belongs.

Wherefore I would not fear humbly to make an Application in the words of King
David: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, Psalm. 2. 12.
be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence; kiss the Son left he be angry, and so ye
perish from the right way.

But I can only be permitted to make one common and promiscuous Application, to
high and low, rich and poor, one with another, namely, To charge upon your
memory (and pray that it may rest upon my own) one saying of Christ himself,
that dreadful saying in Mark 8. If any one shall be ashamed of me, or of my
words in this adulterous and sinful Generation: Of him shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels. Mar.
8. 38.
And without any Apology for my boldness or indiscretions, to conclude in the
words of the Text:

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the Power of God to
Salvation to every one that believes. FINIS.
Rules and Directions for Prayer and Meditation: Written by the late Right
Reverend Father in God Bryan Duppa Lord Bishop of Winton. Sold by James Collins
at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street.


