THE Roman Catholic Soldiers LETTER TO Dr. Tho. Tenison.
Reverend Doctor,
YOU and your A. B. has published a Reply to my Defense of the Speculum, before
I either Printed or Published any such thing. This is not to stay till all the
Muster-Roll be called over before you answer to your Name, as you say Mr. P.
would have had you to have done; but it is every whit as absurd, for it is to cry
I am here, I am here, before ever you be called. This is a strange and unheard
of way of proceeding.

You write an Epistle to your A. B. in which you tell him and the World, that I
was a Cambridge Scholar, and has changed my Black Coat for a Red one; I am
sorry you have gotten no better Information from your Enquiries after me at my
Lodging, there having been no less than Two Men at one time, and Four at
another (whether sent by you or no, I will not say) making Enquiries of me at
my Quarters, what I was? whether I had been an Oxford Scholar or no? was I no
more than a Soldier? what I did? what I writ? with such like Queries, to which
the good people of the House could give them little or no Answer, (as they told
me) other than this, that they told some of them I was writing something
concerning your Reverence, but they knew not what. Indeed Dr. your Oracles has
deceived you, and you have abused me by writing such palpable and false
untruths of me. For so far off was my thoughts from ever being either a
Cambridge Scholar, or wearing a Clergy-Mans Black Coat, that on the contrary, I
was a Catholic before I was 19 years of Age, and (God Almighty be praised)
have remained a Catholic ever since, which is now other 19 years; which if I
had but time to write into Yorkshire, I could prove by hundreds of Witnesses;
nor had my Father (being a Calvinst or Presbyterian) ever the least thought of
sending me to Cambridge, or any other Protestant University, but rather of
putting me to an Attorney, or some such like Employ, till I lost his kindness
by Embracing the Holy Catholic Faith.

So that you have mist the mark exceedingly, by saying I was, or ever was
intended for a Cambridge Scholar, or had a Clergy-Mans Black Coat to change for
a Military Red one. This story's just like your Jesuits with yellow Peruick and
little Bands, and the sholes of Men that thronged in with Mr. P. in the
Conference, when he has proved by 22 or 23 Witnesses, that he brought but one
Man with him, and he was neither a Priest, nor came to Dispute, but only to be
a Witness of what passed. If you go on at this rate, 'twil be time for Dr.
Oats to look about him, you will darken his lusture quite. What can we expect
from the rest of your Pamphlet, (called your Considerations on the Speculum
Ecclesiasticum) when you entertain us with such a Whiskerat the first; may we
not guess what you have in your shop by what you hang out of the window? If you
would have had us given credit to your following Consideration, (as you term
it) you should not have begun with so gross an untruth. Therefore what ever we
find in your Treatise delivered from your own word, without sufficient proof,
you must excuse us if we do not, nor cannot believe it.

I had not time to take much notice of your Pamphlet, only this I observed that
you have found out a ready way to Confute the Fathers: That is, either by
calling their Works Spurius and suppossititious, making a great show with the
Names of your Authors, but taking care not to Cite the places where any of
their words may be found: Or else reckoning the Fathers words no other than
Historical Apostrophes. p. 69. Complements to the Pope, mere Complements. p.
52. mere Rhetorical Flights, Rhetorical Apostrophes, p. 62. presuming to tell
us, that Orators (meaning the Holy Fathers, for of them you are speaking)
seldom contains themselves within the severe bounds of Truths. p. 63. [well
said Doctor!] nor have you taken the least notice of the Testimonies of Holy
Scripture, why did you not Confute them also?

What I have to say more Dr. is to advise you to wrap up your next of this
nature a little closer than you have done this, or those against Mr. P.

From him who is always ready to serve you, T. Ward.


