A DIALOGUE BETWEEN K. W. and Benting, Occasioned by his Going into Flanders
after the DEATH of the QUEEN.
W. In Bed, the Candle burning dim. W. THese Gripes of Conscience are a domn'd
Disease; nor is there any Cure for them except a Medicine, that will never down
with me, I thought I had quelled, mauled, killed, and rammed the Worm for ever
moving more; and yet if Trouble come, or Danger threaten, I cannot be alone,
but it comes crawling on, and stings, and bites, the Vulture feeding on
Prometheus's Heart cannot be a greater Torment: The impartial Devil will not
bate an Ace of Truth, but musters up all my Villainies before me, enough to have
damned ten thousand to the lowest Hell, and then...

The Q's Ghost glides by, and disappears. Ha! What art thou? Sure it was She;
and is there then something of us that remains even after Death? Is there a
reckoning in the Case? Sure mine will be no very comfortable part in the other
World if it be answerable to my Deserts in this.

The Ghost returns, approaches him, and speaks. Q's Ghost, Repent, for me it is
too late, not yet for you.


(Exit Ghost.) W. Ha! This preaching Ghost has put me in a fit of Trembling;
but since Moses and tho Prophets could never do any good of me, it shall never
be said, that She coming Canting from the Dead shall move me, whom I never
regarded in her Life. Repent! Wise work indeed. Where shall I begin? Or when
shall I make an end? My whole Life has been such a Scene of Monstrous
Villainies, that they are searce to be repeated, never to be repented. Who would
begin a work which will never be done? I have traded in barbarous Murders,
hellish Lies damn^d Conspiracies; I have oppressed my Country, Banished my
Father, Seized his Kingdoms, put the w^ole World in Blood and Flames, and as
far as Man can, have even dethroned God himself; for I have made Religion a
mere Cheat and Stalking-horse to my Design^, and undone all, who would not
ren^unce any Obligation from the Lows of God, or from the Tw of Sacred Oaths:
and could I but conquer Conserence, and the K. of France, nothing could stand
before me. And shall ^repent? No. no, The evils I have done must be m^ntained
by greater, if greater can be; if Hell can find out a Sin, which the World
never yet knew, I Will readily act it, provided it may serve my Am^ition, or
further my Desi^^^.

But oh! In spite of all, I shall feel something within; This gnawing
Conscience, the Devil would not be troubled with: What? Who wa^s there?


Enter Page. P. Sir, Your Majesty's Pleasure?


W. Go tell my Lord Pertlard, it is time to rise, I want him, and send in one to
dress me.


Enter Second Page. W. Come; bring my Clo^ths, Make ready, Be quick, I am
uneasy and in haste, Give me my private A mour next my Body; there is no
trus^ing any Man a Moment; every Man is, or has reason to be my Enemy. Page,
Do thou seep well on Nights? Do thou never dream of the Devils nor see
Ghosts?


P. Sir, I have heard of such things; but nothing breaks my Rest, unless when I
am called, and they will let me sleep no longer; and then within my self, I
wish them hanged for it.


W. Thou art happier than thou art aware of. Villain, What do? Thou drawest
the Stockin on my left Foot first. Curse on the Fool, and Omen both.


P. Sir, I Will pull it off, and put it first on the other, if you please?


W. Coxcomb, Thou have done what thou can undo; Dispatch, let me be out of
thy Hands.


Enter Lord Portland. W. My Dearest Benting, welcome I never more longed for
thy Company. I have had a restlest. Night; Come, let us retire, this Room is
haunetd, the Devil here keeps (...).


B^nt. Your Majesty seems disordered, I am not a little troubled to see it thus.


W. I sent for you to help to mend the matter, not to increase my Vexation.


B. I will do (...) utmost lies in me, when I know what the ma^er is.


W. I doul^t it no^, I know I have thy Heart; and I never more nee^ed thy Head
than now. Have you considered wha^ ^esperate circumstances I am in by the Deeth
of the Queen; and my Necessity of going for Flanders.


B. Yes if you were among Men of Sense or Thought; but amongst the Block-headed
English, who never in Convulsions of State contrive any thing, but their own
ruin, you may be safe enough.


W. I know the Generality of them are like a Hog, who if he sets himself to go
on in a way, you may sooner knock out his Brains, than turn him; but then they
are like a Hog still, who if he chance to turn of himself, is as obstinate in
the quite contrary way; and I have reason at this time to fear it.


B. We shall do well enough for that matter. It is but employing your Agents to
fill their heads with dismal Appreh^nsions of Popery and Slavery approaching;
and then spreading Strange Stories and Swinging Lies; and you may make them run
mad which way you will.


W. I confess that has done Feat^: But I doubt many begin to see throw the
Artifice, and many are not so willing to be deceived as formely they were.
Besides were it not for the variety of Factions, and the Natural
Ungovernableness of the People, notwithstanding the Scandal, there wants not
Men of Sense among them, who are capable of managing Affairs as well as others.


B. True, but it is Fatal in England for any Man to be wiser than his Fellows.
If any one have a longer Head than ordinary, they are seldom quiet till they
have it off. However these need not trouble you. For many of them are so deeply
dipped in Guilt, that they think they cannot be sat under any other Government;
and so are unquestionably yours by an unchangeable Interest. And as for others,
you have finely trick't the Common-Wealths-men to their own Destruction, by
putting them in Employments; These notwithstanding their swe^^ous Pretenses are
a Cruel, Bloody, Ba^barous sort of Men, who will stick at nothing in their way;
and it is but giving them their sull Scope for a time; and they will destroy
every thing in the Nation, that is Brave or Honest; the Odium of which you may
presently return upon them, and thence take accasion to root out them also; and
so your work will be done every way.


W. Thou shall be Canonized in Hell, Lucifer himself could not give better
Council; but yet I fear all will not do, and that my Tools will not work as
formerly, The Death of the Queen has shockt my Throne: She was Popular, and
beloved by many; and in my Absence a sure Guardian of the Crown; now I know not
whom to Trust, I am lest alone with a lamentable cracked Title, there being no
less than Four before me, all Natural Born English, and I a Forreigner;
agreeable neither in Humor nor Ma^ners to the People, and engaged ^n an
Interest quite contrary to theirs.


B. It must be confessed, that the Death of the Queen was no small Loss; She
was a Miracle in Nature, if it were but for this, how so bad a Daughter should
make so good a Wife. But for all that, her Death is our Advantage, for thereby
you are rid of a Rival in your Power; and a dangerous one too, if ever it
should have come in her head to be but half as unkind to her Husband, as she
had been undutiful to her Father; which might justly have been expected,
considering the Provocations you gave her. Besides her Life kept up the
Inclinations of the People to their Old Constitutions, and after a sort they
seem to adhere to them. Now you have overturned all, and have an opportunity to
pull them up wholly by the roots, and in a little time to do what you list.


W. But all this while you say nothing to the Four, the last of which, I told
you had a better Title than my self. Do you think these will be no Rubs in my
way?


B. You are got over those Rubs already, and may easily keep so.


W. Thou art a brave F^ollow, every thing is easy to thee, but pray covince me
how.


B. A^ for K. James and the Prince of Wal^^ they are in Effect but one; for the
Son cannot hurt you, while the Father lives; however they are both far enough
off, and how they should come h^ther with any considerable Force, whilst you
are Master of the Seas, is strange; and if they come without sufficient Force,
it will be just to run into your Net.


W. I begin to doubt of that; for the English have been harassed almost to
utter Ruin, and many begin to look upon there Case as desperate. And in the
eye of Human R^^son nothing can rest^re l'eace, ^rade, and Sa^ety to the Nation
but the Restoration of K James, which in all reason will make him too welcome
to a wearied People. Nay his Restoration would put an end to all the Broyls
and bloody Wars in Europe, with which all Nations are so quite tired out, that
I wonder they do not strive to promote it.


B All this is true; and between our selves it must be confessed, that K^^ames
is a b^a^e and Generous Prince; that no Man ever better understood the Trade of
his Kingdom, or more studied to promote i^, which made the Dutch both hate and
dread him, and use all Arts to ruin him; and it is not to be doubted, but that
the worst of his Enemies would find him more Merciful, than they expect or
deserve? But we must say other things of him: Lying has done our Business
hitherto, and must still; and let all other Nations do what they will, if we
can keep his own Subjects against him, you may be safe enough


W. But how can that be done? It will be impossibly to keep them blind-folded
always.


B. Sir! Trouble not your self, They hate and dread the Name of Papist worse
than that of Devil; that shall be rung conti^nally in their Ears, and then I
have set Scriblers to work to blacken him all that may be; some of which
represent him as a Fool, some as a Knavo, some as cruel and bloody, some as a
Dotard; in short, their Pens neglect nothing, that may render him Odious to his
People, or to appear incapable of Reigning. And then others I have in Pe^sion,
who go into all Companies, and Redicule him, and tell strange things of him,
and after so long Absence, and so often telling, these things are sunk into the
Peoples heads; and they are prepared for any thing, so that if it should be
told them, that be had Horns and Hoos^, I am consident they would believe it,
and therefore trouble not your self about him.


W. Well! But have you considered, that I leave behind me the Princes Ann and
her Son in my Captial City; and as I may say, in the heart of my Kingdom; and
though others Precede them; yet both their Titles are anteredent to mine.


B. Great things to fear, a Woman and a Child!


W. pr'thee consider, that she has a Husband, who, though he be not very
Mutinous or Ambitious, yet is of a Martial Temper and well beloved by all the
English Soldiers; and if some wiserilead should get the management of him, he
might be tempted to give me more Trouble than I know how to provide against:
For though he could now get a Crown for himself, yet he might Recall and Res^o^e
his Injured Father-in-Law, and thereby not only recover his Reputation, but
gain an Eternal Name and Honor throwout the World. What think thou? Shall I
procure some good Fellow to drop something in his Liquor, and send him on an
Errand to the other World.


B. No, by no means. She might then either Marry another, who would not take
things so patiently, or be stirred up by others to be more troublesome Her self.
It were much more advised to send Her, and Her Brat packing, if it could be
done neatly. But as to that, Opportunity must be waited, and the Matter well
concerted.


W. What is to be done with them in the mean time?


B. You have lately given them the Honor of Guards; I suppose you did it to no
other end but in effect to make them Prisoners. You must be sure those Guards
are true to you, and watchful over them; and then it will concern you to keep
some of their Servants in Pension, who may betray to you all their Motions and
Councils. And lastly; You must secure a certain Number of resolute Fellows, if
possibly, in the Guards to whom you must make large Allowances (for, Blood is
not bought so cheap in England as in other Conntries) and these must never be
without Orders without any Delay, Regard, or Mercy to D^spatch them, whenever
they are informed they attempt any thing against your Government.


W. I am satisfied, that thus far thou have taken thy measures not much amiss
But still the People themselves run in my head; for though I have deluded them,
yet I have abused them at that rate that I believe the whole World cannot find
one President to parallel it There it therefore some. Cause to fear them,
unless they have utterly lost their Senses; and therefore, my faithful ^ev^ing!
Deal truly with me, and let me know how they stand affected.


B. If I should tell you Truth, I shall enrage you? if not. I shall deceive
you; Therefore, Great Sir! excuse me, and commit that unwelcome Task to some
other, and not tome, who have always studied to please you.


W. Yes to be deceived, and consequently ruined; Come, Dally not with me; I
must know what they say, and will know even the worst of it.


B. That is a hard matter to tell, for some say so very bad, that a Man searce
knows how to repeat it after them.


W. Well Be it as bad as it will, I must know, that I may provide and arm
against it. And therefore I conjure you, as you love and tender my Safety, that
you deal plainly with me, and let me know all you have heard? I may be angry at
them, but shall think my self obliged to you for a True and Faithful Discovery.


B. Though I had much rather this had been done by another; yet since it is your
Majesty's Pleasure, I obey; Then know, that as to your Religion, they say you
are a Papist; that when you so Barbarously caused the Dewitts to be torn in
pieces, you transfacted the matter with Romish Priests; that when you entered
into his Confederacy, you took the Sacrament there upon at the Great Church in
Brussels; That you faithfully promised the Pope to promote the Romish Religion
in England, and that accordingly you now indulge the Papists greater Liberty
than ever they had under K. James, and that where he made one Papist, you have
made Forty; and many more things to this purpose; and from hence they infer,
that you have forfeited the Crown of England even by your own Act of
Settlement. Yet others do not believe this, but take you for a perfect
Libertine; and say that Religion hangs on you like water on a Goose, which you
make use of for your Turn, and shake off at your Pleasure.


W. These last are most in the Right; but they are all a parcel of Fools. What
is Religion to me, except for a Pretense to blind the People. Did ever any
considerable Action of my Life savor of Religion? It had been impossible for
me to have driven my Father out of his Kingdom, if he had not had too much
Re^igion. I can be a Church of England-man here a Presbyterian in Scotland, a
Papist in Flanders, and of any other Religion that is in Vogue in any other
place, so that it promote my Designs. For after all, I will serve God no
further, than God serves me. But go on.


B. They say you are a very Brute; and downright charge you with Sodomy, and
name your very Catamites. Now this Sin is accounted in England not only
Unnatural but Monstrous, and is no where in a worse Name; the Men abhor it; and
the Women will not endure the name of one guilty of it, and therefore you must
be wary, for if the Women here are once your Enemy, the Men will not long be
your Friends


W. Slaves and Villains! What am I a King for; if I can have no peculiar
Pleasure to my Self? The Sot^ ought to be thankful, that I take this course,
that there may be no more of the Breed of me. Have I not been plague enough to
them, unless they may be blessed with a Succession of such?


B. Then thuy say that you have given many Honest Men's Estates, and almost all
the Crownlands to Foreigners, whereby you have ruined many Families, and
impoverished the Crown, and set up Foreigners to trample on the Natives.


VV. Could the Fools imagine, that I came hither to enrich them? Where should I
have it? If I came hither for my own Ends, what can they expect, but that I
should advance my Friends and Relations, and such as will be true to me? What
would they have? They neither wanted Lands, nor Moneys, nor any sort of Riches
before; their only Complaint was for Religion; and they have Religions enough,
let them take them, and be content, and be damned their own way.


B. They Clamor loud against your carrying the Money out of the Nation, and
encouraging the Dutch in their open Clipping, Counterfe^ting and Debasing it.
This last Act against Clipping and Coining, is said to be only a Contrivance to
hang Englishmen, and to se^ure the Profit of all the Good Money, that is left,
to the Dutch; and now they say you have Erected a Bank and Mint at Antwerp,
where you Coin Money of Iron, and other base All^^. ^^^send it hither, and
Exchange it for good Money out of the Exchequer, which receives none here bad,
and now pays none good; whereby in a short time there will not be one Penny of
Sterling Money lest in the Kingdom, which will breed Confusion, and set them
all together by the Ears.


VV. And let them go together by the ears, and tear out each other Throats,
with all my Heart, my Necessities must, and shall be Supplied. If I do not make
vast Contributions, the Confederacy cannot be Supported; and if that fall, I
shall be like the Jackdaw in the Fable, strutting in the Peacocks Feathers;
they will begin then to examine the Case, and every one will be pulling his
Feather, and I shall be a Daw again. No, no, I Will spend their Coin as far as it
will go, and then make them sell their Plate for Iron Money; and when that is
spent, I Will sell their Horses, Cows, Sheep, Corn, and Themselves too, rather
than I Will want.


B. They complain that whilst you are profuse to others, you pay neither the
Seamen* or Soldiers of the English; and yet use them basely, and starve many
of them, and put them on the most desperate Attempts, and then leave them in
the Lurch, on Purpose, that they may be ^ut off; by which means they say you
have Murdered above a Hundred thousand English.


W. And I wish they had been ten times as many more; I had been rid of so many
Rogue^ and Rebe^, and might have Stockt their Country with others, whom I could
have called in, who would have been truer to me, than these can be expected.


B. Very true, but these heavy Clod-pated Rascals, seem to be sentible of this,
however they came by it. For they do not yet cease to talk of the Attompt to
Naturalize ^o^re^gners by Act of Pa^^ ament: which they look upon as an
Invitation of all the Rogue^, Malcontents, and Begga^^ of other Countries to
come over and Dispossess them: And they do not stick to call even their Dearly
beloved House of Commons (...) to their Country, for that under Pretense of
Favor to some particular Persons, they passed Bills whereby several Hundreds
of Strangers were Clandestinely Naturalized, which they say is pursuing the
same design by Retale, which they failed of in Gross.


W. And that Design I will carry by one means or other; what care I what
becomes of them, so I can secure my self, and my own Grandeur?


B. But you must do it warily, for they complain that you are bringing
Foreigners over daily; and that whilst you disarm the Natives, you put Arms
into the hands of Dutch, VValloons, and Refugees, and privately Exercise them;
to what End, they say, they cannot guess, unless it be when opportunity serves
to cut the English Threats.


VV. If I had enough of them, they should quickly find what I would do with
them.


B. They say, you value more, and have a greater kindness for Monsieur Renew,
and his Hugen^ts; than for the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Counsel, and all
the City of London.


VV. There is reason for it; the one are True, to me, the others False, at
least wavering and inconstant: It is a Rebellions, Headstrong City; I care not
if it once more lay in Ashes, had I but first secured the Wealth of it; and I
think I have pretty well pillaged it, or shall do, before I have done.


B. You must consider of some way or other to came that City, or have it at
your beck; which will searce be, unless it were peopled with other Cattle, or
the greatest Part of it; but to proceed; They say, that you have conveyed away
all the Crown Jewe^^, Plate, and Far^iture; and some such as the World cannot
repair the Loss of.


VV. The Fools gave them me, and who is there, whom I would leave them to here?
And therefore I will enrich my self, and my own Country with them, rather than
any other. Besides I must live Great and Splendidly amongst the Consederates;
nor do I know but after all, in spite of my Endeavors, King James may come
back again, which if he do, Infa^th, I Will make my Mother-in Law a giddy
Housewise; for she shall come to bare VValls.


B. I must, Sir, farther tell you, That it (...) a general Complaint, that you
have destroyed the Trade of the Nation, at Home and Abroad. That the Merchant*
cannot have Convoys, unless when it is in savor of the Dutch, whose Trade you
by all means advance, while you stifle theirs; That above three Thousand
Trading Vessels (and some vastly Rich) have sall'n into the Hands of the
French; and that you have withheld the Ships appointed to cruise, as if you
joined with them in the Design. That the East India Trade is in a manner lost;
and given to your Beloved Dutch; That the Turkey Trade is in very ill
circumstances; That our Islands and Plantations are lamentably harassed, and
impoverished: and then for the Trade at home: They say you encourage the
Refugees, Dutch, and all sorts of Strangers against the English; and that not
only by employing them, buying of them, and encouraging others to do so, but
also by raising vast Contributions for them, whereby they are enabled to work
at Under-Rates, and undersell the English, and thereby Beggar and Starve them;
and this they say you do to force the English to go off for Sould^ers, and to
bring on Foreigners in their room for Inhabitants, till in the end you shall
be able to give the L^nd away from them to mere Strangers, or their very
Enemies.


W. I have reason to encourage those Men, as being the Persons, who in all
likelihood must stand and fall with me; and they are the Men perhaps I must
trust to at last, if ever it should come to a desperate Push.


B. Great Sir, I humbly beg your pardon; I am unwilling to tire you with these
unple^sant Relations; but to say the Truth, they have a thousand Complaints,
and they increase daily* But in short, they say you are an utter Enemy of the
English, and do all you can to destroy them from being a Nation.


W. Hell and Damnation seize them; would they had all but one Head, that I
might dispatch them all at once. Who can have kindness for such Rogues and
Villains as drove away their natural King, and s^t aside the Princes of the
Blood, born amongst them, to set me up a Stranger, who from my Cradle was bred
up an Enemy to them? How shall I trust such Fools and Madmen? Or can I think my
self safe, till they are quelled? When I have shared the Lands of their Nobles
and Gentry amongst my Creatures and Dependants, and made the rest Gibeonites
and Slave^; when I have rendered them unable to hurt me, then I may trust them,
and not before But enough of this Theme, I believe thou have dealt pretty truly
with me. Come, let us now consider how to be even with them, and manage them.


B. Sir, After such a strain of Thought, and such uneasy Discourse, Would not a
little Diversion do well to refresh you? I just now saw Madam Villiers walking
in the Garden.


W. Call her up; It is a witty Slut, when she gives her Mind to it; and ^o
unstring the ^ow sometimes is not amiss.


(Exit Binting.) B. Madam* The King wants your Company.


M. V. My Lord; You are mistaken sure, you mean Monsieur Capel; or is your own
Arse grown too old and out of Fashion? Go, te^^ that shameless Buggering,
Sodomitical Rascal your King, that I scorn to come near such a Beast; nor ought
any Woman to come at him, unless it were to scratch out his Eyes, or serve him,
as the Swedes serves Jesuits, when they catch them in their Country. Go, bid
him sen^ for his Catam^tes, with a pox to him.


(Enter Benting.) B. I suppose your Majesty heard the Vixin, I need not relate
her Answer.


W. Yes, yes, Some water has run by her Mill; the Jade is angry, that she
cannot ^ngross the whole Trade to her self, let her fret in her Gree^e, till
she is weary, and come to again; but let you and I resume our former
Consideration, How I shall deal with these damned English.


B. The Blockheads begin to be angry; but you have ways enough to hamper them;
and I make no doubt but ere long, you will thoroughly tame them, and bring them
to your Bow.


W. Thou ^ever want either Courage or Contrivance; But pri'thee, let me hear
by what ways this may be brought about.


B. They are pretty well enured to the Yoke already; they have born that within
these Seven Years, that would have broke any other Peoples backs in Europe.
Hold them to it some three or four Years longer, and they will look for it of
course.


W. But how to do it is the Great thing: for though they are a People wicked and
f^olish, yet they are r^sly and stubbo^n; and if they run a head, there will be
something to do with them.


B. Sir, Do not entertain the least Fear o^ Thought that way: For all things
cons^^^e, as it were; to accomplish your Designs. And first, I think the Wisdom
of the House of Commons has gone a great way in the Matter, but more
particularly in the late Act for Births, Marriages, and Burials; whereby such
an Account i^ ordered to be returned into the Exchequ^^ that the People are not
only ^umbe^ed, but their respective Quality and (...) on (...); so that from
thence, with a little further Assistance from your Agents in all Countries, you
may, like another William the Conqueror, compile another Doom^-day Book; and
thence take an Estimate of the Strength and Riches of the Nation, know whom to
support, and whom to cruk, and where at any time to have a Booty. Nor can they
ever hereafter cheat you considerably in any Tax or Poll, but from this account
you may trace them out.


W. I do believe that more and better use may be made of that Act, than ever
they intended; and I will not fail to improve it to the utmost.


B. Your Majesty has chserv'd that the English Coasts for the most part he
open; and that there are many rich Villages by the Shore which are utterly
Indefensible; These the King of France, without troubling his R^yal Navy, might
burn at pleasure by his Privateers; and when they had made us these costly Bon
fires and ^^uminations, they might whip away, and be gone without the least
hurt or damage either by hand or Sea, unless by mere Accident.


W. It Is very true, and I wonder he has not done it; but I suppose it is to
show himself a Generous Enemy, and to ingratiate himself into a Good opinion
with the English.


B. But it is not your Interest to suffer this; but by Bombing and Burning his
Town^, and Haressing his Coasts, you must provoke him to Retaliate.


W. But I fear, that when the English see their Houses on Fire, and their Goods
burnt, they will be Enraged, that they are not better Protected, after such
vast Sums of Money given.


B. No, It will only enrage them against the French King, and they will every
where cry out against his Cruellies and Barbari^ies, though you foret him to it;
and being he has forborne so long, the People may be persuaded, that it was not
from his own Inclination, but by the Instigation of K. James: and thus you may
set them violently against the K. of France, and K. J^mes, and revenge your
self on the English all at once.


W. What Excellent use may be made of Mischief and Lying? But proceed:


B. When the Coasts are thus burnt, you must take care to remove the
Inhabitants, either under Pretense of putting them into the Hospitalt, or of
allowing them Pensions, or of finding them Employment, or something else to
that purpose; but above all show your self extraordinary Compassionate of their
Condition, and wondrous Zealous to relieve them.


W. Pox take thee, Benting! thou wast never so much out in all thy life, as
now: Beside^ that, mercy is not in my Nature, this would undo me.


B. Your Majesty is mistaken, not I. I never intended you should do thus, but
only preten^ it; And when you have thus blinded the Peoples Eyes, then scatter
them all over the City of London, and their Great Towns there to Starve or Beg
their Bread, and with Frightful Stories to enrage all others against the
French: but in the mean time you must (...) sure to take care, and see that you
in no wise neglect to Rep^^ple the forsaken Coasts with trusty Foreigners, who
shall depend upon you, and be your faithful Servants upon all occasions, and if
you could possibly thus secure the Coasts the whole Island must be at your
Devotion; for after all to deal plainly with you, you must either Conquer this
People, or they will Conquer, you, and kick you off, or deal worse by you.


W. Now you say something to the purpose, if I could make a Conquest, my work
were done; if nor, I am senssible, that I am only Tenent at will, or by
Courtesy and may be turned out at Pleasure; and I will hazard all. rather than
l^ve in such Circumstances, but as to what you were speaking; the coasts indeed
generally ly open and defenseless, but yet there are several strong. Ports, and
Cittadels, which Monsieur cannot hurt; and in these seems to lie the great
strenth of the Nation,


W. Of those aron; there are other Matters in course must fall under
Consideration before them; are you fully resolved how to leave Matters in your
Absence?


W. Yes, I think the best way will be, as we concerted the Matter among our
selves. It Is true, that in spite of the Parliament, I made old Schomberg's Son
General of all the English Forces; and I would willing have left him and you my
Deputies, or Viceroys in my Absence; but things are not ripe for that yet, the
Nation will not bear it, and there are some sturdy Noblemen, as well as some
pliant Tools, whom I must make use of, till I can handsomely get rid of them.


B. Then you seem to be resolved on the Seven?


W. I am so. I am unwilling to say, that they have lost their Reputation;
however, the worse Men, the better for me; but they have no Interest in the
People, so that it is not likely they should do me any hurt: And then being so
many, and of such different Persuasions, they will never agree upon any thing
of Moment without Recourse to me; so that wherever I am, I shall be their
Umpire and Oracle; but if they should so fall out, as to accuse each other; I
might in time have an happy opportunity to cut them all off; and th^n be sure
the rest shall follow as fast as I can. Besides, I have left Leeds and
Sunde^land, who are over head and cars in my Interest, to be their Council and
Directors; and in case any of them tread awry, to be my Spies and Informers.


B. And I think you have so limited their Power by your Commission, that they
are rather Pageants than Princes. But to leave these Actors to their Parts,
What are your thoughts of the Campaign?


W. I wish the Devil had it with all the Confederates, and the King of France
into the Bargain. I must bluster and make a Noise, and in words despise the
French Lines, and threaten to break through them at pleasure; and some Shows
and Offers I must make, and perhaps cause ten thousand English or more, to be
knocked o'th head; and then send strange News hither, and cause every thing to
be magnified, and right or wrong reported on my side, as if I had done Great
Fea^^. But to deal plainly and truly with thee, my Bosom Friend! I have (...)
little hopes of doing any good there, that I care not how soon it is at an end;
and my Chief thought^ are employed, what I shall do at my Return, if I can
secure it.


B. Your Majesty is now come to the main Point, for (pardon this Freedom, Great
Sir) with humble submi^sion, it is my poor Opinion, that if you do not your
Business socedily, at your Return you will certainly m^scarry.


W. I like not such O^nens. But come, tell me what you think can be then done,
that by Conful ation with my Friends in Holland, I may improve ^t to the
utmost, I know nothing will b^ wanting from them to dest^oy the English, whom
they irreconcilably hate.


B. My thoughts, Sir! are only to serve you, and therefore I hope I am more
pardonable, if I warn you of Danger, and advise you to secure your self.


W. I am sufficiently satisfied b^th of your Fidelity and Ability to serve me;
and therefore let me have no more of these idle A^^^^gies; but come to the
Business.


B. Sir, there is an unlucky Swagge^ing ^amphletteer, who has given such a
spiteful, ^mp^deat, lying Ch^racter of K Jame^, that I m^ self was ashamed to
read it, and yet in my Conscience he has no great love for you; but after all,
he has hit upon the thing, that will do the Fea^.


W. Say you so? But pray what may that be?


B. Sir! He says plainly, and I think truly, that we are no ways likely to
distress France, whilst from time to time we talk only of trying one Summer
more: For as he well observes, that Rich Kingdom cannot fail at a pinch to
afford their King a Cordial Sup, or furnish him wherewith to hold out one
Summer more. But, says he, if a General Excise was settled, that would be such
a large and lasting Fund, as would fright him into a Compliance, when he saw no
end of the War.


W. Nor any end should he have, till I were Master both of Him, and the
Confederates too, could I get that, but how shall I come by it?


B. Why thus Sir, You see your Parliament grow troublesome and factious; and I
know not how you can trust another; and therefore make this serve for a^l, and
be troubled with no more for them.


W. Gods Sacrament (...) would give the Kingdom of ^co^land to be ^id of the
Parliament of En^l^nd, f^^ know how; t^ach me but this trick, and I Will d^ny
thee no h^ng b^t my Th^one; nay thou shall not want an Intered of share in
that, wh^r^ in it may ^erve thee.


B. Sir, It must be a shaft winged with their own Feathers, that must give the
Fatal wound. You know your Par^i^ment by their own Act draw toward an End:
Great lawye^s say, it is ^^ss^^ved already; however, as matters go, ^ere can be
expected but o^e Sessions more: and therefore, a soon as you return, at their
next M^eting, spare for no Cost, give wh^t the lowdest, and mo^^ extravagant A
h^rs can desire, for (...) be at that Trouble or Charge to (...) again, and all
shall be your own.


W. I would throw away a Bra^e or two of (...), that I Am g^^^g^t a General
Excise set^^^d. But what if they should settle ^t but for some Years?


B. Never fear that, we w^ll make it everlasting, if we can once get it of any
fashion. And perhaps it is not so difficult a thing to get, ^s you imagine.
Some of them know, that they shall never be Chosen again, if another Parliament
were called; and these w^ll play their last Game to their utmost Advantage.
Some of them are so b^se and beggarly, that they would not sti^k to sell their
Country for Twenty Guineas. Some are desperately in your Interest, and must
comply with what you Resolve. Many are your Pensioners, and many accustomed to
be greazed; and I scarce think there are any, who will be ablet to refuse Gold
enough: but if any such there be, their Number is in considerable; they will be
laughed at by the rest, and may be undone first, You are not bound to make all;
The Major Vote will do your Business.


W. And I will have it, if Money will do it.


B. When this is done, Parliaments will be reedless to you, and hateful to
their Country; so that there will be no danger in laying them aside. Then
placing your Troops conveniently, by degrees make Foreigners the Gatherers of
it, who will not sp^^e the Natives, and best know how to serve it to the
Height; and will make you a trusty A^my, if occasion require. Then putting
faithful Carrisons in Portsmouth, Hull, and Plymouth, and other places of
Strength, you may privately invite Forreig^ers by way of Trade to pour in, till
they overpower the Natives, and keep them under; and if any Great, or Small,
do but so much as grumble, behead, or hang them, and dispose of their Lands and
Fortunes to your sure Dependents, till you have rooted out their Nobil^ty and
Gentry; and when you have brought things to this pass, you may have what you
will, and do what you will.


W. A General Exc^se, I think, would enable me for this But what if I fail in
the Project?


B. I hope you will not; but if the worst come to the worst, then you must
watch the breaking of the Confederacy, and exchange all the Forces you can, or
buy them, and s^nd them over speedily hither, with promise of Estates; Arm all
the Refugees and Strangers; Secure the Ports in such way as we discoursed
before, and then with the Sword in your hand you may take, what they would not
give; and if any Stir against you, it will be your Advantage to destroy them
and their Families, and gratify your, Followers with their Estates. And, all
this you may do with a few Veterane Forces, which you may have when you please;
and if you need Recruits, there are not less than a Hundred thousand
Foreigners in the Kingdom, who will be at your devotion, and afford you a
Select Stock upon all occasions. And who shall be able to stir or molest you,
when you have a formed Army, and Secured all Avenues?


W. I do not see, but this may take, if closely and resolutely followed,


B. But, Sir! There is one thing I had almost forgot; The Fleet with Russel in
the Mediterane^n. Though the Confederacy should hold, it cannot stay long
there; and yet it must not come home, till you have effected your Designs; of
which if you should fail (and then the Devil deceives me) it were well if the
matter were so contrived. That that Fleet were given to the Dutch, which will
eternally oblige them to you, and m^ke them Superior to both English and
French by Sea; but I think that matter ought to be further Consulted with the
old Stanch Politic Cabal at the (...). In the mean time continue to carry away
every thing that is good for any thing. It will be some revenge to have
Beggared the English, if you cannot Rule them; and will procure you Friends
abroad; and you will be ready furnished to set your Tools at work, and wait the
opportunity of another Turn here o^ elsewhere.


W. Well, My Benting! I am resolved. I fear neither Scotch nor Irish; so I can
get the Absolute Domonion over the English; and if all the Arts of Man, or all
the Powers of Hell can effect it, I will not fa^l of it; But if like Phaeton I
must drop, it is some Satisfaction to have set the World on Fire; and as for
this Cursed England, if I must bid Adieu to it, I will first so pill, strip,
and ransa^k it, that I will not leave it worth King James's or any other Man's
having. But come, My Faithful Benting, enough for this time; Let us now go and
refresh our selves, and drink a Cheerful Glass to our good success in
prosecuting the Designs we have now Consulted on.


B. I am always ready to attend Your Majesty.


Exit Tyrannus, etc. FINIS.

