THE ANIMADVERSIONS AND REMARKS UPON Colonel Sydney's Paper ANSWERED.
WE live in a Wonder-working Age, wherein Death (the ultimate Execution of the
Law) is not deemed sufficient for the Punishment of a Malefactor, but his dead
Ashes must also be disturbed with the Animadversions and Remarks of every witty
and wanton Pen. The good Old Rule, de mortuis nil nisi Bonum seeming to be
quite antiquated.

There was not one that suffered upon account of the late hellish Popish Plot,
though at their Deaths they denied all effectually, and asserted their own
Innocence with all Protestations imaginable, yet some of them (as the five
Jesuits, etc.) expressing the common English saying of the Child unborn, and
the like, had their last Speeches (for that Reason) animadverted upon. And when
Langhorne, and the late Lord Stafford, in their Speeches gave no such
occasions; Then matter was invented for the Animadverters to work upon; as that
Langhorne was disciplined or whipped, the Lord Stafford was kept Drunk or
intoxicated with Spirits and Brandy. Nay, even the late Earl of Essex, though
he was his own Executioner, and died as private and quiet as was possible
(without one word of a Speech) yet oh Monstrous; Matter was also invented for
Animadversions upon his death.

It Is true, the first three (viz.) Walcot, Hone and Rouse; that were executed
for this Fanatical Conspiracy, escaped their animadverting and remarking Pens.
But the Reason is plain, they at the Gallows made their own Speeches, and
therein confessed the Conspiracy and submitted willingly. Now the Loyal Party
disdaining to Triumph over dead men (according to their wonted modesty) were
silent; And as for the Whiggs, they were otherwise employed, laying all their
Heads together how to sham the Conspiracy it self, and to Render it (to the
Mobile) a mere Story and trick of State. The contrary whereof these three men's
Speeches and Confessions sufficiently evinced, and therefore they were very
desirous they should rest in Oblivion. But when one of the Top of the Party,
the late Lord Russel, came to Dye, and he having with the Assistance of his
Scotch Ghostly Father compiled his written Speech, and delivered it to the
Sheriff; It no sooner appeared in the World, but Lord, how many Pens were
presently employed to Animadvert and Remark upon it, though I must needs
confess there was some Reason for so doing, for his Lordship upon delivery of
that Paper spoke words to the Sheriff contradictory to the Purport thereof,
Saying he knew of no Plot. And yet in the Paper confessed the CONSPIRACT. And
besides, the Paper it self was so stuffed with Contradictions, Evasions, and
Equivocations, that his Lordship seemed to have out stripped the whole College
of Jesuits in these faculties.

But pray Gentlemen, how comes Colonel Sydneys Paper to be animadverted and
remarked upon, when it is neither entitled his last Speech, nor so much as
looks like a Speech, for there is neither Confession nor Denial in the whole
Paper; And if these light and nimble Penmen had considered the second Paragraph
in the Paper, they might have perceived it a Flat-Bar to any Animadverting upon
it, the Paragraph being thus; Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth
pass for Treason: I dare not say any thing contrary unto [it] And the Ears of
those that are about me will probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial
and Condemnation does sufficiently Evidence this. Now Mr. Animadverter you
should first have found out the Relatives to the first, [it] and the last word
[this] in the Paragraph, and then have made sense (if you could) of the whole,
before you had troubled your self to Animadvert upon it.

I perceive you seem mighty angry with the Colonel for the ill words he in the
next Paragraph gives the Lord Howard; I must agree they are very uncharitable
ones, and very unfit for a dying man to utter, especially any who professes
Christianity, which enjoins all it is Disciples not only to forgive, but to pray
for their Enemies, as they expect their Prayers should be heard and their Sins
forgiven; But I suppose the Colonel was in a dogged ill Humor when he wrote
this Paragraph; However you might have observed he was so much a Gentleman as
not to tell a Lie, and therefore (as I suppose) could not deny the least Iota
the Lord Howard evidenced against him at his Trial, and from thence all Mankind
(without breach of Charity) may conclude, that his Lordship Swore nothing but
plain and pregnant Truth. The Consequence whereof naturally is, that Colonel
Sydney was a Traitor, and deserved to Suffer as such, and I cannot find by his
Paper, that he himself was of any other Opinion.

Now since the Protestant Church of England, with all its true Sons, teach,
profess, and practice (according to the holy Scriptures and the example of our
Blessed Lord and Savior and his Apostles,) That Kings are Gods anointed, and
Gods Vicegerents; That their Functions and Persons are exceeding sacred, and
not to be approached but with an untoucht admiration; What? If for quieness
sake, and to comply with the Colonels ill humor we grant him his Whim Wham,
That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country was, That which the
Laws of that Country made it to be; I cannot see any great hurt in it, Since
even the Laws of England do not only confirm the Church of England in the
above mentioned Doctrine and Practice; But do further avow and declare, That
the Crown of England is an Imperial Crown; That the King is supreme in all
Causes, and over all Persons etc. That the King can do no wrong; That it is not
lawful upon any account whatsoever to take up Arms against the King or any
commissionated by him. That neither the People, collective or representative,
have any Coordinate Power with (much less) Jurisdiction over the King, and the
like; We may very well hope that though our Modern Whiggs (according to the
Principles and Practice of those in 40. and 41. and the late Cargalites in
Scotland) seem to have stifled their Consciences as to Gods Laws in these
Particulars, Yet even these humane Laws may be sufficient to bridle and curb
the unruliest Spirit of them all, or to send them after the Colonel and his
old Companions, Harrison, Scott, Cook, etc.

But how came you Animadverters to appropriate all Idols and Idolatry to
Popery, whenas it seems most plain that this doughty Colonel by the Idols and
Idolatry in his Paper aimed at Monarchy and Hierarchy; and upon that account
one may fancy the Colonel speaking to his Men, Brethren and Father; Friends,
Countrymen, and Strangers, at the head of a new raised Regiment.

In like manner the Animadverter has taken a great deal of Pains to interpret
the Collonel's Paper before he found out the Deity to whom the Paper was
directed, for as for the God by whom Kings Reign, The God of Peace, etc. I
cannot find by the Paper that the Colonel meant any such. And therefore it may
be supposed he admired Mars; For I find by his Principles and Practice he was
an utter Enemy to Venus.

Now I am so far from envying the Colonel in his Imaginary Happiness in being
singled out as a Witness for the OLD CAUSE in which he was from his Youth
engaged, and for which (his God) had so often and wonderfully declared himself;
That I heartily wish that every Mothers Son in the three Kingdoms that still
obstinately retain the same affection for that CAUSE, and are so maliciously or
wilfully blinded either not to see, or else do envy the great plenty, Peace,
Ease and Happiness we enjoy under our most excellent Prince, the best of
Governments, That they may be all singled out, and forthwith compelled to give
their evidence in the same manner as this their deceased Brother Colonel
Sydney has done.

The Animadverter has done well to leave it to the Gentlemen of the long Robe
to answer so much of the Paper as concerns them. But I hope they have better
and more profitable Employments than to spend their Time or Pains with the
Insolences and Impertinency of every Boutifeu.

And now you Animadverters and Remarkers, If this that I have here said be not
sufficient to deter you from the like Practices hereafter, I here protest that
the next time I catch you tardy I will send the Salamanca Doctor, who shall
fall upon you with his 30000 Pilgrims armed most dreadfully with Black-bills
and Mustard-balls, or else in his more sure and speedier way I will prevail
with him

To whet his Memory, though once forgot,
And make you an Appendix to his Plot.

LONDON, Printed for the Author S. Ward. 1684.


