A SERMON Preached before the PEERS, IN THE Abby-Church at Weslminster: October
10th. M. DC. LXVI.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of EXON.



LONDON: Printed by E. C. for James Collins, and are to be sold at the
King's Head in Westminster Hall, 1666.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Peers AT WEST MINSTER.
ECCLRS. xi. 9. -- But know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment.
Rejoice O young man, -- etc.

THE great and general design of the Ministry and preaching of the Gospel is to
bring men to Christianity; not in the outward profession, but in the true
spirit and power thereof; to the end they may be justified and sanctified, and
finally saved through Christ for ever.

The particular design of this Days Observation is to humble our selves under
the mighty hand of God, in Consideration of his Judgments, especially that late
one in consuming with Fire the Ancient and noble Metropolis of this Nation; and
to endeavor to appease the wrath of God gone out against us.

To compass both these designs (whereof the later is subordinate to the former)
I know no better expedient, than to reason a while upon that important argument
suggested in the Text.

Who can think upon the Conflagration of our late Glorious City; and not call
to mind the great and terrible day of Judgment?

Who can think seriously of Judgment, and not be compelled to come in, (driven
to Christianity) that he may be saved from the wrath to come?

The great Instructor and Example of Christian Preachers (he who says of
himself, that Christ sent him to preach, and not to baptize) found no means so
powerful to persuade men to Christianity, as to reason upon this argument; as
first to lay before them the terror of Judgment, and then (whilst that was warm
upon their hearts) to make them a tender of the Gospel. This is the great
Advantage and use the Apostle makes of the Doctrine of the Text. We must all
appear ( says he) before the Judgment Seat of Christ, -- Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord, we persuade men.

Upon these Considerations I shall hope for the pardon of this Noble Auditory,
if (without affectation of Science I shall, in a practical and familiar way of
reasoning endeavor to imitate our Apostle in this particular.

If in the mean time it will be irksome and unpleasant to hear of the Judgment
to come, we shall do well to consider what it will be to undergo it; we shall
do well to reflect upon our Souls, and search out the ground of this
averseness; Is it because we do not believe a Judgment to come? or that we our
selves shall be brought to Judgment? Is it because we never consider Who it is
before whom we must appear? or what things will be charged on our own account?
Is it because we are so far gone in our arrears that it is to no purpose to
call these things into our remembrance? -- What ever it be, we may perhaps hear
of that which may meet with and remove the prejudice and Imposture that is upon
us. It is neither our Negligence nor Infidelity that will make void the Truth
of God. Whether we will hear, or Whether we will forbear, the Words which I
have read remain firm and unalterable, and they clearly contain these
Propositions:

1. There is a Judgment to come. 2. Thou shall be brought to Judgment. 3. God
will bring thee to Judgment. 4. God will bring thee to Judgment for these
things, the ways of thy heart, etc. 5. God will bring thee to Judgment for All
these things. 6. All this is certain and evident; for it is not think, or
believe: But -- Know that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.


I. First, then There is a Judgment to come. This is no I.
Politic invention found out to fright thee from thy pleasures, this is no
Engine of State devised to keep you in a subordination to your Brethren; this
is no vain Thunder or foolish fire, to affright you into a blind obedience, but
it is the Tenor of the Scripture of the voice of God, King Agrippa believe
thou the Prophets, I know that thou believe, (says St. Paul). Brethren do we
believe the Scriptures? I hope we do believe them, this we do all profess to
believe, so often as we repeat our Creed; and I hope the dissolution of our
times has not yet shattered that foundation of our faith, the ground work of
our hopes, even the Salvation of our souls. Surely there are rewards for men;
doubtless there is a God which judges the Earth. What though the foundations
of the world be out of course, the pillar of Faith remains unshaken; the Rod of
the ungodly shall not for ever rest upon the back of the righteous: I desire to
make a little use of your faith for that which anon will be obtained from your
reason. There is a Judgment to come, it is as sure as death, nay far surer;
they shall be judged which shall not dye, they have been judged which could not
dye: the one at the end, the other at the beginning of the world.

There is a Particular and a General Judgment; the one at the dissolution of
the lesser, the other of the greater world; the one at the hour of death, the
other at the day of Judgment. A Judgment I say, a strict examination, an exact
account, a severe sentence; words which make no thundering noise, or tragical
sound, and so they may pass our hardened hearts without any motion; wherefore
let us judge of the tenor and moment of them by their antecedent signs.

Before one of them, the evil days come: The other is called the evil day.
Before one, Solomon tells us, that the Sun, and the Moon, and the Light, and
the Stars shall be darkened. Before the other, a greater than Solomon tells us
that the Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, and the
Stars shall fall from Heaven. Before one, the Keepers of the House shall
tremble, and the Strong men bow themselves; Before the other, the Mountains
shall quake, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken: Before one, we shall
rise at the voice of the Bird; Before the other, at the sound of the Trumpet.
Before one, the silver Cord shall be loosed, and the golden Bowl broken, and
the Pitcher broken at the Fountain, and the wheel broken at the Cistern; Before
the other, the silver Zone of the ecliptic, and the golden Globe of the Sun,
the Orbs, and the Vortices shall be confounded, (the wheel within a wheel) the
Heavens shall be rivel'd as a scrowl of Parchment, and the Earth and the
Elements shall melt away with fervent heat. In the one, the dust shall return
to the earth as it was, and the spirit to God that gave it; at the other, the
dust shall return from the earth to be as it was, and the spirit from God that
gave it.

Come now and let us reason together.

Are all these the forerunners and symptoms of approaching Judgment; then why
art thou so drowsy O my careless soul, and why art thou so secure within me?
What strange Lethargy has seized on thee. Awake thou that sleep, and Christ
shall give thee light. The time of thy dissolution is a coming, and after
death, the judgment. Retire therefore a while into thy self, and commune with
thy heart: Enter thou into thy Closet, and shut thy Door upon thee: Let us
examine our selves before we come to that strict Examen: Let us make a Judgment
of our expectation before we come to Judgment. Do we believe a Judgment will
come? Then how are we provided against that Day? Are our accounts ready? Art
thou able to stand in Judgment? Shall thou be clear when thou art judged? When
Paul reasoned before Felix concerning the Judgment to come, Felix trembled; and
because it was an unpleasant argument, he put him off to another time.

There is no doubt but our treacherous hearts would gladly put off these
Considerations, and deferr them to a more convenient season. Nay! but there is
no time so convenient as the present, when we are wrought into some
apprehension of Judgment: If we stay till our present thoughts are over, we
shall again be brought to lose the apprehension (to forget the import and
moment) of the Judgment; we shall come again to hear the Name thereof, and to
neglect it as an idle Noise, and empty Sound.

Let us therefore not neglect this opportunity; Let us search our selves to the
bottom; Let us make a discovery of our final Resolution, and secret Reserves in
reference to Judgment. We profess openly to believe that Christ shall come with
Glory, to judge both the Quick and Dead; What are our inward thoughts in that
particular? and how are we provided against the Day of Judgment?

There is a Judgment to come, that Judgment terrible, the Examination strict,
the Condemnation insupportable, and most of us utterly unprovided; yet for all
this, it is possible it may be avoided. All these things are true in Judgments
here below, and we see the proof of them at every Assizes; yet all Offenders
are not brought to Judgment, but many Thieves and Murderers escape it: It may
be thus in the Judgment to come; it is possible it may be avoidable.

A miserable hope, if this be all; for Thou shall be brought to Judgment:
That Is the second Proposition. II.


And it contains the Universality or Particularity of the Judgment, (which you
please:) thou, and every man; singuli generum, and genera singulorum; all sorts
of men, and every man of every sort, from Him that sits on the Throne, to
Her that grindeth in the Mill: For we must all appear before the Judgment seat
of Christ. It is appointed for all men once to die, and after death the
judgment. Death shall deliver up our Souls to the first, and Death shall
deliver up our Bodies to the second Judgment. The Grave shall deliver up her
spoils, and the bodies of all men devoured of Beasts, consumed of Fire,
swallowed by the Sea, scattered to the four Winds in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, shall be brought to Judgment.

And here shall I bewail the infirmity, or inviegh against the negligence of
us Men, that suffer our selves to be hurried he adlong by the power of our
imaginations against the striving of our consciences; that suffer our Senses to
carry away the crown from our Understanding, and give over our selves to the
impetuous stream of our passions: That when we have a full information, a
complete judgment, a clear dictate of conscience, we will suffer all these to
be overborn in us by the Idola Specus, tribus, etc. which are brought into our
imaginations. That having clear and evident Principles, we can yet doubt of
their immediate consequences; or whilst we profess an universal truth, never
descend to think of the particulars.

We know there is a vast difference between the things present, and those to
come; and yet we form our thoughts of those, according to the analogy of these,
deluding our selves with idle and childish imaginations. God keeps silence; we
think he is such a one as we: Vengeanc is not presently executed, we set our
hearts to do wickedly. We profess that all men must die, and come to judgment;
yet ve do not really believe that we our selves shall die, and come to
judgment: This is the fountain of our misery, and the original of our spiritual
miscarriages: the discovery of the causes and remedy whereof, lies deep in the
Philosophy concerning Humane Nature; but the thing it self is of every days
observation: we may recount it in these authentical examples. David knew full
well what belonged to Murder and Adultery, and what himself had done in the
matter of Uriah; yet he cried not out that he had sinned, till Nathan had
charged him, Thou art the man.

Abab undoubtedly had read the Law of Moses, and knew the guilt of Marder and
Oppression; yet he goes on triumphantly, he kills, and also takes possession:
but when Elijah charges him home, In the field of Jezereel shall Dogs lick thy
blood, even thine, then he cries out, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? (1
King. 21) and having applied things to his particular, he Rent his clothes, and
put on sackcloth, he fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

Once more! It Is likely Belshazzar had a general Judgment, and an universal
Maxim in his mind, That it was unlawful to spoil the House of God, to plunder
those things which were dedicated to the Lord, and to debauch in the bowls of
the Temple, and probably he had seen the hand -- writing of the book of God to
that purpose: yet all this does not restrain him. But when the Fingers write
upon the Wall, Mean, Mean, etc. thou art weighed, etc. then his countenance
was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smore one against another. This then is the Office of
this second Proposition, it charges us home, it lays down the Universal, and it
brings it down to the Particular.

Thou shall be brought to Judgment. Thy Judgment is unavoidable.

O but then thy Evasion is crossed, O my stupid Soul! Thou art spoiled of thy
frivolous ground of hope: Thou shall surely be cited, and thou must appear, if
thou refuse to come thou shall be brought to Judgment. Return then again into
thy self, and take a review of thy condition; what will the issue be of that
Judgment to which thou must be brought? What hopes are now remaining that thou
shall not be condemned? when the Officers have haled thee before the Judge,
that thou be not delivered to the Executioners.

If thou art called to Examination, Can thou elude thy Judge by thy wily
answers? or Can thou baffle or suborn the witnesses? Can thou work off thy
Jury not to find the Verdict? or bribe the Judge to favor thee in thy Doom?
Can thou withdraw him from the Rigor of Justice by the mediation of thy
friends, or melt him into compassion by the loudness of thy cries, the sadness
of thy lamentation? Can thou procure a Reversion or Reprieve of thy sentence,
or appeal from thy Judge unto another? Can thou make an escape from thine
Executioner? Or lastly, Can thou stoutly endure the sentence of condemnation?
These are the hopes of men here brought to Judgment, and why may not some of
them be mine? No, thou know O treacherous heart all these to be fond
impossibilities, dreams, and suggestions of a childish faney; If once this day
be over, and that time come, thy hopes are barely these; that Omniscience and
Wisdom it self may be deluded by stupidity, that Omnipotence and Power it self
may be evaded by poor contemptible infirmity, that Severity and Justice it self
may be perverted by iniquity; all this is evident by that which follows: For we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. God will bring thee to
Judgment. III.


And here we are concerned to raise our thoughts, and employ the utmost of our
attention, lest by the prejudice which our Idleness has brought upon us, we
treasure up wrath to our selves against that day of Judgment. It Is true, we
daily he ar of God, and receive the names of his Attributes into our ears, but
we pass over his Name as if he were like to us, and never bestow so much labor
as to attain to a considerable notion of those names. O that the God of Heaven
would afford us here some Glimpse of himself; That he would illustrate us with
some beam of his Majesty; That he would be pleased to visit every unprovided
soul, and insinuate into it a full and clear apprehension of this Proposition
-- God will, etc. --

But how shall we endure to see his face? No man can see my face and live,
(Exodus 33) if the Israelites durst not hear him proclaim the Law, how shall we
endure to hear him denounce the Judgment? If the Angels veil their faces, not
able to behold his Excellency, how shall we be affected with his terrors? If
the Cherubins are oppressed with the sight of his glory, what shall we be with
the sense of his fury? If we find our selves confounded and swallowed up into
inextricable Labyrinths, when we set our selves to consider of his immanent
Attributes, of his eternal duration, his unbounded Essence, his unconfined
Presence: With what disposition can we entertain the terror of his Judgment,
the search of his Omniscience, the stroke of his Omnipotence? If the best and
choicest of the Saints of God, have been afraid and trembled at the thoughts of
Judgment, if they have been surprised with horror and confusion at the mere
imagination of that Dreadful voice, Arise and come to Judgment, What shall the
worst and most obdurate sinners, when they shall be stripped of this cloud of
flesh and error, and cited before the great tribunal, there to render an
account of our Creation, Preservation, and Redemption?

What fear, what horror, what agony will possess thee O sinful soul, when thou
shall be brought into a perfect apprehension of thy Judge, and of thy self, and
he shall be gin to order out before thee the things which he has done; when
the whole Trinity shall begin to unfold its common work, and that sacred Person
blessed for ever, upon whose shoulders the Judgment is laid, shall unfold to
thee his peculiar, and thou must render a severe account of thy returns?

When the mystery of thy Creation shall be unveiled to thee: When thou shall
apprehend thoroughly, what it is to have been fetched out of the dark and barren
shade of an eternal privation to be put in a capacity of glory. When he shall
recount to thee the proceedings of his handy work, the method of thy making,
the several articles and gradations of his Providence in the formation and
information of thee. How at first he poured thee out like milk, and crudled
thee like cheese; How he spun out thine arteries and veins, and whilst thou
were yet in thy blood, he said unto thee, live: How he guarded thee with
muscles, and strengthened thee with sinews, and propt thee with bones, and
covered thee with skin, furnished thee with organs, endowed them with senses,
invested thee with reason, crowned thee with freedom, enlightened thee with
principles of Science and Conscience, bounded thee by his Precepts, encouraged
thee by his Promises, restrained thee by his threatenings. When he shall
run-over the benefits of thy daily preservation, and rigorously examine what
thou have done for him.

When God the Son shall display to thee what he has done and suffered for
thee, and shall set before thine eyes the great mystery of thy Redemption; When
he shall bring thee to apprehend the price that he has paid, that ransom which
thou have not regarded. When it will not be in thy power to pa^ over these
considerations as now thou do; but they shall be forced into the essential
center of thy Soul; When thou shall have a clear sight of the abasement of a
God incarnate: When thou shall know how to be moved at the sight of a despised
and an abused Godhead.

When he shall charge thee with the blewness of those stripes, and the
ghastliness of those wounds which thou have made: When he shall rehearse to
thee the miseries of his life, and the circumstances of his death: When he
shall recount to thee the woundings of the taunts and reproaches, the smart of
the whips, the terror of the agony, which made him sweat great drops of blood,
the pricks of the thorns, the piercing of the nails, the launcing of the spear,
and the ineffable horror of the dereliction, when he cried out in the
bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And when he
shall fiercely call upon thee, to answer for the wounds that thou have made, to
render him his blood that thou have spilt, to account to him for that life
which thou have made, to show him the fruit of all his pains and sufferings, to
present him thy returns for all these benefits and favors; then tell me what
thou will answer O stupid soul? How art thou provided to reply?

Will thou deny that he has done these things for thee? or can thou show as
much for him? Have thou returned him that being which he has given thee, and
so been even with him in a form of words, though that come infinitely short
indeed? Have thou sacrificed thy self for his benefit, or abased thy selffor
his commodity? What will thou plead when thou art called? The time is coming,
thy Judgment hastening, thine account is unavoidable, thy Judge inexorable.

Alas what could I have done for him? what profit could I have brought him? if
I should have pined away in the exercise of Devotion, and been eaten up with
zeal? If I should have spent my substance in Burnt-Offerings, or Calves of a
year old? If I should have presented him with thousands of Rams, or ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, To what purpose then should I endeavor that, which I
could not have performed? Why should I trouble my self with vain attempts, and
spend my strength about that, which I never could accomplish, neither if I be
righteous is he the better; nor if I be wicked is he the worse: our goodness
extends not to him; if thou sinnest, what do thou against him? if thou be
righteous, what receives he at thine hand? Is this then the evasion? I need
not stand to unfold the disingenuity, the stupor and madness of this evasion.
However though these things shall be urged upon us, they are not all, these
offer themselves in the consideration of the person of the Judge, but are not
all the matter of thy Judgment. For

Thou shall be brought to Judgment for these things; IV.
there is the matter ofthy Judgment.

For all these things; there is the extent. Because this V.
latter adds only a Modallity to the former, and I desire not to be over
tedious, we will put these two together.

And now we are descended from those less familiar Considerations, to which we
were forced to strein our understandings in the contemplation of our Judge,
into the compass of our own sphere, to the survey of our own operations; we are
come from the incomprehensible ways of God, to the ways of our own hearts. Walk
in the ways of thy heart, etc. and but know etc. In the judgment of this life
men are tried by the works of their hands, or the words of their mouths; for
theft or murder, for slander or Treason men may be brought to Judgment, but
thought is free, he has lived well that has carried his crimes close, the
crafty Politician and the concealed Hipocrite escape: There the case is quite
contrary, the Judgment takes in primarily the ways of the heart, and the words
and actions as they proceed from them. Wherefore let us withdraw a space into
our selves, and endeavor to mete out the extent of that Proposition. For all
the ways of the hearts of men God will bring them to Judgment.

How would it trouble us to recount and bring to memory every thought but of
one only day? and how many disorders and irregularities should we find in such
a reflection? How do our thoughts flote upon our brains, and we know neither
whence they come, nor what becomes of them? when they are broken in upon our
minds we cannot hold them, and when they are gone from us (as it was with
Nebuchadnezzar's dream) it is not in our power to recover them. How many roving
fancies present themselves unto us in a moment; and how many sudden and
imperfect Complacencies and distasts are raised by them? Leave but thy self
unbound, unfixed (by hearing, or reading, or business, etc.) for an hour, and
then tell me what suppositions and consequences, and resolutions thou have
made? And how thou have felt thy self to strein upon the borders of Lust or
Envy, of Pride or Anger, of Discontent or Melancholy. O that you would but
reflect a little upon your souls, and consider how many wandering thoughts have
broken in upon your minds since I began to speak of this important Subject. You
might save me the labor of further speaking, and raise your selves to that
which I endeavor: I fear you might find among your sacred thoughts, a mixture
of others very unsuitable; your envious, your amibitious, your covetous, your
idle thoughts. All these are the matter of our future Judgment, and however
they slightly pass us here, they are noted in the Book of God; and when that
Book shall be opened, they will be charged on our account. Thou tellest my
wanderings, (says the Psalmist) Are not these things noted in thy Book? I have
already said enough to take up the consideration of the remainer of our time:
But our hearts being too heavy, and our ears too dull of hearing to be moved
with generals, I must crave leave that I may be permitted to run over the heads
of some particulars.

Thou must give an account of all things committed to thee, Inward, or Outward,
Natural or Spiritual, thy senses and thy understanding, thine Outward and thine
Inward faculties.

If thou have been at a constant covenant with thine eyes, and have never
suffered them to rove in loose disorders: If thou have bowed thine ears to
discipline, and never let them open to vain entertainments: If thy taste has
been moderated by the necessities of nature, and the laws of temperance, and
never let loose according to the lust of Riot: If thy hands have been wholly
employed in the works of God, and never been instruments to the machinations of
the Devil: If thy speech have never uttered any idle words, but ever
administered grace to the hearers: If thy feet have only traced the ways of
God, and never stood in the way of sinners.

What has been the exercise of thine inward faculties, thine Apprehensions and
thine Appetite? If thy fancy has ever been employed in administering help to
thine understanding, and never afforded incentives to thy vile affections: If
thy memory have been taken up with the things which God has done, and Christ
has suffered for thee, and has afforded no place to Ribaldry and vanity: How
thou have ordered thine Anger and Concupiscence: What have been the object,
measure, and end, and circumstances, love, hatred, desire, aversion, delight,
sadness, hope, despair, fear, boldness, anger, envy, jealousy, and compassion.

How thou have managed thine understanding, and improved thy contemplative and
active principles. If thou have advanced in the discovery of eternal verities,
or herded with the beasts that perish: If thou have cherished the principles of
thy Synteresis, and the dictates and reflections of thy conscience, and never
rebelled against them: How thou have determined the freedom of thy Will, in thy
volition and intention, thine election and consent, fruition and use, when Good
and Evil, Life and Death have been set before thee.

How thou have behaved thy self in Spirituals, in gifts and graces. If thou
have accepted that which has been offered and improved, what thou have
accepted, or hid it in a Napkin. In outward things, how thou have acquired, and
how thou have managed thine Estate: How thou have behaved thy self in thy
Relations public and private, in thy charge, and in thy duty. -- But the time
would fail me to reckon up a considerable part of the exercises and objects of
the ways of the hearts of Men: And now all these and many more, are but the
simple elements, and common heads, of our account.

Consider then, O Negligent and incogitant soul! if thou could reckon up the
ways of thy heart, in any one of these kinds; if thou could call to mind but
every idle word whereof thou must give an account, or thy motions upon every
thing that thou have heard, and remember in any one of these elements, what
thou have done or else omitted. Then tell me how would thou find thy self
possessed, and how would thou be disposed to Judgment? Would thou deem it
needless or idle to call it betimes to thy remembrance? Would thou drive off
thy thoughts of it to the time of sickness, to the hour of death, and rudely
throw thy self upon it? -- But then try, and examine all these together,
contemplate a little upon the mixtures and combinations of them; these will
afford us many millions of millions of ways (far exceeding the varieties of
the corporeal nature, which proceed from the mixture of fewer elements) so many
as will utterly confound our thoughts to number. Who can reckon up the ways of
the hearts of the children of Men? Who can understand his errors?

And now, that he that has the World to uphold, the Planets and Stars to
guide, the course of nature to maintain, should keep a Register of our
impertinencies, and bring to Judgment all the ways of Men; (the traces of a
Ship in the Sea, of a Serpent upon a Rock) Who has believed our report? we are
apt to think it cannot be. Surely he sees not these things: Tush he cares not
for them. This is indeed the last resort of the treacherous hearts of men, the
grand imposture which resolves into a species of Atheism and Infidelity. O but
then, if I shall use the language of the Scriptures, I must call thee fool and
beast, to doubt of that which is plain and evident, to disbelieve that which
may be known. This Article concerning the Judgment to come, is not a problem of
Philosophy to be disputed this way and that way with equal probability; neither
is it only an Article of faith, but it is a principle of natural Theology, the
Scripture speaks of it under terms of greater evidence. St. Paul reasoned with
Felix, he disputed with the Philosophers concerning it, he speaks of the terror
of Judgment under terms of certainty, and of a kind of Demonstrative evidence.
Knowing the terror of the Law, etc. and here in the Text, it is not said,
Think, or believe. But know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment.

He is a fool that has said in his heart there is no God, VI.
and he that thinks he has no understanding may well be compared to the beasts
that perish: and so sure as there is a God, and that man has an understanding
soul, so surely it may be known, That for all these things, etc. For if there
be a God he must be infinitely just; and if so, he must render to every one
according to their actions; and if not here, then hereafter; and if so, he must
bring them to Judgment. But he does it not here: The ways of Providence seem
to be promiscuous, there is a wicked man to whom it happens according to the
way of the righteous, and a righteous man to whom it happens according to the
way of the wicked. Dives receives pleasure, Lazarus pain; therefore so sure as
there is a God, there will be a Judgment.

Again, If man have an understanding soul, he must have freedom in his actions,
and if so, he deserves either good or evil; and if there be deserts, there must
be rewards; and if there be rewards, there must be a Judgment. So then, so sure
as thou art an understanding creature, so sure there is a Judgment to come.

Once more, Reward is answerable to desert; and desert is only in what is free,
and what is free in man is the ways of his heart: wherefore they are to be
brought to Judgment, and if any, then all: for no reason can be fancied, why
some should be brought to Judgment, and others not. Wherefore, if it be sure
that God is in Heaven, and that Man has an understanding soul, then it is also
sure that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment, that God shall
bring to judgment every secret thing.

And now how sure and evident are these things? more sure and more plain, if we
will attend, than any other truths in the world, for there is not any known
truth which does not evict the truth of these things. We know a truth, because
we plainly and evidently understand the composition or division of the notions
in a Proposition, or the Deduction of a Proposition from some others; therefore
if we know any truth, we presuppose that we have souls which understand the
notions of things, and if souls which understand these notions, then to be sure
they are not bodies, (no combination os fire and air, and earth, and water, no
disposition of insensible atoms can cause the subject to apprehend and judge,
to reason and discourse) and if they be no bodies, then they are not subject to
corruption: It is evident therefore, that our souls are understanding and also
immortal, deserving and capable of future Judgment.

And as evident it is also that there is a sovereign Power, a God that governs
and will judge the Earth.

This is not a Rhetorical undertaking, but a just and measured truth; there is
not any thing in the world from whence these two may not be plainly and
evidently evicted, viz. a Godhead from the Creature, and thine own Immortality
from the discovery of a Godhead. The world which thou see, had it a
beginning, or had it not? if it had a beginning, he is thy God that made it; if
it had no beginning, then there are past as many myriads of years as minutes of
time, which is infinitely more absurd to grant, than tosay, thou have as many
hands as fingers, as many wholes as parts.

If then at any time we find our selves to doubt of these things, it is not
because we are the beaux esprits, or forts sprits; our doubting proceeds from
dullness, and the want of that strong reason to which we do pretend, the things
are certain in themselves and evident. He is not far from any one of us in
whom we live, and move, and have our being; and the Light of Nature discovered
our Immortality not only to Philosophers, but even to the Heathen Poets, to him
that sung to us, that, We are also his offspring.

So that now thy pretenses are all taken off, and every imposture of the heart
discovered.

Return then once again into thy bosom, and take account Applic. general.
of thy apprehensions; The day of the Lord is coming and stealing upon thee as
a theif in the night, the day of Judgment, the great and terrible day. A day of
anguish and of gloominess, a day of a whirlwind and a tempest, a day of anguish
and tribulation: Where will thou hide thy self? O that is impossible, Whether
shall we go then from his presence: shall we call to the Mountains to fall
upon us? How will thou appear? O that is intolerable; for our God is a
consuming fire. What will thou do when the day of Judgment comes, and this may
be the hour, this minute thou may be smitten and hurried hence to Judgment?
Thousands have fallen besides us, and Ten Thousands at our right hand, and why
may not we be next.

The time of our particular Judgment cannot be far away, and why may we not
reasonably apprehend the approach of the General Judgment, either of this
World, or at leastwise of this sinful Nation?

Our Lord Christ indeed tells us, that of the day and hour of the final
Judgment, Knows no man. Yet he has given us the signs of his coming: The
Apostles have left us Characters of the last days, the Prophets have declared
the manner and apparatus of the coming of the Lord to Judgment.

We read that when the Disciples admired the stones and the building of Herod's
Temple at Jerusalem; Christ told them, That the day was coming when there
should not be left one stone upon another: upon this the Disciples ask him
(privately) three Questions. 1. When shall these things be? 2. What shall be
the sign of thy second coming? And 3. of the end of World?

As for the precise moment of these things, he denies to tell it them; (Nay, he
professes, that as he was the Son of Man he did not know it.) But for the other
two he cendescends to their curiosity, he tells them the signs of his coming,
and of the end of the World, and that they shall be such as these;

You shall hear, says he, (Matthew. 24.) of Wars and rumors of Wars, Nation
rising against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. There shall be Traitors and
false Prophets, Saying, Lo! here is Christ, Behold! (a new Messiah) in the
Wilderness: Lo! there is Christ, Behold! he is ( at a Conventicle) in the
secret Chambers: He tells us, that iniquity shall abound, and the love of many
shall wax cold, that he shall hardly find faith on the earth as it was in the
days of Noe, they ate, they drank, till the flood came and swept them all away;
so shall the coming of the Son of Man be.

He tells us ( Luke 21.) there shall be Famines and Earthquakes, Pestilence,
and fearful sights, great signs from Heaven; in the Earth distress of Nations,
great perplexities, the Sea and Waves roaring; Men's hearts failing them for
fear, looking after those things that are coming upon the Earth.

Concerning the last days, St. Paul tells us, that there shall be perilous
times; that on one hand there shall be a sort of men, that shall be lovers of
themselves, Covetous, Proud, Boasters, Ranters, and Blasphemers.

On the other hand there shall be a Race of heady, high minded Traitors, having
a form of godliness, creeping into houses, leading captive silly women. They
shall despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, They shall be Separatists
from the Church, and false pretenders to the Spirit. Th^se says St. Jude, are
they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

St. Peter tells us, that in the last times there should be a loose, profane,
a bold Atheistical Gigantick race of scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
saying, Where is this God of Judgment? let him make speed and hasten his work,
that we may see it. Where is the promise of his coming? since the fathers fell
asleep all things continue as they were before.

And for the manner and Apparatus of his coming, Our God shall come ( says the
Psalmist) and shall not keep silence, there shall go before him a devouring
fire, and a mighty Tempest shall be stirred up round about him.

Behold! the Lord will come with fire, ( says the Prophet) and with his
Chariots like a Whirlwind, to render Esai. 66. 15.
his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. The streams of Zion
shall be turned into Pitch, and the dust thereof into Brimstone; the Earth
thereof shall be burning Pitch, the smoke thereof shall ascend day and night,
and shall not be quenched, [ compare Revel. 6. with Esai. 34.]

The Kings of the Earth shall tremble, the Captains and the mighty shall be
horribly afraid, the great men and the rich men shall hide themselves, all the
bondmen and all the freemen shall fly to the Rocks of the Mountains. And soon
after all this, The Heavens shall be rivel'd as a s^r^wl, the Earth and the
Elements shall melt away; for God shall arise to judge terribly the Earth.

Have not all these things come upon us, the men of this Generation? Is it
weakness, is it a vain and superstitious scrupulosity to call these things to
our remembrance? Have we no reason at all to apprehend the approach of a
General Judgment, either upon the World, or upon our sinful Nation?

Do we not now envy those despised souls which have made their accounts ready?
We thought it madness to see them pine away with poenitential exercises, and
macerate themselves with mourning. We thought it folly which they called
Conscience, for which they denied themselves the pleasures and enjoyments of
the World. We fools counted their life madness, and their latter end to be
without horror. But the time is coming when they shall be comforted, and we
shall be tormented. Because he has called and we have refused, he has
stretched out his hand, and we have not regarded, He will laugh at our
calamity, and mock when our fear comes. When our destruction comes as a
Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon us.

May we not therefore give up our selves to the torments of our hearts, and
surrender up our souls unto Despair? so Israel said there is no hope, we will
follow every one the devices of his heart: after 20, 30 or 40 years continuance
in our courses, 'tisin vain to think of turning from them. Our arrears are so
far gone, that there is no hope to discharge them; and why should we trouble
our selves with the thoughts of our Account? Nay, that which must come, let it
come, and what is a few days respite to Eternity? Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Let us go forth as at other times, and shake our selves
and scatter these troublesome apprehensions of future Judgment. What if we
should drink a little to drive away Melancholy?

Yes! and fall perhaps, and spew, and rise no more.

Nay, but I beseech you, stay a little, and consider, consider at least in this
your day the things which belong to your peace: It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God; Who among us can dwell with a devouring fire?
Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Such careless and desperate resolutions are the advantages which the Devil
aims at, that he may sear our Consciences, and seal us up in a final
obduration. But there is another kind of advantage, which God and our Lord
Christ and the Holy Spirit, and the Gospel, and the Ministers aim at, That
advantage which I told you of in the beginning of my Discourse. That knowing
the terror of the Lord they may persuade men.

And now what is it that they would persuade us? that we will be contented to
part with the tormenting fears of Judgment, that we will condescend not to be
miserable to all Eternity: That we will accept of deliverance from the wrath to
come, that we will not neglect so great salvation, nor trample on the blood of
the everlasting Covenant.

Behold! God calls upon us, Turn you, turn you at my reproof, why will you dye
O House of Israel: As I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of sinners.
Our Lord Christ calls upon us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you. In the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles, he
stood and cried, Saying, If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. The
Spirit says come, and who ever will, let him come, and take of the water of
life freely. The Gospel assures us, That God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish but
have everlasting life.

Behold! I set before you this day life and death, blessing and cursing, and as
an unworthy Ambassador in Christ's stead I pray you be reconciled to God, take
his yoke upon you, his yoke is easy, and his burden light; embrace now the
tender of the Gospel, only repent and believe in the Lord Jesus, accept him for
your Savior and your Lord. Your Prophet to instruct you, your King to govern
you, your Priest to save you, and you shall be saved. Saved from the fears and
horrors of a Guilty Conscience condemned by its own witness. Saved from the
wrath of God and of the Lamb. You shall meet the Lord with Confidence. We shall
be able to stand with boldness in the Judgment, to lift up our heads with joy,
because our redemption draws near.

This is the way to save our own souls from perishing, which is the General
design of all our Preaching. And this is the way to appease the wrath which is
gone out against us; and to preserve our Nation from destruction, which is the
particular and more immediate end of our present Humiliation, whereof I am yet
to speak.

THe hand indeed of the Lord has been heavy upon us, Applic particular.
his wrath has been kindled, it has waxed hot against the Sheep of his
pasture, and he has plagued our Nation very sore, His Judgments have been
multiplied, his strokes have been redoubled; and for all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Wars and Pestilences, and those other forerunners of Christ's coming to
Judgment have been seen and felt amongst us, and now when these have not been
able to prevail,

To awaken a drowsy people, to rowse up a Lethargic Nation; to ferment a
people settled upon their Lees. God has made anew thing in the midst of us, he
has wrought a work in our days, which makes the ears of all that hear it to
tingle. A work not to be paralleled perhaps in all the circumstances since the
Creation of the World.

How has the Lord covered the Daughter of our Zion with a cloud in his anger,
and has cast down from Heaven to Earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not
his footstool in the Day of his Anger; he has swallowed up the habitations of
his people, he has taken away his Tabernacles, and destroyed his places of
Assemblies, the Ramparts and the Walls lament and languish, her Gates are sunk
to the ground, her Bars are destroyed.

Who can express the terror of this fatal Judgment, the unexpected eruption,
the sudden increase, the irresistible force, the remorsless rage, the
insatiable voracity of this fiery Judgment? the present sufferings, the lasting
miseries of private persons are inexpressible; the public damage, the
dangerous consequences (it may be) unconceivable.

What thing shall I liken to thee O Daughter of my People? Whereunto shall I
compare the day of thy Visitation? To the destruction of Jerusalem? to the
great and terrible day of Judgment?

O the terrors and affrightments, the shreikes and lamenations, the agonies,
the confusions of that Day. They that were on the house top, durst not stay to
take any thing out of their houses; nor he that was in the field return back to
take his Clothes; they that were in the City betook themselves to the Fields
and Mountains, where they beheld their flaming habitations, where they trembled
to behold the abomination of desolation raging in the holy places.

How were the wise men amazed, and the strong men terrified? despair seized
them, counsel and strength fled away from them, there was no help in them, they
presently gave all for lost; they stood affrighted at a distance gazing at the
dreadful spectacle: in vain they thought it to contend, it looked so like the
coming of the Son of Man.

The breath of the Lord kindled the fire, he rode upon Cherub, he came flying
upon the wings of the wind. He made the winds his Messengers, and the flames of
fire his Ministers: He brought the Winds out of his Treasure, and (to point the
flame directly upon the bulk and body of the City) through his power he brought
in the South-East wind: as a theif in the night, as pains upon a woman in
travel, as the lightning that comes from the East and passes to the West; so
came this flaming Judgment; and so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. I
cannot endure to dilate upon this Argument; Sorrow and anguish are in the
consideration of it: Animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit. Great is the
Judgment, and there is reason for us to fear that it may be portending and
symtomatical.

YEt who can tell, but God may have mercy upon us, but he may yet save us from
destruction? though our breach be great as the Sea, yet is not in it self
irreparable; though our wounds be deep and gaping, they are not desperate or
uncurable; hitherto we may say with the Apostle, We are chastned, but not
killed; afflicted, but not in despair.

The signs and symptoms of an approaching final Judgment are not so decretory
and peremptory that we should despair. God's signal Judgments have hitherto
been accompanied with signs of mercies, and this is a plain case, that he is
not fond of our destructions, and that he had rather that we should live: He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. He stands pausing
and hoesitating, as he did once before, O Ephraim, how shall I give thee up, O
Ephraim? O England, How shall I give thee up, O England?

What mean else those Alternations and those mixtures, and combinations of
wonderful Judgments, and of wonderful deliverancies and mercies which our ears
have heard and our eyes have seen?

We have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have told us what wonderful
deliverances he wrought in their time of old.

We have seen vicissitudes great and prodigious, mixtures and combinations,
mavelous in our eyes, horrible destructions and wonderful restitutions,
succeeding one another, raging Plagues at home, and signal Victories abroad.

God has filled us with bitterness, and covered us with ashes: But it is his
mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. If the arm of
his Justice and Severity has been made bare, that it might be seen of all the
people, He has not left his mercy without witness. If his Judgment has been
great and terrible, in that which is consumed, his mercy is wonderful and
miraculous in that which is preserved. Plainly! except the Lord had left us a
Remnant, (and visibly interposed to do it,) we should not have had this place
wherein to humble our solves before him. We should have been as Sodem, and we
should have been like unto Gomorrah.

It was he that in the midst of Judgment remembered mercy; when the flaming
vengeance was in its height, when in the opinion of all men it had arrived at
the state of irresistibility, and when every man's heart failed him, when the
hopes of all men were sunk into despair; He checked the domineering vengeance,
he put up the flaming Sword, he controlled the streaming waves of sire, and
said thus far shall ye come and no further.

In a wonderful manner he preserved the Goods and Persons of the poor
Inhabitants of the City.

He restreined the rage of our enemies, that cried concerning our Jerusalem,
Down with it, Down with it, Aha! so would we have it.

He suffered not a foreign Enemy to land, nor our domestic loes to make a head
in our confusions.

He was a wall of fire about the persons of our Gracious Sovereign and his
Royal Highness, and of those valiant Noble Persons which adventured, boldly and
strenuously, and indefatigably labored the public preservation.

He has given signal Preservations and Victories to our Fleets abroad, he has
restored our Highborn and Noble-Generals, and our Fleet in health and safety.

He has given us plenty of all things necessary for the life of man.

In one great word, to sum up an aggregation of great and various mercies, he
has upheld our Religion and our Government in peace; and for an earnest of his
further preservation he has given us this seasonable opportunity with health
and safety in this place to attend the Public Service, to advise and assist
in this arduous Juncture of affairs.

Arduous and difficult indeed it is, to restore our City and defend our
Country, to restore the Houses of God, and Public Buildings, to re-edifie ten
Thousand private habitations; to sustein the poor and needy, to preserve the
rights, and properties of men; to find such a temper of Justice and equity,
that there be no decay, no just complaining in our Streets. To uphold the
Traffic of the Nation, and to keep it in order and security, free from private
Robberies and public Insurrections; and therefore in order to all those ends,
to uphold our Religion in the zealous and effectual exercise, in the sincerity
and uniformity thereof, to preserve it from encroachments and undermining
Tollerations, ruinous to Religion, destructive to the Government of the Nation.
And all this while to make provision against our dangerous and cruel Enemies,
Gebal and Ammon, and Amalech, the French, Dutch, and the Dane, who have
conspired to our destruction.

These things are arduous, but not insuperable; difficult, but not to be
despaired of.

Concerning Jerusalem burned and laid wast by the Assyrians, Daniel foretold,
that the streets and the walls thereof should be rebuilded even in troubleous
times; and when the time came that they were re-edified, we read in Nehemiah,
that the laborers in one hand held the trowel, and the other held a weapon;
one half of the people labored in the work, and the other half held the Spears
and the Shields, the Bows and the Habergeons, because of their cruel enemies on
every side.

If God shall be pleased to give us a spirit of Understanding, and teach our
Senaters Wisdom; If he shall pour out a public spirit upon our Councels, a
spirit of tenderness and compassion, of Justice and Equity, Temperance and
Frugality, Fortitude and Magnanimity; If all Orders and Degrees amongst us,
Civil, and Military, and Ecclesiastical shall take to themselves the spirits of
Christians and of men.

If our Counsels and endeavors shall be answerable to the care and benignity,
to the fervor and strenuous industry of our gracious Sovereign, and to the
alacrity and magnanimity of our courageous and generous Countrymen; then
(speaking humanely, and abstracting from our Deservings) we need not greatly
fear, but we may yet subdue the pride and insolence of our barbarous Enemies;
we may yet behold our City rising out of its ashes in greater splendor than we
have seen it heretofore.

Wherefore arise, and gird your selves O ye Princes, ye Nobles, ye Rulers of
our Israel! Consult, consider, and give sentence. Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
let us arise and labor; let us up and be doing, be strong and of good courage,
and the good hand of our God shall be upon you; he shall give you the honor to
be the defenders of your Country, he shall make you repairers of the breaches,
restorers of our City to dwell in.

Yet I cannot, I may not forbear to put you in remembrance of this one thing;
Except the Lord build the City, their labor is but lost that build it. It is
not our wisdom or industry, much less our confidence that will do it, unless
God be for us; neither will God be for us, unless we turn from the evil of our
ways: except we repent, we have reason to fear, that what we have seen
hitherto, will be no more but the beginning of our sorrows. The Prophet Esaias
tells us, That the Lord sent a word unto Esai. 9.
Jacob, and it lighted on Israel; and all the people shall know, that say in
the pride and stoutness of their hearts, the Bricks are fallen, but we will
build with hewn Stones; the Sycamores are down, but we will change them into
Cedars. Therefore the Lord will set up their Adversaries, and join their
Enemies together, the Syrians before, and the Philistims behind, and they shall
devour Israel with open mouth; Because this people turns not to him that
smites them.

Wherefore turn you, turn you every one from the evil of his ways. Let us
search our hearts, and try our ways, and turn to him that has smitten us. Turn
unto him with all our hearts, with fasting and with weeping, and mourning; he
has smitten us, and he will heal us, because his compassions fail not. Come
and let us reason together, says God, though your sins were as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow.

There is yet a way open to take away the terror of our Particular Judgment,
and to prevent a final Judgment from falling upon the Nation. We are yet in the
Land of hope, and space is given for Repentance, the door of mercy is not yet
shut upon us, nor the ears of our Judge sealed against us.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
wonders that he has done for the children of men! that has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our Iniquities; that has not cut
us off in the midst of our sins, nor in the height of our impenitencies
snatched us away to Judgment, that has not dealt with us as with the Apostate
Angels, and with Thousands of our Brethren, who were better and more righteous
than we.

Let us once more then return into our selves. Let us consider our condition,
let us veiw over and balance the grounds of our hopes, and the reasons of our
fears: Let us take an exact account of our whole estate and interest in
reference to all our concernments, National and Personal, Temporal and Eternal.
Let us deliberate and advise what is to be done, and what to be avoided.

Did I say deliberate? Whether we shall save our souls from utter darkness and
everlasting burnings? Whether we shall save the Nation from final ruin and
desolation? -- Nay rather,

Let us break off our sins by repentance, and our Iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor.

Let us make our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that-when we
fail, we may be received into everlasting habitations.

Let us lend unto the Lord, that we may have treasure in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, nor theives break through and steal.

Let us fast the fast that the Lord has chosen; Loose the bands of wickedness,
feed the hungry, cloth the naked; he that has two Coats, let him give to him
that has none; and he that has meat let him do likewise.

Such an occasion scarce happens in many hundreds of years; and for motives to
charity, they are all comprised in that great argument of the Judgment to come.

When the Son of Man shall come to Judgment, and shall sit upon the Thnone of
his Glory: When all Nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall set the
Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left: This shall be the mark of
their discrimination,

He shall say to those on his right hand, I was hungry, and ye fed me; thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; naked, and ye clothed me; sick and in prison, and ye
visited me; Come ye blessed of my Faiher, receive the Kingdom prepared for you.

And he shall say unto them on the left hand, I was hungry, and ye fed me not;
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; etc. Wherefore go ye cursod into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

The way is short and compendious to save all our interests. What does the Lord
require of us but to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly before the Lord
our God; Let us be merciful therefore as our heavenly Father is merciful, and
let us humble our selves under the Almighty hand of God, as we pretend to do
this day. Let us betake our selves aforehand to our Judge, and pour out our
complaints before him. Let us confess our wickedness, and be sorry for our
sins. Let us lay hold on the feet of our Blessed Redeemer, and give him no rest
till he has sealed our pardon. Let us bathe with our tears the wounds that we
have made. Let us cry mightily to the Throne of Grace. Let us wrestle and
strive with our Redeemer, and not les him go until he bless us: Until he open
our eyes to see the dangers we are in, and through his mercy show us a way to
escape them. Till he quicken us up to resolutions of amendment, and carry us
strongly through these resolutions. Until he heal our backslidings, and make
up our breaches: Until he save our souls from death, and our Nation from
destruction.

To work our selves to these Resolutions, and to fix us in them, to make them
abide upon us all our days, let us remember what has been spoken, and let us
frequently meditate upon that Sarcastical Concession of the Text,

Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, walk in the ways of thy heart, and the sight of thy eyes; But know
that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

FINIS.

