THE Rambling Rakes: OR, London Libertines.

By the Author of The STEP to the BATH.

London Printed and Sold by I. How, in the Ram-Head Inn-Yard, in
Fanchurch-street, 1700.

Books Printed and Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in
Fenchurch-Street; and by M. Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel.
1. SOt's Paradise: Of the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House: With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Iamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island. Price-Six Pence. 3. Ecclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashoper. Price-Six pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six pence. 5. A Trip to
New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English and
Indians. Price Six pence. 6. Modern Religion, and Ancient Loyalty: A Dialogue.
Price Six Pence. 7. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between two Astrologers and
the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen from the Vices and
Villainies Practiced in Court, City, and Country. Price Six pence. 8. A Walk to
Islington: With a Description of New Tunbridge-Wells, and Sadler's
Musick-House. Price Six pence. 9. The Humors of a Coffee-House: A Comedy.
Price Six Pence. 10. A Frolic to Horn-Fair. With a Walk from Cuckold's-Point
through Deptford and Greenwich. Price Six pence. 11. The Dancing-School. With the
Adventures of the Easter-Holy-Days. Price Six pence. 12. The First Volume of
the LONDON-SPY: In Twelve Parts. 13. The Second Volume of the LONDON-SPY: In
Six Parts. Price Six Pence each; or they may be had both Volumes Bound
together; and also Bound with the rest of the Authors Writings. 14. The
Metamorphos'd Beau, etc. Price Six pence. 15. The English Nun: Or, a Comical
Description of a Nunnery. With the Lives and Intrigues of the Priests and Nuns
Price Six Pence. 16. Laugh and be Fat: Or, an Antidote against Melancholy.
Containing great variety of Comical Intrigues in Town and Country. To which is
added Nine Delightful Tales. Price One Shilling. 17. A Step to the Bath: With a
Character of the Place. Price Six Pence. 18. Labor in Vain: Or, what Signifies
Little or Nothing, viz. I. The Poor Man's Petition at Court. II. Expectation of
Benefit from a Covetous Man in his Lifetime. III. The Marriage of an Old Man
to a Young Woman. IV. Endeavors to Regulate Men's Manners by Preaching or
Writing. V. Being a Iacobite. VI. Confining an Insolvent Debtor. VII. Promise
of Secrecy in a Conspiracy. VIII. An Enquiry after a Place. 19. The Reformer.
Exposing the Vices of the Age: In several Characters. viz. 1. The Vicious
Courtier. 2. The Debauched Parson. 3. The Factious Hypocrite. 4. The Precise
Quaker. 5. The Covetous Miser. 6. The Prodigal Son. 7. The City Letcher. 8. The
Insatiate Wife. 9. The Amorous Maid. 10. The Beau Apprentice. 11. The City Mob.
12. The Country Squire.
THE Rambling Rakes, etc.
BEING something Indisposed by a late Debauch, which confined me to my Bed some
hours extraordinary; during of which, I was as Squeamish as a New Married
Woman, and lap'd more Mutton-Broth, than a Country-Dame in the Straw does
Oatmeal-Caudle: About Three in the Afternoon I was sent for by a Friend, who
had been doing the same Penance, to Vulcan's Coffee-House in Stocks Market,
once Famed for the Athenian Conclave, but now for the Grave Cabal of
Colleterian Factors, and Renowned Herb-women; where we heard several pleasant
Tongue-Combats.

The first was between two Feminine Pull-Guts, concerning Priority; for the
Gray Mare was now the better Horse, notwithstanding her Husband had formerly
been a Domestic to the others. They had both been taking a Cup of the
Creature, and being at the Head of the Fountain, was the bolder with the
Liquor; but the noble Juice of the Grape so Exhillerated their Ten-penny
Craniums, that their Noisie Nonsense far exceeded the Cataracts of Nile; and
with eagerness of Loquacity foamed at the Mouth like a Dray-Horse. No sooner
was this Fray ended, but C -- the Circuli Tap-Lash, fell a Railing at the
Parvous Fishmonger, for reporting he had made an Inspection into his Daughters
Quarters, of which he gave a very nice Description; and Demonstrated the Signs
of a Mole to a Miracle. For which Stripp-Eel was Arrested, but proved it to be
matter of Fact, before the Gigantick Figures at Guild Hall; whereupon poor
Miss's Nunquam Satis became the subject of the Neighbourhoods Discourse.

But the dull Mohammedan Infusion not agreeing with our Maukish Pallats, we
deposited our Pence, and cros'd to the East Side of the Market, to the Remains
of a Tragematopola, or, to speak more properly, the Inconditus Grocer, Retailer
of Nants, and an Uncouth, Sempstress, next door to the Sign of Aquila, to try
the effects of a Golden Cordial; where we found our Formal Hostess
extraordinary Studious in consulting Aristotle's Masterpiece for the choice of
a good Penis: She has more Stitched Volumes in her Library, than ever her
Mother had Cherry-Sieves in her Stall. She Is Mamma's own Babe, an Eternal
Tatler, and very Precise in her Discourse; makes a pretty diminutive Figure in
her Sundays Attire, which consists of at least Thirty Remnants, and has more
variety of Colors than the Rainbow. It Is to be supposed she was Begot in the
Dogg-Days, and that her Mother Engendr'd before she had cleans'd her Hands from
the Scorbutic Filth of Green Wall-Nuts; for she has such a swarthy Tincture,
that she has often been tendered the Paw, and taken for a Gipsy. Her Education
is chiefly owing to her Mothers late Seminary, which was Billingsgate, and are
both well versed in its Lingua.

From thence we adjourned to the Sacerdotal-Cap, fronting Marble Majesty, with
the Head of Rebellion under the Heels of his Prancer, where good Wine is no
Novelty, which proved the best Cordial, revived the puking Spirits and inspired
us with fresh Vigor. To spend the Remaining part of the Evening, we agreed to
go see a Play, and ordered Trip-stairs to see what was Acted. Gentlemen, said
he, That requires at least an Hours time; for there is lately Published an
Edict, that no Play-Bills shall be stuck up in the City Liberties, by reason
they often tended to the Corruption of Youth. Bless me! Cried my Friend, I am
surpised to hear that any should Abdicate Play-Bills, from the City-Gates, yet
suffer the Church-doors to be Plastered over with Pocky ones, and their Walls
Adorned with Piss-tubs. I am apter to believe, said I, it is rather in
Opposition to the Corruption of their Wives, and if possible to cut off their
Communication with Quality, with whom they are generally Affected; and the
tempting Loll in a Coach and Six, has proved more prevalent than the Holy
Cross: And it is a strong Argument, that too many have more Respect for a
Pissing-Corner, than the Gates of the Sacred Temple.

Discoursing of which, occasioned us to call for the other Quart, so that we
out-stay'd our Time; and being too late for a Play, stroul'd to the Lunaticks
Mansion in Morefields (a Place famous for Assignations) to pick up a Confiding
Female; but meeting with a Disappointment, we returned to the Stocks-Market,
where was variety of Company, devouring the product of Dame Natures Liberality.
At one stall was a young Beau Clerk, wrapped in a Scotch-pledd, with a Pen stuck
as stiff in his Hair as a Skure in the Flap of a Shoulder of Mutton, Treating
his Masters Chambermaid with Strawberries, but as watchful as Argos; and his
Head as full of Motion as a Weavers-Shuttle, in watching his Masters Door, and
Admiring Mrs. B -- s Fiz, which plainly discovered she bore no Antipathy
against Chalk and Oat-meal. Hard by him was another of his Brothers of the
Desk, and the round Shouldered Son of a Potter, Eating of Cherry's for the
Plate, attended by more Spectators than the late Monstrous Fish at Black-wall.
At another Stall was a leash of Virgins, the Daughters of a Horse-fac'd
Midwife, near that remarkable piece of Antiquity known by the Name of
London-stone, darting their Amorous Glances, to as little purpose as Washing an
Ethiopian, and had no more influence, than a Poor-Mans Petition on a Courtier;
they are of a Masculine Hue, full Aged, and constant Lecturers, but as little
esteemed as Malt-Tickets; Their Father, without doubt was a Hero, and had as
bold an Appetite as he that first encountered an Oyster; The Mother out-rival'd
the late Hermaphrodite in More-fields for Features. At the Corner Stall was a
young Upstart Money Merchant, buying Apricocks by the Dozen, with an Old Porter
at his Heells bare Headed; at which my Friend was mightily concerned, to see
one of Fortunes Fools, so idolized by Age, and reverend Gray-hairs; but
another. Gentleman taking Notice of it, swore he had a mind to break his Head
for having no more respect for his Fathers Profession. With that I asked him if
he had any Acquaintance with him. He told me Yes, that his Father was a Porter,
and Drummer to one of the Companies of the City-Trainbands, and it is supposed
he was taken on Charity by his first Master; but he Dying, was shuffled about
for some time, till at length the Sheerings of the Golden Fleece, and the
Clusters of the Vine, have so Evapulated this proud Coxcomb, that his Dexterity
in Cleaning of Shoes, the dandling of his Masters Housekeeper, and his
Honorable Title of Piping-Sam, is now Blotted from his Memory: Set a Beggar on
Horseback, he will ride to the Devil; At the same Stall was Old Split-Fig, an
Adjacent Grocer, and the uneven-leg'd Hosier, almost his Neighbor, joining
their Forces, for three Farthings worth of Currants; and stood as hard for two
or three Bunches over-Measure, as a Tailor for a piece of Carrot to a Two-penny
Cut of Boild-Beef: The first is more Noted for a Miser, than the other is
Admired by the Exchange Girls. He often trots to the Burrough-Market to save a
penny in a Joint; and would sooner part with an Eye, than give a halfpenny to a
poor Basket-woman. By the Antiquity of his Attire, he resembles a Spaniard; and
preserves his Wardrobe for succeeding Generations. He is as great a stranger
to the Tailors, as to common-civility. Not long since some unlucky Spark took
the pains to send him the Epigram, on Diogenes's salutation to the Rich Croesus
in Hell; which for the Morality sake, I think not amiss to insert here. When
the Tubb'd Cynick went to Hell, and there
Found the pale Ghost of Golden Croesus bare;
He stops, and jeering till he shrugs again,
Says, O thou Richest King of Kings! What gain
Have all thy Large heaps brought thee, since I spy
Thee here alone, and poorer now then I?
For all I had, I with me bring; but thou,
Of all thy Wealth, have not one Farthing now.


But the greatest of our Diversion consisted in hearing of an old Basketerian,
banter a young Eloquent Norwegian-Factor, whose time is but lately Expired; and
is now Master of a little dark Cave, (but of less Sense) in a Noble-street,
from the Corner of which you have a fair Prospect of the Orphans-Conduit. He is
of the same Opinion of the late Sir John P -- that every Generation grows Wiser
than the former; so by Consequence his Tallent must be very large. The Vulgar
has Corrected his Name by Adoption, to one more suitable to his Natural Parts,
and Re-Baptis'd him Ben. He Is a Complete Beau, bait but the two most Essential
Parts of the Animal, that is his Head and his Heels. But Notwithstanding his
great Perfections, he has verified the Old Proverb, Fools have Fortune: But the
Old Harradan being a little too Extravagant with her Clapper, was rebuked by
his Neighbor the Friendly Tallow-Chandler: But the Old Woman gave very little
Attention to his Reproof, and told him, Though he pretended mightily to the
Spirit, 'twas well known he was Fleshly given; and his deeds was Dark, though by
vocation he was an Author of Light, and a Confounder of Cotton.

The Wine, Walk, and Fruit, Creating us an Appetite; we quitted the Market, and
hasted to the Sign of the Infallible-head, in an Alley that bears the same
Title, as Noted now for Nice-Peck, as 'twas formerly for an Amorous Bar-keeper:
Having Anatomized the Carcass of a cold Fowl, and wring'd a Lemon as hard as
David Jones once did the Bankers Consciences; We took leave of his Holiness,
and went over to the obliging Relict of the late Alphabetical Cutler, who was
Drinking of Burgundy Bumpers, with two or three Brawny Officers, to the
commemoration of his deceased Honor. Having bartered for some of her
Commodity, we departed, but not without Tasting their Wine, and Saluting her
Lips, which were as Clammy as Treacle, and as Red as her Neighbor, the
Apocryphal Tonsor's Nose, which is Scarlet in Grain; and of such a Spungy
Nature, that it has soaked up more Claret than will float the Royal Sovereign.

Standing at the Alleys End some short time, considering how to steer our
Course; and likewise viewing the noble Front of the Universal Correspondent
Fabric; Lolling on each other in as lazy a posture, as a Walbrook Furrier in
July, or a Paternoster Row Mercer in December: In the Int'rim of which,
outbolts a brace of Ladies, from the aforesaid Mansion, whose Airy Deportments,
slow Motions, and Amorous Looks, gave us an Invitation to follow the tract;
which as soon as they perceived, they put the black Pall over their Fizes; and
could no more forbear looking back than Lott's Wife, but gave as many backward
Ogles, as the Hackney-Boarders in their Sundays progress, at the City Beau's:
And fauntring after them as a Boy to School, till we had almost reached the
Waterside, as we were just about to give them a Broadside, and make our
Addresses, as ill luck would have it, who should we meet but both our Dads, who
were going to refresh their jolly Old Hearts at Heroic Guy's, near the Royal
Edifice of Renowned Gresham; the Old Gentlemen would have persuaded us to go
with them, for which we begged their Pardon, pleading Extraordinary haste for
the payment of some Bills that Night. Whereupon they released us, Commending
our Diligence, which I believe they would hardly have done, had they known our
design on the Ladies, whom we resolved should be the Receivers.

By this unexpected Accident we lost the sight of our Does; but Conjecturing
they were going either to Lambeth-Wells, or Cupid's-Garden, we hasted to the
Old-Swan, presently took a pair of Oars, and by the laborious Tugg's of our
Element Splitters, was soon conveyed to the Southern-Shore, near the Ancient
Palace of England's head Prelate; and ferriting about to recover our Loss, till
we came to Lambeth-Wells, where I observd an Old Fornicator a Mutton-hunting,
who by his sanctified Look, and Formal Carriage, one would have thought could
have bid defiance to any Temptation of a Female Devil, and resisted the Lust of
his own Flesh. My Friend hap'ning to know him, told me he was a Maggot-Monger
by vocation, lived in Leaden-Hall-street, was formerly Excommunicated from the
Church, and not long since narrowly escaped it from the Assembly of the
Faithful in Lime-street, and all for the tickling Sin of Whoring; but on his
Public acknowledging his Crime, with a promise for a thorough Reformation for
the Future, he was confirmed in the Congregation; but he still retains his
Integrity to Wenching; and so predominant is his Flesh, that a Bull from his
Holiness would no more be regarded, then the Reproof of the Elders.

In the same Walk was the Widow of a late Grocer, but now the Wife of a Draper,
rigged as fine as a Duchess, with a Livery at her heels. Her Natural
Complexion is as swarthy as a Bantainer, but plastered over by Art as thick
as the lid of a Goose-pye. She had a Crozier of Diamonds at her Ase -- as big
as a Frying Pan; but the adjacent part has proved very unfruitful, having never
Received the Blessing of the first Command; and of all the Commandments, she
regards the seventh the least. Under the Notion of Drinking the Waters, she
carries on her Intreagues. She often boasts of being a Lady in few years; and
will bring the More-fields Star-gazer to avouch it.

Among the Dancing-Crew was several whose Tails were far lighter than their
Heels; and the motion of their Buttocks so melted their Grease, that they
out-sweated a Stoker to a Glass-house in June, or a Pye-Corner Cook during
Bartholomew-Fair. The wipe with their Handcherchiefs, had so intermixed the
White and the Red, that their Faces looked as Streaky as Marble-Paper. The
Grains of their Skins by the Heat of their Body, and the Essence of Toes and
Armpits, made such a Fumigation, that had not my Friend had a Bottle of Spirit
of Hartshorn, we had certainly fainted. There was one Lady of Pleasure, to
whom Nature had been very liberal with her Endowments, as she was dancing a
Jigg (which she performed extraordinary well) pulling out her Hankerchief to
wipe her face, out drops a large piece of Green-Cloth, and as much Orice-root
as would supply an Hospital for a Month, which dashed her so much out of
Countenance, that she departed, without making her Honors, so by consequence
spoiled her Market for that Evening. She is a true resemblance of Pandora's
Box; for she has been in Kent-street-Lock more times than double the number of
her hands and feet. The bulky mein Usher, with a white Wand in his hand, for
the generality leads the Dance; he steps as fine as a Mill-horse, has the Air
of a Cow, and makes more Noise than a Captain of the Mob on the fifth of
November.

Seeing not our Ladies, we thought it lost time to stay any longer there, but
hasted to Cupids-Garden, with as dejected a Countenance, as the Commissioners
of the Land Bank on the News of Dr. Chamberlains trip to Holland; and as big
with expectation of finding them there, as his poor deluded Subscribers were of
annual Estates; but notwithstanding we were so vigilant that no mask of
Petticoat 'scap'd us, we were baffled in our hopes, and our search had the same
Effect as Penelope's Labor, therefore we resolved to strive no longer against
the stream, but submit to what kind Chance should offer; waiting for which, and
walking about for an Opportunity, we took Notice of a Goggle-Ey'd Jew, of the
Tribe of Mordecai, whose Habitation is not far from the Synagogue, and he
particularized by his black flews, Moross Speech, and Upright Gate, he muttered
love to his Mistress, faster than their Orator pronounces the Hebrew Law on
their Sabbath, on which day, he carries no Pecunia in his Breeches, but will
Whore, go to a Play, or Tavern, in the Evening, taking with him a Friend of a
contrary Faith to disburse the Rino. He seemed to be far more vigorous than a
Stone-horse, and was so confounded Amorous, that we thought he would have
covered her in our Sight. She Is the Uxorrous Dame of one of his Dependants, and
as Notified for an Intreaguer at Cupids, as her Husband* for one of Othello's
Monsters; she Patches to admiration, and Dresses with such a profound Air, that
she is envied by all her Neighbors of her own Sex near Cree-Church, and as much
admired by the contrary.

The next discovery we made, was an Intreague between a Shopkeepers
Beau-Apprentice, on the Royal Exchange, and the Wife of his Masters Bosom; the
Spark has a better Knack in pleasing the Ladies, than his Master, though he has
been much admired by the Female Sex, but is so damnable Effeminate, that he has
been Ridiculed by the whole Town, and Censured hard for his Nonperformance; he
is far Nicer than Sir Courtly in his Apparel, and more troublesome to his
Tonsor than the Scrubbado to a Sempstress; and Garters so very Neat, that he
often takes down his Glass in the Shop to admire his Legs; he declares he could
wish 'twould become a Fashion for the Men as well as the Women to carry
Umbrella's to Shelter them from the Weather; and uses more Variety of Washes,
than the once renowned Bawd Madam Creswel. The Spark without doubt had made
good use of his time; and notwithstanding his Familiarity with his Mistress, he
commiserated his Masters Confinement during their Absence by hasting home to
shut up Shop. But finding none among all those numerous Intreaguers that resort
there, tempting enough to break a Commandment with, or run the Risque of a
Flap-Dragon; After we had drank a Bottle or two of Red-streak, we departed;
resolving to go thorow-stitch in our pursuit, we boarded the Folly, a Place as
worthy of it is Name, as a Thief of a Halter.

Having entered the floating Seraglio, we were presently showed into Number
Three; and before we were well seated, came to us a Brace of Harlots, as lewd
as Sodomites, and as impudent as the Devil, and gave us an invitation to Dance:
The Countenance of the Whores, was an Antidote against Carnality to us; not but
we were willing to be Lewd, though not with such Common-Strumpets: However we
bestowed on them three or four Betys of pricked Wine, the best the place
afforded, which made their heads as light as their Tails, then dismissed them to
seek for fresh Company; and presently the Noisie Instruments played, which was
far more hideous than the ruff Music at Ludgate, on the Conjunction of a
Prisoner and his Wife, if possible; and up starts a whole Covy of Whores, with
their Cully Part'ners, placing themselves to Dance, with as much Decorum as the
Cripplegate Pioneers on my Lord Mayors-day; nay, I am confident there is hardly
a Bawdy House within the limits of the Bill of Mortality, but one of their
Proselytes was there; they will make as punctual a Bargain before they will go
with you, as a Butcher in Smithfield-Market for Cattle; but one of the Company,
happening to spy out a Poulterian Jannisary among the Crow'd, discovered him to
the Mob, who was so enraged at the Catch-pole, that had he not made his Escape
into a Boat, out of one of the Windows, they had soon sent him to another
Element, which is a far kinder fate than he Deserves, whose Actions are as Dark
as his Name; for there is nothing that is Mercenary and Base, but is as Natural
to him, as Milk to a Calf.

Among this Chaos of Sexes, was a person of a Venerable Age, his Clothes
miserably tattered, and his Face as Pale and Wan, as if he had newly risen from
the Dead, notwithstanding which, he still retained the Air and Appearance of
one that seemed to Command much Honor and Respect; and showing him to my
Friend he knew him, and told me he is no more like the Man he was three years
ago, than an Apple is like an Oyster; he was then, said he, counted a Topping
Merchant, and as noted a Capon-Eater, as belonged to Haberdashers-Hall; but by
Misfortunes Abroad, his Lustful Inclinations, and shaking his Elbows, has
reduced him to what you see; his being here now I presume is on no other
Account, then to satisfy his Letchery. And no sooner had he spoke the word,
but the old Fornicator had got him a Drab, and moved off seemingly as well
pleased, as if he had been repossest of his former Fortunes. In the next Box to
us was three Jilts, who had Drank pretty plentifully, not doubting but to light
on some Cully to discharge their Reckoning, but being deceived in their
Expectation, and having no more Money than Honesty, they were obliged to leave
a Pledge for it, so one left her Scarf, another her Hood, the third her Gloves,
and took up threepence in Money, for a Waterman to set them on Salisbury-Court
Shore.

Being now near Ten, we came from the Folly, and took Boat for the Temple, and
went to the Devil to Enjoy our selves with a Glass of good Wine, after our
successless Ramble; and the Streets being Dry, and the Night light, we had a
mind to Foot it home; not in Consideration of saving Coach hire, but for the
sake of Diversion, we imagined we should have; but in Fleet Street overtaking
an Ordinary Man, handing a young airy Lady, who made a very good Figure, we
pretended some Acquaintance with her, and must needs take her from her Husband
(as we afterward found him to be) and Endeavored to force her into a Tavern
being something Elevated, and enamored with her Person; but she crying out for
Help and he getting timely assistance, she was soon Rescued, and we seized,
notwithstanding we lugg'd out our Steel, and Wounded two or three; but the
powerful strokes of pairing Shovels, soon o'er-master'd our Swords, and the
Constable took Care for a New Lodging for us that Night in the Counter; which
Occasioned us to take Coach, which if we had done so at first, it is possible we
had lain at our Old one, But, Night, Wine, and Love, no Moderation bear;
Night knows no Shame, or Love and Wine no Fear.


As soon as the Key was turned, the whole Family of the Rat-Castle, stocked
about us as thick as the Mob about an ensnared Diver for Pence at the
Post Office, demanding Garnish, which we presently paid, least we should be
dismantl'd of our Rigging; And being willing to be rid of our Company, we
desired a Bed; upon which we were conducted to a very indifferent one, for I
dare be sworn the Sheets had performed several Voyages to the Indies under
another Office, before they were converted to that use; and for the Bed, I am
Confident it had more Vermin than Flocks: But being full fraught with Wine and
Vexation, at that Nights Adventure, we doz'd away the time till Morning
appeared. Then Consulting how to Manage this Misfortune, that it might not be
blazed Abroad, or reach the Ears of our Friends; and calling to mind a Splitter
of Causes, who was a particular Friend of ours, we sent for him, and gave him
an impartial Account of the Occasion of our Confinement; whereupon he advised
us to Endeavor, if possible, to prevent going before a Justice, and to make it
up on any Terms; demonstrating the Letter of the Law against any such rash
Attempts. We Acquiesc'd in his Arguments, and were sensible of our Fault (but
too late) and desired him to stay, till they and the Constable came; but he
told us that a Sister of his that lived near the Monument, sent to speak with
him just before our Messenger came, on some Urgent Business, but would be back
in an hour; and if they came in the mean time, to desire them to stay till his
return; but before that time was half expired, comes the King of the Night,
with his short Painted Trunchion of Authority, and two or three of his
decripped Door-thumpers, and called for his Prisoners, telling us that both our
Friend and Adversary, was at the Rose-Tavern at the Alley's-end, before whom we
must make our Personal Appearance; this seemed strange to us, but however it
was no Unwelcome News, by reason our Friend was there, but gave us hopes it
might be Accommodated, and we not Exposed before a Magistrate; then paying our
Fees, we quitted our new Lodging with as joyful a Heart, as ever poor Wench
that is past her Teens went to be Married.

Being come to the Tavern, our Friend smiled, telling us he was sent for by our
Adversary, who was his Brother and Sister, to assist in the Prosecution of us;
but we being his Friends, he had prevailed with them to put it up. At which we
begged both their Pardons, pleading abundance of Contrition for the Abuse; and
the Wounds we gave in the Scuffle being but slight, we promised to pay the
Cure, and a Gratuity for their Civility; and giving Mr. Constable and his
Assistant a Reward for their Trouble, we were as good Friends as good Company
and good Wine could make us: And after about an Hour or two's Enjoyment, we
discharged the Reckoning, which mounted to about a Guinea, besides the other
Expenses, then took our leave and departed.

My Friend and I Agreed to meet the next Morning at the Flanderkin Sutlers, who
was so Ambitious of being a Vint'ner, that he gave 900 Yellow-Boys, for the
influence of a Star near the Royal Exchange; but some Old Sophisters, who
pretend to have mighty judgment in Astrology, prognosticate, that unless the
Juice of the Grape be something extraordinary, he will quickly repent his
purchase, and the Star be buried in a Cloud. But meeting according to
Appointment, I perceived my Friend to be very uneasy and melancholy, asking
him the Reason, he answered me, that one Misfortune seldom came alone, but was
generally backed by another; and since we were no strangers to one another.
Intreagues, he would give me an Account what has happened since we parted.

My Master, you know, has three Daughters, who are Youthful and tolerable
Handsome, and no small Fortunes; I being full Fraught with Vigor, and not able
to resist such tempting Fruit, made Love to each of them, unknown to the other,
pretending a great deal of Passion; and so managed it, that there was no
Suspicion or Jealousy in the least between them; and to obtain my Desires, I
promised them all Marriage, at which the poor deluded Fools, soon granted my
Request: Since which, by my industrious Labor, they are all pregnant, and
press me mightily for Marriage, which now is as far from my Thoughts, as they
are Stale in my Embraces; therefore I still put them off by some plausible
Excuse, and deferred it from time to time. But being pleased at Yesterdays
success, after the Nights Misfortune; and also being mighty full of Love, as I
was going up to my Chamber I met one of my Loves on the Stairs, then taking her
by the Hand, I led her into my Apartment; where she was mighty Solicitous for
me to fulfill my Promise, and I as Eager to renew our Joys.

Having fast'ned the Door, she gave me the Trouble to use a little force, at
which starts from behind the Curtain the Eldest Sister, which balked my
Design, and cooled my Courage. She overheard our discourse, and was a Witness
of our Procedure; fell into a violent Passion, Taxing me with Unkindness,
Perjury and Fashood to her, who had been so liberal of her Favors, and loved
me beyond Expression. Then Upbraiding her Sister, who was so supris'd, that she
sunk Breathless into my Arms; and being willing to be Eased of my burden, I
laid her on the Bed, and began to plead for my self to the enraged Charmer:
But, Alas! all that I could say rather Augmented her Fury, and had the same
Operation as Oil, to extinguish Fire. False, Ingrate, and Perjured Deluder,
cried she, is it thus you reward me for all my Kindnesses, Extended to thee?
And is this the Effect of your mighty Passion, which so often you have invoked
the Sacred Deities to Witness? Are all the Solemn Oaths and Protestations,
which so often you have sworn on your Knees, now Cancelled, and so soon forgot?
Thou who art the Author of my lost Honor, and increasing Shame, art thou now
palled by Enjoyment? And could you not content you self with being false to me,
but also, must deceive my Sister, and ruin both our Fortunes? Indeed it is no
more than what I have of late suspected, but now find too Evident; And had not
kind Chance, in your Absence, directed me to your Chamber, to seek for
something to divert my self, I had still remained Ignorant of your Falsehood.

No sooner had she pronounced these words, but the intranc'd Partner of her
Woe, recovered her deprived Senses. At the same Instant one knocked at the
Door, which gave me hopes of relief; whereupon I presently opened it, wishing I
might be sent for out; for I was in a damned Fatigue, at the discovery. But, ye
Gods! How was I dismayed, to find the third Sister there, and would not be
denied Entering? Nay, now, cried I, Fate do your worst; then let her in. She
finding one in Tears, the other like a Fury, made a scrutiny into the Occasion;
and 'twas not long before she was satisfied, at which she kicked up her Heels;
and Faith I thought was gone to carry the News to the other World. But in a
short time coming to her self, she divulged her own Weakness, of being imposed
on by my pretended Love; and gave me a second part to the same Tune. At length,
all being silent with Grief, I spoke to them to this Effect, Fancying my self
that Heroic Libertine, Don John: Tou see, Ladies, how by Accident I am
discovered in my Amors with you all; you have all declared to me severally you
are with Child by me, and that I promised you all Marriage, which I Confess:
But since it is not in my Power to gratify all your desires in performing my
Promise, I do declare I renounce it to you all; and advise you for your own
Honor, not to divulge it, thinking thereby to Expose me; for thereby your own
Reputation will be Blasted: But by Concealing your own Frailties, since you are
alike Guilty, things may be so managed that the Censorious World may be
Ignorant of it. Then leaving them to condole one another Misfortunes, and
contrive for their own Safety; I came to meet you according to our Appointment.

Most Sinners, said I, find by experience the truth of the Old Proverb, That
Sweetmeats must have Sower-Sawce: And Ills, though perpetrated with the greatest
Cunning and Security, are seldom exempt from the Punishment they deserve; as I
last Night Experienced, by a Misfortune attended with such amazing
Circumstances as the hazard of my Life, and Distraction of my Senses. Which
happened as follows.

Having spen the remainder of the day (when I had left you) after a Drunken and
Libidinous manner, about Ten a Clock at Night, I staggered from my Company, and
rambled about Streets, in quest of Common Game, that the Wickedness of the
Night, might Crown the Debaucheries of the Day; and that I might continue a
Fashionable Libertine in a hot pursuit of Vice without any Cessation, lest an
Interval should cool me into Sober reflecting on my past Lewdness, and make me
fit for Bedlam, rather than a true Penitent; The next Morning accordingly I met
with a stroling Strumpet, whose Face by Candlelight (which commonly gives
Advantage to the Female Sex) looked plastered over with Pomatum, and her Lips
imbellish'd with a Counterfeit Color to imitate a Healthful Redness: But
however, the Power of Lust and Weakness of my Judgment, rendered any thing that
appeared in Petticoats Welcome to my fond Embraces; so that with very little
difficulty, I readily engaged my Condescending Madam to accept of my Company,
unwarily giving her the Privilege to conduct me to what Place, her most
Mercenary Ladyship should think convenient to spend the whole Night together,
in the reciprocal Enjoyment of each others Company; upon which, she took me
under the Arm, as Lovingly as a Citizens Wife does her Cuckoldly Spouse, and
conveyed me very safely into Salisbury-Court; where we traveled down the Lane
as Lovingly together, as if we had been Bedfellows and Mess-mates together,
ever since the Miraculous beginning of the late happy Revolution. At last she
carried me into a House where a burly black Fellow with a Countenance as
terrible as the Prince of the Devils, bid us wonderfully Welcome, and showed us
into a back Kitchen, where the easiest Seat was a Buffer-Stool, and the rest of
the Furniture fit for nothing but to be dedicated to the fifth of November, or
to the Pious Memory of our Gracious Queen Elizabeth. By that time we'd sat
down, my Mistress tip'd the Wink for some of her beloved Liquor, and presently
in came a middle-Ag'd Harradan, representing the Hostess charged with a
diminutive Quartern of infernal Spirits, having so many unlucky Signs in her
dangerous Physiognomie, as if the Devil had traveled through the Features of her
Face, as the Planets through the Houses of the Heavens, and had left the mark of
his Cloven Foot on every place he trod upon. The Brandy, or more properly
Kill-devil, being raw, my Mistress complained it lay very cold upon her
Stomach, and desired she might have half a Pint burned, to prevent her falling
into a fit of an Ague; which I, being a very liberal Gentleman, very readily
consented to, or indeed any thing else, my Insinuating She-compound of Compound
of Devilism was desirous to please her snuffling Pallat with; her Dialect was
so agreeable to the appearance of her Person, and the Pestiferous place in
which we had taken Sanctuary, that I was mightily pleased to see every thing
answerable to the Wicked Purpose I was thus far engaged in. To what ever I
said, she had a piece of Newgate-Cant, that she made applicable, and Thwarted
my Bawdy-Rhetorick with as many May-be-not's, as a Bungler makes Why-not's in a
whole days Play at Tick-Tack; every now and then I heard a Lumbering in the
House, and observed the People every time they came, to look with very busy
Countenances: I was mighty Solicitous with my Mistress to go up to Bed, but she
still resisted my Importunities by an Interferring request of the other Quartern,
which I still submitted to; till at last Nature quite tired with the Day's
Fatigue, and my Brains over-burthen'd with the stupifying Fumes of our Fiery
Devils-Piss, I fell fast a Sleep, and lay exposed to the mercy of my Mercenary
Mistress, and her vile Accomplices; who hoisted me (after what manner I know
not) up two pair of Stairs, took off most of my Clothes, and laid me upon an
old Flock-Bed by the side of a Dead Woman; who I found afterward had made her
Exit in a Flux, and covered both up together, with an old Lousie red Rug, where
I slept till near Daylight, by the Cold side of my Defunct Mistress; in which
time they removed all their Goods, which I suppose needed not many Carts to
expedite their Conveyance, and amongst the rest, both my Money, and as much of
my Apparel as was worth their taking; locks up the House, puts the Key under
the Door, and there leaves poor Pill-Garlick Snoaring, in this hopeful
Condition, Dreaming nothing of the matter: The Watchman coming by, past Four a
Clock, gave an Audible Thump at the Door, according to Custom; and the House
being Empty so encouraged, the Sound, that it struck as powerfully upon my Ear,
as if a Demi-Culverin had been fired at my Beds-head, or I Would been hoop'd up in
a Drum between a couple of Calves Skins, and somebody had been beating on it;
insomuch that it waked me, and put me in a great Quondary to think whither I
was got; remembering very well I came into an Alehouse with a serviceable
Drudge called a W -- re, but could not recollect any thing of my coming to Bed;
Extending my Arm a little from my Body, I found I had a Bedfellow; and the
heat of the Brandy having very much inflamed my most Sinful Parts, I began
Presently to examine what Old Nick had sent me, a Male or a Female; and finding
on it of the right Sex, to tell you the Truth on it, I began to be wonderful
kind, and hug her as close as a strenuous Lover ought to do a new Mistress; but
found her very Cold, very and very fast asleep, as I thought; so believing she
had been, like my self, at hard Service the Day before, I even like a good
careful Bedfellow, covered her up as warm as I could, and turned my self about
to take the other Nap till Daylight, by which time I was in good hopes my
Mistress would have Feasted Nature with sufficient rest, and her frozen Limbs
would have recovered such warmth, as would have made her fit for Humane Action;
having composed my self again, I slept soundly till the Sun had peeped above
our Horizon, and somebody came rattling at the Door, with as much Authority, as
a Churchwarden at an Alehouse knocker, in the middle of Sermon-time; which
awaked me out of my sweet Sleep, and brought me waking into a great many
troubles; I rubbed my Eyes and began to look about me, and seeing a Bed without
Curtains, Walls without Hangings, a Hearth without a Grate, and a Room without
Chair or Table; I began to be a little surprised and turning to my Mistress
attempted to wake her, but found her, as stiff as a Marble Statue, as Cold as a
Snow-Ball, as Deaf as a Mute, as Blind as a Beetle; in short, as Dead as a
Herring; finding nothing in the Room, but a Tin Spitting-pot, and an Earthen
Bed-pan; by which I reasonably conceived she Dyed in her Calling, and between
the Distemper and Medicine, Pox and Mercury, was carried the Lord knows
whither, to give an Account of her Stewardship. All this while somebody rattling
at the Door, as if either a Constable was come for me, or the Devil for the
Corpse; which lamentable fright, together with the other grievous Circumstances
I lay under, had like to have caused so great a difference between Soul and
Body, that 'twas as much as ever I could do to keep 'em in one another
Company; still hoping there was somebody in the House, though as things appeared
there was little reason to believe it; still every half Minute I had a fresh
Alarm, and at last venturing down into other Rooms, found nothing but a
Vacancy, having carried every thing clear off, but the Dead Carcass of a Woman
which married men generally account to be their best Household stuff: At last I
ventured to peep out at Window, to see what furious Assailant attacked our
Castle with such a vehement Pulsation; seeing only a single Man, who looked
like a Rogue, though not like a Constable, I asked him what he wanted? He told
me, To speak with the People of the House, for that he was the Landlord. I told
him they were not within; but he being, I suppose, a Confederate in the design,
was very preremptory, vowing he would come in, either by force or consent, and
that if I would not give him Entrance, he would fetch a Constable and break the
Door? Which upon good consideration, I thought better to be opened by fair
means; accordingly I went down, took up the Key, which was thrust under the
Door, and gave him admittance, who as soon as he came in, looked round about
him, with a counterfeit stern look, and asked, What was become of the Goods? I
told him truly I could not tell, but believed they were gone with the People?
How, says he, Pray what do you do in the House, if my Tenant be marched off
with his Effects? In answer to which, I told him the Truth of the whole Story,
which, I suppose, he knew well enough before; with which he would by no means
be pacified, crying, I was a Confederate in removing the Goods off the
Premises, and that they owed him a Twelve-months Rent, and he would make me pay
it, or he would trounce me for assisting them? Besides, he did not know but the
Woman was Murdered, and would have me before the Lord chief Justice, if I would
not comply to give him the Arrears. Which I thought it rather Prudence to
submit to, than to stand the Test of the matter, in so Scandalous an Adventure;
which if it had reached my Fathers Ear, might have been the cause of my
disinheritance; so that I sent to a trusty Friend for Clothes and Money, made
up the Business, and left the poor Woman, without further enquiry, to be buried
by the Parish. If such a Trick will not cool the Lust of Man,
Sure nothing but Age, Death, or Sickness, can:
Reader take Care of Iilts, for here you see,
Living or Dead, they have been Plagues to me.


FINIS

