An IMPARTIAL DESCRIPTION OF SURINAM UPON The CONTINENT of GUIANA IN AMERICA.

With a History of several strange Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, Insects,
and Customs of that Colony, etc.

Worthy the Perusal of all, from the Experience of George Warren Gent.

London, Printed by William Godbid for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in
Gresham-Colledge, in the second yard from Bishopsgate-street. 1667.

To the READER.
THIS is a present of three years Collection, not without many hazards to my
self: for the delights of Warm Countries are mingled with sharp Sawces, and
indeed from the Constant breathings through the Pores, more there than in
Colder Regions, it is rationally believed, our Spirits must make have out of
Bodies exhaust by heat; but I have often seen many both Natives, and others at
Surinam, very vigorous in extreme Old Age. In this Continent, the Indians will
tell you of Mighty Princes upwards, and Golden Cities, how true I know not. But
a brave Country it is, and it may be truly said, to a Mind untaint with
Ambition (and that can live according to Nature) no place is more accommodate;
whether we regard health, a luxuriant Soil, or kind Women. I have made it no
design of mine either to hide the inconveniences of the Country, or to extol
the happiness thereof beyond truth: Such as it is, is here exposed. Some there
are, who confidently believe, these warm Climates were the Dwellings of the
Ancient Learned Heathens: to which opinion, for the pleasure of the same
places, I could assent, but that the most Acute Philosophers of old, held a
gross Doctrine, that under, or near the Line, 'twas not habitable, whereof
daily Experience affords a Confutation: and it is great ignorance to think any
considerable Improvements can be made far distant from the Sun. What advantage
has Accrewed to the English Scepter, How Navigation has been increased by the
only Trade of Tobacco and Sugar in our New Plantations, Who has not heard? As
for my self, I held it more Ingenuous to venture thy Censure for appearing in
Print, than that you should lose the delight of these Observations.

Farewell.
A Full and Impartial DESCRIPTION of SURINAM.
CHAP. I. Of the River
WHICH is in Six, or Five and a half Degrees of Northerly Latitude, barred with
Sand at the Entrance: but yet, Three Fathom deep at High Water; and in Spring
Tides more. It Is about a League over at the Mouth, of which breadth, or but
very little narrower, it holds five Leagues, up to a small Village, called the
Fort; and then, by degrees, in two Leagues farther, decreases a Mile, and so
continues as far as has been discovered. It has a Channel on either side, to
the East, and West, but the first is reputed best, in which, Vessels of 300
Tons have sailed near 20 Leagues up to the Metropolis or chief Town of the
Colony, called Toorarica, consisting of about One hundred Dweling Houses, and a
Chapel. Before the Town is a very fair Bay or Harbor, large enough to contain
an Hundred Sail of Ships. It Is on both sides Woody, unless here and there a
Plantation be open to it; and so perfect a Meander, that in a matter of fifteen
Leagues sailing, a Ship steers all points of the Compass. It Is well stored with
good Fish of innumerable kinds, and others, though not so useful, yet for their
Rarity very observable: as the Sword-Fish, so called from a Bone growing at his
Snout, resembling a Sword, or more properly a Rake, of which I have seen some
above an Ell long. There is another, called the Manatee, who feeds upon Bushes
by the River side, gives suck like a Cow, and eats more like Flesh than Fish:
I Will but name a third, which, for the strangeness of its Nature, deserves a
more particular Description, It Is the Torpedo or Num-Eele, which, being alive,
and touching any other Living Creature, strikes such a deadness into all the
parts, as for a while renders them wholly useless, and insensible, which, is
believed, has occasioned the Drowning of several persons who have been
unhappily so taken, as they were Swiming in the River: It produces the like
Effect if but touched with the end of a long Pole, or one man immediately
laying hold of another so benumbed: The Truth of this was experienced, One of
them being taken and thrown upon the Bank, where a Dog spying it stir, catches
it in his Mouth, and presently falls down, which the Master observing, and
going to pull him off becomes motionless himself; another standing by, and
endeavoring to remove him, follows the same fortune; the Eele getting loose
they Return quickly to themselves.

Plantations are settled Thirty Leagues up the River, higher than which, it is
not probable, the Limits of that New Colony can extend, by reason of Cataracts
or Falls of Water, that descend from ledges of Rocks, from one side of the
River to the other, rendering any passage by Water (the best means of Conveying
necessaries) altogether impossible; nor is it only one, for which, in time,
perhaps some Remedy might be invented, but they are observed to be within five
or six Leagues one of another, for ought is known, up to the very head: There
was once an occasion to go up those Falls in Chase of some Indians, who had
been down, and killed an English-Woman, and robbed the house wherein she was:
This Expedition was undertaken by a good number of men well provided, who,
after they had with most grievous labor hall'd their Boats by Land above seven
or eight of those Falls, were at last, compelled to return without desired
Success, not having so much as seen an Indian, and adventuring as they came
back to shoot those Precipices in their Boats, were some of them dashed to
pieces in the Descent, and the rest hardly escaped with their Lives: These
Cataracts are in most of the Rivers upon the Coast, and are the only Let to the
more perfect discovery of that rich Continent.

CHAP. II. Of the Climate and Country in General;
WHICH, from November till July, is but moderately hot, by reason of Clouds
interposed, and excessive Rains cooling the Earth all that time, and the
Constant North-East-Brizes, which no less Refrigerate the Air: The other five
Months, when little Rain falls, and those friendly Clouds are wanting, the heat
is something violent, occasioned no less by a Reflection from the earth, which
is generally Sandy, than the nearness of the Sun it self, and would be hardly
tolerable, were it not for the Brizes beforementioned. Being no further from
the Equinoctial Line, the days and nights are always almost Equal, not
differing above an hour, the Sun Rising and Setting never sooner or later, than
half an hour before, or half an hour after Six. The constant warmness of the
place makes it far more agreeable to Age, than Youth; The first it cherishes,
and as it were, renews their years, making them sprightly and gallant, who were
here crazy and impotent; the latter have less spirit, and decay more swiftly
than in these Northern Countries, though Surinam be healthful enough to
temperate sound bodies. The most common Diseases incident to it, are the Fever
and Ague, the Yawes, and the Dropsy, called there, the Country Disease: With
the first, the People were not a little Afflicted at their first settling, I
believe, occasioned rather by bad Lodging, and worse Diet, than any natural
Intemperature of the Climate. The Yawes is the same with, or but little
differing from the French Pox, it is too frequently Caught by Coition with
Indian-Women, to whom it is no less natural than any other Malady, and which, by
the Mediation of the Spaniard, is become no Stranger to almost every part of
Europe; 'twill breed also there from any Sore, which if not carefully looked
after (such is the Malignity of the Country to things of that nature) Converts
into that most loathsome and not easily cured mischief. The Dropsy, or
Country-Disease, is, I think, acquired by that unwholesome flashy kind of
nourishment, which, from the hardness of the place, and penury of Masters, poor
Servants are forced to make a shift with, (for I never observed any but such
have it) which, lighting upon dull un-active Spirits, drives them into a
melancholy Carelessness of themselves, and for want of vigor and liveliness to
expel those moist humors, which such tempers in that Country do abundantly
Contract, they perish, being hardly recoverable unless taken at the very
beginning of the Distemper.

The Land next the Rivers mouth, is low, woody, and full of Swanyes: One, but
about thirty Leagues up, high, and mountainous, having plain Fields of a vast
Extent, here and there beautified with small Groves, like Islands in a Green
Sea; amongst whose still flourishing Trees, it is incomparably pleasant to
consider the delightful Handy-works of Nature, expressed in the variety of
those pretty Creatures, which, with Ridiculous Antic Gestures, disport
themselves upon the Branches. There is a constant Spring and Fall, some leaves
Dropping, and others succeeding in their Places: But the Trees are never quite
divested of their Summer Livery; Some, have always Blossoms, and the several
degrees of Fruit at once: The Sense of Smelling may, at any time, enjoy a full
delight amongst the Woods, which disperse their Aromatic Odours a good
distance from the Land, to the no little Pleasure of the Sea-tired Passenger.

The various productions of Insects from the heat and moisture, is admirable in
that Country. I have observed a white Speck, at first, no bigger than a
Pins-Head, upon a new-sprung soft Excrescency from the Root of a Great Tree,
which, by degrees in two or three days, has grown to a kind of Butter-flye,
with fair painted black and Saffron-Coloured Wings. I have found others not
quite perect sticking upon the Bodies of Trees, as it were incorporated into
the Wood it self. There is another, called a Cammel-Flye, from its long neck,
how Generated I know not, which has its Wings like small Leaves, and, having
lived a while, at length lights upon the ground, takes Root, and is transformed
into a Plant. This I relate, not from any certain Knowledge of my own, but I
was encouraged to insert it, from the Information of the Honorable William
Byam, Lord General of Guiana, and Governor of Surinam, who, I am sure is too
much a Gentleman to be the Author of a Lie. Many more Observations of this
Nature no doubt I might have made, if the vanity of my years would have
suffered me to mind it.

The Government is Monarchical, an Imitation of ours, by a Governor, Council,
and Assembly; the Laws of England are also theirs, to which are added some by
Constitutions, no less oblieging, proper to the Conveniences of that Country.

CHAP. III. Of the Provisions
WHICH are Yames, Plantons, and Cassader, for Bread; The first is a Root,
bearing a Bine not unlike to a Hop, it is Ripe in Eight Months, and being boiled
or roasted is dry and crumbly; it has no bad taste, because it has none at all
that ever I could find in it: The Planton is a Fruit of a Tree, but of Twelve
Months growth; it is almost like a Bean-Cod, but bigger; they hang Forty or
Fifty in a Bunch, of which, the Tree bears no more than One at a time, and
being gathered before quite ripe, are also either boiled or roasted, and in my
opinion not much more excellent than the former. The last, which indeed may
most properly be termed Bread, is also a Root, ordinarily almost as thick as a
Man's Leg, but of various Forms; it bears a small Tree about Eight foot high,
and becomes fit to draw in Twelve Months, when, it is Replanted with Sticks of
its own laid in the Ground: The Root is taken, scraped, and then pressed from
its Juice, which is rank Poison, and, after, baked upon Stones in Round Cakes,
half an Inch thick; when it is new made, it is pleasant enough, but by that time
it is a day old, methinks there is little savor in it: Of this, the Indians make
diverse kinds of Inebriating Drinks, one whereof, called Perrinoe, is truly
good, and nearly resembles our strongest March-Beer, which has been preserved
to a Twelvemonth staleness: But the relation of their manner of Brewing it,
will, I believe, Rebate the edge of any one's desire here, which, perhaps,
might be otherwise sharp enough to taste it; First, they take Cassader-Bread
baked for that purpose very black, which the oldest Women, and snotty Nose
Children chaw in their Mouths, and with as much Spittle as they can, throw into
a Jar of Water, so letting it stand a while, then strain the Bread from it, and
with some Chaw'd Potatoes set it a working, which becomes fit to drink in few
days. The English Planters make their Cool Drink of the Juice of Sugarcanes,
and Water boiled together, a most pleasant Liquor, and supposed wholesome.

Of Flesh and Fish they receive Constant Supplies from New England, Virginia,
and other places, though the Woods and Rivers are not unfurnished of sufficient
quantities, but the incessant Rains, and over-flowes of water hinder their
being taken Considerably, save in the day time, when no body need Complain of
Want that can but take a little pains to Catch it. The Fish may justly be
reputed Comparable to ours, but, a not very Curious Palate may easily discern,
how much better the Flesh of England is, than the same kinds in those hotter
Countries, that breed there, being observed to be for the most part, flashy and
insipid: Hogs only excepted, which are far better and sweeter than amongst us.

At one time of the year also are taken Tortoises, (not those whose Shells are
so highly valued here) upon the Seacoast, weighing two or three hundred pounds
a piece. The Females are Accounted best, who have commonly a Peck of Eggs at
once in their Bellies, each as big as a Hens, but hardly so good, which they
come out of the Water to lay in the Sand, where they Cover and leave them to be
hatched by the Sun's heat: The Flesh of these Salted, I think, nothing but an
invincible necessity can plead for; but fresh, it is Cried up by some for a most
excellent Dish, though, for my part, I am prone to believe otherwise: The Taste
is not un-pleasant, but it was always most offensive to my Stomach, which is
none of the nicest; and it cannot but yield a very gross and slimy nourishment,
because of its sudden aptness to Putrefaction, not being preservable from
Stinking, without Salt, above two hours after it is killed. Sheep will by no
means thrive there, being a Creature, I suppose, more appropriated to Cold and
Dry, than Hot and Moist Countries. Beeves like the place well, especially by
the Seaside, but the Stock is not yet grown numerous enough to find overmuch
Employment for a Butcher. Hogs would increase infinitely, did not the Bats
Retard it, by Biting off their Teats.

CHAP. IV. Of the Birds
WHICH generally both for Beauty and Goodness, may, I believe, Claim Priority
from most in the World: But the Philomela's warbling Throat is wanting to all,
in those too savage Mansions for so sweet a Guest. The Birds there, making no
other Harmony, but in horror, one howling, another schreiching; a third, as
'twere, groaning and lamenting; all agreeing in their ill-Consorted Voices to
Represent the dismal Yellings of a Hellbred Quire: But what is wanting in their
Music (which Contributes nothing to real uses) is more than Compensated by
their other Excellencies. Duck, Teal, Widgeon, Plover, Snite, Pheasant,
Partridge, etc. far bigger, and every whit as good as any here, are there
frequent in all places. Parrots also are more Common than Jack-Dawes in
England; And, upon the Seacoast, are a kind of Fowl (whose Name I don't
remember) so tall, that at a distance, they appear like Companies of men, upon
the Sand, and coming nearer, their glittering feathered Armors (of so pure a
Scarlet as no Art can equal) almost dazzle the greedy Eyes of the Beholders.
Exceeding these, for Beauty, (though of far different magnitude, being not
bigger than some Humble-Bee) is a Bird in the Woods, which turning several
ways, presents as many of the most delightful Colors to the Eyes, and so
lively, as can possibly be imagined: it is called a Humming-Bird, and like a
Be, gathers its nourishment from Flowers. There is another kind of Black Bird
which hangs its Nest like a Pursnet, at the ends of Boughs, to secure it from
the Roguish Monkies, who would be otherwise pulling it to pieces. A great deal
might be spoken more Commendatory, at least more Curious, upon this Subject, by
some body, whose Observations were intended, not, like mine, taken, as it were,
by chance, and without a thought of rendering them more Public, then by
Cursory, and Verbal Repetitions to Familiars. I would have added something of
the Bat, but it being disputable whether it belongs to Birds or Beasts, I refer
it to my Description of things hurtful, being a place more proper for it than
either of the former, with which, Surinam is so well and variously stored, that
I think no place whatsoever, can, with more Reason, brag of its Excellency in
this kind, and it is almost as easy to enumerate the Stars of Heaven as their
several Species. But I Will trespass no further upon the Reader's Patience than to
give a short Description of such, as are accounted most remarkable, and which
my Memory presents to me on a sudden: Those are Deer, Hares, Conyes,
Armadillaes, Hogs, Buffalloes, Ant-Bears, Tigers, etc. The Inhabitants of the
Trees are Baboons, Quottoes, Monkeys, Marmazetts, Cusharees, Sloths, and many
more, I have forgotten. The Deer are much like our ordinary ones in England.
The Hares more resemble a Pig, than any other Creature that I know, they are
Brown, Smooth-haired, Spotted with white, and are far bigger than an
English-Hare, which, beside the mouth, they have no part like: They are
excellent good meat, much better than any Four-footed Game in England. The
Conies are red, not so good meat, and less than the Hares, but not differing in
Shape. The Armadillaes are of two kinds, great, and little; of the greater, I
saw one weighed Eighty Pounds. They are short Legged, have three Claws upon
their feet, are Headed like a Hog, have no Teeth, and but very little Mouths,
they are defended all over, save the Head and Belly, with an Armor as it were
plated, scarce penetrable by a Lance, unless it happen in a Joint, they Burrow
in the ground, and had they not quite so strong a Smell of Musk, would be no
Contemptible meat. Of the Hogs, there are three kinds, one lives like an Otter,
for the most part in the water, and is much commended, but it was never my luck
to see any of that sort. The other two are called the Pakeera, and Pinko; the
first, has the Navel growing upon his Back, he is of a gray Color, and about
the bigness of an English Shote of six Months old, is indifferent good meat.
The Pinko is near as big, and every whit as good as ours. The Buffalloe, is
reported to be as big as a Bullock of two years old, and almost as good meat,
but I cannot give him a particular Description, because it was never my hap to
see one all the while I continued there, they having been rarely observed to
come so low as where I dwelt in that Country. The Ant-Bear, is about the
bigness of an ordinary Hog, of a black and gray Color, having a
Long-Brush-Tail like a Fox, or Squirrel, with which, he shelters his whole Body
from the Rain, his Head is small, his Snout about a foot long from his Eyes, he
has no Teeth, and a Mouth not big enough to thrust in two fingers, his Tongue
is round, and small, which he can put out a foot beyond his Mouth to lick in
Ants, never feeding upon any thing else; he is very strong, especially in his
Foreparts, and has sharp Claws above an Inch and a half long, with which, he
can strike dangerously, but his Pace is slow, and therefore easily avoided; his
flesh is none of the Sweetest, but if well sawc'd with hunger, it will down. Of
the Tigers there are three kinds, Black, Spotted, and Red; The first is
accounted fiercest, but he very seldom appears amongst the Dwellings. The
Spotted, which I think are miscalled, being rather Leopards, than Tigers, do no
little hurt to Plantations, by destroying the Cattle, and Poultry. They are of
so vast a strength, that one of them will make nothing to leap over a five or
six foot Rail, with a Hog in his Mouth. There was once one came into a
Plantation, killed a Bull of two years old, and dragged him above a quarter of
a Mile into the Woods. Unless they be wounded, or very hungry, they will hardly
assault a man in the day time. I never heard of above two or three they have
killed one way or other, since the settling of the Colony: one of them (who was
a Huntsman and a lusty Fellow) was often heard to wish he could meet with a
Tiger, and made it a great Complaint in all his Searches through the Woods, it
was never his good fortune; at length, one night, lying in his Hamacko, in an
open House, a Tiger comes, takes him up, and carries him two miles into the
Woods, in vain Crying for help, which was heard by an English-woman in a Close
House hard by, who had so much Courage (more than is usual in her Sex) to fire
a Musket from the Window; but those who have had to do with them know, it is
not noise only can scare a Tiger from his Prey: the Man was found next day with
his Head and Shoulders eaten off; they are observed to be not so numerous now
as formerly, partly retireing further into the Woods, and a great many having
been taken by the Hunters. There is one John Millar, who has killed no fewer
than a dozen or fourteen, singly with his Gun and Lance, from some
miraculously escaping with his Life, and having been dangerously hurt by
others. There are not many of the Red, and those not so fierce as either of the
former. In the Woods, are a great many Land Tortoise, but not so big by more
than three quarters, as the Sea ones, their Shells are so hard, and strong,
that a Laden Cart may go over and not crush them, in which being otherwise
defenseless, they secure themselves from any Enemies, but Men and Tigers: The
first, breaking up their Lodgings with an Axe; the other, with his Teeth:
They Will eat almost any thing, and are by the Planters preserved in Pens a great
many together, to make use of when they please, being reputed none of the
Coursest dishes there. There are also Porcupines shaped almost like our English
Hedg-hogs, but larger, and Armed all over with Black and White Quills about two
handfuls long, and sharp as Needles, which Nature has taught them too shoot
from their sides, with admirable Dexterity against a Coming Enemy.

Monkeys, and Baboons, are so familiarly known in England, they need not a
particular Description here; though one thing of the Baboons, wherein, I think,
they differ from all others, I cannot omit inserting, which is, that at certain
hours both of the night and day, they send so horrid a Roreing from their
hollow Throats, that, to those un-wonted to such noises, nothing can seem at
first more strange, and terrible, being easily to be heard above two miles off.
The Marmazet is a very pretty Creature of a greenish yellow Color, and, though
far less than a Monkey, is Commander of all those lofty Dwellers, riding them
from Tree to Tree at his pleasure, they not being able to shake him off, and in
stead of Spurs, to provoke their speed, he bites them by the Ears. The Quotto
is black, something bigger than a Monkey, having a very long tail, with which
he swings himself from Bough to Bough, his Face is Red, with hair hanging a
little over his Forehead, and his Aspect is almost like an old Indian-Womans,
his Cry is shrill, and very loud. The Cusharee is black, less than a Marmazet,
and shaped every way perfectly like a Lion. The Sloth is a Creature so called
from the dullness of his nature, somewhat bigger than a Baboon, and of various
Colors, he is so stupid, that neither shouts nor blows will make him mend his
pace considerably, which one may imagine is none of the swiftest, when if not
disturbed, he will make it a days Journey in Climbing up a Tree, from whence, he
rarely descends, till there is nothing left to feed upon, and then, moved more
by necessity than Choice, he very gravely travels down that, and up another,
where he sits Spending those Idle hours, which are not many he can spare from
eating, and sleep, in whistling such tunes as himself is too lazy (and, I
believe, no body else would think good enough) to Dance after.

This is but a taste of what another (whose humors were not so volatile as
mine) might frame into a Banquet: though I am persuaded the most serious
observer might Continue there, almost seven years together, and yet be always
finding some Creature or other he had not met withal before, and not much less
worthy of his notice, than any I have named.

CHAP. V. Of the Fruits
WHich are Oranges, Limmons, Limes, Pomcitrons, both Water, and Musk- Melons,
with some Grapes; all which are forced, not natural to the Country, though as
good, and thrive as well there as in any other place. Those originally found
there, are Plantons, Bonanoes, Semerrimars, Guavers, Pines, and abundance of
Wild Trash, which, perhaps if Transplanted, might prove not so Contemptible as
they now are. The Planton I have already spoken of, from which the Bonano is
little different, but rather the better of the two, though neither of them, in
my opinion, very pleasing. The Semerrimarre grows upon a pretty tall Tree, it is
almost like a Peach, woolly on the outside, and is not to be eaten till rotten,
when, the taste is not unlike to that of Marmalade of Quince. The Guaver is
about the bigness of a Medlar, yellow, and full of Seeds, it is truly a most
delicious fruit, and when quite ripe, tastes very like a Strawberry: it grows
upon small Trees, commonly in Savanna's, or Pastures. The Pine, or rather the
Prince of Fruits, is ordinarily eight or nine inches about, and a foot in
length, the outside is green and checkered; and within yellow, juicy, and full
of holes, like a Hony-Combe; on the Top it has a fair Coronet of Leaves, as
'twere denoting its Supremacy; nor do I think it a Usurper, being incomparably
the best, and most beautiful that ever I saw or tasted: it grows upon a small
Bush, about four foot high, the Stalk coming from the root like an Artichoke:
the Crown being cut off and planted, bears again in ten months.

CHAP. VI. Of the Commodities
WHich are Sugar, Speckle-wood, Cotton, Tobacco, Indico, Gums, and Dying-woods:
of Sugar very considerable quantities are made, and accounted generally better
by Ten per Cent. than that of Barbados. Speckle-wood is also plentiful enough,
and has been sold in England equal to the price of Sugar, but by its too great
and frequent Importations, it is now become of less value. Cotton does not
thrive so well there as in Barbados, and other Islands, by reason as it is
supposed, of the excessive Rains, and too far distance from the Sea, from
whence arises a brackish Dew, that keeps off Caterpillars, and other things
offensive to the Bushes. Tobacco thrives well, and is reputed much better than
that of Virginia: for my part, I am no Smoaker, and therefore an incompetent
Judge of either: I think there is not yet more made than what serves the
occasions of the Colony; the People, Men, Women, and Children, being very much
addicted to the Pipe. Indico has yet been but little experienced. Rum is a
Spirit extracted from the Juice of Sugarcanes, commonly, twice as strong as
Brandy, called Kill-Divel in New England, whither it is sold, at the rate of
Twelve pounds of Sugar per Gallon. Molasses relates also to Sugar, being that
which drops from it, while it is Cureing, and is the same commonly sold in
England for Treakle. The Gums yet most familiarly known there, are Montagne,
and Gumma Semnia, neither of which our Drugsters are unacquainted with; they
are both easily procurable, and no doubt many more excellent, which time and
experience will bring to light. There Is also Cassia Fistula in abundance, and a
kind of Balsam distilling from a Tree, accounted second to none for a Green
Hurt. Nor are Dying-Woods wanting, but more minded by the Dutch than English.

CHAP. VII. Of the Plantations,
WHich are in all about five hundred, whereof Forty or Fifty have sugar-works,
yielding no small profit to the Owners, for a slight Disbursement, considering
how brave a Revenue, if prudently managed, may be raised from it in a few
years: far larger (if no Contingency divert the ordinary Course of things) than
is usually produced from a greater foundation, and more Continued Industry in
England.

The Seasons for Felling down the Wood are between April and August, it being
left upon the Ground to dry till about the latter end of September, when, it is
burnt, and the Soil enriched with its Ashes. Indian-Corn and Canes are planted
upon the Lower-Grounds. Yames and other Provisions upon that which is higher.
The Corn grows upon a Stalk like a Reed, commonly six or seven foot high, and
two Ears upon a Stalk: The Grain is about the bigness of a Pea, which becomes
ripe in four Months. They have two Crops in a year, and the Increase is at
least five hundred for one. Canes become fit to break in Twelve Months when
they are about six foot high, and as thick as a Man's Wrist: They bear a Top
like a Flag, which being Cut off, and the Canes squeesed through a Mill, the
Juice is boiled in Coppers to a competent thickness, and then poured into
Wooden Pots made broad and square at the top, and taper'd to the compass of a
Sixpence at the Bottom with a Hole thorough, which is stopped with a little
stick, till the Sugar begins to be cold, and stiffen'd; when it is pulled out,
and by that Passage, the Molasses drains from it; and being Cured a while after
this manner, is knocked out into Hogsheads, and so shipped off.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Negroes or Slaves,
WHO are most brought out of Guiny in Africa to those parts, where they are
sold like Dogs, and no better esteemed but for their Work sake, which they
perform all the Week with the severest usages for the slightest fault, till
Saturday after noon, when, they are allowed to dress their own Gardens or
Plantations, having nothing but what they can produce from thence to live upon;
unless perhaps once or twice a year, their Masters vouchsafe them, as a great
favor, a little rotten Salt-fish: Or if a Cow or Horse die of it self, they
get Roast-meat: Their Lodging is a hard Board, and their black Skins their
Covering. These wretched miseries not seldom drive them to desperate attempts
for the Recovery of their Liberty, endeavoring to escape, and, if like to be
re-taken, sometimes lay violent hands upon themselves; or if the hope of Pardon
bring them again alive into their Masters power, they will manifest their
fortitude, or rather obstinacy in suffering the most exquisite tortures can be
inflicted upon them, for a terror and example to others without shrinking.
They are there a mixture of several Nations, which are always Clashing with one
another, so that no Conspiracy can be hatching, but it is presently detected by
some party amongst themselves disaffected to the Plot, because their Enemies
have a share in it: They are naturally treacherous and bloody, and practice no
Religion there, though many of them are Circumcised: But they believe the
Ancient Pythagorean Error of the Soul's Transmigration out of one body into
another, that when they dye, they shall return into their own Countries and be
Regenerated, so live in the World by a Constant Revolution; which Conceit makes
many of them over-fondly woo their Deaths, not otherwise hoping to be freed
from that indeed un-equall'd Slavery.

CHAP. IX. Of things there Venomous and Hurtful.
THE propagating heat (and paucity of Inhabitants in that Country to keep them
under) has I suppose occasioned its Swarming with so many several kinds of
Vermin, as render the Beings of Men in some measure dangerous, troublesome, and
unpleasant: Those most familiarly taken notice of, are Snakes, Crocodiles,
Scorpions, Bats, Ants, Musketoes, Toads, and Frogs; of Snakes, it is certain
there has been some killed near Thirty foot long, and of a greatness
proportionable to their length: I know some people are so foolishly incredulous
in things of this Nature, that they will believe nothing which cannot be
visibly demonstrated within the Limits of their own Thresholds; therefore, for
fear of being thought to use the Authority of a Traveller, I dare not repeat
how huge a Morsel one of them will swallow at a time: But far less danger
resides in one of those huge Creatures, then their presence may seem to
threaten; for they are not at all venomous, and especially when full, very
un-weildy: These belong properly to the Water, though sometimes they prey by
Land: what ever they take is by Surprise, never by plain glideing; nor have I
ever heard of any man yet, was so much a Fool, to be Cheated out of his Life by
so evitable a mischief: But the lesser kinds which are too too numerous, are a
great deal rather to be feared, being many of them so poisonous, as nothing can
be more, as was once or twice woefully experienced, not only killing, but the
Flesh in less than a days space, dropping by Peice-meal from the Bones of them
who were bitten: Some are all over diversified with Beautiful and Lively
Colors, under which Gallantry is generally observed to Lie hidden the most
deadly poison. Others are knotty, with Horns in their Tails, and Tusks two
Inches long upon the upper Chap. Crocodiles there are too, but those neither
very numerous nor large, they need not take up the room of a Description here,
their Skins being so commonly to be seen in England, in almost every
Apothecaries Shop. The Scorpion is black, and almost like a Craw-fish, he lurks
for the most part amongst dry Wood or Corn, his Sting is in his Tail, with
which, who ever is stricken, will be vexed with most intolerable torture for
some hours, but it reaches not the life: The ordinary Remedy to allay the
fierceness of the misery, is taken from the thing it self being killed, and
bruised upon the place. The Eats are found to be not a little noxious both to
Men and Beasts, in the night drawing away their Blood, and so easily, that the
loss is not perceivable, 'till it be past prevention, which (if I was not
misinformed) has forced several people to forsake their Dwellings, to save that
little blood they had, which would have been otherwise sucked out. Some seem as
big as Pigeons in their flight, and, as I have already mentioned, are the only
Impediments to the English Hogs more numerous increase in that Country. The
Ants, though but little Creatures, yet they are so many and hurtful, that than
them, Surinam has scarce a greater trouble; very Sandy grounds have always the
largest share of their annoyance, which poor men, who have happened upon such
Soils, and have had no more Servants than themselves, have found so constant
and insuperable, that in spite of all their endeavors to destroy them, they
have been compelled to desert their Plantations, which otherwise they would
have ruined, and settle in some better place. The Muskeeta is a kind of Gnat,
in the night so restlesly vexatious, by Biting and Raising little Swelings in
the flesh in all the lower places of the Country, but chiefly by the Seaside,
where it is most over-flown Marish Lands, that Fishermen for Rest-sake, have
been fain to Cover themselves all over, save the Mouth and Eyes in the Sand.
Toads and Frogs, the Scare-Crows of Women, like those amongst the Egyptians,
are frequent in all places, as well of the Houses, as in the Fields; and in an
Evening after a Shower of Rain, their Noises are so loud, that a man can hardly
hear himself speak, and the Croakings of some of them are so horrid, that do
but imagine the latest Groans of a Dying person, and you have it. Thus much is
the worst can be justly spoken of Surinam, though its Contrary Blessings and
advantages are of far greater weight; nor are these mischiefs so Considerable,
but that Experience has taught infallible and absolute Remedies for some, and
safe evasions may easily be found for others.

CHAP. X. Of the Indians
WHO are a People Cowardly and Treacherous, qualities inseparable: there are
several Nations which Trade and familiarly Converse with the People of the
Colony, but those they live amongst are the Charibes, or Caniballs, who are
more numerous than any of the rest, and are settled upon all the Islands, and in
most of the Rivers, from the famous one of Amazones, to that of Oronoque: They
go wholly naked, save a Flap for Modesty, which the Women, after having had a
Child or two, throw off. Their Skins are of an Orange Tawny Color, and their
Hair black, without Curles: A happy people as to this World, if they were
sensible of their own hap: Nature with little toil providing all things which
may serve her own necessities. The Women are generally lascivious, and some so
truly handsome, as to Features and Proportion, that if the most Curious
Symetrian had been there, he could not but subscribe to my opinion: and their
pretty Bashfulness (especially while Virgins) in the presence of a Stranger,
adds such a Charming grace to their perfections (too nakedly exposed to every
wanton Eye) that who ever lives amongst them had need be owner of no less than
Joseph's Continency, not at least to Covet their embraces: They have been yet
so unfortunately ignorant, not to enrich their amorous Caresses with that
innocent and warm delight of Kissing, but Conversing so frequently with
Christians, and being naturally docile and ingenious, we have Reason to
believe, they will in time be taught it. Their Houses for the night, are low
thatched Cottages, with the Eves close to the ground; for the day, they have
higher, and open on every side, to defend them from the violence of the Sun's
Rays, yet letting in the grateful Coolness of the Air. Their Household Utensils
are curiously painted Earthen Pots and Platters, and their Napery is the Leaves
of Trees. Their Beds or Hamackoes (which are also used amongst the English) are
made of Cotton, square like a Blanket, and so ordered with strings at each end,
that being tied a Convenient distance from one another, it opens the full
breadth. For Bread and Drink, they plant Gardens of Cassader, and the Woods and
Rivers are their constant Suppeditories of Flesh and Fish. For ornament they
Color themselves all over into neat works, with a red Paint called Anotta,
which grows in Cods upon small Trees, and the Juice of certain Weeds; they bore
holes also through their Noses, Lips, and Ears, whereat they hang glass
Pendants, Pieces of Brass, or any such like Bawbles their Service can procure
from the English; they Load their Legs, Necks, and Arms too, with Beads, Shells
of Fishes, and almost any trumpery they can get; they have no Law nor
Government but Oeconomical, living like the Patriarchs of old, the whole
Kindred in a Family, where the eldest Son always succeeds his Father as the
greatest; yet they have some more than ordinary persons, who are their
Captains, and lead them out to Wars, whose Courage they first prove, by sharply
Whipping them with Rods, which if they endure bravely without Crying, or any
considerable motion, they are acknowledged gallant fellows and honored by the
less hardy. These Chiefs or Heads of Families, have commonly three or four
Wives a piece, others but one, who may indeed more properly be term d their
Vassals than Companions, being no less subjected to their Husbands than the
meanest Servants amongst us are to their Masters, the Men rarely oppress their
Shoulders with a Burden, the Women carry all, and are so very humble and
observant in their Houses, that at Meals, they always wait upon their
Husbands, and never eat till they have done; when a Woman is delivered of her
first Child, she presently goes about her business as before, and the Husband
fains himself distempered, and is hanged up to the Ridge of the House in his
Homacko, where he continues certain days dieted with the Bread and Water of
Affliction, then, being taken down, is stung with Ants (a punishment they
usually inflict upon their Women, Dogs, or Children, when they are foolish, for
that is the term they usually put upon any misdemeanors) and a lusty drinking
Bout is made at the Conclusion of the Ceremony. Their Language sounds well in
the expression, but is not very easy to be learned, because many single Words
admit of diverse Senses, to be distinguished only by the tone or alteration of
the voice. When any Martial Expedition is resolved upon, the General, or chief
Captain, summons the Towns and Families to Assemble by a Stick with so many
Notches in it, as he intends days before he sets out, which when they have
received, they cut out every day one, till all are gone, and by that only they
know the expiration of the time, for their Numbers exceed not twenty, which
they want Names for too, but express them by their Fingers and Toes, which they
will sometimes double, and treble, but their Arithmetic is quickly at a loss,
and then they Cry out Ounsa awara that is, like the Hair of ones Head,
innumerable. They go to Sea in Canoa's or Boats bravely painted, made of one
entire piece, being Trees cut hollow like a Trough, and some so large, that
they will carry five or six Tons of Goods at once. Their Arms are Bows, with
poisoned Arrows, and short Clubs of Speckle-wood, some, for Defense, carry
Shields made of light wood, handsomely painted and engraved. They observe no
Order in their Fighting, nor, unless upon very great advantages, enterprise any
thing but by night. The men they take Prisoners, they put to Death with the
most barbarous Cruelties a Coward can invent for an Enemy in his power. Women
and Children they preserve for Slaves, and sell them for Trifles to the
English. They did once Cut off some French in Surinam, and made several
Attempts upon the English at their first Settling, which were always frustrated,
and they soundly smarted for their folly: now the Colony is grown potent they
dare not but be humble. They are highly sensible of an Injury amongst
themselves, and will, if possible have Revenge at one time or other, which they
always effect by treachery, and dare never Assault a Man to his Face. They
have no Religion amongst them that ever I could perceive, though they will talk of
a Captain of the Skies, but neither worship him nor any other. They have some
knowledge of the Devil, whom they call Yarakin, and their Impostors, or, as
they call them Peeies, make them believe they frequently Converse with him,
whether they do so really or no, I know not, however, it serves to scare the
rest, and makes think, Death, or any Misfortune proceeds immediately from him.
They have also a glimpse of an after Life, in which shall be Rewards and
Punishments for the good and bad, but are wiser than to pretend to any certain
knowledge of what, or where. The belief of the Peeies familiarity with the
Devil, and skill in Herbs, to which also they pretend, causes them to be
employed by others as Physicians, though they need not be over fond of the
Profession, for one of them being sent for to a Sick Person, and, that,
notwithstanding his Charms and Fooleries the Patient dye, the surviving
friends, if he be not the more wary, will give the poor Doctor Death also for
his Fee. They burn the Dead Body, and with it, all the Goods he was Master of
in the World, which are combustible, and what is not, (as Iron-work) they will
destroy by some other means, that no necessaries may be wanting in the other
life: and, if he had any Slaves they are killed also, to attend him there. They
solemnise the Funeral with a drunken Feast and confused Dancing (in which they
are frequent and excessive) while some Woman of nearest kin to the deceased,
sits by, and in a doleful howling tune, lamentably deplores the loss of her
Relation.

Have, and an unfaithful Memory, made me omit an Observation, in my opinion,
very remarkable, and for which, I want a greater reason than my own, to give me
satisfaction. I have said the Warmth and Moisture causes a constant Verdancy
and Flourishing of Plants in Surinam, holding true not only in all Trees
natural to that Country, but also in Transplanted Vines which bear there twice
a year; yet this Exception I observed in an European Apple Tree, which,
notwithstanding the equality of Seasons, always shed its Leaves, and continued
bare after the usual manner in its Native Soil all our Winter Months, and grew
green again in Spring: But how it comes to pass, that the Heat and Moisture of
that Climate should not Cause in that Tree an Assimilation with the rest (as well
those transplanted as natural to that Country, since they say the spirit of
Nature is universally diffusive) I leave the Virtuosi to dispute.

FINIS.
Books sold by Nath. Brook Stationer and Bookseller in Gresham-Colledge, at
the Sign of the Angel in the second yard from Bishopsgate-street going into the
Exchange.
FAX nova Linguae Latinae. A new Torch to the Latin Tongue, much enlarged for
the use of all Gentlemen and Scholars whatsoever, in order to their ready
Writing and Speaking Latin purely and elegantly by Paul Jaz Bereny Hungaria
Transylvania Teacher of a Grammar School in London.

A new Nomenclatura in English and Latin for the benefit and help of young
Latin Scholars; by the same Author.

A Survey of the Turkish Empire, History, and Government: Being an Exact
Discovery of what is worthy of Knowledge or any way satisfactory to Curiosity
in that Mighty Nation.

A Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from Alfonso the first
King, to Alfonso the Sixth now reigning.

A Description of England* or the several Counties and Shires thereof, briefly
handled. Some things also premised to set forth the Glory of this Nation. By
Edw. Leigh M. A. and Author of the Books called The body of Divinity. Et
Critica Sacra.


