Suspiria Ecclesiae and Reipublicae Anglicanae.

The sighs of the Church and Commonwealth of ENGLAND: OR, An Exhortation to
Humiliation, with a help thereunto.

Setting forth the great corruptions and mseries of this present Church and
State, with the remedies that are to be applied thereunto.

By THOMAS WARMSTRY D. D.

Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save,
neither his care heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquiries have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1648.

To the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES Prince of Wales, and Heir Apparent of
the Kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland, Increase of Grace, Honor, and
Happiness.
Great Sir,
I Here present you with the sad portraiture of the wasted and distressed
Church and Kingdom of England, which as it is both the subject and partner of
your Fathers sorrows, so it is now become the object and matter for your
Honorable Actions. Many great and glorious spirits have lost their splendor
for want of work, and many others have failed of true excellency by
misemployment, whilst the greatness of their achievements and victories have
been blemished with injustice and impiety, and for want of a right ground of
their enterprises, their conquests over the rights of other men have been but
splendida peccata, magna latrocinia. God has provided better work for you to
do; Justice and Honor lie equally before you, and offer you a large sphaere
for so bright a Planet to move in; Since your business is not to oppress, but
to deliver your oppressed Father, and his people; not to invade other men's
rights, but to recover your own: That you may be the Inheritour at once of the
valor of your Grandfather, the Great Henry of France; and of the Justice and
Piety of your Father, the Great Charles of England. Of which two, whether was
more glorious, the former in the prowess of his doings, or the latter in the
constancy and patience of his sufferings, may be the great controversy of Ages
to come. Both these together are a pair of golden Spurs presented unto your
Highness to set you forward unto high undertakings; that you may give the
Crown unto the Stories of your Ancestors; let the foundation of your
enterprises be Religion, and then you may expect that the great God will finish
them with a golden roof of success, which is the hearty prayer of him

Who is a most humble and faithful Subject of your Fathers, and honorour of
your Highness.

Thomas Warmstry.

An Errata of the most remarkable Faults.
PAge 11 line 5. for cause read case. p 15. l. 17. for limed r. livid. p. 46.
l. 9. for an r. and p. 53. l. 6. r. it not p. 89 l 18 r. months. p. 94. l. 3.
for one r. on. p. 97. l. 19. for l. wguid r. languid. p. 123. l. 10. for tears
r. tares. p. 146. l 2. r. Satyra^, p. 147. l. 6. r. praeter p. 148 l. 11. r.
woo. p. 170 l 9 r (...) ^b l. 10. r (...). p. 191. l. ^5. r. in these p. 219.
l. 13. r. Sacerdotalis p. 245. l. 17. r. of the Ministry. ^b. l. 18 dele will.
p. 247. l. 19 r. nostrarum. p. 279 l. 6. r. (...). ib. l. 13. for argued r.
agreed. p 334 l. 16. for tyranny r. tit^^^g. ib. l 20. (...). p. 384. l. 5. r.
unhappines. ib. l. 20. for in t^rr^ r. interea. l. ult. for viz r. s^nctis. p.
385. l. 6. r. prodessent omnia. p. 389. l. 7. 1. amoroas. p. 417. l. 3. r. are
as. p. 494 l. 5. r. Chap. 5. p. 519. for to r. too. p. 523. l. 2. dele our. p.
530 l. 19. r. of the.

In the Help for Humiliation.

Page 9. l. 2. dele stood. p. 28. l. 6. dele and l. 7. r. and turned.

To the two Houses at Westminster.
IT is storyed of the most high God in the most ancient Records of the holy
Writ, that in the several periods of his great work of the world, he ever and
anon took the survey of the results of his operations, and as it is said of
every particular prospect that he made of them, That God saw that it was good,
so it is the sentence given of the full sum in the conclusion of them all,
That God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. It is
not imaginable why the divine Architect should stoop so far unto the
resemblance of a humane Method, but that it was his holy pleasure so far to
limit his own power and wisdom in his performances, that his operations might
be at once both the matter of our admiration, and the Pattern for our
imitation, otherwise as his omnipotent power could have made all things in a
moment, so his omniscient wisdom was too fully satisfied, of the unblemishable
clearenesse of all those streams that were to flow from the immaculate and
abounding fountain of his perfection, to stand in need for himself of any
after-game of wisdom to be played in the survay of that opifice which was made
by that hand that could do nothing amiss; It was then without doubt not for
his need, but for our instruction: To teach us this lesson, That as it
concerns us to be well advised beforehand of the uprightness and convenience
of those things that we undertake, so by reason of the manifold infirmities,
and the great liablenesse to failings and miscariages that are in us, in the
manage of our best intentions, and most upright designs we should add unto
our care of the predisposing of our actions in that we have to do, a frequent
survay of the several events and effects of our performances in the
examination of that which we have done. And both these as they are very
convenient, and challenged by humane weakness of us in all sorts of our
undertakings, so are they indispensably necessary in those works that are of
most weighty and momentaneous concernment. This rule then that is commended
unto all by that most speaking and emphaticall example of the Almighty, is much
more than ordinarily urgent upon you, who have had those works in your hands,
than which it is hard to find any of greater weight and hazard within the
Sphere of humane actions: That is to say, the rectifying, or marring (which
indeed has been your business) of those two great bodies of humane society;
The state of a Church, and of a Commonwealth, whereupon the whole entire good
or evil of mankind, both temporal and eternal under God do depend; whether
you have in so great an exigent used that sincere and Christian forecast for
the right and just platforming of your designs and undertakings as was
requisite, is a question too late now to be asked, for the maine purpose of
that inquiry: Deliberatio non cadit in praeterita; but yet it may be to some
purpose for you to consider even of that, and if it be not altogether against
the rules of Logic, to guess at the premises by the conclusions, we shall
find too much evidence from the Products, to believe that so wretched a
building (if a matter of so clear ruin may be called so) had none of the best
models in your first and earliest thoughts, and addresses to this affair. But
we have good reason to be yet so charitable toward you, as to allow you some
share in the truth of that old saying, that Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, and
to believe that you have been so far deceived by your selves, and one more whom
I lust not to name, as that you have both deserted and forgotten your first
Intentions, as you have your first Declarations and Expressions, and that the
Platformes that you laid in(...) beginning, (however perhaps they were faulty
enough) yet were not half so confused as the edifice you have raised, but
however innocent that may be thought to have been, you must look to answer for
the structure of every part of that Babell that you have set up. If you can
think to carry on your business so safely, as to fordoe all possibility of a
reckoning to any upon earth, yet I can assure you there is One in heaven, that
maugre all the shufflings and riglings, the Muses and refuges that you can use
or contrive, will be sure to have an account from you.

It will therefore be very seasonable for you to take some pause a little from
your pursuit, and before you do proceed any further, to look back a while upon
the progress that you have made, and to take the survey of the work that you
have done, and I am fully assured that unless you look with some other light
upon your Fabriques than that wherewith God looked upon his, you cannot see what
you have done to be very good, but will rather find it to be desperately evil;
for such is the contrariety between Gods work and yours, that it can hardly
otherwise be determined, but that if his were very good, yours must needs be
evil.

His work was a work of Creation, your has been a work of Destruction; and
if Creation be good, Destrustion is evil.

There is indeed a destruction which is good, but that is the destruction of
evil, but yours has been the destruction of good, of Government, of Law, of
Peace, of Religion, of the lives of Peaceable and Innocent men; and if the
destruction of evil be good, the destruction of good must be evil.

His was a work of light, yours has been a work of darkness, and if light
be good, then darkness is evil.

His was a work of Order, yours has been a work of Confusion, and if Order
be good, Confusion is evil.

And yet it may be some good to you in time to know and acknowledge it to be
evil, that the timely sense of the evil of your works may bring you to the
timely good of Repentance; for this purpose I here take the boldness (and I
doubt you will think it so) to offer you a view of this scheme that I have
drawn of the sad result of your Seven years Counsels and Actions, in the
dismal and wretched Condition whereinto you have brought this poor Church and
Kingdom. A spectacle whereon I dare to tell you, that none among you can look
without remorse, unless they be men of a neronian spirit; we read indeed of
that monster, that he procured Rome to be set on fire, and when he had
satisfied the lust of his Diabolical cruelty in beholding the flame of that
his own stately City, to take off the odium of so inhumane an Act from
himself, he charged it upon the poor innocent Christians, who were marked out
as the Malignants of those times, as if they had been the only men that were
the public enemies of humane kind, and the chief causes and Authors of those
calamities and disasters, which either by the just judgment of God upon the
wickedness of those heathens, or by their own malicious and pernicious
practices befell the people amongst whom they lived, as Tertullian excellently
expresses it in that admirable Apology that he made for the Christians
afterward, Si Tiberis ascendit in maenia, si Nilus non ascendit in arva, si
Coelum stetit, si terra movit, si fames, si lues, statim, Christianos ad
leonem: If the flood of Tyber ascended up into the walls, if Nilus did not
overflow the fields, if the heaven stood, or the earth moved, if there were
Famine, or Pestilence, presently the cry was, That the Christians must to the
Lion: Let it not be forgotten in the examination of your consciences, whether
you have not used this Neronian Art against some poor suffering Christians in
these days; whether you have not, as he did, set this poor Kingdom on fire,
and when you have done, laid the charge upon them whom you have branded with
the names of Malignants and Delinquents, as if they were the only enemies unto
peace, and the causes of all the public disturbances? If you shall be pleased
to cast a serious eye upon this sad Spectacle which is laid before you, you
will find much cause to embrace your part in that advice unto Humiliation, and
Repentance which is offered with it: And it is now high time for you to
return. Do not think it too soon, because you have yet some delusions left
of outward prosperity to deceive your selves withal; but remember that saying
in Boethius, Si miserum est voluisse prava, potuisse miserius: If it be an
unhappiness to desire an evil, it is a double misery to have the power to
execute it; and if this be true, it will easily appear that yours is but
prosperity mistaken, and that your successes may be reckoned amongst your
greatest disasters, and afford work rather for Humiliations than
Thanksgivings, since the matter and sublect of them is in actions of that
nature that have the Laws both of God and man against them; For my part (says
Philosophy in the same Boet.) Si vehementer ^^^^dum punire desiderarem hominem
improbu^, nec flammas, nec rotas, nec tormenta ei instituerem, verum honoribus,
auro, argento and divitiis rumperem, cumque plenus usque ad os ipsum foret,
aulaea retracta virtutem and paradisum ei ostenderem, cujus alteram
prodidisset, alteram perdidisset. If I had a desire (says he) to punish a
wicked man to the purpose, I would not allot unto him either the scorching of
flames, or the anguish of the Wheels, or any other torments, but I would
rather burst him with honors, and with riches, until he were full up unto the
very mouth, and then would I draw the Curtain, and give him a sight of the
beauty of virtue, and the joys of paradise, the one whereof he had betrayed,
and lost the other. Beware in time (I heartily beseech you) of this Art that
Satan has so long time made use of to waft you on by the pleasing gale of
your outward prosperities and successes in your sins, that he may at length ere
you are aware suck you into the unremediable Gulf of perdition. He helps you
to put Golden chains about your necks, that therewith he may draw you unto
eternal miseries; stinking lakes, and filthy ordures are never more poisonous
then when the Sunshines upon them: And evil designs are then most dangerous
even to those that are the Authors of them when they are in their greatest
glory; As for you, it has been Gods mercy unto you (if he shall give you grace
to embrace it) to give you of late diverse admonitions, and several Antidotes
against such delusions. You have had your clouds as well as your Sunshine, and
when you promised your selves nothing but fair weather, as if you had had the
Ordinances of heaven at your beck, you have yet met with some unexpected
overcasts that have put you into melancholy fits, to mind you that there is one
above that swayes the courses of the world without your Votes, that can at his
pleasure in the smallest moment turn about the hearts and affections of a
people, and tumble down the securest wickedness from the greatest height of
presumption unto the lowest depth of desperation. But if all those changes that
the Lord has sent upon you, those crosse-encounters of his justice, and fiery
flashes of his displeasure wherewith he has met you in your unsanctified
enterprises, have left so small an Impression upon you as not yet to unbewitch
you from your conceited prosperity, but that still you believe your selves to
be in the ascendent of your motion; yet I shall desire to have leave to tell
you that it is the best season you can take for your Conversion: when
wickedness most smiles it is most a Traitor. The kisses of it are but like
the kisses of Judas; the promises thereof are but deceitful baits to make you
swallow down that hook the deeper into your bowels which is hung fast upon
the line of Satan. It may bear you in hand that it will make you a glorious
Parliament, but in the end it will perform it no better unto you, than you
have performed the like unto His Majesty, that you would make him a glorious
King. Instead of that Throne you dream of, you may wake at length and find
your selves in a more dismal prison than that you have bestowed upon Him, and
then you your selves may taste the dregs of that poisoned cup which has been
mingled, etc. I heartily beseech you to prevent it: and if you will prevent it,
you must not delay it, nor bring any pleas of your seeming prosperity against
your selves, (...) persuade you to be any longer held in the snare of Satan,
because it may seem to be of a silken texture; but break through all the
flattering charms and entanglements of your sins, and return unto Loyalty
to your God, unto your King, and to compassion unto your wasted Country. I
would to God it might please him so to work upon your hearts, that this my
poor hearty advice might be taken by you. How happy might you make both your
selves and us? How might you yet (by Gods assistance) boy up the drowned
vessel of this Church and State? how might you glorify God? Increase the joy
of the Angels in heaven? and gain eternal honor unto your selves?

Saint Augustines retractations were his greatest glory; and could we see a
retractation from you, and see it now, whilst you are yet in so much vigor, as
that it may be taken for a voluntary from you, who would not embrace it, hugg
it, and admire it? and passing by the thought of all former miscariages, admire
you for it? who would not write you in Letters of Gold in their memories, as
the great examples of true piety, as the great patterns of the victory of
grace, as the great disappointers and bafflers of Satan, as the great
vindicatours of the self deny all of Christianity; If you desire to be
resplendent and glorious, this were an act that would truly make you so, and
render you almost the wonder of the world; And such a one as would make all
your forepast miscarriages to come in for aggravations of such your stupendous
goodness.

Would you be Conquerours? This is the way to be truly Conquerours, Conquerours
of your selves, Conquerours of sin, Conquerours of corruption, Conquerours of
His Majesty, whose heart you could not choose but even captivate, I am
persuaded, by such a work, and make him more your prisoner than he is, even
when he shall be at his greatest liberty.

Conquerours of all the Loyal Party, (of all I dare say that are truly
Loyal,) yea, even of their very souls and affections, and that by an happy
and unbloudy victory; nay, me thinks it were even to overcome then in this
too: To make them even ashamed of their poor constancy, and to allow you the
right hand of fellowship even in Loyalty.

Since however the devil and corruption does deceive us, It is more glorious,
and a more noble triumph of virtue, to forsake a vigorous and prosperous
wickedness, than to adhere to afflicted righteousness. Be persuaded then to
do this miracle of repentance, and thereby get an heaven unto your selves, and
plunge the devil into another hell, by deceiving him and the powers of
darkness of their so great and assured an expectation of your ruin, that the
English Story of this our time (to recompense all the sad pre-eminences of
wickedness that have been amongst us,) may yet dazzle the eyes of other
Nations and ages, with two such resplendent and unparalelled Jewels, with so
bright a Star, and so clear a Constellation, shining forth in so gloomy an
horizon: The admirable patience of an afflicted King, and the strange
repentance of a misguided Parliament; what shall I say? Think upon your King;
think upon your bleeding Country, your endangered souls; Think upon God, and
upon that account which you must one day make before him for your actions. Cast
your eye upon this prospect you have before you, and consider what you have
done. I shall conclude as Tertullian once spoke unto Scapula in an Argument not
much unlike this unto you; Parce tibi si non nobis, parce Carthagini si non
tibi: If you will not spare us, spare your selves. If you be merciless unto
your selves, yet be merciful unto poor England, to bleeding Ireland. The God
of heaven yet work upon your hearts to his glory, your own comfort, and the
preservation of his Church and people; So prays one that heartily wishes
your conversion and salvation.

THO. WARMSTRY.

An earnest exhortation to the people of England to Humiliation and Prayer unto
Almighty God, for the obtaining of his mercy in these miserable and sinful
times.
WHen I consider how many powerful Orators God has sent unto our Nation to
declame unto us upon this Theme, in those many and heavy afflictions which he
has laid upon us; It might well seem needless for me to speak in an
argument that is set on with so much eloquence from heaven. But when on the
other side I remember how deaf we have been unto all those Orators, it might
well be conceived a thing hopeless for me to be heard, where so many and so
earnest pleaders from heaven have not obtained an hearing.

Not a stroke that God has laid upon us, but has brought with it an
admonition unto humiliation and Prayer.

The Word of God, and the rod of God are but several preachers in a diverse
dialect of one and the same doctrine. The word speaks it more clearly: The Rod
more terribly: The Word is the interpreter of the Rod and the Rod the quickner
and enforcer of the Word: In the WOrd God dictates his Rules and Precepts, and
calamities are as it were the Press of the Almighty to imprint them upon the
Tables of our hearts. Affliction urges us to every duty, but to none more
properly then to humiliation and prayer.

The Rhetorique thereof has been so powerful, that it has convinced
Hypocrites, and even mere natural men. It was so powerful that it brought
down Pharaoh and Ahab to do something in humiliation. Though they came short
of the full performance; it forced some expressions even from corruption it
self, it overcame the stubbornness of rebellious Israel, although their hearts
were not right toward God; yet whilst the hand of the Lord was upon them in the
multiplied lashes of the divine indignation against sin, they durst not stand
out in a professed opposition, but fell down prostrate at the incensed
divinity, Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, them they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God, and they remembered that God was their
Rock, and the high God their Redeemer.

It was prevalent upon the natural temper, (for we know no other that be had)
of the Shipmaster in Jonah, so that he could become the reprover of Jonah for
his sluggishnesse, and exhort him to the necessary duty of supplication to the
divinity, Jonah 1.6. when the storm was violent upon them, he thought it
strange that Jonah should be asleep and forget to pray. He came to him and
said, what meanest thou O sleeper, arise call upon thy God, if so be that God
will think upon us that we perish not.

It is a Doctrine that nature it self it seems can hear from the mouth of
present distress and anguish; a voice of God that overcommeth the deasenesse
of those that are spiritually dead: A principle much below Christianity, that
was legible in the dark and gloomy glimmerings of corrupt humanity: That it
concerns men to seek for help of God in the time of danger, and anxiety. Yea
some have thought that it has been forcible enough, to improve the
bruitishnesse of mere sensible creatures, and to teach them some motions
toward God and heaven in their extreme necessities; The Lions roaring after
their prey seek their meat of God; who prepares for the Raven his food, when
his young ones cry unto God? Job 38 41.

And although that of Lorinus be good Commentary, that it signifies, that God
is invocated by them, (...), not by the clamor of language but by the cry of
their necessity, which God is pleased to hear by the holy ear of his
providence, so far as to extend his care herein unto those brutish
Creatures; Or that of Simeon de Muis upon the 104. Psalm, That these brutish
Creatures are said to seek their food of God, whose office it is to provide
for all, in the like sense, wherein we may say, that the child by his cry
asks food, or the Teat of the mother, which yet knows not the mother.

Yet I find Euthymius brought in for the Author, that many men have often seen
it in the time of famine or drought, that those brutes have lift up their eyes
unto heaven, as if they did by an ineffable kind of language call upon their
Creator for a supply.

And is it not a shame that we should be such dunces in Piety, that we should
be of a lower form therein than the beasts themselves? that we should be set
to learn to seek God in affliction of the Ravens and the Lions, and yet come
short of the lesson?

It was an ignominious reproach that lay upon the ingratitude of Israel, Isa,
1.3. That the Ox knew his owner and the Ass his Masters Crib: And yet Israel
did not know nor consider the bounty of God who was so liberal a Master toward
them; at whose hand they were continually fed, at the breasts of whose
providence they continually sucked: who bare them in the arms of his mercy,
and carried them in the bosom of his compassion.

The Wiseman without doubt intends to shame (as well as to instruct) the
sluggard when he sets that Truant to School unto the Pismire, that he may
learn industry and providence of that little Mistress.

And certainly Job meant it for no grace unto the Scholars he was instructing,
when he sends them for learning in matter of providence to the Beasts and
Fowls, to the Earth and to the fishes: And what a dishonorable stupidity is
it in us; that Affliction should in any sense work that upon natural men,
upon mere hypocrites, yea upon bruit creatures, that these should in any
signification be said to seek to God in the time of affliction; And that we
cannot learn this lesson of the same Master. It is time for us to disclaimeour
very humanity and kind, and to yield up all the pre-eminence thereof unto the
meanest of those creatures, if we suffer them to outgoe us in Religion too, as
well as they are beyond us in many other perfections.

And yet alas how dull have we approved our selves! How many severe Masters
has God set over us for the purpose; To teach us these so low and mean
Lectures of Piety: To seek for deliverance from God in the time of our
trouble, at least when the cause is so with us, that we can see no hope of
attaining it any where else; that we should at least make God our Cum nemini as
it is said, and betake our selves to him when all other helpers reject us; that
we should make him our last refuge, if we will not make him our choice; and
yet how poor proficients have we proved our selves herein? Are we such sworn
fools that experience can teach us nothing after so long a Prentiship of
misery? Are we so fast asleep that no Thunder can awake us? So dead in our
Lethargy, that we cannot feel so many bloody gashes that the Sword of the
Lord has made upon the wounded and dying body of our Nation? that we have no
sense of the scorching and the scalding of those flames of the wrath of heaven,
which have so wasted and consumed us, and burnt away so many members of our
Church and State unto ashes?

Have so many years pruning and digging about us made no cure at all of our
barrennes? but that we will needs have that fearful sentence, Cut it down,
why cumbreth it the Ground?

Has the Cycle upon our branches been so utterly uneffectuall, that we will
needs have the Axe laid even to our root? that we may be hewn down, and cast
into the fire; because we will bring forth no good fruit unto God for all
those corrections wherewith he has chastised us?

Shall the Lord complain of us, as once of Israel, I have corrected their
children in vain; the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire,
the Founder melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.

Will neither the Rod turned into a Serpent, the wholesome Rod of Government
that heretofore bore Almonds of Peace, and Plenty, and happiness, unto us,
turned into a Serpent of oppression and violence, that has stung so many of us
even unto death?

Nor the waters turned into blood; The calm and pleasant streams of concord
and prosperity wherewith this Land of ours was heretofore watered and
refreshed; turned into a red Sea of Christian blond shed so abundantly among us.

Nor the Frogs, the spawne and progeny of corruption, that have so covered the
face of our Nation; those multitudes of errors and heresies and blasphemies
that do swarm in our Egypt, which have made it to stink in the nosthrils of
the Almighty.

Nor the lice of beggary and bondage: Nor the Flies of Oppressors that sit
galling upon our sores, and have corrupted the Land wherein we live: Nor the
literal murnins that have destroyed our Cattle: Nor the Biles and blaines of
the Plague and Pestilence, that have transplanted so many Colonies weekly into
the Land of darkness where all things are forgotten: Nor those more
pernicious Biles and Plagues of the body of the State, whose swelling Tumors
of ambitious Tyranny, and limed spots of corroding envy, are sad presages of
the approaching death of this poor Nation. Nor the terrible and wasting
showers of hail that have bin shot against us from heaven in many judgments,
and from the engines of war and enmity, that have been upon man and upon beast,
mingled with the raging fire of desolating devision: Nor the Locusts and
Caterpillars that have devoured the fruit of our Land in the field; nor those
armed ones that wast our provision in our houses and habitations, and eat up
that which has escaped the former.

Nor the darkness of Atheism and infidelity that has obscured us; nor the
destroying Angel that has been sent forth against us, and has cut off so
many of the firstborn; and of the chief of all the strength of our nation:
will not any of these I say, nor all of them work upon us, nor soften our
hearts, that we may let them go from that hard and vile bondage of sin to
which we have inslaved them, That Egypt of ungodliness, wherein they are in
servile captivity; that they may go and do sacrifice unto the Lord in the
offering up of the holocaust of a broken and contrite spirit, and the incense
of earnest and sincere prayers and supplications unto God for mercy? Are we so
hardened in our stubbournesse with Pharaoh and his people, that nothing will
take us off from the pursuance of our sins? but that we will needs follow them
on desperately, even into the midst of the Sea of the fury and rage of our
incensed God; that we may be utterly overwhelmed and swallowed into
destruction.

Do we not yet perceive that we are miserable and wretched? Do we not yet feel
that we are caught, that we are entangled in the snares of confusion and
destruction from the Lord?

That whethersoever we fly, and which way ever we run, the bearded arrow of
the anger of the Almighty still sticks fast in us?

The fire of his indignation still meets us in the face, and the threatening
flames thereof have encompassed us round about, so that we can find no way to
get out: we have turned this way and turned that way, and sought at every
corner to make our escape from his fury, but still the Angel stands with his
sword drawn in our way, and we (like blind Balaam) cannot discover him.

It is now a long time, that this pooro miserable Nation has lain lowing and
tumbling like a wild Bull in a net; we have strugled, and bellowed, and
foamed, and fretted, and tired our selves with striving to break out; but the
more we have strugled, the more we have been entangled.

We sink still more and more into the mire of destruction; The floods and the
billows still arise upon us, and we like the poor Dove can find no place to
rest our foot on, and yet we will not return unto the Arc; we have fled
from it unto this Mountain and to that hill, but the waters of desolation
still ascend up after us, and no advantage of ground has secured us.

Our wounds are rankled, and Gangrened, and the fretting Cankers thereof have
eaten even unto our hearts, and are ready to seize upon the very principles of
life; and yet we delay to seek for a recovery; we will not admit of any
mortifying applications that may kill the rancour of these devouring Ulcers,
that we may preserve the being of this perishing Nation: Do not be so foolish
as to think you are safe because the Sword is taking breath a while from the
chase of your blood, because it seems to rest it self for some hours after so
full a meal as it has made of the flesh and the carkases of this people: This
temporary cessation (if you take not heed) may prove but a reenforcement of its
violence, that may shortly return it upon us with the greater rage, and gain
it but the better stomach and appetite to feast it self more freely hereafter
in our utter ruin. You would not think him to be a good Politician, that
should presently conclude the siege to be raised, because the roaring of the
Cannon of the Adversary is intermitted for a space; that takes every Truce for
a conclusion of the quarrel: Such leasures are many times but the gaining of
opportunity either for the contrivance and expediting some new works or
designs that may prove more effectual to more speedy destruction; A giving of
us leave to fall asleep, that we may be surprised in our security and
oscitancy. Gods respits of judgments if they be neglected by us, and not
entertained with addresses of conversion and humiliation unto him, become not
the removalls, but the growths of our calamities; when his long suffering
leads us not to repentance, it will deliver us up at length unto the greater
condemnation: and every minute of his forbearance shall be set upon our score,
and be reckoned for by us in the advancement of our following miseries. What
though the instruments of death which he has prepared be not for the present
active upon us as heretofore? we see yet they are still brandished against us;
The mystery of our desolation we see is working every day: The engines of our
destruction are restless in their motions, and nothing we see can stop them
from the fatal business they have in hand: but they are still hastening on
the sad period of this once flourishing Nation, as if they had no price left
them to purchase their own safety, but by procuring the ruin of us all. The
case is with us as it is said to have been in France in some part of the Reign
of the Great Henry of that Kingdom: It is impiety to speak of Peace, and
Treason to seek it. All the gracious tenders of a pious King offering the most
precious jewels of his own Crown to buy the safety and preservation of his
people, and to divest himself of his honor, to save the lives and the blood
of his poor subjects, are scornfully despised and thought unworthy of an
answer; The great Masters of our calamities are become like the spleen in the
body, which grows bigg by the consumption of the rest of the parts. Ephraim
is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, but both together against
Judah: Pilat is against Herod, and Herod against Pilat, but both agree together
against Christ and against his Church. The public misery is the common mark
that they both shoot at from their opposite stations. The showers of blood that
have fallen amongst us, have not at all abated the lowering of the skies: but,
The clouds have returned after the rain, Eccles. 12.2. They are still
gathering more and more thick and gloomy about us, and threaten us again with
a more violent tempest. The sharp physic that we have taken, has indeed
weakened our body, but has not at all cured us of our diseases; The evil
humors are still predominant, and ready to cast us into a relapse, and to
renew the paroxismes of our furious malady. Do you not perceive, that after
all those dreams of happiness, That some have so boasted of to themselves and
others, in the sad successes of their prosperous impieties: who promised you
grapes from those thorns which they planted and fostered, The Serpents root is
yet still alive. The root of division, discord, and sedition; and that it is
ready to bring forth a Cockatrice, and the fruit thereof to be a fiery flying
Serpent; a Serpent for the poysonousnesse; fiery for the fierceness and rage;
and flying for the swiftness of that devastation wherewith it menaceth us.

What though we have tasted deep of the Cup of that Red Wine of the divine
wrath and indignation, which was filled and mixed for us in the hand of the
Almighty? Be not secure: The dreggs of that Cup it may be justly feared are
still behind: and if we will not seek to prevent it by repentance, this
ungodly Nation must drink them and wring them our. But Lord if it be thy will
let this Cup pass from us. Judgment has begun at the house of God: in those
persecutions and miseries that have befallen the Church and the faithful
people; it was Gods pleasure that they should begin the round: but the rest
must look to pleadge them at the last without a timely reconciliation unto
God: and woe be unto them, whose lot it shall be to drink the bottom of the
heavenly fury. I fear we have ye^ seen but the beginnings of sorrows; and
that yet we may (...) that saying fulfilled, Anglorum miseria ultima, pessima,
My dear fellow-Country men, whose preservation I heartily and earnestly long
after. I that speak unto you am a man full of infirmities and sins, yet I hope
I may say truly with that good woman of Abel. of Bethmaachah, 2 Samuel 20.19.
That I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in this Israel. And
though (I confess) I should not be unwilling with her to throw a Traitors head
over the wall, where it is necessary to prevent the swallowing up of the
Inheritance of the Lord: yet I call God to witness, who knows that I lie
not; that if I know my own heart, there is not that man living upon the earth
(maugre all the hard dealing that I have met with from some in these times)
whose safety and happiness I would not willingly promote; and I heartily wish
that the sufferings of my self and others that have been my fellow patients in
that Physic which God has administered unto us, and our Brethren in
tribulation, may if God please, excuse all others of this Nation of what side
soever they have been, from those draughts of miseries which are yet behind;
but then I must beseech you to be sensible of your miseries; That you will
seriously lay your present condition unto your hearts, and those yet greater
calamities that are impendent over us. That we may be all induced to join for
the procurement of a release. There is none more dangerously sick than he that
is well in his sickness: that is unsensible of his disease, and takes his
malady for health. And then secondly, I would feign put you in mind of those
fountains and roots from which our calamities flow, and upon which they grow
and prosper, and will do still if we prevent not, to our utter undoing.

And then thirdly, I would willingly persuade you unto this truth (not that you
may know it, for I doubt not but you do, unless you be ignorant of the very
natural principles of Piety,) But I would feign press it upon your affections
that it may be operative in your hearts and lives: That there is no
possibility of obtaining a release from our distresses, a deliverance from
those judgments which are befalne us, but from God, and that without him no
outward means, agents, or endeavors can procure it us.

And than fourthly, That there is no way to obtain this from God, but by
repentance, humiliation, and faithful prayer unto him; that we may be stirred
up all of us to set about these businesses, unto which I shall labor to incite
you by some powerful motives thereunto.

And then I would entreat you to accept my poor endeavors for your
direction, and guidance in the reght performance of these works, of far
greater moment than all Humane Counsels or Armies, and without which they will
be all in vain and pernicious unto us.

And after all, I shall offer my poor mites into your treasury, for your help
and assistance in the exercise of these duties.

The Lord of heaven help me in the performance of these several taskes, and
give his blessing unto them for the good of this poor Nation, and to the
eternal honor of his glorious mercy, to which I desire to be a poor servant,
though most unworthy in this enterprise.

And the first thing that I have here to do, is to persuade you that you are
miserable. That we may be sensible at length of the sad and wretched state of
this Nation, both in regard of those evils that are already come upon us, and
also those that seem to stand at our doors ready to devour us. As long as we
are not touched with a sense of our evils, we are never like to look after
the remedies. The torment of the disease is the sollicitour of health, and the
best advocate for the entertainment of the Physician and the Physic. There
are two great baggs of poison in the serpentine hearts of corrupted men, that
do above all others keep us off from the cure of our spiritual diseases;
presumption or security, and despair of mercy: The one keeps us from taking
notice of our wretchedness: The other renders us hopeless of relief. And
therefore the great Physician of the Church though he be not wanting in his
provision against all our sicknesses, yet he seems in the general scope of
his compositions to have aimed at the removal of these two. Having ordained us
two great Antidotes against them: The Law against Security and Presumption;
whose office is the discovery of the malignity of sin, both in its own
nature, and in the curse and condemnation that it brings with it; For By the
Law says the Apostle, is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. And the same
Apostle Romans 7.7. tells us, that he had not known sin but by the Law. And
at the 8. verse. Without the Law sin was dead; That is (as I conceive it may
well be understood) that the sense of sin is dead: that it is not felt to be
alive, but is in us like a Gangrene in a mortified member, that eats on
insensibly to the destruction of the body: and in the like signification we
may perhaps not amiss understand that which follows in the 9. verse, When the
Commandment came, sin revived and I dyed: That is; Sin appeared to be sin, the
sense of it was quickened, and thereby I was mortified and humbled, etc. and
thus the Law rouzeth us from our Presumption and security.

But because this Physic of it self is very destructive, and if it should be
let alone, would never cease, till it had brought us to despair, and so killed
us with a contrary Disease. Therefore God has ordained the Gospel for a
Cordial to abate and qualify the violence of this Corrosive: to keep us from
being desperate and hopeless of health: to meet with the rigor and sincerity
of the Law, and to hold us up in the hope of salvation, by the offers of mercy
in Christ Jesus. The Law is like a Lance to open our Tumors, and to search our
Wounds: but as the Lance of it self cures no sores; so the Law of it self
heales none, but makes way only, and propares for the Gospel, which applies
the saving Plaster thereunto. The Law is our Schoolmaster, and whips us unto
Christ, by giving us a sense of our sins, and of the terrors of Hell, and the
curse that is due unto them: And then Christ heales us with the comforts of the
Gospel. And both these works must be done in us, if we mean to obtain our
spiritual health; otherwise for want of the work of the Law upon us, we may
perish through security, and never know what Disease we dye of; or else for
want of the comforts of the Gospel we may perish through Despair. It may be
some question which of these two are most pernicious, but they are both deadly;
and if the question be which is most universally operative in its malignity,
Security and Presumption will be found, I take it, by much the more Epidemical
plague of the two; and that there are many, yea very many more perish by this,
then by that overwhelming sense of the greatness of their sins, which renders
them hopeless, and so helpless. The greatest part of the world dye of a
Lethergy; the Devil deals much in Opium, and Narcoticks, that stupifie the
soul; and deals with men as Physicians use to do with those whom they use to
cut of the Stone: he first casts them into a dead sleep, and then cuts them
and mangles them how he pleases, whilst they lie still and quiet, and never so
much as cry oh! nor flinch at it, nor struggle against it, until at length he
cuts out their very hearts and souls: He knows his hellish enterprise never
goes on so prosperously, as when it moves secretly and undiscovered. His great
care is, that his Engines may not be heard, and therefore he sends most men to
hell in a slumber, charmed with the pleasant Dreams of earthly prosperity, and
sometimes of Heaven it self; from which they are never awaked thoroughly, till
they find themselves scorching in the very flames of the Infernal Pit. Indeed
Despair it seems to be but the Devils refuge, which he seldom makes use
of, but where his Opium will not work: When he meets with some (and they are
too few) that will not be dandled in his lap, nor nuzled in the security of
their sins, but that they will needs be searching into the wounds and
corruption of their hearts, then he strives to make them kill themselves with
the Lance, presents their sins unto them in such a dreadful color, and does
so possess their thoughts with the apprehensions of the greatness of their
iniquities, and the fearful flashes of hell fire, that they cannot believe
God has mercy enough to pardon them. But the former is his more usual, and
more effectual Stratagem; And therefore by the way give me leave to tell you,
that I think there is a great fault in the managing of the work of the
Ministry in these times, for want of the due application of the terrors of the
Law unto the souls of men, for the discovery of their sins, which should be
the Trumpet to rouse them from their security, and to fit them for mercy. We
are all for Cordialls in these times; but it is easy to perceive, if we
consider the looseness and slumbering condition that we are in, that we have
much more need of Corrosives to eat away our dead flesh, without which the
Cordialls of the Gospel do usually rather strengthen our Diseases then our
Souls, and rather hide and palliate, then cure our wounds; one maine reason
why the work of grace goes on no better amongst us in these days; and I pray
God it may find a timely Reformation. Nothing kills more surely then does a
false persuasion of our health: And therefore we find it was the Method that
the Spirit used unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.15, 16,
etc. to convince him of his great corruption, and of his miserable Condition,
that so he might lead him on unto the cure. The Angel of that Church it seems
was conceited of his own Works, and was not sensible of the luke warmness of
his heart in the performance of them: that his Devotion was but half codled,
as they say, therefore the Spirit puts the Searcher into his Wound; I know thy
works, says he, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were colder
hot. He shows him that such a temper is of no acceptance with the Almighty,
who receives no Sacrifices that are not offered up by the fire of Divine love:
nay, that it was so far from pleasing him, that it was loathsome unto him,
and ready, as I may so speak, to turn the stomach of the Almighty, like
lukewarm Water received into the stomach of a man. Because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth, ver. 16.
And then he shows him yet a further view of his misery, by awaking him from
the fond conceit he had of his uprightness and happiness: Because thou
say I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and know
not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. I
counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich,
etc.

As long as we are unacquainted with the vileness an wretchedness of our
condition through sin, we can never be cleansed from our iniquities; we must
feel this burden and groan under it, or else we shall never be rid of it.
Therefore this is the order of the Spirit in the work of the healing of the
soul, as our Savior has declared it, John 16.8. When he is come (says he) He
will reprove, or convince the world (for that I think under favor is the
better Translation of (...) in that place) of sin, and of righteousness, and
of judgment; of sin because they believe not in me; of righteousness because
I go to the fother, and ye see me no more; of judgment because the Prince of
this world is judged. First, he convinces of sin that they may know their own
vileness and corruption, and learn the wholesome lessons of selfe-despaire, and
thereby obtain a longing thirst after Christ, by teaching them what they are
in themselves without Christ Jesus, because they believe not in me, and then he
raises them up upon the wings of faith unto the comfortable doctrine and
apprehension of righteousness, of justification by Christ, who has perfected
the work of our Redemption and reconciliation, by his going unto the Father,
by his Triumphant Ascension into the Holy place of heaven for us, where he
sits as Prince of our Salvation. Having overcome all our spiritual enemies,
and gotten the victory for us, and not only so but from the apprehension of sin
he quickens us unto the righteousness of Sanctification and holiness:
Because by Going unto his Father, having led Captivity, Captive, he has
received gifts for men, even for his enemiess, that the Lord God may dwell
among them, Psalm 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8. He has received power to bestow the gifts
of heavenly graces and virtues, which he seattereth abroad unto his people from
that triumphant Seat where he sits, to the sanctifying of their hearts, That
the Lord God may dwell among them in the height and holiness of his Spirit;
Because I go to the Father; and then having laid in them the foundation of
humility, and selfe-distrust; by the discovery of sin, and raised up the
building of Justification by faith, and Sanctification by love thereupon; he in
the last place convinces them of judgment: That is, (as I conceive with
submission unto better judgments it may be profitably understood) He leads
them from justification and sanctification, unto a comfortable hope,
expectation or assurance of a favorable sentence from God in judgment:
whereby they shall be invested into Salvation and Eternal life, Satan their
arch enemy being cast in his suit against them; Because the Prince of this
world is judged. But the first work we see is the conviction of sin; And this
is Gods method in healing of sin.

And we cannot choose a better for the curing of our miseries. There is no
greater enemy unto true happiness than a conceit of happiness where it is
not; neither is there any more incurably miserable, than he that will not
believe himself to be so. Therefore it is the sad complaint of God against
Israel; That when he (...) them, they grieved not at it, and that they laid not
the judgments of God unto their hearts. He will not leave off from the
punishments of his people until he^ has quickened them from this stupiditie:
Lord when thy hand is lifted up (says the Prophet) They will not see; But they
shall see and be ashamed for their envy at the people; Yea, the fire of thine
enemies shall devour them, Isa. 26.11. God will make use of his own enemies,
even of wicked and ungodly Caitives to scourge his own, rather than they shall
dye of that disease. It was the grayest hair that was upon the head of
Ephraim, and that that did most of all evidence him to draw toward his end;
That he did not know the gray hairs that were upon him; He took no notice of
his decaies, but was unsensible of his calamities, Hos. 7.8, 9. Ephraim is a
Cake not turned; He lay burning upon the harth of the fiery anger of God, and
would not turn unto him, he would rather burn then turn; what was the cause
of it? He had lost his sense, he did not feel the heat of the fire, no more
then a Cake feels the heat of the Oven. Strangers have devoured his strength,
and he knows it not; Yea gray hairs (that is, such calamities as presaged
his decay, as gray hairs do the decay of Nature in the body) are here and
there upon him, yet he knows not: And what followed upon this stupidity, but
a deplorable neglect of seeking unto God: And the pride of Israel test^fieth to
his face, and they do not return to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all
this.

The very case of wretched England at this day: gray hairs are upon this
Nation, not here and there, but all over: a multitude of gray hairs, numerous
calamities that presage her decay and approaching ruin; and yet this wretched
people seems to take little or no notice of them, that they might address
themselves unto the Lord, who alone is able to renew the youth thereof like the
Eagles, Psalm. 103.5. It was a strange kind of blindness that was upon the
poor Fool that was kept for the sport of Seneca's wife; who had so far lost
her sight, that she could not perceive that she was blind: but as he himself
tells it for a wonder, Called unto her Governor to let her go abroad,
complaining of the darkness of the house; We are even become a Kingdom of
such fools; nay, are we not think you somewhat worse than she? She took her
blindness for the darkness of the house, and we seem many of us to take our
darkness for light. How many are there amongst us that are so unapprehensive
of our miseries, that they do even rejoice in them for happiness? Till this
madness be healed in us, we are not like to be cured of any other of our
diseases; give me leave therefore to present you with a glass wherein you may
look upon your selves, and see now at length how gray you are grown, what
messengers of death and destruction are upon you, that you may seek some
heavenly Charm from the Almighty, that may restore you to an youthful
condition, if it may be, or else at least provide for your latter end.

And oh that I had now the Spirit of Lamentation, that was once so eloquent in
the Prophet Jeremy, wherewith he seems to sing the funeral dirge of
Jerusalem, in those holy strains of bleeding compassion, which are recorded in
his Book of sorrows for that people; Read that holy Book of his with a
serious heart, and think upon England, and would you not imagine, that those
miseries of the Jews were but the type and figure of ours in this Nation;
scarce a piece that he draws to hang about that hearse, but seems to be a fit
Emblem to set forth unto us the mournful Estate of our English.
Commonwealth at this time.

Lamen. 1.1. The solitary widow, wherewith the holy Prophet adornes the
frontispeice of that sad Poem he has there composed, what is it but an apt
resemblance of the wretchedness of England at this time; Deprived of the
presence and comfort of her politic Husband. The Father of this great Family
being chased away from the care of his Household, and the poor Widow become a
prey to her own ungracious children, of whom she may even cry out as once God
of Israel, by the Prophet, Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children,
and they have rebelled against me. When we read there of a great Princess
among the Nations. Do we not see the splendor of our former condition, whilst
the light of the Lords countenance shined upon us, and we were the envy and
glory of other people? And when we cast our eye upon that Princess reduced
unto servitude, and become tributarie, do we not behold the very Image of
that sad exchange of perpetual and uncomfortable slavery, which we have made
for our former freedom, whilst we feel Excise, Free Quarter, a fifth and
twentieth part, and diverse other greedy devourers, like so many harpies eating
up the flesh, and picking the very bores of the poor people, whilst we can
find no relief for the present? The Laws whereby our Liberties should be
secured and preserved being trampled under foot, notwithstanding all the
Protestations and Covenants wherein men have bound themselves to preserve both
the Nurse and the Child, both the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberties of
the Subject, and almost as little hope appearing of any ease or remedy for the
future.

Verse. 2. There we find Jerusalem weeping sore in the night, when others eyes
are safe and a^^ rest within their Canopies. Here were restless fountains of
sorrow, but we cannot find any such streams flowing amongst us for the most
part; and we have cause to weep the more because we weep so little: whilst
these wells are dry, we want their water to quench the rage of that devouring
flame which is about our ears.

But though we weep not as she did, we are as comfort less as she was; may I
not complain for England, as well as he for Jerusalem? That amongst all her
lovers she has none to comfort her, all her friends (they at least that
pretended to be her greatest, her only friends) have dealt treacherously with
her. All their fair promises of safety, and Honor, and Riches, and Liberty,
and of Religion it self, have proved but Golden shadows, specious baits with
bearded hooks hidden in the midst of them: The fair baits are all swallowed
up in the confusion that is still more and more upon us, and the hook is only
left sticking in our bowels.

Verse. 3. The Lamenter of Israel complains, That Judah was gone into
captivity; and that she was sent to dwell among the heathen, and found no
rest: And we may truly complain, That Captivity is come unto us, and has
overtaken us in our own Land, and that the heathen dwell among us; even
heathen Christians, which are the worst heathens in the world: How many are
there amongst us that are heathens in judgment (...) That hold and profess
the very Doctrines of the heathens? That have denied the Lord that bought them?
That have accounted the preaching of the Gospel foolishness? That have set up
the Dagon of their corrupt and carnal reason, in opposition to the holy Ark of God? Casting down the glorious and sacred Truths of Christianity tevealed
from heaven, clearly recorded in the holy Book of God, and confirmed by the
abundant Testimony of God himself, in many wonderful and holy miracles; and
delivered unto us from the best and soundest antiquity, even the holy Doctrines
of the Divinity of the Son of God, and of the holy Ghost: The very fundamental
Points upon which all the building of Christianity does depend, and is
supporred, and in the contradiction whereof, that whole frame falls to the
ground. Casting down (I say) these Sacred and awful Truths to set up the
Idols of their depraved ratiocinations in the place thereof.

And how many more heathens in practice are there amongst us? yea, even
Atheists that are worse than heathens, the whole course of whose lives is a
current Lecture of Atheism; every Action whereof death as it were speak
blasphemy, and says, there is no God; no Supreme Power that governs and
rules the world; none to punish Injustice, Deceit, Rebellion, Oppression,
Uncleanness, nor any wickedness; none to call men to account for their
actions: And what rest can poor Christians take in such miscreant Society?

The persecuters of Judah overtoo^e her between the straites: so mournes the
holy Prophet for that Nation: That is to say, they got such power over her,
such advantage against her, that there was no way left for escaping: like as
when an enemy overtaketh a man in the pursuit of vengeance in a narrow place,
where there is no space to avoid or fly from the stroke of his fury. Put but
England for Judah, and the Persecutors, and the straites are at home with us:
They whose mouths were full heretofore of the clamours against persecution;
for little else perhaps, but because they were not flattered, and promoted, for
their factious and seditious practices; have now sanctified the name and Office
of Persecutors, whilst they think they do God service, to starve their
brethren and fellow subjects. I fear our Saviors Prayer will not serve their
turn; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. But yet I wish we
may all join to offer up Saint Stephens Prayer for them; Lord lay not this
sin to their charge: And for our selves; Lord lay not this charge for ever
upon our sins, but rid us from them that persecute us, and deliver us: Yea,
let us from our hearts pray as the Church of England has taught us, if we may
have leave of an Ordinance and Directory: That it may please thee to forgive
our enemies, persecuters and slanderers, and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Varse 4. Did the wayer of Sion mourn, being left desolate as it were, for
want of the cheerful society of passengers to the House of God: Wherewith they
were wont to be cheered up and beautified. Because none came to the solemn
Feasts, which were laid down as it were in the time of the captivity? And do
not we see the like sadness and mourning solitariness in the ways of our
Sions, which lead unto the holy Mountains and Sanctuaries of the Lord, whilst
the solemn Feasts, and Memorials of the Holy Saints of God, are abolished,
which were so many Schools of Holiness unto the people; calling to their
minds the excellencies of the Graces of those eminent and resplendent Lights of
Piety for their imitation: and the Memorials of the most glorious mercies of
the Lord are rejected, even of the Incarnation, the Nativity, the Passion, the
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ Jesus, and of the Glorious Fruit of all:
The sending of the Holy Ghost, with so many Treasures of divine Graces and
mercies to the enriching of the Church, which were of such excellent use; not
only to stir up the people unto thankfulness, or to revive the comfortable
sense of Gods mercies in their hearts, whilst they were so often, and in such
solemn manner presented unto their apprehensions by the Church: but were also
so many blessed opportunities gained to draw the people together unto the
solemn Exercise of Religion toward God, and of Christian Love and Charity to
one another; so many days of mercy to the poor beasts, and toyling servants.
And were of excellent use, for the instilling and preserving of the Fundamental
Doctrine of Christianity in the hearts of the people: Which served in stead of
an easy Catechism unto the simpler sort; whilst if they were but wise enough
to know what day went over their heads, they could not be utterly ignorant of
the great Mysteries of Salvation. An use of solemn days which God himself
ordained, partly for that very purpose in the Church of the Jews; See Exodus
12.26, 27. and so warranted sufficiently unto us. And which indeed is of great
necessity, in regard of the great ignorance and ineptitude that is in many,
for the apprehension of the profound mysteries of Christianity: Which being so
great strangers unto Nature, and their natural apprehensions, would not so
easily have been entertained by them, but that they were by this Ordinance of
the yearly solemnities of the Church, made familiar unto them by custom, which
being as it were another nature, facilitated by use the admission of that high
and misterious knowledge unto their souls: These, these alas are all now cast
away, as if the Church could not be reformed, unless Christ Jesus and his
glorious mercies were forgotten amongst us. I deny not indeed but those daid^
were much abused by some unto looseness and licentious Liberty; But then it
had been true Reformation to have sought the remedy of those miscariages, and
to have reduced those days unto their proper and holy use, by making more
strict rules for the direction and restraining of men unto the right
observation of them, and so to have retained them to the honor of God, and
edification of his people, in the due exercise of the works of Piety toward
God, charity and love one to another, and of mercy and release to our poor
Beasts and Servants. But alas, if the matter be rightly examined, I doubt we
may find that the Works of Piety, Mercy, and charity are only cast away, and
the licentiousness and lawless liberty of those days is still retained, at
least that there is no such watch set against the latter, as against the
former. And I can hardly forbear to tell you, that it is the right method of
the devils Reformation, to cast away the good and retain the evil. They
winnow with Satan's Sieve that shake out the good Gorne, and retain the Chafe
and offall; so he would have winnowed S. Peter no doubt; and so some have now
winnowed the flower of our Church. This whirlewind-Reformation of ours, has
even blown a great deal of the Wheat from us, by casting out the holy
Ordinances of God, the beauty and Order of his Service, together with the
Government of the Church, and instead thereof has left us I know not how many
great heaps of Chafe, of Corruptions, Confusions, and Depravations amongst
us, which are ground and ministered unto the poor deceived people, who whilst
they expect Bread to nourish them, find Husks to choke and destroy them. I
confess heretofore there was some Chafe in our heaps which did deserve a
winnowing, but with a more moderate wind. But we had better have eaten the
Wheat and the Chafe together, then to have had the Wheat taken from us, and
so much Chafe left us in the stead of it.

I should be too voluminous in this sad Subject, should I draw out the
Paralells of our Evils and those of the Jews. Through the whole Book of the
Prophets Lamentations, should I show you every face of our miseries, in those
waters of Marah, or bitterness; Those floods of affliction wherewith they were
overwhelmed.

I might tell you of the Exaltation of the Adversaries of each Church. The
prosperity of their Enemies, Ver. 5. But they themselves will no doubt be your
remembrancers of that.

Of the Princes of our Nation as well as of theirs; yea, the King himself (as
we all know) amongst the rest become like hearts, poor chased Hearts, hunted up
and down by the bloud-hounds of our times, like Hearts that find no pasture,
and gone without strength before the pursuer, Verse. 6.

I might present this poor Church neglected in her Afflictions, bemoaning her
self unto you because none of you will bemoane her; In the sad Dialect of
Jerusalem, there, ver. 12. Is it nothing unto you all ye that pass by? Behold
and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger, etc. And set her before you like
poor forsaken Sion, spreading forth her hands, whilst there is none to comfort
her. ver. 17.

I could tell you (but what need I?) of the Sword that has been bereaving
abroad, and of the Plague or death that has been destroying at home. v. 20.

Chap. 2. ver. 1. etc. The cloud of Gods Anger wherewith Sion was veiled. The
casting down of the beauty of Israel from heaven unto the earth: That is, from
a state of happiness and glory, to a state of misery and contempt. The Lords
forgetting of his footstool; his swallowing up of the Habitations of Jacob; the
throwing down of the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; the polluting of
the Kingdom and the Princes thereof; treading them as it were in the mire in
his fury. The cutting off the horn: That is, taking away the strength and
glory of Israel. The drawing back of his right hand from before the Enemy; That
is, the withdrawing of his protection and defense, and his giving of them over
to the fury of the Adversary. The burning flame, and the bent bow. The pouring
out of fury, like a stream or flood of fire. The taking away of his Tabernacle
as it were of a Garden; That is, either the pulling down of the Church of
Israel, or the removing of the gracious presence of the Lord, whereby he dwelt
amongst them in his mercies and graces, in the light of his Truth, and the
comforts of his Ordinances. These, and many other like these, are all but so
many emphaticall expressions of the violence and fury of Gods anger against
that nation in those times, and may serve for the same purpose amongst us in
these sad days of ours. As if the Prophet had therein set us a Copy to write
after, our present miseries being as it were a Translation of a great part of
that sad original Text, wherein God was pleased to read humiliation unto to
them, as our Language in the Lamentations thereof is a Translation of theirs.

But when we read of the destroying of the places of assembly, and the
forgetting of the solemn feasts and Sabbaths again in Sion: (for that it
seems was an evil that the Prophet would not dismiss with a single
Lamentation, and of the despising of the King and the Priest:) Those great
Symptoms of the Anger of the Almighty, when both Government and Ministry: The
two great Cisternes whereby God usually conveyes the streams of mercy from
that unexhaustible fountain that is in him, in all manner both of Temporal
and Spiritual blessings unto a people; when both these (I say) are demolished
and trampled on, when we read of these, and of these three together, me
thinks, we may see there the very lively Countenance of the sad and calamitous
estate of our own Nation at this present; as if the Prophet had then been
looking through the prospective of his Spirit, upon England in this very time
and condition it is now in, whose parallel miseries may seem to be a sad
Commentary and Exposition of those sad expressions of Jeremiah: our Gloss and
his Text come so close one to another in every particular there mentioned, that
it needs no more but bare and ordinary observation to understand the
compliances.

And let all that have any eyes yet left amongst us, judge whether we have not
a large portion, in that which follows at the 14 ver. of the 2 chap. Thy
Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not
discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy Captivity: but have seen for
thee false burdens and causes of banish meant.

What dawbing has been amongst us with untempered mortar? What sowing of
pillowes under the Armeholes of most horrid sinners? even of Rebels, Perjured,
and Sacrilegious persons: What strengthening the hands of the wicked? What
calling evil good, and good evil? What putting of light for darkness, and
darkness for light? What exchanging of Doctrines between heaven and hell?
What confounding of the Laws of Christ and Belial? And a multitude of other
miscarriages have been of late in the Ministry of the Church: What Gall could
make Ink black or bitter enough to declame against them? But motos praestat
componere fluctus!

I shall break this holy Glass of the Prophet into no more pieces. You may at
your leisure contemplate the heavy case of this poor Church and Nation in the
sundry passages of it, and exercise your selves in the just Lamentation
thereof, in those several helps that he there most elegantly administreth to
teach us the art of holy sorrow.

I shall come more plainly, and closely home unto you; and entreat you of
this Nation to consider two things with me, very requisite for the right
understanding of our miserable condition.

First, what we have been: And secondly, what we are, from whence we are
fallen, and whether we are fallen.

First, Consider what you have been, that by the comparison of your lost
prosperity you may the better take the measure of your incumbent misery. This
is one stone or weight that both spiritual and humane Oratory makes often use
of. Happiness and calamity as opposite neighbors as they are, yet at their
departure, they many times, and almost always leave some Legacy behind them
unto one another; so that each is advanced out of the others store. Precedent
calamities leave jewels and ornaments behind them, to beautify the face of
succedent felicity. Health is much the sweeter after a fit of sickness; A
calm season at Sea seems a kind of heaven unto the tossed and wearied
Mariner, after the blustering and tearing assaults of tempests, the raging
mountains and valleys of the tumultuous billows; A foregoing poverty and
indigence, enricheth the store of every degree of plenty and abundance that
comes after; and it is probable enough, that the Celestial joys and rest in
heaven are the sweeter and more pleasant unto the Saints, for every portion of
misery and bitterness that they have tasted in the various afflictions of this
turbulent and transitory life here in this world; That of the Apostle may be
true even in this sense amongst others: That our light affliction which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. Not only in regard of the great recompense that the Lord
there rewards our sufferings withal: but also in respect of the enhancement
and value that our sufferings here do bequeath as it were unto our recompense
there. Thus every Cross here, is turned into a Diadem there: The thorns of
our present troubles, and tribulations, may seem to add sweetness unto the
Roses of our future tranquillity which grow upon them.

And so on the contrary; A foregoing state of happiness, adds unto the
burden of our subsequent adversity: Poverty is a wrack indeed unto that
worldling that has lately wallowed in the golden mires of his riches. That man
that is borne blind, and never tasted with his eye of the sweetness and
pleasantness of the Sun beams, does not find near so much discontent in
his natural darkness, as he that has lately enjoyed the various delights of
the seeing eye. Miserum est fuisse foelicem; It is a wretched thing to have
once been happy. Fuimus Troes, we were once Trojans, is a Motto of a mournful
importance; Therefore we find it the Eloquence of the Psalmists sorrow, Psalm.
42.4. Lamenting the sad loss of the comfortable Society of Gods people in the
divine worship, by reason of some affliction that had befallen either himself
or the Church: To aggravate that damage upon his own disconsolate Spirit by
the memory of the former joyful freedom thereof which he enjoyed: When I
remember these things, says he, I pour out my soul by me self; why so? Why,
because it had not always been so with him: For I had gone with the multitude,
I went with them unto the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise with a
multitude that kept holyday. Q. D. It grieves me much the more to think what
felicity I have lost: that I have been heretofore in a better condition, when I
enjoyed the freedom and comfort of the holy assemblies, and of the full
Solemnities in the sacred festivals of the Lord. And thus that victorious
Martyr of patience Job, blazons the Armory of his sable afflictions, of that
pedigree of mischiefs that made up the matter of his trialls: by setting forth
the honorable and prosperous condition, wherein he was before they fell upon
him; Job 29.2, etc. Oh that I were (says he) as in mneths past, as in the
days wherein God preserved me: when his Candle shined upon my head, and when
by his light I walked through darkness, etc. But now they that are younger
than I have me in derision: whose fathers I would have disdained to have set
with the dogs of my flock. It added much unto the trial of Jobs patience,
and to the burden of his misery, that he was fallen from an estate of so much
happiness and honor.

That therefore I may give you the greater and truer sense of your calamities,
give me leave to desire you to remember what you have been, and to compare it
with what you are now: and that in these several regards.

First, In matter of Religion, Secondly, In matter of Peace. Thirdly, In matter
of Liberty. Fourthly In point of Government. Fifthly, In point of honor and
Reputation; And in all these, as in many more respects, we shall find the
impairements very great that are upon us.

First, concerning Religion, which is above all others of greatest weight and
consideration, and of the highest importance unto happiness: The time was not
many years since, that we were the glory of all the Reformed Churches: The home
as it were, and proper habitation of the true, sincere, beautiful, and orderly
Worship of God: which was an Exile in most other places of the world: and in
some received (as it were) but as a stranger, and sojourner under the
conditions of restraint and bondage; and rather permitted as an harmless
evil, than embraced as an honorable and commodious good. Here Religion was in
the Throne, in other Kingdoms and Nations it was set as it were upon the
footstool. In this Realm of ours it was ruling as a Mistress, or Queen; in
most others, it was made to serve as an underling, or servant. Here it was in
power, and glory; and ornament; in other places in subjection and servitude.
Here it was in its free and full course, like a clear and untroubled River or
stream, watering the several parts and territories of our Land: and conveying
unto them the rich Traffic of Spiritual and Eternal blessings, together
with the vantage of temporal prosperity; whereas in other places (for the most
part) if it were at all in sincerity, yet it was not at all in freedom and
liberty: but chained up, and limited unto this or that particular station,
under confinement and restraint, as if it were some dangerous and pernicious
beast. Oh how comfortable and glorious was the state of Religion once with us
in this Nation! When it was encouraged by the Royal example of a gracious and
pious Prince: Managed in the hands of a Learned and Religious Ministry:
Steered and carried one, (not after the humors of foolish and frantique men,
not put to Lackey by the side of those unsanctified designs, which have bin the
Brood of the brains of the Achitophels of our Age:) but guided by the Load-star
and Compass of the Divine Truth, in the true road of Eternal happiness:
conducted by the wholesome rules of order and decency: Administered with an holy
and awful reverence, answerable in some kind to the Majesty of hat great God
unto whom the acts of Worship were directed: Strengthened and enforced with
Unity, and Christian Concord of the people of God, gathered together in the law
full and orderly Assemblies of the People, in those places which are
consecrated to the peculiar service of the Almighty: secured from blasphemies
and other inconveniences, by the help of a pious and excellent set form of
public Devotion, framed with great deliberation and judgment by those holy
Martyrs, who have sealed the Truth of God, and testified their sincerity in the
embracement thereof, by the loss of their dearest blood, and Authorized by the
Authority of the Church. Oh how happy was it then with us! When this Church of
ours was as it were the throne of the glory of God here upon Earth: The Zodiake
wherein the Sun of righteousness had his motion: The choice and peculiar
portion of God: The Land of Truth and Holiness.

But now alas! what is become of us? Our silver is become dross: Our wine is
mixed with water. The tried silver of divine Truth stamped with the image and
superscription of God himself, wherewith we were enriched, for the traffic
of Heaven, is turned into the dross of errors and heresies, foisted upon us
under the names of Truths. Those malae monetae; those counterfeit pieces which
the Coyners and spiritual imposturers of this age have put upon us, which will
purchase us nothing but shame and confusion, destruction and damnation: and the
pure wine of the Divine Worship and Ordinances, that refreshed the hearts both
of Men and Angels is mixed with the muddy and unwholesome waters of unreverent,
unseemely, and corrupt performances in Religion, whereby the holy heat and
fervor is cooled, the life and vigor thereof is deaded and extinguished, and
the soule-reviving strength and virtue thereof is rendered lawguid and
forcelesse.

Not any thing left us, wherein Religion is concerned, but all is either
abolished and cast off, or changed for false wares, or poisoned and
sophisticated with venomous mixtures and infusions. The Harlot of schism and
sedition has dealt with us, as the Harlot is charged to have dealt in the
first of Kings the third Chap. and 20 verse, She has stolen away the living
Child of true Religion and Piety, of which this Church of ours was happily
delivered by the Divine goodness: and has left her dead child of disorder and
depravation instead thereof in her bosom, and the poor deprived mother is
abridged of her remedy. Her wise and pious Solomon (oh that he were a Solomon
in peace, as much as he is a Solomon in wisdom,) is kept from the Throne that
he cannot hear her cause, and redress her injury, and restore unto her the
living child again; but he that is greater than Solomon, will we hope in his
good time restore both.

If we look for the true and sincere rule of Religion, the golden standard of
the pure and incorruptible Word of God, illustrated and explained unto us by
the solid and sound interpretation of Antiquity. Instead thereof, we find the
foolish and frantic imaginations of every presumptuous and unlearned
Enthusiast, imposing drunken dreams for the dictates of sober and sanctified
Divinity; setting up themselves for the measures of Religion, whilst they take
upon them a superintendency over the very Scriptures themselves, to mangle and
cut them into what forms they please, bending and bowing them like that regula
lesbia, like a leaden rule to make them square with those wicked and seditious
designs that the devil and their carnal interests commend unto them for the
ruin of the public; one while corrupting them by false interpretations,
another while depraving them with impious additions of their own pretended
visions and revelations, either fained by themselves, or inspired into them by
the spirit of error, God having given them up to strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie, because they have not received the love of Truth that
they might be saved. Yea least there should be left any impediment to cross
them in their ways, and to hinder the spreading of their hellish errors, it
is thought there are some that have taken the boldness, to pull the Scriptures
down from the Throne of excellency and infallibility wherein God has placed
them, as being the dictates of his own infallible Spirit, and to equal with
them, or prefer before them, their own wicked fancies, and the very
witchcrafts of Satan.

Hence it is come to pass amongst us, that the light of true Christian
knowledge is so eclipsed amongst us, like the Sun in cauda draconis in the
Dragons tail, as the Astronomers speak; for what else are these wicked
Sophisters, these bold disturbers of the Church of God, than the tail as it
were of the great red Dragon sweeping down the stars of heaven, the true and
genuine lights of the Church, and of Divine knowledge.

Hence it is that humane interests have gotten so much the start of sincere
piety, and are become so impudent as to take upon them to give rules unto the
Spirit, to silence the preaching of he pure Word of God, to build sanctuaries
and asylum's unto the grossest sins, whereby they are become incurable
Gangrenes and noli me tangeries in the ulcered body of this Church and state.

Hence it is that there are so many supersedeases, countermands, and
inhibitions served upon the Scripture from the Chancery of the corrupt
judgments, or rather affections of wicked politicians, to reverse or silence
the Edicts and decrees of the most high God, to embezill and invalidate the
Records of heaven, making them subordinate to the impious and unsanctified
ordinances of men, and allowing the sacred and unchangeable Oracles of the
Almighty to be of no force any farther than they can be wrested to a seeming
and forced compliance with those wicked principles and ends that worldly minded
men have entertained and proposed for the consummating of that work of ruin
and confusion that they have undertaken; which must be asserted and made good
with a non obstante, to all that the spirit of God has declared to the
contrary, whereby they seem to deal in some sort with Christ Jesus as with his
substitute, under the colors and fair promises to render him glorious, not
only attempting to make void the authority of his Prophetical office, by
disallowing his directions to be an infallible and all-sufficient guide into
all truth, but also to depose him from the Throne of his Royalty by repealing
and abolishing the force of his divine Laws, which he has made for the rule
and government of his people, whenever they lie opposite to their seditious
and pernicious judgments; as if no act were high enough to show the
absoluteness of that supremacy which they challenge unto themselves, unless
the Precepts of God, as well as the Laws of men, be made the Pavement for them
to trample on at their pleasure, in the passes and repasses that they make for
the carrying on of the bold adventures of their awlesse and Lawless tyranny.

Would you not think them the heirs, if not the Ghosts of that inso lent
Roman Senate in the time of Tiberius? And that as they refused to admit of our
Savior for God, because he was consecrited a God before he was so decrecd and
approved by the Senate: so these had determined to reject him from being God,
because he was not deified by their ordinance, and received not has Godhead
from them.

What is it else for them to take upon them as they do, to set up their own
rules in oppostion to the clear dictates of his Law and Gospel?

The Word of God teaches us to celebrate the memorialls of the great blessings
of God, and to solemnize his praise for them in the Congregations of his
people. Psalm. 103.1, etc. Psalm. 42.4.

They teach men to abolish the memorials of the great blessings of Salvation
wrought for us by Christ, and forbid by their command, and hinder by force, the
Ministers of God from assisting the People therein.

Psalm. 2. Psalm. 95. The Law of God teaches us to serve the Lord with fear,
and to rejoice unto him with trembling; to bow down and kneel before the Lord
our maker.

They teach men, or at least allow them, to abolish outward reverened from the
Divine service.

6. Com. The Law of God teaches us that we shall do no murder.

They teach men, and engage them to murder their Brethren, and to destroy the
lives of those that are innocent for the compassing of their wicked purposes,
and to make good the usurpation of their unjust power and greatness.

8. Com. The Law of God teaches us that we shall not steal.

They justify the robbing and plundering of their Brethren, the good and
peaceable Subjects, and even the King Himself, without any color of Law or
conscience, and without so much as allowing many of them a hearing.

The Law of God teaches us that we must be merciful as our Father which is in
heaven is merciful.

They teach men to be cruel and bloody, as their father in hell is cruel and
bloody, who was a murderer from the beginning.

9. Com. The Law of God teaches us that we must not bear false witness against
our neighbor.

But now men are encouraged, and it is thought suborned too, to bear false
witness against their Brethren, that they may get Naboths Vineyard into their
possession.

1 Cor. 9.13, 14. The Law of God teaches us, that the Ministers of the Gospel
ought to live of the Gospel, as they that waited at the Altar were partakers
with the Alear.

But now men are taught to deprive the Ministers of God of their lawful
supportance and livelihood, neither allowing them to enjoy their portions, nor
to exercise their callings.

The Law of God forbids men under the danger of damnation, to do evil that
good may come.

These teach men to do manifest evils under the pretense of holy purposes, but
indeed for the procurement of greater evils, making one wickedness the scale
to get up to another.

Acts 23.5. The Law of God tells us that we must not speak evil of the Ruler
of the people.

They do not only speak evil of him themselves, but countenance the same, and
teach others to do so.

1 Pet. 4. 2 Pet. 13.14. The Law of God teachethus that me must submit to the
King as Supreme, and to Governors as unto those that are sent of him.

They teach the people to despise and disobey the King, whom they are sworn to
acknowledge as their only supreme Governor.

Romans 13. The Law of God teaches us that we must not resist the higher powers,
and shows us that they that do so shall receive to themselves damnation.

They set up resistance and Rebellion for a virtue: and slander that holy Law
with the opprobrious title of Malignancy, wherewith this brand those that
submit thereunto.

Mat. 26.52. The Law of Christ is, that whosoever takes the Sword against the
power of the Magistrate shall perish by the Sword.

But they teach men (and practice it themselves) to take the Sword, and ravish
it from the supreme power, and to use it not only without him, but against
him, to maintain their wicked Doctrines, their Schismatic designs, and
unjust oppressions, and to beat down both truth and righteousness.

The Law of God tells us in the judgment of David, that men ought to figh^^^
defense of the Kings Person, insomuch that David in 1 Samuel 26.16. tells Abner,
and binds it with an oath, That he was worthy to dye because he had not kept
the Lords anointed, though so wicked: Tyrant as was Saul. And our blessed
Savior the Son of David tells Pylate, John 18.36. That if his Kingdom had
been of this world, then his Servants would have fought, that he should not
have been delivered to the Jews.

But they teach men not only to hold the contrary, but bind them by wicked
oaths never to interest themselves, nor to assist any in the defense of the
King, and punish those that have followed this rule of the Scripture, with
imprisonment, death, and confiscation of goods.

The Word of God teaches us to perform our oaths, and to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God, and designed a heavy
judgment unto Zedekiah for breaking the oath wherewith he had sworn unto
Nebuchadnezzar.

But they teach and practice not only the breaking of the sacred oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, but do also compel men to swear down those oaths,
and to vow perjury unto Satan by the name of the great and holy God, making it
the instrument of wickedness, and using it for a seal to confirm their
obligations unto the Prince of disobedience.

The Word of God teaches people to study to be quiet, and to do their own
business.

They teach them to forsake the business, to raise tumults and disturbances in
the Church and State.

The Law of God commands the Ministers of the Gospel to preach the Gospel.

They forbid men to preach the Gospel, unless they will countenance their
seditious practices.

The Word of God teaches that men should be allowed and approved, and ordained
by imposition of hands, that are to undertake the Ministry in the Church.

But now -- alas! the Priests of Jeroboam, of the meanest of the people intrude
into the exercise of the Sacred Function in the Church, without any allowance
from just authority, or competent furniture of solid knowledge.

And what is all this, and much more of the like, but to say of Christ, Nolumus
hunc regnare super nos, we will not have this man reign over us? The
symplicity of the Gospel is of too low a pitch to sort with the deep plots and
wise contrivements of our politic brains; it is much too plain to serve the
turn of those great designs which we have in hand. Good God vindicate the
Glory and Authority of thy truth. But I must hasten; The Judgment of God me
thinks is riding so post upon us, that I am afraid it will prevent my
admonition, it will scarce give me leave to pursue my purposed intention.

My meditations are even overwhelmed with the floods and deluges of those
various calamities that have broken forth upon us in this wretched Nation; we
may justly cry out of them in the voice of the Psalmist, The floods are risen
O Lord, the floods are risen, the floods have lift up their voice, the waves of
the Sea are mighty and rage horribly; all our comfort is, that the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier; and as the same Psalmist tells us in another
place, (...) Psalm. 29.10. The Lord sits upon the flood or deluge, to rule
and moderate it for the good of his people and his own glory, and the Lord
remains a King for ever; were it not for this, we could have no hope to
escape the swallow of those devouring surges that do assault us. Do but open
your eyes and look about you, and you may see your selves encompassed with
deep and threatening waters on every side, miscarriages in the manner and
manage of the work of instruction, whilst the people and the Ministers both
join together to seduce one another; The one kindling the wasting flames of
seditious Factions and corrupt Doctrines, clawing the itch of scabbed and
putrified ears, and the other blowing those fires, and encouraging those evil
performances in their Teachers, by their applauses, and bribing the poisonous
tongues of those that love the reward of unrighteousness, keeping up the
market and commerce of destruction betwixt them: The one buying, and the other
selling wicked deceits, and spiritual impostures, and the mutual ruin of one
another and the Truth; So that as Learned Graser speaks, Neque facile dici
potest utra pars alteram fortius ducat aut ducatur; It is hard to determine
whether the people be more guilty of corrupting the Ministers by their
acclamations and bribery, or the Ministers of the deceiving of the peole by
their pernicious and sophisticated Doctrines.

And of those that are not for this evil Traffic; yet there are too many (as
the evil effect thereof seems to demonstrate) that for want of the right gage
of Christian prudence to steer and regulate their unguided zeal, which they
have indeed toward God, but not according to knowledge; run from one error
into another, and sometimes perhaps leap out of the pan into the fire; that I
say not out of Gods blessing into the warm sun; that like the foolish horse
that has no understanding, blench into the pit to fly from the fluttering of
a bird in the hedge, who may well be compared with Dionysius Alexandrinus, unto
an unskilful Gardener, or dresser of an Orchard, who when he finds a crooked
plant, instead of straitening it, bends it as much clean on the other side; or
unto some unexperienced Physicians, who to cure the patient of an Ague, or some
cold disease, by over-strong Physic, begets a fever in the stead of it,
and does not so much remedy as change the malady. They are very much for
Reformation, and it is not to be denied but they light upon some things that
are fit for animadversions, but whilst they pull up the tears they pluck up
the wheat with them. They abhominate superstition, and therein they do well,
but in the overmuch abandoning that, they fall into the opposite mischief, and
run into profanesse. They are much (they say) for the clearing of the Truth,
for the purity of Worship, for the power of Godliness (a name that is of late
given I fear unto a mystery of iniquity) but they are so over-busie in
snuffing the light to clear it, that they often times put it clean out; in
striving for Purity they justle out Order and Decency.

And for those that are of a more moderate and Christian spirit than to deny a
truth or reject a good usage, because one that is esteemed an Adversary
embraces it, or to think every glimmering appearance of some small mistake in
the one, or miscarriage in the other, a sufficient ground to dissolve those
golden Chains of Unity, and Charity, which are the Ornaments of the Spouse of
Christ, and the badges of true Disciples; The furious and unguided Zeal of
those that feel no other heats but of self-love, and hatred of all others that
will not allow them as Gods to set up their Throne of infalibillity in the
consciences of other men, is presently ready to cry down such honest and
peaceable men to be worse than Heretics. Vt qui Christum and Belialinter se
reconciliare velint; as if they went about (as a learned Author speaks) to
reconcile God and Belial, and to make up a match between Truth and Falsehood.
They look upon such not as Stars but as Meteors, hanging in the middle
Region of the Air, and allot unto them no other portion than sometimes is
observed to befall those that dwell in the middle story of an house, digni
propterea, qui inferiorum faetorem hauriant and a superioribus lotio
perfundantur; worthy to be molested both with the droppings of unsavory
excrements from above, and with the stench of smoke and ordures from beneath.
Thus whilst men state their Religion, not so much in the embracement of the
truth, or in the sincere obedience unto God, as in the abomination of one
another, True Devotion and Piety is murdered betwixt them in the quarrel, and
that of a good Father is proved too true amongst us, Dum alter alteri anathema
esse cepit prope nemo Christi est; whilst we curse and anathematize one another
in the bitterness of opposition, we are on all sides too much anathematized
from Christ for want of Charity and true Devotion.

An evil than which I know not any under which the Church of Christ has more
labored; nor have I observed any Stratagem in all the policy of Satan,
whereby he has more perniciously either hindered the good, or promoted the
ruin of the Church, than is this spirit of opposition, and contradiction,
setting up of sides, and dividing one against another by odious names, and
appellations; intruding our selves, or others whom we admire, into the Throne
of Christ and allowing no other scale to measure Truth or Falshod by, but the
dictates of our own judgments, fancies, or affections, and theirs. And
thrusting all men into the bottomless pit of hell, by our presumptuous and
uncharitable censures, that depart, though but in some small and inconsiderable
matters from their or our magisteriall impositions: whereby not only many
falsehoods are put upon the world instead of truths, obtaining admission, not by
any true price or value that is in themselves, but by the credit of their
Authors with us, or the affections that are borne unto them, whose sentences we
take for authentical rules, without any due trial by the divine Word: but
also many Truths are rejected by the prejudice that men have entertained
against those that offer them, and those truths which are received upon such
terms rendered not very much better than falsehoods unto the souls of them that
do so admit them, whilst they entertain them upon such false grounds, as upon
the mere reputation of humane judgments, and upon the request of our partial
affections; for if I embrace a Doctrine never so wholesome, or practice a duty
neverso Pious or Religious in it self, yet if I do it, either in admiration
of one man or side, or in opposition to another, and not out of any due regard
unto the rule of God, either in Scripture or sound Reason; I therein worship
man, malice, or my self, and not God: for he must needs be the owner of my
worship, in whom I place the ultimate resolution of my judgment in matter of
Truth, or of my affection in matter of Duty: and whilst we ground not upon God,
but upon the errable and fallible opinions of men or sects therein, it is upon
the matter but merely by chance that we hit upon that which is in it self
right, and so a good building falls upon our heads for want of a right
foundation: Yea, I think. I need not much fear to say, That he is in as good
if not in a much better case, that cleaves to an erroneous opinion or
practice, so it be not of too pernicious a nature, with a heart unengaged to
sides and Factions, or to self-love and opinion, but exercised in sincere and
earnest enquiry after those divine and sure evidences which God has ordained
to be our guides, and with a strong persuasion that he has right ground from
thence; than he that receives a Truth out of a factious mind, either out of
admiration of one, or abomination of another, or inordinate love unto
himself; for as it is not enough to make us accepted with Christ, to receive a
Prophet, unless we receive him in the name of a Prophet: So neither is it
accepted with God for us to receive a divine truth, unless we receive it as a
divine Truth: making God and not men, nor any parts that are in them, or any
affections we bear to them, the reason of our acceptance of them, or
submission unto them; giving up our judgments, and prostrating all our
affections at the Throne of his infallible Divinity, and not unto any humane
excellencies or endearements; nor to the self conceit of our own judgments,
or to the partial defense of our own opinions, or received practices, or to
the desire of victory over others; much less to the hellish tribunal of
malice and enmity against others, of whom we have entertained an evil conceit
in our hearts: Nor yet is this all the mischief that Satan works by this
hellish engine of partiality and opposition, to impose falsehood upon us:
exclude us from embracing the Truth: or enervating the virtue of those Truths
which we receive upon such grounds, and depriving us of the benefit and comfort
thereof, and of the duties which they direct us unto: But herein lies one great
masterpiece of the Prince of division, to keep up divisions and contentions
in the Church: it lies diametrally oposite unto Peace and Charity, and is the
very bellows of the devil to blow the flame, and the fueller to nourish and
maintain the fires of perpetual quarrels and contentions among people. A
means to keep the wounds of that body still bleeding and ranckled, there being
scarce any more importunate factour of strife, than the Tyrannical imposition
of our own opinions for laws upon other men's consciences, whilst that
deplorable state of the Church of God, which was lamented by Saint Basil, as an
evil of too much growth in those times, seems to have acquired a more perfect
malignity amongst us. (...) Neque Sacrae jam literae tantum valent, ut
intercessio haru^ admittatur: Neque tradita ab Apostolis controversias horu^
inter ipsos dijudicare possunt, unus est inimicitiae terminus, ea loqui quae
delectationem habeant, and inimicitiaru^ satis praeclara causa, non convenire
sententiae: firmior autem reperitur ad seditionis secietatem omni conjuratione,
sola errati similitudo. It needs no other translation, then the sad and
pernicious practice of our time and Nation, does daily make of it, wherein we
are so far engaged by the evil spirit of contradiction, in the maintenance
of quarrels against one another, that we may preserve the credit of our sides,
our own judgments and interests, and our malice and uncharitable dispositions
against others. That the holy Scriptures are not allowed to be of such force as
to be admitted for intercessours or arbitratours betwixt us: Nor do we suffer
our controversies to be decided by those things which have been delivered unto
us from the Apostles, no end of our strifes but to sacrifice the Truth unto the
pleasures of those that oppose it, whilst that does not please us which is
true, but that only is allowed to be true which pleases us. And it is held for
a laudable and specious cause of enmity, if any man will not subscribe unto our
sentence. And compliance in the same error, is become a greater security to
associate men in the contrivance and practice of sedition, than any conjuration
or conspiracy whatsoever. How many controversies had been prevented, and how
many more had bin long since ended amongst us, could we but have bin brought on
all sides to a fair and sincere compromise to stand to the award of the Spirit
of God in the holy Scriptures, and sound reason agreeable to the Scriptures,
and not to have reserved an appeal from thence (in our hearts and judgments at
least) unto the usurping umpirage of this spirit of partiality and opposition?
How had the names of Papists, and Protestants, and Puritans, of Lutherans, and
Calvinists, and those new make-bates of Roundheads, and Cavalieres, and
Malignants bin either long ago forgotten, or else never known amongst us, were
it not for this humor of siding and contradiction against one another? I
speak it from my heart, and not without grief to think of it, and I wish it
might be well considered by all others. I do not find when I look upon the
state of the quarrels that are amongst us, that they are held up near so much
by any difficulty or want of cleerenesse, either in the rules of Scripture and
reason which concern them, or want of light in men's judgments to apprehend
what they declare therein, as by that partiality of heart which men bear
either to themselves, or some whom they adhere to, and by the prejudice and
opposition against others, whom they are resolved to contend with be it right
or wrong, whereby they have enslaved their own souls unto error, contention
being their Jailer; whilst men are not so much contentious because they err,
as they do err because they are contentious. So true is that which Charron
has in his book of wisdom; Chacun prend plaisir de se tromper; Every man
makes it his sport to deceive himself. And yet they are not satisfied with
this unless they may deceave others too, and play the decoies of their Master
to draw others into his net with them.

Hence it is, that there are daily amongst us such tumultuous and irrational
crying down of most clear and evident Truths, without so much as allowing them
a fair trial, or a liberty to speak for themselves.

Hence it is that there is such headlong condemnation of righteous Doctrines,
and practices, with no better arguments than such as the Jews used against our
Savior before Pylate. If any part of Christian Doctrine or duty seems to lie
opposite unto humor, and those evil ends which men have proposed to
themselves, then presently the cry is, Crucifige, Crucifige, crucify it,
crucify it, and if any ask why? and what evil that Truth has done? They
have no more to say many times than they had than against Christ, John 18. who
when Pylate asked them for their accusation, instead of objecting any crime
against him, cry out, If he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered
him up unto thee; As if it were crime enough to condemn Christ Jesus himself,
that he had the foolish people for his Adverfaries; A way of proceeding, that I
fear has left too much blood upon the score of this Nation in these times:
viderit populus, and viderit Pilatus; Let the people, and the Pilates both
look to it. So if the true and ancient Doctrine of Obedience, and of Suffering
and bearing the Cross, in case of Tyranny or persecution, one of the most
proper notes and tokens of the Christian Church and Profession, which is so
gloriously recorded in the blood of so many Martyrs, come but in the way: What
other cry is there with some in these days, but Crucifige, Crucifige, Crucify
it, Crucify it? They are ready to Crucify the Cross it self, and those that
teach them any such foolish Doctrine as to submit to it: But then if they be
asked as the Jews were, Why, what evil has that Doctrine or the Preachers of
it done? or, What accusation bring ye against them? it is enough that they
dislike them, and that they are not for their turns.

And in like manner they deal with other advices and instructions which are
offered to them, concerning Reverence, Order, and Decency in Gods Worship, etc.

And this evil has so far possessed the Pulpits, and Presses in our times,
that instead of being for what they were ordained, the great gates for the
entrance of true and sincere knowledge into the Public: They are become the
marts of division and strife, the Channels and common gutters to convey the
filthy and infectious ordures of vile contumelies and reproaches, not away from
us, but amongst us, to the poisoning of the very air of this whole Climate,
and to the breeding and spreading of contagious Plagues throughout the whole
Region of this Kingdom; whilst they (whose office is to instruct the people)
have forgottten the business of their Master, which is to be the dispensers of
food unto his family in due season, and like that evil servant in the Gospel,
Math. 24.48, 49. seem to say in their hearts, The Lord delayeth his coming,
and fall to beating of their fellow servants, thrusting them out of their
employments and possessions, as if that terrible threat of the great Judge were
but a mere mormo, or Bugbeare to fright children with, but they will one day
find it to be true; The Lord of those servants will come in a day when they
look not for him, and in an hour that they are not ware of, and shall cut
them asunder, and divide them their portion with the hipocrites, There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

It was a sad account that one gives of the miscarriages of this kind in his
time; Invitus dico and tamen dicere coger, Ecclesiarum cat hedras hodie multis
in locis pro rabularu^ causidicorumque, and hujus generis demagogoru^ rostris
haberi, ex quibus ij quibus statio haec concredita est Satyrus suas in
imaginatos adversarios declamitant. I am loath to speak it, but I am compelled
to speak it; That the Chaires of the Churches are in many places at this day
esteemed for the Pulpits of Raylers, Cause-drivers, and such like side-maken
amongst the people, out of which they unto whom this station is committed,
declaime their Satyrs against those whom they imagine their adversaries.

To which we may add what he complains of afterward Pro salubri alimento
quod familia Christi apponere debebant, auditorum plausum and fav^re^ captant
fictaeque and comp^sit^ orationis lenocinio. ( Petrus (...), diceret)
fluctuantis populi motum and pruritum ad suaslibidines torquent, and circum
agitant. Hoc igitur boni deplorare, corrigere autem preter Deum nemo poterit.
Instead of that wholesome nourishment which they should administer unto the
household of Christ, they hunt after the applause and favor of their Auditors,
and with the alluring dresses of their sophisticated language, or as St Peter
has it, with fained, or plaistred words, (fair in show, but durty and filthy
in substance) they turn and ^osse the itching and moveable people at their
own lusts: this good men may, and ought to deplore, but God only can correct
and amend, which God grant of his great mercy. That the houses of God may be no
more turned into brothels by committing adultery with the souls of the people;
That they that have the manage of holy works in those places, may remember
whose cause it is that they have in hand: that they are not to woe for
themselves, but for the Bridegroom, which is Christ Jesus, whose servants they
are, to make ready and adorn his Spouse (which is his Church) against the
wedding; That they may not seek to gain the applauses of the people unto
themselves, which are too often made the hire of vanity and corrupt Doctrine,
but to gain the souls of the people unto Christ. To conclude, that they may
not preach themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and themselves the Churches
servants for Jesus sake. And it were much to be wished, that the nursery of
this evil affection in some Ministers were removed, by changing those
theatricall applauses of the people; (which if rightly valued, are rather the
accusations and reproaches of the Ministry, and too suspicious a symptom, that
that work is not performed with that gravity and severity that it ought to be,
especially in such times as these) into sighs and tears, and sobs of Godly
sorrow for their sins, and into the cheerful concurrency of the votes of the
people to the petitions and praises that are offered up unto God, But it is a
sign of no healthful constitution in the Congregations of the people, when
their periodicall hummes of the Minister are louder then the Amens of their
Prayers and Thankesgivings unto God. This, and not that, is the thu^der of the
Church wherein s^e struck and battered in piece^ the adversaries of the Truth^
That would throw down the Towers of Satan and his i^struments: Those Babels
of confusion that are setting up amongst us. That being accompanied with the
lightening (...) a fervent devotion, would break the cloud of the displeasure
of the Almighty, and make the fruitful showers of his mercies flow down upon
us. Blessed is the people that know this joyful sound.

And yet the faults we have spoken of might be the better borne with, were they
not accompanied with more (and those of no mean depravation) in the Ministry of
the Word.

Such is the too much unworthy and effeminate pusillanimity, and extreme
lukewarmenesse, that is found in too many in this age, who dare not reprove
prosperous sins, that have betrayed the Cause of God, his Church, and his
Anointed, for fear of the frowns of men: Such whose discretion has devoured
their devotion, that cry out, it is no time now to preach against such sins,
because they are wickednesses in high places, that could talk much and
earnestly against Rebellion, in an Assembly of Loyal men, in those Cities and
places (whilst there were any) where Rebellion dwelt not; or in those Times
when sedition was in a lower condition; But in these times, and in those
places, when and where those sins are in their power and glory, they cry it
is wisdom, and think it no impiety to hold their peace, as if a Physician
should say, he is discharged from the necessity of giving Physic, because the
patient is very sick, and stands in great need of it, forgetting that the
works of the Ministry are to be gaged not by the interests of our safety, but
of Gods glory, and our duty to him and his people, and that however we may
please our selves with some present ease that we find upon our shoulders, yet
that security will prove dear bought in the end, that we have purchased by
suffering and conniving at the spoil of Truth and Righteousness, and although
this may go for prudence amongst men, yet it will be found Treachery and
Treason in the account of God. Oh how have we forgotten those severe and
peremptory rules of the Almighty, so earnestly exacting the discharge of our
consciences in this duty. See Ezekiel. 33.8, If thou do not speak to warn the
wicked from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thine hand.

How have we forgotten those woes of the holy Scripture, which are threatened
against fearful hearts, and faint hands, See Revel. 21.8. See it and tremble.

Do we fear the menaces of men, and do we not fear the menaces of God? Home
minat^r mortem, and metuis, and contramiscis: Deus gehennam minatur and
contemnis; Man that shall die himself, and perhaps before he has done
threatening, menaceth death if thou speak: and thou fear and shakest: God
threatens thee with hell if thou be silent, and thou contemnest it; and yet
God can defend thee from the threatening of man, but man cannot defend thee from
the threatening of God. If God be with us who can be against us? But, if God
will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers must stoop under him.

Oh, I beseech you consider this in time, you whom God has honored so highly,
as to be made the Advocates of his truth, you that are the sollicitours, and
the Atournies of the King of Kings, Impeach these Traiterous Iniquities boldly,
and faithfully: and do not become Traitors your selves, in becoming accessory
to those horrid impieties whereby your Lord and Master is dishonored in these
times; You that are the Ambassadors of peace, be not afraid to proclaim war
against those that are enemies unto Peace; You that are the Factors of the God
of heaven, buy the Truth and sell it not, buy it though you pay your own blood
for it, God will account it again unto you: He that will save his life, shall
lose it, but he that will lose his life for my sake shall save it. Sell it not,
no not for the greatest preferments, not for freedom, nor for life it self.
Oh let us nor be so vile as to keep the door whilst the devil and wicked men
commit fornication together in the most horrid iniquities. Let us not see the
name of God dishonored, the Church of Christ demolished, and ruinated, the
Lords Anointed abused, imprisoned, and trampled upon, and sit still and say
nothing, as if we were not at all concerned in it, or as if all were well,
because you enjoy your liberties, your revenues, whilst your Sovereign is in
bondage, poverty, and persecution; me thinks we should be even ashamed of our
freedom almost whilst he suffers such strait imprisonment for us; what shall I
say to this? I will say no more, but wish that we may remember the curse of
Eli, and take heed of it; I have told him (says God) that I will judge his
house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows (not for the iniquity which
he had done) because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.
And yet Ely was not altogether wanting in the business, he did reprove his
sons after a manner, but it was too gently for such sins, he was too
ceremonious and complementall with their iniquities, 1 Samuel 2.24. Nay my Sons,
for it is no good report that I hear, etc. And yet this would not serve to
free him from the judgment; And shall we think to escape if we sit and say
nothing, whilst the most horrid iniquities ate acted and justified amongst us?

Add unto these, that great neglect under which this Church of ours does so
miserably groan; and which is the great fountain both of our corruptions and
distractions; and those other bloody streams of sedition, confusion, and
oppression in this Nation: The laying aside of that most necessary kind of
instruction by Catechism, whereby the foundations of Christian Piety and
Righteousness should be laid in the hearts of children and young disciples: A
method practiced by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who held
it a duty in themselves, and by their authentical example have commended it
unto the Church; to administer first this milk unto children, that they might
thereby be prepared and fitted for the stronger meat of more perfect knowledge.
The want whereof has proved most unhealthfull unto the Congregations. Having
proved that saying of Master Calvin too true, that he has in an Epistle of his
unto the Protector of England: That without the use of a set-forme of
Catechism, it is not possible for a Church to consist. If any ask the
question how it comes to pass, that the building of Christian doctrine and
practice is of so sinking and tottering a condition in these days? And that
the solid and true knowledge of God and Christ Jesus (which is eternal life)
is turned into so many ayry and foolish fancies and imaginations with the
people? Or if any shall enquire from whence it proceeds, that there are so many
contentions and divisions, such a multitude of foolish and mad conceits and
apprehensions; such devilish heresies, and horrid blasphemies; such ignorance
of Christian duties, and such general counter-practise thereunto in this
Kingdom? If any shall expostulate why the light of Christianity is grown so
dim among us, that there is such a black cloud, (that I say not an Eclipse)
of the Sun of divine and heavenly illumination: That faith is so weak,
devotion and charity so cold, zeal so intemperate and unguided, our wisdom
so earthly, sensual and devilish? why obedience to God and the Magistrate so
trampled on? If any shall wonder, as they justly and sadly may, why under the
bare name of a Christian profession, which is a profession of mercy and
meekness, of righteousness and humility, of purity and patience under the
Cross: There walks such horrid, and more than Turkish and Heathenish cruelty
and barbarousnesse; why such injustice and fraudulency in our trades and
dealings, such intolerable haughtiness of spirit, such ambition, spiritual
pride, and contempt of one another, such Pharisaicall boasting, such Epicurean
luxury, intemperance and uncleanness, such envy, hatred, murmuring and
revengefulnesse? Or if it shall be examined, why all Religion is so much
monopolized by the tongue and the ear, and so little a share left unto the
heart? Why men are so sick of a (...), or canine appetite: So greedy after
Sermons, and yet so fruitless in the use of them? why they devour so much
spiritual food, and yet after all are like Pharaohs lean Kine, lean and
ill-favored as before? why such hypocritical fasting, such dull and
uneffectuall praying, etc. One of the most general answers that I know how to
give unto these and all other pensive and mournful quaeries that our evil and
ruinous condition may prompt us unto, is this: That the people of the Land have
not been catechized as they ought: That they have not been instructed in the
first grounds and principles of sacred Doctrine: That they are thereby become
destitute of the knowledge of God, of his greatness, of his goodness, of
their great and indissoluble obligations unto him, as they are his creatures,
and his purchase, of the holy Vow and Covenant that they have entered into in
their Baptism; of the privileges of a Christian, and the duties that hang
upon them; Of the great necessity and comfort of obedience and holiness; Of
the nature and meaning of the divine Laws, and the holy rules of Christianity;
Of the propriety and purity of divine worship; Of the true characters of holy
and Christian love; Of the necessary matter and object of faith, and of the
inseparable connection thereof with good works and holiness of life: Of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come: Of the mysteries of the
Trinity and Incarnation: Of the Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ:
Of his Natures and his Offices: Of the Spirit of God, and his gifts, and
operations: Of the Essence, unity, order and power of Gods Church: Of the
communion of Saints with Christ by faith, as members of that body of which he
is the Head, and with one another by Christian charity in Christ, and the
operations thereof toward one another, as fellow members of one another in
him: Of the glorious fruits of this holy fellowship and communion with Christ:
The pardon of sin: The Resurrection of the Body, and everlasting life and
salvation, etc. In stead whereof, the foolish and unsteady curious
impertinents, and affectatours of science falsty so called, have like the
prodigal child, or like the Swine, sed upon the husks of empty speculations,
or upon the dung and dross of gross Errors, and carnal doctrines; and have
rendered themselves of that evil complexion which the Apostle deciphereth in
the first Epistle to Timothy, the sixth chapter, and the fourth and fifth
verses: Proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmises, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, supposing that
gain is godliness; forgetting the wholesome advice of Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 2.14.
Strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers; And
that at the 16, verse of the same Chapter, etc. Shun profane and vain
babbling, for they will increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will
eat as does a canker; And that of the 22, and 23. verses, Follow
righteousness faith, charity, peace with them that call on the Lord out of a
pure heart; but foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do
gender strifes: Or else not minding that elegant and excellent rule of the same
Apostle, Romans 12.3. (...).

They have strained their weak and feeble wits out of joint, by reaching at
the knowledge which was neither necessary for them, nor comprehensible by them;
and if they have by chance, (more than skill) perhaps light upon things in
themselves true and wholesome, yet in default of that growth, and age, and manly
strength of Christianity which they should have arrived unto through the
knowledge of the first principles, as the spirit of God leads on, Heb. 6.1.
That food otherwise sound and healthful, yet for want of ability of digestion,
breeds ill humors, and noxious qualities, and pernicious diseases in them,
whilst they have refused to stand to that wise dispensation of the Author to
the Hebrews, Chap. 5. verse 13, 14. (...) For every one that uses milk is
unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe; but strong meat
belongs unto them that are of full age, (or to them that are perfect) even
those who by reason of use (or habit) have their senses exercised for the
discerning of good and evil: And so that is fulfilled in them, which was
spoken of the Gentiles by Saint Paul, Romans 1.21, 22. (...). They became vain
in their ratiocinations, and their foolish heart was darkened, professing
themselves to be wise they became fools, like weak and feeble eyes looking
upon the Sun, or some glorious and splendid object, above the passibility of
the sense, they have blinded themselves with too bold atttempts upon that light
which they are not able to bear, not considering that modesty and humility is
the best gate to bring in knowledge into the soul, and that there is scarce
any more incurable bane unto agents and enterprises than the attempting of
things that are above the strength of the undertakers; From this it has come
to pass, that this age of ours has brought forth such monstrous and frantic
opinions; That the foolish and presumptuous seekers of our times have vented
such mad and blasphemous questions, like that which was once with great
acuteness and wisdom, as the Author thereof seemed to think, proposed to my
self, whether it were lawful to desire God to forgive us our sins or no?

And indeed how can it be otherwise, but that many maladies both in judgment
and affection, and practice, which is the child of these, should proceed from
such a miscarriage in diet, since it is of great consequence unto health; not
only that the food should be of good substance in it self, but that it should
be proper and fit for the nature and constitution of the body that receives it.

If all Parents should give unto their Infant children, Beef and Bacon,
instead of the breast, and other such like sustenance which is apt for the
weakness of that age: it were the ready way to the destrustion of mankind.

The blame of this mischief lies upon more than one sort of people; The
carelessness of Magistrates, whose charge it is to see that things be rightly
managed in the Church, as well as to look to the peace and government of the
State, and that should make that the principal work of their Authority and
wisdom.

The negligence of Ministers, or which may be too probably suspected, a
vainglorious humor in them, that affects nothing but that that brings
honor and applause unto themselves, by the ostentation of their parts and
gifts, and has taught too many of them to despise this and other prescribed
duties of the Church, and to look upon it as a thing below their wisdom and
excellency to have to do with children, to descend to their weak capacities,
and to lead them on in that easy rode of instruction, in the foundamentall
points.

The intolerable improvidence of Parents, and Masters of Families, and their
forgetfulness of that cure of souls which they have in this particular over
their Families, and of the great obligation that lies upon them for the
performance of this duty to their Children and Servants by themselves, and to
send them at fit times to the Ministers for the bringing up of them in Religion
and Piety; that they may say with good Joshua, I and my house will serve the
Lord; whereby they become answerable unto God for the souls of their Children
and Household, whilst they take care indeed for their bodies and estates, but
reckon not at all what becomes of their souls, whether they go to heaven or
to hell.

The miscarriage of Schoolmasters, whose prime and most profitable business it
should be at some set and convenient times frequently and orderly to initiate
their Scholars, and to lead them on in this way of Christian knowledge, and
to teach them Piety as well as other Learning; That they may know Christ Jesus
and him Crucified, without which all other Rudiments will prove barren and
fruitless, yea, even hurtful unto them, and will teach them only to be wise
to do evil.

And lastly, the stubbornness of many children, servants, and others, that
stand in need of this instruction, and for want of it incur the danger of the
damnation of their souls, and yet will by no means submit thereunto: Though
invited and called upon, accounting it their dishonor, and an unnecessary
slavery. Oh how soon do we grow too old, and too wise to go to Heaven! The
Lord grant that they may all seek to reform it. That this so necessary and
useful an Ordinance may be restored into credit and practice again amongst
us. The most ready way to recover the truth and unity of doctrine, the
firmness of faith, the purity of worship, and to reform the abuses and
miscarriages of life and conversation in this our lapsed and depraved Nation.
Yea, although it is my hearty desire that the preaching of the word of God, in
the concionary way, in doctrinall discourses, Scripture-expositions,
declamatory exhortations unto virtue and holiness, and dehortations from
sin, may be more and more encouraged and promoted amongst us: And am not at
all of the opinion of those men (of which side soever they are) that cry down
preaching of the Word in that kind, as if it were the cause of more evil than
good amongst a people; because too many have made a perverse and corrupt use
thereof, to the serving of their own or others unsanctified ends, and to the
raising of factious and seditious motions in the Body of the Church and State,)
a mischief that lies full sore upon our shoulders at this very time,) and yet
of no such force as to give us a warrant to desire the abolition thereof from
amongst us. For this were to fall into the error of the Papists, who upon the
like pretense have locked up the Scriptures in unknown tongues from the
people, and prohibited them the liberty of the reading of them; because as it
is too true (though not of all those upon whom the Church of Rome would fix
the charge thereof) That many through presumptuous ignorance, and resting too
much upon their own judgments, and despising those guides which God has
appointed for their help to lead them on safely, and keep them from drowning in
those depths: And perhaps many more through wilful perverseness, have drawn
poison from that honey, and by an ill composition, and worse application of
those excellent drugges that are there laid up and ordained by God for the
health of our souls, have procured diseases, and death both unto themselves
and others. This were to be as unjust and unreasonable as some others (that
walk under a better title) in these times, that can find no other way of
Reformation, than like that foolish Vine-dresser, that cut up the Vines by the
roots in stead of pruning them; to pull up the Trees of Government in Church
and State, Root and Branch, because some boughs or spriggs thereof were
unfruitful or corrupted. I know intemperance is a great evil, and has proved
very pernicious, both unto the bodies and souls of men: And yet if any should
advise the Husbandman not to sow his ground, or the householder not to provide
meat and drink for his family, or any other, absolutely to forgo the use of
those creatures for fear of abusing them; It would be a hard matter to tell
which were the wiser, the giver or the taker of such counsel. Many Doctors
perhaps through carelessness or ignorance become the greatest diseases of their
Patients: And natural bodies as well as politic prove oftentimes to be
sicker of their Physicians than of their maladies: And yet he were no good
Physician, that would persuade men to cure themselves by abolishing the use of
the Physician and of medicine. It is the express command of the Spirit of God,
and no pretenses of humane wisdom must dissolve the force of it: Preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and doctrine. Yea there is not only a bare command, but a severe
charge and adjuration applied to Timothy by the Apostle to that purpose: I
charge thee before God (says he) and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and dead at his appearing and his Kingdom. Preach the Word, etc.
And dare any say that this was for Timothy only, and not for all those that are
called to the like office in the Church? As well they may go about to make
void the Churches interest in the Gospel of St Luke, because it was dedicated
to Theophilus; or deforce the Universal Authority of the Epistles of Saint
Paul, because the first was written to the Romans, the second and third to the
Corinthians, etc. As if the People of England were not bound to submit to the
King as Supreme, because England is not in the Title of that Epistle of St
Peter, where this Precept is Recorded, but that it is directed to the strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia; nay,
there is no respect of persons with God. Wheresoever any meet in their
callings, they must meet in duties as they do meet in obligations. Therefore I
say again, I cannot, I dare not be of their opinion, that would upon any
pretenses pull down the Pulpits, or strike them dumb to prevent mischiefs;
and whilst God shall allow me liberty, and strength, and ability of
performance, I shall always hold it my duty to be exercised in that work, and
so much my duty, that I shall take no humane prohibitions to be my discharge,
though Kings, or Parliaments, or both join together therein. And I wish there
had been, and were still more of my mind in this, remembering that answer that
the Apostles returned unto the inhibition of the Rulers of the Jews, that
forbad them to speak at all, or teach in the name of Jesus, which I am
resolved shall ferve my turn against any of the like sort. Whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God judge ye. Act.
4.19. And yet though I have made all this digression to satisfy my Reader of
the uprightness of my judgment and desires in this particular, I am not
afraid to profess, that if the case were so, that we must needs part with one
of them, it were better and safer for a Church to want any other kind of
instruction, than to be deprived of the use of Catechism, which contains the
Principles of all Christian Doctrine; for where this is well managed, there can
nothing be wanting in matter of knowledge that is absolutely necessary to
salvation; so that this alone, where no more is to be had, might serve the
turn to steer us unto heaven; and besides he that has the principles well
settled, cannot but be made master thereby of many of the conclusions that flow
from them. These Fountains will run and produce their streams: These seeds
will grow and bring forth their flowers and their fruits: though they have no
other manure than our own private meditations. But where principles are not
settled, the conclusions that are taught without them are neither like to be
soundly apprehended, nor firmly embraced, where the fountains are not opened,
whatsoever showers may fall, or whatsoever store of water may be cast in, it
will hardly produce a constant current of divine knowledge, and Christian
practice in the soul; where the Plant wants Root, it will have no lasting
growth or fruit. Nay, I will venture, one step farther, and I am ready to wish,
that we knew no more than Catechism, than the mere necessary Principles, so
that all the Christian name were united in this, rather than for want of
holding this Head, for want of sticking to this Foundation, there should be so
many quarrels and contentions amongst us as there are, to the so great
scandal and reproach of Christianity. Pardon me if I forget the bounds of my
discourse, so far as not to forbear when I have been in contemplation of
these diseases, to add some hearty, though poor consultations about their
remedies.

Had I the art of mournful Rhetoric I might anatomize and dissect many more
members of this sad body of our desolations in matter of Religion; Consider I
beseech you, how the holy Sacraments those great Seals of the King of Kings
are defaced, abused, and rejected from amongst us. How the Sacrament of
Baptism is denied by some unto the Children of Christians, who like
presumptuous Disciples take upon them without commission, to rebuke those that
bring these little ones unto Christ in that ordinance; and that after the
promulgation of that merciful (permittite) of Christ Jesus: Suffer little
children to come unto me and forbid them not, for to such belongs the
Kingdom of God.

How the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is even utterly left off and cast away
as a thing unnecessary or rather pernicious, in too too many places of this
Land. The frequent use whereof, as it was an excellent Fountain of comfort to
distressed souls that hunger and thirst after spiritual refreshings in Christ
Jesus, and a powerful exacter of self examination, than which there is scarce
any thing more conducing to the restraining of the liberty of sin, or the
keeping up and reenforcing of decaying duties in us, so the neglect thereof
(under what pretenses soever of strictness it is brought in by those
Pharisaicall Spirits that have taken the Chair in times, who shut up the
Kingdom of heaven against men, and neither go in themselves, nor suffer those
that are entering to go in. Math. 23.13.) yet if the evil effects of it be
but well observed, and rightly weighed, will be found (I doubt) to be one of
the maine Stratagems of Satan to widen the gate, and enlarge the way that
leads to destruction and damnation, and to keep men from being disturbed or
awaked from their sinful courses. I cannot forbear me thinks to put one
question here, and wish all those that are concerned in it, to make a true and
unfeigned answer to their own consciences, for they shall whether they will or
no one day unto God, whether the abolition of this Sacrament under the pretense
of strictness, be not joyfully made use of by too many to serve their turns,
who are entered and engaged into those known sinful courses; those bloody,
unjust, and seditious designs, which they know too well if persisted in, (and
I fear they are too far gone to return) must needs make this holy Sacrament
unto them, nothing but the Seal of their own damnation. But they will find
the deeds between Satan and them authentical enough, without that Seal, and
it will afford them no such advantage as they do perhaps dream of; for he that
refuses the Sacrament because he will be unworthy of it, is in little better
condition, than he that receives it unworthily: At least I am sure, if the
latter crucifies Christ, the former sels him, and makes him the price of his
sinful courses, since he will rather reject Communion with Christ, than with
his sins, and than I see not but both are guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, unless whilst we condemn him that abuses the Sacrament, we will
absolve him that despises it, or give an acquittance unto one that gives up
Christ Jesus, that the seditious murderer Barrab as may be delivered.

Ponder this well, and how to the so great an abolition of the holy Communion
is added (as another underminer of Religion) the casting out and
excommunicating of Excommunication it self out of this Church, whereby it is
come to pass that no way is left us to purge out the evil leaven from the
Congregations of the Almighty; so that the Incestuous Corinthians, and the
Sacrilegious Achans, the Rebellious Korahs, with their Dathans, and Abirams,
and the rest of the Rabble of Adulterers, Murderers, Blasphemers, etc. do not
only appear freely, but may take upon them without interruption, to rule
powerfully in the Assemblies; and how can that body think you continue in life
or health, that is neither allowed to receive things that are wholesome, nor to
purge out things that are noxious and hurtful, the two great means of
preservation, both in the body Natural and Ecclesiastical. All our
Congregations are become sick of an Iliaca passio as it were, or a miserere
mei, they purge not at all for the most part, or else at the wrong end, and in
the wrong matter: But I pray God this and other miscarriages, make not Christ
Excommunicate the whole Land.

What shall I say? Or, where shall I end? Imagine what you will or can almost,
to make a nation despicable, wretched, and unhappy in this kind we are now
speaking of, and see whether you can miss of it here in distressed England.

If an unworthy, unlearned, corrupted and depraved Ministry will do it. Would
it not wound a Marble heart to see that glorious assertion which did heretofore
so adorn and beautify the English Nation; (Irascatur mundus, saeviat demon,
stupor mundi clerus Anglicanus;) turned now into this, Rideat mundus illudat
demon, pudor mundi -- I will not speak it! my Pen shall not be guilty of
proclaiming so sad a story. Yet this I will say; Heretofore Learned, Grave, and
Reverend Bishops, Champions of the Lord, that by their victorious Pens
triumphed over the pride, and Sophistry of Babylon, and Conquered this Land of
ours to the possession of Truth, Ministers, and Deacons, approved, ordained,
furnished for the work, burning and shining lights, burning with zeal, shining
with knowledge, burning to consume the dross and stubble of Error and
Falshod; to wast the holds and habitations of Satan; shining to illustrate and
manifest the Truth: But now, Heu quantum mutatus ab illo? Boys, Novices,
Shoomakers, Cobblers, Women, what not! without any calling, but their own
Pride, and the peoples Folly to admit them: without any furniture, but their
own intolerable impudence to enable them; proh puder! proh dedecus! as if that
awful, holy, and weighty Function (enough almost to crack the shoulders of
Angels, which drove St Paul unto his (...) who is sufficient for these things,
that made the holy Prophet cry out in the consideration of the greatness of
the work: (...) Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak for I am a child,) were fit
for nothing but to lackey at the side of the mean employment of every
mechanicke, to be their sport and recreation from their more serious
occupations. But whilst every sort is thus ready to make a claim unto the
Ministerial abilities and privileges, that they may divide the spoil of the
Ministerial supportance among themselves, how few are there that think
themselves bound withal to the rules of Ministerial conversation and
holiness? That they should be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior,
given to hospitality, (...), apt to teach, as well in regard of ability and
furniture, as readiness of mind, in respect of skill, as well as of will to
do it, no doubt: Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre,
but patient, not a brawler or fighter, not covetous? or how do we find that
they do according to the Apostles rule, endeavor to approve themselves as the
Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings,
in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by
the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by
the Armor of righteousness, on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, as deceivers and yet true, as unknown and yet well known, as dying
and yet living, as chastened and not killed, as sorrowful yet always rejoicing,
as poor yet making many rich, etc. Blameless they are indeed in their own
eyes perhaps, puffed up (as the Pharisee) with the windy conceit of their own
holiness, canonizing themselves for the only Saints, to make room for whom,
poor Peter and Paul, James and John, yea, and Christ himself too must be put
out of the Calender of the Church, where they may succeed in time in red
Letters, in bloody Characters written with the gore of those thousands of
Christians, who have bin made sacrifices for the consecration of their
holiness. But whilst they style themselves Saints, I would they did not prove
themselves -- But the poor Publicans, whom they despise who stand afar off
knocking their breasts, with a Lord be merciful unto me a sinner! might go
home to their houses (if they would let them, and did not keep them from them
as the purchase of their piety) justified in the sight of God rather than they.
Indeed some of them may be called Saints, according to that Hebrew phrase,
whereby Jobs wife wished him to bless God, that is (as it is interpreted) to
curse him: or as the word (...) or (...) from (...) to be holy. Is used to
signify the impurest kind of polluted carnalists, that make a trade of the
vilest sins, or as Sacrum in the Latin is used sometimes for Sacrilegum, or
impium, as in the Poet, as I remember,

Ad quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames.
What wickedness was ever hatched within the depth of hell,
To which the holy love of Gold men's hearts does not compel?
That is the unholy love of riches and wealth, which is the root of all evil.

Vigilant they are indeed, but to do wickedness, like those in the Proverbs,
They sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away
unless they cause some to fall; They are watchful as Satan is watchful, who
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour.

If they be sober in regard of wine or strong drink, yet how many of them are
drunk with pride, intoxicated with the opinion of their carnal security? or
what is the cause there is such a vertiginous swimming in their brains, such
reeling too and fro in their unconstancy of opinions and resolutions? How come
they to think there is no Church but what turns round? or how few are there
that are sober in their judgments, in their opinions? nay, may it not be truly
said of many that are taken to be the wisest and the gravest amongst them, that
they do but cum ratione insanire, are but more soberly mad than others; for
what is it indeed, but mere madness, to think to set up the Throne of mercy
in blood? to call cruelty piety? and to profess Christianity in oppression? to
think to maintain a reputation of sanctity in themselves, by talking of
Religion and Godliness, whilst they are at the same time in their hearts
contriving, and acting in their outward performances, the great and horrid
designs of seditious wickedness; Ioabs in practice, as well as some of them
in profession, dealing with Christ as he with Amasa; at the same time he gives
him a fair salute with his tongue, Art thou in health my brother, and takes
him by the beard with his right hand to kiss him with his lips, and with his
left hand stabs him under the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground.
1 Samuel 20.9. And what did Judas do before he hanged himself? And what is it
else to give Christ good words, to have mouths full of Religion, and hearts
full of intolerable and diabolical pride, envy, malice, covetousness, and
ambition, yea, both hearts and hands full of Blood, Treason, Murder, and
Oppression; but is it not pure madness, to think that God will thus be
mocked; may they be as bold with him as they make with his Anointed? Or will
he take it well that they shall jeere him with a bended knee (but indeed this
is scarce allowed him) and a (...) That like those Soldiers in the 15. of
Mark. verse 18. They should put a crown of thorns upon his head, and then
salute him with a hail King of the Jews. That they should at once or in the
same breath smite him and spit upon him, by those persecutions and contempts,
those scorns and reproaches, that they cast upon his poor members, and yet
pretend to adore and worship him? Are we turned Lucians, Iulians, porphyries
instead of Christians? is this sobriety? Let them remember what Saint Paul
received from heaven, for all his strictness, (and yet he was in earnest,)
when he was exercised in the business of cruelty against Gods people, all his
zeal and mistaken holiness, could not secure him from that terrible voice,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Burning lips and a wicked heart, are like
a potsheard covered with silver dross; so says the wiseman, Pro. 26.23. pious
and devout discourses, are but drossie pigments or varnishes: Though we put
never so many of them upon earthy and wicked minds, God will be cheated with no
such ware; He has a touchstone that will quickly discover it, Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, says our Savior, shall enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven, and what
is the will of God? Even our Sanctification, that our hearts and our actions
should be religious as well as our tongues; And what is true Religion and
undefiled before God? To throw down the Thrones of Princes, that they may
without control devour and oppress their miserable Subjects? To lie and
dissemble with God, the King, and a whole Nation, to bring to pass their
wicked purposes, until they have got them, and then to cancel all their
promises and protestations? To make wicked Covenants to join one another
together in sedition, making the holy name of God the bond of their hellish and
black conspiracies, and then when their Idoll-interest prompts them to it, to
break them in pieces as Sampson did his new Cords, and to become open
confessors of Satan, (they may have the honor to be his Martyrs in time) by
professing atheistical policy, and as if oaths were of no force but to be the
servants of their designs, when they have done their work, and served their
turns with them, to turn them out of doors and send them packing, saying
that they are but old Almanacks. Is not Matchiavell think you that Christ which
they so talk of, that was never known till they taught him to the people: Iura
perjura. etc.

Let me make it out a little.

Swear and forswear, that so thou may obtain thine own desires;
That thou may reign, set all the world on fires.
Or is not that religious speech of him in Lucan, a great part of their new
Gospel which they bragg of:

Jus and fas multos faciunt ptolomaee nocentes.
Dat paenas laudata fides cum sustinet (inquit)
Quos fortuna premit, etc.
But let them take heed how they play too much with God. His Magazine is not
all spent, they have not disarmed him yet; He can when he pleases frown them
all in a moment from the greatest height of their success and glory (whereof
they do so boast) into the lowest depth of ruin and confusion: and let them
not think with the wicked man in the Psalm, that because God holds his peace
for a time, he is therefore even such a one as themselves. There will be a time
when he will reprove them, and set all their sins in order before their faces.

Or let the heathen Poet ask them one question:

An quia non fibris ovium Ergennaque jubente
Triste jaces lucis evitandumque Bidentall.
Idcirco stolidam praebet tibi vellere barbam
Jupiter?
Take it briefly thus.

Because thou art not thunder struck,
Will Jove give thee his beard to pluck.
Let not the forbearance of God, make them presume too much. Yea, let them
remember that pure Religion and undefiled before God is this; to visit the
fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world, Iam. 1. v: 27. To do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with God, Micha 6.8. If they be sober let them teach and
practice these things.

And is their scornful and insolent carriage, that good behavior that the
Apostle requires? Or is it hospitality to turn men out of their own houses,
in stead of receiving them into theirs, that they may imitate therein the piety
that was heretofore showed unto Chrish; The Son of man (says he) has not
where to lay his head. Math. 8.20. Is this the hospitality that the Apostle
requires? or are they apt to teach, in the Apostles sense, that are scarce
capable to learn? Or if we hold it absurd in Popery to say ignorance is the
mother of devotion, is it not almost as bad to hold ignorance to be the mother
of Instruction? Or when the blind leads the blind, do we think the ditch will
have nothing but water in it?

Are they no strikers, that make it their practice to smite with their tongue,
to curse the Ruler of the people, to speak evil of dignities? and have set up
the trade of smiting with their hands too, which they have so deeply embrued
in the Christian blood of their brethren, and are angry that men will not
admire it for a beauty in them: That God that would not suffer David to build
his Temple because he had had his hand in the sheding of blood, though it were
the blood of Gods enemies and Rebels, in just and lawful wars, will he
(think we) approve of such bloody builders as these, to set up his Church, or
to repair the decaies of his spiritual habitation? Are they not given to
filthy lucre, that to enrich themselves with other men's havings have sold
themselves to work wickedness, and have taken away the lives of the owners
thereof?

Will they say they are patient, which will not only suffer nothing for Gods
sake, but are enemies even to the very Doctrine of the Cross? Teaching men to
resist, and not to suffer, let our Savior say what he will; in stead of
practicing patience themselves, exercising the patience of others by their
persecutions; and whilst they forbid men to suffer under the lawful
Magistrate, they compel them to suffer under their unlawful Tyranny.

They do indeed well approve themselves the Ministers of God: In afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments. For though they
suffer them not themselves, yet they will be sure to act them upon others. In
tumults indeed they are excellent, but it is in raising them against the
lawful power of the Magistrate; which Saint Paul thought good to clear
himself of, as being no good mark of a good teacher of the Gospel, Acts
24.12, 18. and likes it not well it seems in the people, since he was afraid
to find it amongst the Corinthians as no mark of good Christians, 2 Cor.
12.20. I fear (says he) when I come, that I shall not find you such as I
would, and that I shall be found of you such as ye would not; lest there be
debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings,
tumults. Bring them to the touch in these and the rest of those marks of
Ministerial perfection which the Apostle sets down, and we shall easily
perceive that fulfilled in them, that Tertullian takes notice of in some of the
like spirit with them in his time, de monogam. c. 12. Quum extellimur and
inflamur adversus Clerum, tunc unum omnes sumus, tunc omnes Sacerdotes, quia
Sacerdotes nos Deo and Patri fecit. Quum ad peraequationem disciplina Sacer
dotatis provocamur, deponimus infulas, and impares sumus: When we are lifted up
and swelled against the Clergy, (says he, speaking in the person of some
insolent spirits in his Age) Than we are all one, then we are all Priests,
because he has made us Priests unto God and the Father; but when we are
stirred up to the height or perfection of Sacerdotall Discipline, then we lay
down our Priestly Ornaments, and then we are of an inferior rank.

Such were they of whom Saint. Cyprian not long after complained of in his
time, as a pest of the Church: Hi sunt, says he, qui se ultro apud temerarios
convenas, sine divina dispensatione praeficiunt, qui se prapositos sine ulla
ordinationis lege constituunt, qui nemine Episcopatum dante Episcopi sibi nomen
assumunt. These (says he) are they who take upon them of their own heads to
set up themselves, ever their rash and unadvised Congregations: That make
themselves Rulers and Leaders of the People without any legitimate Ordination,
etc. And these the good Father says, are Sedentes in pestilentiae Cathedra,
pestes and lues fidei, serpentis ore fallentes, and corrumpendae veritatis
artifices, venena lethalia linguis pestiferis evomentes, quorum sermo ut cancer
serpit, quoru^ tactus pectoribus and cordibus singulorum mortale virus
infundit. They sit in the pestilentiall chair, they are the very plagues and
murraines of the faith or Christian Profession, deceiving with their serpentine
language: Artificers of corrupting the truth, vomiting out deadly poisons with
their p^stiferous tongues, whose word does creep like a canker, whose touch
does infuse mortiferous venom into the breasts and hearts of all men.

And now we see how the devil acts over and over his old tricks among us in
these days.

But sure the song of the 4 Beasts and the 24 Elders, Rev. 5. is not so to be
understood, as if thereby all men indifferently were to be admitted to the
public Office of Ministry in the Church, because it is said there without
distinction, that Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto God; but it is
rather in regard of that access which all true Christians have obtained by
Christ Jesus unto the mercy-seate, according to that of St Paul, Romans 5. ver.
1, 2. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith into this grace
wherein we stand. Or that of Ephesians. 2.13. In Christ Jesus ye ^ho sometimes were
far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. And ver. 18. Through him we
have an access by one spirit unto the Father. As it was the privilege of
Priests heretofore in the Jewish service to draw nigh to God in the Temple: and
also in regard of those spiritual Sacrifices which every true Christian may
and does offer up unto God in and by Christ; 1 Pet. 2.9. Heb. 13.15. Unto this
Priesthood we are consecrated, not by the blood of our brethren, but by the
blood of Christ: Rev. 1.5. and Heb. 13.12. Not that the Spirit of God intended
at all hereby to confound the callings in the Church, or to give a general
Commission to all men that have insolency enough to presume upon their own
gifts, to take upon them the public office of instructing the people; for why
than did the Apostle ask that question; 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Prophets, are
all Apostles, are all Teachers, etc. Or why does the same Apostle give order
unto Timothy and Titus solemnly to ordain with imposition of hands? 1 Timothy
5.21. and Tit. 1.5. Why does he give them such severe rules and cautions for
the managing of the power of Ordination? That they should admit none but such
as were rightly qualified, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither
be partakers of other men's sins: and 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. etc. He sets down the
Catalogue of those conditions which they were to look for both in Ministers
and Deacons, and will have them be proved before they be suffered to exercise
that calling; which were all in vain and to no purpose if (notwithstanding all
those rules) it shall be still in the power of any to intrude themselves into
the execution of those Sacred Functions; it is not to be denied indeed, but it
is the duty of every Christian to make use of those occasions that God offers
to communicate that knowledge which they have unto others, in private
occasional exhortations, consolations, and reproves of sin; and it is not
only lawful but requisite for Parents and Masters, to instruct their Children
and Servants in the known and certain Principles of Christianity, and in the
duties that belong unto them, according to those rules which are clearly set
down by the Church of God and the Scripture. But it is a business of an
higher nature to undertake the public administration of Doctrine in the
Church, and of the interpretation of the Scriptures, unto which those inferior
works of private instruction and admonition, are subordinate, and whereby they
are to be guided. The people of God in the time of the Law, were to exercise
the like duties to their Families and their Neighbors, etc. And yet the
offices of the Priests and the Prophets were not thereby prohibited unto the
common people, but were still preserved proper and entire unto them, otherwise
the Spirit of God would not have said as he has done in the 2. of Malachi v.
7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his mouth. There is no scruple at all to be made but a Father or a Mother, a
Master or a Friend, may apply some known or ordinary medicines unto the
wounds, or diseases of their friends, or children, or dependants, or others;
but yet if every man should take upon him the practice of Physic or
Surgery, there would be more killed by Medicines, than by Diseases in all
likelihood.

If every Mariner or Passenger in a Ship should undertake the office of a
Pilot, there would need no storms nor tempests to make Shipwrackes. The order
and distinction of parts, members, and faculties, is not only the beauty, but
the preservative of organicall bodies, and substances. As we have many members
in one body, (says the Apostle, Romans 12.4.) and all members have not the same
of fice, so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another. But yet the unity of the body does neither confound the variety, nor
destroy the order of the several parts and functions, but the variety and
order of the parts preserves both the unity and being of the whole. Having then
gifts differing according to the grace given unto us, whether Prophecy let us
prophecy, according to the proportion of faith, or Ministry let us wait on our
Ministering, or he that teaches on teaching, etc. So the same Apostle, 1 Cor.
12.14. The body is not one member but many; and ver. 17. If the whole body were
an eye where were the hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the
smelling? and if they were all but one member, where were the body? but now are
they many members yet but one body. It is the Apostles rule, and sure it is a
just one, That they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; 1 Cor.
9.14. And that he that is taught in the word should communicate unto him that
teaches in all good things, Gal. 6.6. That double honor should be given to
the Elders that rule well, especially to those that perform their duties
industriously, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. And what the
Apostle means, he himself will tell you in the next verse; for the Scripture
says, thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn, and the
labourer is worthy of his reward: If there be no distinction between Clergy and
Laity, between Teachers and Learners, no bounds set about the Sacred Mount, but
that every one that will, may break in to the exercise of the office of a
public Teacher in the Church, how should these rules of the Apostle be
observed? how should it be known who is to communicate, and who to receive the
benefit of that Communication? Or at least, how shall the people be able to
maintain all that will be ready to intrude into that business? Or, why has
God ordained such a supply in temporalls for the Preachers of the Gospel from
the labors and possessions of others? but that it was presumed, that the work
of the Ministry was to be their proper occupation and function; unto which they
were so far to apply themselves, as to prohibit them the exercise of other
trades and occupations ordinarily: for although the extraordinary gifts of St
Paul, and of some others perhaps in the Apostolical times, did enable him or
them to exercise both together, yet that is no warrant unto any that make no
just claim unto that portion of gifts which God thought fit to bestow on them
who were the first planters of the Gospel, to take upon them the like mixture
of occupations. It is a good rule of the Schools I think, that Opera liberi
spiritus non sunt trahenda in exemplum communis vitae; That the works of the
free Spirit, that is, the extraordinary works of the Spirit, are not to be
drawn into example of common life, not to be patterns for us to walk by. But
what unreasonable creatures are we grown? What an incongruity and gross
solaecisme is it to cry down the Ministry so loudly and so earnestly as they
do in these days, from having to do with civil affairs, or secular matters,
under pretense that they are not to be distracted from that great work of
their spiritual employment? and upon that ground to render them mere slaves,
depriving them of the liberty of assenting unto those Laws whereby themselves
as well as others are to be Governed? and yet withal to admit of every Layman
that will, to exercise the meanest and most toilesome mechanic occupations,
and withal to take upon him the office of a Minister? To forbid the Clergy to
meddle with Lay-matters, and at once to admit the Laity to meddle as they
please with the work and function of the Clergy? yea to ravish that work out
of their hands who are properly designed and furnished thereunto? That they may
get up into their places, to vent their mad fancies, their raw and rude
conceptions, their follies, their blasphemies, their seditious doctrines, and
their vain dreams and imaginations to the people. If it be not likely, as it
has been pretended, that that Minister can answer the great expectation of the
Ministerial work: that makes it his maine business, his daily study, his
ordinary exercise, that does but admit of some few or rate interceptions from
that work, to attend perhaps once in three years at a Parliament, or to
perform the Office of a Justice of Peace once or twice perhaps in a month, or
three, or four, or five times in a year: How is it likely, or even ordinarily
possible, that he whose maine employment is in Secular affairs, that follows
a Trade all the week long, and makes the work and employment of a Minister,
only as a (...), a breathing business, or matter upon the by: How is it
possible I say without a miracle, that such a one should rightly perform that
work? Let the World judge, whether there be not either great want of reason
and logique, or else great want of honesty and sincerity in these carriages? Or
whether it does not favor more of design than of Religion: First, to urge the
weightinesse of the Ministerial work, to exclude the Ministry from any secular
business, to deprive them of all Offices in the State, of their voices in
Parliament, and other temporal advantages, that they may get them into their
own hands? and then, when that is done, to admit of a mixture of that holy and
weighty business, with the most durty, bloody, or toilesome imploiments in the
world, by prostituting it at the feet of every dusty Mechanicke? that they may
ravish both the work and the supportance of the Ministry out of their hands
unto whom it belongs: Stripping by this means the poor Churchmen, first of
their personal advantages by exclusion, and then of their spiritual
proprieties by intrusion. But I know what will be said, Oh they have gifts, and
why should they not use them? If God has given them Talents, must they be
bound to wrap them up in a napkin, and bury them in the earth for fear of
displeasing a black gown or a square cap? or intrenching upon that Monopoly
of teaching and saving souls, which a sort of people called Parsons and
Vicars, have thus long challenged unto themselves against the liberty of
Christians? When God has given us light, must we hide it under a bushel? Did
not Eldad and Medad prophecy in the Camp, without the censure or reprehension
of Moses, Number. 11.26. Do not we read of the house of Stephanus, that they
addicted themselves unto the Ministry of the Saints? Or where do you find that
Apollos was ordained, or that Aquila and Priscilla received imposition of
hands, were they not Tentmakers as well as Paul? It may be answered: For their
gifts which they have, God forbid that we should envy them, and perhaps there
is no great temptation to it. But it is thought to be reasonable, That since
the hearts of men are (as they teach us too clearly) very apt to overweene of
themselves: And since what ever their gifts be, the use of them is not their
own but the Churches interest, wherein the public good, if well used: or
evil, if ill employed, either above their strength, or against their duty, is
very much concerned: They are not therefore fit to be their own Judges,
whether their abilities be answerable to the work they undertake or no; but it
is to be judged by those that are designed by God and his Church for that
purpose (such as was Timothy and Titus, at Ephesus and Crete) that upon trial
and approbation from them, and by solemn ordination, and imposition of hands,
together with Prayer and Supplication to God for a blessing upon them and their
gifts, they may be admitted to that work, which is indeed very requisite for
the security of the Church and Gods people, that they may not have wolves
instead of Sheepheards, to devour them instead of feeding them, that they may
not have perverse insolence, and bold ignorance, but solid, sober, and modest
knowledge to be their guides in the ways of righteousness and salvation; that
they may not receive poison instead of nourishment, but that they may have the
sincere milk of the Word administered unto them that they may grow thereby. A
matter of so great consequence, as our own lamentable experience at this day
may inform us abundantly, That although it were to be wished indeed, that the
Church had the enjoyment of all her riches, and that nothing should lie idle
that may be of use, yet it were much better that many good gifts should lie
hid, then that under the color of a liberty in making use of good gifts, the
people of God should be bewitched, and poisoned with so many sophisticated
impostures of Satan; have so many heresies and errors, and phrensies, and
schismatic, and seditious Doctrines put upon them instead of the truth of
God, to the producing of such a Chaos of confusion among us, and the enkindling
of so many false, but raging fires of division and distraction in the Church of
God. It is much better that the building of the Temple should go on somewhat
the slower, then that the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin should be suffered
under the pretense of promoting, to hinder and confound the work, Ezra 4.1,
etc. Many hands many times makes light work in a worse sense then the Proverb
is usually understood in; that is, they make slight work. If a Watchmaker
should suffer every commer in or passer by to be tampering with his business,
he might well give them all his gains for their wages. In short, do but stand
still a little, and consider what excellent fruits this liberty of prophesying
(as they call it) has produced in this Church of ours, and if you can conclude
it to be commodious or a blessing, go then and pull down your hedges, and hire
the hogs to dress your Gardens and your Fields: set flames of fire to repair
your houses: let the moath be your taylour to mend your clothes: or use the
like husbandry for your selves that Sampson did for the Philistines; Tie the
Foxes together by the tails, and a firebrand betwixt them, and send them into
your standing Corn to weed out the Thistles: no, no, we have learnt by too sad
a trial, that Satan has his seed and his seedsmen, as well as Christ; and if
all that will offer themselves may be admitted, think him not so dull a
contriver of mischief, but that he is provided of his volunteers, who though
they hate the Garments of Ministry, yet they will will put on the Garb perhaps
of Angels, and will sow Tares instead of Wheat, even in the field of the Lord
himself. I know none that desires to make any monopoly of the gifts of God, or
of the business of salvation. I doubt not but there are of the lawful
Ministry, that are so sensible of the greatness and difficulty of the work,
that they could be content, if God would be pleased with it, to have any body
take the burden thereof off their shoulders, and so that they might be rid of
the great charge, willingly to part with the honor and supportance too of
their callings, much more would they be ready to receive the aid of any that
were fit, and willing to help them, and to join with Moses in that holy wish
of his Number. 11.29. Would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. But whosoever they be that wish well
to the Church, or to Gods glory, must needs wish withal, that those gifts may
be well weighed and allowed according to Gods will, and that they may be set
free with a blessing, by the prayers of the Church, and a solemn ordination
unto the holy Function, before they be let loose into the public. That they
may be tried and approved not by themselves, for that old saying is too true,
Omnes rerum nos trarum iniqui estimatores sumus; We are all of us unfit to be
the prizers of our o^wne goods; Non videmus id manticae quod in terg^ est; It
is an hard matter for us to look round about our selves: And withal, it is
not amiss I hope to desire that no private gifts may be so much preferred, as
to destroy that great gift and ornament of the whole body of the Church which
gives luster and beauty unto all the rest, which is the grave and matron-like
Robe of Order in the use and dispensation of these gifts, which does at once
safeguard and commend them all, with which the Apostle concludes that excellent
discourse of his concerning spiritual gifts, set down in the 12, 13, and 14.
Chapters of the first to the Corinthians, as that which was to have the
guidance, and the moderation of them all, and to have them in custody and
Guardianship; after he had set forth the variety of gifts, and their uses in
the Church, he sets this rule as it were to have the government of them all,
Let all things be done decently and in order.

As for Eldad and Medad, they were not ordinary men, they were of those 70
Elders that were chosen to assist Moses for the government of the people, unto
whom God gave of the spirit that was upon Moses: for as we may see Number. 11.26.
They were of them that were written, though they stayed behind in the Camp,
and went not out unto the Tabernacle, and to these God was pleased to give the
testimony of the spirit of Prophecy.

Apollos, and Aquila, and Priscilla lived in those times where in the Spirit of
God as he gave extraordinary gifts, so he moved men to the exercise of them by
extraordinary motions, as was requisite in those times of the planting of the
Gospel; and wherein the Church of Christ was not yet settled, so that the
ordinary course of admission unto the Ministry could not be every where had;
and this may serve to answer to that in the 11. of the Acts, at the 19.
concerning those that were disporsed upon the persecution of Stephen, and all
others of the same nature, etc.

Now that the economy of those times is not to be a pattern to the Church of
God now in a more settled condition, may appear since we see even in those
times where the Church was settled, (as in Ephesus and Crete,) the Apostle gives
rule^ for an orderly admission: so that these are no warrants for these men, to
refuse the ordinary way of vocation to the Ministry where it may be had, to
intrude themselves without i^ unless they will plead that unsettlement which
themselves have wickedly wrought in this Church for the color of the in
presumption, which is but to excuse one mischief by another.

If they shall say they are tried, approved, and admitted by the people; I
answer, that trial is coram non judice, since it belongs not unto the people
either to judge in election, or to confer that Ministerial power by
ordination.

The first is against reason, fot the election of Ministers must reasonably
belong unto those that are able to judge of them: and as it is in Sciences,
that that has in it the rules whereby other Sciences are judged of, is held to
be above the rest in wisdom and excellency, so in persons or callings: now
whether that can be a fit man to guide the people that is inferior unto the
multitude in wisdom and knowledge, let any man judge; so that the very
election by the multitude does upon the matter infer him to be unfit, and so
that choice does as it were destroy it self, and as the Musician rebuked his
Scholar (as I remember the Story) because the people applauded him, telling
him that he knew it could not be right or good Music that they approved; and
as a man may judge that to be crooked that agrees with a crooked rule, so of
the two we might rather conclude that man to be unfit that the people chooses
than to be fit: and so more consonant to reason that he should even therefore
be rejected than admitted, for in that he is chosen by the people, it is to be
presumed that they are fit to judge of him, and if they are competent judges of
him, it will reasonably be inserred that he is inferior to them in wisdom and
excellency, but this is not to be imagined, and therefore the conclusion holds
fairly; per argumentum ab absurdo, that the people ought not to have the
choice of the Minister.

Again, it is against two maine ends of Trial and Election, which are first
that the Minister may be such as may not deceive the people, Therefore there
must be some wiser than the people to try him, or else they may be deceived by
him in the capacity of Triers, as well as in capacity of Disciples or Learners,
otherwise this would suppose upon the matter all Election unnecessary in regard
of this end for if they are presumed to be able to judge of his Doctrine, there
is no danger that they should be deceived by it; nay, for ought I know, it will
infer no necessity at all of a Minister, or of his teaching them, for if they
be wise enough to examine him in point of Doctrine, or to try him in it, it is
to be presumed that they have as much or more light than he, for that light
must be greater that will discover the failings or imperfections of another
light: unless we will have darkness to judge of light.

The second maine end is, that he may be such as will not corrupt them by his
life and conversation, that will not lead them on by ill example in Faction,
Sedition, or in any wicked course. Now this is not likely well to be provided
for by committing the Election to the people; for how soever the timpany of
opinionate holiness is become so general a disease in these times: yet if we
take not maskes for faces, if we understand holiness aright, or make a true
survey of the people, it will be found a conclusion too operative even in these
times; That the greatest part of the people are not of the best inclinations;
and than if that be a true principle, that own appetit simile, Every thing
delights in that which is like it self. The major part of the people which is
evil, are not in any great probability to choose a pious Minister. In short,
the question than will be, as I have it from an Elegant Lamenter of this
Churches miseries in far better times, when these evils which we suffer, seem
to have been but in their cradle, Quonam pacto de eruditione imperiti, vel de
sapientia stulti, and let me add, vel de probitate impii recte judicabunt?
Querim. Eccles. How shall rude and illiterate men judge of erudition? or fools
of wisdom, or wicked men of honesty and righteousness? Have we not cause to
fear with him least in a popular Election the holier sort may be overcome of
the greater number, and that they may choose such Ministers, as in their wills,
their inclinations, their lives and manners are most conformable unto
themselves?

If reason will not prevail, let the Scripture be searched, and see if upon
due examination, it can be found that ever a mere popular Election was erected
by any Divine warrant to be the gate for the Ministry to make entrance by into
their Functions; I deny not there are pretenses of Scripture for the purpose,
but shadows are many times much longer than their substances, and if they have
any substance at all in them, that note which is taken from those that have
showed themselves none of the best friends unto the true and genuine orders of
the Church, may well serve to abate the force of them in this argument; Quae
pro populari Electione a nonnullis afferri solent, ea nascentium rerum
primordiis fuisse accommodata, sed nostrae aetati minus apt convenire; That
those things that are produced in behalf of popular Election by some, were
proper unto those rudiments and beginnings of the church, but do not agree with
the age wherein ^e live: not only in regard of the necessity which might then
give countenance thereunto: but also because the whole multitude of Disciples,
and Christians, as they were much more pure and sincere, and more eminent in
piety, which secured them proportionably from miscarriage in the choice, so
they were endued for a great part, if not all, as it appears with
extraordinary gifts, whereby they were enabled to judge of the Abilities and
Orthodoxnesse of those which were proposed to their choice.

And yet even in those times there is sufficient to be found to show us that
those acts that were done, or seem to be done in that way, were not intended
for ruled cases to the Church, in that it is evident in the practice of the
same Apostolical times, that men were sent to exercise the Ministry amongst
the people, and accordingly undertook and performed it, without any the least
reference to their consent or approbation. See Acts 13.4, 5. and Acts 9.20.
with diverse other places.

And indeed had it not been so how should the work of Gods building have gone
on? How should the Vine of the Gospel have spread it self so gloriously as it
did over the face of the earth, sending out her boughs unto the sea, and her
branches unto the River, and covering the hills with the shadow of it, as the
Psalmist speaks in the 80. Psalm. Should the Preachers of the Gospel have
staid and expected that they who were not converted to the faith, and yet
enemies to the Gospel, should have chosen Ministers to preach it amongst them?
Or how can it be expected now in these days, that the people who are deeply
infected with corrupt opinions, and schismatic affections, should Elect
Orthodoxe and sound Teachers, in such times as these are? wherein that sad
prediction of St Paul (2 Timothy 4.3.) is fulfilled That the time should come when
men would not endure sound Doctrine, how then is it likely that (...) should
make choice of (...) ^inisters, or not rath^^^ ^^^ that they should (as they
do) after their own lusts heap unto themselves Teachers having itching ears,
turning away from the Truth and being turned unto Fables? Nay, if the case were
so, in such an age as this, wherein Religion seems to be looked upon and used
by too many but as a mere cheat and imposture of humane policy, and wherein
there are so many that had rather save their Tithes than their souls: Both
Ministry and Preaching would perhaps ere long be totally discarded and cast
off, as things unnecessary and burdensome, when men have once fully served
their turns with the shows of Piety and Religion (...) all would be swallowed
(...) that Religion that the Storck speaks of in the Character that he gives
too truly of the common devotion, (...) where men's profit is, there is their
Religion. If any here shall urge the practice of ancient times after the
Apostles wherein the Bishops were sometimes chosen by the people: I answer
first, that it was not constantly so. Secondly, that the practice does not so
much convince the legallity of that course as the evils that it produced does
demonstrate the inconveniency; for as one says, Vt eligeret, excitavit tumult
us; Commisit varias caedes, and infinitis prape malis turbavit Christianam
remp: as Tumult was the leader on to those elections, so they were the
occasions of diverse murders, and of disturbing the Christian Commonwealth,
with almost infinite mischiefs. Thirdly, A facto ad jus non valet argumentum;
it does not follow that it was just because they did it, for examples are to be
examined and corrected by rules; and as the same Author of whom I last spoke
has well determined, Non quid aliquando factum fuit, sed quid perpetuo ficri
debet perquirendum est; We ought not so much to enquire what has sometimes
been done, as what ought in all times to be done. But alas nothing is well done
now unless the frantic people have the conduct and manage of it; Omnes nempe
imperatores in hac mundisenect a natura gignit, nullos milites; (as he also
goes on) Nature is grown so strong in this old age of the world, that she
brings forth all Emperors, no Soldiers in these days. But as Lycurgus once
answered a certain man that would needs persuade him to leave the Government
of Sparta to the people. Go thou (says he) first and leave the manage of thy
house to them, and if that course shall please thee well, then come and make it
thy request that the multitude may have the rule and regiment of all things. So
say I unto those that would have the matters of the Church (or of the State) in
these days left unto the people; let them first go and resign up the rule of
their private Families and estates unto them, and indeed perhaps they had
almost as good do it before hand, for it is most likely to follow after with
speed: for where there are so many Masters of all things, no man is like long
to be Master of any thing; ex pede herculem, we may make a pretty guess at
it, by what the motions toward such a Government have already given us a taste
of.

But were it so that the right of Election were in the people, yet if the right
of Ordination be not in them likewise, there will be a maime and failing in
that Commission which is pretended for an universal Ministry; and will any say
that this is needless? or this also belongs unto the people. Indeed they
have gotten great promotions of late since the old plea of Korah and his
company that was once buried alive with the Authors, has gotten above ground
again among us in these days, and men of any rank dare tell both Moses and
Aaron, both King and Minister, that they take too much upon them, seeing all
the Congregation are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them,
wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Both
Royal and Ministerial power (for it seems it is their fate to suffer together)
are made a scatter among the people. It was shrewdly spoken by Tertullian, in
his Book, de praescriptione adversus Hereticos. c. 41. Nusquam facilius
proficitur quam in castris rebellium, ubi ipsum esse illic promereri est. There
is no readier way to preferment then to be in the Rebels Tents, where the very
presence of men is meritorious. How easy is it to get up from hence, both into
the Pulpit, and into the Throne.

Alphonsus a Castro (I confess) ascribes it unto Luther, as if it were his
Doctrine, (how justly I have neither opportunity nor lust now to examine) That
all Christians are Priests, and that they are consecrated to this Office in
their Baptism, and that they have all equal power without distinction either
of Sex or Condition: but yet so, that it is not lawful for any to exercise
this power, Nisi per consensum communitatis; But by the consent of the
Community; Quia quod est omniu^ communiter, nullussingulariter potest usurpare,
nisi vocetur; because no man cansingly usurp that power which belongs unto
all in common, unless he be called: as if the power of Ministry or Priesthood
were derived first to the Community, and then from the Community to him that
does exercise the Ministry or Priesthood. A fancy that may well contend for the
prize in point of wisdom and commodiousnesse to Gods people, with that which
our State-Levellers have taken upon them to vent: that will have the multitude
to be the originary King as it were, put them both together and make them a
Melchisedech, a King and a Priest, and then they will be well contented and
live in peace, if we can but persuade them to admit of one condition, that
there may be but one head, and one heart amongst them all, and that all the
rest may be cut off and ripped out, otherwise we may conjecture without the
help of an Ephemerides, or consulting with the Stars, what excellent Grapes
are like to grow upon such Thorns: In the mean time I cannot but wonder (me
thinks) that either of these Pleas for civil or Church power should be so
Authentical with some in these days, and yet that Korah and his followers had
such ill luck as to speed no better then they did in their suit for the like,
especially for the latter: since they had not only the same privileges of
nature with these, but seem to have altogether as seemly a title from the
Scripture, had they but had the skill of our modern interpretation, for what
these men find for their purpose in our days, from Saint Peter, and Saint
John, That God has made us Kings and Priests: or a Royal Priesthood, etc. The
like they might have urged for ought I know for themselves, Exodus 19.6. where
God promises the people upon their obedience, that they should be a kingdom
of Priests unto him. And yet however it came to pass, the calling of Aaron and
his Sons and their Successors, and of their Brethren the Levites, was their
enclosure, without the Election or Consecration of the multitude. It might
suffice to discover the folly of these pretenders, to tell them what exception
one has made against the force of that argument which they would draw from the
named places: Si nihil est Sacerdotis officium quia omnes vocaniur Sacerdotes,
oportebit eadem ratione te fateri ut Christus nihil sit supra quemquam little de
quibus dictum est, nolite tangere Christos meos. If the office of a Priest or
Minister shall be nothing, because all are called Priests: by the same reason
thou will be compelled to confess (which God forbid) that Christ is nothing
above any of those of whom it is said in the 105. Psalm. Touch not my Christ's,
for so the Original will well bear, and so both the Septuagint and the Vulgar
translate it; but if what has been said already will not suffice to weane them
from so fond a mistake of those places before mentioned of the Revelation and
St Peter, let them take their choice of wiser Commentaries upon those Texts,
and be persuaded either to embrace that of Beda, that the faithful or people
of God are called Priests, because they are united unto Christ, who is the
great and eternal Priest; or that of St Augustine not much unlike it,
remembered by Fevardentius, in his notes upon Irenaeus, Sicut omnes Christianos
dicimus propter misticum chrisma, sic omnes Sacer dotes quentam sunt membra
unius Sacerdotis; As we call all Christians because of the mystical anointing,
so all are called Priests, because they are the members of that one Priest,
which is, Christ Jesus. Indeed that Priesthood of Gods people is no more but
their Christianity: and I pray God make all to be Priests in that sense, that
is to say, good and humble, and faithful Christians: and upon that conditition
I should wish them Kings too, that they may moderate and keep under their
unruly affections, with the Scepter of our Royalty, which is the grace of Gods
Spirit, and the power of his Word, not excluding but actuating sound reason
therein as an useful and commodious Minister; They would be the better
Subjects for being such Kings.

But we have before our eyes too numerous a brood of mischiefs from that womb,
to wish that it should teeme any more, either to justify the multitude in
taking upon them the holy Functions in the Church themselves, or to allow them
to have power to ordain others thereunto.

Could St Paul have found in his heart to have given it unto them, we should
not have been against the claim that they make unto it: But then he needed
not to have left Titus at Crete for that purpose, or let them tell me if they
can better than St Paul: How, and from whom Timothy received his ordination, it
was not sure from the people, but from Paul and the Presbytery; from Paul the
Prelate (for so we may well call him) and I would to God we could leave
snarling at harmless names) assisted or attended (envy not the honor of this
term unto the Apostle) with a company of Presbyters or Ministers of the
Church; in which we have (me thinks) a clear and excellent pattern, of the
Primitive and genuine course of Ordination, which God of his mercy restore
amongst us in this Church and Nation. See the first of Timothy 4. ver. 14.
Neglect not the gift which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, And 2 Timothy 1.6. (...). I put thee in remembrance
to stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the pitting on of my hands.
Compare the places together, and see how sweetly they are argued to make up our
differences had we moderate spirits: and did we not seek our selves more then
Christ Iesw, to make good our own humors, actions, and interests, (yea, I
would to God I might not say) our Covetousness, our Pride, and other things as
bad or worse perhaps then these, more than to procure peace in the Church:
there is (...) in both, the gift, and in both there is (...). Imposition or
laying on of hands: St Paul and his Assistant-Ministers, both joining in
Ordination, and Ministerial Collation of that gift, (if any shall strain the
word Presbytery to make it a foundation for their skewed Synedrion, consisting
of Lay and Clergy Elders together, ipsi viderint, let them be sure they can
justify it, for my part I confess I cannot.) But then (me thinks) there is
some difference remarkable: in the first place it is (...), and in the latter
it is (...), With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, But by the
laying on of my hands; whereby, if I be not mistaken in the Criticismes of that
Language, the Apostle may seem to intimate by the variety of the phrase, the
inequality of concurrence between himself and the Presbytery in the act of
Ordination, which was conferred by him as a more principal agent, or at least
as an isntrumental one in an higher degree, as the word (...) or (by) being a
causall may import, but with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, as
his Assistants and subordinate concurrents therein; which may help to clear
us in the discovery of the right and exact manner of the performance of this
work, and of the true Apostolical Government in the Church; which is then
most exactly framed, and most authentically managed, when it is administered by
one of supereminent power, as succeeding the Apostle therein in his part, and
with the Assistance of other Ministers as subordinate helpers unto him therein:
which, as it has this and diverse other arguments to convince it to be the true
and Primitive Form of Government; so the admission thereof amongst us, If
private Interests interpose not, might satisfy all reasonable parties amongst
us, and be a great means to recollect the scattered Members of this poor
distracted Church unto one another, again in unity and order, and to soder up
those sad breaches and divisions of our Ministry: which have been much
fomented and increased whilst the Competitours for Government and their
adherents, (I mean the Episcopal party, and the Presbyterian) have been so
far affected with their several extremes, and each to the setting up of
themselves, in a kind of solitariness of power, (I speak of some, not of them
all) that nothing can serve their turns but the exclusion of one another:
whereas if they could be content as they ought to live and dwell together with
their several due portions in the administration of Church Matters, the Lord
might be much glorified in a happy and sweet compliance, and each might yield
comfort and encouragement to one another: for want whereof, their mutual
quarrels and contentions, whereby they have thrown dirt upon one another, have
had no better effect for ought appears, then to render both sides, even the
whole Ministry contemptible to the people, and given occasion to a third party
of utter enemies to all kind of order to lift themselves up and trample upon
them both; let me not be thought presumptuous if I offer this earnestly unto
the timely consideration of all our Fathers and Brethren in this Kingdom,
least the continuance of their divisions prove the ruin of them both, and of
this poor Church betwixt them; and beseech them in the bowels of Christ Jesus,
that they would ponder it seriously whether there have not been a great cause
in this very thing of those judgments which God has sent upon us; whilst the
overmuch imperiousness of some, and the too much disorderlinesse, and
ungovernablenesse in others, have entrenched (it may be feared) so far upon
that Christian temper which should be found especially amongst the Ministry,
as to render their quarrels too liable unto such a Character as was once given
upon the contention of two great men in this Kingdom: to this purpose (as
near as my frail memory does serve me) Gaufridus and Hugo, magno cum scandalo
inter se concertarunt, hic ut praesset, ille ne subesset, neuter ut prodesset.

Geffry and Hugh
Are fallen in two:
Bout what think you?
He strives to reign,
This subjection disdaines;
Neither cares for the Churches gain.
An happy condescension in this particular would not only be a means to set
the things of the Church in the rightest and safest way, but also to revive the
dying flames of Christian love and charity, which should have their vigor in
the Ministry above all other men: and withal, to stop the mouths, and and
take away the occasions of the haters of all order that seek occasions, and to
keep up Christianity amonst us, which is too visibly stealing away from us at
those gaps and breaches which our contentions have made; and above all others,
those which are most ours, and indeed the great fountain of others: The
contentions of the Ministry.

However it be, we see clearly enough that the power of Ordination is not at
all placed in the people by the determination of the Apostle. If there be any
part theirs in this holy business, it is that they may be present at these
public performances as witnesses, not as judges, and that they may have
liberty to speak freely and with such modesty and reverence as befits them, if
they know any just and certain cause, why such as are to be admitted into
these sacred offices, should not be invested thereunto. But nothing will serve
the turn in these days of ours, unless all order be cast out of the Church
to make room for that excellent piece of confusion which men are now pleased
to call a Reformation. A Reformation that has put too much color of truth
upon that Sarcasme which I once heard fall from a foul mouth against the
Protestant Churches; Eglise reformee, est deformee, The reformed Church is the
deformed Church. I am sure they that have gone about to make such a jumble of
holy things and profane together, and to take away the distinction of the
Ministry and People in this Nation, have done so much to justify it, as I can
scarce tell what one thing the Adversaries could have asked of them, or hired
them to have done more for the asserting of their Calumnies against the Church
of England: Of whom we may too justly complain, as Tertullian does of the
Heretic in his time; Simplicitatem volunt esse prostrationem disciplina,
cujus penes nos curam lenocinium vocant, pacem quoque, possim cum omnibus
miscent, nihil interest illis licet diversa tractantibus dum ad unius veritatis
expugnationem conspirant; With these men the overthrow of Discipline is
reckoned for simplicity, and to take any care thereof, is accounted
wantonness; whatever difference of opinions there is amongst them (as there is
very much) yet they can agree well enough with any, so that they may conspire
together against the truth: They are all swollen with pride and self conceit,
and (like unskilful Empericks or Mountebankes in Religion) they all promise
much knowledge in their Bills, whilst for the most part there is nothing but
ignorance in their Boxes. Indeed that that follows has too much order in it
for them; Ordinationes corumtemeraria, leves, inconstantes, nunc neophytos
collocant, nunc saeculo obstrictos, nunc Apostatas nostros, ut gloria eos
obligent quia veritate nonpossunt: Their Ordinations (says he) are
temerarious, light and inconstant, sometimes they place Novices in the
Ministry, sometimes secular men, sometimes those that are Apostata's from us,
that they may oblige them with glory and preferment unto them, whom they cannot
with the truth. Should we not spend all our breath in sights, and all our
moisture in tears to think on it? that our Age should be found of such
transcendent perverseness and irregularity, that the very disorders of former
times would be a kind of desirable Discipline to us? This is a great evil, a
womb big with a multitude of mischiefs: A nest of Serpents: A very
fountain of poison: A great gate of corruption and distraction: A Pandora's
Box full of Pestilences and infections: A blazing Comet that threatens
destruction to all truth and righteousness: And I beseech God it prove not the
very Passing Bell of Christianity in this Nation, and the forerunner of
Tureisme and heathenisme, to make way for their entrance into the inheritance
of the Lord. And now we need not think it strange (though we must not forget
it as another deplorable degree of our present miseries) that they whose piety
it is to rob the Church of the Ministry, make no scruple at all of Robbing her
and the Ministry both of their revenues and supportance. Indeed there might
seem to be a kind of justice in it, that when such unskilful fumblers have
undertaken the work, and ravished it out of those hands whom God and the
Church has filled therewith (as the Hebrew phrase of consecration to the holy
Function may imply; for in that Tongue, (...) to fill their hand, signifies to
consecrate the Priests; or holy Officers in the Church, and may well intimate,
that they that are best furnished and most authentically and orderly admitted
unto that work have their hands full of that great business, and therefore
should not have their hands left empty of supplies and encouragements.) But
since they have put that work into such hands as they have, they may seem to
observe a kind of justice in their wickedness, in leaving them no better wages
then they are like to earne; but the compliance of impieties is no harmony in
the ears of God, or of good men. The uniformity of iniquities is but
beautiful ugliness; neither can the issue be legitimate, however equal or
consenting the contract be between those actions or designs that are of any
kindred in that blood; therefore we cannot but look upon it as another horrid
declination of this Church from the happy state and condition that it has been
formerly in; that those revenues which were heretofore dedicated and
consecrated to the maintenance of Divine Service, should be now accounted the
wages of Rebellion, and, as if God himself were a malignant, that his
peculium, the portion of his house and worship should not only be Sequestered,
but wholly alienated from him, as if it were the lawful prize of those whose
usurped power and greatness knows no limits either in heaven or earth. But it
is too too clear an evidence that they have fought against God, that make his
Sacred Portion the spoil of their victory: for Conquerours (if I mistake not)
do not usually make a prey of their friends but of their enemies, and then the
plundering of Gods house is no good mark of an holy War, nor the
confirmation thereof by Law, any good Symptom of an holy state. But they will
say perhaps, that these Lands and emoluments though they wear the title of
Gods Interest, yet they were dedicated to superstitious purposes; The blind and
foolish zeal of our Ancestors had so eaten up their brains that they had not
wit enough to keep their own; these things were gotten from them by evil
Arts, and false pretenses, upon erroneous and heretical considerations of no
truth nor value: such as are those two great cheates and impostures of the
Church of Rome, Purgatory, and Merit, and as they were gotten per malas arts,
by evil arts, so they were dedicated to evil and superstitious uses; as to
the maintenance of that Romish Dagon of the Mass, Prayer for the dead,
worshipping of Saints, adoration of Images, for the supportance of a false
Priesthood and Sacrifice set up in opposition to, and derogation of the
Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ, for the adornation of the Temples of Idols,
and for the holding up of many superstitious orders and distinctions of idle
Monks and Friars, etc. And the fruits and effects thereof have been not much
better, even none other but the Pride, Luxury, Sloth, Tyranny, Covetousnes,
and many other mischiefs in the Ministry: the devouring of Families, and
impoverishing of the Civil State, with the reducing of Judaisme amongst us in
Tithes and Offerings, which were indeed things proper and peculiar (as they
boldly affirm) unto the Jewish Economy and administration of the old
Testament, as was also the difference between things Sacred and Profane; which
to bring in or continue in the time of the Gospel were to deny the coming of
Christ, and to make void the fruit thereof unto the people, to countenance the
Jew in his expecting yet another Messiah, and to raise up the Spirit of Bondage
again, in putting that intolerable Yoke of ceremonies laid upon the necks of
Christ's Disciples, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear.
These, and such as these are the pleas, and colors, that must paint over this
Strumpet of Sacrilege, and turn the Robbery of God into a pious Reformation:
yea, we must be persuaded hereby that Sacrilege was but a Jewish sin, and
that there is no such thing at all in the Christian Church, or if there be any
thing alive now under that name, it is not a vice but an eminent virtue. Oh the
pernicious and bewitching Sophistry of Covetousness! Sad and dangerous is the
condition, hard and hazzardous the warfare of those truths which are to fight
against the Militia of Mammon in this age: when once the hearts of men have set
up that great IDOL-GAINE into the place of God, and put profit for Godliness,
what verity is so awful but will pass away in their Market? What sin so
deformed but shall find a veil in their Wardrobe, under which it shall be
counted as a piece of innocence, nay, as a point of wisdom and piety? What
iron wickedness so hard or unconcoctable but the fiery stomachs of these O
striches will digest it and put it over? But if there be no such sin as
Sacrilege in the time of the Gospel, why does Saint Paul ask that impertinent
question, Romans 2.9. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Why
does the Apostle wrong this virtue so much, as to yoke it together with
Idolatry? as if they were sins of the like nature, to rob God of that which is
devoted and due unto his worship and honor, and to give that which is Gods due
unto another? Or why did God himself provide so ready an Executioner to
execute that dreadful sentence of Saint Peter upon those two Sacrilegists,
Ananias and Saphira, by cutting them both off by a strange, sudden and
exemplary death, Act. 5.5. etc. For but keeping back some part of the price of
that Land which they sold, and pretended to offer up at the Apostles feet? Or
how I beseech you comes it to pass, that Christ is become such an Alien
amongst us, as not to be allowed capable of a donation, or inheritance? Or how
is it that he has forfeited his Interest? Were the Jews think you true
witnesses against him; That he was a perverter of the Nation, a teacher of
Sedition, forbiding men to pay Tribute unto Caesar, that he was a Traitor in
making himself a King? Or if they were, surely these are such virtues now,
that they might rather according to the Doctrine and practice of this Age, give
him a title too more, rather then forfeit any of his peculiars? Or have men a
freedom and liberty to bestow their Lands and their Goods at their pleasure
upon the devil in Luxury, and Pride, and Lust, and Cruelty, and in the support
of that hellish train of costly sins which are the glory of our times? And is
it only unlawful, or a void act, for men to give any thing to the Service of
God? It is our honor, and Gods great goodness that he is pleased to stand in
need of us, not in himself, he cannot; for as we receive all from him, so in
that respect we may say unto him in some sort as he unto the Emperor: Nec tua
fortuna (pardon the word) desiderat remunerandi vicem, nec nostra suggerit
restituendi potestatem: The state of all sufficiency in him, does neither
require any remuneration, nor the state of indigency and poverty in us, suggest
unto us any power of restitution; but we must still cry out in all our
offerings to God in the voice of holy David, 1 Chronicles. 29.11, etc. All that is
in the heaven and in the earth is thine: who are we that we should be able to
offer, etc. For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.
But yet it is the honor he is pleased to do unto us, his poor Creatures, to
send unto us by his Servants in the state of his Exaltation, as he did once by
his Apostles in the state of his humiliation, with a dominus opus habet, The
Lord has need of us; he is pleased to stand in need of us in his Members, in
his Ministers, in his House, and in his Service, which as he has ordained for
us, so he looks they should be maintained by us. If then God has need of us,
and is capable to receive from us, and we not at all forbidden, but most highly
obliged to give unto him, shall not those Vows be as Sacred in the time of the
Gospel, whereby such gifts are conferred and solemnly dedicated unto the
Worship and Service of God, as ever they were in the time of the Law? Is it not
as reasonable that our Ministry should have a supportance as their Priesthood?
Is it not Gods own Ordinance, that they that preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel now, as well as heretofore that they that served at the Altar
should live by the Altar? Or must the Ox only be muzzled that treads out
this Corn? Or is not faith to be kept with God now (think we) as well as
then? It has been heretofore held injustice to violate a Promise, especially
an Oath made unto man, though to our own hinderance, or to temerate a deed of
gift or Testament whereby Interests are conveyed from one earthly Creature unto
another, and shall we think it any thing less than an high impiety to violate
those Vows, those donations, those dedications and consecrations whereby
things are devovoted unto the Service and Worship of the Almighty, to the
supportance of his Ministry, and the keeping up of the work of his honor
among us? Stop thy mouth for ever then thou covetous bag-bearer; thou
Iudas-Traitor-Temple-theefe, and cry no more, (...), To what purpose is this
waste? When thou see this ointment pow^ed upon the head or feet of thy Master
Christ Jesus; upon his head in the maintanance of Piety, or upon his feet in
the works of Charity; Say not it might have been sold for much, and given to
thine own Pride or Luxury, or to the maintenance of the sedition or cruelty of
others; do not buy nor fell in the Market of Sacrilege, least when thou sellest
Gods right, his peculiar right, his devoted right upon earth, thou sellest
withal that right which thou hopest for in God and heaven: and least whilst
thou buyest the Sacred Portion of the Lord, thou have a Curse, a propagating
spreading Leprous Curse made over by God Tibi and Tuis, To thee and thine, to
have and to hold for term of life in this world, and hell and damnation into
the bargain in the world to come. Be not like unto the foolish Eagle in the
Apologue, that took the flesh from the Altar to feed her young with, least the
inseparable Coal of the Divine Indignation, set both thy nest and thy young on
fire, and thou perish together with them in the flame. Be not so foolish as to
imagine, that all things that were ordained in the Church of the Jews were
abolished by the coming of Christ; some things were of order, some things for
unity, some things there were for helps unto men's affections, as Music; some
things for the excitement of their memories, as the writing of the Law in such
manner as might make it obvious unto them; some things for the necessary and
comfortable supportance of Gods Worship, the Officers and Instruments thereof;
other things were properly ceremonial, and of a typical use; some were of a
mixed nature; be not carried away with prejudices against the truth; take not
the hire of Satan in the proposal of advantages, (as too many have done) to
betray thy judgment and thy conscience unto thy filthy and insatiable avarice;
Be not thine own Judas, that thou may fill the Bagg of that thief
corruption within thee, that would cheat thee to the dear purchase of Thine
own ruin: but take these rules rather to satisfy all doubts, and to answer
the pleas of Satan for this evil. First, Things properly ceremonial, that
were mere types and figures of Christ, are abolished by the coming of him who
is the Substance: and what was the effect of this abolition? Even the same, and
none other than that which is the effect of the abolition of every Law; to
leave the things enjoined or forbidden in the very same state and condition
that they were in before the Law, and should have continued in if the Law had
never bin made. The ceremonial Law made many things indifferent before, to
become either necessary or unlawful, it made them that had before no such use
at all in them, to become types and figures of Christ, and of things to come.
What does then the Abolition of this Law do? Why clearly, it removes all that
that the Law added or put upon them, that is to say, the necessity of things
enjoined, the unlawfulnes of things forbidden, the legal or typical use of
both, and leaves the things themselves in the same natural freedom that they
were in before. This is the voice of reason, and reason will receive it, and
would thereby end some quarrels if it might be heard, and discover the mistake
of those that think that the abolition of the ceremonial Law, made the matter
of the Ceremonies unlawful. It left them indifferent if they were so before,
but makes it unlawful to use them as types, or as things of necessity. Brevity
is obscure, and that I must now labor for, but understanding and peaceable men
may make good use of this. I intend by Gods grace to say something more fully
hereof hereafter.

Secondly, Things of order, of helps of affections, of memories, and the like,
as the general reasons remain so they may be useful, the use of such things
is not forbidden for such purposes, they were only shadows that the coming of
the Substance chased away.

Thirdly, Ordinances of supportance, as they have the same reason still, so
they are no way abolished by the abolition of the Law of Ceremonies, but may be
continued without any offense, for the like purposes in the time of the
Gospel, for which they were instituted in the time of the Law, viz. for the
supportance and furniture, and ornament of the Worship of God, and the
instruments thereof: yea, it is not only lawful but necessary that the same
(or as liberal a proportion as that, and that certain) should be allowed for
the maintenance of Gospell-Worship, as was allowed for the Ministry of the Law;
for if the ministration of the Gospel be more glorious, it is against all
reason that it should be allowed less honor, or a less comfortable
supportance. It is the Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do ye nos know
(says he) that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple, etc. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel: for if it be a good rule, that sicut se
habent simplicia ad simplicia, sic se habent comparata ad comparata; As things
in their simple and absolute consideration hear themselves to one another, so
the like proportion holds in their comparisons with one another. Then I know
not how it can be reasonably denied, but if it will follow from the allowance
that was ordained for the Ministry of the Law, that there ought to be an
alowance for the Ministry of the Gospel, because this as well as that is the
worship of God, and the means of Salvation unto the people, which cannot be
performed without the pains and labor of the Officers thereof, etc. It will
follow, that because the ministration of the Gospel is a more holy, and more
excellent kind of Worship of God, and more excellently conducing to the
Salvation of the people, and requires at least as much diligence and labor in
the Ministers thereof, it ought therefore to have at least as large; nay a more
large and a more comfortable supportance. And it is not, nor can be so
comfortable, unless it be certain, and settled; for no man can deny, but there
is more comfort in an assured and settled allowance, than in that which is only
at pleasure, or else why should any man give more for a lease for life or
years, than for a tenancy at will? And therefore though in the time of the
first rudiments of the Gospel, the Church could not upon the sudden attain
unto such a settlement, partly for want of the Christian Magistrate, and partly
by reason of the afflictive condition of the Church, which in those times
required and produced a kind of community amongst those that were thoroughly
established in Christianity, who brought all as it seems to the Apostles feet,
and partly for fear of offending those that were not yet established, lest
they should be frighted by worldly respects from the embracement of the
Gospel. Yet where the Gospel is settled and established by the authority of
the Magistrate, it is most requisite that there should be as a liberal, so a
certain and settled allowance unto the Ministry, not only for their
encouragement in the manage of that great charge that they have upon them, but
also to free them from manifold temptations and snares, that tie in the
dependence upon the voluntary and uncertain supplies of the people.

For first, in such a case of uncertainty, the Minister cannot likely but be
much confounded in the disposing and proportioning of his expenses and
provisions, his Revenues being still upon uncertainties, and not only
alterable, but quite extinguishable upon every dislike of the people. The
consequences whereof are like to be not only disturbance of mind and
distraction; but also a great impediment unto the exercise of his Hospitality
and Charity, since he can scarce possibly tell how to regulate it: For he that
knows not what he has, cannot know what he can spare. If any shall here
reply, that the Minister is to depend upon Gods Providence, I answer; that is
the duty of every Christian as well as the Minister; and yet it is not held at
all unlawful for the workman to agree before hand for his wages. Nor do those
that press this, either hold it or practice it as a Duty, to leave it to the
wills of their tenants, and so to the providence of God moving them, what Rents
they shall receive from their lands for their supportance. The Ministry of
the Jews was equally bound to depend upon Gods providence with the Ministry
of the Gospel, and had as clear promises for temporal things as we; and yet
the Lord was pleased to provide against temptation, by allowing them a certain
proportion. But then secondly, Thereby the Minister is too dangerously exposed
unto the desire to please men, and to preach placentia, to play that tune that
they are pleased to dance, left he be turned away without his reward.

Thirdly, it is a means to discourage the Minister in the reproof of sin,
when he knows that he may not only lose the Peoples favor, but their supply
too; when by such a course the people are made as it were his Judges, and
enabled to censure and mulct him whenever he does not humor them.

Fourthly, it is likely to occasion many temptations to discontent and
partialities of affection, between the Ministers and people, as they shall
increase, or decrease, afford or take away their Contributions.

Fifthly, experience teaches us, that this has been too fruitful a nursery
of Schisms, and Factions, and Divisions in the Church. As we may see too
clearly in the Divisions of these times, which are sufficiently known to be
set a foot, much more by those, if not altogether by those, who have had their
dependency upon the voluntary supplies of the people, than by others of the
Ministry.

Sixthly, this would be too much encouragement for wicked men to go on in open
and scandalous iniquities, when they know that they have the command of such a
key unto the Ministers mouth, etc.

I confess we nor they should not yield unto any of these, nor unto any other
temptations: But in the regulating and ordering of the public matters of a
Church, it is a point of Christian wisdom, to provide as much as may be
against sin, by settling all things in the safest way, against temptations,
and humane weaknesses on all sides. And this is done herein by a settled and
competent allowance to the Ministry. And though I confess there may be some
doubt made, whether that very precise proportion of the tenth part be
absolutely necessary in simple and primary consideration, now under the time
of the Gospel, as under the time of the Law: Yet first, I know no Arguments
that they have against it to prove the contrary. The best that they can do. I
concern, is but to infuse some doubt and ambiguity into the matter, and then
in a Question of Title between God and us, it is much safer for us to yield
than to stand to the hazard of a trial with God at the last day, when we
should have nothing left to make restitution with, but our souls, and the
forfeiture may be out eternal damnation. All the overplus that is paid unto
God, God will assuredly restore, if we do it with a Christian heart: But if
we hold back any thing that is his due, it may be purchased to us at too dare
a rate, both in judgments here, as is often seen, and the eminent and notable
stories collected by Sir Henry Spelman, and his son Master Clement Spelman,
and others, of Gods revenge against Sacrilege may inform us; and if we take
not heed in greater judgments hereafter.

And then secondly, it may be some presumption for any to undertake to find
out a wiser way than God himself found out, as was this way of tithing unto
the Ministry, whereby God provided excellently both for the Ministry, and
the People.

1. For the Ministry, that they should be free from that enslaving
dependence upon the people; and yet still learn to live upon the Providence of
the Almighty, according whereunto their revenue and supportance was measured
forth unto them every year: and that thereby the Minister might be
continually put in mind of his duty and charge over the people, from whose
hands he received his supportance.

2. For the people, who were thereby first secured, that their allowance unto
the Minister, besides their voluntary offerings, should be no more than such
as should bear a competent proportion to their commings in, since in this
course the allowance of the Ministers or Priests increased, and decreased,
according to the increase and decrease of their Estate and commings in.

And withal, the people were hereby continually urged to remember the
fountain of their temporal blessings, by their paying of Tithes and first
fruits unto the service of God: And withal, it might put them in mind of the
holy use whereby they ought to sanctify all the rest unto God, which they did
as it were consecrate to him in the tithes and first fruits; for these may seem
to have been Gods earnest, whereby we acknowledge all the rest to be his
due; and in the payment whereof we do upon the matter devote and consecrate
all the rest unto God to be used in his service and to his glory, though not in
his peculiar solemn worship. A meditation worthy of our serious consideration:
And if I be not much mistaken, this is the true thought and affection
wherewith Christians are, as well as Jews were, to pay their tithes and
offerings. It is no Judaisme, but our duty still to consecrate and dedicate all
we have unto God. To vow this and perform it, is a very acceptable service. The
paying of thithes I conceive is still an engagement to use our whole Estates to
Gods honor: and we are to do it as the payment of our homage unto God,
therein acknowledging his supreme Lordship and Dominion, and giving pledge of
our duty in the due employment of all: as also of our thankfulness unto God
for that which we have. If men would pay their tithes in this manner, they
should have no cause to repent it, neither here nor hereafter; The benefit
thereof would be much more theirs in their engagement of themselves thereby
unto their spiritual and Christian duties, than the Ministers in the supply of
his temporal necessities.

But thirdly, in the greatest doubt that can be made hereof, it is to be
considered how exceeding dangerous it is to trust the deceitful pleas of our
hearts in a matter of Meum and Tuum, between God and us.

And fourthly, it is very considerable that Tithes were not proper to the
Aaronicall Priesthood, which was the Ceremonial Priesthood that was abrogated,
but also to the Melchise dechian Priesthood, which is the order of Christ's
priesthood, and therefore seem in great probability, if not demonstratively, to
stand still due unto Christ; and so to be due still unto him. And how can they
be paid more properly unto him, than in the supportance of his service? and in
that it continued in both these Priesthoods, it appears me thinks thereby
that it was no part of the Ceremonial Law, but a thing common both to the
ministration of the Law, and the Gospel, which were severally presented in
those two Priesthoods, as I may so speak: For the Law was changed in the change
of the Priesthood, as the Epistle to the Hebrews teaches. This Ordinance of
Tithes therefore continuing, as well as the Ordinance or office of blessing in
both those so different Priesthoods, it appears thereby to be none of that
changeable Law that is done away. I desire the Reader to excuse my engagement
to brevity, so far as to save me some labor here, by casting a diligent eye
upon the 7th to the Hebr. from the 1. Verse to the 18. as also Genesis 14.18, 19,
20. Verses. Let these things be seriously considered, and if they be of
weight, let them prevail to end this quarrel; and let not covetousness and
envy be heard any more against reason and Scripture: nor the comparing of men's
own ends be set up for Religion; nor Mammon for the true God. If there be any
paralogisme, or any unsoundnesse in these arguments, I refuse not to have them
searched by any man's pen that shall please. When their failing is discovered
unto me, I shall be willing to relinquish them, and not hang this conclusion
any longer upon them.

But then fifthly, I desire it may be considered, that this way of tyranny
holds excellent correspondence with that Command of the Apostle, Gal. 6.6.
(...) Let him that is Catechized, (I seldom hear that word, but I think of
the ruins of our Church through the neglect hereof: And I can hardly pass by
it without renewing my complaint) or taught in the word, communicate unto him
that teaches or Catechiseth in all good things. Which cannot be exactly and
orderly done (and let the builders of Babel say what they will, all things are
the better for order) unless by that or some such like way.

And then sixthly, the rule will hold a minori as before, that the proportion
ought not to be less, but rather greater than that of the legal Ministry:
So that either tithes or more will be due: and why first fruits should be
forgotten I know not.

And lastly, however the matter be, at the worst that is imaginable, The
Abrogation of the Law had left tithing indifferent as it had been so before the
Ceremonial Law was given, by the rule before set down and declared; and if it
be of an indifferent nature, and ordinable unto the promotion of Gods glory, it
may be the subject and matter of a Vow, and of a Law both Ecclesiastical and
Civil; and then in case where they are devoted, and that by the will of the
dead, the most sacred and inviolable bond, and the most authentical and
irrevocable act of humane power in its kind, and established by Law, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil. They are to be paid with great fidelity, and that
out of Conscience. And though the Law might be abrogated, and that it had not,
as perhaps it has in cases of this kind, the nature of a public Vow, yet as
long as the private Vow of the giver, and the Will of the dead is irrevocable,
there had need to be much greater reason than is pretended for the violation.
But I must away.

As for those evasions, (for they are no better, and covetousness, will
strain hard, but it will find one trick or other to cheat the Conscience
withal) whereby the Reformers of these times, as too many heretofore, would
feign justify the alienation of tithes and other things consecrated to God and
the Church. viZ. That the grants thereof were procured by erroneous
persuasions; and upon false grounds, as was the opinion of merit, of
satisfaction for sin, of obtaining deliverance out of Purgatory, and the
like; and that they were given to evil ends, as to the supportance of Idolatry
and Superstition, instead of true Religion, and the sincere worship of God,
although they have been answered, and answered over and over by far more
learned and able pens, and sufficiently to the satisfaction of any that have
not enslaved their judgments and reason to the partial opinions and
admirations of men's persons, or to their own corrupt affections and wordly
intents, whereby they have made good that saying of the wise man, Proverbs
27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a Mortar, among Wheat with a
Pestle, yet will not hts foolishness depart from him. And that of Petraach,
algidum in cinerem nequicquam flabis, He that blows into the cold ashes,
shall do no good thereby, but make them fly about his ears. Or what Gregory
Nazianzen said long ago of those that are bewitched with the love of riches:

-- (...)
(...),
(...),
-- If thou persuade
They are more ready straight thee to invade
With injuries, than to receive from thee
Those medecines that might cure their malady.
Yet notwithstanding give me leave manipellos meos horreo Domini immittere, to
bring in my little gleaning handfulls into the Lords Barn in this point.

And first to reply to the former of these evasions; That though it be too
probable that many things were given in this kind in the times of the
blindness of Popery, upon such erroneous grounds and persuasions, as are before
set down, (and it is our great shame that their errors should be more
fruitful than our truths) yet it will be an hard matter perhaps for them to
prove which of them were so procured, or given; or to assure themselves that
there were not joined with those superstitious apprehensions, some mixtures of
better thoughts, that might be sufficient to make good the interest of God and
his Church therein. Secondly, that long prescription does make good those
acquisitions that are founded in error and mistake; for though it be a rule
in the Civil Law, that quod initio vitiosum est non potest tractu temporis
convalescere; yet this rule has this exception, viz. Nisi haec duo simul
concurrunt. sc. Vitii cessatio and novissimus actus. Thirdly, that it may be
very dangerous in these days to admit of such a principle, that those grants
are invalid that are obtained upon false pretenses and persuasions: For this
would entrench shrewdly upon the validity of the Act some years since obtained
from his Majesty, for the continuation of this present Parliament, which was
granted upon other pretenses and persuasions than do any whit agree with those
actions wherein it has been since employed. Fourthly, give me leave to
propose this Dilemma unto all men's consciences, that are any way concerned in
this point. Either those errors that are supposed to be the inducements of
those donations, made them void or no; if it did not make them void, they stand
good unto the Church; if it did make them void, then without doubt it ought to
return unto the heirs of the Donours, who ought not to suffer for the fraud
of others, or their Fathers folly or superstition. What then has any body else
to do either to take them away, or to buy or sell them?

Fifthly, false persuasions or grounds, where the party granting is faulty in
the admission of them, do not seem to make void concessions; especially when
they are confirmed with sacred Bonds: Or if so, how came it to pass, that the
league of Israel with the Gibeonites, who deceived them with their old shoes,
and their old bottles, and their moldy bread, and with a plain down right
lie, Josh. 9.4.9. etc. was yet so firm and lasting, that the breach thereof
was so severely punished by God so many hundred years after: as you may see 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3 Verses, etc.

To the second evasion I answer, That a superstitious use or intention, or
emploiment, does not make void the Vow, or the consecration of a thing
dedicated, much less render it incapable of being employed in the true worship
and service of the Almighty. God himself pronounced the Censers of Korah and
his company to be hallowed, though they were consecrated in a superstitious and
unwarrantable way, and used in a false worship, Numb. 16.38. and therefore
though they must not be used in that particular way in which they were
dedicated, yet the Lord gives order to have them made into broad Plates for the
Altar; and that is indeed the right cure of things dedicated to superstitious
uses, not to alienate them from the Church, and so turn them from the the
service of superstition to be the instruments of pride, and lust, and luxury,
and rebellion; but to vindicate them unto those employments that are truly
religious. See the Story of Gedeon offering Sacrifices unto God, with the wood
of the Grove, Judge. 6.26. And that by the command of God, and of the bringing
back the Vessels of the Temple to Jerusalem, Ezr. 1.11. and 5.14, 15. and 6.5.
and 7.19. and Neh. 13.9. So we see these evasions are no justifications; But
without doubt the gain is the godliness; there lies the sweetness of
Reformation with these men. Demetrius and the Crafts-men may cry up Dia^^; but
the gain, and the profit that came in by the silver shrines, that was the
Diana that they worshipped. Had it not been for that, they would perhaps have
cared alike for Diana and for Christ. And men in these days may talk of
Reformation, (and I would to God we could see them once set about a true one;)
but it is too apparent what the English of their Reformation is, even the
plundering and the robbing of the Church Revenues, and the enriching themselves
with the spoil of the Ministry, and the House of God, and the intruding of
themselves into the possessions of other men. It is an ill sign when these
Cooks of Reformation grease themselves and lick their fingers so much in the
dressing of it, it is like to be but a slovenly piece of Cookerie. Had the
Church been poor enough, perhaps it had never been meddled with by these men;
and therefore we see this has been the great business: The Bishops Lands
have been sold, and the Malignants, as they are pleased to style them, have
been sequestered: And in order to that and some other good purposes, they have
been pulled down. But for any matter of Reformation in any thing else, what
great matters have been done? What is the glorious issue of these seven years
labor?

As for those evil fruits that are so much cried out of, as Pride, Ambition,
Idleness, Luxury, Worldliness in Churchmen, etc. I deny not but there have
been ill uses made of Gods blessings as well by us of the Clergy as by others;
and we most willingly acknowledge Gods justice in making use of the injustice
and oppressions of men to scourge us for our miscarriages, and to deprive us of
those mercies and encouragements which we have used no better. But first, this
is not the fault of the revenues, but of those that abused them; and then
again this might have been remedied by a better course; by wholesome Laws for
the reformation of such abuses. Thirdly, as Riches have their temptations, so
has poverty too. We do not find it is always the mother of piety. The old
saying is too often true, that Necessitas cogit ad turpia; Need sets men upon
uncomely and unjustifiable actions. Fourthly, there are temptations also in the
riches of the Laity; and if all matters be rightly examined, it will be found
that their Honors and revenues have yielded no better fruits in them, than
those which are charged upon the Clergy; let the world judge. But will you
hear something out of a Church-complainant, in Queen Elizabeth's Days, taxing
the like fault in some Reformers of that time: Pamphagum quendam Helluonem
spurcissimum, cum ad convivia invitatus esset, in delicatiores cibos sordes
conjecisse ferunt; Vt solus quibus vellet vesceretur: and certe qua olim
aviditate, gurges ille atque helluo ad cibos accersit: eadem reformatores
nostri ad devorandas Ecclesiae opes accersisse mihi vide^tur; cclesia enim opes
arripiunt, cu^ condemnant, omnium malorum semina and alimenta esse dicunt, and
in privates quaestus, nequissime transferunt. It is said of one Pamphagus or
Eate-all a most filthy Glutton, that when he was invited to a Feast, he went
and cast some filth or dirt into the most delicate dishes, that he might enjoy
them wholly to himself: Just so (says he) do our Reformers seem to us to
have addressed themselves to the devouring of the riches of the Church. They
cast dirt upon the Churches Revenues, and condemn them as the fountains and
causes of much mischief; but it is that they may gain them to themselves. And
truly that is but an unmannerly trick, to spit in the Pottage to deprive
others of it, and then to eat it all themselves. But give me leave to propound
unto them some few interrogatories out of the same Author: Si divitiis virtutem
enervari statuant: quid divitiis circumfluere tam vehementer contendunt? Si
opum abundantia Ecclesiae puritatem concidisse existiment, quid tanti mali
causam non sibi quoque perniciosam futurum putant? Si affluentior rerum copia
sine scelere possideri non possit: quid illis, sceleratius qui cupiditati
violentiam and avaritiae rapinas adjungunt. If riches be so hurtful, why do
they keep such ado to become rich? and if wealth cannot be possessed without
unrighteousness, what is more unrighteous than they, that have undone a King,
a Church, and almost two whole Kingdoms, to enrich themselves? or are they so
armed against the temptations of Mammon, that none of his Witchcrafts can hurt
them? or if they may be so happy; why may not others as well as they? And if
some of the Ministry have abused their riches, are there not others to be
found that have done much good with them? But have you never heard of some
Clergy-Reformers, that heretofore cried down Pluralities whilst they could not
get them themselves? (for my part I confess I approve them not, and yet not
upon those terms, it is well known unto some I think.) But when there was by
this happy Reformation a scatter of Benefices made amongst them, by the
persecution of the Orthodox and Loyal Ministry; how easily was their old
Doctrine forgotten? and what scrambling there was amongst them for Pluralities?
How were they ready to choke themselves with Greediness? swallowing down three
or four Livings at one time. But, to the pure all things are pure. I confess
it; and yet there is a vast difference between Purity and Hypocrisy. Sure
these things are of no good report. The God of heaven grant the spirit of
sincerity amongst us. In the mean time let them and those others that are like
them remember, that as he speaks, vitiosos reprehendere, sed probare vitia,
condemnare nocentes sed Crimina absolvere: to reprehend other men as vicious,
and approve the same vices in themselves; to condemn them as nocent, and to
forgive themselves for the same crimes, is no good sign of an upright
Conscience. And then they that rob the Church out of zeal to sanctity, put a
velvet Mask upon a foul and an ugly strumpet, and go about to arm the devil
against himself.

Indeed Sacrilege is one great bane wherewith Satan has used to poison
Reformations, and Rebellion another. Hear how Master Calvin chid some
heretofore for this miscarriage in their work. First, in an Epistle to Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, he notes this as a blemish of the English
Reformation; Certe nunquam integra florebit Religio, donec Ecclesiis melius
prospectum fuerit, ut idoneos habeant pastores, and qui docendi munus serio
obeant; Id quo minus fiat, occultis quidem artibus obsistit Satan: Vnum tamen
apertum obstaculum esse intelligo, quod praedae expositi sint Ecclesiae
reditus: malum sane intollerabile. Certainly, (says he) Religion will never
flourish entirely, till there be better care taken for the Churches that they
may have competent Pastors, that may seriously and diligently exercise the
function of Teaching; This indeed Satan strives to hinder by secret
stratagems. But there is one manifest impediment, as I understand, That the
Revenues of the Church are exposed to the spoil: which is intruth an
unsufferable evil. And again, in an Epistle to Viretus: Acriter aurem illis
velli cavi de administratione bonorum Ecclesiasticorum, in tempore
cogitandumillis esse qualiter Deo and hominibus rationem reddituri forent.
Papam fuisse furem, and Sacrilegum. Videndum, ne simus successores. I urged
them sharply, about the administration of Church-Goods; That they ought to
think upon it in time how they should be able to render an account to God and
men. I told them that the Pope had been a thief and a Church Robber: and we
were to look to it, that we do not prove his successors.

And agreeable to these speeces of Master Calvin, is that complaint of Zuickius
in a Letter of his to Caivin. Huc ventum videtur quod non sine gemitu dixerim.
Vt magna nostrorum pars credat sese tum demum vere regnum Antichristi evasisse,
si cum bonis Ecclesiaeludant pro libito. Nec ulli disciplinae subsint. O
egregium Christianismum!

It is come to this pass (says he) (which I may speak not without
lamentation) That a great part of our people think they have then at length
truly escaped the Kingdom of Antichrist, if the Church goods be exposed to
be the game of all men at pleasure; and that they be subject to no discipline.
O egregious Christianity! Just such a Reformation is this of our days.

I am even wearied with this sad contemplation, and almost confounded with that
flood and heap of Mischiefs and Corruptions, that wild Forest and Desert of
thorns and briers that have overspread the face of this poor Church of ours.
I am gotten into the midst of them, but can scarce tell how to get out: my
medirations are even out of breath, and I am entangled in this brake of our
Calamities, neither can I see to the end of them. Wheresoever I look, I see
too much matter for lamentation. When I look upon the houses of God, and see
them demolished and neglected; When I go into them, and behold how they are
profaned and abused; When I consider the waste that is made in the peaceable
and orderly assemblies of the people, which are devoured and consumed by
Factions and Sectious Conventicles: When I look upon the unreverent and
unseemly behavior of those that remain, to the dishonor of God, and the
scandal of Religion: When I observe how the Crutches are taken from the lame,
and the guides from the blind, by the merciless abolition of the set and
advised Forms of Prayer out of the Church, against so many Warrants of Gods
Word, allowing them, and prescribing them, so many necessities of the people
requiring them, so many undeniable reasons convincing the convenience and
usefulness of them, so many clear advantages of the Church thereby commending
them, and setting forth the benefit of them, against so ancient, so constant
practice of the Church, both Primitive and Reformed establishing and ratifying
them; and such a multitude of evil consequences upon their removal, which our
daily sad experience informs us of, and urges unto us for the restitution of
them. The Tautologies, the Blasphemies, the corrupt, unsound, and unorthodox
expressions; the confused, unmethodicall, and undigested, half codled,
scandalous, and temerarious vociferations and frantic ragings, rather than
prayers and devotions, that the people of God are continually in danger of
thereby. Together with that which is so much the more to be deplored, by how
much the less it is deplored and considered of, The turning out of the daily
public prayer every where for the most part out of the Church, settled by Gods
own Institution and Commandment anciently in the Church of the Jews, and
commended unto us in the Church Christian, by the authentical precedent and
example of the Apostles and Apostolical men, In the second of the Acts and 16
Verse, of whom it is said there, That they continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all
the people: and by the excellent fruit thereof, set down there also in the last
words of that Chapter: And the Lord added daily unto the Church such as should
be saved. When we consider these things, and how the Currents of Gods mercies
are grown low and dry unto us, since we left drawing with these Buckets, of
our daily prayers and supplications, in the Wells of Salvation. How God has
forsaken us, and cast us off, since we have forsaken and cast off him and his
service.

And when we add unto these thoughts, how the ancient and profitable
Discipline of Christian fasting and humiliation is abominated and rejected: and
in stead thereof Iezebels bloody and cruel Fasts, for the destruction of poor
Naboth, and the surprizall of his Vineyard, substituted in their rooms; not to
the reconciling, but to the further provoking of the Almighty, as we may too
easily perceive by the wretched returns thereof that we continually receive:
whereby the Lord seems to answer us, as he did the children of Israel, in the
58th of Isaiah; Wherefore have we fasted say they and thou see not; wherefore
have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? Would you know the
reason? hear then what God says at the fifth Verse; Behold ye fast for
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, etc. Whilst we
fasted in earnest, and fasted in unity, and fasted in obedience, and fasted in
Charity, how wonderfully has the Lord heretofore answered us in this City of
London, and in other places of this Kingdom? how has God yielded himself to
be bound by us as it were hand and foot, to be disarmed by us of his Weapons
of Destruction, to be overcome by us unto mercy and compassion? How speedily,
how hastily, how wonderfully, have the Plagues and the Pestilences fled from
the faces of our sincere and Christian humiliations and devotions? And how have
we thereby as it were upon a sudden ravished the sword out of the hand of the
destroying Angel, or caused him to put it up into the sheath? But now since we
have set up our factious Fasts, and our smiting Fasts, instead of true
Christian Fasts, How empty have we returned? What continual repulses have we
received? How has the Throne of Graee been shut up from our prayers? How have
our miseries and desolations been confirmed, and sealed, and multiplied upon
us? though we have repeated them so often, though they have been performed with
such outward strictness and solemnity, though we have roared like Bears, and
mourned sore, like Doves; yet we look for judgment, but there is none, for
salvation, but it is far from us. Judgment is turned away backward, and
justice stands afar off, for truth is fallen in the street, and equity
cannot enter. Yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes
himself a prey. Though we bellow and low like Oxes; yet still the Yoke of
our Transgressions is bound by the hand of the Almighty. Our wounds still
wranckle, and fester, and there is no healing for us. When we think upon these
things, are not our Bowels turned within us? What storms and tempests of
sighs and tears should be raised hereby from our hearts, were we not
overwhelmed more in our carnal security, than in so great a depth of
affliction and misery? How justly may we be ready to cry out with the
Psalmist (...), Ps. 42.7. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy
Water-spouts, Thy waves and thy billows are gone over us?

How are we beggered and broken by these losses? How is the trade of our
heavenly Merchandise, and of our spiritual Traffic decayed and intercepted?
How are we ship-wrackt and splitted in pieces like the Ship wherein St. Paul
was, in the 27th of the Acts, at the fortieth Verse, by the encounter of the
two Seas that have met together against us, the Seas of the divine indignation,
and of our own divisions and confusions. How is our tottered Vessel run a
ground? The forepart, that part of the Church which is right and orthodoxe,
sticks fast, as it were, and remains unmovable, being restrained from the
free exercise of that truth and worship which they profess, (and yet God be
blessed that they yet stick fast too unto their principles, and hold so well
together, in so great a storm.) But the hinder part, you know what I mean,
that is broken with the violence of the waves, into innumerable pieces, into a
thousand fancies, and foolish imaginations, into a multitude of strange and
monstrous Factions, and Sects, and Heresies, and Blasphemous opinions, and
Diabolical Enthusiasmes, and the Soldiers Counsel is to kill the Prisoners,
(it may be feared) lest any of them should swim out and escape. Where shall
we find a Centurion that is willing to save a Paul? Some indeed (and too many)
cast themselves forth into the Sea, forsaking the Communion of this poor
distressed Church: Some into the Sea of Rome, by falling away unto the Idolatry
and superstition of popery, so much the more to be blamed, for deserting the
Truth in its affliction; a clear discovery, that they were never sincere and
hearty friends unto it; otherwise sure they would not have left it in its
distress, when it stood most in need of their comfort and relief. I pray God
make them ashamed of their base and dishonorable Apostasy. And others have
cast themselves out on the other side, into another Sea, a red Sea full of
inconstant waves and raging surges, and dreadful Monsters, amongst whom the
Leviathan takes his pastime. But too few of these, I fear will ever get unto
the Land. Yet some may perhaps on the Boards of repentance, which is called
tabula post naufragium, (which God grant them) and on the broken pieces of the
Ship.

And to add more yet unto all this misery, in all these storms, The Pilot,
under Christ and his Spirit, of the ancient government is cast out; and every
unskilful Mariner, and capricious lay-Elder, children of a Geneva sedition,
viros e sanguine natos, and therefore sit instruments for that business they
have to do, to seed and nourish the womb from whence they sprung; These, on
the one side, and on the other side some that are worse than these, whom I
scarce know what to call, are striving for the stern, whilst the Vessel goes
to ruin; and to all the rest of those strange symptoms of the frenzy and
frantic madness of the people of this Land. This is added, That they are so
foolish as to be persuaded, That the Government established by the Apostle of
Christ himself, and warranted by the analogy that it hears unto that which
was established by God himself in the Church of the Jews, the wisdom and
equity of the order whereof does still prescribe unto us, though that that was
typical, and proper unto the Jewish Nation, and the legal Ministry is
vanished; That this government (I say) is antichristian, as if there had never
been any true Discipline in the Church of God until Calvin's time, Of which
we may truly say, aetatem non habet, It is not yet at age to answer for it
self, much less to be a fit Guardian for Gods people. But this is the sad
fruit of the miscarriages and corruptions of those, (I mean of some of those)
to whom that high trust of Government in the Church of God was committed, who
were more puffed up with the state and dignity, than they were affected with
the charge and duty of their places, which they left too freely unto the
mismannage of their inferior Officers, who looking after gain more than
godliness shall I say? Nay looking after gain in despite of godliness, in
opposition to godliness, sowed those tares whilst they slept, who should have
looked over them, which have since borne confusion and destruction to this
Church and Nation. I wish with all my heart I could have been silent in this,
for God knows I delight not in the trade of Cham: But my design is
Humiliation, and therein I must not be partial; and therefore give me leave
to say as one of the honestest of the Adversaries of the Truth that ever I met
with to my knowledge has said before me in another case: Si vero haec culpain
Ecclesiae quoque speculatores derivatur, ipsi viderint, ut Christi judici olim
suum officium excusent, in talibus.-nos in antiqua Ecclesiae nostrae seu prima
saecula respicimus, and illa ipsa contra insurgentes haeretistas defendimus;
tolerantes interim cum dolor incommoda praesentia, Vt pote quae mutare non
opis nostrae sit: and I hope I may say something more truly than he did; pug
no pro veritate Ecclesiae primae nullius novae sectae odio, multo minus ut
pseudo-catholicis obsequar, qurbus ut non scribo it a precor ut cum sectis
resipiont, illae nimirum ab haeretismo hae ab abusu. I desire to contend for
the truth of the Primitive Church, without any rancour against any side, much
less with any compliance with those that are Pseudo-Catholiques. Unto whom as
I write not (says he) and yet I confess I do, to them and all, and as I
write unto them, so I pray that they may repent together with the Sectaries and
Seditious; as these from their Heresies, Blasphemies, and ungodly designs; so
they from their a buses and miscarriages. In the mean time for those that are
as he also speaks, acti suo quodam spiritu ita antecclesiastico ut nihil
Ecclesiasticum illis placeat, sed sordeant omnia quae Schismatica, and transfug
is aut horibus nuper inventa non sunt. That are hurried on by their own
Anteeclesiasticall spirit (And sure an Antecclesiasticall Spirit is an
Antichristian Spirit, for Christ and the Church are one, 1 Cor. 12.12.) so that
they can away with nothing that is Ecclesiastical, but account all things
sordid and vile that are not schismatic, and invented by those that are
forsakers of the Church. For these I say, I humbly desire of God, that he
would either open their eyes, and convert their hearts, or else put a palsy
into their hands, that they may not enforce others to subscribe unto their
follies and wickedness.

And thus you have seen a sad prospect of some of the calamitous changes that
have befalne this poor destitute and forsaken Church, which are as so many
crooked lines, yet meeting in this center, if we may call that a Center wherein
there is no rest, even in the general decay of true Piety and Religion, which
is degenerated into a strange and horrid Chaos of Divisions and Distractions,
of Quarrels and Contentions, whereby the sincerity of faith is corrupted, the
flames of Christian love and charity cooled, the operations of a godly and
Christian life abolished and neglected; Conscience dethroned and deposed, and
carnal interest got up into its room, which has arraigned and condemned not
only the actions, but the very rules of virtue and holiness, and in stead of
the true spiritual and heavenly wisdom, which is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy: That is intruded under the name thereof, which
is the B^ood of envy and strife, and the womb of confusion and every evil
work, which the Apostle tells us is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish; and in stead
of that which was heretofore the glory of the ancient Christians, which made
the very Heathens fall into admiration of them with an Ecce quam se invicem
diligunt? quam pro se invicem mori parati sunt? Behold how they love one
another, how they are ready to dye one for another, They might now more justly
fall into an astonishment at the inhumanity and Barbarism that is amongst us,
against one another, with an Ece quam se invicem oderint quam se invicem inter
ficere parati sunt? Behold how they hate one another? how they are ready to
kill and to destroy one another? Thus the fruitless and roten Vine is become
the most sordid and useless of all trees. And according to the saying, that
Corruption optimi pessima, The corruption and degeneration of Christianity has
proved worse in too many than Turcisme or Heathenisme it self, as the best
Wine makes the sharpest Vinegar; those cruelties and injustices being acted
among us, yea professedly and openly performed and justified, which even
Ethnicks and Mahometans would be ashamed to be suspected of. And how shall
this reproach and ignominy of the Name of Christ, and the profession of the
Gospel be answered for?

And if this were the full sum of all our miseries, there were cause enough
for us even to melt our hearts in tears of lamentation, though we were never
so entire and unmaimed in outward and temporal blessings; Though we swamme in
the midst of plenty; Though our outward Peace ran as heretofore smoothly like a
calm and clear River; though the reputation or honor of our Nation were
never so splendid and unstained in the eyes of men; though the outward frame of
Government were never so orderly and excellently composed and settled, and our
liberties secured never so much unto us; all this would be but splendida
miseria, a splendid kind of misery and happiness, being destitute of the Crown
and true glory of them all, which is the prosperity of Religion and the Church
of God: for as one speaks in the person of the European Church; Quanti ista
sunt si comparent ur cum illis aeternis benefici^s, nam quid si frugibus, si
mercibus abundarem, si viis a latrocinio, maribus a pyratica liberatis pace
perfruerer, opulentiae matre. Quid si magnificis aedificiis, bonis legibus,
probis moribus, ingenuis artibus exornarer, and in terra carerem sana fide,
puro cultu, viz. precibus, incorruptis Domini Sacramentis, quibus mihi solatium
vivae Gloria mortuae solo Christi merito communicetur. Quid (inquam) illa mihi
terrena beneficia prodessen^o mnia, hisce caelestibus destitutae? si hic beata
viverem ad tempus, and post misera perirem in aeternum? What are all these
temporal things, if they be compared with eternal blessings? What would it
profit us to abound with the fruits of the earth and merchandise; to have our
high ways free from the danger of Robbers; the Seas from the perrill of
Pirates; to enjoy outward peace the mother of plenty; to dwell in stately
Edifices; Nay what would it be for us to have good Laws, civil manners, and
to be adorned with liberal Sciences, if with all these, we be destitute of
sound faith, pure worship, holy prayers, undepraved Sacraments? whereby comfort
in life, and glory when we are dead, is communicated unto us, by the sole merit
of Christ? what I say would all these terrene benefits advantage us, being
deprived of these heavenly blessings? What behocfe would it be unto us, to live
happily for a time here, and to be miserable for ever hereafter? If we be
excluded from the end, what shall we be bettered by enjoying the means?
How-ever our carnality has blinded us, it will one day be found true what the
foresaid Author has, that, nan Ecclesia propter rempublica^, sed respublica
proter Ecclesiam. The Church is not for the Commonwealth, but the
Commonwealth for the Church. The prosperity of the Civil state is lost, or in
vain, if the wholesome constitution of the Church be ruined. Nay he goes
further, Dicam amplius, says he, and vere, non Ecclesia propter mundum, sed
mundus propter Ecclesiam. The Church is not for the world, but the world for
the Church. The prosperity and health of Religion is the foundation of all
other blessings. Ruere Ecclesia non potest, as he goes on, quin codem
respublica labefactata motu concidat. The Church cannot fall to ruin, but the
Commonwealth must be shaken with it; and so indeed we have found it: For in
the concussion of our Religion and our spiritual blessings, what outward
blessing is there that is left unmaymed, undissipated?

First, for our outward peace, which is upon the matter the sum of all;
whither is it vanished? is there so much as a shadow of it left amongst us?

The time was, when we were the Palace of Peace, the habitation of tranquillity
and concord; The harmony whereof making a perpetual music and melody in this
nation, made us the envy of other people, and them too much our scorn, who
should have been our pity: It was once with us in this Realm like a long
fair calm and Sun-shiny day, like a pleasant and gentle gale of wind, not
buffeting us with rough or injurious gusts, but stroking us with amarous and
pleasing Aires. The Current of our hours and days was like a stream of milk
running in a Channel of the most polished Ivory, upon which we sailed up and
down with pleasure and delight, freed from those jarring and discordant bussles
and encounters wherewith our neighbor nations were continually molested. The
curled waves waiting round about our Island, as an armed Guard set by the order
of the Almighty for our safety, and attending as speedy posts and ready
Messengers, and swift Charriots, to run upon our errands unto foreign
Nations, and to convay our traffic unto them, and their riches unto us. We
sat quietly then every one under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree; No
rude and Barbarous Soldier beating open our doors to plunder us of our
estates, or to hurry us unto prison, or unto death; No firing of our houses, or
Cities; No wasting of our Fields or Vineyards; No tearing away of the poor
oppressed Husband from the bosom of his affrighted Wife at midnight; Noopen
ravishing of Women, and murdering them when that was done; No common massacring
of them and their poor innocent children to be heard of. No fields or
meddowes dyed with the dismal Scarlet of Christian Gore; nor Furrows made fat
with the blood of the slain. The terrifying sound of the warlike Trumpet, that
made the Prophets Bowels to moove within him, and payned him at the very heart,
Ier. 4.19. was once a stranger in our land. The Travailet might go on in the
highways, without being puzzled with that amazing question, Who are you for?
not to be answered without the hazard of his life. No capital crime then to
be for God and the King. No carrying of a pious and gracious Prince by violence
and treachery from one prison unto another; nor forcing of poor Orthodox
Ministers, for discharging their consciences out of their Churches or Pulpits,
unto the Gaols. The profitable Plough went on cheerfully in the Country, and
the Husbandman was not then feign to put out the eyes of his Horses, to save
the lamenesse of his Teeme. The gainful Trade of the City brought in the rich
returns of the Merchant and Artificer without interruption. Each man knew what
was his own, and possessed what he had gained with his labor. It was not a
crime then to be rich, nor a badge of honesty to be poor, nor a piece of
malignancy to be faithful and loyal. The certain and known Laws of the
Kingdom were the limits and bounds of the private and public interest, and
were not demolished by the perpetual and daily battery of Ordinances. Then we
were like an health full body, wherein the bumours and qualities keeping their
due proportions with one another, Break not the preservative League of nature.
Then we were like an entire fortress, strengthened by the cement of solid
unity, against the assaults of invading enemies. Then we were like a well
walled City without breach, yielding security to the inahbitants thereof, and
defying the attempts of the most potent adversaries. Then we were like a
Beautiful Body, wherein the parts being fitted with an amiable proportion unto
one another, with out Convulsions, Distortions, or Dislocations, and
contributing jointly unto the general comeliness, by the tribute of their
particular features, enjoyed the mutual sweetness of one another, under the
splendour of a royal and Princely head, from whom they received life, and
orderly motion under God: The several faculties, exercising their proper and
vital operations, to the good and preservation of the whole; and answering the
visible music of the outward beauty with another more active, and
intellectual harmony.

Then we were like a specious and well-composed Building, erected upon the
foundation of solid, well-framed, and well-established constitutions, and
covered with the Golden roof of a glorious Monarchy, the one to support it,
and the other to protect it: and the Cornerstones thereof were all of Unity.

We were like the Scythidns Sheffe of Spears or Arowes bound up together,
which neither Spain nor France could break, nor all the force of sorraigne
enemies burst, until the devil, and our own pride and faction, broke the
Band asunder, and so robbed us at once both of our unity and strength, and
rendered us a prey to a more contemptible people than either.

We were once like a sound and untoitered Vessel, sailing upon the Main, in a
pleasant and fair season.

But now alas! Quantum distamus ab illis? How are we changed from what we
were? The health of our body languisheth, through the Wars and Quarrels of
the contrary humors and qualities. The strength of our Fortress is broken and
demolished by breaches and divisions. The Walls of our City are Battered and
beaten down by the Hellish Engines of our bitter strifes and contentions. The
foundations of our building are cast down, and the golden roof thereof is
broken up, and has left us open to the storms and tempests, to perpetual
ruin and confusion; and the cement of peace being broken and dissolved, the
parts of our Edifice moulder away from one another; and in stead of a fair
structure we are become a heap. Our sheffe of Arrows are divided from one
another. Our poor Vessel is become tottered and broken, splitted upon the
Rocks of our own Discords, and beaten with the surges and billows of these
unhappy divisions which are still amongst us. So that we are now become like
the Ship wherein the Dissciples were in the eighth of Matthew. The storms are
risen upon us, and we are even covevered and overwhelmed with the waves, and
too few there are that will wake our Jesus by their earnest and hearty prayers
and supplications, that he may rebuke these Winds and these Seas, and restore
us unto a calm. The judgment of the Midianites and of the Philistines is
fallen upon us: We go on madly, Beating one another, that our enemies may
make a prey of us all. The flames of our intestine Broils have seized upon us,
and we are wasted and consumed in the raging heat thereof. Thus is our peace
vanished and gone.

And when Peace is gone, liberty is not like to stay behind. Heretofore we
enjoyed the happy freedom of Subjects and of Christians; no Bonds for the most
part upon the Body of this Nation, but the Golden Chains of those wholesome
Laws which were framed by the Authority of his Majesty, with the general
consent of the people of the Land, in the representative Body thereof, which
were unto us Chains rather of Ornament than Slavery, and did not so much limit
as preserve our Freedom; nor restrain us from using it so much as others from
hurting it; for though the blindness of our minds, together with the
inordinatenesse of our affections, has heretofore so bew itched us, that we
could not see our own happiness. Yet methinks by this time our sad
Experience, which is the Mistress of Fools, may inform us, that the Power
and prerogative of the Magistrate, and the ready subjection of the people
thereunto, is the surest guard of the liberty of the people, under God. The
removal and violation whereof, has not rendered us as we soolishly dreamed,
so much masters of our selves, as those that promised it us, absolute Tyrants
at their pleasure over us, and us the Vassals unto their irregular and
unsatiable appetites, who having ravished the Sword out of the lawful
Magistrates hand, and gotten too much of the strength of the Kingdom into
their own, use them both, after all their fair protestations and
pollicitations to the contrary, to compel the poor abused people of the Land,
to prostrate their Estates, Possessions, and their personal services to the
maintenance of that bondage which they have brought upon them, and to the
strengthening of that intolerable yoke which they have forced upon their necks;
and it were well yet that they had gotten but so much wisdom into so sad a
bargain, as to discover and acknowledge their folly, and how at length to
seek a remedy thereof, by endeavoring the restitution of Law and Monarchy;
that they would but now at length see the palpable difference, between one
Lord, and many; between one gracious and pious King, and thirty thousand
Tyrants, whose variety of designs and inclinations, renders the obedience of
the people as perplexed and impossible, as the rigorousnesse of their Commands,
and infinity as it were of their exactions, makes the burden often their
oppression intolerable.

And whilst we mistook Anarchy for Liberty, we have found that true that was
spoken by an accute Politician of this nation; Qui propter libertatem suam
omnia agit arbitrio suo, propter libertatem alienam omnia patitur arbitrio
alieno. He that for want of a lawful Government, by reason of his own
Liberty is left to do all things at his own Will; By reason of the liberty of
others is exposed to suffer all things at their Will.

But we would not be persuaded of these Truths, not yet will we, though we
have bought the knowledge of them so dear. We would not believe we were free
enough in our possessions or persons, until by dismissing those guards which
the Law and the excellent Government of this nation had set upon them, we had
set others free to enslave them both at their own wills; as the whole Kingdom
has found by many heavy evidences. Thus whilst they would not live in an
orderly subjection to their Superiors for their good and preservation, it is
most just in God to make them live in villainy under their equals and
inferiors, to their ruin and destruction. And now what is become of our
Liberty? surely there is scarce any other Liberty now left us, but such a
liberty as the poor Sheep have that are deprived of the Shepherd, and are free
to be devoured by every ravenous and savage beast. We took our fold for a
prison, our Castle of defense for a Dungeon, our Guardian for a Iaylor, and our
Security for Restraint. We have broken down these Fences, and now we rejoice
much in our liberty. Such a kind of liberty indeed as the Lord threatened to
the people, Ierem. 34.17. wherewith he rewarded their Oppression of their
Brethren.

A Liberty to the Sword, and to the Famine, and to the Pestilence.

A Liberty to the Oppressor, and to the Plunderer, and to the Thief.

A Liberty to the Murderer, and to the Waster, and to the Devourer.

Liberty to Desolation, and liberty to destruction.

Heretofore no man could be deprived of his estate, or ejected from his
possessions, without a legal trial, according to the known and established
Laws of the Kingdom.

No man could be adjudged unto death, but according to the same established
Laws, and that upon evidence and conviction, by the trial of 12. men.

It was then no usual course to imprison men at pleasure, without any crimes
laid unto their charge, nor to keep them in prison six or seven years
together, without affording them a hearing and trial, being desired.

If there were some miscarriages of this Nature in the Government heretofore,
yet they were but rare, like Comets and wonders: (as there are some
extravagances even in the work of nature it self; and must be expected
sometimes in the best Government by reason of the infirmities of men, the
miscarriages of Instruments, the fallacies and deceitfulness of
Representations, and the manifold difficulties and impediments of Government,
which has been too little considered heretofore, and should have been cured
with medicines, and not worse Maladies; But now our Estates are ravished from
us by violence, by those new orders of Thieves, called Committy-men and
Sequestrators, without so much as any Charge objected against some of us. And
if others have had some Charge laid against them; yet how often have they been
charged with their Duties in stead of Crimes, and condemned, not for breaking,
but for observing the Laws of God, and of the Land, and that without any due
hearing, or any the least show of any legal Conviction? witness those numerous
multitudes of Loyal and Orthodox Ministers, that have been whifled out of
their livings and charges, by the illegal storms of a Committee-tempest, upon
no other ground but a sic volo sic jubeo; or because their Consciences would
not stretch unto disloyalty upon the tenter-hooks of their oppression; and that
without so much as a form of any legitimate trial and eviction.

Our Bodies are hurryed away to Iayles and Prisons, without so much as any
Cause declared, or a Summons premised to come in to our Answer, or the least
Color of Law to countenance it; and both these clearly against the Petition
of Right, and the great Charter of England.

When some have been kept for diverse years, and have never so much as heard,
either why, or wherefore; but only to satisfy the pleasures of our new Lords.

The lives of the honest and loyal people of the land have been sacrificed to
the lust of cruelty and oppression by arbitrary Sentence, and without any
regular proceeding, for committing Duties against their ungodly Designs, for
offenses against no law either of God or man, that allotted any capital
punishment thereunto, but such as were made by an invalid power, and that after
the Facts conmitted: which if allowed, who can tell what to do, or when he
does well or ill? or who can be secure of his life? Witness the blood that yet
still cries and speaks no better things it may be feared, than the blood of
Abel, of Strafford, Laud, of Yeomans and Bowcher, of Tomkins and Chaloner, and
many others in Cool blood, and deliberately massacred; besides those many
thousands destroyed by the lawless sword of Rebellion: And witness that blood
now lately shed, not by Laws, but by false glosses upon the Laws rather, the
blood of loyal Captain BURLY. And that this mischief may be secured if
possible from all remedy, it is become an high offense so much as to ask the
Restitution of our freedom; witness the barbarous massacring of the late
Surrey Petitioners at Westminster. And what freedom is left, where we may not
so much as petition for our freedom? Or what security remains unto any either
of life or liberty under them who take away men's lives but for asking their
Liberties?

But what do we talk of the Liberty of Subjects? look upon your King: Yea
let me say unto you in Pilat's words unto the Jews, but in a better sense,
and with a better affection: Behold your King, and see the very Grave and Tomb
of your Liberty in his base and unworthy Captivity and Bondage. The Lord grant
it a resurrection by his speedy deliverance and restitution. But this is a
subject both for the horrid impiety of the Actors, and the Glorious and
Christian patience of the Royal Sufferer, now made nothing but a Royal slave
by their wickedness, too full of Emphasis for me to venture it upon the
poverty of my Pen, in that haste that I am in. Consider it, and let it divide
your hearts at once into an abomination of their wickedness, an admiration of
his courage and tolerancy, and a lamentation of your own wretchedness and
slaverie. The Crown whereof is the Captivity of the Crown, and your gracious
King: for though it be true indeed that this is the just reward of the
unthankful murmurings and discontents of the people, who were weary of their
own happiness, and have thereby betrayed themselves to misery and ruin; and
of that too much fondness of outward and mistaken liberty, which whilst we
held at too great a rate, and preferred inordinately before Peace, and greater
blessings, and esteeming it above that true liberty and freedom of spirit,
which consists in an ingenuons and unservile Dominion over our selves, our
passions, and affections, which if we had not betrayed in our selves, no man
could have taken from us, it being such as a noble and Christian heart may
enjoy in the greatest outward slavery and bondage, in the closest Prisons, and
the deepest Dungeons, and under the tyranny of the most wicked oppressors. Yet
the visible fountain of this Calamity is the desolation of just and lawful
Government amongst us.

And I need not labor much to tell you of the sad impairements, and
dissolutions of that amongst us. You have the sad spectacle thereof daily and
hourly before your eyes.

You may yet remember the time, though it has had a long interruption, when
the Crown of Majesty was the Ornament of this Nation, and upon that glory was a
defense; when agracious and pious King was the Crown of his Crown, and with
the virtues and Clemency of his Person, adorned the greatness and dignity of
his office: When the Throne and the Scepter of lawful and just power, armed as
it were with celestial lightning, and strengthened with the sinew of the
Divine authority, from whence it was orderly derived and received, as a Ray of
that majesty and Authority which is in God himself, summoning the Consciences
of men unto obedience in the virtue and force of the divine Ordinance, yielded
protection unto the lives and liberties of the People, security unto Religion
and divine worship, solidity unto the Peace and Unity of this Church and
nation, and was like a Cherubim and a flaming sword against the invasions of
Violence, Injustice, and Oppression.

Justice was dispensed in the right Channells, being derived from the proper
Fountain; the Laws, which are it were the life-bloud of a nation, ran
freely without such obstructions they now meet with through all the veins and
vessels of this lody, and yielded unto each Member its equal and just supply,
at least in so good a measure and manner as was sufficient to preserve the Body
in good liking and prosperity; and though the secret Briberies and partiabities
of some inferior instruments of Government, caused some smaller distempers in
this kind, yet they were such as might have had easy cures, and did not at
all destroy the constitution of the body.

We were governed by authentical and certain Rules, and were not subject
unto Mushrome Ordinances; those abortive issues of the womb of Sedition, those
unformed lumps, and dead motions of a diseased and dropsy state, begotten by
no legitimate Father, but by the Incubus of a rebellious people and Army.

There was then no professed and ordinary infliction of punishments without any
offenses going before them, no offenses then without their precedent Laws, to
give the lie to the Blessed Apostles, who tell us that (...), That sin is the
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. And again, By the Law is the knowledge
of sin, Romans 3.20. And again, where no law is there is notransgression. Romans
4.15.

Then Justice was administered in the right method, there went a fair hearing
before cndemnation, and the sentence of the law was the Usher to Execution.

It was managed by the right and genuine instruments, enabled by authentical
Commissions from the supreme Magistrate, the force and virtue whereof was like
a lively sap dispensed from the Royal Root into those several Branches of
Government, which made them bear the fruits of Peace, and lustice, and safety
to the people.

The motion of Rule, was like a natural motion, derived from the head unto the
members, by those legal Officers which were as the Nerves and Sinews of this
body, propagated from thence into the several Regions and parts thereof.

And the Scales and weights and the mensures of justice were the same unto all
sorts, without any open or professed inequality, when the eyes of the Judges
were fixed not on the Persons, but their Causes, without such diversification
of the sacred and inviolable rules of right, as now, according to the several
inclinations of parties and interests. There was not then as now one measure
for a Cavalier, to yield him nothing, though his case be never so clear and
just, and another for a Parliamenteer, to yield any thing he will stand for,
though his pretenses and colors be never so weak. Men were not then wracked
and goard between the two horns of that unreasonable Dilemma, nor crushed to
pieces in the press of that Pharaohtick and unconscionable oppression, under
which the poor loyal party, many of them suffer at this day, (and many more
would suffer, were it not for the mercy of some good men, that they have to
deal with, and such whose hearts God has made tender toward them in these
hard times) to be laid open, to have all their debts exacted with all severity
by their Creditors, and in the mean time to be utterly disabled for the
recovery of their own, or the enjoyment of their estates; Whereby they should
be furnished to pay that which is required of them; which is much worse than to
require men to make Brick without straw. It was not so with us heretofore.

But now, the Ornament and Defense of the Royal Crown is cast down; and that
gracious and pious Prince that adorned it, is now sent away from the Throne of
his Majesty, to be the ornament of a Iaile or Prison; of whom we may say more
truly than he of Socrates, Carolus carcerem intravit ignominiam loco
detracturus; King Charles by being so long a Prisoner, has taken away the
ignorminy and reproach of imprisonment; and I might perhaps be pardoned, if I
should say that it may be looked upon hereafter rather as a reward than as a
punishment; and truly it may be considered by those that are the Authors
thereof, that it is no good way of Reformation, to bring the Prisons into too
much credit, unless they mean to set up their own trade by it, and to
encourage men to rob, and steal, and to murder, on purpose that they may have
the reward of a Iayle or Prison. But to go on, now in stead of a just and
legal Authority, that awful Bond that lays hold upon the very soul, an
illegal and usurped power is set up, which a rectified Conscience so far
disclaimes, that it accounts it a sin to submit unto it, and there is like to
be little peace or settled order in that rule, where obedience it self is a
transgression. Strength and outward force may prevail for a while, and make
slaves mor than subjects of a people; it may bind their carcasses, but it is
Authority that rules the heart, and that is none where it is not just. The
great comfort and encouragement of every duty unto man, is when it strikes
through them unto God. This is it that does at once secure, and sanctify and
sweeten our performances. Where Intrusion and usurpation is, there all these
are wanting unto the soul. What hope then is there that an usurped Dominion,
should either recover or maintain a settled concord in this Nation, where it is
opposed by so many branches of just Interests against it, and cannot in any
likelihood be held up but by great oppressions of the people, which must needs
make the yoke thereof too irksome to be borne either with long Peace, or
Patience.

The Laws of the Kingdom are obstructed and intercepted, those true
conceptions are stifled and destroyed by the adulterate superfaetations of
Ordinances. The Great and once awful and venerable Court of Parliament, that
was the womb of our wholesome Laws, is degenerated into Factions, and become
the Seminary of Sedition; and instead of being the great Counsel of the King,
is become his enemy; and whilst that which was ordained for the Physic of the
Kingdom, is enforced upon us for a perpetual Diet (as it usually falls out)
it is become mortal unto the body, and in stead of curing has multiplied our
Maladies. Punishments are inflicted without mercy, not only for no offenses,
but for acts of righteousness. Transgressions are made without any Laws
forbidding them; more than the corrupted rules of some men's unsanctified
Consciences.

The method of Justice and Government is confounded; and instead of the lawful
Officers and Instruments of Government, they being removed, Changelings are
thrust into their places, without any legal or authentical delegation from
the fountain of Justice and Authority, whose want of Commission, poisons their
administrations, and whilst they execute one murderer, they commit another
therein.

A stone and a stone, and an Ephah and an Epha, are become too perpetual an
abomination to the Lord in this notion, and in this ruin and devastation of
Government, All the Duties both to God and man, both of the first and the
second Table, of piety toward him, and justice and charity to our Neighbors,
of chastity, temperance, and Christian sobriety in our selves, how are they
fallen and trampled under foot? and indeed how should it be otherwise? when the
hedge of the vineyard is broken down, what beast of the field, or wild Boar of
the Forest can w^nt an admittance to forage and waste it? When the
foundations of the Earth are out of course, what hope is there of any
soundness or integrity to be left? The Sun is scarce more necessary to the
world, than a lawful and settled government is to a people; And if the Sun be
Eclipsed it is held to be the forerunner of sad Eclipses of our inferior
Comforts: and so we have found the Eclipse of our Politic Sun in the State.

And lastly for our Honor and reputation; Alas! How should that stay, when all
these are gone? It is a blessing, which if it be true, is but the splendor of
other perfections; and therefore when they are vanished, it must likely run
after them: Or if it stay behind, it is but a shadow in shead of light. What
Credit is to rich men, or Riches, such is Honor or Reputation to other
Excellencies. And we may here remember the old Verse:

Quantum quisque sua nu^morum servat in ared,
Tantum habet and fidei --
When wealth and riches take their journey, credit uses not to remain at
home. And since Peace, Liberty, and the nurse of both and of all other
blessings, Government, have left us, our reputation is become but a fading
flower.

We were once the Glory, who are now the shame, the scorn, and reproach of
other nations. Our brightness is clouded, our splendor is obscured. We whose
name heretofore for comeliness and beauty in Religion, made Rome to blush as it
were in all her pride, to see Truth in this Church, like a Diamond richly set
in the gold of excellent Order and decency, to outshine all that sophistical
luster of their gaudy and glaring superstition. We whose fame for Valor and
Prowess has heretofore put such Agues into the greatest of our bordering
Kingdoms, whose renown for learning and knowledge in the Liberal Sciences,
and in the Laws Divine and Humane, made us so much the Athens and Academy of
the World. We? Ah! what a We are we now become? How are we made the
mocking-stock of our Adversaries? ROME laughs at us, to see our grave and
comely Matron (for such was our Church) spoiled of her decent and seemly
ornaments, and clothed in the garments of madness, and in the rags of
Confusion and desolation; To behold that precious Gemme of holy truth which we
embraced, rent out of the Gold, and cast under foot into the Dunghill; To see
our field that bore such fruitful Crops, and our Valleys that stood so thick
with Corn, that they did even laugh and sing, even with the good Corn of
wholesome and sound Doctrines, to be overgrowne now with the Thorns and Briars
of Heretical opinions, and mad Factions and Divisions. There, there say they,
so would we have it, whilst the Calamities of our Church are their game and
pastime, and as once it was said of Tire in her ruin. Is. 23.7. so we may
conceive them crying out scornfully against us, Is this your Joyous City? and
is this the temple of truth and holiness? Is this the Fortress of the divine.
Oracles? the great Castle and Champion of the reformed Religion? See now what
is become of their Reformation? where now is that excellent building which they
had set up? Oh how bravely it burns and consumes in the flamer of those fires
which themselves have kindled in it? Oh what sport it is to see it? How it
warmes us, how it revives us! Thus they delight themselves with our phrensies,
and strengthen themselves by our confusions and desolations. But Lord how long
shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they utter
and speak hard things? and the workers of iniquity host themselves? Lord
look upon our reproach and ignominy, and restore us for thy mercies sake: Let
not them that are our enemies wrongfully rejoice over us, neither let them
wink with their eyes, that hate us without a cause. They have opened their
mouth wide against us, and have said Aha, Aha, our eye has seen it. This thou
have seen, O Lord, keep not silence, O Lord be not far from us. Stir up
thy self, and awake to our judgment, even to our cause, our God and our Lord.

Our bordering Nations that heretofore feared us, and honored us, how do they
now despise, or pity us? whilst our samed Valor and Prowess, is degenerated
into treachery and baseness; and the glorious noon of our Learning and
Knowledge is overspread with a cloud of stupidity and ignorance?

And all these losses are accompanied with many other, with decay in trade, of
husbandry, and what not?

But I have done with this long and sad contemplation of our miseries, although
I doubt not but your daily observations, and the perpetual sense of that
variety of pressures that are upon us, may inform you that I have left many
sores untouched. But thus far I have endeavored to show you the streams of
our evils; and now I come to discover the fountain of them. I have hitherto
set before you some symptoms of our maladies; it remains now that I should
lay open the root of them, that so we may proceed unto the cures and remedies.
And here I have a world of matter before me: But I have been too prodigal of
my paper already, and therefore dare not lanch out into these deeps. Besides
that, necessity is urgent upon me in diverse respects for a conclusion.

Take therefore for that which is behind these several Theses.

The first is this; That the general fountain of all these our miseries and
caldmities, are the general Corruptions, Backeslidings, and Pollutions that
are amongst us in this Nation.

The Assertion is evident.

1. Because sin is the causa sine qua non, The cause without which there is
no affliction. There was never any but one that was punished without sin, and
that was Christ, and even he was punished for sin.

This might further appear from the goodness of God, who can meditate no
evil to his poor creatures, made after his own Image, if not engaged thereto
in justice. God was all love and mercy, till sin kindled a flame of fury and
wrath in him, and yet that is a flame of love too; for it is his very love unto
goodness that incenseth him against sin. No cause in God without sin; no
cause in the creature without sin. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the Ground. Job 5.6.

2. From the nature and use of afflictions, as they are either punishments, or
chastisements, or trialls.

Were there no sin, there would be no Punishments.

Were there no Diseases, there needed no medicines. Where there are no errors,
there need no corrections.

Where there are no falsifications, there eis no use of trialls. If there were
no corrupt money, or base Metalls, the Touchstone might be thrown away.

3. From the clear expressions of the Scripture.

1. Those that place the fountain of our Destructions, and our Calamities in
our selves. Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is
thine help.

2. Those that more plainly lay the charge upon our sins, Psalm 107.17.
Fools because of their transgressions; and because of their sins are
afflicted. See Ier. 2.19. and a multitude of other places.

3. Those wherein God threatens affliction, all which threatenings are either
explicitly, or implicitly brought in by sins. See Deuteronomy. 28, etc.

4. Those wherein we find the people of God acknowledging sin as the root of
their Calamities, as Psalm 38.3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because
of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.
Where we have the descent and pedigree as it were of afflictions and judgments
set before us. The first root is sin; that enkindleth Gods anger, and that
breaks forth into judgments, etc. God is the first cause of all good and
blessing. But the Devil and our corruptions are before him in the production
of evil, and the curse. He is the Author indeed of these two, and the first
cause of all that is good, and of being in them; but as they are evil, they
are first from Satan and sin. For God sends afflictions not as an instituter
of nature, but rather as a revenging Judge, or as a healing Physician etc.
Therefore this is opus alienum, the first spring of this motion is in some
sense not in God; that is to say, in regard of the evil that is therein.

5. Those wherein the spirit argues from calamities to repentance and
reformation; as a means of removal, ubi negatio est causa negationis, ibi
affirmatio est causa affirmationis.

6. Those places, where we find Gods practice herein recorded.

It was for the sin of Adam, that he was cast out of Paradise, made subject
to the Curse, to death and damnation, and that the creature was cursed as his
utensils and furniture, Genesis 3.

It was for the bloody sin of Caine, that he was cursed from the earth, and
made a fugitive, and a vagahond, a Rogue upon the face thereof. Genesis 4.

It was for the general corruptions, and depravations of the old World, that
it was destroyed by the wrath of God in the Deluge: First, the fountains of
the deep were broken up, in a flood of their hellish sins and impieties, and
then the windows of heaven were opened to overwhelm them with a Deluge of
Destruction, and so Abyssus Abyssum invocat, one deep calls another. See
Genesis 7.11.

There was a Fire of horrid and unnatural lusts, blown up and nourished by
those fuellers of Lust, Pride, and fullness of Bread, and abundance of
idleness in Sodom, etc. before the fire from heaven came down and consumed
them unto ashes, etc. Genesis 19. Ezekiel. 16.49.

And from such and many other places we may conclude, That it is from our sins,
our great, our horrid, our crying, our national sins, our universal
corruptions, and desertions of God, that these great Evils are befallen us in
the Church and State.

Especially from our hay nous contempt of the Gospel, and of the divine
worship and ordinances, and the prophanations of his House and Service.

And for the contempt of that Government which he has set over us, and the
violating the Authority of Christ, from whom it is derived. A sin that is
indeed the womb of universal Corruption and Confusion; and however it may be
painted over with false colors and pretenses, invented by worldly and depraved
minds, to deceive themselves and others withal, yet it will appear one day
in its own Colors, when those that have brought forth and nursed this
mouster, will (if they repent not) be afraid to look upon it, etc.

For these high despights done unto Gods holy and gracious ordinances; and for
those general and national sins of Perjury, Sacrilege, Extortion,
Profanation: for those Adulteries and beastly pollutions that have over-flowed
amongst us; and an innumerable company of other sins, are these sad and heavy
messengers sent unto us.

For the Injustice, Bribery, Partiality, Carelessenesse, and Cowardice of the
Magistrates.

For the Ambition, Covetousness, Idleness, Luxury, Contentiousness, Vain
glory, Pusillanimity, Temporizing, Treachery, Falsehearte^nesse, and
Scandalousnesse of too many of us of the Ministry.

For the betraying of Innocence and Justice in the Lawyers, their Pleadings
against the truth, and selling the righteous for a pair of shoes.

For the looseness, the Blasphemies and horrid execrations, the open and
professed drunkenness and lust, and utter contempt of God and the duties of
piety on the one side.

For the Pride, the Faction, the Hypocrisy, the uncharitableness, the bloody
crueity and oppression, the Disobedience and Rebellion, the disorderly walking,
the Perjuries and secret corruptions of another side.

For the Atheism and irreligion that is on all sides.

For the Falsehood and injustice of the Tradesmen, and others in their dealings
and contracts; their false lights, false waights, and measures, and other
deceipts, whereby they make a trade of injustice.

For the murmurings and unthankfulnes, and face-grindings, and Tithe-stealings
of the Husband men, Corne-masters, and others.

For the Pride and impudent shamelessenesse, and wantonness, and vanity of the
Women of our age and nation, openly professed and written before the eyes of
all men as it were, in the scandalous and unseemly nakedness of their Bodies,
and in those Witchcrafts of Satan, those hellish Characters and Charms
wherewith their faces are bepatched and bespotted; those Diagrams of the
Devil, upon which he reads infernal Iectures of Lust, unto the libidinous
and luxurious youth, and other people.

For the dissolution of all order, and rules, and relations. amongst us. For
the harshnesse and untendernesse of some Husbands to their wives, and the
foolish and indiscreet fondness of others.

For the stubbornness, and disobedience, unreverence, and uncompliancy of
Wives unto their Husbands: And for the unfaith. fullness of both one toward
another, against those sacred bonds of Marriage, and that holy Ordinance of God.

For the carelessenesse of Parents of their children, especially in respect of
their spiritual good, neglecting to bring them up in the fear and in the
nurture of the Lord, and in the instruction of salvation; their heathenish
cruelty unto the souls of their progeny, who can be content to damn their
own for them to get them a temporal inheritance here by their appressions and
injustices, but take no care to provide either for them or themselves, in
respect of their eternal inheritance in heaven; Too clear an evidence of
their heathenish hearts, however they may be in the profession of Christianity.

For the disobedience and undutifulnesse of Children to their Parents: The
Viper that is begotten even of that corruption of their Parents, The Scorpion
of their own breeding and bosom, whereby God justly punishes them for their
carelessenes of their Children, making a wicked and rebellious son oftentimes
to be the scourge of careless and irreligious Parents.

For the Injustice of Masters, and their unmercifulness. And for the
stubbornness, negligence, unfaithfulness, eye-service; the undutifull
insolences, and the filching Roberies, Tale-bearing, and treacheries of
Servants.

For these, and for that (...), that swarm and miscelany, that Augean stable
of all sorts of corruptions, wherewith this Land of ours does stink in the
Nostrills of the Almighty, together with that lukewarmenesse that is in the
best of us, which has made him ready to abominate us, as we may justly fear,
and to spue us out of his mouth. For these things the land mourns, and yet
how few are there that give themselves to godly mourning for the land? Yea all
our sins have a share in this sad business, every man must accuse himself.

And as these are the mothers and the wombes, so they are the nurses of our
miseries; the hinderers and impediments of our relief and remedy.

These are the winds that blast our prayers, and our fastings, and turn them
into sin; so that they become a means not to the abatement of our miseries,
but to the increasing of the heap of our iniquities: and what a wretched case
is that Patient in, in whom all the Physic that is administered takes part with
the disease, and the remedies themselves become new Maladies.

This is our sad condition; so that we may conclude this point with that of
the Prophet, Is. 59.1, 2. Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
seve, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear. But our iniquities have
separated between us and our God, and our sins have hid his face from us.

These, even our sins are the fountains of our Calamities, perditio tua ex
te, thy destruction is from thy self, is Gods voice unto England now, as well
as to Israel heretofore.

Thus we see our diseases in the stream and in the fountain, in the symptoms
and in the roots; and indeed the Fountain is much more bitter than the stream,
the roots much more poisonous and deadly than the branches; our sins are our
greatest miseries and judgments.

But is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Has the Lord
that wounded us no healing for us?

Yes, There is a Physician that can heal us; and it is but one, and that is
God. There is a Balm that can cure us, and this is but one neither; and that's
his mercy.

God has wounded us for our sins; And it is he only that can heal us. He
can do it, for he is omnipotent, and can do all things; he has omnipotent
mercy, as well as omnipotent justice; yea if there be, or could be any
difference in his Attributes, his mercy would seem to have the better of it,
and to be the stronger of the two. He pulls down, and builds up; and it
is as easy with him to raise, as to demolish: He en^creaseth the Nations and
destroieth them: He enlarges the Nations, and straightneth them again, Job
12.23. If he cut off, or shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?
He that made the World out of nothing, by his mere word, can by the same word
restore us from all that nothing, that misery and confusion whereinto we are
fallen. Though we are dead and dry like the bones in the Valley, Ezekiel. 37.1, 2.
yet he can make these bones live; he can make a noise, and a shaking for
recovery, as well as he has made a noise and a shaking heretofore for ruin.
He can put us into an healthful ague, as well as he has done into a sickly
and destructive one; He can make them come together again bone unto his bone,
by repairing the breaches and divisions in the Church and State, which is as it
were the skin and the covering; He can make the sinews and the flesh to come
upon them, by restoring the Laws, which are as it were the sinews of the
State, and by re-setling the order and freedom of trades, and vocations
therein, which are as it were the Muscles and Fillings of this body; He can
cover them again with skin, by re-enforcing the Government, which is as it
were the skin and the covering of a nation under God, to keep all safe
within, and to preserve it from outward violence, even with the fair and
beautiful skin of a Royal Monarchy, wherewith this Nation was once so
amiable. Yea, he can raise up the spirit of true Prophecy, and make the
quickening wind of his holy Spirit, to breath upon the dead members of this
Church, that they may live, by the restoring of the purity and freedom of his
Ordinances, and the infusion of his graces. Yea, though a people be even dead
and buried, and even ready to stink in the Grave with Lazarus; though they be
dissolved into dirt, nay into a very nothing: yet he can open their graves,
and cause them to come forth out of their graves, and recreate them out of
their dust, and of their nothing make them a better something than ever they
were; more glorious in their resurrection, than they ever were in their former
constitution. He that shall do this for the world at the latter day, can do
the like for us or any other decayed parts thereof every day.

He that commanded the storms and the tempests, and the unruly Waves and
Billows of the Sea, in the midst of their highest Quarrels and Contentions,
and with one small word reconciled them into a sudden Calm, can as easily
quiet the storms and the tempests, the unruly surges and billows of men's
minds and affections amongst us, and can turn all our divisions into a
pleasant calm of Christian Charity in the Church, and civil concord and unity
in the State.

He has medicines for the most desperate diseases, he has remedies for all
our sicknesses, his Word is the (...), that can cure them all.

He can do it; That is comfortable: and yet this will not I fear bring us
unto him. It is too true, that we too seldom go to God but out of stark
need, as long as we can find any shadows to skulke under in the creature; we
rarely think of laying hold upon the substance which is in God; few there be
that make him their choice: If we fly to him, it is commonly for a Refuge;
Till we be convinced of the emptiness and helplessenesse of outward aides, we
are for the most part strangers unto God. We must therefore be further
instructed, that as God is able to help us; so there is none else able; that
there is no possibility of obtaining a true and soled recovery from our
miseries and decays, but from him. And this is a truth so clear and evident,
that it is the monstrous blindness of our corruption that we do not see it.

It is established upon three firm foundations: First, upon Natural Reason.
Secondly, upon the irrefragable evidence of Scripture. Thirdly, upon Common
experience.

First, it is a principle written upon our hearts in the Chatact^^ of reason.

Which reaches us that God being thesest couse, as the essences of the
Creatnres, so all their motions are dependant upon him, as they cannot be, so
they cannot work without him: All their motions are swayed and overruled by
him, so that the creatures can give no help but by his commission; they are
all empty Channels, unless they be filled unto us by the streams of his
goodness. If he give not the Word of help and health unto them, all that they
can do will rather harm us than relieve us. His power and goodness is the
sinew and the strength of them all: Therefore if God be not present unto us in
them with that, they will all prove but Broken Reeds.

Secondly, the Scripture is full of this Doctrine: there we find this principle
acknowledged by the King of Israel, in the Discipline of the Famine whereby
that Lecture was imprinted on him as it seems, 2 Kings 6.27. If the Lord do
not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the Barn floor, or out of
the Wine Press? But what he could not see perhaps but in the time of that
actual failing of the creature, The Spirit of God teaches us to acknowledge
in its greatest fullness, and that what ever promises it makes, it can perform
nothing without God.

First, it is set down in the general rule, James 1.17. Every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights,
etc. The blessings that are administered unto us by the Creatures, are but as so
many rays of light convayed unto us from that Father of lights by them; If he
intercept his influence, they are nothing but darkness and misery: and if all
good is from him, there can be no good obtained without him. He is
all-sufficient without the creature, but they are altoget her insufficient, yea
deficient without God; without him all their wisdom is dotage, all their
plots and contrivances are madness, all their strength is weakness, all their
fidelity is treachery, and all their riches is extreme beggary. Nay they are
so far from being helps unto us, that they prove many times our greatest
impediments, like Saul's Armor unto David, 1 Samuel 17.38, 39. Therefore God
tells Gedeon, Judges 7.2. The people that are with thee are too many for me to
give the Midianites into their hands. And there you may see Gods reason too,
lest Israel vaunt themselves against me saying, mine own hand has saved me.
Observe Gods dealing in the progress of that story, and profit by it, it may
afford us excellent matter for our meditation.

And see what is recorded concerning Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 15. He was
marvellously helped till he was strong: But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction, etc.

You may stand and admire the working of this principle in another way upon our
gracious King at this time, whilst he had Armies and much outward strength, he
came down; for indeed their wickedness rendered them unworthy to be a Guard
for so pious a Prince, and much more to be the instruments of Gods mercy to
him and to his people. But since he has been stripped of all those outward
helps, how wonderfully has God been seen in the Mount? So that his Motto
may be like that of Saint Paul, When I am weak then am I strong. Insomuch, that
I must confess that I am almost afraid of his recruiting Armies, lest by their
irregular violences, and their former impieties, and miscarriages, they prove
to the interruption of the gracious work that God has begun for him, and his
poor people. I beseech God give them grace to beware of it. But I hope their
former miscarriages will in struct them that they may not make themselves
guilty of a double ruin.

This conclusion is yet further confirmed, Job 9.12, 13. Behold he takes
away, who can hinder him, and who will say unto him, What do thou? If God
will not withdraw his Anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him.

But generals are too wide to chain (...) our unruly thoughts and affections
for the most part.

The Lord therefore descends to particulars for our instruction, to show us
that there is no kind of relief that can be had without him; there is no
medicine in all the creatures to cure us of the smallest evil, in any kind,
unless the Lord enrich them and make them beneficial to us by his goodness.

1. There is no defense without him; for the shields of the earth belong unto
the Lord. Psalm. 47.9.

2. No safety or victory in the greatest strength of Armies without him:
Without me (says God) they shall bow down under the Prisoners, and fall under
the slain, Isa. 10.4.

Whilst the people of Jerusalem were disarmed of God, it was to no purpose for
them to fend to Egypt for help. For though ye had smitten the whole. Army of
the Caldeans tha fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among
them, yet should they arise up every one in his tent, and burn this City,
Jerem. 37.10. But if the Lord once engage himself in the business, nothing
can stand against a people. Zachariah 9.12, 13, 14. Turn ye to the strong
hold ye prisoners of hope, (that strong hold I conceive is the strength of
God) even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee: When I have
bent Judah for me, filled the Bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons oh
Zion against thy sons o Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man:
Then the Lord shall be seen over them, and his Arrow shall go forth as the
lightning, and the Lord God shall blow the Trumpet, and shall go with
whirlwindes of the South: Then the Lord shall defend them, and the Lord God
shall save them. See Verse 15, 16. An excellent place, a rich Mine of
Meditation.

3. There is no wisdom nor counsel without him, Job 5.12, 13, 14. He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty: He takes the wise in their own
craftiness: They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the
nooneday as in the night.

Prove. 21.30. There is no wisdom nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord. And whatsoever is without God is against him.

No Associations can do good without him. See Isaiah 8.9, 10.

Walls and Fortifications are to no purpose, Isaiah 22.8, 9, 10, etc.

The sounds of Rams horns shall be as good as the Batteries of the greatest
Rams, or the shot of the greatest Cannon against Hiericho, if the Lords
strength be not the cement of the stones thereof. Josh. 6.20.

There is no nourishing virtue in the creatures without him. Matthew. 4.4. Man
shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

There is no Security, no Prosperity; no success in any Action, any Operation,
or Enterprise, without the blessing of the Lord.

Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build it. Except
the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain, etc. Psalm 127.

What seems to be attributed unto Chance, Eccles. 9.11. being spoken as is
thought in the person of a carnal man, (perhaps to convince such an one from
his own principles) is without doubt the prerogative of God, who is equally
the great Master both of contingent and regular events; for there is nothing
contingent in regard of the first cause; The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, etc. Eccl. 9.11.

There is no peace nor indeed any good to be had but from him, Isaiah 45.7. I
form the light, and create darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the
Lord do all these things.

The Scripture flows with this kind of instruction.

And the voice of Reason and Scripture is subscribed by Experience.

The experiments are innumerable that History affords to this purpose.

We need go no farther than to those evidences which have been given us in our
late miscarriages.

We see our Wisdom has forsaken us, and the contrivances of our great
Counselors have proved plots of destruction, our policies have served but to
improve our miseries, to cheat us farther and farther into the power of
Mischief and Desolation. On the one side, our gracious King, the glory of our
strength under God, is imprisoned, and he that should help us, is not able to
help himself: God has suffered so good a King to fall into such a condition,
perhaps to teach us this lesson that I am now pressing upon you, I pray God we
may learn it quickly for his sake. Our Armies, though they were strong and
powerful, and had the great comfort and encouragement of a righteous Cause;
yet through miscarriage in the mannaging thereof, and for want of engaging God
with them in the work; yea through their dis-ingaging of him by their
wickedness and horrid impieties, they have been defeated and brought to
nothing. I pray God this may be remembered hereafter.

On the other side, the Armies in which so many have trusted, and which they
have been at such cost to set up and maintain, instead of helping them, have
become their Oppressors; the edge of their Swords has been turned toward
themselves, and their own force threatens them with ruin.

The Money and Wealth of the City and Kingdom has purchased chased us no
deliverance at all, but has rather served for the hire of our calamities.

All the Pillars on which we have leaned are broken, as it were, on all sides;
and we have no Foundation left us to rest our selves upon, on earth.

Oh then now let us learn from all this, that there is no help but in God. If
we have our recovery we must have it from heaven, and from his hand. No Drug
will help us but Manus Christi.

If we ever have Peace we must have it from him. He is the Prince of peace,
and the God of peace.

Though the whole World should conspire to do us good and to relieve us; yet
if the Lord come not in to the work it will be in vain.

Let us therefore learn wisdom by our former follies, and do not now relapse
into your old errors again.

There is much gaping after help from this and from that, from the Scots, and
from the Welsh, and from I know not whom; and indeed these may be isntrumental
helps, and it will be wonderful in God to make them so. But all these will
deceive us, unless God be brought in for us; unless he be with us, as good
they were all against us; They will neither prove faithful unless God hold
them, nor helpful unless God strengthen and prosper them.

Let us look upon them therefore as the returning glimpses of Gods mercy unto
us, as his proffers and invitations, to make us seek unto him: But let us take
heed that we place not our hope in them, nor in any creature. It is the common
Dilemma of humane folly and perverseness, that where no outward help appears
it is apt to despair of help from God; and we will trust him no farther than
we can see him in the means: but they that are of this mind, if they truly
search into their condition, will find perhaps, that they trust not in God,
but in the means.

And again, when outward help does begin to show it self, we are presently
too apt to forget our dependence upon God, and to withdraw our expectations
from him, and to set up that means for an Idol in his Throne, by placing our
hope and confidence therein.

I pray God deliver us from both these extremes; and teach us in all the
varieties and changes of humane things to keep our selves unmoveably fixed
upon this Rock; That our help comes from the Lord which made heaven and
earth. Psalm. 21.2.

But it is a great question that comes in the fourth place, and would require
more space than I have allowed me to resolve it fully. What course may be
taken to engage God on our side, and to obtain help and relief from him.

First, let me entreat you all to be firmly fixed upon this, and to let it
seize upon your affections as well as your judgments, that if ever we be
relieved it must be God that must relieve us.

And then take in this conclusion for your direction:

That there is no way to obtain help and deliverance from God, but by
Humiliation, Repentance, and faithful Prayer unto him.

This only will do it, and this will do it.

I must divide, and be brief.

I shall premise only this premonition: I deny not but God may grant outward
deliverances, and outward blessings where they are not sought of him in this
way, for diverse ends that are known unto his heavenly wisdom. He does
sometimes take off judgments from the wicked, that he may render them so much
the more unexcusable, and sometimes to give them the reward of some outward
Services, and sometimes for the sake of the righteous that live amongst them;
as God made an offer to Abraham of sparing Sodom, if there had been Ten
Righteous in the City: and sometimes that by them he may correct and chastise
his children; sometimes to make room for some greater Judgments, as Isa.
14.29. That the Serpents root may bring forth a Cockatrice; and sometimes to
leave men to themselves, and to give them over as in a desperate condition: as
a Physician withdrawes himself from the administration of Physic when he
finds the Disease invincible unto the means: So God speaks of Israel, Isa.
1.5. Why should you be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more. As the
Husbandman gives over the Ploughing and the Harrowing of that ground that will
not by all his Husbandry be reclaimed from barrenness, and Weeds. And I
beseech God deliver us from such a deliverance. We ought to pray unto God that
he will not withdraw his Corrections from us until he has ^one the work of
Grace upon us.

But my meaning is this: First, That we have no way to engage God unto
deliverance, no way for us assuredly to obtain it at his hands, but by that
Course that I have prescribed: And secondly, That God uses not to give a
merciful, and a comfortable deliverance unto any but those that seek unto him
in that way. It is a fearful thing when God removes his Judgments before we
remove our Sins; when the case is with us as Reverend Gildas in his Epistle
records it of the Britains, not to their comfort but their terror, A while
ceased (says he) the attempts of our enemies, but yet not ceased the
wickedness of our Countrymen, our Foes lest our People, but our People lest
not their Iniquities; and this was no good presage, and I pray God it prove not
our case. There is cause enough for us to tremble at the very thought of the
departures of Calamities from us, if we consider how little they have wrought
upon us.

But to the purpose, Take it in these four Branches.

First, there is no obtaining of mercy and favor from God, which is the
Fountain of all our comfortable and true blessings and deliverances, but by
Humiliation for sin past. Secondly, Repentance, or Conversion from sin unto
God. Third- Prayer. And fourthly, Faith, which must present them all unto God
in Christ.

And all these in their efficacy depend upon one another; No Conversion without
Humiliation, no Prayer without Repentance, no effectual Prayer or Repentance
without Faith.

First, no reconciling of God, nor obtaining of his favor and mercy, without
humiliation for sin past.

See how God threatens the people of the Jews for want of this, Ier. 44.10,
11, etc. They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor
walked in my Law, nor in my Statutes that I set before you, and before your
Fathers; what follows? Therefore says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
behold I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah, etc.

See Isa. 22.12, 13. And many other places, where God lays the cause of the
continuance and increase of his fury upon the want of this. And if we search
the whole Scripture, and the History of Gods dealings with the several people
of the world, we shall never find that God was ever reconciled to any without
this. And God is no Changeling, He is uniforme in his Actions, He is the same
God still as he was then, hates Sin as much now as ever he did, nothing can
reconcile him unto Sin; The Blood of Christ could not reconcile him unto Sin,
though it reconciled him unto Sinners; and therefore as long as we are at peace
with Sin, and at peace with our selves in Sin, there is no peace to be had with
God: His answer will be to all our Petitions for peace like that Answer of Iehu
unto Ioram, 2 Kings 9.22. Is it peace Iehu? (says he) And he answered, What
peace so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabell and her witchcrafts are
so many? Such has the Answer of God been a long time unto this Nation, and
such will it ever be until we are humbled under his hand for our Sins. It is
our peace that hinders our peace, the dead and dull peace of our security, that
hinders the peace of unity; our peace with our Sins hinders our peace with
God; we have had indeed feigned Humiliations, Iezebels Fasts, But we have not
been exercised in true Humiliation and Fasting, and therefore we return
without a blessing; we have often indeed moved the question as it were unto
God, but he has answered us as Iehu did him in a manner, in his effectual and
operative word, in the continuance and increase of our afflictions, What peace,
as long as the Impieties, and Iniquities of England are so many, and there is
so little humiliation for them? It is the very proper and immediate end for
which God sends affliction, that he may make Sin bitter unto us, that that
bitterness may produce a sanctified grief, etc. See Ier. 2.19. and 4.18.

Indeed there can be no peace with God without Humiliation for sin, because
without this can be no Repentance or Conversion from Sin, for this is the
Prologue and the Usher unto Repentance. It is as it were the womb, or rather
the travel and labor of the soul whereby Repentance is brought forth. 2 Cor.
7.10. For godly sorrow works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of.

So that no Humiliation, no Repentance or Conversion; for that I conceive the
Apostle there means by (...), as he there differenceth it from godly sorrow.
It is the change of the heart which is Conversion: And as without Humiliation
there is no Repentance, so without Repentance or Conversion there is no
Reconciliation to God, and so no merciful, no true and comfortable deliverance
to be obtained.

That is the second Thesis, or proposition, That there is none to be had
without Conversion.

Sin in the foul is like Jonah in the Ship, until the rebellious Prophet be
cast out, the storm will not cease: And unless this Rebel of Sin be cast out
of the soul by a true and serious Conversion unto God, a forsaking of all our
sins, and cleaving unto God, the storms of his fury and indignation will be up
against us, and if we hear them or feel them not, it is because we are in a
dead sleep; yea, we are then many times in greatest danger of them when we
feel them least. This tempest is often most violent when it appears a Calm,
and it is a great affliction to be without affliction.

What should I stand to prove this? The Scripture is every where almost
embroydered with this Doctrine; take a place or two for the present.

See how God threatens not only the continuance, but the multiplication of
Judgments upon Israel? Amos 4. What a Chain of calamities he makes for them,
and what a heavy weight of judgment he hangs at the end of it, from the 6.
unto the 13. verse, I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities,
and want of bread in all your places, yet have you not returned unto me says
the Lord. etc? There the Lord deals with them as they use to do with unruly
Prisoners, hangs first the Irons of one affliction upon them, and when those
will not tame them, then he hangs more and more upon them, and if none will do,
at last he brings them to execution; So there he sent Famine upon them, to make
them return, but they would not turn: Then he sends Drowth after the Famine,
and Blasting and Mildew and the Palmerworme after the Drowth, and the
Pestilence after these, and the Sword with the Pestilence, and the Fire after
the Sword, as so many Messengers one after another, to fetch home those
Prodigalls to their Fathers house; but when none of these will do, he
threatens them with a Judgment without a name as it were, Therefore thus will
I do unto thee O Israel: and because I will do thus unto thee prepare to meet
thy God O Israel. If you have a desire to know what this Judgment is, I
conceive you may find it in the next chapter, there the Prophet is singing as
it were the Dirge, and celebrating the sad funeral of Israel, Chap. 9.1, 2.
Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a Lamentation, oh house of
Israel. The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more arise, she is
forsaken upon her Land, there is none to raise her up: Let this impenitent and
secure Nation of ours read this and tremble; And let them read what the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 7.12. If a man will not turn he will whet his sword.

And what a Commentary our blessed Savior makes upon the slaughter of the
Galileans, and of those upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, Luke 13. and the
same gloss will hold upon all those sad Rubricks of Blood and ruin that have
befallen others before us in this Nation; and upon all other black and
mournful stories of Gods Judgments that are recorded of our own people or
others. The waters of the old world; The fire of Sodom and Gomorrah; The
desolations of Jerusalem; The ruins of Babylon; The late devastations of poor
Germany, and Ireland; And the destructions that have befallen so many thousands
in this Kingdom; They all seem to cry out unto us in that voice of our
Savior there, Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish: Ye shall all
perish as well as they, though perhaps not in the same manner; if ye escape
affliction here, ye shall be paid to the full with all arreares and interest in
eternal damnation hereafter.

It is the method of mercy, first to remove sin, and then to remove judgment:
Conversion is put before healing, Isa. 6.10. Lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their cares, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be
healed. Observe the order, first there is Illumination, then Conversion, then
healing of affliction. Ier. 30.17. I will restore health unto thee, and I will
heal thee of thy wounds. First, health from sin, and then health from
affliction. See Isa. 19.22. and 57.18, 19, 20, 21.

God must needs hate us, as long as we are in love with sin.

An impenitent and unconverted heart is shut out from Gods favor, and from his
mercy; It must needs be so, for he is shut out from Prayer: Prayer is the Key
wherewith God has appointed us to open the treasures of mercy unto us. Now as
there is no Repentance or Conversion from sin without Humiliation for sin: So
there is no Prayer, I mean no acceptable Prayer without Repentance. We are so
far from any assurance of receiving, that God does not admit us to be
Petitioners without it. See Isa. 1.11. 12, 13, 15, 16. Ier. 7.8. The Sacrifice
of the wicked is an abomimination to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is
his delight: Prove. 15.8. See Prove. 28.9. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in
my heart the Lord will not hear me. It is in vain for us to cry unto God as
long as we continue in our sins, and at enmity with God; that blasts all our
Petitions, Ier. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? (says God to
Israel) Thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquities, because
thy sins were increased I have done these things unto thee,

These two must indeed help forwards one another, we must Repent, that we may
pray, and we must Pray, that we may Repent. As our body warmes our clothes, and
our clothes preserve the heat of our bodies; If there were no warmth in our
bodies, our clothes would not warm us; Cloathe a cold Carcass never so much,
it will not make it warm: so unless we repent, Prayer will do us no good.
Now Prayer is the means that God has ordained for us to obtain help at his
hand by, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you: Mat. 7.7. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50 15. If we will not ask
deliverance we are like to go without it; All our fighting and warring will do
no good: James 4.2. Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to have, and
cannot obtain, ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

Prayer is the Bucket of the Soul whereby we are to draw water out of the
wells of Salvation; the Chain whereby we are to bind God, as Moses seems to
have done, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone (says God to Moses) that my wrath may
wax hot against them, and that I may consume them in a moment; As if God could
not consume if Moses would Pray. These are the surest weapons against our
Enemies; Joshua cannot prevail in the Field, unless Moses hands be lift up
upon the Mount. These are the Arms and Sinews of a Christian, whereby he is
to wrestle with God like Jacob, and to wrest the blessing out of his hands;
Haec vis Deo grata est, says Tertullian, God loves to be thus overcome by his
People; This is the Mathooke whereby we must dig into the Golden Mines of
Gods blessings; we must ask if we mean to have.

But it must be a right Prayer, a faithful Prayer; nothing acceptable to God
without Faith; Neither Contrition, nor Conversion, not Supplication, can be
prevalent, unless they be all offered up, and presented by faith; Without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. See the excellent scale of the
Apostle, Romans 10.13, 14. First he places Prayer at the very top of blessing,
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But then mark
how Prayer gets up, how it climes unto Gods Treasury, How shall they call on
him on whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe on him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall
they preach except they be sent? Faith is the Ladder of Jacob, or rather Christ
is the Ladder, and Faith is the hands and feet whereby the Angels of our
Prayers get up unto God, and procure the Angels of his blessings to descend
down again upon us; As Saint James speaks of Wisdom, so we may say of every
blessing: of peace, of deliverance, of all: If any man lack them, let him ask
of God, who gives unto all men liberally, and upbraydeth not, and they shall
be given him, to wit as far as it is a gift: as far as it is fit and
convenient for Gods glory, for the good of the Church, and for his own good.
But then mark, Let him ask in faith nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is
like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed: As the wave is lifted
up toward heaven but falls down again presently without attaining unto it, so
is the motion of a man toward God in Prayer without faith. Let not that man
think that he shall receive anything of the Lord, that is to say, he can
promise himself nothing by such a Prayer. Note every thinking to obtain by
Prayer is not Faith, there is a confidence which is an impudent presumption,
that is not it. That we mistake not, note the Acts of Faith and its Object, and
its ground; First, we must believe that God is, an Atheist cannot pray.
Secondly, we must believe that God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, an Epicure cannot pray. To this latter it is necessary first to believe
Gods wisdom, that he knows our wants. Secondly, His power, that he is able to
relieve us. But many there be that are wise enough, and able enough, that have
no good will; Therefore we must in the third place believe that God has a good
will toward us to do it. But how can we believe that, when we are all in our
selves sinners, and his enemies, have nothing in us to engage his love or his
good will, but are full of provocations to his wrath? It is necessary therefore
in the fourth place that Faith lay hold upon the reconciliation between God
and us in Christ Jesus; we must therefore believe that Christ has satisfied
for our sins, and justified us by his obedience; And that God has opened unto
us his Exchequer, his Office of mercy in Christ; that he has given Christ to
dye for us, and does accept us in Christ, and for Christ's death and
righteousness sake; and that we being accepted, and reconciled by Christ, our
Services, our Offerings, our Prayers, our Praises, and all, are accepted in and
for him, as God accepted Abell and his Offering. The ground of all this is Gods
truth in his promise, in the Scriptures: we must believe this to be Gods Word,
and that offers it self unto our faith in a multitude of Arguments; In the
Prophecies fulfilled, In the spirituality and purity of the doctrine, In the
perfection thereof for all persons, and callings, and cases; In the weakness,
and the simplicity of the Instruments, whereby the work is declared not to be
of them, but of God: For as is the man so is his strength; no Agent can work
above its faculty; simple men could not possibly of their own store produce
such wonderful wisdom; they could not have that wisdom from Satan; the
wisdom is too pure, and they were too holy, and too honest; therefore either
from good Angels, or from God: If from good Angels, they must needs have it
from God, otherwise they were false in presenting it as his, and then they
should not be Angels but Devils; if must therefore be from God, and then it
will follow that it must be immediately from God by inspiration and
illumination of the Spirit, at least in the greatest part of it, (though some
were by the ministration of Angels, Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.) Because it witnesses
so of it self, 1 Timothy 3.16. This is confirmed by the wonderful unity and
agreement of so various and several Authors in several times and places, and
by the very seeming differences, which will show it to be no packt and
contrived unity. By the impartiality of Scripture, and the different ways
thereof from the impostures of humane policy, setting down the gross slips and
falls of the eminentest instruments and professors of that truth, which humane
policy would never have done; by the very height and mysteriousnes of the
Doctrine. Tertull de Carn. Christ. Credibile est, quia ineptum est, certu^ est,
qui a impossible est.

By these and many other Arguments, faith is engaged to believe it to be Gods
word, and then the promises to be his promises, we must then necessarily
believe them to be true; for truth is a perfection, which the perfectest being
which is God cannot want. So then Faith must believe the Promises. The sum of
all is in Christ, for all the Promises of God are yea and amen in Christ Jesus.

Faith lays hold first upon the Promises of Christ, that we are reconciled
unto God by Christ, and so have access to him, and that his ear is at our
command (be it spoken with reverence) in Christ; and that though we are
Sinners, yet he is our Advocate, and the Propitiation for our sins, Faith first
must lay hold upon Christ, fly to Christ, seize upon Christ by adherence, and
rolling our selves upon him for our peace with God and Salvation, embracing him
and his merits and righteousness, as the only and the sure means thereof; And
then we may and must believe that God is ready to do all things for us, that we
shall ask of him in the name, and by the Mediation of Christ, building upon
that Promise of Christ, Ioh. 16.23. And that of the Apostle, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own Son, but gave him up to dye for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? This we must believe God is willing to
do for Christ's sake for us, seeking it of him in Christ, in his good time, and
in such measure and manner as shall be best pleasing to him, and most for his
glory, the true good of the whole Body of the Church, and the true good of that
member that asks of him: Not that we are bound to believe that we shall
receive every particular thing that we ask of God, for God does sometimes
deny out of mercy, (Though we should keep our selves as close as we can unto
the Promise in our Prayers, and then we may be sure to speed well) But That God
does lend a gracious ear to our Petitions, we coming to him in Christ, and by
Christ (we must look to that;) And that he will give such returns unto them
as he shall know to be best. Much more might be said, and profitably said too
in this Subject; But if it please God I may have another occasion to enlarge
upon these. This is sufficient I hope here to show the necessity of Faith to
make Prayer and all duties acceptable to God. He that comes without faith comes
without Christ, and then he is not like to speed: for as Joseph said to his
Brethren concerning Benjamin, so God unto us, Except we bring Christ Jesus with
us, we shall not see his face. He is the great Master of requests, from whose
hand God receives all our Petitions; He is our Advocate; He is our high Priest
by whom we are to offer up all our spiritual Sacrifices, the Sacrifices of a
broken spirit in humiliation, Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of righteousness in
Conversion from the ways of sin to the ways of righteousness, Psalm. 4.5.
The Sacrifice or Incense of Prayer, Psalm. 141.2. He is the Priest, and he is
the Temple, and he is the Altar, and he is the Sacrifice of all our Sacrifices,
that propitiateth God to us and them all, and his merit is the Incense that
perfumeth our Prayers and all other our Offerings. See Revel. 8.3. and
therefore it must be faithful Prayer.

But I have done with this Point, only give me leave now to present my hearty
and humble request unto all the people of these distressed Nations, that they
will now at length leave doting upon things that cannot help, and depend no
longer upon earthly and transitory aides, after so many miscariages of our
carnal confidence, whereby God has knocked our fingers, as it were, to make us
lose our holt from those false dependances, and that they will now betake
themselves speedily and earnestly unto God. By these ways which are here
prescribed. I forbid you not, neither does God forbid, but does both permit and
require that that you should make use of all honest and lawful outward
succors, which he in his good providence shall administer unto us, for God
will not have us to be idle beggars; And it is a good rule that I have read
somewhere, (...). David must go forth with his Army against the Philistines at
the hearing of the sound of going in the tops of the Mulbery trees; Though that
were the sign that God gave him of his going before him to smite them, 1 Chronicles. 14.15. It is the honor that God is pleased to do us, to make us serve
him with our endeavors in the gracious works of his mercies toward us. There
is a time indeed when God bids a people stand still and see the salvation of
the Lord: But that is usually when means is not to be had: and God has been
wonderful in this unto his Majesty, and the suffering Party of this Kingdom
of late, if we have eyes to observe it; But where means are offered, they must
not be neglected lest we despise the providence of the Almighty. It is not for
us to put God to miracles, nor to cast our selves down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, in a bold presumption of his sending of Angels to support us, when we
may have the benefit of a pair of stairs to help us down; that is none of
our ways wherein God has promised us protection, Psalm. 91.11. The devil
knew this well enough it is like, and therefore it was perhaps that he mangled
that verse of Scripture in the temptation of our Savior, Matthew. 4.6. God in
the barren wilderness made the Clouds the barn or granary of the people as it
were, and sent them Manna from heaven, and turned the Rock into a River in
that dry and thirsty Land: But when they came into the Land of Canaan where
there was Corn in the Land, those miraculous granaries of heaven were shut up;
neither do we read of any melting Rock about Jordan. Our blessed Savior in
those wonderful miracles of the Loaves, though he was as well able to create
as to multiply, yet he despised not the few Loaves and Fishes that were to be
had, nor would he suffer the fragments to be lost; we ought to be good husbands
and thrifty of Gods power and providence, and not think to lavish it away in
wonders when we please. Whatsoever we ask at Gods hand we must endeavor to
procure too by the use of Gods means, otherwise we deny our selves what we
ask of him, and he offers unto us; When thou ask grace use the means of
grace; If thou desire to be freed from sin, avoid occasions and temptations,
otherwise thou temptest both God and the Devil to, and there is no great need
of that. If we ask bread at Gods hands we must labor for it too with our
own, lest God subscribe the rule of the Apostle unto us, He that will not
labor let him not eat. The reason why we fail so much in our Petitions, is
not because God is hard unto us, but because we are hard unto our selves:
Therefore remember we are bound in conscience to use all lawful means for our
deliverance, and to bless that God that shall afford us any. Stir up your
selves therefore in the name of God, up and be doing in all just and honorable
ways for the deliverance of our gracious King, and our distressed Country,
from those great oppressions and persecutions that are exercised against them,
and do not through sloth and Cowardice make your selves answerable unto God
for all those traitorous cruelties that are practiced upon the Lords Anointed,
and for your own ruin and destruction; But take heed of trusting in the
means, or in your selves, but in God only; And let it be your principal and
first care to engage him on our side, and then we need not care who is against
us. Away then speedily unto him every one of you, with hearts truly humbled for
your sins past: with sincere and serious resolutions of amendment of life, with
earnest and fervent Prayer and Supplication unto our Almighty helper, at the
Throne of Grace, offering up our selves and our requests unto him in the true
faith of Christ Jesus, that the Lord may now look toward us again with a
favorable eye: And that he may apply the Balsomes of his heavenly mercies unto
the rankled and gangrened wounds of these bleeding and languishing Nations.
Consider the miscries of your Picus and Gracious Prince. Consider the growing
desolations of your Countries. Consider the most wretched devastations of
Truth, Religion, and the Church of God. Cast an eye upon those clouds that are
yet gathered about us, upon those farther judgments that threaten us. Call to
mind the mournful and sad condition of your Cities, of your Families, and the
ruin that hangs over your selves, your Wives, your Children. Remember the
streams and the rivers of the Blood of your Friends and Countrymen. Let all
those distractions and confusions that have overspread these Nations come
before your eyes; And apply your selves with all earnest importunity to the God
of mercy for relief. Your King calls for it, your Country calls for it, your
poor disheveled mother the Church calls for it; The regard of your our own
lives, your Liberties, your Safety, your Religion, of your Honor and
Reputation calls for it. Your sins and all our sins have kindled these flames,
let your penitent tears, and earnest and faithful Prayers endeavor to quench
them. The anger of the Lord incensed by our iniquities is the root of all these
miseries, let us seek to appease his anger by the incense of our fervent
devotions. God is a powerful God, and is able to help us; He is a merciful
God, and willing to relieve and succor all those that turn unto him with
penitent hearts, The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, yea unto
all such as call upon him faithfully Methinkes we may hear him clucking us
unto him, as A Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, that he may hide us
there; oh let us run unto him! Me thinks we may see him spreading out his
arms, and stretching out his hands unto us, as he did once unto Israel, that
he may reach us unto himself, and embrace us in our return; oh let us not
stand out against his mercy to our own ruin! When the Prodigal child in the
Parable returned, how ready was the good father to go forth and meet him? how
did he fall upon his neck, and kissed him? Oh let us then feed no longer upon
the Husks with the Swine, upon the empty shells of created helps by relying
upon them, but let us go to our Father, our heavenly Father, our merciful
Father, and say unto him in the bitterness of our souls, and the compunction
of our spirits, Father we have sinned against heaven and against thee, and are
no more worthy to be called thy Children. Let us now at length lay aside our
strifes, our divisions, our wicked, and foolish, and frantic, and worldly
contentions, about shadows, and trifles, and impertinences, And let us all
join together to quench the fires that are kindled in our houses about our
ears. Consider how long God has waited for this; He has been seven years
now upon the matter preaching this Lecture unto us. It has lost many thousands
of lives to teach it us. Oh let us now learn it then, and practice it, lest we
answer for all that blood that has been shed. Take heed you weary not out the
patience of the Almighty, but let his long suffering lead you to repentance,
lest his despised mercy be turned into the greater fury, and you be made to pay
a heavy interest, for all his for bearance, in eternal destruction. Oh delay
not the time, lest the Decree of utter subversion come forth against us and
there be no remedy. We must seek to him if ever we be relieved, let us do it
quickly that we may be speedily relieved; let us do it quickly lest it be too
late; away with procrastinations, Illud modo and modo non habet modum; There is
no end of our anons, and too morrowes, if we yield unto our Tempter, and our
corrupt hearts. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he
is near. Plough up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek the Lord. Oh
make haste, for the day declineth, the shadows of the Evening are stretched
out, the Morning comes and also the Night, if you will return, return, come.

But especially let me bespeake you, my beloved Brethren, and fellow sufferers,
unto whom I desire to empty out my soul in this Exhortation. You that are the
Loyal people of the Land, whom God has so long disciplined under the yoke of
the oppression of your enemies; Let not all that pruning, and digging about you
prove in vain, lest he break out at length against you in a far greater
judgment. Oh despise not the correction of the Lord, nor cast his reproves
behind your back; deceive not your selves with vain hopes; Trust not to the
righteousness of your cause: Alas have we forgotten so soon how our
wickedness has betrayed it once already? And Sin is as great a Traitor still
as ever. Joshua and Israel had a good cause, and a good Commission even from
God himself, and had received great pledges of the Almighties favor; The Sea
divides asunder to give them passage, and what was a Wall unto them, was a
Sepulcher unto their enemies; The Mountains skipped like Ramms, and the little
Hills like young Sheep, as it were, before them; The Walls of Jericho fall
down at the noise of them, and instead of being a fence for their Adversaries,
become a pavement unto them. These, and a thousand more favors God had done
for them; and yet though their cause was never so good, and their Commission
never so authentical, and though all these privileges were bestowed upon
them, yet we know what one Achan did amongst them. See the Story, Ioshuah 7.
Alas my Brethren, how many Achans are there amongst us! we may even tremble to
think on it. I love you too well to flatter you in this. Israel was Gods
people, and Midian was his Enemy, and yet when the Children of Israel did evil
in the sight of the Lord, the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian seven
years. Let your own sad experience make you wise; you see whither your Sins
have brought you and your Cause, and your gracious King. Take heed you run
not again into the same error for which you have already suffered so much,
and do actually suffer. God has put you to the Trial once again whether you
will receive mercy or no, by making new offers of deliverance unto you; let not
your sins now stand in the way to divert his mercies from you. Do not run away
from God by your iniquities, when he is coming toward you in his goodness. Oh
I beseech you be humbled; be reformed; let us have no more of your Oaths and
Blasphemies, and horrid Execrations; Your Dammees, and your Sinke-mees; I fear
there are some of your number now cursing and banning in Hell for it, for all
their Loyalty, and their righteous Cause; and how shall they escape, think we,
that love damnation so well as to pray for it? It is the monster and prodigy of
Corruption, that the Devil should so besot any soul.

Let us have no more of your swinish Drunkenness, nor your riotous revellings,
nor your brutish Lusts.

No more of your contemning of God, and his Truth, and his Worship, of his
Ministers, and his Ordinances: You see God will not be contemned; I pray you
consider it hereafter, lest if you miscarry again you miscarry without
recovery, and your King, and the Church, and these whole Nations fall with you:
Oh endeavor I beseech you to make amends for former miscarriages.

Do not think you can do any thing without God: leave him out of he business
no more.

Trust not to the Scots; Trust not to the Welsh; though I hope they will prove
faithful; Trust not to your strength, your forces, your friends; Trust not to
the people; All these will come to naught without God; Trust in God, take him
along with you in all your ways; Consult with him in his Word, let him be
President of your Councels of War, and take the rules of Justice and Piety
from him. Since there must be yet more War, remember this.

Bethink your selves of your former sins, and forsake them; Enter into a true,
and a holy Covenant with God, (you cannot think I mean the solemn League and
Covenant) but enter into a Covenant of righteousness, of holiness and
obedience with God; dedicate and consecrate your selves unto him, and then the
Lord will be with you; Be careful to fear God, as well as honor the King;
yea let the fear of God be the bond of your obedience to his Anointed, else
it is worth nothing; we must submit to the King for the Lords sake: and then we
must needs submit to the Lord for his own sake. If you be Traitors to your
God, you will be likewise to your King: You know my meaning, your impieties and
vile courses have betrayed him once already; I speak not of you all, no, God
forbid I should wrong that happy combination of Loyalty and Religion, that has
shined in so many of you so gloriously, I acknowledge it, I honor it, I rejoice
to think of it, I could even kiss the dust of their feet: But let me beseech
them to increase more and more. And for others, I beseech them to take better
Courses; I beseech them for their own sake, for their souls sake, for their
lives sake, for their distressed and pious Kings sake, for their Countries
sake, for the poor tottered and forsaken Churches sake, yea for Gods sake. If
beseeching will not do, But oh that it would! If not, I must take the boldness
to require them, to command them in the name of God, The great, and glorious,
and terrible Lord God: In the name of Christ Jesus, (we have power to do it) In
that name at which the Devils tremble; To conjure them, As they will answer at
the dreadful day of judgment for all the misery that may befall their King;
The ruin and destruction that may yet farther befall their Country; for the
dishonor of righteousness, and the miscarriage of that holy Cause which they
have to manage; for the reproach of Religion and the Truth, and the
countenance of wickedness and falsehood, and the utter devastation of this
Church which may follow upon it: That they give themselves to Humiliation and
Repentance, and to the practice of faithful and earnest Prayer and
Supplication to God. The God of heaven work it upon you all, and make this
poor, and plain, but very friendly advise, acceptable unto you my dear
friends and Brethren, and fellow sufferers, that you may receive it as a
message sent unto you from God for your good: I might say much more, and
multiply arguments, but I must not.

There remains yet one thing to make my building answerable to my platform,
to speak some few words of direction for the right performance of these
works, and I have done, they must be but a few, the Lord supply what shall be
wanting.

1. In general to all.

1. Let us all set upon a serious search and trial of our hearts and ways,
according to that advice of the Prophet in the like case, Lam. 3.39, 40.

Let us take the survey of our former thoughts, of our Words, and of our
Actions.

Of the substance, of the circumstances, and aggravations of our sins, of our
omissions, commissions, and repetitions of the same sins.

Of our failings in the end of our obedience, in not aiming at Gods glory in
our performances, but rather sacrificing to our own glory, and to our worldly
and wicked purposes, which has polluted our best Actions.

Of our failing in the rule of obedience.

In the matter, and in the manner, and in the measure, etc. Let us examine our
selves, and judge our selves, not by the customs of the world, nor by the
opinions of men, nor by the humors of the times, nor by the corrupt
imaginations and partial affections of our own hearts: But setting our selves
before the tribunal, and at the Bar of our Consciences, as before the
tribunal of God; Let us sift our selves by the Law of God, and consider
wherein we have failed, either in matter of piety toward God, or in matter of
Justice and charity to one another, or in matter of Sobriety, and Purity, and
Chastity, in our selves; Trying our souls, and putting Interrogatories to our
consciences how we have lived in respect of every several Commandment.

And when we have found out our sins, let us condemn and judge our selves for
them, acknowledging them unto God with compunction of Spirit, considering what
a glorious and powerful, and what a gracious and merciful God we have
offended: What a tender Savior we have dishonored; what a holy Law we have
transgressed; what precious souls we have endangered; what a glorious
inheritance we have forfeited; what horror of hell and eternal damnation we
have deserved; what reproach we have brought upon the name of Christ, and upon
the profession of the Gospel, and what ruin and destruction we have provoked
hereby upon our selves and others, upon the King, the Church, and the
Commonwealth, etc.

Secondly, Let this set us upon a loathing of sin, and of our silves for sin,
after the pattern of holy Job. Job 42.6.

Thirdly, Let this put us upon our slight from sin. And upon the pursuit of
righteousness. Seeking unto God for pardon for what is past, with hope in his
mercy toward us in Christ Jesus, and imploring the gracious assistance of his
holy spirit for the time to come, that we may be able to resist sin, and to
cleave unto him in holiness.

Fourthly, Let us set our selves upon the diligent and conscionable use of the
means of grace, in reading the Scriptures, and meditating frequently on them;
Hearing the word with reverence and godly fear; and examining all our
thoughts, words, and actions thereby, keeping this resolution as an
unreversible fixed Law in our hearts, not to allow our selves in any thing that
is displeasing to God, though it bring never so much pleasure, or profit, or
seeming honor with it; withal we must exercise our selves in the pious and
frequent receiving of the Sacrament, the neglect whereof, as it may be well
suspected to be one of the great floudgates of iniquity and impiety amongst us,
so the restoring of the Christian and frequent use, with the due administration
thereof, would likely be a great means to recover holiness amongst us.

Fifthly, we must apply our selves to some honest business, and some good
employments, ( Idleness being the great harbinger of sin, the devil being
like a great and exacting Lord of a manor, laying claim to all the woste,)
and to a Christian watchfulness over our selves, prudently avoiding the
occasions of sin, and endeavoring to foresee, and provide against temptations.
It would be very helpful I conceive, every Evening to make even with God (the
English word Evening me thinks may put us in mind of it, and perhaps that may
be the reason of the name,) by turning Pythagorases rule into Christianity:
Examining our selves always before we sleep concerning our thoughts and
demeanor that day, with some such questions as the Philosophers verse does
imply, (...); Where I have been? What I have done? What duties I should have
done that day and have omitted. And seeking pardon and grace for the future,
and strengthening our selves against our sins with holy resolutions. And if
every morning we would bethink our selves what temptations we may fall into
that day, and if we can, contrive prudently the avoydance of them: if not, to
desire Gods help, and the grace of his Spirit to arm us against them.

Sixthly, It will behove us to bend our selves most against those sins unto
which we are most inclined, and against our mastersinnes.

Seventhly, To be wary of our Society, and as much as we may to avoid evil
Company, and to associate our selves with those that are good; evil
communication corrupts good manners.

Eighthly, To meditate often of the presence of God, who is with us every
where, seeing all our most secret thoughts, hearing our most whispering words,
and observing all our most private actions, See Psalm. 139. and meditate upon
it. To contemplate of the hour of death, the frailty of life, the vanity of
the world, the profitablenesse of righteousness, having the promises of this
life, and that which is to come; of the all sufficiency of God and Christ, of
the day of Judgment, of the joys of heaven, and the pains of hell; of
eternity, and above all, of Gods love toward us in Christ Jesus: of his
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension; of his Kingdom, Priesthood, and Glory; and
of the glorious patterns of his holy life.

Ninthly, Be frequent and fervent in Suppplications to God for the King, and
his Family, the Church, the Kingdoms, for the obtaining of a remedy to our
miseries and desolations, with submission to his Will, and regard unto his
glory. And let all be offered up with a firm faith in Christ Jesus, resting
upon Gods mercy toward us in him.

For a help unto these Duties, I do not undertake to prescribe any thing in
this kind in particular; but if I might without offense give my advice, I would
advise all good Christians that wish well to the King, and Church, and Kingdom,
to give themselves to a private weekly Fast, once a week at the least during
these miseries, to be employed in earnest Supplication to God for pardon of the
sins, and the removal of his judgments, from the King, and his people, and
these Nations, and for the obtaining of grace and holiness, and in other holy
duties, agreeable thereunto.

Now for the Loyal Party in particular, I have only thus much to say.

1. To entreat them to get honest, pious, and able Ministers amongst them, that
may instruct them, and guide them in the ways of God, and assist them with
prayer and Supplication.

2. That they make it their principal care to set up Religion in their Camps,
and to keep up a pious discipline amongst the Soldiers, in case they shall
have more to do in that way.

3. That they take heed of violence and revengefull thoughts, which may engage
God against them; and that they meditate not cruelty or retaliation: But that
their endeavors be fixed upon the honor of God, and directed to the good of
the King, and the Church and Kingdom, with a resolution to be regulated and
guided by his Majesty, as they ought, and not to take upon them to be the
carvers of their own reparations, nor seeking to return evil for evil, for
the private injuries they have received, but observing that golden rule, of the
Apostle, Let your moderation be known unto all men, that they may not by their
fury and violence both displease God, and overturne the business they shall
have to manage; but that by their meekness, and patience, and Christian
carriage, they may stop the reviling mouths of their adversaries, and show
themselves to be sincere Christians, as well as Loyal Subjects. The Lord of
strength, and wisdom, and grace, and mercy, Arm us with his Strength, direct
us by his Wisdom, sanctify us with his Grace, and Crown us with his Mercy,
Through him who is the Lord of all Power, and Wisdom, and Grace, and Mercy,
even Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

A HELP FOR HVMILIATION.
O Lord the Great and dreadful God, keeping the Covenant and mercy to them
that love thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments; And a God of judgment
and fury, even a consuming fire unto thine enemies: Bow down thine ears, O
Lord, and hear, open thine eyes, O Lord, and see the great afflictions and
miseries of thy poor and wretched people, who are assembled before thee this
day to call upon thee for mercy Stir up our hearts we besseech thee, that we
may seek thy face and obtain thy pity and compassion toward us. O Lord
(...) God, we do not come before thee in any trust or confidence in our own
righteou^nesse, but in the multitude (...) thy mercies toward us (...) Christ
Jesus, in whom the have promised us a gracious access unto thee, who is both
^^ Priest and our Sacrifice, to make an atonement betwixt thee and us: by
whose hand we desire to offer up unto thee the sacrifices, not of Bullockes and
Goats, but of troubled spirits, and broken and contrite hearts, which thou have
assured us thou will not despise. We confess O Lord, that we have sinned and
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled even by
departing from thy Precepts, and from thy judgments, neither have we harkened
unto thy Servants which spoke in thy name to our Kings, our Princes, and our
Fathers, and to all the people of the Land; We have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord our God to walk in thy Laws which thou have set before us by thy Servants
the Prophets, neither the terrors of Sinai, nor the comforts of Sion, neither
the threatenings of Moses, nor the gracious Promises of Christ have wrought upon
our stubborn souls to make us forsake our sins in the fear of the one, nor
to embrace righteousness in the hope of the other. Thou have assayed many
times to draw us unto thee by the Cords of love in great mercies and blessings
which thou have showred down upon us; Thou have given us the dew of heaven,
and the fatness of the earth; Thou have opened the Treasures of thy bounty
unto us in the plenty and abundance of the fruits of the ground; glorified thy
self in wonderful deliverances of us from the violence and conspiracies of
our adversaries; Thou have been a shadowunto us against the heat, and a shelter
against the storm; Thou have strengthened the bars of our gates, and made
peace in all our borders; and to these and many other mercies thou have added
that which is above all, in settling the true Religion among us, and making the
light of the Gospel to shine upon us: the splendor whereof made us unto the
greatest part of the world beside, as the dwellings of Israel unto the rest of
the Land of Egypt where light was given by the privilege of thy goodness
when all the rest of the Land was overspread with a black night of palpable
darkness; And for all these thy mercies we have returned unto thee no other
recompense but rebellion and disobedience, most scornfully and unthankefully,
most impiously and insolently have we thrown thy blessings in thy face, and
fought against thee with thine own mercies by abusing them to the dishonor of
thy great and glorious name; Our prosperity has made us fat with Iesurun, and
we have kicked against thee our God. In the strength that we have received
continually from thy bounty we have continually rebelled against thee. Thy
liberality unto us in the rich supply of thy Creatures has been made by us the
furniture of gluttony and drunkenness: the incentives of lust and uncleanness:
the wardrope of pride and vanity; whilst we have neglected to bestow them upon
those holy purposes for which thou gave them, in relieving of thy poor
members, and in the maintenance promotion, and ornament of thy holy service: we
have filled our selves with costly and intemperate diet to the robbing of thee
our God, the destruction of our bodies, the disabling of our souls for the
performance of holy duties unto thee: yea even to the debasing of our very
natures as it were, turning our selves into brutish and unreasonable Creatures,
to the damage not only of our Piety and Christianity, but even of our very
being and humanity it self: whilst thy Son Christ Jesus has stood hungry
and thirsty at our doors in his poor distressed and afflicted Members, left
destitute not only of our succor or relief, but even of our pity and
compassion. We have clothed our selves like the rich man in the Gospel with
fine Linen, with rich and sumptuous attire, without any due regard unto our
estates or callings whilst thy Son Christ Jesus in his poor Members has
stood stood quivering and quaking with cold and nakedness, being left by us a
prey both to torment and disgrace: We our selves have dwelt in seiled houses;
to the splendour and ornament whereof we have engaged the riches both of Art and
Nature, whilst we have suffered thy house, the place wherein thine honor
dwells to lie waste, and shared it betwixt sordidnesse, deformity and ruin,
to the reproach of thy service, and scandal of Religion; yea O Lord we have
not so much as taken care for the maintenance of their bodies that feed our
souls; we have muzzled the Ox that treads out the Corn, and robbed thee our
God in tithes and offerings; the meagrenesse and poverty of many thy poor
Ministers that spend themselves in labor for the salvation of our souls, do
in too too many places of this Land testify against us.

Those glorious deliverances which thou have given us from our enemies have but
rendered us so much the more potent and active enemies unto thee as if thy
preservation of us had been no blessing, but rather an offense and injury unto
us. Our long and lasting peace has been made by us but a long and lasting
opportunity of sin, and in our freedom from enemies upon earth, we have most
impiously fought against heaven and thee our God.

And that we might fill up the measure of our unthankefulnesse, and make it
equal unto the measure of thy goodness (if it were possible) by the contempt
and abuse of all sorts of thy mercies, we have scorned and trampled upon all
thy spiritual blessings; We have turned the very grace of God into wantonness;
we have made thy very Gospel the savor of death unto death unto our selves,
by resisting and refusing the gracious offers of salvation which thou have made
unto us in Christ Jesus: whilst thy promises of Grace have been used by us as
incitements and encouragements to sin, and upon the very ground and
foundation of thy most incomprehensible goodness toward us, we have built up
the Babell of confusion, the cursed building of disobedience and impiety
against thee; yea O Lord there are too too many of us that have trodden under
foot the Son of God, and have counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith we
have been sanctified an unholy thing; and have done despite unto the Spirit of
grace, whilst they have made a mock of Religion and Piety; to the great
disheartning of the work of thy service; the horrible dishonor of thy
Majesty; to the deplorable scandal of our Christian profession; and to the
almost (O Lord that it might be no more) inevitable ruin and damnation of
their own souls.

Thus, thus, O Lord our God have we requited thee for all thy goodness and
mercy toward us; and the more gracious thou have showed thy self unto us, the
more wicked and sinful have we been against thee.

Thou have made us a pleasant and fruitful Land, even as the Land of Sodom and
Gomorrah which was as the Garden of God; And we have (it may be feared) outdone
the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah: their sins were pride and idleness, and
fullness of bread, together with horrid and unnatural lusts; and which of
these sins have not been committed in our Land? Yea many more sins not
inferior unto these have sent up their cry unto heaven against us: and it is
the wonder of thy mercy and forbearance that thou have not long ere this sent
down fire from heaven upon us to have consumed our whole Nation into ashes; we
have tasted deeper of the Cup of thy mercies then Israel, and yet the measure
of our sins (as we may justly fear) has been no way less then the sins of
unthankful Israel; yea we have justified both Jerusalem and Samaria by our
iniquities, and therefore it were most just in thee to give us up to desolation
as thou have done them.

But O Lord our God, thou have not so left us off: when thy mercies would not
work upon us, thou have assayed us with thy bitter chastisements and
corrections, that thou might thereby have whipped us from our sins; when
Cordials and pleasant medicines would not heal us, thou have used the bitter
pills, and irksome purgatives of calamities and afflictions; thou have applied
the lance unto our swelling sores, by suffering thy wrath to grow hot against
us in great and many miseries that thou have sent upon us; Thou have pruned us
and dressed us by the sharp instruments of thy chastisements, that we might be
reclaimed from our wildness and barrenness and yield forth the fruits of
obedience unto thee; Sometimes thou have sent thy destroying Angel amongst us,
with his sword drawn against us in the Plague and Pestilence, whereby many
thousands of us have been hurried into the pit of destruction, that the plague
of our bodies might have cured us of the Plague of our hearts; otherwhiles the
heavens have become brass unto us, and the earth iron; The Creatures have
refused to yield their fruit to the sustenance of such unthankefull wretches,
that thou might have cured the diseases that we had contracted by our
fullness, by the contrary medicines of scarcity and want; and so have reduced
us to an healthful temper of humility and obedience unto thee: proclaiming
thereby as it were a general and necessary fast unto us in the house of
nature, that we might have made a virtue of that necessity in the exercise of
repentance; Sometimes thou have afrighted and amazed us with prodigies in the
Creatures, by wonderful and unwonted changes in the several parts and
operations of the universe, by rare and unusual Comets in the heavens, and in
the air, by fire from heaven sent upon our Churches and dwellings; thou have
shot thy thunderbolts and hailestones against us; the earth has trembled and
quaked under us, as not being able to bear the weight and burden of our sins;
and the waters have broken forth upon us by sudden deluges to our destruction,
to mind us of our great pollutions whereby our iniquities have over slowed
against thee; yea they have altered their courses in their ebbings and
flowings, to admonish us of our unnatural motions in our sins; and when none
of these things would prevail, thou have drawn out the Sword of our neighbor
nations against us; and because that would not work upon us, thou have now for
a long time put the spirit of frenzy and madness into our hearts, and armed us
with sury against our selves, making us to become the executioners of thy just
wrath upon our own Nation, by sheathing our swords in our own bowels; thou
have divided us asunder, and dashtus in pieces one against another, that by our
enmity with one another thou might have scourged us to the embracement of
peace and reconciliation with thee; thou have put out the glory of our Nation
and cast our Crown down to the ground; thou have raised up a rebellion
amongst the people against thine anointed, and suffered them to prevail in
their wickedness, that thou might thereby chastise us for our manifold
Rebellions against thee our God. The Pillars of that happy Government (which
thou hadstset up amongst us) are broken; thy Sanctuaries profaned and
demolished; the light of thy truth is eclipsed and clouded by the foggie and
poisonous mists of many Heresies, Blasphemies, and Corruptions; and the Order
and beauty of thy holy Service is continually interrupted and defaced.

Thou have besieged us with the Armies of thy Fury on every side; Thou have
shut us up unto misery and affliction Thou have ^ndled a fire in the Forest of
our Carmell which has consumed the green tree and the dry, the flame thereof is
not quenched, and our Faces are burnt therein: A Sword, o Lord, a Sword is
sharpened, and also surbished, it is sharpened, and has made a sore slaughter
amongst us; it is furbished, that it may glitter, it contemns the rod of
thy Son: as every Tree, thou have given forth a Commission unto it to devour
the Inhabitants of the Land; our blood, o Lord, has run like water; our
children are fatherless; our wives are widows; there is a Conspiracy of the
Prophets in the midst of us, like a roaring Lion ravening the Prey, they have
devoured Souls; our Substance is snatched from us by Rapine and Violence, our
Cities have been surprised by Treachery and Oppression; Thou have made the
enemy to possess our houses, and our holy places they have defiled;
Destruction comes, and we have sought Peace, and there is none; Mischief is
come upon Mischief, and Rumor upon Rumor; The Law is perished from the
Priest, and Council from the Ancients; Thou have set up wicked and ungodly men
to rule over us, thou have cursed our blessings unto us; The King mourns, and
the Prince is clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land
are troubled: These things, o Lord, and much more have thou done unto us; Thou
have made our own wickedness to correct us, and our backslidings to reprove
us, that we might know and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter that we
have forsaken the Lord our God, and that thy fear is not in us; from the
Crown of the head to the sole of the foot there is no soundness in us; and
yet, o Lord our God, we have not humbled our selves under thy mighty hand; we
have not turned unto thee that smitest us, thou have wounded us and we have
not grieved, thou have afflicted us and we have not laid it to heart; the
spirit of drunkenness and slumber is upon us, so that we have not relented at
thy chastisements; we have neither been sensible of thy judgments, nor
lamented our sins, nor sought unto thee for mercy as we should have done,
nor forsaken our iniquities: But in the very amidst of the fire of thine
indignation we have increased our impieties against thee, and triumphed in our
Pollutions, and our abominable Transgressions; thou have called us to weeping
and to mourning, but behold joy and gladness; slaying of Oxen, and killing of
sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, the voice of the desperate Epicure is
in the hearts of too many of us (let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall dye;) although all this be come upon us, yet we still continue in our
sins: thy Name is continually dishonored amongst us by wicked and fearful
Oaths and Blasphemies: thy service neglected and trampled on by Profaneness;
We have said it is in vain to serve the Lord, or what profit is it that, we
should keep his Ordinances, or walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? We
call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, yea they that
tempt God are even delivered; We accounted thy Worship a dishonorable thing,
and esteem thy Service as a thing of naught: We have loathed the heavenly
Manna of thy Word, and corupted thy sacred Truth, to turn it into a Plea for
our very sins, and to make it a Cloak for seditious and ungodly practices.

The holy Seals of thy grace and mercy which thou have ordained for us in the
blessed Sacraments have been corrupted and rejected by us. (Too too many of us
have sworn unto iniquity, and made wicked Oaths and Covenants to bind us unto
sin, and the works of Satan, whilst we have broken our holy Covenant with
thee our God.) Thy holy Sabbaths are continually profaned; the joyful
solemnities of thy people abolished and rejected; Rebellion and Disobedience is
become a Virtue; Murder and Bloodshed is taken for a work of Piety; Rapine and
Injustice pleads Privilege; Gluttony and Drunkenness, Adultery and
Uncleanenesse are esteemed matters of allowable merriment: yea the subject of
our Boasting and Glory, and to reprove them is taken for sauciness and
absurdity; Carnal Confidence has set up the arm of flesh, and disarmed us
of our trust in thee: And Covetousness has made gold our hope, and we have
said unto the wedge of Gold, thou art our Confidence; Idolatry and
Superstition, Hypocrisy, Vainglory, and Heartlessenesse has polluted and
our Fastings and Prayers, turned thy face away from our Services: Schism and
Faction has broken the bonds of holy Communion amongst the people in the
Church: envy and malice has set us on fire against one another: Pride and
Vanity has still the dominion over us: Usury and Sacrilege are established by
Law amongst us: unjust gain is taken for godliness: Perjury is used for
Wisdom and Policy: Our hearts are estranged from thee, and from heavenly
things, and set upon the vanities of this present world, and the sinful
pleasures of the Flesh; and all these Mischiefs and Corruptions are bred in
the womb, and nourished in the lap of that spiritual ignorance and blindness
that is in us: Thou, o Lord our God, have a Controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Land, because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the
Land; by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood: hence it is, o Lord, that
thou continuest still to plead with us in judgment, and that thy hand is
stretched out still: Hence it is that thou still withholdest peace from us,
that thou have stopped the Current of thy favor toward us, and have delivered
us up into the hands of our Enemies. Lord we acknowledge that thou art just in
this and all thy dealing with us; Yea, O Lord, we acknowledge thou art
merciful therein unto us, that thou have not long ago given us up to a total
ruin and desolation, and suffered us at once to have been devoured by our
enemies: Thou have not dealt with us, O Lord, after our sins, but have
punished us less then we have deserved, and have sweetened thy Corrections with
many blessings which thou have yet continued unto us; in that thou have
preserved us a remnant, and have yet given us our lives for a prey; in that
thou have preserved unto so many of us our Liberties, and enlarged thy self
unto us in the supplies of thy providence in the respite of thy judgments, and
hopes of further mercies.

O Lord our God, we beseech thee pardon and forgive us all those grievous and
horrid offenses which have exposed us to thy great and heavy judgments, and
made us unworthy of thy mercies: Break our Hearts with true and hearty sorrow
and contrition for them all: wash and cleanse us from them with the precious
blood of thy dear Son: let the cry of that blood which speaks better things
then the blood of Abel drown the cry of all our iniquities, that they may not
incense thine anger any more against us; Cloth us we beseech thee with the
Garment of thy Sons Righteousness, that our Iniquities may not appear before
thee; turn us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned: convert us and we
shall be converted: Help us all, we beseech thee to renew our Covenant of
Obedience unto thee, that thou may renew thy Covenant of Mercy toward us. Oh
let us now at this very time break all the bonds of Corruption in our souls,
that we may not from henceforth allow our selves in any sin; raise up our
Affections to thee our God, and sanctify us unto thee by thy Holy Spirit, that
thy Service, and thy Glory may be precious unto us, that our lives and safety
may be precious unto thee; Let Swearing and Blasphemy be turned into Prayers
and Praises unto thee our God: Uncleanenesse and Intemperance into Sobriety and
Chastity: Violence and Injustice, into Righteousness and Honesty:
Profaneness into Piety: Disobedience into Loyalty: Cruelty and Murder into
Mercy and Compassion: Pride into Humility: Idolatry and Superstition into
Purity and Worship: Schism and Faction into Unity and Concord; Let Hypocrisy
be changed into Sincerity: and desire of Vainglory into an earnest seeking
of thy Glory; let Malice, and Emulation, and Strife be turned into the holy
Flames of Brotherly Love and Christian Affection; let the sordid love of the
World, and the impure flames of fleshly Desires, be turned into the holy Fires
of Divine Love toward thee our God, and to things that are above, where Christ
Jesus sits at thy right hand; Let not Usurie, nor Sacrilege, nor Perjurie,
nor any other horrid Iniquities curse this Land of ours any more. And that all
these happy Changes may be wrought in us, let the gross blindness of our
minds be healed by the precious eye salve of thy holy Spirit, and thy heavenly
light, that so thou being reconciled unto us, our wars may be turned into an
holy, wellgrounded and lasting peace: our Confusion into Order and Beauty: our
sadness and discontent into joy and cheerfulness: that thine Anointed may be
restored unto his power and Majesty, to rule thy people according to thy will;
that all our Calamities may be redressed, thy Judgments removed, thy
blessings restored, continued and increased unto us: And that the glorious
light of thy Gospel may be more and more resplendent amongst us to guide us in
thy ways, and in the purity of thy worship.

O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, which is thy mercy, we beseech
thee let thine anger cease from ns, for we are not able to bear thine
indignation, O let thy fury be turned away from this Nation, which has been
heretofore thy holy mountain; Because for our sins and the iniquities of our
fathers we are become a reproach unto those that are round about us; now
therefore oh our God hear the prayer of thy servants and their supplications,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is desolate for the Lords
sake; O our God incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the people that are called by thy name: for we do not present
our. Suplications before thee for our righteousness but for thy great mercies;
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thine own
sake, oh our God, for thy people are called by thy name; oh let the sentence of
mercy come forth now from thy presence: and call in those Commissions of
vengeance and indignation which thou have given forth against us; oh make us to
hear the voice of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice; Oh comfort us again now after the time that thou have plagued us, and
for the years wherein we have suffered adversity: show thy servants thy work,
and their children thy glory, and let the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God
be upon us: Oh take off the indignation of thine anger from the King, and from
the Priest, and from all the people of the Land; let the Magistrates rule in
righteousness, the Ministers guide in holiness, all the Members of this
Nation live peaceably, and religiously and honesty in their vocations, keeping
themselves within those bounds and limits of their callings which are proper
unto them: Let them study to be quiet, and to do their own business, and
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: teach them to fear the
Lord and the King, and not to meddle with those that are given to change;
restore unto us the joyful solemnities of thy worship, and vindicate thy
portion from those Sacrilegious hands, that have robbed thee of the
encouragements and supportance of thy Service; that we may yet again, and ever
more and more serve thee our God in unity and truth, and glorify thy name for
thy mercies from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, To
whom with thee O Father, and thy holy Spirit, one Almighty, Eternal, and most
glorious God, be all honor and glory, and blessing and praise, from hence
forth and for ever, Amen.

Psalms for Humiliation and Imploration of Gods Mercy, etc.
Psalm 6.1.
O Lord rebuke us not in thine Anger: neither chasten us in thine hot
Displeasure.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bones
are vexed.

Our souls also are sore troubled: But thou, O Lord, how long?

Return, O Lord, deliver our souls: O save us for thy mercies sake.

For in death there is no remembrance of thee: In the grave who shall give
thanks unto thee?

Psalm 7.9. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish
the just. For thou, O Lord, tryest the hearts and reins.

Psalm. 9.9. Be thou a refuge for the oppressed: even a refuge in these times
of trouble; Thou that liftest us up from the Gates of Death.

Psalm 9.19. Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail, break thou the power of the
Enemy for the presumption of them that hate thee increases yet daily. Put them
in fear O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men.

Psalm 10.13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He has said in his
heart thou will not require it.

Verse 14. Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischiefs and spite to
requite it with thy hand: The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the
helper of the fatherless.

Verse 15. Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: seek out his
wickedness till thou find none.

Verse 18. Judge thou the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the
earth may no more oppress. Amen.

Another Psalm.
Psalm 12.1.
Help Lord for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the
children of men.

Verse 2. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor with flattering lips
and a double heart do they speak.

Verse 4. They have said, with our tongue will we prevail our lips are our
own, who (...) Lord over us?

Verse 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, arise
now (O Lord) according to thy word, and set him in safety from him that puffs
at him.

Psalm 13.3. Consider and hear us O Lord our God: lighten our eyes least we
sleep the sleep of death.

Ver. 4. Least our enemies say, we have prevailed against them, and those that
trouble us, rejoice when we are moved.

Psalm 17.3 Let our sentence come forth from thy presence, let thine eyes
behold the thing that is equal.

Verse. 5. Hold thou up our goings in thy paths that our footsteps slip not.

Verse. 6. We have called upon thee, for thou will hear us, O God: incline
thine care unto us and hear our speech.

Verse. 7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness, oh thou that savest by thy
right hand them which put their trust in thee from them that rise up against
them.

Ver. 8. Keep us as the Apple of the eye, hide us under theshadow of thy wings;
from the wicked that oppress us, from our deadly enemies who compass us about.

Verse. 13. Arise O Lord, disappoint them, cast them down, deliver our souls
from the wicked which are thy sword.

Verse. 14. From men which are thy hand O Lord, from men of the world which have
their portion in this life, and whose bellies thou fillest with thine hid
treasure.

Verse. 15. As for us we will behold thy face in righteousness we shall be
satisfied, when we awake, with thy likeness.

Another Psalm.
Psalm 51.1, etc.
HAve mercy upon us, oh God according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out our transgressions: Wash us thoroughly
from our iniquities, and cleanse us from our sins, for we acknowledge our
transgressions, and our sins are ever before us.

Against thee have we sinned, and done evil in thy sight; That thou may be
justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge.

Behold we are shapen in iniquity, and in sin have out mothers conceived us;
we have sinned with our fathers, we have done amiss and dealt wickedly.

Neh. 9.16. We and our fathers have dealt proudly, we have hardened our necks,
and have not harkened to thy Commandments: We have refused to obey, neither
have we been mindful of the wonders that thou did for us and our Nation.

How thou have brought us out of darkness into thy light: How thou chasedst
away the fogs of Error and Superstition, and causedst the glory of thy truth
to shine amongst us.

Psalm. 84.11. How thou our God have been a Sun and a shield unto us.

Psalm. 66.12. How thou have carried us through fire and water, and have
delivered us from the Enemies hand.

How thou brakedst the Ships of the Sea, and scatteredst the Armadoes of our
Enemies upon the waters.

How thou armedst the very Elements to fight against our Adversaries: And
drewest forth the Storms and the Tempests in array, to chastise the pride and
insolency of our foes, and to turn the destruction upon themselves which they
intended against us.

How thou have defeated the divellish devises of the wicked, and disappointed
the hellish plots and conspiracies of the ungodly.

When the lot of destruction was cast upon us, and the deep design thereof
was even ready to blow us up.

When the contrivers thereof thought all things sure, and that they were safe
under the cloud of their dark counsels, and were ready to triumph in the
success of their cruelty.

When the time of our expected overthrow was even come, and they were gaping to
swallow us up at once unto ruin.

Psalm. 78.65. Then thou Lord awakedst as one out of sleep, and as a Giant
refreshed with wine.

Thou discoveredst the covering of their mischievous intentions, and broughtest
their designs of darkness unto light.

Psalm. 18.12. At the brightness of thy presence the clouds removed, and their
secret wickedness was laid open to our view.

Thou unfoldedst the riddle of their hidden impiety, and made us to
understand the mystery of their iniquity; so Thou overthrewest the enterprise
of ruin that was against us.

Thou savedst us from the mouth of destruction, and made the pit that our
adversaries had dug, to swallow up themselves.

Thou gave them shame for the wicked joy that they expected, and sufferedst
them not to triumph in the blood of thy people.

Psalm. 124.7. Our souls escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the
snare was broken and we were delivered.

Psalm. 106.12. Then believed we thy Word and sung thy Praise.

Ver. 13. But we soon forgot thy works, and waited not for thy counsel.

Ver. 21. We forgot God our Savior, which had done so great things for us.

22. Wondrous things in the Land of our habitation, and fearful things upon
the great Sea.

Psalm. 78.32. For all this we sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous
works.

Ver. 41. We turned back, and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel.

We turned back and dealt unfaithfully, we turned aside like a deceitful bow.

Psalm. 78.5. etc. Thou establishedst thy Testimony in our Jacob, and
appointedst thy Gospel in our Israel, which thou command our Fathers that
they should make them known to us their children.

That the Generations to come might know them, even the children that should
be borne: who should arise and declare them to their children.

That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God but
keep his Commandments.

And might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their heart aright and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God.

But we have not regarded the mighty works that thou have done nor the wonders
that thou have wronght for us.

For all this, we have sinned yet more against thee, and have lightly esteemed
the rock of our Salvation.

Psalm. 80.8. Thou broughtest us as a Vine out of the Egypt of Popery, and
plantedst it in a very fruitful hill.

Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to take deep root, and it
filled the Land.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like
the goodly Cedars.

Thou wateredst it with showers from above, and enrichedst it with the River of
thy goodness, and blessedst the springing of it.

Thou causedst the beams of thy heavenly light to shine upon it.

That it might grow and prosper and bear fruit abundantly, and that thou
might bless the increase thereof.

Isa. 5.2. Thou fencedst it with the wall of thy divine protection and
providence, and did set the hedge of an happy government about it.

Thou gathered stout the stones thereof, by removing the offenses, that they
might not hinder the growth thereof.

Thou prunedst it, and diggedst about it, and dungedst the root thereof with
the fat soil of thine earthly blessings.

Isa. 5.4. And what could have been done more unto thy Vinyard, that thou have
not done in it?

But we quickly turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto thee,
and when thou lookedst for grapes we brought forth wild Grapes.

Therefore thou have now taken away the hedge thereof, and it is eaten up, thou
have broken down the wall thereof and it is trodden down.

It is laid waste, and blasted with the burning wind of thy displeasure.

It is become a place of Briers and Thorns: A Land of darkness and of the
shadow of death.

Isa. 34.11. The Cormorant and the Bitterne possess it, the Owl and the Raven
dwell in it, and thou have stretched out upon it the Line of Confusion, and the
stones of emptiness.

Psalm. 80.14. But return we beseech thee O God of Hosts, look down from
heaven, behold and visit this Vine.

And the Vineyard which thine own right hand has planted, and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.

It is burnt with fire, it is cut down, and we perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.

Let thine hand be upon the man of thy right hand; upon the Son of man whom
thou made strong for thy self, So will not we go back from thee, quicken us
and we will call upon thy name.

Turn us again O Lord God of Hosts, show the light of thy countenance and we
shall be whole.

Another Prayer for these Kingdoms.
O Most glorious and gracious Lord God, who rulest and governest all things;
Thine are all the Kingdoms of the world, and all the Nations of the earth are
in thy power and at thy disposing: Thou buildest them that they may stand, and
thou plantest them that they may grow, and whilst thou waterest them they
flourish, and at the blast of the breath of thy displeasure they fade away, and
come to nothing; whilst thou blessest them they are blessed, when thou cursest
them they are weak and consumed; Look down, I beseech thee, upon these poor
Nations that lie weltring before thee in their blood, and in their sins; that
are entangled in the net, and perplexed in the Labyrinth of their great
transgressions and miseries, and cannot tell how to get out. O Lord our God, I
beseech thee take pity upon us, and grant us a release; Thou have the
sovereign medicines with thee that can heal both our sins and miseries, we
are unworthy of thy mercy, but thou art a God that delightest in mercy, and the
more undeserved it is, the greater is thy glory; nothing is too hard for thee,
no malady so desperate, no sickness so incurable, as to outbid either thy
wisdom or goodness; they are both glorified, but neither can be puzzled or
hindered by the extremities of our conditions. It is thy property, and thy
divine peculiar work to help when there is no help to be found; woe have been
struggling, and striving, O Lord, a long time to get out of the toil of our
afflictions, but all in vain; The more we strive the farther still we are
engaged in the mischief; wheresoever we run thine arrows stick fast in us, and
the poison thereof drinks up our spirits; thy terrors set themselves in array
against us; all our hopes in the Creatures have deceived us, They have proved
unto us but false conceptions; they have brought forth nothing but wind; we
have waited for help but we have found none. And therefore now O Lord we come
to thee, beseeching thee our God to have mercy upon us, that what all the
strength in the world cannot work for us, nor all the wisdom in the world
contrive for us, we may yet obtain from thee our God.

But alas how should we obtain any thing at thy hands, when there are such
loud cries and clamours of our great and horrid sins and iniquities against
us?

How should thou draw near unto us that do continually run away from thee,
and fly from thy mercy by our impenitency and wickedness, even whilst we ask
mercy at thy hands?

How should thou but abhor and abominate us, that by our filthy and noy
some iniquities have made our whole Land even to stink in thy nostrills? O
Lord our God we confess there is nothing in us that can challenge thy favor,
or bespeake any relief from thee;

If it be thy pleasure to destroy us, to consume us with all thy plagues, and
damn us all, even our whole Nation, to the bottomless pit of hell, we have
nothing to reply or object against thee; it is no more than our iniquities call
for: But we beseech thee O Lord to be gracious unto us; all that we can do is
to beg it at thy hands, to beseech thy pardon, to implore thy compassion, to
plead unto thee thy gracious Promises in Christ, and the Merits of thy Son,
whereby thou have engaged thy self that what we ask in his Name we shall
receive. Thou have opened unto us a gate of mercy in him, he has purchased a
Pardon for us with his own Blood; He is the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world; and thou have opened in him a fountain of Grace to
sanctify our natures, and reform our sins. That the clouds may be removed,
and thy light and grace may shine upon us; We desire therefore to relinquish
our selves, to disclaim our selves, and to come unto thee in and by Christ
Jesus, beseeching thee for his sake to save our poor sinful Nations; O deal
not with us after our iniquities, but according to the greatness of thy mercy
think thou upon us, O Lord for thy goodness. O Lord forgive our great and
horrid offenses that have provoked thy wrath against us.

O cleanse our filthy and polluted souls, rinse us in those Rivers that flowed
from thy Son in the Garden, and upon the Cross.

Perfume us with thy holiness.

Adorn us and sanctify us with the graces of thy spirit.

Give us clean hearts, and pure affections, and holy, and Christian lives and
Conversations.

O Lord forgive us that thou may reform us, and reform us that thou may
heal us.

O grant us broken and contrite hearts, humbled spirits, and melting souls,
that we may mourn for our sins past.

Grant us those Spiritual groans and sighs that may pierce even into thy
Bowels, by the Merits and Mediation of Christ Jesus, that they may be moved in
compassion toward us.

Grant us clean souls, and renewed consciences, that we may speedily and
heartily forsake all our wicked, sinful, and abominable courses, whereby we
have enflamed thee our gracious God against our selves, our King, and People.

Rouse us up from our carnal security, that we may seek speedily and earnestly
unto thee our God, who for our sins art justly displeased.

O be gracious, be gracious unto us, be favorable O Lord, be favorable unto
thy people, and let us not be brought to confusion, give us not up to
destruction and desolation, for the Lords sake.

Call back thy Judgments and Plagues, that thou have sent forth against us.

The Pestilence, and the Dearth, and the devouring Sword that has so long
drunk up the blood of the people; Call back that spirit of corruption and
confusion, of division and distraction that has beone sent forth into these
Lands, and make up a happy union and peace amongst us for the Lord Jesus his
sake; Call back that spirit of rebellion and oppression, of cruelty and rapin
that has seized upon the hearts of so many of this Nation, and reduce them
into the ways of obedience and righteousness.

Send forth the spirit of truth, of peace, of righteousness, of mercy, of
loyalty and obedience into all our hearts, that we may be restored to a happy
and prosperous condition.

Lord restore the King and deliver him, Lord preserve his Queen, Children, and
Family; Lord have pity upon His distressed People, upon the Prisoners, and the
outcasts, and the poor persecuted Subjects of this Land, and deliver them from
the fury and the cruelty of their Adversaries.

Lord direct, guide, sanctify, and prosper all the Loyal Armies, and those
faithful people that are engaged in the cause of thine Anointed and his
people; let not their sins, nor our sins stand between thy mercy and them, or
us.

Lord be merciful to our Enemies, make their hearts to relent, forgive them,
and convert them, and preserve them if it be thy blessed will, reconcile us all
to thee, that we may be reconciled to one another.

Or if they shall still continue in their wickedness, Lord suffer them not to
prosper therein, suffer them to prevail no more against thy Substitute, and
thine Ordinance, to oppress no more, to kill and murder thy poor People no
more, but bring them down O Lord we beseech thee, for thine infinite mercies
sake.

O Lord hear us, O Lord help us, O Lord relieve and succor us, O deliver us,
and be merciful to our sins for thy Son Christ Jesus his sake; to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory world without end, Amen.

A short Prayer to be used upon the undertaking of any just design or
enterprise for peace.
O Lord I bless thy holy name for that good motion which thou have put into
our hearts for the procurement of peace unto these Nations. I confess O Lord I
am not worthy to be an instrument of so great a blessing, neither is there any
strength or wisdom in me thy poor Creature, that I should be able to manage
so excellent a work; but thou art the God that pardonest sins, And art pleased
to make use of weak and worthless means, that the glory may be so much the
more thine.

I beseech thee be thou glorified in us thy Servants, pardon our sins, heal
our infirmities, supply us with wisdom and thy strength, and assist us by thy
spirit, make us to set up thy glory before us, and sincerely to seek the good
of thy Church and people.

Show us the ways that are conducible thereunto, and conduct us, and speed us
therein, and give a happy issue thereunto, to the glory of thy Name, to the
comfort of thine Anointed and all his People, to the furtherance of thy
Gospel, and to the good of me and mine, etc. and of these whole Nations,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for the restoring of an happy and settled Government in this Nation.
O Lord God who rulest and governest all things by thy Son Christ Jesus; and
have ordained Magistracy, and the power of Government amongst men, as a ray or
branch of that supreme authority in Christ Jesus, to be the guardian under
thee, of peace and righteousness among thy people; The foundation of humane
society; The Pillar of the world; The shield of thy people, and of all the
blessings that they enjoy; And of all other Governments have most approved in
thy holy Word, of that excellent form of royal Monarchy, as that which is the
most lively Image of thy rule, and the most fruitful Channel of safety and
peace and felicity unto a people; Weblesse and magnify thy holy Name for this
thy great and holy Ordinance, whereby thou have so provided for the fecurity
and preservation of thy poor Creatures. And more particularly we bless thy
holy Name for that comfortable portion which thou have given unto this Nation
heretofore in this thy blessing, and in the benefits thereof, in setting over
us Kings and Princes to take the charge of the Government of this Land, whereby
thou have been pleased for so long a time to preserve this Nation of ours in
peace, and plenty, and prosperity, and happiness; We confess O Lord that
there never was any the least merit in us that could challenge the least part
unto us of so great a blessing; whilst we had it, we did not prize it, nor
esteem it as we ought to have done, neither did we walk worthy in any measure
of so great a favor from thee our God: But under the covert and shadow of this
thine holy Ordinance we have conspired against thee, and have committed great
impieties to the dishonor of thy Name: And by these our sins we have most
wickedly forfeited our title and interest in such thy goodness, which
forfeiture of our sins, thou have most justly taken, by letting loose the
spirits of sedition and Rebellion, of division and faction, like tempestuous
whirlewinds upon the face of these Nations, which have overturned the frame of
rule and order amongst us, and have battered down the Throne of thine
Anointed, and changed our happy Monarchy into Anarchie and confusion: and in
the ruins of this thine excellent Ordinance, the wastes and decaies of all
other blessings are befallen us; the purity the order and beauty of Religion;
the equal and upright administration of justice; Innocence of life, and
honesty of conversation; All the obligations of natural, civil, and Christian
endearements, the offices of love, neighborhood, and charity; and together
with these, our outward peace, our safety, our security, our plenty, our Trade
and Traffic, our liberty, and what not? have received their great and
deplorable impairements, by that great eclipse of Sovereignty in these
Kingdoms; and now we are become as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping
things that have no ruler over them, spoiling, and devouring, and destroying
one another, raging, and madding, and suming against one another, thrusting one
another out of their rights and possessions, reproaching, and defaming, and
worrying one another with such monstrous and merciless cruelty as is not to be
found amongst the most savage and wildest Creatures in the world, much less,
is answerable in any degree, either to the meekness of Christians, or the
sobriety and equanimity of reasonable men and Christians.

This O Lord is the sad and wretched condition that we are in: And unless
there be some timely remedy, our house that is thus divided must needs fall,
and our Kingdom that is thus set against it self must needs be brought unto
utter desolation; But Lord who is it that can cure us of this our great and
manifold malady? Who is it that can water the dying root of this our Tree? That
can repair the mouldered foundation of this our Building? It is thou only O
Lord our God that can do it; unless thou help us nothing can help us;
unless thou be merciful unto us, we shall have no mercy upon our selves; Lord
we are falling into the precipice of destruction, if thou catch us not with the
Arms of thy mercy, we shall be broken and dashed in pieces: we are overwbelmed
in the flood of our fins and miseries, if thou hold us not by thy heavenly hand
we must needs be drowned and choked in the deluge; send down thine hand from
above and deliver us out of the deep waters. Thou can whenever it shall
please thee put a stop unto our raging calamities, and snatch us out of the
jaws of that ruin which has seized us; Let it be thy heavenly pleasure we
beseech thee to look down in thy tender pity upon the great confusions and
desolations of this Kingdom, and to command some deliverances for us; we are
here before thee, O Lord God, as a company of poor weatherbeaten sheep
scattered upon the mountains without a Shepherd, ready to become the prey
unto every wild and savage beast; Oh thou great Shepherd of the sheep, seek
thy flock and gather them unto thy self; we are before thee like a poor
tossed and tottered Vessel without a Pilot, ready to dash in pieces upon every
wave, and to split upon every Rock, to be made the mockery, the game, and the
pastime of these violent and contrary winds that are risen amongst us; Lord
save us or else we perish; O restore our Shepherd unto us, and enfold us
again within the defense of that happy Monarchy which thou had placed over
us; Yea, Lord be thou both our Shepherd and our fold to keep us safe under the
guarde of thy providence, that the evening Wolves, and the ranging Bears may no
more ravish and devour the poor people: raise up again the Throne,
re-embellish the Crown, and cement and strengthen the broken Scepter of this
Kingdom, that Piety, and Justice may be revived, and Peace, and Prosperity
with all other blessings may be restored unto this Nation; re-enforce we
beseech thee those wholesome Laws and constitutions which have been heretofore
the Conduits of so much security and happiness unto this Land. A bolish we
beseech thee all unlawful and usurped power, and cancel all Arbitrary, unjust
and Tyrannical Ordinances, and set up that true and legitimate Government
again in this Nation which has heretofore been so fruitful in blessings unto
our Land; Give wisdom, and fortitude, and the spirit of Government unto thine
Anointed, and all those that shall be sent of him, that they may be able to
weild this thy great Ordinance, and to manage it to thy glory and the good of
thy people, to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of them that do
well; And put the spirit of subjection and obedience into the hearts of the
people of this Land; that they may yield a willing, a conscionable, and
cheerful submission thereunto as unto the Lord, and not unto men, looking
upon the Authority of the Magistrate as upon a sacred stream flowing unto them
from the heavenly fountain of thy divine power, that they may reverence it, and
as an instrument of thy mercy and great goodness unto them that they may
embrace it, that no unquiet or distempered motions may hereafter be raised
amongst us in this Nation, from private and wicked interests, or from ambitious
and turbulent spirits, to disturb the happy peace and tranquillity of thy
people, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the King.
O Lord thou righteous Judge of heaven and earth, who have committed all power
unto thy Son Christ Jesus both in heaven and earth, and have revived the rays
of his supreme Authority and Majesty unto Kings and Princes, whom thou have
ordained to be the Rulers and Governors of thy people, to the end that we may
lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

We beseech thee look down in mercy upon the Person of thine Anointed, our
gracious King (the light of our eyes, and the breath of our nostrils) who
suffers at this time for the sins of us and these Nations under the cruelty
and oppression of seditious and wicked men. Consider his Enemies how many they
are, and what a tyrannous hatred they bear against him. Consider O Lord how
low they have brought him; what great bondage and affliction they have laid
upon him; how they have imprisoned his Person, robbed him of his revenue,
killed and massacred his Loyal and faithful People, bereaved him of the
comforts of his Queen, and Children, left him destitute of the solace of his
friends, abridged him of the attendance of his Servants, disappointed him of
the advice of his Counsel, deprived him of the benefit of thine Ordinances,
shut him up from thy House and the Assemblies of thy People, blasphemed him
with vile and false reproaches, spoiled him of his just power and greatness, and
profaned his Crown down unto the ground, and attempted by hellish conspiracies
to take away his life.

These things have they done O Lord to the great dishonor of thy Name, and to
the great discomfort and destruction of thy people.

And in so doing they have rebelled against thee our God, trampled upon thy
Laws, violated thine Ordinance, broken their Oaths and Protestations, and that
very Covenant which themselves contrived and imposed upon others of the people
of the Land.

This thou have seen O Lord, and yet thou hold thy peace, whilst they
triumph in their wickedness against thee.

And because thou keep silence, they have though wickedly, that thou were
even such a one as themselves, and have strengthened themselves in their
prosperous impieties.

But Lord how long will thou look upon this?

Sirre up thy self O God, against those that magnify themselves in so many,
and so great impieties against thee.

Be thou glorious in the vindication of thine own Ordinance; cloth thy self
with thy might and thy strength, for the relief and deliverance of thine
Anointed.

Plead thou with them that strive with him, and fight thou against them that
fight against him: lay hold upon the shield and buckler, and stand up to help
him; bring forth the Spear and stop the way against them that persecute him,
and say unto his soul that thou art his Salvation.

Pardon his sins, and the trangressions of his people, and let not the sins
of his Forefathers come into thy remembrance, but dispell them all from before
thy presence as a cloud by the beams of thy heavenly goodness, drown them in
the bottomless pit of thy mercy that they may no longer hinder thy favor from
thy Servant, but make thou the light of thy countenance to shine upon him.

Remember his patience, his meekness, his humility, his mercy, his love that
he bears unto thy House, to thy Ministry, to thy Worship, and Ordinances, his
zeal to thy glory, his devotion to thee his God; And let all those holy
Sacrifices that he has offered up unto thee through thy Son be accepted in thy
sight for Christ Jesus his sake.

Remember all those Prayers and Supplications that have been daily made to thee
in his behalf, and let them not return empty from thy Throne; Oh let it be
thy pleasure to command mercies for him.

Be thou unto him a Pillar to support him in all his trialls a Shield to defend
him in all his dangers; a Treasure to supply him in all his necessities; a
Comforter to relieve him in all his distresses; a Counselor to advise him in
all his perplexities; And let thy extraordinary mercies, and the heavenly
influences and breathings of thy divine Spirit supply unto him the want of the
outward means of thy Word, thy Sacraments, and thy public Worship.

Oh let not his precious soul suffer through the wickedness of those that
oppress him, but feed thou him from thine own hand, and by the ministration of
thy heavenly Ministers in those straights and solitude that he is in, even with
the choice delicates of thy heavenly Table.

Be thou with him in trouble, to keep him from miscarrying; and compass him
about with songs of deliverance; as thou have furnished him hitherto with thine
excellent gifts of Patience, and Wisdom, and Christian fortitude, and have
made him in spite of all his Adversaries, and even to the shame and confusion
of his malicious persecuters, a glorious example of Christian constancy unto
his people; so Lord establish unto him every good gift which thou have wrought
in him, and increase all thy spiritual graces in his foul that the splendor
thereof may break forth more and more through the clouds of his calamities, to
the amazement and astonishment of his rebellious enemies.

Arm him more and more with an unchangeable love unto thy Truth, and to thy
Service, to thy Church, and to thy people, that neither the subtle and
deceiptfull insinuations of any false Iudases, nor the terrors or menaces of
any insolent Rabshakahs may shake him from those pious and Christian
resolutions which thou have been pleased to put into his heart.

Set a guard of thy heavenly host continually about his Sacred Person, that no
wicked assasinates may dare to approach unto him, and that the Son of violence
may not hurt him.

Discover and defeat all hellish plots and devilish conspiracies that may be
against him, and blast them all with the breath of thy displeasure; O prepare
thy loving mercy and thy faithfulness that they may preserve him.

Break thou his bonds asunder by thy strength: make thou the doors of his
Prison to fly open.

Soften the hard and flinty hearts of those that are the Authors and
instruments of his restraint and misery, that they may relent toward him if
it be thy blessed will, or else affright them with the terrors of their evil
consciences, and strike them with trembling and fear that they may not be able
to pursue their cruelties.

O Lord preserve his Fame and Honor from the scourge of those malicious and
traitorous Tongues, whose sport it is to speak evil of Dignities, and to
blaspheme the footsteps of thine Anointed.

Make thou his righteousness as clear as the light, and his upright dealing
as the noon day.

O Lord restore him to the bosom of his Queen, to the comfort of his
Children, of his Friends, of his Servants, of his Revenue.

Restore him to the joyful Assemblies of thy People, to the Comforts of thy
house and of thy holy ordinances.

Preserve his Life, enlarge his straits, repair his honor, re-establish his
Throne in peace, in truth, in holiness and righteousness amongst us.

Bring him forth now at length like Gold out of the fire of his long
afflictions, precious and glorious in the eyes of God and men.

But thou O Lord deal with us according to thy name, for great is thy mercy.

O Lord arise for the deliverance of thine Anointed for the Lord Jesus his
sake, Amen.

A Prayer for Peace in the Church und State.
O Lord, thou God of Peace, and Author of Unity, Look down we beseech thee
in thy tender pity upon the miserable distractions, and bloody divisions of
this our Church and Kingdom of England; who, by our sinful separation of our
selves from thee our God, are fallen in pieces from one another. Thou, O God,
art the center of Unity, and we are like unto so many crooked lines that are
fallen from thee our Center by our sinful and corrupt affections; straiten us
again we beseech thee by thy grace, that being reconciled unto thee, we may be
joined together in thee, and reconciled to one another, That we may be one as
thou art one.

Unite our judgments in the harmony of thy truth; and unite our affections in
the sympathy of thy love.

Take away the spirit of discord from amongst us, and put thy spirit of love
and amity into our hearts, that we may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace.

That as there is one body, and one spirit, and as we are called in one hope of
our Calling, as there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all those that are true
Christians: so we may be by that one spirit united and compacted in that one
body, joined together in that one hope, unanimously subjected unto that one
Lord; That we may perfectly consent in that one Faith, be quickened together by
that one Baptism; That we may be the united children of thee, that one God and
Father of all; that thou who art above us all by thy glory and greatness, and
through us all by thy divine power and efficacy, may be in us all by thy
heavenly grace, and by thy spiritual life, and saving consolations.

Rain down the celestial dewes, and the cooling showers of thy blessing
upon our scorched and inflamed souls, that may quench those hellish fires and
unsanctified heates of envy, and wrath, and malice, and fury, of emulation, and
strife, and debate, and misguided zeal, which have burnt asunder the bonds of
amity amongst us.

And enkindle the holy flames of divine love and fervent devotion toward thee,
and of Christian charity and brotherly affection to one another in our hearts;
that we may put on at the elect of God, holy, and beloved; bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, If any man has a quarrel against another,
even as Christ has forgiven us. And above all these things, that we may put on
charity, which is the bond of perfectness; that so speaking the truth in love,
we may grow up together into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ.

Give us the grace of self-denial, that we may not seek our own, but every
man another welfare.

Break off our hearts from our private interests, and give us public spirits,
that we may all labor for the common good, and be ready to sacrifice all our
particular advantages in the things of this world unto thee our God, for the
procurement and maintenance of the public peace and preservation. Deliver us
from the slavery of those earthly affections which divide us from thee, and
from one another, and give us heavenly minds which will unite us unto one
another in thee our heavenly Father.

Unite us under one rule of sound Doctrine, and pure, and orderly Worship in
the Church; That all siding, and partiality, and contradiction, and admiring of
men's persons because of advantage, and all tyrannizing over men's consciences,
may be wholly banished, that we may seek after the things that make for peace,
and wherewith one may edify another.

Teach them that are strong to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
despise them, nor to offend them, but to be render over them as over the poor
feeble members of the same body, and as over the little children and spiritual
infants in thy Family.

Teach them that are weak, not to judge those that are strong, but to labor
to attain unto strength with them.

Let not them that are wise contemn the simple: nor those that are simple envy
those that are wise. Let not him that stands trample upon him that is fallen,
but endeavor to raise him up in the spirit of meekness, considering that he
also may be tempted.

Nor let him that is fallen reject the help of him that stands, but receive
it thankfully that he may be restored by it.

Teach them that are in high estate, not to scorn or to oppress the brother
of low degree.

And them that are in a low estate to be content with their condition, and not
to emulate or behave themselves proudly against these that are honorable.

Suffer not the rich to despise the poor, knowing that that is to reproach
their Maker; but rather make them willing to relieve them. Nor suffer the poor
to murmr against those that are rich; nor let their eye be evil because thou
art good. Let not the subject intrude into the Office of the Magistrate, nor
the inferior Officer into the station of the superior. But keep every member
of this Church and State within those bounds and limits which thou have set
them; make them to study to be quiet, and to do their own business.

Make us all to be like affectioned one toward another: To weep with them that
weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice: To remember them that are in bonds as
bound with them, and them that are in adversity as being our selves also in the
body. And that the disjoynted bones of this distracted State may be set again
by thy goodness, O Lord reduce us all under obedience to thine Anointed, our
gracious and pious Sovereign; Under one righteous and just Law and government.
Banish from amongst us all war, and bloodshed, and sedition, and consusion.
Suffer us no longer to be the devourers of one another, but rather make us
ready to lay down our lives for one another. That so all our unhappy divisions
and differences being composed, we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
holiness and honesty. And let the peace of God rule in our hearts, to which me
are called in one body, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the members of the HOUSES, and of the ARMY.
O Most glorious God, who by the precept and example of thy dear Son have
taught us to pray for our enemies, oppressors and persecutors: We heartily
beseech thee look down in thy mercy upon the sad and wretched condition of
those Members of the Houses of Parliament and the Army, who have thus long gone
astray from thee, and have through thy just judgment upon us for our sins
been the instruments of injustice and oppression unto the people of this
Nation. Lord we know there has nothing befallen us by them, but what thou in
the counsel of thy divine wisdom have fore-appointed and ordained for us, and
is far less then our sins have deserved from thee, and thou have assured
us that all things shall work together for the good of those that love thee
our God. It is not therefore for us O Lord our God, to murmr against thy
will, or to resist thy good pleasure, but to acknow ledge thy justice, and
admire thy mercy, in that thou have been pleased to correct us so gently, and
to punish us so far less than our deservings. Neither dare we to fall into
any furious or revengefull thoughts against our adversaries, although they have
been thus cruel unto us: But as thy son has taught us, so we desire to put
it in practice, beseeching thee that thou will take pity upon them, and that
thou will be pleased now at length to sosten their hearts, and to open their
eyes; That they pursue no further their works of violence and rebellion; but
that having a true sense of their great iniquities, and being truly humbled
before thee for their sins, they may lay hold upon thy gracious offers of
mercy toward them in Christ Jesus, and leaving all their evil and seditious
courses, may return unto thee their God, their obedience unto their
Sovereign, and to the affections of justice and charity toward their Brethren:
That upon their unfaigned repentance thou may receive them into thy favor,
and that their souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Lord, we know
thou art a God, thou art able to do all things: Thou stillest the raging of
the Sea, the noise of the ways, and the madness of the people: Thou can
tame the fiercensse of the most savage Lions, and make the Woolfe to dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with the Kid: Thou can cause the fire
to forget its fury and rage, and thou refrainest the wrath of man: Thou by the
power and might of thy grace did meet Saul in the midst of the very heat and
violence of his persecuting zeal, and did turn him into a Paul, a meek and
faithful servant unto thee, and made him of an enemy, to become not only a
member of thy Church, but also a glorious fellow-sufferer with thy people.

Lord show the like power of thy mercy and grace unto these our persecutors,
smite them to the ground with an apprehension of their great cruelties and
bloody oppressions, that they have exercised against thy poor Church and
people; and raise them up again in the apprehensions of thy tender love and
goodness in Christ Jesus. Thou who have pardon for the greatest sinners that
come unto thee with penitent hearts, and a firm belief in thy Son Christ
Jesus: as thou pardonedst Paul, so Lord pardon them: As thou convertedst Paul,
so Lord convert them, etc. and let them not pursue the destruction of their
own souls. If it be thy blessed will O Lord, bring them home unto thy fold:
Let not their successes beguil them any more, nor any evil engagements detain
them in their sins: Suffer them no more to set up their carnal policies
against thy spiritual and heavenly wisdom; but bring down every high thought
in them unto obedience to thy heavenly Word; make them to know that there is no
shame but to be wicked, and that their greatest honor will be to forsake their
sins, and to return speedily and entirely unto thee their God. O Lord break
in sunder those chains of corruption, whereby they are held from thee, and
deliver them out of the snares of the Devil.

O quench the fire of that malice and rage which is enkindled in them against
us thy poor people, and inflame them with Christian affections toward us
again.

As for us, O Lord, make us patiently to endure what thy fatherly hand shall be
pleased to inflict upon us, whether by them or by any other means, and give us
always a readiness of heart to forgive all those injuries that they have done
unto us, and to embrace an hearty reconciliation with them, whenever they
shall be moved by thy grace to give over their unjust cruelties against us: and
Lord lay not those sins unto their charge. Grant this O Lord for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen. *

A Sum of diverse principal things contained in this Book.
1. AN Introduction consisting of various incitements unto Humiliation and
seeking of God. 2. A discovery of the sad condition of the present estate of
the Church and Commonwealth of England. First, In a parallel thereof with the
miserable condition of the Jews, set forth in the Lamentations of Jeremy. page
57 Secondly, In a more peculiar and express delineation of the cerruptions,
depravations and devastations thereof, illustrated by the consideration of our
former happy condition in matter of Religion, of Peace, of Liberty, of
Government, of honor and reputation. First, in point of Religion, and things
conducing thereunto. page 91 1. Of Corruptions on the rule of Religion. page 99
2. In the manage of the work of Instruction. page 110 1. By seaucing
Doctrines. Ibid 2. By running from one extreme to another. page 124 3. By
uncharitable censures of moderat^ spirits. page 124 4. By the spirit of
contradiction, and tyrannising over the consciences of men. page 127 5. By
partiality and prejudice, etc. The evil fruits whereof are described. p. 128
6. Pulpits and Presses made marts of division. p. 141 7. Hunting after
applause. p. 148 8. Pusillanimity and lukewarmenesse in the Ministry: where, an
exhortation to Christian con-age. p. 155 9. Neglect of Catechism. p. 159 2. Of
corruptions about the Sacraments, 1. Of Baptism. p. 190 2. Of the Lords
Supper. Ibid
3. In abolition of Excommunication. p. 194 4. In rejecting the grave and
learned Ministry, and putting up youths and raw novices to be the guides of the
people. p. 196 And Lay men without any lawful calling. p. 29 A discussion of
that point at large, of popular Elections, etc. p. ^52 Of the ordination of
Ministers the Apostolic call way. p. 278 5. In the sacrilegious taking away of
the revenues of the Church, as Tithes, etc. where the Question about Tithes,
and of things devated to Gods Service is discussed. p. 293 6. In Conventicles,
and unreverent carriage in the Church, abolition of forms of Prayer, and the
evil effects thereof. p. 361 7. In matter of Church government, the sad causes
and sountaines thereof. p. 373 A discovery of the miseries and Corruptions of
the civil State. 1. In matter of Peace. p. 388 2. In matter of Liberty. p.
399 3. In matter of civil Government. p. 415 4. In matter of Honor and
Reputation. p. 429 Of the sonntaine of these calamities, which is the great
wickedness of this Nation, p. 437 God the only Physician. p. 454 No way to
obtain deliverance from God but by Humiliation for sin. p. 484 Conversion from
sin. p. 490 Prayer. p. 497 Faith in Christ Jesus. p. 501
The conclusion, with exhortation to the Kingdom in general. p. 514 To the
suffering Party, p. 527 Directions concerning the exercise of the said daties.
p. 535
An help to Humiliation.
1. A Confession and Supplication laying open the sins and miseries of this
Nation, and imploring Gods mercy. p. 1 2. Certain Psalms for that purpose;
The first. p. 41 The second. p. 44 The third. p. 46
3. Another Prayer for these Kingdoms. p. 59 4. A short Prayer to be used upon
the undertaking of any just design or enterprise for peace. p. 72 5. A Prayer
for the restoring of a happy and setted Government in this Nation. p. 74. 6. A
Prayer for the King. p. 86 7. A Prayer for Peace in the Church and State. p 99
8. A Prayer for the two Houses. p. 109
FINIS.

