The Natural FANATIC, OR, Reason Considered In its Extravagancy in RELIGION,
and (in some late Treatises) Usurping the Authority of the Church and Councils,

By JOHN WARLY B.D. late Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridg.

Sic si homines rationem bono consilio a Diis immortalibus datam, in fraud m
malitiamque Convertunt, non dari illam, quam dari humano generi melius fuit:
Cicer. de not. Deor. lib. 3. Satius fuerit nullam omnino nobis a Dijs
immortalibus datam esse rationem, quam tantam cum pernicie datam, ibidem.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Basset at the George in
Fleet Street, 1676.

IMPRIMATUR.

2. November. 1675. Geo. Hooper Rmo. Dno. Arch. Cant. a Sacr. Domesticis.

TO THE Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of DAVENTRY AND Lord High
Chancellor of England.
May it please your Lordship
THough Dedications as much as Prefaces may seem formal impertinencies; yet
they cease to be such when the Patronage it as the Broad Seal of England, to
Authorize and license the Examination of the Libertine; though in such method
as may seem unkind and unnatural to Humanity in the discovery of Reasons
defect, and exposing it to the public vieu naked and intoxicated. This way of
arguing is so far justifiable as it is more necessary at some times to declare
that men are mad, sools, and bewitched in their search for Religion, than to
flatter them with soft compellations of men of sober minds, disposed for
reasonable service, and critically wise to Salvation. This method is also
commended by Christ's practice, who disputing with the Pharisees and
Opinionative formalists of the Jewish Church, answers their questions with
questions, and at the same time confounded them whilst he informed them by
retorting their folly, and turning the edge of their own troublesome queries on
themselves; which was the most proper way to silence a Pragmatical Jew. The
present state of Religion as it is to be found in factions minds makes this
method seasonable for this age, which is full of Rea: soning Zelots (the secular
Fanatics) who must be Catechized in the first Elements of their natural
Religion, though in a style as rough as that by which Arnobius discovered the
folly of the Gentiles.

These considerations, I hope, may render this bold address more pardonable,
and the Tract less liable to censure, which being presumed I cannot but think
it necessary, that I declare which were the first motives which conmended the
task to my thoughts, and what directed it to your most Honorable Patronage
Libertinism exalting it self above Sacred Authority, and Usurping its power,
pleading Reasons claim and right to the spiritual Judicature; and it being
seasonably checked by that Oration which made England (in its Representatives)
its Auditor, when it captivated both ear and mind with sweetness and vigor,
and (as it is the property of Eloquence) commanded whilst it persuaded: I
thought it would not appear an impertinent piece of curiosity in a private
person to inquire into, and examine the composition of that Leaven with which
Faction swells, and turbulently serments.

I was also more confident in this address to your Lordship, whilst I
considered that some of the matter of these papers, when spoken, as duty called
me, as well as written, found encouragement from the Right Honorable Heneage
Earl of Winchilsea my very good Lord; presuming they might find the same
favorable entertainment whilst they apply themselves to the same name, which
is now famous both for Foreign and Domestic administration of the affairs of
the Kingdom; For it is no contradiction in my hopes to conclude that Souls may
be allied as well as bodies, and that there may be Affinity of Opinions as well
as Persons: and the same singular Candor and Humanity may run in the same
blood as Hereditary to the Family.

This Task was also encouraged as necessary, whilst I considerd that several
interested persons cloakt their practice under the thin film of a pretended
Religion, which might exempt them from the imputation of being Atheists (which
is a name so odious as would effectually stifle their designs and make their
practice nauseous) and seemed careless whether Christian Religion, as it is
said of Astraea, returned again to heaven; so that the world was possessed with
a belief that they acknowledged the Deity which they would have proved and
worshipped by their rational Method.

Now that such might not impose upon credulous minds, by persuading them they
are truly Religious. I thought it proper to unmask them, by showing that they
are so far from being so, that by that method they cannot entitle themselves to
the names of Theists.

These men also pleased themselves, or at least others (with an empty name of a
new kind of faith, which they did no more understand than the Exorcist does the
Sacred words abused in his Charm) making it natural Reason with an object
brought nigher by Revelation, and to supply its defect have impudently meddled
with the object God himself representing him as a Proteus to be adored in
several shapes, or as a Picture to be seen and worshipped in diverse forms
according to the various situation of the Spectators, by which arbitrary
Transsiguration of Christ in each man's brain he will be as much abused in men's
phancies as the Deity was in the Heathens Idolatrous way of worship. It need
not be called to your Lordships mind that such extravagant liberty will exceed
all former Her esie and schism, which seem more modest, for they were never
contracted into a more narrow compass than an Assembly, or congregation, but
this makes (in its Ecclesiastical Anarchy) each Zelot an independent-Church

But I was not only led to this Task by the wild projects of Extravagant
brains, but by the practice of men of more sober minds, who (perhaps) observing
the predominant humor and prevailing prejudices of some against Ecclesiastical
Authority, as Tyrannical over Consciences, out of their great zeal for the
Church, and Christian resolution (like Commanders disarmed in sight snatch a
Sword from their Enemies hand, when ill success deprived them of their own)
dispute with the Atheist upon his own principles and fight against him with his
arguments, which way has been little succesful. And it is no great wonder, for
Divine Authority (which is excluded in such disputes) sets the edge on the
spiritual sword, and is the strength of that arm which weilds it. All natural
arguments so managed are as some vicious Syllogisms which have all the
propositions, but concluded nothing. But this being not so easily believed as
said in This Treatise, Reason and Religion dispute their rights to be judge in
spiritual matters. This method is altogether necessary: for the Reasoner will
never believe he is lawfully condemned, if he have not liberty to bring in all
natural evidence in the Trial, which large concession will make him know the
vanity of liberty falsely so called, and subjugate his unruly mind, playing like
a fish which is wearied with the line of his vain imaginations, who scorned all
ties of Laws and Religion. As subjection to Governors is never more
effectually recommended by any mere rational argument than that which comes
with this consideration of the necessity of bring obedient to Magistrates,
because humane nature is not so able to provid for it self in solitude as in
Societies; So the extravagant Reasoners in Religion are not any way better
reduced to obedience to Ecclesiastical Authority, than by contemplating the
vanity of their own imaginations. For that prospect of their own ignorance will
make Reason so obsequious and tame, that though Ecclesiastical Laws (as the
Greek Lawgiver says of Laws in general) are looked on as Cobwebs; yet they
will not think it their interest to break them.

This considered, I hope may supplant all censure which might condemn this way
of arguing as prejudicial to Religion by rendering arguments, which were
designed to fortify it, weakened by too severe an inquisition, for this method
does no more violence to Religion, than a Surgeon does to his Patient whilst
he stretches the Sinews in order to set a bone which was out of its place.
Neither shall I fear that these Papers will be looked upon as vainly
speculative, seeing the Dedication directs the Reader to so eminent an Example,
which alone (though the Church was not protected by civil power and truth naked
in that sense which the factious Adversary would have it) is able to win
practice and engage all Christian obedience, which is desired and designed, (so
far as these Papers can promote it) by

My Ld.

Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant John Warly.
An Advertisement.
SO often as the word Reasoner occurrs in this Tract, it is to be understood of
the Author of the Treatise of Humane Reason or of any other who is conducted by
his principles, and so often as the word Reconciler is used, it is to be
understood of the Author of the considerations of the Reconcileableness of
Reason and Religion, other Authors ancient and Modern are either plainly cited
or so discoverable by their matter, that nothing more need be said by way of
Explanation.

ERRATA.
REad as straight an Union page 16. for who read which p. 34. (...) p. 35.
(...). 65. dele they 73. (...). p. 83. (...) p. 85 (...) p. 90. r. terminated
p. 92. r. and p. 104 (...) 108 r. Minucius Felix 112. dele that 115. r. as much
p. 116. dele least r. or p. 118. r. Erroneous p. 139. dele not and r. are not
p. 153. r. scales p. 162. for which r. when 170 r. (...) p. 173. for that r.
what 178. fornor r. now, p. 180. Dele not 184.

REASON in some late Treatises being set up Umpire in Religion, challenging
Appeals to be made to it, as the highest Tribunal, and being asserted with
privileges, which are exalted above Pelagian invention, or what any other
Heresy could project. And one Article of the Church of England being threatened
by some positions which directly oppose it, by saying; That a man may be saved
by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he diligently frame his life
according to that Law, and the light of nature. I thought my self obliged to
examine the foundation on which this natural infallibility was built, which is
supported by these positions, which say; That faith is an assent given to
Religious matters, the understanding and will being no otherwise assisted, than
they are in drawing other Conclusions.

And that Reason requires no other assistance in the act of faith, than the
proposal of that which is to be believed, which the Reasoner calls the near
approach of the object being brought nigher by Revelation.

The former account of faith is imperfect, and attended with many false
conclusions, which are deductions from it; amongst many, let this be
considered; That no man (according to that description of faith) can be an
Infidel, who has readholy Scripture, or its contents or matter proposed to his
understanding; And as it is an impossibility that Euclid should not render the
intelligent Reader a Mathematician, so it is equally impossible, that the
contents of holy Scriptures proposed to the Infidel, should not make him a
Convert: This is necessarily inferred from the former position, and shall be
more illustrated by a supposition; suppose therefore an Ethnic made so much a
Proselite to the true Religion by reading holy Scriptures, that he gives assent
to matters of Religion no further, than upon Examination he shall find them
agreeable or congenial to his Reason, or (to speak another Phrase,) Reason can
confess them to be true: and let him be supposed to speak like the
Samaritan-Woman in another case; saying, I do not believe the Creation of the
World, the incarnation of Christ, and other matters of faith, because of the
evidence of the Divine Records, but because I presume my belief will be
ratified and approved by my reason, which is naturally bound to confess them,
when they are proposed, it will appear upon experiment, that he is a wavering
and weak Convert, not far removed from infidelity. This supposition is
agreeable to the Reasoners account of faith, and that term of art which
expresses it, calling under standing and will the Elements of which faith is
compounded. In examining which I intend not to be so critical as he, in
interpretation of (...) will equally admit of such critical exercise, but
rather take it in the common acceptance. That out of which bodies are made,
and into which is their last Return or Resolution; which, being accommodated to
the Reasoners sense, will conclude, that Religious knowledge was no otherwise
in man's mind than Idaea's: or some dormantknowledg to be excited by proposal of
holy Scriptures, or as letters to make words to be framed by the Divine
Paedagogy, the Law and Gospel too being in his sense but as a Schoolmaster
(not according to the Apostles meaning) to prompt the understanding. This is so
false, that it may be confuted by History, which says, many perused the
Mosaical-Scripture, and some past critical judgments on them. Longinus, and
others, with the Greek Lawgivers (though some of their knowledge seems borrowed
from them) who must be in the Catalogue of Infidels. And later ages give
examples of this kind, many men who must be acknowledged to be Masters of
reason, being not able to reduce themselves to belief, according to the former
method, which wanting the Divine Testimony to bias their wills and to command
assent, left them in desperate Skepticism; for though the contents of Religion
are such as may be presumed sufficient to command, or at least win assent; yet
the medium which begets this persuasion is taken of holy Scriptures, which
says, Reason in some sense must be laid aside, (which shall be more proved in
its proper place) whilst it resigns it self to a more insallible conduct.

Let it be also considered, if the will and understanding are the Elements of
Faith, that an Ethnic laying aside the Divine Testimony and retiring to his
reason, would be more confirmed in his persuasion; As a Chemist asserts his
principles and practical knowledge above that which Theory teaches, whilst he
Analyzes or dissolves a body, by which he makes sense a witness of his reason,
and gives evidence of the truth by both: or as the Mathematical knowledge
challenges greater certainty, than that in other Sciences, which taking a
Scheme asunder by demonstration and rebuilding it on the same principles,
confidently and justly calls it true; but the success is different in Religious
cases, as in some curious contexture, which is defective by its too fine
threads, and not far removed from nothing when most tenderly unwoven.

To this, another consideration may be added, how it can be imagined that the
Heathens should be ignorant of the contents of Religion, at least, so far as
practical, seeing Reason is allowed a Judge naturally qualified for decision of
Religious controversies; and consequently able to comprehend matters of Faith,
and in capacity to frame Religious precepts or notions without any assistance
from without, but only furnished with its own innate faculty. For that as well
as he who is set up as judge in all controversies must be supposed to
understand the whole Law, though particular cases determine the sentence to
some parts of it. Let this be illustrated by that famed instance of a Theorem
revealed to Pythagoras by a Demon, which although acknowledged to be borrowed
from Revelation, yet the principles, by which judgment was past on it, were not
derived from that kind Spirit, and it may be though possible that the Sophy
might have made the discovery without that Monitor, and himself proclaim the
(...). This instance applied to the present case will force the Reasoner to
confess: that it was possible that the Ethnic might have luckily discovered the
matter which Religion proposes to be believed, by his own saculties following
their natural conduct, which cannot be granted.

If it is objected that a great part of Religion is to be found in Heathens
writings. It may find an answer from this consideration, that no arguments
taken from Pagans Books for the proof of the truth of Religion, can be said to
prevail otherwise than by being probable and persuasive (and they borrowing
their force from Christian Interpretations) and those which have influence on
practice, notwithstanding the seeming affinity between Reason and Religion, are
like Towers or Buildings, which at a great distance seem contiguous, which the
eye by a nearer approach finds removed from their fallacious neighborhood.

That which is said may find another check from the Reasoner's fundamental
position; which concludes, that it is a sufficient assistance to reason in act
of faith, if the object be brought nigher by Revelation; which if true, he may
impute Heathenish ignorance in matters of Religion, to no other cause but the
want of holy Scriptures; and retort the force of the former considerations by
proposal of this question; whether it is possible that the curious and secret
Mechanism of nature in Animals and other Bodies, could be discerned without a
Microscope, which being denied may make it applicable to the former case?
Revelation being as necessary for the begetting of faith in the Heathen, as a
Glass for discerning the small parts of matter. This must not be denied, but if
by Revelation, the bare proposal of holy Scripture is understood, as sufficient
to command assent; this will be a necessary consequence, That the true Religion
was not embraced, or believed in several Ages, for no other reason than the
Sporades (which were confusedly discerned in the Via lactea) were not discerned
till Galilaeus made the discovery. For as a Telescope was necessary for the
discerning of the one, so the holy Scriptures for believing of the other, the
want of which cannot be thought the sole cause of infidelity, the contrary
being demonstrable from the practice of the Jews (who must not altogether by
one peremptory sentence be deprived of their Reason) who have not, and perhaps
could not be reduced to belief, though conversant with holy writings, this
makes way for this Disquisition.

Whether in the act of faith, the understanding is enlightened, and consequently
the will determined in such manner as it cannot be by a mere natural conduct.

The affirmative of this may be proved, according to the method of the Schools
from this Topic of Gods concurse with man, which always leaves goodness as
its effect, which must be called perfection, according to the meaning of the
Character which was given of the whole Creation, that all that was made, was
good, viz. Every Creature perfect in its kind, seeing therefore faith is the
work of God on the understanding; it is past doubt, that it is improved, and the
sight more perfect.

How it is perfected, shall be declared in another disquisition (in this place
it is enough, if I remove prejudices, which the former assertion may create) by
saying that the perfection which the Soul has in the act of faith, is not such
as advances its nature to an Angelical degree of knowledge; yet it has more
than could be the result of mere natural powers, guided by their own methods.
Neither must this perfection be restrained to simple apprehensions or notions,
but complex, which would be as Ropes of Sand without any true connection; which
must be such, because matters of Religion transcend reasons highest pitch,
which knows not how to compound its notions or thoughts, so as to make true
propositions, as may appear from an instance in one fundamental. If this
question be proposed to reason, whether God and Man could be in straight an
union as they are in Christ's person, it must remain undetermined. And God and
Man must stand in the proposition, as Subject and Praedicate, till Divine
testimony comes as a Copula. To prevent such misprisions, this explanation may
be added, viz. That by the perfection attributed to the Soul in the act of
faith, no new faculties are to be supposed, that could transform its nature,
and remove humanity to another kind. However that which is said, may make way
for an objection; if the mind is thus perfected or enlightened to discern the
truth of proposition, of which it must be ignorant, whilst guided or informed
by its own natural evidence and conduct, all believers are Enthusiasts.

This is no necessary consequence of the former assertion: For Enthusiasin
derives not its name from the Divine concurse with the Soul in some particular
acts, but when it comes at times, when it is not expected, and out of the
common course and method, or when knowledge which seems extraordinary, such as
a man could not attain to by use of his reason; and which he does not
understand when spoken. Now the improvement of the pious man's knowledge, which
is acquired by regular means, which Religion commands to be used, deserves not
the name of Enthusiasm. Neither can that extraordinary assistance promised to
holy Councils and Synods, denominate them Enthusiastic in their definitions.
But I will not urge this argument, seeing the Reasonner concludes Councils no
otherwise assisted than by Reason, and no better qualified for finding truth
than a Senate or Parliament; but further, examine the Reasoners positions,
which allows no more Divine assistance to Reason, but the near approach of the
object represented in holy Scripture; or to speak in his Metaphor, that the eye
of the Soul can discern all spirituals objects, external impediments being
removed, and brought within the Sphere of Vision. This discerning faculty is
such, that the Soul can no more pretend to be furnished with it, than the Batt
or Owl can be said to have an eye as quick and as piercing as the Eagle, and as
well disposed for vision, if nature had not placed its proper objects at too
great a distance. Some parts of Matter are so small, that it is impossible they
should be discerned; he deserves to Chronicled a fool, who observing the
discoveries made by Microscopes of small bodies (which nature could not see
whilst unassisted by art, and she looked with her own eyes,) would attempt an
invention of making discoveries of the parts and figures of them, of which the
Air or Wind consist. Some objects are not visible, though as near as it is
possible they can be. Not to speak much of Atoms and Mathematical points, the
one not to be discerned by the eye of the body, the other not distinctly seen
by that of the mind, as appears from numerous Controversies which arise from
them, which are not so trivial or useless, but, that prudence can had has made
them subservient (as the strange Phaenomena's of the Lodestone suggested by
the Reconciler) to facilitate the belief of the existence of a spiritual being;
by showing that there are beings in nature, as well as those which Religion
discovers, whose existence must be consess'd, though the object are invisible,
and confound both sense and reason in their search.

This defect of natural sight proceeds not from the want of the near approach
of the object, as is demonstrable from the first prospect Religion takes, viz.
The being and nature of God (who being brought as near as imagination can wish
or propose; for what object can be so near to the Soul, as an Idaea, which is
connate with it, and inseparable from it?) is but confusedly discerned: besides
the ubiquity of this object implies, it is near to every faculty which is able
to discern it; the World also being as a Theater in every part of which of God
is to be seen, yet the notions of God, which natural men frame in their brains,
are as ill Representations of him, as Pagans Idols, whose monstrous Pageantry
owes its beginning to man's imperfect knowledge of the nature of Spirits, which
is so far from comprehending the Supreme, that it cannot conclude the being, or
understand the manner of the existence of the inferior, (the Angels) who are
above mere humane knowledge.

But if this may be retorted, by saying, the natural ignorance of the existence
and nature of Angels (whose being, reason cannot necessary conclude) does not
imply the ignorance of the Deity, whose existence is more evident, which must
be granted; (for as he who cannot discern an Atom, or the smallest visible part
of matter, may see a Mountain, or greater object, so humane Reason ignorant of
finite, may discern an infinite spirit) yet it argues the imperfection of the
sight, for he who cannot discern a Mote in a Sunbeam, cannot so distinctly
discern the vast body of the Sun, and he who knows not the ratio formalis, or
essence of the least part of matter, knows it not as it lies in the great Bulk
of the Universe. Let this be concluded, by saying, That as he who cannot
distinctly see the small Sands, cannot so distinctly see the vast Seashore; so
he who knows not the nature of finite, does not distinctly discern that of an
infinite spirit.

To what degree of knowledge, Reason, only following its own conduct, can lead
its follower; and how he can be said to be a THEIST?

Satisfaction will be given to all doubts, which can arise out of this inquiry,
if these positions be proved. That Reason in its quest concerning the being of
God, and the manner of his worship, cannot arrive to a higher pitch of
certainty than that of opinion. And that such knowledge is so uncertain, that
it cannot be consistent with that firm assent which Religion commands.

For proof of the former, it is enough to direct the Reader to the precedent
Disquisition, which shows how the Reasoner puts himself in the condition or
quality of an Ethnic. For though Revelation is allowed, as necessary for the
setting out his Rational guide, yet, whilst Reason is set up Judge of revealed
propositions, which must be ratified by appeals made to it, nothing is left of
Revelation but the name, and reason Consecrated by a Heavenly Title.

These premised, will make a more easy digression to the examination of the
particular method and Rules, which the Reasoner prescribes his guide, viz. Not
to assent to any Conclusion, which cannot be proved by natural evidence.

This direction observed by the guide, will give no better assurance of
safe conduct, than that which opinion affords, and in strictness of Language
cannot entitle him to the name of Theist, which shall be more largely proved.
But before I speak to that part of this inquiry, I cannot but suggest my fear,
that by this harsh conclusion I might be thought to condemn the great part of
the world as Atheists, and to call Gods goodness in question, in not indowing
man with such faculties, as could discern the Creator and trace a way to
happiness, and by this position to take away the satisfactory method of solving
doubts in Religion, viz. That there is as much evidence of the Truth of
Religion, as the matter of it is capable, which would be insignificant, if
Reason were not able to discern it. These prejudices shall be removed by the
following discourse; I only name them here, least the Reader might think I was
not sensible how many obstacles were in the way, before I could attempt the
proof of the former proposition, and to desire him to pass over them, with a
swift touch, as the Traveller tenderly goes over a Quag-mire or Quick-sand,
till he can find a more sure bottom, to which he may be conducted by weighing
the several arguments Reason has for the proof of the being of a Deity.

Amongst many, let that of the French Philosopher (who bid defiance to the
Sceptick) take place, whose force consists in these particular positions. That
the Idaea of God, which is in man's mind, could not be framed by his invention;
because the Soul cannot contrive the Model of a being, which is more perfect
than it self. This being granted, that there is an Idaea of God in man's mind,
the truth of it is proved from the goodness of God, which cannot be imagined to
have deluded his Creature with a false draught of himself. This argument is of
so great force, that I know none so cogent, if it meet with a mind praedispos'd
for the Reception of truth, but is not strong enough to beat the Sceptick off
his ground, because the very sinews of this argument borrow their strength from
a supposition; one attribute of God being necessarily supposed, viz. His
goodness, before the Reasoner can put himself in a capacity of arguing. However
it must be granted, that supposition does not destroy the certainty of finding
truth: for to suppose Falsity in some cases, is a sure way to find Truth; as in
the Rule of false in Arithmetic. But this method fails in this case, for in
those Operations the suppositions are razed out, and laid by, when the work is
perfected; but in this argument the supposition can never be laid aside, for
the truth of the Conclusion depends on the goodness of God, as known to be such
as would not impose on his Creature, which the Sceptick will look on as but
supposed. If it be urged in favor of the former argument, That Reason
concludes the being or existence of the Deity, and understands the attributes
of God by rules equally certain, with those in the Arithmatical instance,
seeing the Souls faculties are as a Standard, by which it can measure the
Divine perfections, and find what is goodness or wisdom in God by measuring
them with the notion or footsteps of them left in the mind.

The argument thus managed, must be acknowledged to be of great value, and
serviceable to the casuist in solution of doubts, but the defect of Reason
being necessarily supplied with a supposition (in this way of arguing) without
which man's faculties may be suspected as false, it is not probable the Sceptick
will be persuaded out of his affected ignorance.

After this new Method let old arguments be considered, which seem more
Catholic and easy, being drawn from the common appearance or Phaenomena's of
Nature, and observation of Providence, with those from other Topics, by which
the Soul is fettered, so that it cannot evade an assent to the existence of
God; yet it will appear, that the strength and evidence of this argument cannot
command that assent without confusion of Thoughts, which implies ignorance, and
extravagancy, which are not tolerable in a Guide.

That argument which is most obvious, is drawn from the admirable Fabric of
the World, which must be allowed to have its due force, when it meets with a
ductile mind (far removed from Skeptical stiffness, made so by a Divine
disposition for receiving Truth) without which it is so far from conducting men
to the knowledge of God, that it will rather incline the mind to Idolatry:
Heathens practice is an undeniable evidence of this Truth. For it may be a
reasonable conjecture, that Idolatry took its rise from the gross consideration
of Wisdom and Power, which appeared in the lovely frame of the World, and
afterward this power was divided and subdivided into several ranks of Gods and
Semi-Gods. That the whole World was but as one great Idol, may appear from
Poetical sayings (which Authority may pass in this case, Poets being the only
Divines in the Heathenish ages who wrapped Religion and that Secular wisdom in
verse) who Deified the World under that great name Pan. If it be said that
Shepherds had this name given them by Poets, yet it is plain, that the mystery
was terminated in higher beings (as Plutarch allows Pan to have influence on
the Oracles as Superintendent, and some have applied the story of his death to
Christ's suffering) which is enough to show he was more than a Shepherd, or
(...). For that age, as others before, considered the World and its Creator in
one gross notion which they expres't by Pan, as may be proved from the account
which Orpheus gives of that Idolized name in another place further to be
considered: But seeing this way of argument from Practice, may not appear so
convincing as that of Theory, because all do not tread the same steps with
equal success, and the question is not, what knowledge of God has been, but
what may be learned from the Creation.

To this demand a short answer may be returned. When a man takes a serious
prospect of the World, one of these thoughts will arise, either that it had a
beginning of it self, or that it was the work of some Architect: if he is
inclinable to allow the former, all that Reason can do in order to his
conviction, is, to show the impossibility of the World's being its own cause or
maker. This proved, can only remove him from Atheism, or at least dispose him
for a belief of the existence and knowledge of God. He therefore who arrives to
this degree of knowledge in strictness and propriety of speech, deserves not the
name Theist, any more than a man comeing out of a Cell or Wilderness, seeing a
Diamond or Jewel, has only so much knowledge to pass sentence, that it is not
of the same kind of stones which he treads on, deserves the name of a Jeweller,
or seeing a stately Palace, has only skill to conclude, that the stones did
not meet by mutual consent (as the fabulous story says of the building of
Thebes for erecting that Fabric, neither did grow so uniformly out of the
Earth), may be said to know an Architect or a Builder.

If in defense of this argument it is said, that he who denies that a Fabric
can raise it self, tacitly implies the necessity of the being of some Builder.
This granted, will not relieve the Idiot, for the Builder can be no otherwise
said to be known by him, than under the general notion of a Cause. Now who will
be so ridiculous as to say, that a man understands what an Architect is, and
what kind and degree of knowledge gives him that name, who has only a general
notion of him, by which he calls him the cause of a House, which description is
so rude, that it cannot be allowed, except Logic can justify it by terms of
Art unknown to the Idiot, however it cannot acquit him from the imputation of
gross ignorance, which will appear greater when he considers the nice
operations of nature. For if Creatures are looked upon which are most exposed
to common view, nature sitting in them as on the stage, it is but little (and
that conjectural) knowledge, he can pretend to; let the Heavenly bodies be an
instance to prove man's ignorance of their nature and influence; who will
pretend to know (except from Astrologer as ignorant as bold) for what design
the Heavens so regularly muster their forces, till the event shows it, or to
determine what dependence the World has on some of the Stars, and positively
conclude, that they are not Worlds; though not of the same frame with this, of
which Men are Inhabitants? Now if man is ignorant of the dependence of one part
of the Creation or another (as he must be except nature were supplied with
greater assistance than that of Telescopes, or of any device which invention
has yet found) his knowledge must be said to be so imperfect, that it is not
probable the argument drawn from the Worlds Harmony, should be prevalent, when
it meets with so much ignorance. To speak all; the little and uncertain
knowledge of natures works, rather disposes man for admiration, than full
satisfaction of all doubts. But that I may not seem to detract from humanity,
suppose the harmonious subordination of causes was understood, this only
implies, that there is a power which restrains them from destroying or falling
foul one on the other, or makes them subservient to some end, of which the
Reasoner is and must be ignorant.

If this assertion seem too rigid, which supposes man in the World as in
Cimmercan darkness, let it be granted that the mere Reasoner has a partial
knowledge of God, if he will be content with the name of a partial Theist.

Let it be also considered, that it is possible, that the same contrivance may
seem harmonious to one, and appear not to be so to another. The Inhabitants of
the Northern Climates may admire and adore the Sun for its warm influence,
whilst those between the Tropicks breath imprecations, because it scorches by
more direct rays. Let more be granted by saying that the Fabric of the world
is such (if understood) that it must be concluded to be a Divine work; yet
seeing there is a possibility that matter and motion (as the French Philosophy
teaches) might work it self into that order which is to be admired in the
world, the natural Reasoner will have little satisfaction to his doubts from
the consideration of the worlds Harmony; especially seeing the French
Hypothesis is consistent with it self, and solveth doubts on its own
principles, which will abate the force of the usual arguments against Chance
and the Epicurean Philosophy. It also appears that some have been sensible of
the weakness of an argument drawn from this Topic of Harmony, rather proving
Gods existence from the gross consideration of matter moved, than as it is
modeliz'd into forms. This way of arguing seems to press the conclusion with
greater necessity than the other, but nearly looked into can make a man no more
a Theist, than the Idiot in the former instance. The examination of this
argument might end by the citation of a Poetical saying, cited by St. Paul. By
him we live, we move and have our being, (which motion (I presume) intended to
be confined to the motion of the parts of man's body) is equally, if not more
valid to prove the existence of God, than that argument which is drawn from a
more distant Topic, viz. The first impress on matter.

But before I pass to another natural evidence of the being of God, I cannot
but confess that the harmonious Fabric of the world is used in holy Scripture,
and by the ancient Fathers, as a confirmation of their doctrine and faith,
which might be examined and confirmed by such contemplation; yet I presume I
shall not be injurious to Scripture or Fathers, if I say, that Method was used,
because it is more universal and agreeable to imagination and common reason,
than other arguments which are more artificial; not that it was thought to be
more cogent. Besides, it is an easy conjecture, which supposes that such
arguments were intended for believers, or at least those who were disposed to
entertain their Doctrine, not for skeptical Reasoners. If it be further urged
that the holy Fathers have made Converts and confuted Atheism by this method;
yet it is not sure to find success with all persons, especially such Reasoners
as allow nothing to be certain which cannot recommend it self with an undoubted
evidence, or impossibility of being otherwise. Suppose this pertinent question
was proposed to the Atheistical Reasoner. If a man should find a Statue or an
Altar with an inscription, whether he would conclude it was possible some
liquid substance (like Aqua fortis corroding Iron) might casually effect that
which art should do, and by the same reason press't to give his answer,
determining whether the World wrought it self into its lovely frame. If the
affirmative is answered, it is true that his conclusion is enough to denominate
him a Madman, but he will not value or think himself injured by such
compellations who sceptically disputes; for he will be so bold as to say that
as Religion and true Faith was once preserved by one Athanasius, so may truth
be found only in one single person.

To give the Reasoner a fair trial of his knowledge, let the former instance be
reveiw'd with a larger concession, viz. That the Idiot who acknowledges the
building to have some cause (though the manner of expression is rude) yet
implies the being of a builder, as the saying, the world was not its own cause,
does assert the existence of God. This being granted his ignorance will appear,
for it is possible and commonly observed, that men may speak sentences and not
understand what they imply, or what may be inferred from them. How many sayings
which fall suddenly from some person, whose sense being measured by the bare
interpretation of the words, is but trivial or ordinary, but by deduction will
bear a higher meaning; whence it must be inferred, that those conclusions which
are gathered as consequences of the words (which seemed not to import so much)
cannot be properly called his, who spoke the words, but must be owned by him
who advanced them to a higher sense. Idiots sometimes are like Oracles and
Prophets, whose high effusions are not understood by those who speak, such are
the sentences of some Philosophers and Poetical Raptures, which according to
the Authors words or sense savored of a low and mean degree of wisdom, till
some Christians reading their Books Consecrated them by Comments and
Conclusions, of which they could never have thought. Hence it is, that the
Books of some ancient Philosopher are now like the famed Ship, which was so often
repaired, till no old Plank remained. Many wise Conclusions appear in
Heathenish writings, but are as mysterious Characters and Ciphers, which only
the Religious by comparing them with Revelation can understand. These Effata,
or sayings, are like signs which Deaf and dumb men make, who neither have
advantage of nature to understand or speak, whose Interpreters are as Mouths
and understanding too, whilst they stretch their Interpretations, beyond that
which the Significators designed, or could declare. Hence it appears, that the
Reasoner in this particular quest (whilst he utters divine sentences not
understood by himself, but to be Consecrated by the Commentator,) may not be
put in the Catalogue of Theists, except it can be imagined, implicit Reason,
may be allowed as much as implicit Faith. Hitherto it being considered what
degree of knowledge may be acquired by the Idiot (for in this Quest the
Reasoner must be content to be so called) from the contemplation of the world,
let a man of another apprehension (whose knowledge is more resin'd by industry
and art) who apprehends the Cause, grossly conceived by the Idiot, as an
Architect, be Catechized in this Article of his natural faith, he will be found
ignorant. For although the world is a great Glass, in which its Maker may be
seen; yet the Lineaments are so scattered and confused, that it is almost
impossible to reduce them to a perfect form, as may appear from the
consideration of the method used for the proof and knowledge of God, from a
prospect of the world, which takes all the perfections which lie scattered in
the Creatures, and then imagins them to be in one most perfect Being, (which
implies a denial of all imperfections) and all those concentred in that Being,
are modo infinito, as the Schools say. This argument bids fair for the
discovery, but will fail, when strictly examined. For though it is granted that
the perfections which are in the Creatures, are the same, though in an
inferior degree, with those attributed to the Creator, yet the ignorance of
the manner how they are in this Being, which is infinite, and consequently
incomprehensible, will make him so far fall short of his designed knowledge
(attempting vainly to measure Infinity by his finite Creatures) that he
deserves no more to be called a Theist, than a man, who has only seen the Suns
image in a drop, and as it is in every part of the Rainbow, or the Stars in a
Pool, can own the name of an Astronomer. This method is as insignificant, as
addition of numbers to numbers; so that is impossible that they can have any
denomination, or as an attempt to measure two quantities (one by the other)
which in their own nature are incommensurable, or without any known proportion.
By these instances I give greater advantage to the cavilling Adversary, than he
could reasonably expect, for there is greater disproportion between God and his
Creatures, than can be between quantity and quantity, However let it not be
thought an unnecessary crowding in instances, if it be said, this method is so
far from being infallible, that it falls short of the certainty of operations
in Decimals, which are not true, if examined by Rules of Demonstration, yet
serve in practice, and the Error is not to be discerned. But he who attempts to
know God by this way of Reasoning, will fail in practice as much as Thcory. The
Heathens, who framed a notion of God by this method, and suited their Morals to
it, were so notoriously erroneous, that some of their precepts and Conclusions
are not reconcilable with Religious truth.

Another branch of the Reasoners argument, is the subordination of Causes,
which in this Quest need not be distinguished nicely from Harmony, one being
the result of the other, both of which are so far from being Catholic
arguments, which may convince all, that there are scarce any, who are able to
pass judgment on that Harmonious subordination: for he who is a fit judge of the
Harmony of the world, must be supposed to know all the parts of it and their
use, or how they have dependence one on the other, as Causes and Effects. How
imperfect this knowledge is, will appear from a view of natural Philosophy, in
which most of the discoveries are but conjectures, though called
Demonstrations. I do not design to start many old Errors, it will be sufficient
to suggest this consideration. That the ancient Sophies who took this method to
conduct them, had an imperfect prospect of the World's Harmony, as may be
concluded from the Astronomy (which is conversant about the most glorious and
harmonious part of the World) extant in their ages, the best and most valuable
part of which was comprised in the sam'd Almagest. Now how monstrous and
defective a Ptolomaic System is, is plain from late observations. But omitting
these, let it be considered, as suiting with that age in which (some
discoveries (which destroy it) were not made; yet it will appear to be, if
compared with the Copernican, as an ill contrived Engine which moves with many
Wheels, Cycles and Epicycles, when one or few would make it more perfect. This
perhaps may be the reason of that saying fastened on Alphonsus, who considering
the world's Fabric in Ptolomie's Sphere, rashly said, that he could contrive
the world in a better frame, had he power to Create. Here I may expect a Check
from the Reasoner, who may demand, whether I thought any late, or more
Harmonious System might more effectually improve this argument? To this
question I only say, that late inventions may improve the argument by rendering
it more preswasive, not much more demonstrative. For Harmony is a certain
proportion between numbers or magnitudes, which is not called so only for this
reason, that some quantities have a mutual alliance, and agree in some third,
which is common to both; but as it has respect to the mind which apprehends
them; as Music is so called, because it kindly complies with the ear. It Is
confessed, that so much may be concluded from this Topic, that the humane Soul
and the world ows their original (because of the approbation which Reason gives
concerning the admirable contrivance of the worlds Fabric) to the same Being
or Cause; but as to the nature of that cause, a man can conclude nothing, much
more distinctly and certainly, than the Idiot in the former instance.

The next natural evidence of the existence of God, is from the general consent
of all Nations, of which none so barbarous as not to own it, (as it was well
observed by that great Orator, who did not much improve it for his own
information, as appears from his Books) yet this argument will find more
Barbarism in the Skeptical Reasoner of this age, than the former was guilty of;
For this knowledge of God as it is generally found, is not proved by the
Reasoners method, which unravels and analyzes all by reason before it is
believed, but is rather a common notion, or natural impress, which is on the
lowest degree of mankind, that there is a Being, able to Reward or Punish; yet
this is not the conclusion of the discursive faculty; for those who cannot
prove a God, give assent to this Conclusion of his existence; which proof
considered, though in the gross notion of an Idiot is more valid, than the
Reasoners arguments modeliz'd into Syllogisms, and is more agreeable to the
account, Revelation gives of God, which only expresses his existence, when he
describes himself, by saying I am. Hence it follows, that the natural knowledge
of God, so diffused over the whole World, is like that of an Idiot, who seeing
a Circle can confess it to be so, although he cannot prove it by trial, whether
each ray or line drawn from the Center to the Circumference is equal.

This argument thus managed, will not find any success with the Reasoner, whose
Rules oblige him to admit nothing as true (though the will is so inclinable to
assent, that it can be sooner confounded than diverted) except it have passed
the exact Inquisition of the understanding by discourse. Besides, he may
suppose or doubt, whether that general consent was the result of natural
knowledge, or the Doctrine of some wise men, whose open profession of that truth
occasioned the vulgar (in process of several ages) to conclude it natural
knowledge. These thoughts in the Reasoner can be looked upon no otherwise than a
mere cavil, he being not able to show, how, when or where this notion was
framed (as it well observed by a late Author) yet the suggestion will not shake
the skeptical mind, for he who will be so bold to conclude the whole Worlds
Representatives in a Council may err, will not boggle in saying, the general
consent of all Nations might be terminated in an Error.

Thus far the World has been considered, as to its Harmony of parts, from
which 't will be an easy digression to the Harmonious disposition of man's
mind, which inclines him to a civil life. From this Topic no weak arguments
are drawn for the proof of the existence of God, seeing man's regular, because
civilized, life is as great a wonder in Policy, as the subordination of causes
in nature, which prevents mutinies amongst the Elements, and hinders mutual
destruction. Now this bond of civil Society borrowes its strength from the
supreme Lawgiver, who by his Divine Empire in man's mind, disposes it, for
mutual agreement with equals, and subjection to Superiors. This argument must
have its allowance of validity, but it must be acknowledged, that this, as the
former, wants its due force, except the existence of God is supposed, which the
strict Reasoner will have proved, before he will own him, or any deductions
which depend on it, For as it is confessed, that the distinction of Good and
Evil is the foundation of humane Society; so it must be allowed, that actions
are no otherwise called Good or Evil, but as they have relation to the natural
Conscience, which supposes the existence of God. Hence the defect of the
argument appears, seeing he who proves God's existence by this method,
necessarily supposes a being, which endowed his mind with such knowledge, which
could point out Good and Evil. Seeing therefore the truth of Conclusions drawn
by this method, depends on a supposal of the existence of that being which
should be proved, it cannot be imagined to have much force to convince the
Sceptick, for he supposition makes him retire to his (...), suspecting the
whole argument as weak Suppositions and Hypotheses; being like flaccid Nerves,
which want spirits to fortify them, only serving to knit Paralytical members
together, but without strength. If it is said that some Heathens, who had
little or no knowledge of God, or at least owned a false Deity, which is
aequivalent to none, did many Heroical and good Acts, which implies the notion
of good and Evil. This may be granted, yet their actions could no further be
called Good or Evil than they had respect to a Deity, of which they had only a
confused notion. For the conformity of an action with the Law of nature (which
is a Divine impress on the mind) makes it to be good, being the formal reason
of it, as the disconformity makes it vicious. Hence it follows, that those
actions which were good, were not known to be so, but as they were measured by
the goodness of God, which implies the former supposition.

Then next part of this Disquisition shall be the examination of the force of
that argument which is drawn from terrors of Conscience upon Evil committed,
which is of so great force (with a due allowance of Heavenly assistance, Grace
and Revelation) that it storms the Atheist's strongest holds, and so beats him
off his ground, that he knows not where to secure himself, but without, it is
as little forcible as those drawn from other Topics. For it being proved, that
no action can be said to be Good or Evil, but as it has relation to the Divine
Goodness and Will, either as it is written in man's mind in the natural frame of
his Soul, or by external conveyance by revelation; it is a praeposterous proof
from that Topic of fear, that God punishes Evil, before it is granted (which
cannot be) that reason knows what is Evil, without the Consideration of a
Deity, without which, fear is so far from being a Medium to help the Reasoner
in his Conclusions, that it is more probable to hinder him in his natural
Quest. That which leads men to certainty, according to the Reasoners method,
must inform the understanding, and consequently determine the will after such a
free manner as must exclude compulsion, but fear or any argument taken from it
(which cannot be so framed, but that passion will interpose it self) is so far
from doing either, that it cannot determine the will without some kind of
violence done to it, so he that acts out of fear, cannot so properly be said to
be a free Agent. Neither is it less prejudicial to the understanding, casting a
mist before the eye of the mind by its turbulency; The Philosopher was sensible
of this, who concluded its removal necessary from the mind in the search of
Truth. Si vis lumine claro cernere verum, gaudia pelle, pelle timorem. Boet. de
Consol. Phil. Fear is placed in the Soul as tempests in the lowest Region,
through which it is as difficult for the mind to have a free and clear
prospect, as for the Sun to discover its luster through a Cloud. Let it not be
argued from Holy Scripture, that sear was a necessary introduction to the
knowledge of God, as appears from the apprehension the People had of wonders on
Mount-Sinai, and the Mosaical appeal to them, if ever they saw such astonishing
wonders. This tends not so directly to justify the former argument: for it may
be reasonably presumed, that this method was used rather to confirm them in the
belief of a Deity before entertained, and to prevent Apostasy, than to be their
first Tutor, to instruct them in the first Article of the Jewish, as well as
Christian Creed. The most direct way to wisdom, as it respects speculation, is
not by fear excited in the mind, although it has great influence on practice,
as the sense of that holy saying imports, which calls the fear of God the
beginning of wisdom, for in that sentence, the existence of God is supposed,
before fear takes its place in order to instruction. However it was a necessary
defensative against Idolatry, to which the Jews were too inclinable. In such
particular cases, such turbulent passions may usher in Devotion: but generally
considered, rather confound than inform the mind. For it seems not designed for
the Christian, but that part of the world which may be called the Devil's
Province, in which he is adored by numerous votaries, led to that adoration by
fear, which gives occasion of considering, how that turbulent passion rather
disposes man for Diabolical worship, than that of the true God. For seeing the
Devils can inflict punishments, or rather vex men with Tortures which excite
sear, they may possibly terminate man's Devotion in them as Deities. If it is
said that this assertion implies impossibilities, whilst a power is allowed to
the Devil of terrifying the Conscience with punishment, which the Reasoner may
conclude Eternal, as well as Temporal. A short reply will show, that this
objection cannot be the sense of a man in his pure naturals, except he was
assured of the immortality of his Soul, of which some Heathens spoke
doubtfully, though they confidently presumed its eternal duration, because they
could not imagine, how it should perish by any known causes. Therefore their
all-natural Divinity did not conclude eternal Rewards, or Punishments, suitable
to the Souls duration. It Is true Hell is sometimes so shadowed by the Poets, as
if their Poems had borrowed from Revelation, but their Poetical conclusions in
this case can be no further credited, than they speak of the Souls immortality,
of which there is as little satisfactorily said, as in Prose; besides they
being the result of fancy, cannot effectually commend themselves as matters of
natural faith: For if the Authors of such Poetical sentences, could they be
imagined to rise again, and take a view of the Conclusions of Mythologists, and
those who write Comments on their Poems. I might reasonably doubt, whether
several opinions fastened on them by deduction would be owned as their genuine
sense. I need not add this, that some have openly declared in verse as much as
others in Prose, that they were fabulous fictions, not much to be regarded by
minds, not too much biased by passion, or superstitious fear. For not only the
profane and Atheistical Poet concluded the future state as dubious, saying,
Quid Styga, Quid Barathrum, Quid nomina vana timetis? but others, whose
invention and fancy were more soberly bounded, and free from the extravagancy
of more dangerous Raptures. Before I take one step further in this
Disquisition, it is necessary, that an objection be removed, which may render
what is said less credible, viz. That the Devil has no power of himself,
neither can act any thing by his own absolute Authority, but by Deputation, and
it cannot be imagined, that he should punish sin with eternal punishment,
seeing he is a finite Creature, and his business is to promote it. To the first
part of this objection, the same answer must be returned, which was given to
the former. That it is such as the mere Reasoner cannot start, for Revelation
only informs man of the nature of Devils, and the limitation of their power,
wherefore seeing reason could not suggest, that it is sufficiently answered by
showing it is impertinent; the other part of it, which threatens the former
assertion, cannot destroy it; for although the Devil cannot be thought
inclinable to punish sin properly so called, yet practice shows, that he
Tortures some as sinners against his Laws, by which he supports his Dominion in
the World, which offenders deserve the name of actors of good, as by avoiding
vice (according to the plain definition of virtue, virtus est vitium fugere)
men become virtuous. The Indian concludes he that offended the supreme power,
though but Diabolical, when mischief, or any extraordinary appearance,
threatens his ruin. Hence appears the possibility of terminating Devotion in a
finite being, for it being represented as dreadful, as any deduction from mere
reason can make it, it is no great wonder if a man look on that power, as
infinite (which is not so) seeing it bounds his thoughts, if not transcends all
he can imagine, and consequently adore that power, as a God or the supreme
Being, which is only deputed, and limited. This may be further proved from
Sacred story, which says, the ignorant multitude declared the Apostles Gods in
humane shape, and were hardly restrained from an Idolatrous Worship. This
instance is a sufficient evidence of the truth of the former assertion,
although it seems to fail, because of the difference between good Apostles and
bad Angels; yet both agree in this, that they are Creatures, which shows it is
possible, that finite beings may be mistaken for God. For this instance
justifying the possibility of adoration given to finite beings, and the
inclination of men who are too ready to worship them, when they show themselves
able to do good in the highest degree (such as was wrought by the Apostles
Miracles). It may be concluded by the same reason, that when any Being
manifests it self with such power, which is able to inflict the greatest
punishment, the Reasoner may own it as God.

Before more is said to prove the former position, it is necessary, that some
objections be removed, one of which may arise out of the instance, which said
the ignorant multitude in that case were not to be esteemed as rational men,
being without the due use of their reason, which could inform them of the
impossibility of finite Creatures being Metamorphiz'd to a Deity, or the
perfections of it to be communicated to a Creature. To this a double answer
must be given suitable to the parts of the objection, to the first of which it
may be said, if the ignorant votaries were so much astonished with the Miracles
that surpised reason knew not how to act; and those which have been conducted
by this argument drawn from fear, which confounds the understanding, appear
with such confused zeal, which savours more of distraction than sobriety of
mind, (as it is evident from the Indians practice,) it may be concluded that
the Topic from which they argued, viz. The Emergencies of some extraordinary
power put them in that confusion. To the second, it is enough to say, that it is
not necessary, that it should be determined in this case, whether the Demons
terrifying that part of the World with malicious prodigies, are finite, or
infinite with a real respect to their natures, but the understanding, which
makes esse and apparere, signify the same in matters of natural faith. This
may be further confirmed from Heathens practice, who adored Oracles, which were
Devils Resident in some parts of the World, but worshipped as the supreme
powers. But perhaps it may be said, that the Heathen esteemed the Oracles only
as Secretaries or mouths of the Deity as the Etymology of (...) and Sibylla
implies, yet practice did not make this distinction, for Monarchs, who
consulted them, thought they had taken Advice or Counsel from the supreme power
(which was only distinguished by the names of several places where their
sentences were uttered) which Supremacy was boldly written on their Altars,
till by Christ's coming the glory was buried, and the proud inscription changed
to an Epitaph, the Oracle being spiritually dead, in that forced return to
Hell, which occasioned this sad complaint to a Votary, who came to consult of
future events.

Me puer Hebraeus divos Deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede jubet tristemq, redire sub Orcum.
The Oracles were necessitated to make such confessions, it being one part of
their penance to proclaim their own weakness, and necessary subjection to that
supreme Being, of whom they so prophetically spoke, as if they had been the
Oracles of God, as appears by the answer given by Apollo's Oracle, to one
demanding what God was (...)
(...)
(...)


Who could imagine that the Devil was the Author of this almost sacred verse,
were it not considered that God lays a necessity on the evil Angels, that they
shall proclaim his power, for the Devils in the Caves and Groves, as well as
those amongst the Tombs did speak truth concerning Christ, though it added to
their Torment? This is enough to demonstrate, that those true sayings when
spoken by them were extorted, and they (as much as spiritual beings are capable
of) put on the rack by such confessions. This Oracular cunning (which would not
confess Christ but when forced) occasions a remark on the Devils subtilty, who
being necessitated to acknowledge him, insinuates this to his Votaries that
Oracles are God's Nuncio's, and allied to a Deity as Ambassadors, whilst the
lie is minc't by (...). If the Reasoner take advantage from this citation of
refuting the former position, by saying that they seemed not to aim at
adoration as infinite beings; neither were they esteemed by wise men as any
other than Angels, as appears from Heathen compellations, which speak them
Ministers; beside the Oracles more plain confession, who would have prayer
directed to him in this language (...) Yet it must be observed, though the
Devil calls himself Demon or Angel, yet he calls himself omniscient and owns
universal wisdom, which cannot be allowed any Creature, and seeing he injoyns a
form of Prayer to be directed to him; he tacitly insinuates to his Votaries
that he is God, for he to whom Prayers are made must be God according to
Heathens Religion, which owns no invocations of Creatures as Mediators.

But let it be granted that the Oracles were Angels, and only Jupiter, Apollo,
which some other were adored as Deities, this concession will be so far from
destroying the former position, that it rather confirms it, by allowing
adoration to finite beings, such as Jupiter and Apollo, and many other who must
be in the Catalogue of men, who made use of Dreams and Oracles to promote their
Apotheosis as Lactant. cap. 8. De origin erroris, argues, Eos ipsos quos
docuimus Deos non esse, Majestatem suam ostendisse prodigijs, insomniis,
auguriis and Oraculis, etc. More might be cited out of that Chapter as
pertinent, the design of which (as well as of this Tract) being to show the use
of Reason in Religion, and how much the natural man is guilty of folly, who
entirely resigns himself to its conduct; but I am sensible that I must appear
tedious in this first Disquisition, and inexcusable too, did not the Subject
treated off exact the most strict examination, and starting all that can be
said against the former position. Wherefore let the Reasoner object in another
way of Heathens practice, in showing that they did not always terminate their
Devotions in that Being in which they found a specimen of Divine power or
knowledge, which may be proved from the Sibylls, who appeared no less Divine
than the Oracles; yet were so far from being adored, that they scarce found
civil Entertainment from the greatest Personages in the World; to this
objection I will only suggest these considerations as an answer. That the
disregard and little estimation they had in the World proceeded from the
different manner and matter of predictions of the Sibylls and Oracles, the
former were to come to pass after many Revolutions of Years and Ages, the
latter as ex tempore Prophets spoke to every particular question, and their
mouths open to each Votary. Now seeing the Sibylls prophesies were to be
fulfilled not until some ages were past, it may be easily imagined that active
minds would be more prone to adore the Oracles who were as Tutelar Angels to
advise in every particular case, than those who spoke more generally of what
should come to pass at further distance. Another reason may be given why the
Sibylls were not adored; because their Birth and Lineage was but humane, it was
not probable they should purchase Adoration, for the known humanity was an
obstacle which hindered worship due to him, to whom all Oracles and Angels
submit with fear of that power which was able to silence them. If it is said,
that this answer cannot remove the objection, for the same reason will destroy
Heathenish Devotion to Jupiter, and other reputed Deities, who were only men
Deifi'd by opinion of some fond Votaries; It must be answered, that they were
esteemed as eternal, though really they were mortals; which opinion was enough
to denominate them Gods; for in Heathens devotion to be, and to be believed to
be so, was the same. As Alexander thought it was enough to his purpose, that
the Barbarians were persuaded he was a God, though he knew himself to be but
mortal, as he glories in the delusion; whilst he says, (...). The Idiots
conquered themselves by their false zeal and persuasions: so it answers
diabolical designs, if Devils are mistaken for Gods. Besides the Sibylls were
so much like Apostl's, that they did not pretend to Worship, due to them, but
another, of whom they Prophesied; neither did they, as the Devilish Oracles,
require any form of Worship or Prayer to be directed to them; it was as much as
they aimed at, if they were thought (according to the Etymology of their name
(...)) to be of the Heavenly Counsel. If that age had been so zealously
inclined to adore their wisdom, and could be imagined to have considered their
Prophesies as fulfilled; yet the matter of what was foretold, would convince
the World that they were not Gods, nor claimed Adoration. These circumstances
considered will give satisfaction to the question, how it happend that Sibylls
were not Adored as Oracles? and show that it is enough to confirm the former
position, viz. That Devotion may be terminate in some finite Being, as supreme,
though not in all appearances of extraordinary power. These obstacles being
removed, the next argument for the proof of the being of a Deity shall be
examined, which is taken from that prevailling Topic of paternal love and care
which is presumed to be such as would not deceive his Son, by a successive
Tradition of the being of God (which is so universal, that Barbarians are not
without it) which if false, would be such an unnatural deceit, that Stage nor
History can parallel. This argument has more strength from this consideration,
that as the Fathers would not be so unnatural to deceive their Sons, so would
they not suffer themselves to be deceived in matters of great moment. This is
so probable, that it scarce admits of any suspicion of its possibility of being
otherwise; yet when it is examined by a Rigid and subtle inquiry, it will be
doubted whether the Forefathers might not commit that out of weakness, which
they would not have done out of choice, could their understanding have been
better informed.

How much reason fails in its general quest, appears from the consideration of
these arguments. I pass now to a more particular Disquisition, how the unity of
the Godhead is or can be known by principles of pure or uninlightned Reason.

Although the supposal of Polytheism, according to the manner how man frames a
notion of God (which is by summing up all perfections, and then concentring
them in one Being after an infinite manner) implies a contradiction, and the
plurality of God supposes the possibility of more than all, which is so
palpable a contradiction, that the very naming of it is a sufficient
confutation; yet in strictness of speech, seeing the Reasoner cannot attain to
a clear and distinct knowledge of an infinite Being, how can he be said to know
God as one God, and it may take place amongst the Theists, he must be seated in
the Classis of the Athenian Votaries, and be esteemed no wiser than the
inscription which St. Paul cites, makes them who worship an unknown God; in
which the Epithet supposes they were ignorant of what they said, for if they
had known him they could have distinguished him from other Beings in the
universe, for it is so essential to Unity to be distinguished from other
Beings, that if it be apprehended as it lies confused, it cannot properly be
said to be known, no more than the nature of Gold can be said to be known when
it meets with such an Idiots Judgment, which is so far from being a Touchstone,
that it can only distinguish the Ore from common Sand. Besides it is more than
probable, that the Heathen had (neither can the Reasoner have more on such
principles) only a confused notion of power and wisdom in the World, not able
to comprehend one being distinct from the rest, so as to be pointed out by any
certain and distinguishing Character, and an assurance of all power and wisdom
summed up in one being.

I might conclude this Disquisition without any further survey of Heathens
opinions, did I not consider that authority, though in this case may appear
insignificant to my purpose; yet may be urged against my position, if it be
suggested, that the Heathens, Plato, with many others acknowledged but one God,
and therefore by Christian writers both ancient and modern cited to confute
Polytheism, which citations, I presume, were rather made use of, to dispose the
minds of men for a belief of one God, than as convincing Demonstration, for it
is plain that the Heathens in their most refined notions of a Deity have not
framed such an exact Idea of one God, as to quit the thoughts of Polytheism;
for when they spoke most Divinely, they oftentimes, as if they had forgot what
they were speaking of, or at least sensible, that they could not comprehend it,
instead of God, say Gods. I cannot but take notice of Socrates, so famous for
natural Divinity, for opposing Heathenish Deities, when he speaks of the
excellent goodness of the Deity, and how that men were so much the more good as
their actions had Conformity to the Divine; which sentence Erasmus says
deserved to be called Gospel, had there not been a mistake in the number,
saying Gods for God.

I might here detain the Reader by citation of opinions of Heathens (which is
not pleasant to me but when necessary) who may as well spend time in
considering such extravagant brain Idols, as viewing those in Pagans Temples,
but I shall only refer him to Tully, Seneca, or other famous Heathen Sophists,
and he will find, that although they speak of the providence, justice, and
goodness of the Divine Being, as if they were Secretaries of Heaven; yet these
by them are not attributed only to one God but Gods, and Dij in these high
accounts of Divinity is as often used as Deus.

To instance but in one cited by Tully, lib. 2. de legib. Thales, who speaks so
Divinely, that he owns Providence, ubiquity and eminent power, with Wisdom,
which knows our thoughts, to be in some Divine Being; yet at last fastens all
these perfections in Dij, how much this favors of Polytheism or confusion of
thoughts, the Reader will confess when he traces Tully himself (who cites
others). All that can be said to exempt them from Polytheism is, that when they
said Dij, they intended inferior Deities; This cannot rescue them from the
former imputation, because it is a contradiction to imagine Providence,
Omniscience, and other Attributes can be communicated to any Being which is not
infinite. To conclude this part of the Paragraph, all the seeming Divine
sentences of Heathens speak promiscuously of God or Gods, and make the Court of
Heaven speak in the Language of a mortal Monarch (We) which though a plural
expression without the help of a figure is known to represent a King; they were
so unluckily ignorant, that although they had some notion of the Deity, they
could not express what they had in confusion conceived, as it too plainly
appears from their wild discourses of God, which if they had been on any other
Subject, they would have never entitled the Authors to the names of wise men.

Let it not be objected, that the same may be argued against the Scripturist,
which is against the Reasoner; because in holy Writings God is as well
represented by an Elohim a plural number, as Jehovah which is singular. To this
objection it is enough to suggest, that there is not the same reason in Pagan
writings to justify such expressions, which seem to favor Polytheism, as in
Holy Scripture. Moses (when he expresses one God by a plural number) his
language is suitable to the Hebrew Idiom or way of expression, without the nice
and mysterious Criticism to prove a Trinity; as it appears from Heathen
Interpreters, as well as those of the Jews, it has been translated as
singular. So Longinus, Page 35. Sect. 7. (...), citing Moses's words. Add to
this another consideration, that he who wrote the History of Creation, wrote
also the Law, in which man is confined to the worship of one God in the
plainest terms, from which command there may be a reasonable conjecture, that
man in his corrupt state is more prone to own plurality of Gods than profess
one, else why was this command in the front and so early given? I know it is,
and may be said, that the Preface as well as the Command was as an Antidote
against the poison of the Egyptians Idolatrous customs; yet Idolatry being then
so young (only a few Garden Deities, Leeks and Onions adored) it may be
imagined that this Law was promulged to remove men's ignorance, which without
Divine assistance is invincible, for the eye of the Soul in its decai'd state
is like one intoxicated, whose we kness multiplies a single object, wherefore
it was necessary that Israel, even to improvement of Knowledge as well as
Religion, should know there was but one God. Let this also be considered, that
in Pagan Divinity we find no such distinguishing worship or character given to
Jupiter, to show that he was God. Are the other Deities but Deputies? (as some
learned men say) or so reputed, for they were all adored: now in Scripture,
there is not the least favor or disspensation granted to adore any Being but
God, no not so much as his Representators, Prophets and Apostles working
wonders; This is enough to justify the expression of God by a plural number in
Scripture, though not in Pagan writings; (besides the Grammatical help of a
singular number with a plural without false Syntax or false sense) The Heathens
did apprehend God in such a manner, as a plural number best suited with their
thoughts, seeing the Universe was their God as appeared by their Deifi'd Pan,
of whom there is this account

(...) --

Orpheus in Hymn. This may be further proved by a Testimony of lactantius. lib.
9. De false Religione who when he brings in Trismegist speaking most Divinely
concerning the Unity of the Godhead, saying (...), which he translates or
paraphrases on it, Ignitur Deo nomen non est, nec opus est proprio vocabulo
nisi cum discrimen exigit multitudo.

Whence it is plain, that the multitude sometimes apprehended God as the
general power reigning in the World, though at other times they were more
accurate in asking his name.

But not to check inventions or methods, by which men frame the notion of one
God, let the Metaphysician think of infinite power, wisdom, justice, etc. And
according to art or rule, put them together, he will make such an Aggregate or
Sum of perfections which man cannot naturally know, or by what one name to call
it, beside that of infinite, now how properly Infinity in the natural man's
sense can be said to be one, has been said before, it being like Eternity, of
which we can speak so little properly, that we can rather say what it is not,
than what it is. Add to this, that the Reasoner who frames a notion of a God by
summing up perfections, and knowing not how one Attribute poises another, how
power, wisdom, justice and mercy bound one another, he seems as much a
Polytheist as he who owned power in Jupiter, and wisdom in Apollo, etc. And can
no more be said to be a Theist, than one whose education has advanced him no
further than the Alphabet, can be said to be a Philologer, or he who only knows
Letters, an Interpreter of words, before they have taken their places to form
them. This instance, if it seem not so apposite, yet I hope pardonable, seeing
Christ himself disdains not to be called the Word, which without his own
exposition would but imperfectly express his nature, and Amelius a Platonist
admired by Eusebius. lib. 11. de prepar. Evang. cap. 19.

And called (...). Because he so much approved the compellation. Suppose a
Novice who has been only in the Porch of a Geometrical School, and learnt all
kind of Lines in their several varieties, of which the most accurat draught
must consist, shall he be thought worthy of the name of a Painter who knows no
proportions of the single lines? this instance I presume is so apposite, that
it will need no comment on it, and it giving me occasion of a digression from
the Metaphysical method of framing a notion of one God to one more suited to
all apprehension by similitude, as Vives, Grotius, Morney, and others, who have
illustrated the Unity of the Godhead by Analogy, viz. The Heavens, one Sun, one
Primum mobile, and other instances of Monarchy, as it appears in the World. How
little impression such instances are like to make on some, who in their
Philosophical certainty conclude that there is no such primum mobile in the
same Authors sense, neither dare affirm there are no more lights of like
nature, and influences, may be guest at by the reception and entertainment
which later Hypotheses have found.

So he who endeavors to demonstrate the Unity and Trinity in the Godhead by
the three powers which are in one Soul, may expect his argument should be as
little prevalent; for that method which obliges a Peripatetick to the belief
of a Trinity, may persuade the Platonic to believe a Quaternion; for he as
zealously contends for that, as accommodated to its several degrees of
knowledge, as the other was for his (...), or three powers in the rational Soul:
and surely the Platonicks did admire the number 4. else it had not been so
solemnly used in their Oaths. Let it be urged that God may be known by
similitude, and although there be but imperfect and small footsteps of his
Being to be traced by the Reasoner; yet according to proportion, by one
Attribute there may be discovery of all, as the proverbiall speech of an
Herculean draught from a foot (and if I may stretch the letter of the Proverb)
a little finger. If such objections appear to the Readers thoughts, I only
desire him to re-collect, or look back to the former part of the Disquisitions,
in which it was never granted, that man by reasoning can have any such knowledge
of any Attribute, so as it shall be a Rule to him infallibly to judge of the
nature of God without Revelation, and the last appeals made to it. I am not
ignorant that the primitive Fathers, (to instance in one, Minutius Foelix) made
use of similitude to convince the World of the Unity of the Godhead, Dux unus
Apibus, Dux unus in Gregibus; yet this was intended rather for illustration
than strict proof; neither is there violence done to the Divine example, whilst
the Reasoner disowns similitudes in case that demonstration is justly expected,
for although God is pleased to discover himself by similitudes, he expects not
that his Being should be proved by that method.

The Reconciler who supposes the Being of God and Providence. Page 4. of his
Preface, cautions us to beware of similitudes whilst we would have a true
conception of him. page 12. Attributes which we cannot possibly know, except he
tell us, and then says, we should not conclude or guess about them by
Analogies, to things of a nature infinitely distant from his, or by maxims
framed according to the nature of inferior being. Let not this argument which
seem; to have its foundation in practice prejudice the Reasoner, for I shall no
further make use of it than reason must allow, and the authority cited shall
have another ratification of its strength, by an appeal to the Reasoner who
helps his thoughts by art, and impartial and unbiased industry; who by the
conduct of his own reason will scarce find out that narrow path which will lead
him to the infallible knowledge of one God, for after the utmost perusal of his
own arguments concerning him, he will be obliged to describe himself by a name
suitable to his thoughts, which if he do, he will be in suspense whether he
ought to be called Theist or Polytheist, this bold presumption is founded on
the former position. Viz. That the Reasoner has only a general knowledge of
power undistinguished in the World. That a gross and imperfect knowledge in a
loose and common way of speech is enough to justify the Language which calls a
Being, one which in strictness is not so. As a late Author instances in Rome,
which retains its name; although the City is not the same, which first took
that name, and there are Protean bodies which each moment change; yet retain
the same name. Such comparisons, or such expressions may serve to express
things finite, words being as Coin, or rather the Stamp upon it (which
oftentimes is so far from representing the person of a King, that there is much
necessity of a Motto, to tell whose Image it is; as Painters in the infancy of
their Art were forced to supply the defect of their Pencil by their Pens, and
make men Readers, not Spectators of Pictures.) But the strict Reasoner as he is
careful in frameing notions of things, so he will be careful in giving names,
or saying any thing concerning number or nature of that Being which he cannot
comprehend; Infinite, as infinite is beyond the reach of our understanding,
whence it is apparent, that when any thing is affirmed of an object as
infinite, so far the affirmation will be doubted of as uncertain, that assent
which passes apprehension, must pass for ignorance, and can only be adjusted by
an implicit faith. Infinite would not be infinite, could it be apprehended as
an adaequate object of humane knowledge; though it were as nigh as possible. The
French Philosopher modestly took the liberty to make a term of Art, a gives the
old World a name more suitable to man's apprehension, than that which it had
been known by in several ages; for finite, calling it indefinite, which is
something in its own nature which has bounds, therefore its dimensions
possible to be known; but no man can determine any thing concerning infinity
either as to number or quality, seeing the object he judges of is beyond his
reach. He who attributes any property to a Subject, is supposed to understand
the nature or form of it: otherwise, he like the man in the gospel, who having
not fully his sight recovered, may call men Trees, or fasten impossibilities on
the Subject, least qualify it by the notion he frames of it, with a power to
make impossibilities not to be so; as the Reconciler of Reason and Religion
instances in the French Virtuoso, who concludes the possibility of a Hill
without a Valley, not considering that (...). Alex. Aphrodis. de fato, p. 135.
To make such assertions appear plausible, all that can be said, is, that
impossibilities cease to be such, when they have relation to God, as the vast
bulk of the Earth appears as a point or as nothing, when considered in respect
to the motion of some Stars. This assertion shows the Authors ingenuity and
modesty, but gives little satisfaction to the Reasoner: for to conclude God can
do impossibilities, because he is infinite, is to prove a proposition by a
medium equally obscure. It is a difficult task to find truth in general, and he
who is nice, will be cautious how he attributes any property to a Being, which
he does not understand, but more especially when he is to speak of one, whose
attributes are so nearly united to his being, that they cannot be distinguished
from it. This difficulty of frameing the notion of God, made some Heathens look
on the Deity as an universal power, or an aggregat of all perfections in the
World: for though they seem to speak Divinely of God as one, I am apt to think
they speak in the Language of Jewellers who call one kind of Margarites unions
(because first they were found single) when daily experience shows many are
hatched in the same shell. Here I might make a stop and pity the Ethnic and the
secular Reasoner, who like Apodes (Birds on the wing) hover in contemplation
without feet to rest on (for whose support, though nature has made provision;
yet with greater difficulty and danger than for other familiar works of nature)
for though it must be confessed as a father eminent both for Christian and Pagan
Oratory, says in his Octavia that the Heathens did always own one God and
providence but knew not how to point it out. This confessed, helps the Heathen or
Reasoner very little; for as it was said in the beginning of this Disquisition,
that he who has such a Roving fancy as not to distinguish God from other
beings deserved not the name of a Theist. If it be again objected that the
unity of the Godhead has been known to those who had no opportunity or
abilities to read holy Scripture, yet spoke sentences which are matter of
Christian faith To instance in one famous verse.

(...).

This cannot help the Reasoner in this Article of belief, for it being the
saying of a Sibyl it cannot be called the dictate of pure reason, for though we
know not how, yet it must be acknowledged, that so much as they spoke truly of
God and Christ came from Revelation in such a Way as none can determine. Thus
far I have endeavored to show Reasons defect in its first and chiefest
discoveries, when it puts it self on the rack, stretching only to a Skeptical
uncertainty. It now remains, that I meet with another objection, which may seem
so considerable, that I may not pass it by without taking notice, that it may
be retorted from the former part of the Disquisition, that I conclude the
Gentiles or Ethnicks had not the true knowledge of a Deity (neither could
properly be called Theists), which assertion seems too cruel and unreasonable:
for some eminent in learning allow, that the Heathens in their Theory and
practice, (if not saved in some sense, may be exempt from Damnation, because
they had a Law from God, and by that Law were to be judged. Add to this, that
the Heathens are allowed to be Judges of actions morally good and evil, just
and unjust, and justice in man is the same with that which is in God, though in
an inferior degree. Let this be granted; It will not help the Reasoner in
setting out his guide, for although the rules of Justice are the same in the
Ethnic and the Christian (and some of the Commandments being Reasons dictates,
promulg'd and made Law by another Legislation) yet they shall not be judged in
the same way and manner, suppose the Heathen exactly observe his Legem
Talionis, and demands an Eye for an Eye, or a Tooth for a Tooth, as the holy
Scripture expresses it, or to speak in the poetical saying which Aristotle lays
down as a rule approved by Rhadamanthus (...). Arist. lib. 5. Such observation
of natures Law will justify the Heathen, not the Christian. The Reasoner may
also urge that Tully, Plato, Seneca, and other Sophies have been Authors of
such sentences which have such a near alliance to Scripture, that only the
Authors names can distinguish them from it. This granted, will not help the
Reasoner, for he cannot prove them emanations of a Heathens mind, or convince
the World of the certainty of their not being borrowed from Divine Revelation,
mixing their own thoughts with some notions taken from Scripture, as some have
endeavored to prove, which will appear more probable, if the Ethnic be
considered in his confused way of speaking of God, and different expressions of
him, which will give way for a conclusion, That they certainly knew a Being
above themselves, but what it was were uncertain, for had they as certainly
known his nature as they seemed assured of his Being, there had not been such
variety of opinions concerning him, for these notions in man's mind are
unalterable, and although discourse or artificial ways may confound them, when
conclusions are to be drawn, and so seem variable; yet in themselves considered
cannot be changed. Wherefore it being granted, that God is known by pure Reason
as to his Being, and some of his attributes; yet by this imperfect notion the
Reasoner can be no more called a Theist, and said to know God, than he who
seeing some few, or all the proportions of a man drawn or painted, can be said
to know his Crasis or Constitution, or what humor is predominant. If a
similitude may be admitted in this case, it may be said that he who passes
judgment of the nature of the Deity by those lineaments of justice and mercy,
power and knowledge, which are in man, he will be as ignorant of the nature of
God as the other of the Crasis or Constitution of a man, for as the one cannot
conclude by the draught what humor is predominant; neither can the other know
in which attribute God takes most delight. Besides, if mere natural evidence is
to be set up judge of just and unjust, without respect to the Divine will, a
great part of Religion will be disputed, and the Christian Creed contracted
into too narrow a compass, some of its Articles (according to the method of
passing judgment) being in danger not to be believed; and Christianity would
not be improved much above that height which King Agrippa arrived at, men being
but almost persuaded to be Christians.

Hitherto Reason has been considered in its quest, concerning the Unity of the
Godhead, but before this disquisition is concluded, I cannot but take notice
of that famed instance in Plato (cited by Eusebius, de praeparat. Evang. lib.
undec. c. Dec. tert. who made the unity of the Godhead as a Characteristick or
token, by which Dionysius should discern, whether his Letters or Epistles were
jocular or serious. This seems to speak the Author naturally Orthodox, but does
not sufficiently justify him, and undoubtedly free him from the imputation of
Polytheism, or a confused notion of the Deity, for it may be doubted whether he
used that Beginning with one God as a mark of his more serious business, rather
than to signify his settled opinion; because it would savor too much of a
narrow and envious Spirit, not becoming a Philosopher, to have communicated
that as a secret to Dionysius, and not so clearly and ingenuously declared it
to the rest of the World in the whole series of his Discourses. It may be also
a wonder that he could at any time write Jocularly, and playing with the
Deities, making the term Gods to be as a Signet to seal his more trivial
secrecy, or less accurate writings, except it can be thought, that he, as a
Socrates, derided and laughed at the Heathens Idolatry, being serious when Deus
came into his mind, but laughing when he thought of Dij. This may be one
plausible way to confirm the usual application of Plato's Epistolar Mark or
Sign, but it is hard to be imagined, if his style and manner of writing is
considerd.

That which is said of Heathens ignorance, will not be easily refuted by
citations taken from Porphyrius, Proclus or Plotinus, or other Platonists,
seeing it may be presumed, that they entertained the same opinion of the Deity
which their Master had. Now how far the Platonic Doctrine is to be embraced,
may appear from the consideration of the Discourses (...), which some have
endeavored to accommodate to Christ, the second Person in the Holy Trinity;
For the second Principle in Plato's sense implies more, or rather is different
from the personal distinction in the Trinity, as it is matter of Christian
Belief. If it might be thought proper to vye Authority with Authority, I could
instance in Heathens Eminent in Dignity, Morality and Learning, Antoninus and
Severus who were not free from the thoughts of Polytheism, as may be
conjectured from the Language of their public Professor of Philosophy,
Alexand. Aphrod. in his book De fato, p. 135. which speaks of the Deity in a
plural number, and attributes Omniscience and Prescience (which is the
attribute of one and the only true God) to Dij, or Gods (...). This Language
may be presumed to be suited to the Emperors apprehension of the Deity. This
also may be considered, Zenophon, who in a pleasant Discourse seems not
altogether to speak his own sense or Language, but that which generally was
received, says (...). which shows that the Unity of this supreme power, was not
so apprehended to be infallibly denominated one as (...) implies, which may not
be translated is, but seems, Zenoph. in convivio. If this citation (as Table
Discourse) may seem too familiar to bear the weight of Authority in strict ways
of arguing, let the Author be considered, when he speaks most seriously, and
when an extraordinary appearance of an Enemy obliged his thoughts to
retirement, and engaged him to Devotion, it will appear doubtful, whether he
was Theist or Polytheist, at the same breath confounding Deus and Dij,
beginning with the one, and ending with the other, saying these words,
concluding his Oration to the Soldiers. (...). Zen. de exped Cyri-pag. 296.

Hitherto the Deity has been considered, as it may be said to be known to the
Reasoner, and the next disquisition is. What certain knowledge of the nature of
the Soul and its immortality can be attained by mere Reason.

As the Eye cannot see it self without a Mirror or Glass, so the Soul cannot
know it self, at least as to its duration or immortality without Revelation. It
is a difficult task to prove its existence, much more the eternal continuation
of it, as appears by the French Philosopher, who seems to glory of his
Invention, when he had (as he thought) found a way to convince the Sceptick of
its distinct existence from the body. Wherefore (according to the former
method) let his argument be examined, which concludes the existence of the Soul
to be more demonstrable than that of the Body, because that which passes
judgment on all other Beings, it self must exist. This consequence may not be
denied, and it must be also concluded, that the Soul only passes judgment on
objects, for the corporeal Organs are so far from discerning other objects,
that without the Soul they cannot see themselves, the eyes can see no more than
a pair of Spectacles, (if the Soul is not resident in them to judge of objects)
or the Ear hear any more than an (...) or the Nose smell any more than a Censer
can the Incense which is burnt in it. This is enough to convince the Reasoner
of the existence of a Spirit or Being in a human body which is distinct from
it, did not the definition, which says the Soul is res cogitans, confound
Reason it self whilst it considers it. For he who disputes nicely or
sceptically, according to this definition may doubt whether Brutes may not be
res cogitantes, and consequently have Souls of the same kind with the humane
only differenced by gradual perfection; seeing some in former ages have not
been so Dogmatical as to conclude positively that Brutes have no kind of
cogitation or petty Reasonings, as appears from Platarch's Discourse with this
Title, (...); and perhaps some in this age would not deny them to be res
cogitantes, did not this consequence attend the assertion, viz. The immortality
of Brutish Souls which the Religious man cannot or may not imagine. Let this
also be considered, that this argument for the proof of the Souls existence, as
much as that above cited to prove the Being of God, will be thought defective,
for this, as others, borrows its force from a supposition, which the Skeptic
will not allow, neither will the more sober man ^ook upon that definition of a
Soul as perfect, which may be accommodated to other Creatures, as it is above
suggested. In the next place let an argument of a later Author, one eminent for
Learning and Invention be considered, who says the nature of God is as
intelligible as the nature of other Beings (which assertion in some ages of the
Church would have been thought a just cause of putting the Author in the
Catalogue of the Anomi or Anomaei, who by some of the Fathers were esteemed
Erroneous in a high degree, if not Haeretical) and also attempts to make the
nature of the Soul as intelligible and as easy to be discerned as the Sun
(from which he borrows instances to express his more refined thoughts) whilst
he defines a Spirit, a substance which has self penetration, self contraction,
and self dilatation in his book of the immortality of the Soul. This seems to
help Reason in the conceiving the nature of a Spirit, but really the Authors
notion of extension is not intelligible, for it supposes the possibility of
many Spirits being so contracted, that they must appear to the apprehension as
one, so that the mind cannot distinguish them, and it is impossible it can,
whilst they are couch't in a single superficies not divisible into another, not
so much as in thought, therefore according to this method the mind must have
false apprehensions whilst many Spirits are so contracted, that it must
apprehend many Individuals as one Individual in a more confused conception than
Genus and Species are conceived, with the numerous Beings which are
comprehended in those terms of Art. Let this also be considered, that when
Myriads of Spirits are confined to one extension, that being but one must be a
substance common to all, so that the Spirits cannot decide Meum and Tuum,
seeing by a kind of coalition they are united in substance. And it must be also
imagined that the forms and faculties of those Spirits must be confused in one
substance or extension, or at least for a time be separated from their proper
substance, which is more difficult to be imagined, than the Souls taking a
farewell from the Body for some short time, (which is very improbable) and then
return again. It is confessed, the Author defends his definition of a Spirit in a
plausible way, and perhaps will think these objections inconsiderable, however
my design is answered, if it shows how Reason is confounded in framing a notion
of a Spirit, which was declared so easy to be apprehended. If it is also said,
that this is no new or monstrous assertion; for the Schools and ancient Fathers
have determined that Thousands of Angels may be present in the least quantity,
a point, or if there could be any less extension: let it be considered, that
these positions were laid down to take off the gross apprehension of the
vulgar, who could scarce stretch their imagination beyond material Beings, and
frame notions of Spirits suitable to them, but did never undertake to explain
the manner, or to determine whether Spirits were extended or not. Hitherto the
two rational Assertors of the Souls immortality being considered, this
Disquisition shall be concluded with this consideration, viz. The Souls eternal
duration depends on the concourse of Divine Providence, which can conserve it
or annihilate it, and this depends on God's pleasure or Will, of which the mere
Reasoner must be ignorant; wherefore it is no great wonder, if some ancient
Sophies spoke doubtfully of the Souls immortality. That which is said is enough
to show the uncertainty of the Reasoners knowledge in this quest concerning the
Soul; but perhaps it may be urged, that mere Reasoners, Plato and others have
concluded its existence and immortality. This may be confessed, yet the Divine
sentences in their writings, which speak this, seem rather Enthusiastic (or at
least an innate or common notion) than the deduction of the discursive
faculties. For if the Divine sentences which lie scattered in Plato's Books,
and the media be weighed by which he made those conclusions, they will seem to
be a building with a glorious superstructure without a foundation proportioned
to its weight, or like an Arch which Mathematicians speak of, hanging in the
Air, poised by its own proportions, without a Buttress or foundation. Plato's
sentences may give him the title Divine, but his reasons, by which he proves
them, speak him but a man.

Hitherto I have discovered Reasons defect, or dimsight in discerning the
nature of God and the Soul, it will now be proper to enter on another
disquisition, viz.

Whether Grace in the Act of Faith alters the eyesight, and in what sense
Reason is laid aside.

The negative part of the first Clause of this disquisition is the Reasoners
position, who concludes that Grace does not alter the eyesight, but only
brings the Object nigher, allowing the Believer no alteration, or better
disposition of the eye of his Soul, by which he thinks he can the better effect
what he designs, viz. To set up every private person as an Umpire, as
infallible in defining matters of faith as a Council. For by the same Reason he
will not allow the eyesight altered in a private person, he will deny any
alteration of it (which is that which makes it infallible) in a Council. Thus
making the private Reasoner, and rational members of a Council to discover
truth no otherwise than by a mere natural sight (the object being brought
nigher) he concludes them equally infallible. This project is built on a weak
foundation, which will appear to be so, by considering the unaptness or
indisposition in the Soul to discern truth from falsehood in Religious debates,
which is plain from the vain attempts of Reason in the discovery of it. And the
indisposition of the mind, which is not such as can be removed by frequent
acts, which make a habit to facilitate knowledge in Arts and Sciences; for the
Soul in this case, after the utmost of its endeavors to improve its
understanding, must be beholding to, or dependent on some power besides its
own, which must help it as well as bring the object nigher. For if we do but
consider the several ways, by which the understanding is improved, we must
conclude it is not by its own power. For the believers Soul must have Divine
aid or assistance either mediate or immediate in the act of Faith which must be
called Grace; which if it be only supposed to dispose the Organs, as there is a
necessity of it in mad men, and those which are Fools only by a bodily defect,
which renders those parts useless which were designed for the service of the
Soul in the exercise of her Functions, it is more than bringing the object
nigher. Logicians (which is only a hard name for rational men) say there is
potentia prima, which renders a blind man as capable of seeing, if the Organs
were well disposed, as he who has a perfect sight. And those who say all Souls
are equal, conclude the fault is in the Organs (if a man after the utmost of
industry joined with advantage) is a Fool for this Reason, because his Soul is
as capable of knowledge, as that of the greatest Sophies. This instance will
agree with the Reasoner's case, who will allow no man to be a Spiritual Fool
but on his own default, wherefore he stretches the interpretation of (...), to
signify the sensual man, which cannot be allowed; for if he mean the debaucht
Epicure, then it would follow that every sober man would be assured of finding
truth: for if there is not any fault in the eye of Reason (sensuality according
to his assertion being removed) what can hinder? for if the eye is well
disposed, and the object high, the the eye cannot but see. This is so certain,
that there is a natural necessity of it, but the case is otherwise in
discerning spiritual truth. For the most sober Heathens heave complained they
were in darkness.

Quancum mortalia caecae Pectora noctis habent? The natural frame and
indisposition of the mind occasioned this invincible ignorance, which may be so
called, seeing it cannot be removed by humane Art or Industry, any more than a
mad man can restore himself to a right mind.

That God can improve the understanding is as evident as he can render it less
perfect, which is plain from the punishment of our first forefather, who by his
default forfeited much of his Reasoning faculty which was less perfect than in
innocence; This cannot be denied, although the manner how the natural light was
diminisht, may puzle those who will strictly examine it: For to diminish the
understanding according to those who make cognitation the form of the Soul, is
to make it to be less a Soul, which will not be allowed in Legick or
Metaphysics, or according to that opinion which calls it a faculty or power of
the mind to draw conclusions, it is hard to imagine how it should be disabled,
except God uncreate or withdraw some perfection, or at least his Grace or
Divine assistance, which is as much if not more necessary for preserving it in
its due exercise of Reason in Religious debates, than the concourse of
providence which hinders the World from turning to its first nothing. The
former opinion cannot be allowed, the later if granted, will serve for the
proof of the former assertion, for if it be (as it must be) allowed that God
has and can make the Soul less perfect by withdrawing his Grace, he can, and
does improve it by supplies of the same; also The truth of this cannot be
denied, although it may seem obscure, if it meet with the Reasoner, who perhaps
will be as much puzzled with the word Grace, as he is with the word Schism.
Which demur will soon be removed if Grace be taken for Divine assistance, which
perfects the understanding, although the manner how it is done, cannot be
otherwise than conjecturally expressed; For the strict Reasoner says, if the
matter of Fact be certain, what is and hows, not and not to hinder assent;
wherefore it being proved that there is a necessity of Divine assistance, it is
not so necessary to examine strictly the manner any more, than when we take it
granted, that a Spirit can act on matter though the invention cannot imagine
how, It is enough to conclude the truth of the former assertion, if God in the
Act of faith do only excite notions in the mind, not only by proposal of
objects nigher, but by direction of the will to give its assent, without which
these notions or conclusions would have been dormant, or at least doubtfully
entertained by mere Reason following its own conduct. Before I dispatch this
part of the Disquisition, it is necessary to prevent what may be objected from
the former instance, viz. If Adam in his pure naturals had a distinct knowledge
of God, and consequently could have assented to all the Articles of Religion
without any other assistance than the bare proposal of them with appeals to his
own Reason, laying aside sensuality (which must be allowed to be the occasion
of his fall without straining Cabalistical Divinity, which calls it forbidden
fruit) so his posterity may be abstracting their thoughts from sensual objects
arrive at the same degree of perfection: This granted (which cannot be) will
not qualify the Reasoner for Christian belief; for could he suppose himself
endowed with the same faculties with which innocence was invested, he will be
but a Viator (as the Schools say) more imperfect than the Christian, not a
Comprehensor of matters of faith. Some Scholasticks have been so far from
concluding, that the knowledge which Adam had of God at least as Triunus, was
purely natural, that they doubted not to call it infused, for this reason (as
well as the Authority of St. Austin. lib. undec. de Genesi ad liter. because it
is not probable that God would suffer the Protoplast to be ignorant of that
which was matter of faith to all his posterity; And it may be safely concluded,
that Adam's Christian posterity give assent to the whole Sacred Volume of
Scripture by the same method and means by which Adam assented to, and believed
that Synopsis of the whole Gospel, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpents head. If it is said that Adam's posterity have a measure of knowledge,
as much greater than that of their first forefather, as the second Adam is
justly exalted above the first; yet this advance of knowledge owes not its
Original to mere natural powers. For though the Christian Believer (without
breach of modesty) may be said to know more than his first Forefather; yet that
higher degree of knowledge does not only owe its improvement to a fuller
declaration of God's Will in the latter, than in the first Gospel preached to
Adam by God himself, but also to the Divine supplies, which are proportioned to
the extent of the Revelation; otherwise the Christian could no more believe his
large Creed, than it can be imagined, Adam could have comprehended the sum of
it, declared to him in few words without Divine interpretation or assistance.

If this instance seem not close to the question, let the will and the
understanding be two eyes of faith, though by some one is called blind Caeca
potestas, which error is corrected by later Philosophy) be examined, and they
will in their pure naturals be found defective. For as in naturals it is not
enough that the eye is well disposed, but a certain position of the object, and
direction of the eye is necessary for some Discoveries, so although it is
allowed that Reason is no more new Reason by Grace, than an eye is a new eye,
which by skilful directions discerns that which it saw not before; yet this
assistance though it do not frame sight, but direct the eye, it is enough to
destroy that position which says in spiritual Vision only the object is brought
nigher. Add to this the mere disposal of Media in order to perfect Vision and
it will give way for this assertion, that Divine assistance is necessary, for
we must acknowledge, that several conclusions have been passed as true which
before were doubted of, when a quick and happy invention has found a fit
medium to prove them, or at least render them more easy to be understood. To
instance in that which is nearest to man, his own Soul, its existence is better
apprehended by being compared to some thin air, which has power, though
invisible. Besides it is beyond dispute, that some supernatural power infuseth
notions in dreams, which the Soul it self could not excite. I dispute not
whether there are any such in these days, it is enough to show, that the Divine
method without violence to Reason has made such discoveries in some ages of
the Church, and may continue his assistance (though not in the same manner, for
that would not appear consistent with the settled and more perfect state of the
Church) to help Reason in giving its assent to Divine truth. I need add no more
for the confutation of the Reasoners position than the proposal of the
Discourse in the former disqusition, which shows that there is a Beam in the
eye of Reason, which if not removed, renders it so dimsighted that it cannot
discern the Elements and first principles of Religion, which are rudely in man's
mind, and need some assistance for the due composure of the thoughts concerning
God and his worship; wherefore let the Reasoner consider Grace but as a
Chirurgians hand which couches a Pearl on the eye, or takes away the Gutta
serena; Yet by this act the sight is better, and this cannot be without
alteration. Add to this the proposal of objects and the disposition of the eye
and media (which the eye it self cannot dispose) is enough to show that Grace
by such acts may be said to have altered the sight, which might be rendered
obscure and confused by default of the medium or Organ; for as the Soul looks
through the eye as a Glass, which if sullied or discolored by any Disease, the
judgment is passed according to the tincture which is in the eye, not in the
object, and consequently is as ill a Judge of colors, as he who views objects
with colored Prospectives or any Catoptrical device to deceive the eye; so in
spiritual Vision the Soul looks with the eyes which have the disease, therefore
it is not probable it should discern its own malady, much less discover truth.
To conclude this part of the Disquisition, it may be confidently affirmed that
Grace alters the sight, though it do but take off a film or scale, as from St.
Paul's eyes, which the natural man by his own power is no more able to remove
than the eye by dropping tears (a way to put out eyes rather than restore them)
can do as much as any eye-water which the Oculist can prepare.

From what is here said, there is an easy digression to the other part of the
Disquisition ( how Reason is laid aside in some acts of Faith (a question which
much exercised the Reconciler) whilst it does not follow the dictates of its
own understanding, but gives it self up to the guidance of another, (the Divine
knowledge) which advantagiously supplies natures defect, which makes way for
this conclusion, viz. Reason in some cases is as much and may as properly be
said to be laid aside, as a Judge who is limited by his Monarch, that he may not
pass sentence in all cases on his own judgment, but in some must consult and
follow the directions of the supreme Magistrate, by doing of which he is so far
laid aside, that as to that particular case, he may not so properly be called
Judge as a Proclaimer of Justice determined by his Superior. And for the
illustration, I cannot but insert a story which I borrow from an Eminent
Mathematician who says, a Judge puzzled with a Case of two persons who had made
exchange of Fields which were Isoperimeters, or of equal sides but different
figures, one a Rombus or oblique Angled, the other a square or right Angled
parallelogram, was necessitated to call a Geometrician to discover the Cheat,
which discovery in strictness was enough to call the Mathematician Judge, though
the sentence was pronounced by another. This is applicable to the Spiritual
method of improving the understanding and determining the Will in matters of
faith, if God be considered as the (...) to inform Reason which is defective,
and as ignorant as the Judge in the former Case.

From this instance it is plain and easy to imagine how advantagiously Reason
is laid aside, being diverted from its usual method in giving assent to
propositions (which are true) yet in themselves not sufficiently evident, now
evidence of the truth to the Soul in its pure naturals is so necessary, that
there is no assent certain without it, but it is otherwise in the act of says,
when Divine Testimony supplies the place of natural evidence. If it be urged
that Reason proceeds according to it is own principles, and when it submits to
the Divine Testimony, it is because Reason is informed by Revelation, That it is
not a Competent Judge of Religious Mysteries; yet that assent being guided by
the Divine Testimony instead of evidence, diverting the faculties of the Soul
from their usual method, is enough to assert, Reasons being laid aside.

Yet this will not make way for a cavilling complaint, that the Divine
determination does violence to the faculties whilst thus diverted from their
usual method, for the Divine concurse which determines them, can no more be
said to do violence, than the Mathematicians information of the Judge in the
former case can be called compulsion when he prevailed with him to pass true
sentence, which he without the Artist could not have pronounced.

It is not necessary that matters of belief are clearly and distinctly
understood, for faith takes its name from persuasion (which is not always
begotten by demonstration,) and from assent more than from the manner how it is
wrought; for the Divine method has several ways to command belief, sometimes
it makes an extempore Convert, grace working effectually in a moment, sometimes
it operates through the whole course of man's life to perfect the work. It is
enough that men are assured that their assent is terminated in truth, because
of the Divine determination which makes the Will like the Lodestone (which
instance is much used by the Reconciler) which will certainly conduct the
Mariner, though he knows not how it is directed, whether by a materia subtilis,
passing through the poles of this low vortex, or any other mysterious way of
nature. To speak all, if Sailing had been laid aside till the Pilot could
demonstrate its infallible direction from its causes, the greater part of the
World would have been unknown, and the terra incognita would take more room in
the Mapp than the known part of the World: The same may be concluded of faith,
for if all belief was to be suspended until the manner how it was wrought was
explained, a great part of the World would pass as Infidels.

Thus far the infirmity of the mere natural sight has been discovered, it now
remains that I inquire in what sense the Reconciler, who urges belief as an
Act of Prudence, by which if he only understand a rational choice excluding
grace, the former discourse will equally conclude against him and the Reasoner.
For if a man endued with natural Prudence, must necessarily embrace the
Christian Religion, because its contents are such as will command assent from
the Reasonable man, he shuts out Grace in the Act of Faith, and makes the Holy
Scriptures more sufficient, and in another sense than ever they were said to be
(for which they are said to be so ((...), by Athanasius, Cyril, and other holy
Fathers) it is to show they are self-sufficient without the subsidies of
Traditions not in any other sense; for although it must be granted that the
proposal of Scripture is enough to condemn the Infidel as imprudent; yet this
condemnation may not be justified only, because the evidence of Scripture was
not allowed, for it is more than probable that the neglect of Petitioning for
Grace, and opposing it when offered, to help unbelief, does adjust the severity
of that saying, He who believes not shall be damned. Natural Prudence is not a
sufficient qualification for the embracing Christian Religion, if we take it in
Aristotle's sense, who defines it an habitual knowledge which can discern what is
good and what is evil as they have relation to practice. lib. Sexto Ethicor. ad
Nicom. (...).

Prudence thus defined can have no place as Antecedent to belief, because that
mere Reason in several Cases cannot judge, what is good for man, and what evil,
and therefore will demur at some duties absolutely necessary for the attaining
of happiness, such as are self-denial and other injunctions which natural
prudence will not choose, if left to its own evidence. And if it be considered
as subsequent to belief, there is no need of it in discerning what is good in
practice and what is evil, for duties in Religion are indispensably enjoined,
which destroys consultation, which denominates a man Prudent. I shall conclude
this particular with Christ's deciding the Controversy by ranking the Prudent
man, in this sense not so wise as a Babe, without Divine assistance. And when
it is taken in a better sense, Divine direction and concurse is supposed as
necessary to supply the defect of the mind (and therefore may challenge the
Etymology which Aristotle gives of (...) whilst he calls it (...)) which God
alone is able to do, and make men wise unto Salvation. Add to this another
consideration, that a Prudential choice of Religion, supposes it and its reward
too, to be exposed as a prize, not in the Apostlical sense. So that he who has
the greatest stock of Prudence must pass as most Religious, when he who has
the least, be esteemed a Reprobate.

From all that is said I shall only infer this conclusion, seeing our eyesight
needs alteration and it self is indisposed, the Believer does safely resign
himself to the conduct of the All-seeing-eye, according to the Rule of a severe
Philosopher (who would not admit any truth, but upon the evidence of Reason)
who says, we may in some Cases as safely trust others as our selves, (...),
Arist. lib. Sext. Ethic. ad Nicom. So far as men follow an unerring conduct, so
far they are infallible, though they are not their own Leaders.

Hitherto Reason has been considerd as it is in a single person, but the
following Disquisition considers it in a multitude, or an Assembly as it
attends their Sacred Votes, by which it is made more infallible, than when as a
Monarch, it asserts its seeming privileges by renouncing all manner of
assistance in drawing conclusions, but only that, which were nature affords,
relying on private evidence, which also is supposed in every particular Member
of a Council. Therefore it is proper to examine whether Reason only, enlightened
by apprehending the story and contents of the old and new Testaments, is
capable of appeals made to it as Judge, and the last determiner of
Controversies, so as it can pass infallible judgment on propositions offered as
Revelation: And whether the fallibility of some Councils renders all so
suspicious that the Christian cannot safely rely on Conciliary definitions.

The first branch of this inquiry is affirmed by the Reasoner, and the other he
will not have denied, because it makes way for the proof of the former, for by
infinuating that all Councils are fallible, he presumes he may as well appeal
to a fallible self, as a fallible multitude. But this assertion may be checked
from this consideration; That there is much difference between these
propositions; General Councils may err; And, All have been and are liable to
Error. If the latter is granted, it will destroy the certainty of a visible
Church at any time since it was founded, if not the being of any truly so
called. For that principle which obliges a man to believe, that all Councils
have been fallible, will never put him out of doubt, whether the profession of
the Church at any time was agreeable to the truth of Religion. For seeing the
Reasoners rule admits of nothing as certain, further than it is knowable by
some faculty of the Soul, independent form Divine assistance, it is impossible
that he can have any more than conjectural knowledge, Reason being not able to
inform him of a Criterion of a true Church by its own evidence, but by
Revelation, which says the true faith shall not fail. Now that this true faith
is in a doubtful case, must be determined by those who have power from God to
make a certain discovery of it. That which is said, is so agreeable to the
Apostolical rule, no Scripture is of private interpretation, (which must be
confessed by the Reasoner, though there was no Sacred Authority to confirm that
Canon) that it is only necessary that objections are removed. The first of
which may be this, that by the delivery of Reason in private persons to be
determined by that which prevails in a multitude, is to make or set up a
Rational Papacy. For as each Member of the Roman Church is no further esteemed
Orthodox than he delivers up his private reason either to the Pope alone, or as
he is in juncto with a general Council, which is said to have such power to
determine infallibly, though the interpretation make Scripture to be no
Scripture; So every Christian is to be esteemed Orthodox or Haeretical
according to the sense of the Council, which has power to interpret and make
his reason to be no reason.

No such conclusion can follow, and if it did, it would not break the force of
the arguments, which confirm the former positions. For suppose the Definitions
of Councils as conclusions, which Reason draws from the premises, nor as none
can be so rash as to say, Reason makes the conclusion true which was so before,
(only it could not commend it to the will and understanding, as an object of
natural faith, till the two propositions were brought as witnesses of the truth
of the conclusion,) or that Logic creates truth, but only assists the
invention in its search for it; so by the same reason none may say, that
Councils make Articles of true Religion, though they are the means of their
discovery.

But let this objection be considered as it relates to Papal Decretals. The
name Pope will never affright the sober man out of that reverence which is due
to just Authority, Councils and holy Synods, or if it be found to be so in a
single person. For if it could be proved (as some have affirmed) that the Pope
was and is the Church Virtual, it would be beyond dispute, that infallibility
did at some time since Christian Religion was in the World, sit in the Chair,
or at least may do, when fundamental controversies arise, which threaten the
Churches ruin without the imputation of making Scripture to be no Scripture by
his Authority. It may be safely said by any Christian, that he would not give
assent to several Doctrines which are urged as matters of faith necessarily to
be believed for the attaining Salvation, did not the Church declare them to be
so; yet the same person on the same principle is not obliged to think, that
which is so defined by the Church is made true by its definition. Hitherto I
have used this comparison (which makes the determinations of Councils as
conclusions of a Syllogism made by the Heads of the World) to illustrate the
answer to an objection; but it being so apposit to another design, it shall be
used to show, that the Reasoner in a Council is not capable of making a
Syllogism from mere natural Topics to demonstrate the truth of that which is
debated. This will appear to be true from the consideration of the Structure of
a Syllogism, which leads us to the knowledge of a proposition, which was less
known, by others which are more evident, and easy to be understood. For the
medium (which is an ingredient of both propositions) is as clear and as certain
as a common notion, and the truth of the conclusion depends on it, which if
mistaken, makes the Syllogism a fallacy. Suppose therefore the Members of a
Council as so many Scholasticks arguing, they have no such common notions as
Philosophers have, by which as media, they can draw conclusions. Although it
must be confessed that the understanding by its own evidence can judge of the
truth of some propositions ( viz. It is impossible, God can do any act which
implies a contradiction, etc. Yet Divine Revelation is the medium by which
truth in propositions, which are more obscure, is determined. Hence it sollows
that the Sanctions and Definitions of Councils must be said to be
Hypothetically pronounced true, as this saying is, viz. If the Moon is
Eclipsed, the Earth interposeth it self between it and the Sun. Not unlike this
is the way of arguing in a Council, which proves Christ's humanity from his
Passion; for if he suffers, humane nature did interpose it self, else he
could not suffer. Now as none will say, there is and always was anecessity not
in the nature of the Moon, but in the manner of its motion, that it must be
Eclipsed at some times (for to say so, is to confine the Almighty's wisdom to
one System, and to take away the possibility of the Worlds being in such a
frame in which neither Sun or Moon might be Eclipsed) but when it is seen to be
so, it is evident, that the Earths interposition is the cause of that seeming
defect. So a Council cannot conclude the necessity of Christ's being Man but
Hypothetically; For the Divine decrees (which reason cannot know but by
Revelation) are as the condition or antecedent which makes Christ's humanity
necessary. Let not this assertion seem strange, since it is impossible, but
that reason must be defective as it appears from the former instance, as also
from this consideration, that the mere Reasoner cannot conclude the necessity
of Christ's incarnation, and will be more at a loss in other mysterious matters
of faith. The definitions and conclusions of Councils thus hypothetically drawn
are not less certain, because they are such, seeing the Antecedents of their
propositions are matters of fact contained in holy Scriptures, and those who
discourse, have Divine assistance in discerning the connection and inferring the
consequences; Now the connection and sequel is true, because of the Divine
direction, as is already proved, and the Antecedent, viz. matters of fact, is
so, as it appears from the miracles which confirmed their truth, which were
such as reason might discern to be Divine; for Reason may be allowed a Judge in
this case, though not in all doubts which come under debate in a Council. The
reason of which is this, Miracles being works which exceed mere natural power
or ordinary course of nature, it is furnished with faculties which can discern
what is natural, and what not, but is at a loss in higher mysteries.

This assertion perhaps may be checked by an instance in conciliary proceedings
in discerning Canonical Books of Holy Scripture from Apocryphal, or any falsely
so called, in which, judgment is past by mere rational evidence, whilst it
distinguishes the one from the other by their Contents. This must not be
granted; for though the contents of Holy Scriptures are a good argument of
their truth; yet they are not the only Characteristicks to distinguish them
from others which are not Canonical. When there is any debate in a Council
concerning any part of Scripture to be admitted into Canon, appeals are not
made to mere Reason to judge of its contents, any further than by comparison of
them with those of other Books, which are received without any controversy. It
is the Councils business to argue as the Apostolical Canon says (...) and the
Church of England concludes the definitions of Councils deductions of Reason (
Artic. 21) which admits of this limitation or rather interpretation, that
though Reason draws the conclussions; yet their truth is not measured by a bare
congruity to it, but the reception of it in the primitive Church, or the most
free and unbiassed Councils, and so much of its as belongs to the Old Testament
by the Jewish Catalogue, and by several other Rules, which are as a Touchstone
to discover Gold, and distinguish it from baser Metals. To speak all,
Conciliary Discussions in this case do not inquire how Revelation is agreeable
to Reason, but what is to be admitted as Revelation, and what to be rejected,
and when that is done, compare one Text with another till they agree, which
consent is the most infallible evidence of truth. However it is scarce
probable, that the Reasoner will be persuaded or argued out of his pretended
private infallibility, whilst he concludes, every individual man may proceed on
the same ground which Councils do, because each rational man being in some
degree more or less able to draw conclusions by Analogy, or comparing the
several contents of Holy Scriptures. Wherefore let it be supposed, that each
reasonable man is naturally qualified to find truth; yet seeing the promise of
Divine assistance (which is the most sure foundation on which infallibility can
rest) is not to a single person, those natural qualifications cannot assure
them of finding it.

I am sensible that the Reasoner may take occasion from what is said of urging
a question, whether the former assertion does take the privilege from every
private person, so that in any case he cannot interpret Scripture.

The affirmative of this question may be safely maintained as it has respect
to private persons who are known Members of the Church, and have opportunity of
being acquainted with, and to be informed, what is the interpretation and sense
of the Church in general, which must be a direction to those who pass judgment
in particular cases, for they may not appeal from Synods to their own private
reason, and because truth is certainly to be found in Councils, and there are
Rules of finding it.

If it is further demanded, whether a private person who has neither learning
or opportunity to understand the sense of the Church, may not be a safe
interpreter of Scripture in order to his own Satisfaction and Salvation?

As this proposes an extraordinary case, so the answer may be dubiously
returned. However it may be said to the first part of the question, that it
cannot be well supposed, that any illiterate person should of necessity be
ignorant of the sense of the Church, seeing he is a known Member of the same,
and the pastors are as Mouths to declare it. To the other part of the question,
which supposes a Christian so unfortunately (amongst the Infidels) placed, that
he cannot have access to Pastors of the Church, it is enough to propose another
question, viz. Whether the Thief on the Cross who may be supposed to want time
(though nothingmore could be wanting whilst Christ was with him) did give
assent to all fundamentals of Religion by faith as explicit as is required of
other Chistians who have the advantage of more time and other circumstances?
The answer given to this will help the solution of the other doubt.

The manner of Conciliary proceedings being considered, and the unfitness of
the mere reasoner for such debates: in he next place the necessity of Councils
shall be proved, by which the other part of the Disquisition will be better
understood.

Such Sacred Assemblies are necessary, though not at all times (for some ages
passed without them) for the exigency of the Church requires such supplies. To
imagine it could always be without them, is to conclude it exempt from all
possibility of erring, and independent as to the Divine conduct, which is
promised to lead it and continue it in the way of truth; The former cannot be
granted, for Heresies must be, and then there is as great necessity of their
condemnation. The latter cannot be allowed, for as it intrenches on the Divine
Dominion, so it does equalize the Church Militant with the Triumphant, whose
greatest Trimuph is our Error.

This necessity of Councils is confirmed from the consideration of different
opinions concerning matters of faith, which equally commend themselves to the
Christian, and render his Will so indifferent, that he knows not to which part
to incline, till determined by Authority. It is no strange thing to meet with
two opinions in other cases, which plead for themselves with such equal
probability, that the most accurate judgment will rather suspend its belief,
than give assent to either; neither let it appear a prodigy, if Religion afford
such cases as would render its proselytes or professors sceptically puzzled
without a more infallible guide than their own Reason.

But it may be said, that in other cases the wise men do not give themselves up
to a Sect or Council of Philosophers to be Vmpires in dubious matters. This is
granted, for it is unreasonable that they should deliver up their Reason to the
most famed Sophies, but the reason is not the same in Religious debates. For a
single person may be qualified for finding truth in Philosophy, with such
certainty as may vie with the numerous Sects; but no private member of the
Church may pretend to that cretainty which must be allowed in Councils. It is
possible that one man may be master of more reason and Philosophy than is to be
found in all the World at that time, and one walking Library more valuable than
a Vatican; but Religious knowledge is not designed to be so Monastical as to
live in solitude or a single person. Besides, if it could be proved that the
Philosophers had the same assurance of a true conduct in their doubts by
reason, which the Councils have by Divine supplies, he would be unreasonable in
a high degree who would not give up or resign his private reason to their
determinations.

The great assertor of the Roman Church ( D. Stap.) was not altogether mistaken
when he introduc't Divine assistance to help the Church in making a Syllogism
(though the manner of its conveyance seems inconsistent, whilst he makes the
Members of it to be discursive in the premifes as mere Reasoners, but
infallibly assisted in the conclusion) for Revelation must take place of pure
natural invention in the whole matter of Religious debates.

That there is a necessity of the Resignation of Reason to Authority must be
granted, and it is urged by several methods. Two late Authors (who considered
and examined humane Reason) endeavor to convince men of the necessity of
giving up our private reason to the public judgment of other persons, who have
better means of knowing of truth than we our selves have, as one expresses it,
and both press it by an instance of an appeal in naturals from sense to reason.
This way of arguing may be persuasive, but not cogent enough to evince men of
the necessity of that which they designed to prove; for although it is safely
concluded that the Members of Councils have better qualifications for discovery
of truth than private persons; yet their learning and natural endowments are
not that (...) or the foundation on which faith is laid.

Besides the similitude of appeals from Sense to Reason is not apposit, and
implies a supposition of the senses being erroneous, which in strictness cannot
be allowed, but let that be supposed, it cannot well be accommodated to the
case, for sense and reason in man are not so much strangers as the public
Representatives of the Church in Councils are to its particular Members. The
same percipient is employed in reason and sense, and according to its different
acts and objects has distinct compellations, sensual or rational, as the same
River takes several names from the Channels through which it runs. For when the
Soul perceives material impresses on the Brain without any consideration or
reflex act, it is called sensation (as when it perceives a body as it is
figured in that part which nature designed for Fancy, to be Triangular or
Globular, red or white, or as it is represented in other figures or colors)
but when it deliberates and draws conclusions, such as cannot be the work or
result of a naked representation of the object, it challenges its just title
rational. Now to suppose this similitude exactly apposit, is to conclude that
every private person should have his Soul imployd and acting (as junto which
cannot be imagined) in every particular debate of a Council as the percipient
is in sensation and Reasoning.

More arguments might be urged to evince the necessity of Councils, but I do
not intend to be so voluminous, but to pass to another inquiry concerning truth
and its certainty of being so, as it is in lawful Councils. Satisfaction will
be given to this inquiry, if it is considerd that the true faith was once
delivered to the Saints as St. Jude says, and what that true faith is may be
found in some conciliary Definitions since Christ's coming into the World, and
that it may be safely concluded, that it is found when there is a general
consent, which is an infallible (...) and as certain as any medium in
Demonstration. Suppose one true opinion in Philosophy and a Thousand in which
there is truth, but mixed with error; If they all agree in some positions it is
an undoubted argument of the truth of those in which all agree. This way of
passing judgment on Definitions of Councils upon examination will appear as
certain as that which draws conclusions from this rule. Quoe in aliquo tertio
convenient inter se convenient. That trite saying (...) is more than a
proverbial conclusion, for it is founded in reason, which must conclude error
has many Moeanders and distracting paths: but truth has a narrow way, in
which only it self can walk. And it must needs be so for this reason; truth
being in some Conciliary Definitions, they must be as the Center in which, all
which are true, necessarily meet. If it is said, that it is possible that those
Definitions, which are to be as a Standard to measure others, may not be found,
the Church being defrauded or abused by misfortune or cunning, and consequently
at a loss in the search for truth, as much as he who sails without a Compass.

This cannot be supposed because of the Divine promise of the preservation of
the truefaith, though not at all times discoverable. But let it be imagined
that some true Conciliary Definitions may be wanting, then the supposition is
destroyed, which implies a Catholic consent, which cannot be so called, if but
one Definition is left out: Therefore it may be concluded that Truth is to be
found by this Method; though with as much difficulty as Archimedes discovered
the Gold, and the quantity of it in his Princes Crown, which a Cheat had
Adulterated with baser Metals.

Religion therefore being in its own frame and nature fitted for the severest
Inquisition, it will not stand in fear of the boldest Adversary, Authority in
its name bids the Reasoner be modest, and its matter which it injoyns further
commands him to be so, whilst he speaks of that which transcends his
understanding. It may now seem proper to suggest these Arguments which seem to
invalidate Authority, and render it less valuable; This is done by objecting
the errors of Councils, and the manner of their Process by Votes or Suffrages;
the first of which seems to insinuate to the Christian, the posibility of the
body of the Church being altogether disjointed, and its total Apostasy with the
same reason that a man may conclude that mankind cannot be exempt from the
possibility of being Cripples, because that some bones have been out of their
proper place, and the other seems to render them more contemptible, by
comparing them with Processes of Courts which are purely humane; both these are
as easily confuted as named, and may be more effectually retorted on reason, as
it is exercised in the several ways of Government in several ages. For the
former objection is removed in the precedent Disquisition, and the other will
appear to be weak and disabled, if it is considered that Votes and Suffrages in
holy Councils are as Lots in the choice of an Apostle, which having infallible
Direction from God may vie certainty with a Decree or any way of Election.
Matthias was no less an Apostle, neither was his Authority more doubted, with
which he was invested by Lots, than that of the other Apostles, who had an oral
mission from Christ himself. I might further assert Ecclesiastical Authority,
by showing the safety of relying on the Authority of Councils with a more firm
assent than History or the humane Lawgiver can challenge; For the Historian (I
mean the profane) commits not Annals to posterity upon peril of his own ruin,
in case some cunning and political inventions be interwoven in them like some
of the History which Zenophon wrote, which seems more like a Romance than an
impartial Relation of Cyrus his Life and Education; and those who give precepts
to other men, sometimes have a reserve of immunity, and exemption from them to
themselves: But holy Councils have no such equivocation, which though it may
seem pious deceit, cannot sit safely in Sacred Assemblies, neither may any
Members of them as an Arian profess one, and carry another Creed in his Bosom:
were it possible that any Member of a true Council might do this safely and
without peril of his own ruin, Conciliary Definitions might be rendered more
suspicious, but the case is otherwise in such Sacred debates, the Members of
Councils as well as private persons of the Church are like St. Paul and his
Company in the Ship which could not be secured from the Tempest, If all were
not saved, or at least in a capacity of being so, for as the Apostle might not
escape upon a Planck alone; neither may the public representatives of the
universal Church promise themselves Salvation, it they willingly define any
such matters of faith to the people as may endanger the making Shipwreck of a
good Conscience relying on their Authority. For those who out of design define
error as matters of faith, are in equal danger, if not more, with those who put
their Definitions in practice.

Hence appears the certainty of that knowledge which is the effect of faith,
which as much exceeds that which is purely humane, as Science does Opinion,
which is such a low and fickle degree of knowledge as seems suited for trifling
things below Heavenly objects; for God has disposed of Religious matters in
such manner, as that a man may know God, and be informed of his own duty with
as great certainty, if not greater, than he can know the objects of natural
Science. For the difference which the Schools make between Faith and Science
consists not only in the certainty of the one being greater than the other, but
in the manner of Evidence in the objects, which occasions the grand cavil
against faith, as being an unreasonable piece of service imposed on man, and
which is to give assent to that which cannot commend it self to the
understanding with sufficient evidence.

If this is urged, it may be retorted upon Science, for if nothing must command
assent (as it is before said) but what is clearly and distinctly perceived,
Euclid's Demonstrations must be less in number, and more maimed; and there will
be only the name of Science of many things left in the world. Besides there is
no reason of complaint of want of evidence in the act of faith, for it is
evidence enough, that the mind is informed that it cannot comprehend its
object, however it ought to give assent. Let this be made more plain by a
supposition: Suppose a Terra incognita (I do not mean that which Geographers
call so, for that in future ages may have a new name in the Map) or some part
of the world was so designed and contrived by the Creator, that it is
impossible it should be known: Or suppose there were Planetary Regions
habitable, but not intended to be discovered clearly to man, it is enough in
this feigned case, that men are informed that there are such places, and
advised of the impossibility that they should be known. This fiction is
applicable to more serious and Religious cases, and may stop the mouths of a
querulous Generation of seekers, who are content with a low degree of knowledge,
which does not excel opinion in certainty, which kind of knowledge was so
little esteemed amongst some of the Philosophers, that it was placed by them in
the imagination, rather than the understanding, as better suiting with the
condition of Brutes than men. It Is true the Schools have been more kind and
courteous to Opinion, and give it a place in the Understanding, but being there
according to their account of it, sits trembling and in fear it may be
deceived, and that which it apprehends to be true may be false; This considered
will exalt faith (which in a loose description, may be called Reason Divinely
assisted and directed) above mere carnal Reasonings, and justify the challenge
which St. Paul makes in his Christian Armor, where is the Disputer of the
World?

FINIS.

